Plenary Lectures  Plenary Lectures mitochondria has been associated with neuronal cell death in neuro- degenerative diseases. Taken together our data indicate that accumu- PL01. Establishment and hereditary transmission of epigenetic lation of storage material, due to the lysosomal enzyme deficiency, modifications and pathological developments: the mouse model causes a lysosomal dysfunction which affects the autophagic pathway, F. Cuzin; and more specifically the formation of autophagolysosomes. We pos- Unité 636 de l’Institut de la Santé et, de la Recherche Médicale, Nice, France. tulate that neurodegeneration in LSDs is caused by secondary storage No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg. of toxic protein aggregates due to an impairment of autophagy. org for updates in the online database. PL05. Identification of 3 novel genes that cause X-linked mental PL02. DNA Repair, genome maintenance and human disease retardation; AP1S2, CUL4B and ZDHHC9. M. Radman; F. Raymond1, P. Tarpey2, G. Turner3, R. Stevenson4, C. Schwartz4, J. Gecz5, P. Faculté de Médecine, Necker, Université Paris 5, Paris, France. Futreal2, M. Stratton2, on behalf of the GOLD (Genetics of Learning Disability) No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg. study; org for updates in the online database. 1Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3University of Newcastle, New- PL03. Human neuroimaging - contributions to neurogenetics castle, Australia, 4JC Self Research Institute of Human Genetics, Greenwood, R. Frackowiak; SC, United States, 5University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, UCL, Phenotypic variability, genetic heterogeneity and the high number of London, United Kingdom. disease genes estimated to be involved has made the identification of Voxel based morphometry (VBM) is a new way of analysing structural causative gene abnormalities in X-linked mental retardation complex. MR images. VBM can characterise differences in structural MRI scans To identify further novel disease genes we have used a systematic of diseases influenced by genetic variation. In X-linked Kallmann’s syn- mutational screen of the X chromosome in 250 families with multiple drome there is selective hypertrophy of the pyramidal tract in patients affected members with mental retardation. with mirror movements compared to those without. In a dominantly We report the identification of 3 novel genes that cause X-linked men- inherited, dyspraxic, language-impaired family, gene penetrance is tal retardation. full and associated with abnormal structure and function of the cau- AP1S2 encodes the sigma 2 subunit of the adaptor protein 1 complex. date nucleus and other areas. Atrophy of the caudate in affected fam- We have identified 3 truncating mutations associated with mental re- ily members is associated with task-related hyperactivity, suggesting tardation, hypotonia, delayed walking, absent speech and aggressive functional compensation. Presently unaffected individuals from fami- behaviour. The AP1 complex is present in endosomes and the trans- lies of Huntington’s patients show caudate atrophy that correlates with Golgi network and binds vesicle cargo proteins destined for transport genetic status. Caudate atrophy correlates with clinical score and CAG into different cellular compartments. codon repeats on chromosome 4. Studies with Turner’s and partial CUL4B is an ubiquitin E3 ligase subunit involved in targeting of pro- Turner’s patients have identified focal structural brain abnormalities. teins for intracellular degradation. We have identified 8 mutations, 5 Candidate regions on the X-chromosome have been found that influ- truncating and 3 conserved missense mutations. Additional clinical ence amygdala and orbital frontal cortex development. A structural features include macrocephaly, central obesity, hypogonadism, pes amygdala abnormality in patients predicts failure to recognise fear in cavus and tremor were observed in some of the affected individuals photographs of faces; a prediction that is now confirmed. These stud- but not all. ies suggest that imaging is an efficient way of associating candidate ZDHHC9 is a palmitoyltransferase that catalyses the post-translational genes with quantitative measures of brain structure and function and modification of NRAS and HRAS. The phenotype associated with the that informative intermediate phenotypes can be described that predict 2 truncating and 2 conserved missense mutations found were mental future disease in asymptomatic at-risk individuals. retardation and a Marfanoid habitus. This systematic strategy has identified 3 entirely novel disease caus- PL04. Neurodegeneration in lysosomal storage diseases is ing mechanisms which would not have been predicted by a candidate associated with impairment of autophagy gene approach and illustrates that defects in many different cellular A. Fraldi1, C. Settembre1, C. Spampanato1, R. de Pablo1, D. L. Medina1, L. Jah- processes may be sufficient to cause a mental retardation phenotype. reiss2, A. Lombardi1, C. Venturi3, C. Tacchetti3, D. C. Rubinsztein2, A. Ballabio1,4; 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy, 2Depart- PL06. Mutations in LRP2, coding for the multi-ligand receptor ment of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University megalin, cause Donnai-Barrow and Faciooculoacousticorenal of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Department of Experimental (FOAR) syndromes Medicine and §MicroSCoBiO Research Center and IFOM Center of Cell Oncol- S. Kantarci1, L. Al-Gazali2, R. Hill3, D. Donnai4, G. C. M. Black4, E. Bieth5, N. ogy and Ultrastructure, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 4Medical Genetics, Chassaing5,6, D. Lacombe6, K. Devriendt7, A. Teebi8, M. Loscertales1, C. Rob- Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy. son9, T. Liu10, D. T. MacLaughlin1, K. M. Noonan1, M. K. Russell1, C. A. Walsh3,9, Autophagy is the mechanism responsible for the turn-over of intra- P. K. Donahoe1, B. R. Pober1,9; cellular organelles and digestion of protein aggregates which are se- 1Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2UAE Univer- questered by autophagosomes and degraded upon the fusion of the sity, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates, 3Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, autophagosome with the lysosome. Several neurodegenerative dis- Boston, MA, United States, 4University of Manchester and St Mary’s Hospital, orders, such as Alzheimer, Parkinson and Huntington diseases are Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Hopital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 6Hôpital Pel- associated with an impairment of autophagy. We have analyzed the ligrin, Bordeaux, France, 7University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 8Weill Cornell autophagic pathway in two different murine models of lysosomal stor- Medical College in Qatar and Hamad Medical City, Doha, Qatar, 9Children’s age disorders (LSDs), Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency (MSD) and Muco- Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 10Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, polysaccharidosis type IIIA (MPS-IIIA). Western blotting, immunofluo- MA, United States. rescence and immunohistochemical analyses using anti-LC3 antibod- Donnai-Barrow syndrome (DBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder ies demonstrated a significant intracellular accumulation of autophagic characterized by hypertelorism, myopia, corpus callosum agenesis, (LC3-positive) vacuoles in MEFs as well as in several brain regions of deafness, omphalocele, and congenital diaphragmatic hernia. There is both MSD and MPS-IIIA mice. Accumulation of autophagosomes was phenotypic overlap with Faciooculoacousticorenal syndrome (FOAR). also confirmed by ultrastructural analysis. Co-staining of MEFs using Genetic mapping using Affymetrix 10K SNP arrays on four DBS chil- both anti-LC3 and anti-LAMP2 antibodies demonstrated that autopha- dren from one large consanguineous kindred identified a 17 cM region gosomes do not co-localize with lysosomes, suggesting the presence of homozygosity-by-descent on chromosome 2q23.3-q31.1. This was of a fusion defect. As a consequence of an impairment of autophagy, refined and confirmed by microsatellite marker analysis in three ad- a massive intracellular accumulation of ubiquitin-positive aggregates ditional multiplex DBS families. and an increased number of mitochondria with altered membrane po- Sequencing of candidate genes in six DBS and one FOAR kindreds tential were detected in the brain of both MSD and MPS-IIIA mice. In- revealed homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the 79 terestingly, the build-up of polyubiquitinated proteins and dysfunctional exon LRP2 gene in all cases. LRP2 encodes megalin, a ~600 kDa Plenary Lectures  transmembrane protein that mediates receptor-mediated endocytosis and specific techniques are required to accurately detect the very low for re-uptake of numerous ligands including lipoproteins, sterols, vita- levels of cell free fetal DNA in the maternal plasma. This study is to min-binding proteins, and hormones in the renal proximal tubules and validate the use of Real Time PCR, a widely used technique that can other sites, and may also play a role in Sonic hedgehog signaling. detect very low levels of Y chromosomal sequence, and to assess the The DBS/FOAR phenotypes mirror those of megalin knock out mice use of a highly sensitive PCR technique, pyrophosphorolysis-activated which have perinatal lethality due to respiratory insufficiency, and mal- polymerisation (PAP), for fetal sex determination. Both techniques de- formations of the forebrain and eye (agenesis of the corpus callosum, tected Y chromosome sequence at very low levels with high specificity holoprosencephaly, microphthalmia). Among surviving mice, low-mo- and sensitivity. Furthermore, the PAP technique was shown to be more lecular weight proteinuria with spillage of retinol binding and vitamin robust than the Real Time PCR as none of the samples tested failed to D-binding proteins has been demonstrated. We confirmed comparable meet the acceptance criteria. Combining the two techniques for male urinary abnormalities in our patients, which may serve as a valuable fetal sex detection from maternal blood plasma increases the sensitiv- diagnostic marker. ity and specificity in this series. This study shows that the PAP assay We suggest that malformations of DBS/FOAR result from mutations in can be used for Y chromosome detection using ffDNA. Furthermore, LRP2 and absence of functional megalin leading to embryonic failure by using PAP in combination with Real Time PCR more reliable early to uptake and deliver key lipophilic compounds required for normal de- non invasive prenatal sexing can be performed. velopment. This identifies pathways important in neural and diaphrag- matic development and suggests potential targets for therapy. PL09. Neurodegenerative dementias C. Van Broeckhoven; PL07. RAB23 mutations in Carpenter syndrome imply an Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, unexpected role for Hedgehog signaling in cranial suture VIB; Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Institute Born-Bunge; and University of Ant- development and obesity werp, Antwerpen, Antwerpen, Belgium. D. Jenkins1, D. Seelow2, F. S. Jeehee3, C. A. Perlyn4, L. G. Alonso5, D. F. The neurodegenerative dementias are characterized by different clini- Bueno6, D. Donnai7, D. Josifiova8, I. M. J. Mathijssen9, J. E. V. Morton10, K. cal and pathological phenotypes and are diagnosed according to spec- Orstavik11, E. Sweeney12, S. A. Wall13, J. L. Marsh14, P. Nurnberg2, M. Passos- ified criteria. In brain the pathology shows different neurodegenerative Bueno15, A. O. M. Wilkie1; profiles due to the deposition of defined proteins in defined areas that 1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Cologne are characteristic for the disease e.g. tau within neurons in tauopa- Center for Genomics and Institute for Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 3Centro thies. Neurodegenerative dementias are known to have a genetic ae- de Estudos de Genomca Humano, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 4Washington University tiology though multifactorial in nature meaning that both genetic and School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, United States, 5Universidade Federal de Sao environmental factors contribute to the expression of the disease. Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 6Universidade de Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 7Uni- Since almost 20 years molecular and epidemiological geneticists are versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 8Guy’s Hospital, London, aiming at identifying the genetic variations that underlie the disease United Kingdom, 9Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 10Bir- process. Initial results were obtained in families in which the disease mingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 11Rikshospitalet- was apparently only genetically since the disease was transmitted as Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway, 12Liverpool Women’s Hospital, an autosomal dominant trait. As in most multifactorial diseases, also in Liverpool, United Kingdom, 13John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, all dementia subtypes rare families with a monogenic trait have been 14St John’s Mercy Medical Center, St Louis, MO, United States, 15Universidade identified. In these families causal genes were identified that when de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. mutated produced a 100% risk for the carrier of the mutated gene. Carpenter syndrome is a pleiotropic disorder with autosomal reces- The proteins involved are being studied in detail and have resulted in sive inheritance, the cardinal features of which include craniosynos- important biological hypothesis that are currently being pursued for the tosis, polysyndactyly, obesity and cardiac defects. Using homozygos- development of suitable and more effective treatments e.g. the amyloid ity mapping, we found linkage to chromosome 6p12.1-q12 and, in 15 cascade in Alzheimer’s dementia. For the majority of patients where independent families, identified five different mutations (4 truncating, 1 the disease is multifactorial, not many susceptibility genes have been missense) in RAB23, which encodes a member of the RAB GTPase identified i.e. genes that carry a genetic variation that predisposes to family of vesicle transport proteins and acts as a negative regulator disease in conjunction with environmental factors. One reason is that of Hedgehog (HH) signaling. In 10 patients the disease was caused each one of these genetic variants contributes a small fraction of the by homozygosity for the same nonsense mutation, L145X, which re- risk and that not yet the right instruments are available for finding these sides on a common haplotype, indicative of a founder effect in patients small effects contributed by several distinct genes. Nevertheless, the of northern European descent. Surprisingly, nonsense mutations of current knowledge of genetics and biology of neurodegeneration in Rab23 in open brain mice cause recessive embryonic lethality with dementias indicates that there is substantial crosstalk between the dif- neural tube defects, suggesting a species difference in the require- ferent pathways that lead to disease substantiating the complexity of ment for RAB23 during early development. The discovery of RAB23 brain and disease. mutations in Carpenter syndrome implicates HH signaling in cranial suture biogenesis, an unexpected finding given that craniosynostosis PL10. Selective reduction of cerebellar iron accumulation in is not usually associated with mutation of other HH pathway compo- Friedreich’s Ataxia obtained by a moderate defriprone chelation nents, and provides a new molecular target for studies of obesity. treatment A. Munnich1, N. Boddaert2, Z. I. Cabantchik3; PL08. Y chromosome detection by Real Time PCR and 1Med. Genetics Clinic and Research Unit INSERM 393, Pediatric Radiology pyrophosphorolysis-activated polymerization using free fetal Unit, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades and Université Paris V DNA isolated from maternal plasma. René Descartes, Paris, France, 3Dept of Biol. Chemistry and Charles E. Smith H. B. Schlecht1, E. M. J. Boon2, P. Martin3, G. Daniels3, R. H. A. M. Vossen4, J. Psychobiology Laboratory, A. Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, Hebrew T. den Dunnen4, B. Bakker2, R. Elles1; University of Jerusalem, Safra Campus-Givat Ram, Jerusalem, Israel. 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, Background. Friedreich’s ataxia (FA) is caused by a deficiency in 2Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3International frataxin needed for mitochondrial Fe-S cluster (ISC) formation and Blood Group Reference Centre, Bristol, United Kingdom, 4Leiden Genome heme protein synthesis. The resulting dysfunctional respiratory chain Technology Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands. activity and ensuing oxidative damage are accompanied and possibly The discovery of cell-free fetal DNA in the maternal blood plasma has associated with mitochondrial iron accumulation. Previous attempts to potential for the development of non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of fe- overcome the above deficiencies have led to the successful applica- tal sex and genetic traits. Current fetal genetic testing relies mainly on tion of the CoQ analog Idebenone for reducing cardiac complications. 10 invasive testing by chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis, which Failure of Idebenone to slow-down neurodegeneration has led to us to carry a significant risk of fetal loss (1-2%). Detection of Y chromo- consider the removal of regionally accumulated iron as a possible ad- somal sequence of fetal origin is highly advantageous for early fetal junct therapy in FA. The rationale used in this work rested on the con- sex determination where there is a risk of X-linked genetic disorders cept that oxidative damage is generally caused by iron accumulated or conditions such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Highly sensitive in chemically labile (redox-active and chelatable) forms, but also that Plenary Lectures  labile iron can be safely relocated from areas of accumulation to areas Acknowledgments: The clinical aspects of the study were supported of deprivation. We therefore considered the possibility of: a. selective- by APHP, GE (France) and Association Francaise contre les Myopa- ly dissipating clusters of labile-iron with chelators that demonstrably thies (AFM) and the basic studies by the Israel Science Foundation reach the CNS and that can remove labile iron from cell organelles ISF (Israel) and AFIRN. Deferiprone was a kind gift from Apopharma such as mitochondria and relocate it to cellular and extracellular tar- (Canada). gets b. applying chelation regimens that minimally affect the iron status of individuals known to have no systemic iron overload by using chela- PL11. Huntington’s disease : Intracellular dynamics and tors that can safely transfer labile tissue iron to plasma apotransferrin. neuronal apoptosis Methods. An efficacy-toxicity phase I-II open trial was conducted for F. Saudou, S. Humbert; 6 months on 11 FA adolescents (13-23 years) with deferiprone (20-30 Institut Curie, UMR146 CNRS, Bat. 110, Orsay, France. mg/kg/day) administered together with antioxidants (Idebenone). The Huntington’s disease (HD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder that patients were monitored: monthly or every other month by MRI, so as affects 1 in 10000 individuals of European origin. The neuropathology to gain information about regional iron levels from R2*=1/T2* values; of HD involves neuronal dysfunction and the selective death of striatal bimonthly by biochemical and haematological tests and at entrance neurons in the brain. The mutation that causes disease is an abnormal and at exit for ataxia by ICARS and Purdue pegboard test. Nine of the expansion of a polyglutamine (polyQ) stretch in the N-terminus of the eleven FA patients completed the study. 350 kD protein huntingtin. The mechanisms by which huntingtin in- Results. Brain iron content monitored by MRI, indicated that at en- duces dysfunction and death of neurons in the brain are not clearly un- trance FA patients had smaller and irregularly shaped dentate nuclei derstood. These could involve the gain of a new toxic function as well and proton relaxation rates R2* significantly higher (p<0.027) than as the loss of the beneficial activities intrinsic to wild type huntingtin. age-matched controls. Deferiprone (DFP) intake led to a progressive Indeed, huntingtin possesses anti-apoptotic properties as observed in and significant decrease in R2* (p<0.002) in the dentate nuclei of 8/9 cell culture and animal models. DFP-treated patients and none in untreated patients. After 6 months We have used 3D fast video microscopy techniques to study the in- treatment the relative decrease in R2* was proportional to the value tracellular dynamics in normal and pathological situations. Using this at the onset of treatment, indicating the labile nature of iron in FA den- approach we have unravelled a function of huntingtin in the micro- tate nuclei but not in other brain areas and the possible attainment of tubule-based transport of neurotrophic factors such as BDNF. In the an objective clinical endpoint. Clinical benefits were manifested espe- pathological situation, huntingtin-stimulated BDNF transport is altered. cially in the youngest patients as: disappearance of constipation and Reduced BDNF transport leads to a decrease in neurotrophic support incontinence, improvement of manipulative dexterity and of ataxic gait, and to neurotoxicity that are both rescued by wild-type huntingtin. Our fluency of speech, subjective signs of neuropathy but no changes in results demonstrate that the anti-apoptotic properties of huntingtin are hematological indices. linked to the ability of huntingtin to promote transport of BDNF in the Conclusion. Deferiprone evoked removal of labile iron accumulating brain. in spinocerebellar tracts of FA patients. The ensuing clinical improve- The development and the use of relevant neuronal models of HD al- ments indicate for the first time that local iron chelation might reduce lowed us to identify molecular mechanisms and signal transduction and possibly reverse oxidation-induced brain injury, particularly at ear- pathways that control neuronal death in HD. We will report recent find- ly stages of the disease. The results of the clinical pilot study warrant ings that explain how these signaling pathways inhibit the toxicity of controlled prospective studies aimed at assessing iron chelation alone mutant polyQ-huntingtin in disease. and in combination with antioxidants for treating FA and other diseases of regional ion accumulation, NBIA (neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation).Concurrent Symposia  Concurrent Symposia John Sulston (www.hgc.gov.uk/Client/news_item.asp?NewsId=38) and probably used by individuals, although not as state-funded screening. S01. The increasing impact of internet on genetic services However being used is not the same as being useful! Software claim- S. Aymé, A. Rath, V. Thibaudeau, V. Fonteny, B. Urbero, K. Marazova, M. ing to interpret your genome will become the new palmistry. There is Levi-Strauss; a pressing need to develop research programmes within existing and INSERM sc11, Paris, France. in new cohort studies that include intermediate as well as disease With the widespread dissemination of the internet and the multiplica- phenotypes and environmental exposures to discover what it means tion of web-based information services, the question of to what extent prospectively to carry a particular genotype. The cheap genotyping this affects the behaviour of the stakeholders needs to be addressed. techniques behind the drive for the 1000 euro genome will help in this For the patients, potential benefits are a better understanding of their research although more useful in epidemiology may be selected gene disease and its mode of inheritance, improved dialogue with health by gene sequencing of many thousands of samples in parallel. The care professionals, the ability to more easily locate the expert service first fruits of such cohort research could be the introduction of clinically that they can be referred to, and occasionally to be able to participate useful newborn genetic screens sequencing 100 genes or so. Detec- in clinical research. For the patients support groups, the benefits are tion of filaggrin null mutations might be an example where simple strat- improved visibility, which leads to an expansion of their membership egies might prevent eczema related allergies. One of the problems and allows them to help more people. For the non-specialised health- with the idea of genetic profiling at birth, or at any other time for that care professional, the benefits are similar to those for the patients with matter, is that most genetic effects are likely to be conditional on the the ultimate benefit being to deliver better care. At the beginning of person’s developmental experience and/or the prevailing environment. the internet era, experts feared they would no longer be consulted, Thus the value of knowing just one’s genotype is also conditional. By due to the wide availability of what they considered as their specific the time the 1000 euro genome arrives we may have more useful tests added-value. Experience shows that this fear was unfounded. Taking based on epigenetic/methylation profiling to detect prenatal develop- Orphanet (www.orpha.net) as an example of a website, and looking at mental programming or based on gene expression patterns in periph- the behaviour of the site visitors during the past ten years and at the eral blood cells under challenge from specific stressors. impact in terms of referral to listed services, it seems like the positive effects outweigh the negative ones. Additional services are expected S04. Better education for medical geneticists and non- from the community. The physicians and biologists would like to ac- geneticists in the new genomics era cess mutation databases by population, the physicians are expecting R. M. Harden; more practical information and the patients would like to be partners Tay Park House, Dundee, United Kingdom. in the development of an encyclopaedia concerning their own experi- No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg. ence. org for updates in the online database. S02. Is there a role for the Human Geneticist in the genomic S05. MicroRNAs as oncogenes and tumor suppressors revolution S. M. Hammond; C. J. Epstein; Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of North Carolina, University of California, San Francisco, Department of Pediatrics and Institute Chapel Hill, NC, United States. for Human Genetics, San Francisco, CA, United States. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short, non-coding RNAs that post-transcrip- With the completion of the human genome project, the belief that vir- tionally regulate gene expression. Over 450 miRNA genes have been tually all human diseases and responses to therapy are the products identified in the human genome. We have undertaken the study of of both genetic and environmental factors has firmly taken hold, and miRNA function in mammals. Using a custom microarray platform, we an extensive search for mutations/variants that influence susceptibil- investigated miRNA expression patterns in mammalian development ity to disease and the efficacy and toxicity of drugs is well underway. and in cancer. We found that many miRNAs are down-regulated in The anticipated outcomes of this research are a better understand- tumor cell lines. This downregulation is not due to decreased transcrip- ing of disease pathogenesis and the development of genetic tests to tion, but is due to reduced maturation during miRNA biogenesis. On predict who will be at risk for what. It is believed by many that genetic the other hand, several miRNA genes are over-expressed in tumor risk assessment or profiling will lead to a genomic or “personalized” cell lines and primary tumors. Seven of these cancer-associated miR- medicine in which individualized strategies will be used to prevent the NAs are clustered in a single primary transcript termed chr13orf 25 or onset of disease and to improve the efficacy of therapeutic agents. Al- OncomiR-1. This cluster is located in a region amplified in lymphoma though human geneticists will certainly be involved in the research, the and several solid malignancies. Ectopic expression of these miRNAs role of the medical (clinical) geneticist in the delivery of this genomic in a mouse model of lymphoma accelerated disease progression. In medicine, if it actually comes to pass, is less certain. Given their small addition, the lymphomas had reduced apoptosis and were more dis- numbers, medical geneticists would certainly not be in a position to be- seminated into secondary regions. This work establishes non-coding come the principal providers of genetic testing and risk assessment for RNAs, and specifically miRNAs, as oncogenes in human cancers. the greater population, and this responsibility would fall to others. Nev- ertheless, geneticists do have a special knowledge of genetics and hu- S06. Small RNAs in gametogenesis man disease that should be brought to bear on the provision of these A. Girard, A. Aravin, R. Sachidanandam, M. Carmell, G. Hannon; services. This can be accomplished by playing a role in the education Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Watson School of Biological Sciences, Cold in genetics of other physicians and health providers and by serving as Spring Harbor, NY, United States. designated referral sources for problems that may be too complex for Argonaute proteins and associated small RNAs have critical role in those without substantial knowledge of genetics to handle alone. At development by regulating messenger RNA stability, protein synthesis, the same time, medical geneticists need to continue to provide and, chromatin organization and genome structure. In animals, Argonaute indeed, to expand the services that are uniquely theirs to give: the proteins segregate into two subfamilies. Ubiquitously expressed mem- diagnosis, management (including treatment), and counseling of pa- bers of Argonaute subfamily bind 21-23 nt RNA and act in RNA inter- tients and families with Mendelian, chromosomal, and mitochondrial ference and in microRNA-mediated gene regulation. The Piwi subfam- disorders, malformations, and syndromes. ily is involved in germline-specific events such as germline stem cell maintenance and meiosis. Particularly, three members of the Piwi sub- S03. What use the 1000 euro genome? family in mouse are critical for successful spermatogenesis. Recently M. E. Pembrey; we identified a new class of 25-30 nt RNAs (piRNAs) as a binding Institute of Child Health, University College London, United Kingdom. partner of Piwi proteins in the mammalian male germ cells. piRNAs are Whatever this use of the word ‘genome’ includes in terms of coverage highly abundant in germ cells and accumulate at the onset of meiosis. and DNA sequence information, the 1000 euro genome will detect a Thousands of identified piRNAs show distinctive localization patterns vast amount of personal genetic variation including rare mutations. It in the genome, being predominantly grouped into 20-90-kilobase clus- will become commercially available in less than 20 years was the con- ters scattered throughout genome. We explore biogenesis of piRNAs clusion of a 2005 UK report on genetic profiling by a group chaired by and function of Piwi-piRNA complexes in the mammalian germline.Concurrent Symposia  S07. Vertebrate miRNA diversity variants that influence asthmatic inflammation, positional cloning of E. Cuppen; previously unknown genes is identifying a high proportion of novel Hubrecht Laboratory, Utrecht, The Netherlands. genes in the EMTU and revealing mechanistic pathways behind the MicroRNAs are 20- to 23-nucleotide RNA molecules that can regulate remodelling response. A disintegrin and metalloproteinase (ADAM)33 gene expression. Currently over 400 microRNAs have been experi- is one such susceptibility gene strongly associated with asthma that mentally identified in mammalian genomes, whereas estimates go up is preferentially expressed in the airway mesenchyme. Furthermore, to 1000 and beyond. We have used bioinformatic and experimental recent results suggest that variation in the gene may play a significant (microarray-based detection and massively parallel sequencing) ap- role in other diseases that involve tissue remodelling in response to proaches to get insight in the vertebrate microRNA repertoire and evo- chronic inflammation, and that this variation may act early in life, alter- lutionary dynamics. ing developmental processes, rendering tissue innately susceptible to Analysis of the microRNA content of human and chimpanzee brain remodelling. regions resulted in the identification of hundreds of novel microRNAs genes, many of which are not conserved beyond primates, indicating S10. Genetic and environmental factors in celiac disease their recent origin. Others are expanded in one species through du- L. M. Sollid; plication events, suggesting that evolution of microRNAs is an ongo- Institute of Immunology, Rikshospitalet, University of Oslo, Norway. ing process and that along with ancient, highly conserved microRNAs, Coeliac disease (CD) is an intestinal disorder which develops as a there are a number of emerging microRNAs that could contribute to result of interplay between genetic and enviromental factors. Particu- evolutionary processes and differences in human and chimpanzee lar HLA genes together with non-HLA genes predispose to the dis- brain function. ease. The concordance rate among monozygotic twins is about 75% whereas the concordance rate among HLA identical siblings is about S08. SLE susceptibility genes 30%. This suggests the involvement of non-HLA genes, but the many T. J. Vyse; attempts to identify non-HLA genes has been met with limited success. Imperial College, Molecular Genetics and Rheumatology Section, London, There is evidence for susceptibility genes located on chromosomes United Kingdom. 5q32, 2q33 and 19p13. By contrast, the HLA susceptibility genes in SLE is a generalised autoimmune disease affecting a wide range of CD are well characterised. The primary HLA association in the ma- tissues including skin, joints, bone marrow and kidneys, which afflicts jority of CD patients is with DQ2 and in the minority of patients with ~10,000 individuals in the UK. The disease is characterised by the DQ8. DQ2 (DQA1*05/DQB1*02 can be encoded in cis in DR3DQ2 production of autoantibodies to nuclear and cell-surface antigens. The individuals and in trans in individual being DR5DQ7/DR7DQ2 hetero- cause of the disease is poorly understood although genetic factors zygous). Among the multifactorial disorders with involvement of HLA contribute. The strategy adopted is to use both family-based and case- genes CD is unique, as a critical environmental factor has been identi- control methods to ascertain genetic association with SLE. To achieve fied, namely dietary gluten. Evidence suggests that CD4+ T cells are this we have established large collections of SLE cases (n=500) and central in controlling a multifaceted immune response to gluten that families (n=850). We have analysed approximately 100 different genes causes the characteristic disease pathology. Gluten reactive T cells (based on functional and positional candidacy) and found convincing can be isolated from small intestinal biopsies of coeliac patients but not evidence to support the role of genetic variation in five of these in SLE from non-coeliac controls. DQ2 or DQ8, but not other HLA molecules susceptibility. carried by patients, are the predominant restriction elements for these How nuclear autoantigens are targeted in SLE has been a subject of T cells. Lesion derived T cells mainly recognise deamidated gluten controversy. Nucleic acids can bind Toll-like receptors on antigen pre- peptides, and this the deamidation is mediated in vivo by transgluta- senting dendritic cells, which stimulates an interferon response and minase 2 (TG2). A number of distinct T cell epitopes exist within gluten. thereby augments dendritic cell function. Interferon regulatory genes DQ2 and DQ8 bind the epitopes so that the glutamate residues intro- (IRFs) are key molecules within this amplification loop and we have duced by TG2 are accommodated in pockets of the binding site which shown that patients with lupus are almost twice as likely to carry ge- have preference for negatively charged side chains. Notably, TG2 can netic variants in IRF5 that generate more transcripts, in part due to also generate complexes between gluten and TG2. These complexes differential polyadenylation. Autoantibodies in SLE are of the IgG iso- may permit gluten reactive T cells to provide help to TG2 specific B type and bind with high affinity to their targets, implicating the adaptive cells thereby explaining the occurrence of gluten TG2 auto-antibodies immune system in pathogenesis. We examined a number of candidate which is a characteristic feature of CD patients exposed to gluten. genes acting at the T-B lymphocyte interface and identified associa- tions with SLE at the CTLA4 locus and a stronger signal arising from S11. The genetic architecture of Skin pigmentation the tumour necrosis factor family member, OX40L. Finally, the IgG Fc M. D. Shriver; receptor locus on human chromosome 1q23 has been extensively The Pennsylvania State University, Department of Anthropology, University studied in autoimmunity genetics. We have provided strong evidence Park, PA, United States. that the locus does contribute to the risk of SLE as a result of copy No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg. number variation. Reduction in neutrophil FCGR3B expression predis- org for updates in the online database. poses to end organ damage in the kidney, probably through defective removal of immune complexes. S12. Novel Insights into melanoma genetics In conclusion, we have identified lupus susceptibility genes operating B. C. Bastian1, J. C. Curtin1, J. Bauer1, A. Viros1, J. Fridlyand1, P. Kanetsky2, T. in both the adaptive and innate immune systems. Gene effects pro- Landi3, D. Pinkel1; mote initial autoantigen targeting, aberrant regulation of the immune 1University of California, San Francisco, Comprehensive Cancer Center, San response and finally accentuate end organ damage. Francisco, CA, United States, 2University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, DC, United States. S09. New pathways in pathogenesis of allergic asthma: ADAM Melanocytic neoplasms display significant phenotypic variation.We and end organ susceptibility genes used a genetic approach to compare primary melanomas from muco- J. Holloway; sal membranes, the non-hair bearing skin of the palms and soles (acral Human Genetics and Infection, Inflammation & Repair Divisions, School of melanomas), and sun-exposed skin with and without signs of chronic Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. sun-induced damage (CSD and non-CSD). We found differences in While asthma is an inflammatory disorder of the airways usually as- the degrees of genomic instability, the specific genomic regions that sociated with atopy, an important additional component is involvement are gained and lost, frequencies of mutations in specific genes, and of the epithelium and underlying mesenchyme acting as a trophic unit effects of genetic variants in the germline on melanoma risks. Melano- (EMTU). In addition to allergens, a wide range of environmental fac- mas on acral skin and mucosa had distinct patterns of frequent ampli- tors interact with the EMTU, such as virus infections, environmental fications and deletions involving very small segments of the genome, tobacco smoke and pollutants, to initiate tissue damage and aberrant indicating a unique type of genomic instability. By contrast amplifica- repair responses that are translated into remodelling of the airways. tions were rare in melanomas arising on some-exposed skin. Among While candidate gene association studies have revealed polymorphic these, BRAF mutations occurred in~ 60% of non-CSD melanomas but Concurrent Symposia  were significantly less frequent in CSD melanomas. We showed that by positional cloning. We have inactivated Evc in the mouse and show germline variants of MC1R are a major susceptibility factor for BRAF that Evc-/- mice develop an EvC-like syndrome, including short ribs, mutations among non-CSD melanomas. Further analysis our array short limbs, and dental abnormalities. LacZ driven by the Evc promoter CGH data suggested a genomic region harboring KIT to be important revealed that Evc is expressed in the developing bones and the oro- in melanomas on mucosa, acral skin and skin with CSD. Oncogenic facial region. We developed antibodies that localized the Evc protein mutations or focused copy number increases in the gene were found in to the base of the primary cilium. Recent studies of IFT mutants have 40% of acral and mucosal melanomas, and 30% of CSD melanomas. revealed that primary cilia are integral to Hedgehog signalling. Analy- These results suggest that the existing drugs such as imatanib and sis of the growth plate of Evc-/- mice shows delayed bone collar forma- new are inhibitors against KIT could be useful for certain melanoma tion and advanced maturation of chondrocytes. By in situ hybridization types. More recent studies correlating phenotypic alterations with the we detected that Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is expressed normally in the underlying genotype have shown that mutations in BRAF are associ- growth plates of Evc-/- mutants but expression of the Ihh downstream ated with distinct histopathological features of the primary tumor that genes Ptch1 and Gli1 were markedly decreased. Cilia formation is not can be combined to simple algorithms that can predict the mutation affected in Evc mutants and western blot analysis indicates that Gli3 status of BRAF with high accuracy. Our data show that melanoma is processing is normal. We conclude that Evc is required for Ihh signal- comprised of genetically and phenotypically distinct subtypes with dif- ling in endochondral bone formation. ferent requirements for treatment stratification. S15. Molecular basis of primary ciliary dyskinesia S13. Comprehensive analysis of the SRY-box 10 locus (SOX10): S. Amselem; Implications for diseases of neural crest derivatives INSERM U.654, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France. B. J. Pavan; Defects in structure and function of cilia have recently been associ- Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Insti- ated with a growing number of rare diseases. The phenotypic features tute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. of these so-called ciliopathies reflect the diverse biological properties The transcription factor SOX10 is a key regulator of genes involved of these evolutionarily conserved structures that protrude from the in neural-crest derived melanocytes, enteric neurons, and myelinating apical surface of most eukaryotic cells. Cilia, which contain a micro- Schwann cells. Mutations in the SOX10 gene are associated with hu- tubule cytoskeleton (axoneme) structurally related to the flagella of man diseases that affect these cell populations, including impaired pig- spermatozoa, can be classified according to their axonemal compo- mentation, enteric aganglionosis (e.g., Waardenburg-Shah syndrome), nents: primary cilia, with sensory function, are involved in a wide range and demyelinating peripheral neuropathy. While SOX10 targets have of disorders, whereas motile cilia are involved in the most prominent been identified, the mechanisms involved in the transcriptional regu- ciliopathy called primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). PCD is a rare res- lation of SOX10 remain elusive. Recently, we used comparative se- piratory disease, affecting approximately 1/16,000 individuals, due to quence analysis to identify highly-conserved, non-coding segments impaired mucociliary clearance. This disorder, usually transmitted as upstream of SOX10. We demonstrated that three of these segments an autosomal recessive trait, is characterized by chronic airway in- are encompassed by a 15-kb deletion residing ~ 50 kb upstream of flammation, male infertility, and, in approximately half of the patients, Sox10 in a mouse model of Waardenburg-Shah syndrome. Important- abnormal left-right asymmetry, defining the Kartagener syndrome. The ly, this deletion does not completely compromise Sox10 expression disease phenotype results from various axonemal defects involving in all tissues. Thus, other sequences at the Sox10 locus are likely in- the motile respiratory and embryonic nodal cilia, as well as the flag- volved in transcriptional regulation, and mutations in these sequences ella of spermatozoa. Its molecular basis is just beginning to be elu- may contribute to neural crest disorders in humans. cidated, with, to date, 5 genes known to be involved in that condition One goal of our lab is to fully characterize SOX10 regulatory sequences (i.e. DNAI1, DNAH5, DNAH11, RPGR, and TXNDC3). These results and to establish if mutations in these sequences contribute to human were obtained by various means, including original candidate-gene disease. Our studies involve four distinct research areas: (1) Testing approaches based on data from a one-billion-year-old unicellular flag- conserved segments for enhancer activity in cell lines; (2) Determin- ellar algae (Chalmydomonas reinhardtii) and from see urchin. The cur- ing if these conserved segments drive reporter gene expression in a rent challenges are to identify new PCD genes and to characterize tissue-specific manner in zebrafish and mouse; (3) Deleting these con- the molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in ciliary dyskinesia. served segments in BACs and testing for altered reporter gene expres- Flagellated protists like trypanosomes represents promising models to sion in transgenic mice; and (4) Screening these conserved segments achieve these goals. These lower eukaryotes possess genes for flag- for sequence variations in a panel of >600 DNA samples isolated from ellar motility whose inactivation reproduces the motility and ultra-struc- patients with enteric aganglionosis (Hirschsprung disease). These tural defects seen in patients with PCD. In addition, in spite of the evo- studies will provide important clues about the transcriptional regulation lutionary distance between these unicellular organisms and humans, of SOX10 and the full role of the transcription factor in human develop- the complementation of genetically modified strains of trypanosomes ment and disease. with human orthologous sequences seems conceivable. S14. Cilia in Skeletal Development: identification of Evc as a S16. Making sense of cilia: Bardet Biedl syndrome and other mediator of Ihh signalling ciliopathies V. L. Ruiz-Perez1, H. J. Blair2, M. Rodriguez-Andres1, M. Blanco3, Y. Liu2, H. P. L. Beales; Peters2, C. Miles2, J. A. Goodship2; The Institute of Child Health,, University College London, London, United King- 1Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones dom. Científicas, Madrid, Spain, 2Institute of Human Genetics, International Centre Despite knowledge of primary (non-motile) cilia for over a century, re- for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Department of Human Anato- cently ascribed functions have rekindled interest in these sessile cel- my and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, lular appendages. Less than a decade ago, cilia were associated with Madrid, Spain. renal cyst formation (through observations in mouse models of poly- Cilia are projections from the cell made of a core of microtubules and cystic kidney disease) although the mechanism is still hotly debated. associated proteins. Cilia are classified according to their microtubule More recently, developmental biologists have discovered the origins components: 9+2 motile cilia and 9+0 primary cilia, which are usu- of left-right asymmetry common to vertebrates and demonstrated the ally immotile. The importance of primary cilia in development, e.g. left- involvement of specialised “spinning” primary cilia. Our own area of right development, and postnatally, e.g. in the kidney, is increasingly study, the Bardet-Biedl syndrome along with nephronophthisis, both recognised. Intraflagellar transport (IFT) is required to generate cilia. causes of renal cyst formation have revealed the importance of pri- IFT mutants are embryonic lethal but generation of conditional alleles mary cilia in human disease. enables studies regarding requirement for cilia in later processes and In this lecture, I will describe the evidence for ciliary dysfunction in Bar- have shown that they play a critical role in endochondral bone forma- det-Biedl syndrome and how this is leading us to define extended roles tion. A limitation of this approach is that removal of cilia disrupts all of for cilia in developmental pathways. I will also describe an approach their many functions. We identified two causative genes for the human we have taken to discover the causes of other diseases of cilia function chondrodysplasia Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EvC, OMIM:225500) thus widening the scope of this emerging class of ciliopathies.Concurrent Symposia  S17. Towards a gene expression map of human brain by the NINDS, HHMI, the NLM Family Foundation and the Simons development Foundation. C.A.W. is an Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical S. Lindsay1, L. Puelles2, D. Vouyiouklis1, M. Muiras1, S. Woods3, M. Atkinson4, Institute. D. Davidson5, T. Strachan1, R. A. Baldock5; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, S19. Signalling Pathways Deduced from a Global Analysis of United Kingdom, 2University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain, 3PEALS Institute, New- Spatial Gene Expression Patterns castle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 4National e-Science A. Visel1, J. Carson2, J. Oldekamp1, M. Warnecke1, V. Jakubcakova1, X. Zhou1, Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 5MRC Human C. Shaw3, G. Alvarez-Bolado1, G. Eichele1; Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. 1Genes and Behavior Department, MPI Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Ger- Discoveries of human-specific gene expression or gene regulation many, 2Biological Monitoring and Modeling Department, Pacific Northwest Na- or gene content are being made at an accelerating pace and have tional Laboratory, Richland, WA, United States, 3Department of Molecular and sparked interest in molecular answers to the question of “what makes Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. us human”. Studies of the human brain and its development are ex- Automated in situ hybridization (ISH) permits construction of com- pected to provide at least some of these answers. prehensive atlases of gene expression patterns in mammals. When Characterising gene expression patterns is a crucial step towards un- web-accessible, such atlases become searchable digital expression derstanding the molecular determinants of development and the roles maps of individual genes and offer an entryway to elucidate genetic of genes in disease. However, human brain development involves interactions and signaling pathways. An atlas housing ~1,000 spatial transformations from a simple tube to a highly organised and complex gene expression patterns of the mid-gestation mouse embryo was 3-dimensional (3-D) structure. We have used a recently developed generated. Patterns were textually annotated using a controlled vo- method, optical projection tomography (OPT), to generate digital 3-D cabulary comprising 90 anatomical features. Hierarchical clustering models of early human brain development. These models can be used of annotations was carried out using distance scores calculated from both as frameworks, on to which normal or experimental gene expres- the similarity between pairs of patterns across all anatomical struc- sion data can be mapped, and as objects, which provide a valuable tures. This ordered hundreds of complex expression patterns into a means for visual interpretation and overview of complex morphological matrix that reflected the embryonic architecture and the relatedness data and within which morphological relationships can be investigated of patterns of expression. Clustering yielded twelve distinct groups of in silico. Together these models, mapped gene expression patterns expression pattern. Because of similarity of expression patterns within and the sophisticated software to manipulate and analyse them are a group, members of this group may be components of regulatory cas- being expanded towards the generation of an electronic atlas of hu- cades. We focused on group 7 which is composed of 80 genes, many man brain development (www.ncl.ac.uk/EADHB). This should be a of which encoded regulatory proteins such as Pax6, an evolutionary mechanism for systematically correlating human gene expression re- conserved transcriptional master mediator of the development. By sults with corresponding data in mouse and provide a scientific basis combining ISH on Pax6-deficient embryos, bioinformatics-driven Pax6 for extrapolation from mouse model to human disease which is crucial binding site selection, and Pax6 binding site validation by means of if we are to safely use the mouse (or other animal models) to inves- electromobility shift assays, we identify numerous new genes that are tigate the mechanisms underlying human disorders and for testing transcriptionally regulated by Pax6 in the developing neocortex. Hence therapeutic agents or interventions. cluster analysis of annotated gene expression patterns derived from More generally, human developmental studies bring with them ethical ISH is a novel approach to unravel components of signaling cascades and technical challenges and will need a large-scale, trans-national regulating critical aspects of mammalian development, physiology and effort in order to make the maximum effective use of the limited human pathophysiology. tissue (suitable for gene expression studies) that is being collected. DGEMap (Developmental Gene Expression Map) is an EU-funded S20. New mechanisms of human genetic disease Design Study with a multidisciplinary team which aims to define the M. De Gobbi1, V. Viprakasit2, J. Hughes1, C. Fisher1, V. J. Buckle1, H. Ayyub1, molecular genetic & informatics technologies and the organisational & R. J. Gibbons1, D. Vernimmen1, Y. Yoshinaga3, P. de Jong3, J. F. Chen4, E. M. collaborative structures necessary for a new research infrastructure to Rubin4, W. G. Wood1, D. Bowden5, D. R. Higgs1; meet these challenges within an appropriate ethical framework (www. 1MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, dgemap.org) Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Department of Pediatrics, Mahidol University, Bang- kok, Thailand, 3BACPAC Resources, Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, S18. Genetic and genomic studies of patterning in the human CA, United States, 4Genome Science, Genomic Division, Lawrence Berkeley cerebral cortex National Laboratory, CA, United States, 5Clinical Genetics Laboratory, Monash X. Piao, T. Sun, B. Chang, C. A. Walsh; Medical Centre, Clayton, Australia. Division of Genetics, Children’s Hospital Boston, Howard Hughes Medical In- We describe a new mechanism underlying human genetic disease by stitute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, and Departments of Neurology identifying a gain of function regulatory SNP (rSNP) that causes a form and Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. of alpha thalassaemia which occurs at polymorphic frequencies in The human cerebral cortex is distinguished from that of other species Melanesia. Association studies localised the mutation to a 168kb seg- by its remarkable size, its subdivision into lobes and regions with dis- ment of the genome including the alpha globin locus but conventional tinct functions, and the relative specialization of the left and right hemi- analyses failed to detect any molecular defect. After re-sequencing spheres for complementary functions, with the left usually dominant this region and using a combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation for language and mathematical ability. Remarkably, genetic malfor- and expression analysis on a tiled oligonucleotide array, a regulatory mations of human cerebral cortex can affect different cortical regions SNP (rSNP) was identified in a nondescript region of the genome lying preferentially, potentially identifying genes involved in generating area- between the alpha globin genes and their highly conserved, remote, specific patterns in human cortex. Mutations in GPR56, which encodes upstream regulatory elements. The rSNP creates a new promoter-like an unusual G-protein coupled receptor, cause a recessively inherited element which interferes with normal activation of all downstream al- disorder that preferentially affects the frontal lobe (bilateral frontopa- pha-like genes. This not only demonstrates a new mechanism of hu- rietal polymicrogyria), and specific GPR56 alleles cause remarkably man genetic disease but also illustrates an important general strategy localized frontal defects. Understanding the regulation of GPR56 ex- for distinguishing between neutral and functionally important rSNPs. pression may reveal additional factors that pattern the cortex. In order to identify genes with potential differences in expression between left S21. Chromosome dynamics in cytokine gene expression and right hemisphere, we used SAGE to compare right and left peri- C. Spilianakis, T. Town, R. A. Flavell; sylvian cortex at 12-14 weeks gestation, and found substantial num- Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, bers of genes with differential levels of expression, notably LMO4. We CT, United States. are presently extending these studies to earlier developmental ages. In the last few years, we have found that regulatory elements on one Finally, a recently described human brain malformation preferentially chromosome associate with genes on another chromosome. The sys- disrupts the right perisylvian region but not the left, suggesting a gene tem that we study is the differentiation of naïve, precursor CD4 T cells that may be involved in hemisphere-specific development. Supported into different kinds of effector helper T cells. We first observed inter-Concurrent Symposia 10 chromosomal association of the TH1 ifnγ locus and TH2 loci, which S24. Stem cell renewal and the Nanog gene are mutually exclusively expressed by two subtypes of differentiated T A. Smith; helper cells, precedes differentiation and may act as a checkpoint for T Wellcome Trust Centre for Stem Cell Research, Department of Biochemistry, cell fate determination. Since this primary observation, we have found School of the Biological Sciences, Cambridge, United Kingdom. several other cases of interchromosomal associations between differ- No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg. ent cytokine loci in the naïve T cell precursors. Interestingly, upon TH org for updates in the online database. cell differentiation, these associations are terminated and replaced by interactions between expressed loci. Regulatory elements in one locus S25. The role of Pax5 in B-cell commitment and appear to play an active role in orchestrating processes across these lymphomagenesis chromosomes. The interchromosomal interactions we describe appear C. Cobaleda1, W. Jochum2, M. Busslinger1; to direct either activatory or silencing roles in gene transcription. 1Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Pathology, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. S22. Molecular mechanisms of congenital hyperinsulinism Lineage commitment and differentiation to a mature cell type are con- P. De Lonlay1,2, C. Bellanné-Chantelot3, I. Giurgea1, M. Ribeiro4, V. Valayan- sidered to be unidirectional and irreversible processes under physi- nopoulos1, Y. Aigrain5, J. Robert6, F. Brunelle7, J. Rahier8, C. Fékété5, Y. de ological conditions. Mature B lymphocytes critically depend on the Keyzer9, F. Jaubert10; transcription factor Pax5 for their differentiation and function. Here we 1Service de neuropédiatrie et de maladies métaboliques, Hôpital Necker show that conditional Pax5 deletion allowed mature B cells from pe- Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 2INSERM-U781, Paris, France, 3Service de ripheral lymphoid organs to dedifferentiate in vivo back to early uncom- biologie moléculaire, Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 41Service mitted progenitors in the bone marrow, which rescued T-lymphopoiesis Hospitalier Frédéric Joliot, Département de Recherche Médicale, Direction des in the thymus of T cell-deficient mice. These B cell-derived T-lympho- Sciences du Vivant,, Orsay, France, 5Service de chirurgie viscérale, Hôpital cytes carried not only immunoglobulin heavy- and light-chain gene Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 6Service de diabétologie, Hôpital rearrangements, but also participated as functional T cells in immune Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 7Service de radiologie pédiatrique, reactions. Notably, mice lacking Pax5 in mature B cells also developed Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 8Service d’anatomopathologie, aggressive lymphomas, which were identified by their gene expression Université de Louvain, Louvain, Belgium, 9INSERM-U781, Hôpital Necker En- profile as progenitor cell tumours. Hence, the complete loss of Pax5 fants-Malades, Paris, France, 10Service d’anatomopathologie, Hôpital Necker in late B cells could initiate lymphoma development and uncovered Enfants-Malades, Paris, France. an extraordinary plasticity of mature peripheral B cells despite their Persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (HI) is the most advanced differentiation stage. important cause of hypoglycemia. HI is a heterogeneous disorder which may be divided into two forms on the basis of the histopathologi- S26. Copy number variation in the human genome cal lesion, but which are clinically indistinguishable: diffuse (DiHI) and S. W. Scherer; focal (FoHI). Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. FoHI is characterized by somatic islet-cell hyperplasia, which is as- The advent of genome-scanning technology and comparative DNA sociated with hemi- or homozygosity of a paternally inherited mutation analysis has uncovered a significant extent of structural variation in the of the sulfonylurea-receptor (ABCC8 or SUR1) or the inward rectifying human genome. Structural variants can include microscopic and more potassium channel genes (KCNJ11 or Kir6.2) on chromosome 11p15, commonly submicroscopic deletions, duplications, insertions, and and loss of the maternal allele in the hyperplastic islets. The focal le- large-scale copy number variants - collectively termed copy number sion is a sporadic event, as indicated by the somatic molecular abnor- variants (CNVs) or polymorphisms - as well as, inversions and translo- mality in the pancreas, the observation of discordant identical twins cations. CNVs are the most prevalent form of structural variation and and our experience. However, FoHI occurring in consanguineous fam- they can comprise millions of nucleotides of heterogeneity within every ily can repeat with a diffuse form. genome, having an important contribution to human diversity and dis- DiHI is a heterogeneous disorder which can be caused by various de- ease susceptibility. We have been applying numerous experimental fects in the regulation of insulin secretion by the pancreatic beta-cell. and data mining approaches to catalogue the complete complement of The same genes can be implicated in neonatal diabetes or MODY. CNVs in worldwide populations, as well as to characterize the genomic These include: features and affects of CNVs. Our collective data, integrated with all i) channelopathies affecting either the SUR1 or the KIR6.2 channel; other available information, is released in the ‘Database of Genomic Recessive ABCC8 mutations and, more rarely, recessive KCNJ11 mu- Variants’ (http://projects.tcag.ca/variation/), which we are continually tations, are responsible for the majority of diffuse and severe neonatal curating and upgrading. The database serves as a resource to assist HI resistant to medical treatment. Dominant ABCC8 mutations are re- numerous clinical research studies. Our latest data assessing CNV sponsible for less severe HI sensitive to diazoxide; content for involvement in disease will also be presented. ii) metabolic HI since anaplerosis appears to play an important role in the secretion of insulin, including GCK, GDH and probably SCHAD S27. Destabilization of the NFAT Signaling Pathway in Down deficiencies; the two first causes are dominantly inherited or caused Syndrome by a de novo mutation; I. A. Graef1, G. R. Crabtree2, A. Polleri1, U. Francke3; iii) defects of insulin transcription factors (HNF4A mutations described 1Dept.of Pathology, Stanford, CA, United States, 2Dept.of Developmental Biol- in MODY and HI) or insulin receptor, with de novo or dominantly-inher- ogy & Pathology, HHMI, Stanford, CA, United States, 3Dept.of Genetics, Stan- ited mutations, or defect in proinsulin processing. ford, CA, United States. Syndromic HI (CDG, HI/HA by overactivity of GDH with hyperammo- Trisomy 21 results in Down Syndrome (DS), but little is known about nemia, Sotos, Beckwith-Wiedemann and Kabuki syndromes) is rare in how a 1.5-fold increase in gene dosage produces the pleiotropic phe- our recruitment. Symptoms associated to diazoxide-sensitive hypogly- notypes of DS. Studies of patients with partial trisomy 21 have defined caemia are mental retardation, diarrhea, liver abnormalities, gigantism, a DS critical region (DSCR) on chromosome 21q. We have recently or malformations. The differential diagnosis is facticious hypoglycemia shown that increased dosage of two genes, found within the DSCR, secondary to Munchausen by proxy syndrome. cooperatively reduces the activity of the calcineurin/NFAT signaling pathway, which is a critical regulator of vertebrate development (1,2). S23. Title not available as per date of printing At the centromeric border of the DSCR is DSCR1, a member of a J. M. Houghton; family of closely related inhibitors of the protein phosphatase calcineu- Department of Medicine, GI Division (JH), Department of Cancer Biology, rin. DSCR1 is blocks the calcineurin dependent nuclear localization of Worcester, MA, United States. the NFATc proteins in response to Ca2+ influx. DYRK1a is telomeric to No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg. DSCR1 and encodes a nuclear kinase that blocks NFAT signaling by org for updates in the online database. rapid nuclear export of NFATc proteins. We found that mice harbour- ing mutations of the four genes encoding NFATc transcription factors, individually and in combinations, exhibit many of the characteristics of DS. Transgenic expression of DYRK1a and DSCR1 produces features Concurrent Symposia 11 at E13.5 similar to those seen in DS and NFATc mutant mice. Math- chromatin-remodelling activities have been shown by us and others to ematical modelling of the NFAT pathway, which includes positive and be important for the epigenetic programming of Xist expression. negative feedback loops, predicts that a 1.5-fold increase in DSCR1 Although X-chromosome inactivation has been adopted as a dos- and DYRK1a levels will reduce NFAT activity and alter the expression age compensation mechanism in all therian mammals, phenotypic of target genes. These studies raise the question that perturbation of divergences are known to exist between species and to correlate with the NFAT genetic circuit by increased dosage of these genes may ex- genotypic differences, in which non-coding RNAs are particularly con- plain many of the developmental phenotypes in DS. More generally cerned. As essential as it is in placental mammals, Xist was recently this suggests that developmental defects may arise from the specific found to have no homolog in marsupials and to be derived from a pro- susceptibilities of genetic regulatory circuits. tein-coding gene with ancestral functions unrelated to X-inactivation. 1. Arron, J. R. et al. NFAT dysregulation by increased dosage of Likewise Tsix, which is clearly involved in some aspect of X-inactiva- DSCR1 and DYRK1A on chromosome 21. Nature (2006). tion in the mouse, has seen its existence in human actively debated. 2. Graef, I. A., Chen, F. & Crabtree, G. R. NFAT signaling in vertebrate The observation that X chromosome inactivation can be achieved in development. Curr Opin Genet Dev 11, 505-12. (2001). different species through distinct pathways, most of which remaining to be deciphered, underlies the mechanistic plasticity of epigenetic proc- S28. The Tc1 mouse, an aneuploid mouse with a human esses during evolution. chromosome that models aspects of Down syndrome A. O’Doherty1,2, S. Ruf1,2, C. Mulligan3, V. Hildreth4, M. L. Errington2, S. Cooke2, S31. DNA methylation signatures in colorectal cancer S. Sesay2, S. Modino5, L. Vanes2, D. Hernandez1,2, J. M. Linehan1, P. Sharpe5, J. Rodriguez1, J. Frigola1, R. Mayor1, L. Vives2, M. Jordà1, M. A. Peinado2; S. Brandner1, T. V. P. Bliss2, D. J. Henderson4, D. Nizetic3, V. L. J Tybulewicz2, 1Institut d’Investigacio Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet, Bar- E. M. C. Fisher1; celona, Spain, 2Institut de Medicina Predictiva i Personalitzada del Càncer 1Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, Institute of Neurology, London, (IMPPC), Badalona, Barcelona, Spain. United Kingdom, 2National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, Cancer cells are characterized by a generalized disruption of the DNA United Kingdom, 3Centre for Haematology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Sci- methylation pattern involving an overall decrease in the level of 5- ence, Barts and The London - Queen Mary’s School of Medicine, London, methylcytosine together with regional hypermethylation of particular United Kingdom, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of Newcastle upon CpG islands. The extent of both DNA hypomethylation and hypermeth- Tyne, International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, London, United King- ylation in the tumor cell is likely to reflect distinctive biological and clini- dom, 5Department of Craniofacial Development, Kings College London, Guy’s cal features. We have analyzed DNA methylation profiles in sporadic Hospital, London, United Kingdom. colorectal carcinomas, synchronous adenoma-carcinoma pairs and Down syndrome (DS) arises from trisomy human chromosome 21 their matching normal mucosa using different techniques. All tumors (Hsa21) and is the most common known genetic cause of mental retar- displayed altered patterns of DNA methylation in reference to normal dation, and also results in increased susceptibility for other disorders, tissue. Genome-wide hypomethylation and hypermethylation associ- such as heart defects. DS is a complex genetic disorder likely involv- ate with different features in colorectal tumorigenesis suggesting that ing several ‘major effect’ dosage sensitive genes on Hsa21 and their DNA hypermethylation and hypomethylation are independent pro- interaction with the rest of genome/environment. To help towards our cesses and play different roles in colorectal tumor progression. While understanding of DS we generated a mouse model in which an almost hypermethylation is associated with patient’s sex, tumor staging, and complete Hsa21 segregates through the germline. This trans-species specific gene hypermethylation, hypomethylation is an early event, as- aneuploid mouse strain, ‘Tc1’, has widespread novel phenotypes in- sociated with chromosomal instability and poor prognosis. cluding in behaviour, synaptic plasticity, cerebellar neuronal number, heart development and mandible size, that relate to human DS. Tran- S32. Testing and estimation of genotype and haplotype effects in schromosomic mouse lines such as Tc1 could be useful genetic tools case/control and family-based association studies for dissecting other human aneuploidies and syndromes arising from H. Cordell; dosage sensitivity of multiple genes. Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. S29. Polymorphic miRNA-mediated gene regulation: A variety of methods are used for the analysis of data generated in contribution to phenotypic variation and disease genetic association studies. Most methods focus on the detection of M. Georges; genetic effects using case/control or family (pedigree) data, although Unit of Animal Genomics, Department of Animal Production, Liège, Belgium. arguably a more interesting question, once a region of disease as- The expression level of at least one third of mammalian genes is post- sociation has been identified, is to estimate the relevant genotypic or transcriptionally fine-tuned by ∼ 1,000 microRNAs assisted by the RNA haplotypic effects and to perform tests of complex null hypotheses silencing machinery comprising tens of components. Polymorphisms such as the hypothesis that some loci, but not others, are associated and mutations in the corresponding sequence space (machinery, miR- with disease. We previously developed a regression-based approach NA precursors and target sites) are likely to make a significant con- (Cordell and Clayton 2002; Cordell et al. 2004) that provides a unified tribution to phenotypic variation including disease susceptibility. We framework for detection or estimation of effects using case/control or herein review basic miRNA biology in animals, survey the available family data. This approach allows genotype and haplotype analysis evidence for DNA sequence polymorphisms affecting miRNA-medi- at an arbitrary number of linked and unlinked multiallelic loci, as well ated gene regulation and hence phenotype, and discuss their possible as modelling of more complex effects such as gene-gene interactions importance in the determinism of complex traits. (epistasis), gene-environment interactions, parent-of-origin and mater- nal genotype effects. In practice, many genetic studies contain mod- S30. Epigenetics and X-inactivation erate to large amounts of missing genotype data, either arising from P. Navarro, C. Chureau, L. Duret, P. Avner, C. Rougeulle; individuals who have not been fully genotyped, or from the inability to Unité de Génétique Moléculaire Murine, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. infer phase (alleles received in coupling from a single parent), given Some 150 years after the emergence of genetics, epigenetic mecha- unphased genotype data. We have recently been exploring different nisms are increasingly understood to be fundamental players in phe- approaches to deal with this missing data problem in the context of notype transmission and development. In addition, epigenetic altera- case/control (Cordell 2006) or family (Croiseau et al. 2007) data. In tions are now linked to several human diseases, including cancers. A particular, multiple imputation approaches, in which the missing data common feature of many epigenetic phenomena, for which X-chromo- is repeatedly filled in using the correct posterior probability distribution some inactivation (XCI) is the paradigm, is the implication of non-cod- (given the observed data), appear to represent a promising approach ing RNAs. The X-inactivation centre, which controls the initiation of that has some advantages over missing data likelihood methods with X-inactivation, hosts several such non-coding RNAs, of which at least regards to model flexibility and ease of use. two play essential roles in the process in the mouse. The Xist gene pro- duces a nuclear RNA that, when expressed in sufficient amount, coats the chromosome in cis and induce its silencing. Tsix, a transcript anti- sense to Xist, is a negative regulator of its sense counterpart, whose Concurrent Symposia 12 S33. Genomics of bipolar affective: from multiply affected S35. Cell division and modelling cancer in Drosophila families to the general population E. Castellanos, E. Rebollo, P. Dominguez, C. Gonzalez; M. Nöthen; Cell Division Laboratory, Institut de Recerca Biomedica (IRB Barcelona), Bar- Department of Genomics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. celona, Spain. Bipolar affective disorder (BPAD) is characterized by severe episodes Asymmetric stem cell division is crucial to ensure cellular diversity, tis- of mania and depression and represents a common disorder affect- sue repair and organ homeostasis during embryo development and ing approximately 1% of the world’s population. Therefore, BPAD is adult life. The key issue during stem cell asymmetric division is the considered to be one of the top public health problems associated with unequal segregation of cell fate determinants into each of the two re- a significant morbidity. Although formal genetic studies consistently sulting cells, thus priming one of the daughter cells to differentiate and provide strong evidence for a major genetic contribution to BPAD, the contribute tissue mass, while the other retains stem-cell identity, and underlying genetic architecture is poorly understood. can go into another round of asymmetric mitosis. Loss-of-function of Using family samples from different European populations we impli- any of several genes that control the fate of the daughters of Dro- cated several chromosomal regions in the development of BPAD, in- sophila larval neuroblasts -the stem cells that originate the fly´s CNS- cluding regions on chromosomes 1, 4, 6, 8, and 10 (e.g. Cichon et results in the growth of malignant neuroblastomas. One of the most al. Hum Mol Genet 2001, Schumacher et al. Am J Hum Genet 2005). conspicuous asymmetric clues displayed by larval neuroblasts is the A genome-wide interaction linkage scan provided strong interaction mechanism of spindle assembly and spindle dynamics, which indeed evidence between BPAD genes on chromosomes 2q22-q24 and 6q23- governs the marked size asymmetry of the neuroblast’s daughters. I q24, and 2q22-q24 and 15q26. Focusing on specific candidate genes, will present and discuss recent results obtained in our laboratory re- the best evidence was obtained for G72/G30 and tryptophan hydox- garding the connexion between spindle dynamics, segregation of fate ylase 2 (e.g. Schulze et al Am J Psychiatry 2006). The recent first determinants and tumor suppression in these model stem cells. genome-wide association study was a further progress in the genetic study of BPAD showing that several genes, each of modest effect, re- S36. How is time controlled during embryonic development? producibly influence disease risk (Baumer et al. Mol Psychiatry 2007). Lessons from the chick embryo. Specifically, the gene DGKH showed significant association even after I. Palmeirim, F. Bajanca; conservative experiment-wise correction. Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences, The causative mutations in the implicated genes for BPAD, however, Braga, Portugal. remain to be identified. As soon as these will be known, samples of Throughout the Animal Kingdom, the time of embryonic development patients collected from the general population will allow estimation of is maintained and strictly controlled. Each step of the process is suc- parameters such as relative risks and etiological fraction. cessful only when it occurs at the right time and place. The impor- tance of time control during embryo development is particularly evident S34. Large population studies during somitogenesis, the process by which the vertebrate presom- W. E. R. Ollier; itic mesoderm is segmented along its anterior-posterior axis to form Centre for Integrated Genomic Medical Research, University of Manchester, somites. These are formed in a highly controlled way, both temporally Manchester, United Kingdom. and spatially, and later give rise to definitive segmented structures, in- Approaches in Genetic Epidemiology have now advanced technically cluding vertebrae and ribs. In 1997, chick presomitic cells were shown to such as extent that it is increasingly possible to capture longitudi- to undergo several cycles of hairy1 gene expression, providing the nal real-time clinical phenotype and exposure data relating to massive first molecular evidence for the existence of a molecular clock underly- population samples. When this is combined with relentless advances ing the rhythm of somitogenesis (Palmeirim et al., Cell 1997). We cur- in high-throughput and low-cost technologies to define either labora- rently know that this molecular clock operates in all vertebrate groups tory-based phenotypes/biomarkers or genetic/transcriptomic profiles, studied, in more than one embryonic tissue, with different time-periods vast meta-databases are being generated. Analysis and mining of (Pascoal et al., 2007; Pascoal and Palmeirim, 2007) and an increas- such multi-level datasets will reveal important insights into the health ing number of genes belonging to the Notch, FgF and Wnt signalling and disease at both a population and individual level. This will par- pathways are being implicated in this clocked mechanism (reviewed ticularly relate to disease progression, and gene-environment interac- by Andrade et al., 2007, in press). tions relating to drugs (pharmacogenetics) and nutrients (nutrigenom- References ics). Such longitudinal population-based cohort studies are now being - Andrade RP, Palmeirim I, Bajanca F. Molecular Clocks Underlying developed in a range of countries, taking advantage of advances in Vertebrate Embryo Segmentation: a Ten-Year-Old hairy-Go-Round. health service infrastructure for electronic clinical record capture. UK Birth Defects Research - Part C “Embryo Today”, in press. Biobank (www.ukbiobank.ac.uk) is such a study, designed to investi- - Pascoal S and Palmeirim I. Portuguese contributions to the embry- gate both health and disease in the UK. onic molecular clock discovery and characterization. International At the same time, large national and international collections of sam- Journal of Developmental Biology, in press. ples and data are being assembled for case-control studies of specific - Pascoal S, Carvalho CR, Rodriguez-León J, Delphini MC, Duprez3 diseases (www.dna-network.ac.uk), www.genomeutwin.org). These D, Thorsteinsdóttir S and Palmeirim I (2007) A molecular clock oper- are being used in whole genome association studies using high den- ates during chick autopod proximal-distal outgrowth. Journal of Mo- sity genotyping (>500,000 SNP loci). Examples of such projects in- lecular Biology, Apr 27;368(2):303-9. clude the WTCCC (www.wtccc.org.uk) and GAIN (www.fnih.org/GAIN/ - Palmeirim I, Henrique D, Ish-Horowicz D and Pourquié O. (1997) GAIN_home.shtml). - Avian hairy gene expression identifies a molecular clock linked to Such massive initiatives are required to generate the levels of power vertebrate segmentation and somitogenesis - Cell 91, 639-648. and replication studies to detect small genotype relative risks (<1.2). However, initiatives of this complexity and size are only possible S37. Conditional gene targeting to model human diseases in through increasing international collaboration and data/sample shar- mice ing. K. Rajewsky; New International and European initiatives are directed at such needs CBR Institute for Biochemical Research, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, and these will specifically address what framework has to be put in United States. place for greater standardisation and harmonisation of data/sample Conditional gene targeting using the Cre/loxP recombination system collection, management and exchange, and what measures of quality allows one to introduce mutations into the mouse genome in a cell assurance/control are required. Further important considerations are type-specific or inducible manner, and thus to model acquired human the ethical, legal and sociological frameworks that these studies need. diseases in mice. In addition to the generation of loss-of-function mu- The context and advances being made in the field of large population tations, Cre-mediated recombination can also be used to conditionally studies will be discussed. turn on gene expression. This latter approach is particularly useful for the analysis of the role of oncogenes in the pathogenesis of cancer. I will exemplify this approach by recent experiments addressing the role of the NFκB signaling pathway and of Epstein-Barr-Virus in lym-Concurrent Symposia 1 phomagenesis. I will also draw attention to pitfalls of the conditional netic factors (modifier genes) and environmental factors (e.g., alcohol gene targeting approach, which can lead to serious misinterpretations intake, dietary iron consumption, and menstruation). Iron physiology in of experiments. mice closely resembles that in humans, making the mouse a valuable genetic model. We undertook a quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis S38. On principal & modifying genes in Hirschsprung disease in mice to identify modifier genes that might influence the severity of A. Chakravarti; hemochromatosis. We identified a strong QTL on mouse chromosome Center for Complex Disease Genomics, McKusick - Nathans Institute of Ge- 9 that differentially affected macrophage iron burden in C57BL/10J and netic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, SWR/J mice. A C57BL/10J missense allele of an evolutionarily con- United States. served gene, Mon1a, co-segregated with the QTL in congenic mouse Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), or congenital aganglionosis, is a clas- lines. We present evidence that Mon1a is a cytoplasmic protein in- sical multifactorial disorder that has continued to teach us important volved in trafficking of ferroportin, the major mammalian iron exporter, lessons in non-Mendelian inheritance and the genomics of complex to the surface of iron-recycling macrophages. Differences in amounts disorders. To date, we know of 9 genes that harbor rare mutations, all of surface ferroportin correlate with differences in cellular iron content. incompletely penetrant but with greater effects in males than females. Mon1a is also important for trafficking of cell surface and secreted mol- One of these genes, the RET tyrosine kinase, also harbors a polymor- ecules unrelated to iron metabolism, suggesting that it plays a funda- phism in an enhancer leading to reduced RET transcription and high mental role in the mammalian secretory apparatus. association with short segment HSCR (S-HSCR). Interestingly, the en- hancer polymorphism modifies the genetic effects of rare mutations S41. Genetic Modulation of Sickle Cell Anemia not only for RET in HSCR but many other HSCR-related traits such M. H. Steinberg; as Down syndrome, Congenital Central Hypoventilation syndrome and Center of Excellence in Sickle Cell Disease, Boston Medical Center; Dept. of Bardet-Biedel syndrome. Thus, a single gene can have a diversity of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States. mutations with differential effects but the same mutation can also have Sickle cell anemia, a Mendelian disease caused by homozygosity for differential effects depending on its interactions with other (mutant) a beta-globin gene mutation (HBB, glu6val)), has notorious phenotypic genes. In HSCR, the genetic modifiers can be both allelic and non- variability. We are conducting candidate gene and genome-wide asso- allelic. I will describe the genetic tests needed to distinguish between ciation studies (GWA) to understand the relationships between genetic these scenarios. heterogeneity and the phenotype of disease. Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is the most powerful modulator of sickle cell S39. Why use the candidate gene approach to find CF anemia. HbF levels are regulated by at least three quantitative trait modifiers? loci (QTL) on 8q, Xp and 6q and by elements linked to HBB. When M. Drumm1, M. Knowles2; panels of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were used to study 1Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States, 2University of the association of variability in these QTLs in two independent sickle North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States. cell anemia patient groups, SNPs in TOX ( 8q12.1) were associated Genes that do not cause, but modify, a clinical phenotype are of medi- with HbF. TOX belongs to a high mobility group box protein family that cal interest as these genes provide information about the biology caus- binds DNA with high sequence specificity. Many potential TOX binding ing the phenotype and will potentially suggest therapeutic strategies to sites, including one in the HBG2 promoter are found near the HBB treat the disease phenotype. There are various strategies to identify gene cluster. GWA using pooled DNA confirmed the association on these modifying genes and one of the key design features is the choice SNPs in 6q and 8q associated with HbF and identified promising new of variants selected. Technologic advances are making genome scans areas for further study. more feasible and affordable, and these approaches allow one to test Stroke is a common complication of childhood sickle cell anemia. Us- hypotheses about candidate genes, as well as identify genes not pre- ing Bayesian network modeling to evaluate the interactions between viously considered to contribute to the phenotype. However, these many candidate gene SNPs and the risk of a stroke, we developed a scans are still costly and therefore candidate gene approaches are prognostic model for stroke. SNPs in 11 genes and four clinical vari- still useful. The candidate gene approach relies on knowledge of the ables, interacted in a complex network of dependency to modulate the pathophysiology of the disease to be effective, as genes whose prod- risk of stroke. Case-control association studies examining candidate ucts lie in relevant pathways will be assessed. Consequently, when genes in other subphenotypes of sickle cell anemia showed associa- a candidate gene is found to associate with the phenotype, some in- tions with several genes of the TGF-beta/BMP pathway. formation is already known about the gene’s role in the phenotype. To study the genetic association with a global estimate of disease se- Therefore, this approach is most likely to verify a pathway’s involve- verity, we developed a model predicting which patients with sickle cell ment in the disease phenotype, rather than to identify new pathways. disease are at risk for near-term death and validated this model in two We have taken the candidate gene approach to identifying modifiers independent patient groups. Using this severity score as a phenotype of cystic fibrosis. In doing so, we have incorporated several strategies of disease, SNPs in EDN1, ECE1, KDR, EGF and NOX3 were associ- to identify candidates. One approach has been to examine genes in ated with overall disease severity. pathways thought to contribute to the pathophysiology of the disease, Understanding the genetic modulation of the hemolytic, vascular and such as epithelial ion transport mediators, inflammatory cascade com- inflammatory components of this disease could provide important ponents, endocrine pathways and innate defense, to name a few. A prognostic information and suggest novel approaches to treatment. second approach has been to examine genes that have been reported to modify or cause related disorders, such as asthma and chronic ob- S42. Inborn errors of mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation: structive pulmonary disease (COPD), as CF, asthma and COPD are From newborn screening to diagnosis and treatment likely to have overlapping biology. Using this candidate approach, we R. J. A. Wanders; have tested apparent associating genes in at least two populations of University of Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, Lab Genetic Metabolic CF patients to verify associations. These approaches have identified Diseases, F0-224, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. transforming growth factor beta1, and genes in inflammatory pathways The mitochondrial fatty acid (FA) beta-oxidation deficiencies consti- and airway function as genes contributing to disease severity. tute an expanding group of clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders. Originally, diagnosis of patients suffering from a fatty acid S40. Genes that modify iron loading in mice oxidation (FAO) disorder was difficult, but the introduction of (tandem) N. Andrews1,2; mass-spectrometry and in particular its use for the analysis of acyl- 1Childrens Hospital, Karp Family Research Laboratories, RM 8-125, Boston, carnitines in plasma from patients, has revolutionized the diagnosis of MA, United States, 2Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. FAO deficiencies. In fact, since tandem mass spectrometry has turned Adult onset hemochromatosis, an iron overload disorder affecting the out to be so robust and reliable, existing neonatal screening programs liver, heart and pancreas, is usually caused by mutations in HFE. How- have been extended in many countries around the world and now in- ever, only a fraction of patients homozygous for disease-associated clude different FAO disorders, using tandem mass spectrometric anal- mutations develop clinical hemochromatosis. A wide range in the se- ysis of acylcarnitines in blood spots. The best known FAO disorder verity of iron loading and its complications can be explained by both ge- is medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency with an Concurrent Symposia 14 incidence of 1:5-10.000, at least in most Western countries. Inclusion dent epilepsy (PDE) have mutations in the ALDH7A1 gene encoding of MCADD in new neonatal screening programs is obvious since it is antiquitin. Antiquitin catalyses the conversion of an equilibrium mixture known that 25% of MCADD patients die upon the first hypoglycemic of α-aminoadipic semialdehyde / Δ1-piperideine-6-carboxylate (P6C) to attack. Follow-up diagnostic studies in patients with a positive acyl- α-aminoadipic acid. In the absence of this enzyme, P6C accumulates carnitine screening result are usually based on the analysis of me- and forms a condensation product with pal-P, thus inactivating it. We tabolites, including acylcarnitines in plasma. Since metabolites may be can now diagnose PDE by measuring α-aminoadipic semialdehyde erroneously normal in affected patients, we have investigated whether in the urine and confirm the diagnosis by sequencing the ALDH7A1 it would be possible to measure the candidate enzymes directly, i.e. in gene; a few mutations are found quite frequently. It is becoming clear blood cells. Our results show that all enzymes of mitochondrial fatty that the phenotypic spectrum of PDE due to antiquitin deficiency in- acid oxidation are expressed in lymphocytes and that lymphocyte cludes patients with late onset seizures, cortical malformations, endo- analysis is a reliable and quick method to discriminate between false crine dysfunction and a partial response to AED’s. and true positives. The second part of our research program is focused on the generation S45. The adenomatous polyposis coli protein as a regulator of of new therapeutic options, especially for defects in the oxidation of the cytoskeleton long-chain fatty acids, using selective knockout mice. I. Näthke; Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom. S43. Glycosylation defects Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli protein (APC) are com- G. Matthijs; mon to most colorectal cancers and occur extremely early during tu- University of Leuven, Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. mourigenesis. The most prominent function of APC is its ability to sup- Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG) are an expanding group port the assembly of a protein complex that regulates the degradation of inherited metabolic diseases caused by defects in the synthesis and of beta-catenin in a Wnt-regulated manner. Accumulating beta-catenin processing of glycoproteins. The genetic defect in CDG-Ia, the most causes changes in the activity of TCF/Lef transcription factors. This has common type of the disease, was reported 10 years ago. Since then, been implicated in the transformation produced by truncations muta- more than 20 novel defects have been described, mainly in the endo- tions in APC that disrupt the ability of APC to support a functional beta- plasmic reticulum (type I) but also in the Golgi (type II) (Freeze, Nat catenin degradation complex. However, APC is also an important reg- Rev Genet.7:537-51, 2006). ulator of the cytoskeleton. Inactivating APC in cells causes a decrease The systematic search towards other defects in the endoplasmic in cell migration in cultured cells and enterocytes in the intestine. In reticulum is based on the analysis of intermediate structures of the cells, this change is accompanied by changes in post-translationally dolichol-linked oligosaccharides and takes advantage of the strong ho- modified microtubules and cell shape. Loss of APC also disrupts mi- mology with yeast. The corresponding human genes have now been totic spindles and compromises the spindle checkpoint. This leads to identified, and for nearly also steps in the synthesis of dol-PP-GlcNAc- defects in cell division and produces tetra- and polyloidy in cells and 2Man9Glc3, at least one or a few patients with a defect have been tissues lacking APC. Another immediate consequence of APC loss is identified. On the contrary, the number of type II cases with a known a reduction in apoptosis. Importantly, the mitotic and apoptotic defects defect in the Golgi compartment, is limited. Up till now, only a few de- induced by loss of APC do not require transcriptional changes induced fects in the processing of the glycans were identified. by the accumulation of beta-catenin. Whereas these CDG cases have defects in genes that encode en- In summary, loss of APC leads to the inappropriate accumulation of zymes or transporters that are directly involved in the glycosylation cells with altered differentiation and increased genetic instability to process, recent work has shown that the abnormalities may also be provide an efficient means of increasing the number and survival of due to abnormal intracellular trafficking of resident Golgi enzymes or potential tumour cells. transporters involved in glycosylation. Even though the mechanisms I will describe our work in a number of experimental systems to il- which allow the selective retention of glycosyltransferases in certain lustrate the effect of APC on the cytoskeleton and discuss possible cisternae are still poorly understood, it is clear that multiprotein com- implication of these findings for tumour initiation and progression. plexes, like the Conserved Oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex, are key determinants in their localization. Wu et al. (Nat Med.10:518-23, 2004) S46. Wt1 acts at multiple stages during kidney development described a form of CDG caused by a defect in COG7. We have now K. Wagner1,2, N. Wagner1,2, D. Badro1,3, M. Clarkson1,3, M. Afanetti1,3, E. Berard4, also identified mutations in 2 different COG subunits (Foulquier et al. A. Schedl1; PNAS 103:3764-9, 2006; Hum Mol Genet. 16, 717-730, 2007). These 1INSERM U636, Centre de Biochimie, Nice, France, 2present address : IN- observations open a new era of research into CDG. SERM U145, Nice, France, 3Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France, 4Hôpital de l’Archet 2, Nice, France. S44. Pyridoxine metabolism Wilms’ tumour or nephroblastoma is a paediatric kidney cancer that is P. T. Clayton, P. B. Mills; believed to arise from nephrogenic rests, embryonic cells of the kidney Biochemistry Research Group, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United that have failed to differentiate into nephrons. WT1 encodes a zinc- Kingdom. finger transcription factor that has been shown to be mutated in up to Some infants have epilepsy that is poorly controlled by antiepileptic 15% of Wilms’ tumours. However, mutations in WT1 are also found drugs (AED’s) but responds dramatically to treatment with pyridox- in other congenital diseases affecting urogenital development, most ine or pyridoxal phosphate (pal-P). Mutations in the gene encoding notably Denys-Drash (DDS) and Frasier Syndrome. Using in vitro and pyridox(am)ine phosphate oxidase (PNPO) lead to defective conver- in vivo models we are studying the cellular and developmental func- sion of pyridoxine to pyridoxal phosphate. These infants do not re- tion of Wt1. Here we will discuss the role Wt1 plays at various stages spond to treatment with pyridoxine but their fits cease when they are of kidney development, its direct target genes and the mode of action given pal-P. The first patients identified as having PNPO deficiency of its various spliced isoforms. We have shown earlier that nephrin had biochemical changes in their cerebrospinal fluid that suggested represents one of the direct downstream targets of Wt1. Analyzing reduced amounts of pal-P in the brain. These included raised levels nephrin knockout mice we now demonstrate a novel function of this of 3-methoxytyrosine, threonine and glycine. However, more recently gene in heart development. Finally, we will report on an unusual muta- mutations have been found in the PNPO gene in patients ascertained tion in WT1 that is associated with a rare form of congenital nephrotic on the basis of their response to pal-P treatment and in some of these, syndrome with an almost complete absence of glomeruli and severe no abnormality of CSF biochemistry was found. hypertension. Seizures responsive to pyridoxine treatment can occur when an in- born error of metabolism leads to accumulation of an intermediate S47. HSP90 modulates developmental and cancer phenotypes that complexes with pyridoxal phosphate, thus increasing the body’s V. van Heyningen, P. Yeyati requirement for vitamin B6. The first described example of this was MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom hyperprolinaemia type 2 which leads to accumulation of Δ1-pyrroline- HSP90 is a highly-expressed molecular chaperone with roles in main- 5-carboxylate. The latter forms a condensation product with pal-P. We taining normal developmental regulators, as well as in the folding of were able to show that the majority of patients with pyridoxine-depen- mutant proteins. Partial inhibition of HSP90, previously reported to un-15 cover cryptic mutations in Drosophila and Arabidopsis, has now also ulated in response to inhibitors. Interestingly, responsive phenotypes been shown to modulate phenotype in zebrafish. Using carefully ti- were associated with missense mutations. Some showed increased trated inhibition of HSP90, we identified novel structural eye anomalies severity, others were ameliorated. The proposed molecular mecha- reminiscent of human microphthalmia and anophthalmia in one strain, nism for this HSP90 function also provides insight into the promising showing frequent unilaterality, and illustrating the variable penetrance cancer therapeutic role of HSP90 inhibitors. that is so often observed with some developmental malformations. Some phenotypes with Mendelian inheritance patterns were also mod-Concurrent Sessions 11 Concurrent Sessions phenotypic spectrum of CEP290 mutations to severe and lethal cystic kidney dysplasia with bile duct proliferation of liver. C01. A novel ciliary gene is mutated in cerebello-oculo-renal syndrome (Joubert syndrome type B) and Meckel syndrome C03. A novel vertebrate specific chaperonine related protein D. Marion1, L. Baala2, R. Salomon1, C. Laclef3, K. Tory1, F. Silbermann1, S. Au- (BBS12) is involved in Bardet-Biedl syndrome dollent2, T. Lacoste1, C. Ozilou4, M. Gubler1, J. Martinovic4, F. Encha-Razavi2,4, H. J. Dollfus1, C. Stoetzel1, J. Muller2, V. Laurier1, E. E. Davies3, N. Katsanis4, M. Vekemans5,4, C. Antignac1,4, U. Rüther6, S. Schneider-Maunoury3, T. Attié- O. Poch2, J. Mandel2; Bitach2,4, S. Saunier1; 1Laboratoire EA 3949, Faculté de Médecine de Strasbourg, Hôpitaux Uni- 1Inserm U574, Hôpital Necker, Université René Descartes, Paris, France, 2In- versitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Institut de Génétique et de serm U781, Hôpital Necker, Université René Descartes, Paris, France, 3CNRS Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Inserm U596, CNRS, UMR7104, Illkirch, UMR7622, Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, Université Pierre et France, 3McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine and Departments of Marie Curie, Paris, France, 4Department of Genetics, Hôpital Necker, AP-HP, Ophthalmology and Molecular Biology and Genetics, John Hopkins University, Paris, France, 5Inserm U871, Hôpital Necker, Université René Descartes, Paris, Baltimore, MD, United States, 4McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine France, 6Institute for Animal Developmental and Molecular Biology, University and Departments of Ophthalmology and Molecular Biology and Genetics, John of Düsseldorf,, Düsseldorf, Germany. Hopkins University,, Baltimore, MD, United States. Cerebello-oculo-renal syndrome (CORS), also called Joubert syn- Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is primarily an autosomal recessive drome (JS) type B, and Meckel (MKS) syndrome belong to the ciliopa- ciliopathy defined by progressive retinal degeneration, obesity, cogni- thy group of developmental autosomal recessive disorders associated tive impairment, polydactyly and kidney anomalies. BBS is genetically with primary cilium dysfunction. Nephronophthisis (NPHP), the most heterogeneous with 11 BBS genes identified to date, which account frequent genetic cause of renal failure in children and young adults, is for about 70% of affected families. We have combined SNP array associated with retinal degeneration and cerebellar vermis aplasia in homozygosity mapping with in silico analysis to identify a new BBS CORS. MKS is characterized by renal cystic dysplasia, central nervous gene, BBS12. Patients from two gypsy families were homozygous system malformations and hepatic developmental defects. Using SNP and haploidentical in a 6 Mb region of chromosome 4q27. FLJ35630 mapping, we identified missense and truncating mutations in a novel was selected as a candidate as it was predicted to encode a protein gene, NPHP8, in both CORS and MKS, and we show that inactivation sharing similarity to members of the type II chaperonin superfamily, of its mouse orthologue recapitulates the cerebral, renal, craniofacial which includes BBS6 and the recently identified BBS10. Pathogenic and limb defects of MKS. We further demonstrate that NPHP8 pro- mutations in both gypsy families, as well as in 14 other families from tein co-localizes at the basal body/centrosomes with nephrocystin-6 various ethnic backgrounds were found. BBS12 accounts for about 5% and nephrocystin-4, the protein products of both NPHP6 and NPHP4, of all BBS. BBS12 is vertebrate specific and together with BBS6 and known disease genes for NPHP. In addition, missense mutations of BBS10 define a novel branch of the type II chaperonin superfamily. NPHP8 protein found in CORS patients diminishes its interaction with These three genes are characterized by unusually rapid evolution and nephrocystin-4. Mutations of this novel ciliary in both CORS or MKS are likely to perform ciliary functions specific to vertebrates that are syndromes identify novel JS (JBTS7) and MKS loci (MKS5) and fur- important in the pathophysiology of the syndrome, and together they ther demonstrate that these phenotypes are a continuum of the same account for about one third of the total BBS mutational load. underlying disorder. C04. Mutations in SCNA cause a congenital inability to C02. Pleiotropic effects of CEP20 (NPHP) mutations extends experience pain to Meckel-Gruber syndrome C. G. Woods1, J. Cox2, A. Nicholas1; T. Attié-Bitach1,2, L. Baala3, S. Audollent2,1, C. Ozilou2,1, J. Martinovic2, S. 1Cambridge Institute of Medical Genetics, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Cam- Sivanandamoorthy1, E. Rattenberry4, S. Saunier5, R. Salomon5, C. Esculpavit1, bridge Institute of Medical Genetics, Ccambridge, United Kingdom. F. McDonald4, A. Munnich1,2, S. Lyonnet1,2, M. C. Gubler5, C. A. Johnson6, F. The complete inability to sense pain in an otherwise healthy individual Encha-Razavi1,2, M. Vekemans1,2; is a very rare phenotype. In three consanguineous families from north- 1Unité INSERM U-781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris V, ern Pakistan, we mapped the condition as an autosomal-recessive trait Paris, France, 2Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, to chromosome 2q24.3. This region contains the gene SCN9A, encod- AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Unité INSERM U-781, Université Paris V, Hôpital ing the alpha-subunit of the voltage-gated sodium channel, Na(v)1.7, Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4West Midlands Regional Genetics, which is strongly expressed in nociceptive neurons. Sequence analy- Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5Unité INSERM sis of SCN9A in affected individuals revealed three distinct homozy- U-574, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris V, Paris, France, gous nonsense mutations (S459X, I767X and W897X). We show that 6Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, St. James’s University Hospital, Leeds, these mutations cause loss of function of Na(v)1.7 by co-expression of United Kingdom. wild-type or mutant human Na(v)1.7 with sodium channel beta(1) and Meckel syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive lethal condition char- beta(2) subunits in HEK293 cells. Our data suggest that SCN9A is an acterized by the association of central nervous system malformations, essential and non-redundant requirement for nociception in humans. postaxial polydactyly, multicystic kidney dysplasia and ductal prolifera- tion in the portal area of the liver. MKS is genetically heterogeneous C05. Identification of mutations in Cytokine Receptor-Like Factor and 2 genes have been identified: MKS1/FLJ20345 in Finnish kindreds 1 (CRLF1) in Crisponi syndrome. and MKS3/TMEM67 in families from Pakistan and Oman. The gene at N. Dagoneau1, P. Blanchet2, P. Sarda2, L. I. Al-Gazali3, M. Di Rocco4, C. Huber1, the MKS2 locus remains unknown. F. Djouadi5, C. Le Goff1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1; A genome wide linkage scan was performed by Affymetrix 10K SNP 1Department of Medical Genetics and INSERM U781, Hopital Necker, Paris, chips or 10cM-resolution microsatellite markers in consanguineous France, 2Department of Genetics, Hopital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, MKS families. Homozygozity on chromosome 12q was observed in France, 3Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, four families, in an interval containing CEP290, a gene recently identi- United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates, 4Second Unit of fied as causative for Joubert syndrome and isolated Leber congenital Pediatrics, Istituto G.Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 5CNRS UPR9078, Faculté Necker, amaurosis. In view of the clinical overlap between MKS and JS, and Paris, France. our recent findings of allelism at the MKS3 locus between these two Crisponi syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized disorders, CEP290 was considered as a good candidate. Homozy- by congenital contractions of facial muscles with trismus, dysmorphic gous truncating mutations were identified in 3/4 families, confirming features, camptodactyly, feeding and respiratory difficulties with ac- that CEP290 is the gene for MKS on chromosome 12. Sequencing cess of hyperthermia leading to death in the first months of life. Up of additional cases identified compound heterozygote CEP290 muta- till now, the disease has been reported in a total of 19 newborns from tions in 2 additional MKS cases and in 3 families presenting a “cere- sardinian, italian and portuguese families. The overlap of Crisponi syn- bro-reno-digital” syndrome, with a phenotype in between MKS and JS, drome with Stüve-Wiedemann syndrome (SWS) is striking. However, further demonstrating that Meckel and Joubert are the variable expres- congenital bowing of the lower limbs, which is a cardinal feature of sion of the same disorder. These data identify a fourth locus for MKS SWS, has never been reported in Crisponi syndrome. Studying four (MKS4) and CEP290 as a gene responsible for MKS, and extend the children (from three unrelated families) with Crisponi syndrome, we Concurrent Sessions 1 first excluded the Leukemia Inhibitory Factor Receptor gene (respon- 4Genetics and Genome Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Cana- sible for SWS) in Crisponi syndrome. We then considered the Cytokine da, 5Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Receptor-Like Factor 1 (CRLF1) gene as a candidate gene based on Canada, 6Starship Children’s Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand. the identification of CRLF1 mutations in cold-induced sweating syn- Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are a group of autosomal re- drome. By direct sequencing, we identified CRLF1 mutations in the cessive neurodegenerative disorders with a variable age of onset. four children. The mutations were located in the Ig-like and type III Within the NCLs, the late-infantile onset group (LINCLs) is genetically fibronectin domains and three of them predicted premature termina- the most heterogeneous with mutations identified in CLN1, CLN2, tion of translation. Using real time quantitative PCR, we found a de- CLN5, CLN6, and CLN8. A variant form of LINCL (vLINCL) present crease of CRLF1 mRNA expression in patient fibroblasts, suggestive in Turkish patients is clinically characterized by onset at 2-7 years of of a mutation-mediated decay of the abnormal transcript. CRLF1 forms age, epileptic seizures, myoclonus, psychomotor deterioration, loss of a heterodimer complex with Cardiotrophin Like Cytokine Factor 1 and vision, and premature death. Initially, Turkish vLINCL was considered this heterodimer competes with Ciliary Neurotrophic Factor for binding a distinct genetic entity (CLN7). However, we recently reported muta- to the ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor complex (CNFTR). The iden- tions in the CLN6 and CLN8 genes accounting for the disease in a tification of CRLF1 mutations in Crisponi syndrome supports the key subset of Turkish vLINCL patients, whereas in the majority of families, role of the CNTFR pathway in the function of the autonomic nervous Turkish vLINCL is not linked to any of the known NCL loci. By perform- system. ing a genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism scan and homo- zygosity mapping in nine Turkish and one Indian family, we mapped C06. Crisponi Syndrome is Caused by Mutations in the CRLF1 a novel vLINCL locus, CLN7, in five of these families. Subsequently, Gene and Shows Allelism to Cold-Induced Sweating Syndrome by positional candidate gene sequencing, we identified the causative Type 1 gene with six different homozygous mutations found in patients in six F. Rutsch1, L. Crisponi2, A. Meloni2, M. R. Toliat3,4, G. Nürnberg3,5, G. Usala2, M. families. The gene encodes a novel polytopic membrane protein that Uda6, M. Masala2, W. Höhne7, C. Becker5, M. Marongiu2, F. Chiappe2, R. Kleta8, belongs to the major facilitator superfamily, members of which have A. Rauch9, B. Wollnik10, F. Strasser11, T. Reese12, C. Jakobs13, G. Kurlemann14, various transporter activities. The CLN7 transcript is expressed ubiq- A. Cao2, P. Nürnberg3,4, G. Crisponi15; uitously with several alternatively spliced variants. Like most of the 1Department of General Pediatrics, University Children’s Hospital, Muenster, known NCL proteins, CLN7 localizes mainly to the lysosomal compart- Germany, 2Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazio- ment. The cellular function of the protein encoded by this novel NCL nale delle Ricerche, c/o Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy, gene remains to be elucidated. 3Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Deutsches C08. Identification of a new gene mutated in autosomal Ressourcenzentrum für Genomforschung GmbH, Berlin, Germany, 6Istituto di recessive centronuclear myopathies, and functional links with Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, c/o the dominant form Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrrato, Cagliari, Italy, 7Institute of Biochemistry, A. Nicot1, A. Toussaint1, V. Tosch1, C. Kretz1, C. Wallgren-Pettersson2, E. Iwars- Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 8Centre for Nephrology, son3, H. Kingston4, J. Garnier1, V. Biancalana5, J. Mandel1, J. Laporte1; University College London, London, United Kingdom, 9Institute of Human Ge- 1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Fin- netics, Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, land, 3Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Academic Unit of 10Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 11Pe- Medical Genetics and Regional Genetic Service, Manchester, United Kingdom, diatric Practitioner, Nabburg, Germany, 12Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, 5Faculté de Médecine et laboratoire de Génétique Médicale EA3949, Stras- Mathias-Spital, Rheine, Germany, 13Department of Clinical Chemistry and bourg, France. Pediatrics, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 14Department of Centronuclear (myotubular) myopathies (CNM) are characterized by Pediatric Neurology, University Children’s Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 15Casa muscle weakness and abnormal centralisation of nuclei in muscle fi- di cura Sant’ Anna, Cagliari, Italy. bres which is not secondary to regeneration. The severe neonatal X- Crisponi syndrome (CS) is a severe autosomal recessive condition, linked form (myotubular myopathy, XLMTM) is due to mutations in the characterized by abnormal, paroxysmal muscular contractions re- phosphoinositide phosphatase myotubularin (MTM1), while mutations sembling neonatal tetanus, large face, broad nose, anteverted nares, in dynamin 2 (DNM2) have been found in some autosomal dominant camptodactyly, hyperthermia and sudden death in most cases. We cases. By direct sequencing of functional candidate genes, we identi- performed homozygosity mapping in five Sardinian and three Turkish fied homozygous mutations of the amphiphysin 2 gene (also called families with CS using high-density SNP arrays and identified a criti- BIN1) in three families with autosomal recessive inheritance. Two dif- cal region on chromosome 19p12-13.1. The most prominent candidate ferent missense mutations in the BAR (Bin1/Amphiphysin/RVS167) gene was CRLF1, recently found to be involved in the pathogenesis domain disrupt its membrane tubulation properties in transfected cells, of cold induced sweating syndrome type 1 (CISS1). CISS1 belongs while a partial truncation of the C-terminal SH3 domain abrogates to a group of conditions with overlapping phenotypes, also including the interaction with dynamin 2 and its recruitment to the membrane cold induced sweating syndrome type 2 (CISS2) and Stüve-Wiede- tubules. Our results suggest that mutations in amphiphysin 2 cause mann syndrome (SWS). All these syndromes are caused by mutations centronuclear myopathy by interfering with membrane remodeling at of genes of the ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor (CNTFR) pathway, T-tubules, and that the functional interaction between amphiphysin 2 which is known to be involved in motor neuron survival. Here we de- and dynamin 2 is necessary for normal muscle function and position- scribe the identification of four different CRLF1 mutations in eight dif- ing of nuclei. ferent Crisponi families, including a missense mutation, a single nucle- otide insertion, a nonsense and an insertion/deletion (indel) mutation, C09. A protein sharing similarity with an ancestral prokaryotic ki- all segregating with the disease trait in the families. Comparison of the nase is mutant in a new form of recessive ataxia mutation spectra of CS and CISS1 suggests that neither the type nor C. Lagier-Tourenne1, M. Tazir2, C. Quinzii3, L. Lopez3, S. Makri2, L. Pacha2, T. the location of the CRLF1 mutations point to a phenotype/genotype Benhassine2, N. Drouot1, M. Assoum1, L. Reutenauer1, D. Lynch4, C. Thibault1, correlation that would account for the most severe phenotype in CS. F. Plewniak1, L. Bianchetti1, M. Anheim1, H. Puccio1, O. Poch1, J. Mandel1, M. Our findings provide further evidence for the importance of the CNTFR Hirano3, M. Koenig1; pathway in the development of autonomic and motorial functions of the 1IGBMC; Inserm, U596; CNRS, UMR7104; Université louis Pasteur, Illkirch, CU nervous system. de Strasbourg, France, 2Service de Neurologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Mustapha, Alger, Algeria, 3Department of Neurology, Columbia University Col- C07. The novel neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis gene CLN lege of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, United States, 4Children’s encodes a putative lysosomal transporter protein Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, United States. E. Siintola1,2, M. Topcu3, N. Aula1,2, H. Lohi1,4, B. A. Minassian4, A. D. Pater- A SNP-based genome-wide scan in a large consanguineous family al- son4,5, M. Liu4, C. Wilson6, U. Lahtinen1,2, A. K. Anttonen1,2, A. E. Lehesjoki1,2; lowed us to identify a new locus for autosomal recessive ataxia at 1q41 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Neuroscience Center, (LOD score : 3.9). We searched for nucleotide change in genes of this University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe region coding for mitochondrial proteins and found deleterious muta- University Faculty of Medicine, Section of Child Neurology, Ankara, Turkey, tions in CABC1 in 6 patients from 3 families. All patients have child-Concurrent Sessions 1 hood-onset cerebellar ataxia with slow progression and little additional C12. Identification of a new gene of mitochondrial DNA depletion signs. The CABC1 yeast homologue is mutated in the ubiquinone (or A. Bourdon1, L. Minai1, V. Serre1, J. Jaïs2, E. Sarzi1, S. Aubert1, D. Chrétien1, P. coenzyme Q) deficient S. cerevisiae strain COQ8. Likewise, we found de Lonlay1, V. Paquis3, H. Arakawa4, Y. Nakamura4, A. Munnich1, A. Rötig1; that ubiquinone synthesis was partially impaired in muscle biopsy and 1INSERM U781, PARIS, France, 2Service de biostatistiques Université Pa- fibroblasts of one of the patients (additional patients are under study). ris-Descartes, PARIS, France, 3Département de génétique médicale, NICE, Albeit COQ8 seems to be involved in one of the monooxygenation France, 4Human Genome Center, TOKYO, Japan. steps of the hydroxy benzoic ring of the coenzyme Q precursor, its role The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion syndrome (MDS) is char- is likely indirect, since COQ8/CABC1 belongs to a small family of an- acterized by a severe and tissue-specific reduction of mtDNA copy cestral prokaryotic kinases. Coenzyme Q10 deficiency was previously number. Until now, mutations of five nuclear genes are known to result identified in severe encephalopathy-nephrotic syndromes with direct in MDS (TK2, POLG, DGUOK, SUCLA2 and MPV17). They are ei- blocks in the biosynthetic pathway and, surprisingly, in ataxia-oculo- ther involved in mitochondrial dNTP salvage pathway (TK2, DGUOK, motor apraxia 1 (AOA1) which is caused by a defective nuclear DNA SUCLA2) or in mtDNA replication (POLG) whereas MPV17 has a yet repair protein. The identification of CABC1 mutations emphasizes the unknown function. However, only part of patients (36%) presents mu- role of coenzyme Q10 in the physiopathology of degenerative ataxias tations in these genes suggesting the occurrence of mutations in other and leads to direct supplementation therapeutic possibilities. yet unknown genes. A genome-wide linkage analysis in a large inbred Moroccan family with a severe MDS in muscle revealed a region of C10. Prenyldiphosphate synthase (PDSS1) and OH-benzoate autozygosity on chromosome 8q21.3-q22.3 with a maximal lod score prenyltransferase (COQ2) mutations in ubiquinone deficiency at 3,331. We identified a homozygous non-sense mutation in a gene and oxidative phosphorylation disorders mapping in this region and involved in nucleotide metabolism as well J. Mollet1, I. Giurgea1, D. Schlemmer1, G. Dallner2, D. Chretien1, A. Dela- as in three additional families of French origin. hodde3, D. Bacq4, P. de Lonlay1, A. Munnich1, A. Rötig1; 1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Sur- C13. Gender-specific association of a novel polymorphism in the gery, Stockholm, Sweden, 3UMR 8621 CNRS, Orsay, France, 4Centre National TNFSF gene with allele-specific promoter activity and risk of de Génotypage, Evry, France. myocardial infarction. Coenzyme Q (CoQ ) plays a pivotal role in oxidative phosphorylation M. Ria, J. Lagercrantz, A. Samnegård, S. Boquist, A. Hamsten, P. Eriksson; 10 10 (OXPHOS), as it distributes electrons between the various dehydroge- Atherosclerosis Research Unit, King Gustaf V Research Institute, Department nases and the cytochrome segments of the respiratory chain. We have of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. identified two novel inborn errors of CoQ biosynthesis in two distinct The OX40L/OX40 system, along with other receptor-ligand pairs, has 10 families. In both cases, enzymologic studies showed that quinone-de- been shown to be involved in T-cell activation and might be there- pendent OXPHOS activities were in the range of lowest control values, fore proatherogenic. We previously showed that genetic variants in while OXPHOS enzyme activities were normal. CoQ deficiency was TNFSF4, the gene encoding for OX40 ligand, are associated with the 10 confirmed by restoration of normal OXPHOS activities after addition of risk of developing precocious coronary artery disease (CAD) and myo- quinone. A genome-wide search for homozygosity in family 1 identi- cardial infarction (MI) in women from two independent cohorts. Our fied a region of chromosome 10 encompassing the prenyldiphosphate approach was to use data from a mouse atherosclerosis model to po- synthase gene (PDSS1) which encodes the human ortholog of the sitionally identify candidate genes in a human context. yeast COQ1 gene, a key enzyme of CoQ synthesis. Sequencing Based on a combined strategy including a systematic screening by 10 PDSS1 identified a homozygous nucleotide substitution modifying a sequencing of the TNFSF4 genomic region and a bionformatic evalu- conserved amino acid of the protein (D308E). In the second family, ation of genetic variants affecting potential regulatory regions, we here direct sequencing of the OH-benzoate prenyltransferase gene, the hu- report a novel promoter polymorphism (-921C>T) and a new haplo- man ortholog of the yeast COQ2 gene, identified a single base pair type, conceivably involved in gene regulation. The -921T-allele was frameshift deletion resulting in a premature stop codon (c.1198delT, shown to be associated with increased risk of MI in women. Haplotype- N401fsX415). Transformation of yeast Δcoq1 and Δcoq2 strains by specific chromatin immunoprecipitation (haploChIP) of activated poly- mutant yeast COQ1 and mutant human COQ2 genes, respectively, merase II, as a measure of transcriptional activity in vivo, suggested resulted in defective growth on respiratory medium showing that these that the -921C>T polymorphism is functionally important, the -921T-al- mutations are indeed the cause of OXPHOS deficiency lele being associated with lower transcriptional activity. Electromobility shift assay (EMSA) showed that the -921C>T polymorphism affects C11. Mitochondrial DNA depletion is a major cause of multiple the binding of nuclear factors in allele-specific manner, thus suggest- respiratory chain defects ing that the lower transcriptional activity associated with the -921T-al- A. Rötig1, E. Sarzi1, A. Bourdon1, D. Chretien1, M. Zahrate1, J. Corcos1, A. lele is due to binding of one or more transcriptional repressor(s) to the Slama2, V. Cormier-Daire1, P. De Lonlay1, A. Munnich1; T-allele. 1INSERM U781, PARIS, France, 2Hôpital du Kremlin Bicêtre, PARIS, France. In conclusion, our results strongly reinforce the contention that the Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome (MDS) is a clinically and haplotype carrying the -921T-allele may be causally related to MI and/ genetically heterogeneous condition characterized by reduction in or CAD. mtDNA copy number responsible for multiple oxidative phosphoryla- tion (OXPHOS) enzyme deficiency. In order to determine the actual C14. Genome-wide copy number variation in schizophrenia incidence of mtDNA depletion in multiple respiratory chain deficiency, T. Lencz1,2,3, C. Lambert4, T. Vance Morgan5, J. M. Kane1,2,3, R. Kucherlapati5,6, we have carried out the real-time PCR quantification of mtDNA in A. K. Malhotra1,2,3; liver or muscle tissue of 100 of 270 children with unexplained mul- 1The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Glen Oaks, NY, United States, 2Albert Einstein tiple OXPHOS deficiency. Half of the patients presented a reduction College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, United States, 3The Feinstein Institute for in mtDNA copy number below 50% of control values in liver and/or Medical Research, Manhasset, NY, United States, 4Golden Helix, Inc., Boze- muscle (50/100). Most patients (16%) presented a neonatal form with man, MT, United States, 5Harvard Partners Center for Genetics and Genomics, severe liver involvement, a second group was represented by Alpers Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United syndrome (4%) and 20% of the patients presented encephalomyopa- States. thy. DGUOK or POLG mutations could be identified in 22% of patients Background: Recently, considerable attention has focused on the sur- with liver disease, POLG mutations were consistently found in all but prisingly common degree of structural variation in the human genome. one patient with Alpers syndrome. Two patients carried a homozygous While excess rates of psychiatric illness have been reported in cytoge- TK2 or MPV17 mutation respectively. Our findings show that mtDNA netically-defined chromosomal alterations, whole-genome microarray depletion is a very frequent cause of multiple respiratory chain defi- technology has not yet been utilized to identify sub-microscopic struc- ciency with a incidence of at least 18% of children with unexplained tural variation underlying psychiatric phenotypes. We report results of OXPHOS deficiency a novel approach to examining genome-wide structural variation in a case-control schizophrenia (SZ) cohort. Methods: SZ cases (65F/113M) and controls (63F/81M) were exam- ined. All subjects self-identified as Caucasian non-Hispanic; testing Concurrent Sessions 1 of 210 ancestry informative markers revealed no population stratifi- remaining significant after multiple testing correction. Analysis of an cation. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were assayed using independent large French case-control group replicated this significant the Affymetrix 500K array. Quality control procedures yielded mean association for the same SNP T263I (p = 0,00019), again surviving call rates of 97%, reliability (concordance across repeated samples) multiple testing correction. Haplotype analysis and the independent > 99%, and 439,511 high-quality SNPs available for analysis. A novel effect test using WHAP in both populations were both compatible with algorithm was implemented to identify and quantify extended runs of SNP T263I being the only causal variant. The variant I263 is underrep- homozygosity (ROHs), which can signify chromosomal microdeletions resented in otosclerosis patients and hence protective against the dis- and/or ancestral autozygosity. ease. Combining the data of both case-control groups for SNP T263I Results: A total of 339 “common” ROHs (observed in >3% of subjects) with a Mantel-Haenszel estimate of common odds ratios gave a very were identified across the 22 autosomes. In genome-wide analysis, SZ significant result (p = 9.2 x 10-6). Functional analysis of this SNP T263I patients had significantly more ROHs than controls (32±12 vs.28±13, with a luciferase reporter assay showed that the protective variant I263 p=0.009). Frequency of nine specific ROHs significantly differed be- of TGFB1 is more active than the WT variant T263 (p = 1,6 x 10-6). On tween patients and controls at a nominal p<.01; all demonstrate great- the basis of our results, including very low p-values for association, er frequency in cases. Two prominent ROHs overlapped genes for replication in two independent populations and a demonstrated func- DTNBP1 and DISC1 binding partners. tional effect of the causative variant, we conclude that TGFB1 is the Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the first study of structural vari- first gene that influences the susceptibility for otosclerosis, and that the ation in schizophrenia using genome-wide SNP data. Results suggest I263 variant is protective against the disease. that extended homozygosity, and possibly microdeletions are both more frequent in schizophrenia and specific to critical risk loci. C17. Origin of the Etruscans: novel clues from the Y chromosome lineages C15. A genome-wide assessment of the genetic basis of type 1 A. Piazza1, N. Cerutti1, C. Di Gaetano1, F. Crobu1, A. Kouvatsi2, C. Triantaphylli- diabetes dis2, D. Palli3, A. Achilli4, S. Fornarino4, V. Battaglia4, S. Santachiara Benerecet- V. Plagnol1, D. Clayton1, K. Downes1, D. Dunger2, H. Leung1, S. Nutland1, D. ti4, P. A. Underhill5, G. Matullo1, L. L. Cavalli-Sforza5, A. Torroni4, O. Semino4; Smyth1, H. Stevens1, N. Walker1, Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, J. 1Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia, Biochimica, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Todd1; Genetics, Development and Molecular Biology, School of Biology, Aristotle 1Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Uni- University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, 3Molecular and Nutritional versity of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Epidemiology Unit, CSPO-Scientific Institute of Tuscany Region,, Florence, The strong familial clustering of autoimmune type 1 diabetes (T1D) Italy, 4Dipartimento di Genetica e Microbiologia, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, in families remains only partially explained. The six confirmed genes 5Genetics Department, Stanford University, Stanford, California, CA, United or chromosome regions with convincing statistical support in large, States. and multiple, populations, namely the major histocompatibility com- Three hypotheses have been proposed on the origin of the distinc- plex (MHC), the insulin gene (INS), CTLA4, PTPN22, IL2RA/CD25, tive Etruscan civilization and language that flourished ca. 3,000 years and IFIH1/MDA5 can explain only about 50% of familial aggregation. before present (BP) in Central Italy: 1) an external Anatolian source Nonetheless, their identification has provided many insights into the (Lydia and Lemnos) as claimed by Herodotus, 2) an autochthonous biology and pathways of T1D. Recent expansions in sample collec- process of formation from the preceding Villanovan society as firstly tions, including the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome proposed by Dionysius of Halicarnassus and 3) an influence from Trust Diabetes and Inflammation Laboratory (JDRF/WT DIL) British Northern Europe. A synthetic geographical map summarizing 34 clas- T1D case sample (n = 8,000), and advances in affordable, genome- sical genetic markers in Italy differentiates a genetically homogeneous wide, high throughput single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) geno- Central Italian region between the Arno and Tiber rivers (ancient Etru- typing technologies (Affymetrix), has allowed an association analysis ria) from the rest of Italy. While this fact was tentatively interpreted as a of 500,000 SNPs across the genome in 2,000 T1D cases and 3,000 genetic footprint of the Etruscans, its verification remained a challenge controls as part of the Wellcome Trust Case-Control Consortium due to lack of data on differentiation of such markers and its calibration (WTCCC). Attesting to the quality of the SNP map, positive results with time. were obtained for all six susceptibility loci reported previously. How- Here we show the genetic relationships of modern Etrurians, who ever, follow-up genotyping studies of 14 other chromosome regions mostly settled in Tuscany, with other Italian, Near Eastern and Aegean showing P < 10-5 in the WTCCC scan in over 6,000 cases and 6,000 peoples by comparing the Y-chromosome DNA variation in 1,264 un- controls, and in approximately 2,000 families, supported in a convinc- related healthy males from: Tuscany-Italy (n=263), North Italy (n=306), ing way (P < 10-15 and odds ratios approximately 1.2) four regions South Balkans (n=359), Lemnos island (n=60), Sicily and Sardinia associated with T1D in both the family and case-control samples, on (n=276). The Tuscany samples were collected in Volterra (n=116), chromosomes 16p13, 18p11, 12q13 and 12q24. These results illus- Murlo (n=86) and Casentino Valley (n=61). trate the power of genome-wide association approach to characterise We found traces of recent Near Eastern gene flow still present in Tus- the genetic basis of T1D. cany, especially in the archaeologically important village of Murlo. The samples from Tuscany show eastern haplogroups E3b1-M78, G2*- C16. Identification of TGFB1 as the first gene associated with P15, J2a1b*-M67 and K2-M70 with frequencies very similar to those otosclerosis observed in Turkey and surrounding areas, but significantly different M. Thys1, I. Schrauwen1, K. Vanderstraeten1, K. Janssens1, N. Dieltjens1, K. from those of neighbouring Italian regions. The microsatellite haplo- Van Den Bogaert1, E. Fransen1, W. Chen2, M. Ealy2, M. Claustres3, C. R. W. J. types associated to these haplogroups allow inference of ancestor Cremers4, I. Dhooge5, F. Declau6, J. Claes6, P. Van de Heyning6, R. Vincent7, T. lineages for Etruria and Near East whose time to the most recent com- Somers8, E. Offeciers8, R. J. H. Smith2, G. Van Camp1; mon ancestors is relatively recent (about 3,500 years BP) and sup- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Wilrijk, Belgium, 2Molecular Otolaryngology ports a possible non autochthonous post-Neolithic signal associated Research Laboratories, Iowa City, IA, United States, 3Laboratoire de Genetique with the Etruscans. Moleculaire et chromosomique CHU, Montpellier, France, 4Department of Oto- rhinolaryngology, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5Department of Otorhinolaryngol- C18. Epidemics of viral haemorrhagic fever in Medieval times ogy, Gent, Belgium, 6Department of ORL, Edegem, Belgium, 7Jean Causse Ear as a possible selection pressure for CCR5del32 in Europe: new Clinic, Colombiers, France, 8University Department of Otolaryngology, Wilrijk, insights from Croatian island isolates Belgium. Z. Biloglav1, M. Smoljanovic2, C. Hayward3, A. Vorko-Jovic1, I. Kolcic1, O. Po- Otosclerosis is a progressive hearing loss characterized by an abnor- lasek1, L. Zgaga1, N. Hastie3, H. Campbell4, A. Wright3, I. Rudan4; mal bone homeostasis leading to stapes fixation. Although its etiology 1Faculty of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Split, Croatia, remains unknown, otosclerosis can be considered a complex disease. 3MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4Faculty of Medicine, TGFB1 was chosen for a case-control association study, because of Edinburgh, United Kingdom. several non-genetic indications of involvement in otosclerosis. SNP Aim. The CCR5del32 mutation is protective against HIV infection. The analysis in a large Belgian-Dutch case-control group gave significant possible historic selection pressure that gave rise to its increased fre- results (p = 0,0044) for an amino acid changing SNP in TGFB1, T263I, quency in Europe remains a matter of conjecture. The hypotheses in-Concurrent Sessions 20 clude plague epidemics, childhood infections or random genetic drift. cells. Results indicated that Oct4 and Tdgf1 might be co-regulated dur- Materials and methods. We sampled 1001 examinees from 9 isolated ing ES differentiation. The total number of expressed miRNA genes in Dalmatian villages which had differing history of epidemics during the ES, EB, and somatic cells remained constant. However, their expres- period between 11th-20th centuries. The demographic history of these sion levels were significantly elevated during differentiation, further isolates during the past 1,000 years was reconstructed in great detail suggesting the involvement of miRNAs in cellular development and from historic records. The frequency of CCR5del32 mutation was de- specification. Furthermore, there was no correlation in the expression termined in each population. levels between miRNAs and their predicted target mRNAs, thereby Results: CCR5del32 mutation frequency in the Croatian general supporting a translational repression model. Our results provide new population is 7.1%. The villages with no history of epidemics had a insight into both miRNA and mRNA expression patterns at the single CCR5del32 mutation frequency between 1.5% and 3.9% (p<0.01 in all cell level. cases in comparison to general population). The villages with a history of a major 15th-century epidemic (with lethality rates of about 70%) C21. A High Resolution Oligonucleotide CpG Island Microarray had CCR5del32 frequencies between 6.5% and 11.0% (p<0.01 in all C. Foo, D. B. Gordon, S. Shchegrova, S. B. Giles, E. M. LeProust, S. B. Mil- cases in comparison to epidemic-free villages). Further research on ligan, C. Hopkins, A. Bhattacharjee, R. Mukherjee Saxena, D. N. Roberts; the historic records suggested that epidemics of viral haemorrhagic Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States. fever (possibly originating in Russia) and with an exceptionally long in- CpG islands are areas of DNA containing multiple CpG dinucleotides. cubation period may have spread to Baltic states and then through the When CpG dinucleotides within these islands are methylated, espe- ‘route of Amber’ to southern Europe and the Republic of Venice, from cially in promoter regions, expression of the corresponding down- where it affected some village populations on the Croatian islands. stream genes is often repressed. Aberrant CpG island methylation is Conclusion. The extensive available historical and genetic data from implicated in cancer. these Croatian island isolates supports the hypothesis that an unknown We developed an oligonucleotide microarray that represents the CpG viral haemorrhagic fever was reponsible for the selection pressure on islands in the human genome. This microarray contains ~230,000 the CCR5del32 mutation in Europe. oligo probes tiling the 21 megabases of 27,800 CpG islands, with an average spacing between probes of 95 base pairs. The microarray is C19. Reconstructing functional gene loci using PCR compatible with several published methods for the genome-wide de- S. Kraner, S. Christan, M. Zoller, C. Jung, D. Schindelhauer; tection of methylated CpG islands. To demonstrate the ability of this Human Artificial Chromosome Group, Livestock Biotechnology, Life Sciences microarray to detect methylated DNA, we performed analysis of hu- Center Weihenstephan, Technical University Munich, Freising, Germany. man genomic DNA samples after methylated DNA immunoprecipita- A very long PCR method has been established for 30-65 kb sized hu- tion (mDIP). We also developed “spike-in” control DNA that was in vitro man genomic products from PAC/BAC clones for human artificial chro- methylated to varying degrees. mosome development. Within PAC libraries, gene loci rarely are rep- The mDIP method combined with CpG island microarray analysis ac- resented in an applicable form. The available segments often contain curately differentiated between partially and fully methylated spike-in more than one gene, or parts of adjacent genes, or are incomplete. DNAs. We then applied the whole-genome assay to the prostate can- Long PCR can introduce adequate restriction sites via primers, how- cer cell line PC3 and detected methylated CpG islands upstream of ever, up to now it was unknown if long PCR within this size range can cancer genes including CDKN2A/p16. We studied other cancer cell produce functional genomic molecules. lines and determined relative methylation at multiple cancer-related Using a novel DNA quality termed grade 1, quantitative amplification is genes. Finally, using male and female embryonic fibroblast cells, we robustly achieved within 7-9 PCR cycles, resulting in a very low error demonstrate that many CpG islands on the female X chromosome are rate. For locus reconstruction via subcloning of PCR products, a large more methylated than the corresponding islands on the male X chro- fraction of resulting molecules needs to be free of errors. mosome. Comparitively, methylation of CpG islands on autosomes is Here we have subcloned single 32 kb molecules of the human genom- essentially the same for the male and female samples. This supports ic HPRT gene locus in a telomerized PAC vector. The constructs were a role for CpG methylation in silencing the inactive X chromosome in transfected into HT1080 (HPRT-) cells and checked in a HAT assay. females. Out of five bacterial clones obtained, 2 showed large deletions. Out of the 3 showing the correct PFGE size, 2 turned out to be functional. C22. Cost-effective screening of deletions and duplications of up FISH analysis of HAT resistant cell lines from each construct showed to 1500 loci in one assay: a bead-based approach presence of the transgene locus randomly integrated in a host chromo- E. Aten1, S. White1, M. Kriek1, M. Bibikova2, L. Zhou2, E. Wickham-Garcia2, J. some. Cotransfection of a centromere resulted in the incorporation of Fan2, M. H. Breuning1, J. T. den Dunnen1; the synthetic locus in a human artificial chromosome (HAC). This tech- 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Illumina Inc, San nology represents a breakthrough for the assembly of HAC constructs Diego, CA, United States. based on conventional cloning and for the development of therapeutic Copy Number Variation (CNV), deletions and duplications, is frequent- HACs containing entire gene loci. ly involved in genetic disease. Historically, methodologies detecting quantitative changes were laborious, costly and consequently neglect- C20. Single cell microRNA and mRNA profiling reveals unique ed. Now genome-wide analyses can be used to study CNV, revealing gene expression signatures and heterogeneities in mouse ES extensive variation in the human genome, both pathogenic and non- cells pathogenic. However, in diagnostic setting cost prohibits application C. Chen1, R. Tan1, D. Ridzon1, L. Bahreinifar1, K. Guegler1, W. M. Strauss2; of these methods to screen all incoming patients. Focused on clinical 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2University of Colorado- application, we developed a flexible targeted method using Illumina’s Boulder, Boulder, CO, United States. GoldenGate® assay, facilitating cost-effective screening of 1420 loci in We describe a new method for simultaneously quantifying 237 mouse parallel in hundreds of samples. The assay should detect all trisomies, microRNAs (miRNAs) and 21 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) from single telomere-end rearrangements and known micro-deletion syndromes cells including embryonic stem (ES) cells, embryoid bodies (EBs), 3T3 and perform a rough whole genome scan. Analysis of 48 control cases cells, or splenocytes. The method is based on multiplex RT, multiplex succefully identified all known rearrangements, from trisomy-21 to a preamplification, and singleplex real-time TaqMan® PCR assays. single DMD-exon deletion. Analysis of 320 patient samples (mental Assays are quantitative for a dynamic range of at least three logs. retardation of unknown etiology) revealed many new rearrangements, Single cell expression signatures could classify individual ES, EBs, including non-pathogenic CNV (present in >20% of cases). MLPA, or somatic cells. Significant inter-cell variations of both miRNA and FISH or whole genome SNP-array analysis thus far confirmed other mRNA expression within ES cell lines indicated the heterogeneity of changes as pathogenic in 29 cases. The assay designed is reliable, ES cells. The highest variability was observed among EB cells (CV cost-effective, can be easily modified to include new regions of interest = 139%), demonstrating that EBs undergo differentiation at different and used to screen up to 1500 loci in parallel. stages. Interestingly, ES marker gene Oct4 and signaling gene Tdgf1 were highly co-expressed. Both were absent in 3T3 and splenocyte cells, highly expressed in ES cells, and significantly reduced in EB Concurrent Sessions 21 C23. Literature-aided interpretation of microarray data: a sel, Brussels, Belgium. compendium study on muscle development and disease Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) was introduced in the clinic P. A. C. ‚t Hoen1, R. Jelier2, E. Sterrenburg1, J. T. den Dunnen1, G. B. van Om- in 1990 as a very early form of prenatal diagnosis (PND) for couples at men1, J. A. Kors2, B. Mons1,2; high risk to transmit a genetic disease. Preimplantation genetic screen- 1Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, ing (PGS), a variant of PGD was introduced later in order to improve Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC - University Medical Center Rotterdam, the selection of embryos for transfer in in vitro fertilisation (IVF). Biosemantics Group, Department of Medical Informatics, Rotterdam, The Neth- The requests for PGD or PGS of infertile as well as of fertile couples erlands. were evaluated and accepted for treatment whenever possible. As Lists of differentially expressed genes from microarray studies are dif- soon as the PCR-based or FISH-based single cell assays were ready, ficult to interpret. Comparative analysis of related microarray studies the IVF treatment was planned .A prospective data collection on preg- may help to improve the understanding of the molecular and cellular nancies and children was organised by giving questionnaires to the processes involved. We analyzed 102 microarray studies published in couples on the day of transfer. Additional questionnaires were send to the field of muscle development and disease. The overlap in the lists the patients and their physicians (gyneco- logists, pediatricians) dur- of differentially expressed genes was generally small. Analysis at the ing pregnancy, at delivery and later on. Children were examined at 2 level of biological processes should be more rewarding, since different months and 2 years of age whenever possible. Between 1993 and genes may hint at the same process. Currently available methods rare- 2005, 2756 PGD and PGS cycles were performed for many different ly performed well due to low sensitivity and their dependence on the indications including HLA-typing. After transfer of ‘fresh’ embryos, 567 limited annotation of gene function and pathways in curated databases. children were born .Of these, 548 were liveborn, 19 were stillborn. And As an alternative, we developed a literature-based annotation system. 9 children died neonatally. The perinatal death rate (5 from single- For all genes, species-independent concept profiles were derived, link- ton pregnancies and 23 from multiple pregnancies) of 4.9 %.should ing all biological concepts mentioned together with the gene in Medline be further investigated.. The mean term and birth weight in live born abstracts in a weighted fashion. The concept profiles for all possible singletons is respectively 38.8 weeks and 3268 grams. The major mal- gene pairs from two microarray studies were matched and evaluated formation rate is 3.6%. Embryo biopsy does not increase the major for significance of overlap. Our algorithm discovered biologically mean- malformation rate when compared to children born after IVF/ICSI with- ingful associations between studies that had no genes in common. The out PGD. biological processes shared between studies were easily recognized. For example, mouse and human studies on limb-girdle muscular dys- C26. The use of proteomic methods to search for biomarkers in trophy 2B were brought together by non-overlapping macrophage-ex- maternal plasma from trisomy 21 pregnancies. pressed genes. In vitro and in vivo studies into muscular atrophy were W. E. Heywood1, T. E. Madgett2, A. Wallington2, J. Hogg1, K. Mills1, N. D. connected by decreased mitochondrial activity, and found closely re- Avent2, L. S. Chitty1; lated to mitochondrion-related myopathies. In conclusion, our approach 1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2University of the West of facilitates finding common biological denominators in microarray stud- England, Bristol, United Kingdom. ies in an unsupervised way, and without the need for raw data analysis Objective: To use proteomic methods to search for biomarkers for tri- or annotations of biological functions in curated databases. somy 21 (T21) in maternal plasma. Methods: Surface Enhanced Laser Desorption Ionisation Mass Spec- C24. Producing a reference human gene set trometry (SELDI) detects small mass proteins (<30kDa) that are differ- J. Loveland, J. A. Rajan, A. Frankish, E. A. Hart, J. G. R. Gilbert, L. Gordon, entially expressed. Using protein array chips specific to proteins with E. Griffiths, R. Storey, S. Dyer, V. Curwen, S. Searle, L. Wilming, J. Harrow, T. different properties maternal plasma samples matched for gestational Hubbard; age were analysed. Plasma from pregnancies with normal male and Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. female fetuses, and 8 T21 fetuses were analysed. Higher molecular The Havana group (www.sanger.ac.uk/HGP/havana/) produces man- weight analyses on albumin and IgG depleted plasma samples were ual annotation of finished sequence from vertebrate genomes, con- performed using 2D Differential Gel Electrophoresis (2D-DiGE) in the centrating on finished human, mouse and zebrafish genomes. Manual pH 4-7 range. Further analysis of interesting areas was performed in annotation is needed for the accurate determination of duplicated gene a narrower pH range. clusters, pseudogenes and non-coding genes, polyA features, splice Results: Initial SELDI analysis showed differences between normal variation and accurate nomenclature. Currently, annotation of genes and T21 pregnancies and subsequent studies were controlled for on the human genome is provided by multiple public resources. To gestational age. IMAC30 arrays in T21 samples showed potential bio- provide a standard uniform human gene set Havana is collaborating markers with masses of ~24kDa (p=0.0087) and 24.3kDa (p=0.046). A with NCBI, UCSC and Ensembl to produce a consensus CDS (CCDS) Q10 Chip array showed a potential biomarker of higher mass, 123kDa database containing a core set of mouse and human protein-coding (p=0.027). These proteins were expressed in samples analysed at regions that are consistently annotated. The next release of the human 11-13 weeks’ and 18-19 weeks’ gestation. 2D DiGE results showed CCDS set will contain around 19000 coding transcripts compared to three possible biomarker proteins in T21 pregnancies, one of 54kDa 13372 currently in mouse. (p=0.021) with a 2.3 fold increase in spot intensity and two smaller pro- Havana also collaborates with Ensembl to improve the genebuild on teins with 1.8 (p= 0.01) and 2.1 (p= 0.024) fold increases. Initial work the finished genome and produce a merged gene set that is visible in in a narrower pH range shows better resolution of proteins of interest. Ensembl. This merged set contains only full-length coding transcripts Studies are underway to confirm and identify these proteins. predicted identically and independently by both groups and is coloured Conclusions: Proteomic methods may be useful to identify biomark- gold in Ensembl. This enables Ensembl users to highlight errors within ers of T21 that could be used clinically for non-invasive diagnosis of the automated genebuild allowing Havana to correct the genes manu- Down’s syndrome ally. The resulting corrections get re-incorporated into the new gene- build. The merged set consists of approximately 12,000 Ensembl and C27. Investigation of New Markers for Improved Isolation of Fetal Havana transcripts with identical exon coordinates and splice sites. It Trophoblast Cells in Maternal Peripheral Circulation differs to the CCDS approach in that UTR, as well as protein-coding E. Guetta1, L. Gutstein-Abo1,2, A. Sacher3, G. Desoye4, G. Barkai1; regions, must be the same. A new graphical interface called Zmap has 1Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Tel- recently been implemented which enables multiple genomes to be an- Hashomer, Israel, 2Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, notated simultaneously and thus should improve the consistency of Israel, 3The Maiman Institute for Proteome Research, George S. Wise Faculty annotation. of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Graz, Graz, Austria. C25. How healthy are children born after preimplantation genetic Trophoblasts present an attractive target cell type for non-invasive pre- diagnosis? natal diagnosis in that they can be isolated from maternal blood early I. Liebaers, W. Verpoest, S. Desmyttere, M. De Rycke, C. Staessen, K. Ser- in the first trimester. mon, A. Michiels, K. Boelaert, J. Van der Elst, P. Devroey, M. Bonduelle; The aim of this study is to identify specific Trophoblast cells markers for Research centre for reproductive genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel – uzbrus- application in retrieval of rare fetal cells from maternal peripheral blood.Concurrent Sessions 22 Trophoblast and peripheral blood cell samples were obtained from Denmark after gradual implementation of the new guidelines during women, undergoing pregnancy termination in the first trimester. Tro- 2004, 2005 and 2006. The area covers approx 1.1 mill inhabitants, phoblast isolation was efficient and the cell populations showed high 1/5 of the total population. A comparison was also made with national purity for trophoblasts (85-94% positive cells), with low fibroblast con- figures obtained from the Central Cytogenetic Registry. Main findings tamination (0-12%- positive cells). were: An overall reduction in invasive procedures (from approx. 11% Isolation and identification of proteins was performed by proteomics of all pregnancies to approx. 5%), a doubled number of trisomy 21 technology. The results of 2-D gel analysis revealed many differences fetuses diagnosed prenatally, and a reduction in the number of chil- in protein expression between the maternal blood cells and placenta- dren born with Down syndrome by approx 50%. The maternal history derived trophoblasts. The most obvious protein spots that appeared of the children born with Down syndrome revealed: decline of offer of in the placenta samples but were absent in the blood samples were screening, risk calculation above cut-off limit, too late appearance in isolated, purified and identified. pregnancy. Sex chromosome abnormalities were apparently not de- The proteins identified were: cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 8, keratin 19, tected more frequently prenatally, but triplodi and possibly trisomy 18 Zeta globin, A-gamma globin, G-gamma globin, and annexin IV. were diagnosed more often than previously. Antibodies against cytokeratin 7 (an intracellular antigen) and annexin Selected cases with mosaicim and pseudomosaicim will be present- (a cell-surface antigen) were tested in trophoblast cell lines (JAR and ed. BeWo) and Chorionic Villus (CVS) cultures. Annexin staining was posi- tive in the JAR cell line only whereas both lines as well as CVS cultures C30. Prenatal detection of partial chromosome imbalance by were positive for cytokeratin 7. The remainder of the proteins detected Quantitative Fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR) by proteomics are currently being screened and the most promising V. Cirigliano1,2, G. Voglino3, E. Ordoñez1,2, A. Plaja1, C. Fuster2; markers will be applied in trophoblast isolation from maternal blood 1General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellater- samples, the ultimate goal being culture expansion and karyotype ra, Barcelona, Spain, 3Promea Day Surgery, Torino, Italy. analysis of the isolated cells. The QF-PCR assay allows prenatal diagnoses of chromosome aneu- ploidies in a few hours after sampling. C28. APEX microarrays for the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis Several markers are needed on chromosomes X, Y, 21, 18 and 13 of beta-thalassaemia to minimize homozygous or uninformative samples. However, if mic- T. E. Papasavva1, I. Kallikas2, S. Papacharalambous2, A. Kyrri3, L. Kythreotis3, rosatellites are selected along the examined chromosomes, QF-PCR H. Roomere4, M. Kleantous1; may also allow detecting partial trisomies. 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Archibishop We developed a QF-PCR assay including up to 10 markers on the Makarios III Hospital,, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Cyprus Thalassaemia Center, Nicosia, sex chromosomes, 8 on chromosomes 21 and 18 and 6 markers on Cyprus, 4Asper Biotech Ltd, Tartu, Estonia. chromosome 13. The recent discovery of relatively abundant quantities of cell free fetal In the course of its application on over 30.000 clinical cases the test DNA in maternal plasma and serum has opened up new possibilities allowed detecting 100% aneuploidies without false positive results. On for the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis. In Cyprus, seven different the other end, it was also possible to detect 11 different partial aneu- beta-thalassaemia mutations account for over 98% of all cases with ploidies resulted from unbalanced translocations, duplications, inser- IVSI-110 representing the 81% of the total. Therefore, the develop- tions and other structural rearrangements. Chromosome 18 was in- ment of a non-invasive method for the Cyprus population is based on volved in 4 cases, 6 fetuses had either X or Y derived extra sequences the detection of paternally inherited Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms and in two more samples partial trisomies 21 or 13 were also readily (SNPs) as well as the direct detection of paternal beta-thal mutations. detected as trisomic patterns for two or more STRs. In 6 cases QF- One of the approaches that are being developed is the Arrayed Primer PCR result was crucial to achieve the correct diagnosis. Extension (APEX) method on the Genorama® QuattroImager™ . We Rapid prenatal diagnosis by QF-PCR has proven to be efficient and developed a DNA chip called “thalassochip” that contains 29 beta-thal reliable in detecting major numerical abnormalities. In this study we mutations and 10 SNPs linked to the beta-globin locus. More informa- demonstrate that an appropriate marker selection can also allow iden- tive SNPs are being added constantly. tification of partial chromosome imbalance. The specificity and the sensitivity of the approach were tested using The main advantages of the assay are its low cost, speed and au- genomic DNA. We were able to detect as low as 30pg/μl of genomic tomation allowing high throughput of samples. QF-PCR reaches the DNA. Fetal DNA in maternal plasma is about 90pg/μl. Moreover, the purposes of relieving anxiety of most parents within 24 hours from specificity of the approach was determined using genomic DNA. Fol- sampling or to accelerate therapeutical interventions in case of ab- lowing that, the procedure was applied on maternal plasma DNA for normal result. 2 SNPs and we were able to detect the paternal allele of the fetus for those SNPs. C31. Screening and maternal transmission instability of Although the results are preliminary, the approach is very promising. intermediate-size and premutation FMR1 alleles in 24,446 All the SNPs and mutations that are currently on the thalassochip need mother-newborn pairs from the general population to be standardized. Moreover, more informative SNPs need to be add- F. Rousseau1,2, S. Lévesque1, C. Dombrowski1, M. Morel1, R. Réhel1, J. S. ed validated and standardized. Côté1, J. Bussières1, K. Morgan3; 1URGHM, Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier universitaire de Québec, C29. Prenatal diagbosis in Denmark after the introduction of Quebec, PQ, Canada, 2CanGeneTest consortium & Université Laval, Québec, nuchal translucency screening PQ, Canada, 3McGill University Hospital Centre, Montreal General Hospital S. Kjaergaard1, J. M. Hahnemann1, L. Skibsted2, L. Neerup3, L. Sperling4, H. Research Center, Montréal, PQ, Canada. Zingenberg5, A. Kristiansen6, K. Brondum-Nielsen1; Background: To study the instability of FMR1 gene triplet repeats in the 1Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Roskilde Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark, general population, we screened a large prospective sample of 24,446 3Gentofte Hospital, Gentofte, Denmark, 4Herlev Hospital, Herlev, Denmark, anonymized mother-offspring pairs to determine transmission insta- 5Glostrup Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, 6Naestved Hospital, Naestved, Den- bility of intermediate-size (40-58 triplets) and premutation-size FMR1 mark. alleles (59-230 triplets) in the general population. In 2004, the National board of Health in Denmark recommended new Methods: We used a mini-Southern blotting method to screen all moth- guidelines for prenatal diagnosis. Instead of restricting the offer of pre- ers for FMR1 alleles of 40 to 58 triplets (n=676) or premutation-size natal diagnosis mainly to pregnant women over the age of 35 years, (59+ triplets, n=22). We studied transmission of these alleles to their all pregnant women shall have the possibility to opt for 1. trimester offspring using triplet repeat PCR with validation of the mother-child screening including nuchal translucency measurement in the fetus and link using six highly polymorphic microsatellite markers. a maternal blood sample (doubletest), allowing a combined risk cal- Results: Out of a subsample of 343 transmissions of normal-size alleles culation that the fetus has Down syndrome (or other trisomies). If the (<40 triplets) we observed three(1%) unstable transmissions. There risk is over 1:300, an invasive procedure is offered with chromosome were 11 unstable alleles out of 191 transmission (6%) of intermediate- analysis of fetal cells from chorionic villus sample or amniocentesis. size alleles (40 to 58 repeats) and 6 unstable premutation-size alleles We have surveyed the outcome of prenatal diagnosis in 3 counties in out of 11 transmissions (55%). One mother with a 100 triplet allele had Concurrent Sessions 2 a boy with a typical full mutation. The incidence of fragile-X syndrome the clinical and molecular profile is still being defined. Using aCGH in this population was thus 1:24446 (upper limit of 95% C.I. 1/7065). analyses on the Sanger Institute 30K WGTP arrays we have gener- Intermediate-size alleles were significantly more unstable than normal- ated a genomic footprint for patients with different sized deletions size alleles (Fisher exact p : p=0.0012) but much more stable (about and duplications and compared their genome architecture on a global ten-fold) than premutation-size alleles (Fisher exact p = <0.0001). The scale. Our patients with atypical deletions and duplications involving major fragile-X haplotype (T50-T42-T62) was present in all unstable the WBS locus present with a spectrum of phenotypes for which we premutation-size alleles. will attempt to link genotype to pathological phenotype. Conslusion: Empirical measures of incidence and instability are of in- terest to determine the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of putative C34. Long-range conserved non-coding SHOX sequences FMR1 screening programs and to counsel carriers of large FMR1 al- regulate expression in developing chicken limb and are leles with no family history of the disease. associated with short stature phenotypes in human patients. N. Sabherwal1, F. Bangs2, R. Röth1, B. Weiss1, K. Jantz1, E. Tiecke2, G. K. C32. Familial inherited microtia caused by a benign CNV Hinkel3, C. Spaich4, B. P. Hauffa5, H. van der Kamp6, J. Kapeller1, C. Tickle2, G. amplification at chromosome 4pter Rappold1; I. G. Balikova1, K. Martens1, C. Melotte1, S. Van Vooren2, Y. Moreau3, H. 1Department of Molecular Human Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, Uni- Starke4, D. Vetrie5, H. Fiegler5, N. Carter6, T. Liehr4, G. Matthijs1, J. Fryns1, I. versity of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Division of Cell and Developmen- Casteels7, K. Devriendt1, J. R. Vermeesch1; tal Biology, School of Life Sciences, MSI/WTB Complex, University of Dundee, 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2ESAT-SISTA KU - Leuven, Dundee, United Kingdom, 3Gemeinschaftspraxis, Dresden, Germany, 4Institute Leuven, Belgium, 3ESAT-SISTA, KU-Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Institute of of Clinical Genetics, Klinikum Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany, 5Zentrum für Kin- Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger derheilkunde, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 6Department of Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 6Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,, Hinxton, Paediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. United Kingdom, 7Department of Ophthalmology, KU - Leuven, Leuven, Bel- Defects in long-range regulatory elements have recently emerged as gium. previously underestimated factors in the genesis of human congenital Recently, large scale benign copy number variations (CNVs) were un- disorders. Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is a dominant skeletal malfor- covered, encompassing over 12% of our genome. Deletions and du- mation syndrome caused by mutations in the short stature homeo- plications of these regions present in normal individuals contain genes box gene SHOX. We have analyzed four families with Léri-Weill dys- considered to be dosage tolerant for human development. chondrosteosis with deletions in the pseudoautosomal region but still Here we present a 4 generation family with autosomal dominant inheri- with an intact SHOX coding region. Using FISH and SNP studies, we tance of microtia, eye coloboma and lacrimal duct obstruction, a novel identified an interval of ~200 kb that was deleted in all tested affected syndrome. This phenotype is linked (lod >3) with a cytogenetically vis- family members but retained in the unaffected members and in 100 ible alteration at 4pter but was never described in patients with 4pter control individuals. Comparative genomic analysis of this interval re- deletions nor duplications. We demonstrate by array CGH, qPCR, vealed eight highly conserved non-genic elements between 48 kb and FISH and Southern blot that the disorder is caused by the amplification 215 kb downstream of the SHOX gene. As mice do not have a Shox of a 780kb region on 4pter, encompassing the olfactory receptor gene gene, we analyzed their enhancer potential in chicken embryos using cluster. This is the first example in which the amplification of a well- a GFP reporter construct driven by the ß-globin promoter, by in ovo known copy number variable region causes a phenotype and hence is electroporation of the limb bud. We observed cis-regulatory activity in a novel genetic disease mechanism causing a dominant disorder. 3 of the 8 non-genic elements in the developing limbs argueing for an In addition, we investigated the organization of the amplified fragment extensive control region of this gene. These findings are consistent in order to understand the mechanism by which this amplification oc- with the idea that the deleted region in the affected families contains curred. We show that perfect copies of the 780kb fragment are ampli- several distinct elements that regulate Shox expression in the devel- fied in tandem. oping limb. Furthermore, the deletion of these elements in humans generates a phenotype apparently undistinguishable to those patients C33. Gene dosage, craniofacial and neurological development identified with mutations in the SHOX coding region and, for the first and Williams-Beuren syndrome. time, demonstrates the potential of an in vivo assay in chicken to moni- M. Tassabehji1, P. Hammond2, S. Gribble3, W. Beckett1, A. Karmiloff-Smith4, M. tor putative enhancer activity in relation to human disease. Peippo5, L. Brueton6, P. Lunt7, K. Metcalfe8, D. Donnai9, N. Carter10; 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2UCL, London, United C35. Chromosomal imbalances detected in patients with Kingdom, 3The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, cerebral cortex malformations and epilepsy through array−CGH 4Birkbeck College, University of London, United Kingdom, 5Helsinki University technique Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 6Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birming- F. Novara1, T. Pramparo1, R. Guerrini2, B. Dalla Bernardina3, O. Zuffardi1; ham, United Kingdom, 7Bristol Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Bristol, United 1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2Unità di Neurologia Infanti- Kingdom, 8St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 9University of Man- le, Ospedale Pediatrico A Meyer - Università di Firenze, Firenze, Italy, 3Servizio chester and St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 10The Wellcome Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Policlinico GB Rossi, Università di Verona, Verona, Trust Sanger Institute, Canbridge, United Kingdom. Italy. Segmental duplications play an important role in disease by creating A cohort of 72 patients (37 males and 35 females) with cerebral cortex instability that leads to genomic rearrangements in important regions. malformations and/or epilepsy, and with a normal karyotype was anal- The consequences can be dosage imbalance of gene(s) critical for ysed trough array-CGH at a resolution of about 75Kb (Agilent platform normal human development. Abnormal gene dosage is involved in the 44B). Most of the patients had also mental retardation and a few pre- aetiology of the microdeletion disorder Williams-Beuren Syndrome sented congenital anomalies. All have been analyzed for brain MRI, (WBS) which displays characteristic cardiovascular, craniofacial and behavioural tests and types of epilepsy. Array-CGH resulted diagnostic neurological phenotypes. 28 or more genes are heterozygously delet- in 10 out of 72 patients analysed (14%). The size of the imbalance ed and upsetting the balance of specific gene(s) affects human speech ranged from 350Kb to 10Mb. The following chromosomal anomalies and language as well as cognitive capabilities. Genotype-phenotype were found: duplication of regions 7q11.23, 22q12.3-13.2 and Xp22.2; correlations have been difficult to assign and position effects involv- deletion of regions 2q22.1-q23.3, 5q14-21, 7q11.23, 15q13.2-q13.3 ing genes outside the critical region cannot be excluded. We have in- and 20q13.33. All chromosomal aberrations have been confirmed by vestigated rare individuals with atypical deletions in the WBS region, microsatellite analysis and the parental origin determined. Three cases displaying partial or more severe features of the classic cases, supple- with 7q11.23 duplication, reciprocal to the Williams-Beuren deletion, mented by the study of mouse models. The combination of clinical, have been detected in a girl, a male child and his mother. All suffered psychological and 3D-face morphometric analyses alongside detailed from severe speech impairment; the girl and the boy had cerebral cor- molecular profiling on a genome-wide scale has narrowed down the tex malformations of different type whereas the mother had not been critical region harbouring genes important for the WBS phenotypes tested for brain MRI. The 15q13.2-q13.3 deletion was mediated by the as well as highlighting new regions associated with craniofacial and same type of segmental duplications (BP1, BP2 and BP3) responsible neurological development. Reciprocal WBS duplications also exist and for instability of the PWS/AS region but located at BP4 and BP5. These Concurrent Sessions 2 preliminary results represent the first step to identify novel genes in- C38. OST3 mutation in non-syndromic mental retardation: volved in biological mechanisms important for human cerebral cortex expanding the spectrum of congenital disorders of development and for processes causative of epilepsy. glycosylation? F. Molinari1, S. Romano1, W. Morelle2, P. de Lonlay1, A. Munnich1, L. Colleaux1; C36. Activating SOS1 mutations cause Noonan syndrome 1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2UMR CNRS/USTL 8570, Lille, France. M. Tartaglia1, L. Pennacchio2,3, C. Zhao4, K. K. Yadav4, V. Fodale1, A. Sar- Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) is a group of inherited kozy5,6, B. Pandit7, K. Oishi7, S. Martinelli1, W. Schackwitz2,3, A. Ustaszewska2,3, disorders that affect glycoprotein biosynthesis. The Eighteen different J. Martin2,3, J. Bristow2,3, C. Carta1, F. Lepri5,6, C. Neri5,6, I. Vasta8, K. Gibson9, C. CDG types are characterized by a central nervous system dysfunction J. Curry10, J. P. Lopez Siguero11, M. C. Digilio12, G. Zampino8, B. Dallapiccola5,6, and multi-organ involvement. Group I CDG results in the failure of as- D. Bar-Sagi4, B. D. Gelb7; sembly or transfer of the N-glycan chain while group II is defined as 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Lawrence Berkeley National Labora- defects in the processing of the protein-bound glycan. tory, Berkeley, CA, United States, 3Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA, Here, we report on a non-syndromic mental retardation (MR) in two sibs United States, 4New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, United born to first cousin French family. Homozygosity mapping in the two af- States, 5IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 6Istituto CSS-Mendel, fected and two healthy children led to the identification of a unique ho- Rome, Italy, 7Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, mozygous region of 8 Mb on 8p23.1-p22. This interval encompassed 8Università Cattolica, Rome, Italy, 9Royal Children’s Hospital, Herston, Austra- the gene TUSC3/OST3 (Ost3 S.cerevisae homologue) encoding a lia, 10Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, CA, United States, 11Hospital protein involved in the oligosaccharyltransferase complex which catal- Materno-Infantil, Malaga, Spain, 12Ospedale “Bambino Gesù”, Rome, Italy. yses the transfer of an oligosaccharide chain on nascent proteins, the Noonan syndrome (NS) is a relatively common, genetically heteroge- key step of the N-Glycosylation process. Sequencing the OST3 gene neous Mendelian trait characterized by short stature, facial dysmor- identified a one base-pair insertion in exon 6, 787_788insC. The muta- phisms, congenital heart defects and skeletal anomalies. Accumulat- tion co-segregated with the disease and resulted in a premature stop ing evidence supports the idea that NS is caused by enhanced RAS- codon 37 codons downstream of the coding sequence, N263fsX300. MAPK signaling. Indeed, gain-of-function mutations in PTPN11, the Extensive work-up (Caryotype analysis, liver function, clotting factors, gene encoding SHP-2, a protein tyrosine phosphatase that positively brain MRI, EEG) was unremarkable with normal isoelectric focusing controls RAS signaling, and KRAS have been documented in 50% and Western blotting assay of serum N-glycoproteins. of NS cases. Here, we demonstrate that approximately 20% of NS Recent studies of glycoprotein fucosylation and polysialic acid modifi- patients without PTPN11 or KRAS mutation have missense mutations cation of neuronal cell adhesion molecules have shown the critical role in SOS1, which encodes a RAS-specific guanine nucleotide exchange of glycoproteins in synaptic plasticity. However, our results provide the factor (GEF). SOS1 mutations cluster at residues implicated in the first demonstration that a defect in N-Glycosylation can result in non- maintenance of SOS1 in its autoinhibited form and expression of two syndromic MR providing therefore new insights in the understanding of NS-associated mutants induced enhanced RAS and ERK activation. the pathophysiological bases of MR. The phenotype associated with SOS1 defects is distinctive, although within NS spectrum, with a high prevalence of ectodermal abnormali- C39. A defect in the ionotropic glutamate receptor 6 gene ties but generally normal development and linear growth. Our findings (GLUR6) causes autosomal recessive mental retardation implicate for the first time gain-of-function mutations in a RAS GEF in M. M. Motazacker1, B. Rost2, T. Hucho1, M. Garshasbi1, K. Kahrizi3, R. Ull- inherited disease and define a new mechanism by which upregulation mann1, F. Behjati3, R. Vazifehmand3, A. Tzschach1, L. R. Jensen1, D. Schmitz4, of the RAS pathway can profoundly change human development. H. Najmabadi3, H. H. Ropers1, A. W. Kuss1; 1Max-Planck-Institute for molecular genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Neuroscience C37. Mutations in the SPG11 gene, encoding spatacsin, are a research center (NWFZ), Charité, Berlin, Germany, 3University of social welfare major cause of spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum and rehabilitation sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Neuroscience G. Stevanin1,2, F. M. Santorelli3, H. Azzedine1, P. Coutinho4, P. Denora1,3, E. research center (NWFZ), Charité, Berlin, Germany. Martin1, A. Lossos5, B. Fontaine6, A. Filla7, E. Bertini3, A. Durr1,2, A. Brice1,2; Mental retardation (MR) is among the most common forms of genetic 1INSERM UMR679 - NEB, Paris, France, 2APHP- Pitie-Salpetriere Hosptital, handicaps. So far, however very little is known about the gene defects Dpt Genetics Cytogenetics, Paris, France, 3IRCCS-Bambino Gesù Children’s underlying this disorder. Especially the contribution of autosomal re- Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4Hospital S. Sebastiao and UnIGENe, Porto, Portugal, cessive hereditary defects is largely unresolved and to date, only three 5Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 6INSERM genes have been found to be directly associated with non-syndromic U546, Paris, France, 7Federico II University, Naples, Italy. autosomal recessive MR (NS-ARMR). Autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia (ARHSP) with thin We have previously identified 8 new genomic loci for NS-ARMR corpus callosum (TCC) is a common and clinically distinct form of fa- (MRT6-11) and report here a complex deletion-inversion mutation in milial spastic paraplegia, linked to the SPG11 locus on chromosome the glutamate receptor 6 gene (GLUR6, GRIK2), a member of the kai- 15 in most families. It clinically manifests as spastic paraplegia usually nate receptor family. GLUR6 maps to the MRT6 locus, a 10Mb linkage beginning during infancy or puberty, preceded by learning difficulties. interval on Chr6q16.3, which we have recently identified in a large con- Some patients develop a pseudobulbar involvement, with dysarthria, sanguineous Iranian family with moderate to severe non-syndromic dysphagia and upper limbs spasticity, associated with bladder dys- ARMR. As shown by Southern blotting, inverse PCR, array-CGH and function and signs of peripheral neuropathy. MRI shows thin corpus cloning experiments, the sequence changes include a deletion of ap- callosum (TCC), with hyperintensities in periventricular white matter, proximately 120Kb including exons 7 and 8, as well as an inversion of and cerebral cortical atrophy predominating in the frontal region. about 80Kb that encompasses exons 9 to 11. This mutation was not We collected 12 ARHSP-TCC families. All available members were found in 172 controls, and the integrity of the coding sequence of 7 genotyped using 34 microsatellite markers covering the candidate in- other potential candidate genes in the interval was verified by direct terval for SPG11. Linkage analysis and haplotype reconstruction in 10 sequencing. informative families restricted the SPG11 region to a 3.2-cM homozy- Glutamate receptor signalling has previously been implicated in the gous region. Eighteen genes were analyzed in SPG11 index patients pathogenesis of the fragile-X-syndrome and may also play a role in by direct sequencing, but no disease-causing mutations were found in autism. However, our studies provide the first direct evidence for the 17 of them. Ten mutations in 11 of the 12 families were found, how- importance of glutamate receptors in human cognition. Moreover, they ever, in a novel gene (KIAA1840/FLJ21439) expressed ubiquitously have implications for the diagnosis and prevention of NS-ARMR and in the nervous system but most prominently in the cerebellum, cere- may shed new light on the role of ion channels in the human brain. bral cortex, hippocampus and pineal gland. The mutations were either nonsense or insertions and deletions leading to frameshifts, suggest- ing a loss-of-function mechanism.We have identified the SPG11 gene that accounts for the majority of the ARHSP-TCC families studied here (11/12). The identification of the function of the gene will provide insight into the mechanisms leading to the degeneration of the corticospinal tract and other brain structures in this frequent form of ARHSP.Concurrent Sessions 2 C40. Mutation of a potassium channel-related gene in C42. Haploinsufficiency of TCF4 causes syndromal mental progressive myoclonic epilepsy retardation with intermittent hyperventilation (Pitt-Hopkins R. Azizieh, P. Van Bogaert, J. Désir, A. Aeby, L. De Meirleir, J. Laes, F. Christi- syndrome) aens, M. J. Abramowicz; A. Reis1, C. Zweier1, M. M. Peippo2, J. Hoyer1, S. Sousa3, A. Bottani4, J. Clay- IRIBHM, Brussels, Belgium. ton-Smith5, W. Reardon6, J. Saraiva3, A. Cabral3, I. Göhring1, K. Devriendt7, T. Objective: We investigated a large consanguineous Moroccan family de Ravel7, E. K. Bijlsma8, R. C. M. Hennekam9,10, A. Orrico11, M. Cohen12, A. with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (PME) consistent with autosomal Dreweke13, P. Nürnberg14, A. Rauch1; recessive inheritance, in order to describe the phenotype and identify 1Inst. of Human Genetics, Univ. Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, the causal gene. 2The Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3Pediatrics Hospital, Co- Methods: We recorded the clinical course of the disease and the re- imbra, Portugal, 4Division of Medical Genetics, Geneva, Switzerland, 5St Mary’s sponse to drug therapy, while carefully excluding known causes of Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick Children, PME. We then linked the disease by homozygosity mapping using Dublin, Ireland, 7Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 8Centre for Hu- microsatellite markers and SNP microarrays (11K GeneChip®) and man and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 9Institute of Child Health, studied candidate genes in the critical linkage region. London, United Kingdom, 10Dept. of Pediatrics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Results: Epilepsy started between 16 and 24 months of age after 11Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 12Kinderzentrum normal initial development. Seizures were multifocal myoclonus ag- München, Munich, Germany, 13Computer Science Dept. 2, Erlangen, Germany, gravated by movements, and generalized tonic-clonic seizures in two 14Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), Cologne, Germany. patients. EEG showed slow dysrythmia, multifocal and occasionally Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is a rarely reported syndrome of so far unknown generalized epileptiform discharges, and photosensitivity. Brain MRIs etiology characterized by mental retardation, wide mouth and inter- were normal. All patients were demented. Two had refractory epilepsy mittent hyperventilation. By molecular karyotyping using GeneChip and a severe course. Seizures were controlled in the third patient, Human Mapping 100K SNP arrays we detected a 1.2 Mb deletion in whose disease course was less severe. Linkage analyses identified 18q21.2 in one patient. Sequencing of the TCF4 transcription factor a new locus on 7q11.2, with a maximum multipoint LOD of 4.0 at gene, which is contained in the deletion region, in 30 patients with D7S663. In the critical linkage region, we found a C to T mutation in significant phenotypic overlap revealed heterozygous stop, splice and exon 2 of the Potassium Channel Tetramerization Domain-containing missense mutations in 5 further patients with severe mental retarda- 7 gene (KCTD7). The mutation affected a highly conserved segment tion and remarkable facial resemblance. Thus we establish the Pitt- of the predicted protein, changing an arginine codon into a stop codon Hopkins syndrome as a distinct, but probably heterogeneous entity (R99X). caused by autosomal dominant de novo mutations in TCF4. Due to its Interpretation: Neurodegeneration in PME presented by our patients phenotypical overlap Pitt-Hopkins syndrome evolves as an important paralleled therefractoriness of epilepsy. The disease was transmit- differential diagnosis to Angelman and Rett syndromes. As both, null ted as an autosomal recessive trait linked to a novel locus at 7q11.2, and missense mutations impaired the interaction of TCF4 with ASCL1 where we identified a mutation in KCTD7. from the PHOX-RET-pathway in transactivating an E-box containing reporter construct, hyperventilation and Hirschsprung disease in pa- C41. Mutations in TCF-, encoding a class I basic helix-loop- tients with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome might be explained by altered devel- helix transcription factor, are responsible for Pitt-Hopkins opment of noradrenergic derivatives. syndrome, a severe epileptic encephalopathy associated with Our study shows, that molecular karyotyping is not only able to dis- autonomic dysfunction. close novel microdeletion syndromes and the underlying gene defect J. Amiel1, M. Rio1, L. de Pontual1, R. Redon2, V. Malan1, N. Boddaert3, P. Pl- in well known disorders like CHARGE and Peters-Plus syndromes, ouin4, N. Carter2, S. Lyonnet1, A. Munnich1, L. Colleaux1; but also to resolve the etiology in very rarely reported phenotypes. 1INSERM U-781, Université Paris-Descartes, Faculté de Médecine; AP-HP, However, Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is probably widely under-diagnosed Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger like the now clinically recognizable Mowat-Wilson syndrome was un- Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Pe- til the identification of the underlying gene defect. To our knowledge, diatric Radiology and INSERM U-797, Paris, France, 4Clinical Neurophysiology Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is the first constitutive phenotype in which the Unit and INSERM U-663, Paris, France. etiology was identified by molecular karyotyping using genome wide Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is a rare syndromic encephalopathy SNP arrays. characterised by severe psychomotor delay, epilepsy and daily bouts of diurnal hyperventilation starting in infancy, mild postnatal growth re- C43. Powerful methods for whole genome association analysis tardation, postnatal microcephaly and distinctive facial features. We of quantitative traits in samples of related individuals have ascertained 4 cases of PHS and carried out a systematic 1Mb Y. S. Aulchenko1, N. Amin1, N. Belonogova2, D. de Koning3, C. Haley3, C. M. resolution genome wide BAC array screening for microdeletions or van Duijn1; duplications in all cases. Using this approach, we have identified a 1Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Institute of Cytology & 1.8 Mb de novo microdeletion on chromosome 18q21.1 in 1/4 case. Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Roslin Institute, Edinburgh, United We subsequently identified two de novo heterozygous missense muta- Kingdom. tions of a conserved amino acid in the basic region of the TCF4 gene Genome-wide association (GWA) analysis is a tool of choice for iden- in three additional PHS cases. These findings demonstrate that TCF4 tification of genes responsible for complex human disorders. GWA anomalies are responsible for PHS and provide the first evidence of a analysis using closely or remotely related individuals from genetically human disorder related to class I basic helix-loop-helix transcription isolated populations (e.g. EUROSPAN consortium) or families from factor defects (also known as E-proteins). general population (e.g. Framingham study) may have certain advan- Differential diagnoses include Rett, Angelman, Mowat-Wilson and tages over designs using apparently unrelated individuals from the Goldberg-Shprintzen syndromes. The facial gestalt of patients with general population. PHS is extremely valuable for clinicians to consider the diagnosis be- Most of the methods suitable for GWA analysis of pedigree data are fore the onset of distinctive features such as bouts of hyperventilation based on variants of the Transmission-Disequilibrium test (TDT). and epilepsy. EEG and brain MRI may also give valuable clues that will These methods utilise within-family variation and are therefore robust be discussed. Patients diagnosed with PHS dysplay a broad spectrum to false positives potentially induced by population stratification. How- of dysautonomic features (hyperpneic episodes, dilated pupils with ever, these methods lose power because they ignore between-family sluggish responses to light, short-segment Hirschsprung disease or variation and also require precise knowledge of pedigree and sampling severe gastrointestinal dysfunction). These data may shed new light of closely related individuals, which may be not always possible and on the normal processes underlying autonomic nervous system de- cost-effective. velopment and maintenance of an appropriate ventilatory neuronal Here, we suggest a set of powerful methods suited for analysis of sam- circuitry. ples of (potentially) related individuals. We show that when pedigree relationships between the study subjects are not known or are only partly known, genomic control (GC) may be used to correct for related- ness and stratification. As expected, for a wide range of scenarios the Concurrent Sessions 2 power of this method is much higher compared to TDT-based meth- C46. A powerful approach to detect parent-of-origin effects in ods. When pedigree structure is at least partly known, utilisation of this whole-genome association scans of quantitative traits information allows even more powerful analysis. The baseline method N. M. Belonogova1,2, Y. S. Aulchenko1,3; is extended to include covariates, interactions and more complex ge- 1Institute of Cytology & Genetics SD RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, netic effects, such as parent-of-origin and epistasis. We demonstrate 2Department of Cytology & Genetics, Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, the utility of the newly developed methods using real data from a young Russian Federation, 3Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus genetically isolated population. MC, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Parent-of-origin effect (POE) is a widespread genetic phenomenon ex- C44. Optimizing information for linkage genomescreen in a large tensively studied in model animals. For the genes exhibiting POE, the and inbred pedigree with a high density SNP map trait value in a heterozygous offspring depends on the parental origin C. Bellenguez1,2, C. Ober3, C. Bourgain2,1; of the alleles. There exist evidences that POE is important for such hu- 1Univ Paris-Sud, UMR-S535, Villejuif F-94817, France, 2INSERM, Villejuif F- man traits as weight, type 2 diabetes, and others. For these traits the 94817, France, 3Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, power of genome-wide association (GWA) analysis may be increased Chicago, IL, United States. by incorporating POE into the analysis model. Large genealogies available in isolated populations are potentially To study POE in GWA scans of human quantitative traits, different vari- very informative for linkage analyses, in particular when considering ants of TDT-based methods may be applied. These, however, exploit high density SNP maps. only within-family variation in order to avoid population stratification Here, we investigate different methodological aspects of linkage analy- bias. In homogeneous populations methods utilizing both within- and sis in a large and inbred 1840-member Hutterite pedigree, phenotyped between-family variation, such as the measured genotype (MG) ap- for asthma and asthma-related traits. Starting with a 5cM microsatellite proach, are shown to have greater power. In MG analysis, genetic map, we first identify genome-wide significant regions (1p13, 1p31, polymorphism is included as a fixed effect or covariate in a mixed 5q33, 6q21-23, 12q14, 13q13 and 14p11-q11), after a carefully op- linear model along with a polygenic component. To utilize POE infor- timized breaking of the pedigree. Our approach is interesting since mation, we suggest using probabilities indicating parental origin as a these regions had not been significantly detected in previous analyses covariate in the MG analysis. We suggest a fast approximation to the of the same dataset but have been described by others. full MG analysis, which is suitable for the analysis of GWA scans and We further analyse these linked regions using a 500K SNP map. Be- a method to estimate probabilities of parental origin in arbitrary com- cause SNPs are much closer than microsatellite markers, they present plex pedigrees. Using simulated data, we compare our approach to the important linkage disequilibrium (LD), which bias classical nonpara- TDT-based methods. We show that our approach is more powerful. metric multipoint analyses. This problem is even stronger in population For many scenarios the sample size can be reduced two times when isolates where LD extends over larger regions with a more stochastic using our approach and the same significance level as by using the pattern. The only method that models LD in the NPL analysis is limited TDT-based methods is still achieved. in both the pedigree size and the number of markers (Abecasis and Wigginton, 2005) and therefore could not be used. Instead, we pro- C47. Quantifying the increase in human individual genome-wide pose methods that identify sets of SNPs with maximum linkage infor- heterozygosity through isolate break-up and admixture mation content in our pedigree and no LD-driven bias. Both algorithms I. Rudan1, Z. Biloglav2, A. Vorko-Jovic2, I. Kolcic2, O. Polasek2, L. Zgaga2, T. that directly remove pairs of SNPs in high LD and clustering meth- Zemunik3, R. Mulic3, D. Ropac3, D. Stojanovic4, D. Puntaric5, R. Stevanovic6, H. ods are evaluated. Preliminary results suggest that in such population Campbell1; isolates, a careful marker selection is necessary to obtain information 1Faculty of Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Faculty of Medicine, Zagreb, content for linkage higher with SNPs than that already available with Croatia, 3Faculty of Medicine, Split, Croatia, 4Faculty of Medicine, Rijeka, Croa- microsatellites. tia, 5Faculty of Medicine, Osijek, Croatia, 6Institute for Public Health, Zagreb, Croatia. C45. Epistasis for physiological variables in admixed Aim. The human population is undergoing a major transition from a populations metapopulation structure (subdivision in many relatively isolated com- M. Fenger1, A. Linneberg2, O. Pedersen3, T. Hansen4, T. Jøregensen2; munities) to a more admixed structure such as that which occurs in 1University of Copenhagen, Hvidovre, Denmark, 2Research Centre for Preven- large cities. We attempted to quantify the magnitude of increase in tion and Health, Glostrup, Denmark, 3Steno Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Den- average individual genome-wide heterozygosity (IGWH) that has oc- mark, 4Steno Diabetes Centre, Gentofte, Denmark. curred through isolate break-up and admixture. The metabolic syndrome and diabetes mellitus are highly influenced Materials and methods. We sampled 100 examinees from 9 isolat- by genetic factors. These conditions are heterogenous and polygenic ed villages on 5 Croatian islands, and an additional 101 immigrants in nature for the vast majority of cases, each gene supposed to have into those villages. Out of the larger sample of 1001 examinees, we only a minor impact of the phenotypic variance in the general popula- carefully selected 6 samples each of 23 individuals with a predicted tion. increasing level of genome-wide heterozygosity, which was then mea- Therefor large populations are required to identify and elucidate the sured studied using 1,200 STR markers. The first sample was from genetic structure of these conditions. A major obstacle is the het- the most isolated island, the second from less isolated island, the third erogeneity of most study populations, i.e. the populations consist of from the least isolated island, the fourth included individuals admixed a mixture of yet unidentified physiological and genetic homogenous between villages, the fifth immigrants from mainland cities and the subpopulations. To define these subpopulations a latent class analysis sixth extremely outbred individuals. is performed. This was done in a structural equation modelling frame- Results: Relative to the mean IGWH estimate in the first sample, the work. Basic physiological variables previously shown to be related to increase in the percentage of the genome that is heterozygous in the the metabolic syndrome were included in analysis as indicators and remaining 5 samples was found to be: 2.3%, 3.8%, 5.8%, 6.7% and covariates. No genetic model is assumed. This model defined 19 sub- 7.9%. These differences are statistically highly significant (p<0.0001), populations with an entropy measure of approximately 0.9. Less than and their gradual increase follows the predictions based on a priori 0.1%. of all possible single-gene heritabilities were present. In con- hypothesis. trast, including two-gene interactions revealed that 28 of the 30 genetic Conclusion. The human population is undergoing substantial outbreed- markers are involved in one and usually several epistatic interactions. ing through breakup of isolate communities and rural-urban migration, On average approximately 1/3 of all possible two-gene interactions with the potential to increase average genome-wide heterozygosity by were significant for all the traits included in the model. Most notably, up to 10%. The health consequences of this major change in genetic stratifying the basic study population revealed approximately 30% structure merit further study. more interactions masked in the physiological mixed study population. These results supports the notion that genome wide single-gene asso- ciation studies generally will be futile. For a genome wide screening to be successful the populations should be physiologically stratified and at least two-gene interactions should be included.Concurrent Sessions 2 C48. CHROMSCAN: Genome-wide association mapping cancer (HNPCC). A significant proportion of all identified MMR gene A. R. Collins; mutations are non-truncating, which complicates the interpretation of University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. their clinical relevance. Many genome-wide association mapping studies using high density We have previously conducted functional studies on non-truncating arrays of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are underway. Typi- MSH2 mutations to clarify their role in the pathogenesis of HNPCC. In cally these involve 100s to 1000s of DNA samples collected as case- this study we characterized the biochemical defects of mutated MSH2 control studies screened for several hundred thousand SNPs across proteins in more detail, by assessing the ability of the mutated proteins the genome. Efficient analysis and interpretation of these vast data to bind base-base mismatches, and to dissociate from mismatched sets raises considerable difficulties. If significance is tested at individu- DNA in vitro. al SNPs, large numbers of false positives make interpretation difficult. Wild-type and fifteen mutated MSH2 proteins, twelve of which had Models which utilise information from multiple SNPs simultaneously showed functional defects in our previous studies, were expressed offer advantages by reducing the number of tests and providing in- in the baculovirus system together with his-tagged wild-type MSH6. creased power. However, the reliable computation of significance lev- The recombinant heterodimeric MSH2/MSH6 complexes were purified els remains an issue, given the high density of non-independent SNPs by fast protein liquid chromatography or partially purified on Ni-NTA and consequent auto-correlation. Other concerns include the difficulty columns. The heterodimers were then used in bandshift assays to ex- of incorporating information on the underlying linkage disequilibrium amine their affinity for homo- and heteroduplex DNA. In addition, their (LD) structure when testing association with disease. Including such ATP-mediated dissociation from the mismatches was assessed. information has been shown to substantially increase power and preci- None of the proteins showed detectable binding to homoduplex DNA. sion of mapping. Preliminary data showed that some of the mutants, also those defec- CHROMSCAN models association with disease in non-overlapping tive in other functional assays, displayed mismatch binding comparable sliding windows and rapidly and robustly determines candidate regions to the wild-type protein complex. Some failed to bind mismatches, and and maximum likelihood locations and standard errors for putatively some weak binders could also be identified. The ATP-mediated dis- causal polymorphisms. The program employs a composite-likelihood sociation from DNA was not impaired in any of the proteins analysed based model, estimating a small number of parameters in each re- thus far. This study will provide additional information for interpreting gion, thereby reducing the number of tests made. A permutation test the pathogenicity of HNPCC-associated missense mutations. ensures the P-value distribution is not distorted due to autocorrelation caused by extensive LD. Association with disease is modelled on an C51. MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP): spectrum and underlying map in linkage disequilibrium units (LDUs). CHROMSCAN, frequency of extracolonic lesions which runs on UNIX and Linux platforms, is also implemented for par- D. Christian, V. Steinke, S. Uhlhaas, P. Propping, W. Friedl, S. Aretz; allel computing on either a Linux-based cluster. Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP) is a recently discovered auto- C49. Screening for splice defects: application to BRCA1 and somal-recessive precancerous condition of the colorectum which is BRCA2 unknown variants (UV) caused by germline mutations in the base excision repair (BER) gene V. Caux-Moncoutier1, S. Pagès-Berhouet1, D. Michaux1, A. De Pauw1, M. Gau- MUTYH. MAP is associated with a colorectal cancer lifetime risk of thier-Villars1, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,2, C. Houdayer1,3; up to 100%, comparable to familial adenomatous polyposis. However, 1Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2INSERM U509, Paris, France, 3UMR INSERM there are only sporadic descriptions of extraintestinal manifestations. 745, Paris, France. Here we report on a systematic evaluation of the tumour spectrum in Nearly half of BRCA1 and BRCA2 sequence variations remain of un- German MAP patients, based on medical records and anamnestic in- certain clinical significance (UV) and are candidates for splice altera- formation. The study is part of a collaborative European trial performed tions e.g. by creating cryptic splice sites. Since an out-of-frame splicing together with two centres in the Netherlands and UK. To date, 83 bi- defect leads to severe reduction in the level of the mutant mRNA, we allelic German MUTYH mutation carriers were included. The median developped a cDNA-based test to evidence such allelic imbalance. age at evaluation was 54 years (range 28-85). In 17% of the patients Seventy patients without BRCA1/2 mutation and bearing consecutive- duodenal polyps are reported; 49% had extraintestinal lesions (10 pa- ly identified UVs were included in the study. Following RNA extraction, tients had two, 6 had three different tumours), 23% had at least one DNAse treatment and RT-PCR, 3 exonic SNPs on both BRCA1 and extracolonic malignancy. The following tumours were observed more BRCA2 were asked using a semiquantitative single-nucleotide primer than once: extension approach. Tumour Frequency Age of diagnosis Data were collected with an ABI3130XL then analysed using Gene- Breast cancer 10% (4/42 females) 49-60 Mapper (Applied Biosystems). cDNA allelic ratios were corrected us- Endometrial cancer 5% (2/42 females) 32-54 ing genomic DNA ratios from the same sample. This approach was Ovarian cancer 5% (2/42 females) 45-56 combined with in silico predictions using Splice Site Finder, Splice Site Skin cancer 5% (4/83) 32-68 Prediction, MaxEntScan, ESE Finder and Rescue ESE. Bladder carcinoma 2,4% (2/83) 45-62 Teratoma 2,4% (2/83) 28-33 Allelic imbalances were found in 4/21 and 11/49 cases for BRCA1 and Lipomas 8% (7/83) 30-50 BRCA2, respectively. However, the corresponding UVs did not show Benign skin tumours 15% (12/83) 15-62 in silico pathogenic effects. In order to determine UVs’ impact on mRNA instability, sequencing of Compared to the age-related population-based tumour risk these preliminary data their cDNA flanking regions has started, using cDNA from cells treated indicate an increased incidence of gynaecological cancer (endometrium, ovary) and with puromycin. cutaneous tumours in MAP patients. The risk of breast cancer is close to the age- Analysis of the first 5 patients excluded UVs’ involvement therefore related female population risk. The results may influence future surveillance recom- complete cDNA sequencing was performed, evidencing in one case an mendations and contribute to the understanding of the underlying pathophysiological out-of-frame deletion of BRCA2 exons 12 and 13. These preliminary mechanisms in MAP. results showed that allelic imbalance screening is a simple way to de- The study was supported by the Deutsche Krebshilfe (German Cancer Aid), tect splicing defects but they also demonstrated that changes in allelic project no. 106244 expression may be due to other cis- or trans-acting factors. C52. A genome-wide SNP screen for bowel cancer susceptibility C50. HNPCC-associated missense mutations in MSH2 may lead alleles to failure of the protein to bind mismatched DNA I. Tomlinson1, R. Houlston2, CORGI consortium, NSCCG; S. E. Ollila1, D. Dermadi1, J. Jiricny2, M. Nyström1; 1London Research Institute, London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Cancer Re- 1Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Division of Genetics, search, Sutton, United Kingdom. University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute of Molecular Cancer Re- We present the results of a genome-wide screen using the Illumina search, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. Hap550 SNP arrays to search for susceptibility alleles for colorectal Inherited mutations in mismatch repair (MMR) genes, MLH1 MSH2, carcinoma. 1,000 familial cases and 1,000 controls from the UK Cau- MSH6 and PMS2 predispose to hereditary non-polyposis colorectal casian population were screened in stage 1 of this survey and we re-Concurrent Sessions 2 port the findings of this screen, including SNPs that are significantly ETV6/PDGFRB-positive). Moreover, ETV6/RUNX1-positive leukaemic associated with increased risk of bowel cancer. These SNPs are now cells accumulated in G1/G0 phase after HDACi while other B-lineage being tested in a phase 2 study involving 3,000 unselected cases and leukaemic cell lines showed rather unspecific changes including induc- 3,000 controls. Further collaborative studies involving large sample tion of apoptosis and decreased proliferation. Presented data support sets will be needed to confirm that SNPs from our phase 1 and 2 data the hypothesis that HDACi affect ETV6/RUNX1-positive cells via direct are truly associated with disease. interaction with ETV6/RUNX1 protein, and that treatment with HDACi may release aberrant transcription activity caused by ETV6/RUNX1 C53. Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC) patients and chimeric transcription factor. CDH1 mutations: a systematic review of the literature Supported by grants IGA MZ 8316 and MSM0021620813. C. Oliveira1, R. Karam1, C. Graziadio2, H. Pinheiro1, S. Sousa1, R. Seruca1,3; 1Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, C55. Analysis of the genomic insertion sites of viral gene Porto, Portugal, 2Department of Genetics, Fundação Faculdade Federal de therapy vectors using next generation sequencing technologies. Ciências Médicas de Porto Alegre (FFFCMPA), Porto Alegre, Brasil, Porto C. Bauser1, M. Schmidt2, C. von Kalle2; Alegre, Brazil, 3Medical Faculty of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 1GATC Biotech, Konstanz, Germany, 2National Center for Tumor Diseases Porto, Portugal. (NCT), Heidelberg, Germany. Worldwide, gastric cancer is the second cause of cancer-related Viral vectors commonly used for somatic gene therapy can cause in- death. Despite an overall trend for decrease, incidence of gastric sertional mutagenesis, activating oncogenes in the patient, potentially cancer in young patients and cases with familial clustering remains leading to oncogenic transformation. After transduction, the viruses in- stable. Despite being an uncommon disease, HDGC is a major health tegrate into the genome, preferentially upstream of actively expressed problem and extremely difficult to address in clinical and therapeu- genes. The potential therefore exists to alter the expression of onco- tic grounds, due to its severity and unavailability of early diagnosis. A genic or tumor suppressor genes which occasionally leads to changes single gene was identified with a causative role in HDGC, E-cadherin. in stem cell self-renewal and oncogenic transformation. Clonal expan- We performed a systematic review of CDH1 mutation carriers clini- sion of a cell with an integration event that promotes cell division, and cal presentation and its association with frequency, localization and possibly oncogenic transformation, leads to the dominance of a few (or type of CDH1 germline mutations. We collected information on 99 single) integration events in hematopoietic progenitor cells. CDH1 mutation carriers, described to date in the literature. The age By using LAM-PCR, DNA-sequencing and bioinformatic analysis, we of onset of CDH1 mutation carriers varied between 16 and 73 years can identify the viral integration sites in the genome. Because the inte- old (mean=41.8±14.4), and 75% of cases were diagnosed before gration site can differ in each cell, it can be difficult to identify all genes 50. Male:female ratio was near 1.0. Although CDH1 mutations were potentially influenced by the integration events. Whereas cloning and distributed along all gene sequence, exons 2,3,7 and 11 were pref- Sanger sequencing only allow identification of several hundred inte- erentially affected. Most mutation carriers (87.9%-87/99) harboured gration events, next generation sequencing methods allow the iden- CDH1 truncating mutations. The type of mutations (truncating and mis- tification of ten thousands of individual integration events in parallel. sense) was significantly different between families with complete and The ability to identify more integration events early in the gene therapy incomplete criteria for HDGC, previously established by the IGCLC treatment procedure, and follow changes in the distribution of cells (p=0.0001). Carriers from families with complete criteria harboured having different integration sites, will allow to better assess the safety preferentially truncating mutations (92%), while carriers from families of somatic gene therapy, and develop new and safer viral vectors and with incomplete criteria harboured truncating and missense mutations transduction methods. in similar frequencies (50%). Moreover, truncating mutations carriers We present the results of a systematic insertion site analysis for a were significantly younger (40.5±14.3) than missense mutation carri- retroviral vector and show that the broad range of insertion sites found ers (50.7±12.4) (p=0.02). This systematic analysis is of crucial impor- using next generation sequencing technology is a vast improvement tance to help genetic counselling and to direct molecular analysis in over the traditional Sanger method. suspected HDGC mutation carriers. C56. Correction of VLCAD deficiency and prediction of mutation C54. The identification of (ETV6/)RUNX1-regulated genes in severity with bezafibrate: how to kill two birds with one stone. lymphopoiesis using histone deacetylase inhibitors in ETV6/ S. Gobin-Limballe1, F. Djouadi1, F. Aubey1, S. Olpin2, S. Yamaguchi3, R. Wan- RUNX1-positive lymphoid leukaemic cells ders4, T. Fukao5, J. Kim6, J. Bastin1; J. Starkova1, J. Madzo1, G. Cario2, T. Kalina1, A. Ford3, M. Zaliova1, O. Hrusak1, 1CNRS UPR 9078, Paris, France, 2Sheffield Children’s Hospital, Sheffield, J. Trka1; United Kingdom, 3Shimane School of medicine, Shimane, Japan, 4Academic 1CLIP – Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, Department of Paediatric Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 5Gifu University, Gifu, Japan, Haematology and Oncology, Charles University, 2nd Medical School, Prague, 6Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States. Czech Republic, 2Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Hol- We recently showed that fibrates could restore FAO in patient cells har- stein, Kiel, Germany, 3Leukaemia Research Fund Centre, Institute of Cancer boring inborn defects in Very-Long-Chain-AcylCoA-Dehydrogenase (VL- Research, Chester Beatty Laboratories, London, United Kingdom. CAD; mitochondrial β-oxidation), by stimulating residual enzyme activity. Chimeric transcription factor ETV6/RUNX1 (TEL/AML1) is believed to Given the variety of reported VLCAD gene point mutations, we investigat- cause pathological block in lymphoid cells development via interac- ed the response to drug as a function of genotype. 34 VLCAD-deficient fi- tion with corepressor complex and histone deacetylase. We wanted broblast with distinct genotypes representing 50 different mutations were to demonstrate regulatory effect of ETV6/RUNX1 and its reversibil- treated with 400µM bezafibrate for 72h and FAO was measured using ity by histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) and to identify potential tritiated palmitate. Untreated cells exhibited FAO rates much lower (-30 ETV6/RUNX1-regulated genes. We used luciferase assay to demon- to -90%) than control. Bezafibrate induced a marked increase in FAO in strate the interaction of ETV6/RUNX1protein, ETV6/RUNX1-regulated 60% of the genotypes tested, and a complete correction in 15 cell lines. gene and HDACi. In order to identify ETV6/RUNX1-regulated genes These data allowed to identify three groups: - severely deficient cells we employed expression profiling and HDACi in the lymphoid cells. with nonsense mutations, or missense mutations affecting residues es- Next using the flow cytometry and qRT-PCR we measured changes in sential for catalysis (G222, G441, R469), that were drug-resistant -a 2nd gene and proteins expression after HDACi treatment. Luciferase as- group with missense mutations compatible with a moderate response to say showed repression of granzyme B expression by ETV6/RUNX1 bezafibrate - a 3rd group which harbored genotypes compatible with a protein and reversibility of this effect by HDACi. Proving this regula- full restoration of FAO by bezafibrate, pointing to mild mutations (V283A, tory role of ETV6/RUNX1, we used complex statistical analysis to G441D, R615Q). We also characterized changes in VLCAD mRNA and identify 25 genes that are potentially regulated by ETV6/RUNX1 pro- residual enzyme activity levels induced by bezafibrate, as a function of tein. In 4 selected genes with known role in the cell cycle regulation genotype. The mutations were reported in a predictive VLCAD 3-D mod- (JunD, ACK1, PDGFRB and TCF4) we confirmed expression changes el allowing to confirm the mild or severe mutations that were character- after HDACi by quantitative analysis. After HDACi treatment, ETV6/ ized in the “bezafibrate test”. The response to bezafibrate can therefore RUNX1-positive cells showed immunophenotype changes resembling predict the severity of VLCAD point mutations that was not documented differentiation process compared to other leukaemic cells (BCR/ABL, yet and might help to identify patients for a future clinical trial.Concurrent Sessions 2 C57. RNAi-based allele specific silencing of the ataxin-7 gene in C59. Harmless selection of genetically manipulated human stem South African patients with SCA7 keratinocytes J. Scholefield1, M. Weinberg2, P. Arbuthnot2, M. Wood3, J. Greenberg1; T. Magnaldo, V. Bergoglio, E. Warrick, F. Larcher, O. Chevallier-Lagente, M. 1Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, UCT, Cape Town, Del Rio; South Africa, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Haematology, Wits, Jo- CNRS, Villejuif, France. hannesburg, South Africa, 3Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, Ex-vivo gene therapy of monogenic and recessively inherited genoder- Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. matoses prone to cancer require the selection of transduced epidermal RNA interference (RNAi) is a mechanism that occurs naturally in eu- keratinocytes in a manner compatible with skin graft perspectives. We karyotes and mediates post-transcriptional gene silencing and has have set up a selection system which aims at : i-preserving growth been shown to have application to treatment of many debilitating ge- and differentiation potentials of transduced keratinocytes, ii-reduce the netic disorders. One such disease is the polyglutamine disorder, spi- risk of immune response in grafted patients, iii-maintain sustained ex- nocerebellar ataxia 7 (SCA7). SCA7 has a higher frequency in South pression of the corrective gene. In this system, selection is based on Africa and has only been diagnosed here in black African patients to ectopic expression of the small cell surface marker CD24 in prolifera- date. A recent study demonstrated that an exonic single nucleotide tive keratinocytes. In human epidermis, CD24 is normally expressed polymorphism (SNP) is tightly linked to the disease-causing (CAG) in post mitotic, differentiated keratinocytes. Several primary strains of n expansion within ataxin 7. The aim of this project is to exploit the RNAi normal keratinocytes could be successfully transduced using a CD24- pathway to achieve specific knockdown of the mutant mRNA transcript IRES-GFP MoMLV retroviral viral vector. CD24-selected cells could of ataxin 7. A panel of 14 different Pol III U6 promoter-encoded short be passaged serially over more than one year, attesting the conserva- hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) that target the ataxin 7 SNP were designed. tion of stem cell growth potential. Reconstruction of organotypic skin Knockdown effects against mutant and wild-type targets linked to a cultures using transduced cells, indicated normal differentiation and luciferase reporter gene were measured in triplicate. Knockdown of the proliferation capacity. Transduced cells were grafted onto the nu/nu targets was measured in triplicate. Luciferase emissions were reduced athymic mouse and regenerated a full thickness, normally differenti- in cell cultures containing the mutant target compared with those of ated epidermis, over a period of 20 weeks. Expression of the GFP the wild-type, although the differences were for the most part, small. reporter gene was maintained without attenuation. The encourag- However, one shRNA showed nearly 30% discrimination between the ing results strongly stimulate our prospects of genetic correction of wild-type and the mutant target cell cultures. Unexpectedly, shRNAs epidermal keratinocytes from patients suffering from the DNA repair with secondary mismatches abrogated discrimination and knockdown deficient / cancer prone disease, xeroderma pigmentosum or for any with one exception. These preliminary results indicate that discrimina- other genodermatose candidate for ex vivo cutaneous gene therapy. tory knockdown of ataxin 7 can be achieved using a weak mismatch. In addition, our system now allows any application of long term and Further shRNAs have been designed to maximise this initial discrimi- harmless gene transfer such as gene extinction or mutation expres- nation. This investigation shows promise for development of a gene sion in human primary cells. therapy-based approach to treating a disease of South African impor- tance as well as other similar conditions. C60. Development of liver disease despite mannose treatment in two patients with CDG-Ib C58. Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay regulates response of K. Mention, F. Lacaille, V. Valayannopoulos, S. Romano, F. Jaubert, Y. De Key- cystic fibrosis patients to gentamicin ser, N. Seta, P. De Lonlay; L. Linde1, S. Boelz2,3, M. Nissim-Rafinia1, Y. S. Oren1, M. Wilschanski4, Y. Yaa- Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. kov4, G. Neu-Yilik2,3, A. E. Kulozik2,3, E. Kerem4, B. Kerem1; Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) result from a defect in 1Department of Genetics, Life Sciences Institute, The Hebrew University, Jeru- N-glycosylation. Phosphomannose isomerase (PMI) deficiency is the salem, Israel, 2Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, University of Heidelberg only treatable CDG (CDG-Ib). The first clinical description of CDG-Ib and European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Depart- was made by Pelletier et al. in 1986, as a lethal disease in 4 patients ment for Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, University Hospital from the “Saguenay-Lac St-Jean” area in Quebec. Since this descrip- Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4CF Center, Hadassah University Hospital, tion, mannose therapy improved the general condition and the diges- Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, Israel. tive symptoms in all reported patients as well as in ours. Aminoglycosides can readthrough premature termination codons We report here the 6 year follow-up of two patients with CDG-Ib treat- (PTCs), permitting translation of full-length proteins. Previously we ed with oral mannose, who were diagnosed at 2 months of age with have found variable efficiency of readthrough in response to the ami- digestive symptoms, liver involvement and hyperinsulinemic hypogly- noglycoside gentamicin among cystic fibrosis (CF) patients all carrying cemia. Both developed portal hypertension while general condition the W1282X nonsense mutation. Here we demonstrate that there are improved and other symptoms disappeared. #The development of the patients in whom the level of CFTR nonsense transcripts is markedly characteristic histological lesions of congenital hepatic fibrosis was reduced while in others it is significantly higher. Response to gentami- observed despite an early onset of treatment and several years on cin was found only in patients with the higher level. We further investi- mannose. In both patients, improvement of the transferrin profile was gated the possibility that the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) noted, although complete normalization was never observed. We can might vary among cells and hence governs the level of nonsense tran- speculate that persistently abnormally glycosylated proteins interfere scripts available for readthrough. Our results demonstrate differences with the normal development of the liver, either by accumulation of an in NMD efficiency of CFTR transcripts carrying the W1282X mutation abnormal product, or more probably by a loss of function. among different epithelial cell lines, even derived from the same tissue. In conclusion, the efficacy of mannose might transform this lethal dis- Variability was also found for β-globin transcripts carrying a disease- ease into a treatable one. However, in some patients this treatment causing PTC as well as for five physiologic NMD substrates, RPL3, does not seem to protect against the liver disease. SC35 1.6 kb, SC35 1.7 kb, ASNS and CARS. Importantly, our results demonstrate existence of cells in which NMD of all transcripts was ef- C61. Acetylcholinesterase deficiency with neuromuscular ficient, while others in which the NMD was less efficient. Downregula- junction remodeling in a mouse model of Schwartz-Jampel tion of NMD in cells carrying the W1282X mutation increased the level syndrome of CFTR nonsense transcripts and enhanced the CFTR chloride-chan- M. Stum1, E. Girard2, V. Bernard3, M. Bangratz1, C. Davoine1, N. Tabti1, J. nel activity in response to gentamicin. Together our results show that Willer4, B. Fontaine1,5, J. Molgó6, E. Krejci3, S. Nicole1,5; the efficiency of NMD might vary and hence regulate the response to 1U546, INSERM; UMRS546 UPMC-Paris6, Paris, France, 2UPR9040, CNRS, treatments aiming to promote readthrough of PTCs in many human laboratoire de Neurobiologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Institut de Neurobiologie genetic diseases. Alfred Fessard, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, 3U686, INSERM, Paris, France, 4As- sitance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Fédération de neurophysiologie clinique, Groupe Hospitalier de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Assistance Publique- Hôpitaux de Paris, Fédération des maladies du système nerveux & centre de référence “canalopathies musculaires”, Groupe Hospitalier de la Pitié-Salpê- trière, Paris, France, 6UPR9040, CNRS, laboratoire de Neurobiologie Cellulaire Concurrent Sessions 0 et Moléculaire, Institut de Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, Gif sur Yvette, France. CRTAP (cartilage-associated protein), two members of a complex in Schwartz-Jampel syndrome (SJS) is a rare autosomal recessive dis- the endoplasmic reticulum that 3-hydroxylates only α1(I)Pro986 in type order characterized by permanent and generalized muscle stiffness I collagen. We identified 3 OI probands with null CRTAP mutations and (myotonia), and chondrodystrophy. First symptoms appear during 7 with null LEPRE1 mutations. Five patients with P3H1 defects have a early childhood, and the disease is slowly progressive until adulthood. common LEPRE1 mutant allele, which apparently originated in West SJS is due to hypomorphic mutations in the gene encoding perlecan, Africa and is also present in African-Americans. All probands have de- a ubiquitous heparan sulfate proteoglycan secreted within basement fects in both alleles and heterozygous carrier parents. Proband mRNA membranes. We have developed a mouse model of SJS by a knock-in and protein from the mutant gene is absent or severely reduced. approach, introducing one missense mutation into the perlecan mouse Mass spectrometry demonstrated absent or residual hydroxylation of gene by homologous recombination, to explore the pathophysiological α1(I)Pro986. Interestingly, excess lysyl hydroxylation of proband col- mechanism of this human disorder. lagen helices is comparable to that caused by defects in the primary Homozygous mutant mice were viable with unaffected life span, but structure of the collagen helix, suggesting that helix folding is delayed. showed a reduced growth and a distinct neuromuscular phenotype Proband collagen secretion is moderately delayed but total collagen with delayed opening of the eyelids, and flexion of the hind paw when secretion is increased. These recessive null mutations of CRTAP and suspended by the tail. EMG recordings revealed a sustained bursting LEPRE1 delineate a novel skeletal paradigm and demonstrate that the activity at rest. Histological analyses of skeletal muscles were sugges- 3-hydroxylation complex is crucial for normal bone development. tive of denervation-reinnervation events. Major modifications of NMJs with lack of pretzel-like shape and acetylcholinesterase deficiency C64. Left-sided embryonic expression of the BCL-6 corepressor, were observed. However, ex-vivo electrophysiological analyses did BCOR, is required for vertebrate laterality determination not reveal abnormal synaptic transmission. Our results argue for the E. N. Hilton1,2, F. D. C. Manson1,3, J. E. Urquhart1, J. J. Johnston4, A. M. accuracy of our mutant mouse line as a model of the disease, dem- Slavotinek5, P. Hedera6, E. L. Stattin7, A. Nordgren8, L. G. Biesecker4, G. C. M. onstrate that the incomplete perlecan deficiency which characterized Black2,3; SJS is responsible for major modifications of NMJs, and suggest that 1Centre for Molecular Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, United acetylcholinesterase deficiency alone is not responsible for the muscle Kingdom, 2Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetic Service, hyperexcitability observed in SJS. St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Manchester Royal Eye Hospital, Central Manchester and Manchester Children’s University Hospitals C62. Trinucleotide repeat “big jumps” in DM1 transgenic mice: NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Genetic Disease Research Branch, large CTG expansions, splicing abnormalities and growth National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, retardation Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genet- M. Gomes-Pereira, L. Foiry, A. Nicole, A. Huguet, C. Junien, A. Munnich, G. ics, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, 6Department of Gourdon; Neurology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States, 7Department of Inserm, U781, Paris, France. Clinical Genetics, Umeå University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden, 8Department of Trinucleotide repeat expansions are the genetic cause of numerous Molecular Medicine, Clinical Genetics Unit, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, human diseases, including fragile X mental retardation, Huntington Sweden. disease and myotonic dystrophy type 1. Disease severity and age-of- Oculofaciocardiodental (OFCD) syndrome is an X-linked male lethal onset are critically linked to expansion size. Previous mouse models condition encompassing cardiac septal defects, as well as ocular and of repeat instability have not recreated large intergenerational expan- dental anomalies. The gene mutated in OFCD syndrome, the BCL-6 sions (“big jumps”), observed when the repeat is transmitted from one corepressor (BCOR), is part of a transcriptional repression complex generation to the next, and have never attained the very large tract whose transcriptional targets remain largely unknown. We reviewed lengths possible in humans/patients. We now describe dramatic inter- cases of OFCD syndrome and identified patients exhibiting defective generational CTG•CAG repeat expansions of several hundred repeats lateralization including dextrocardia, asplenia and intestinal malrota- in a transgenic mouse model of myotonic dystrophy type 1, resulting tion, suggesting that BCOR is required in normal lateral determination in increasingly severe phenotypic and molecular abnormalities. Ho- and that the frequent heart problems occurring OFCD syndrome may mozygous mice carrying over 700 trinucleotide repeats on both alleles be due to defects in this process. To study the function of BCOR we display severely reduced body size and splicing abnormalities, nota- used morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs) to knockdown expression of bly in the central nervous system. Our findings demonstrate that large xtBcor in Xenopus tropicalis, thus creating an animal model for OFCD intergenerational trinucleotide repeat expansions can be recreated in syndrome. The resulting tadpoles had cardiac and ocular features mice, and endorse the use of transgenic mouse models to refine our characteristic of OFCD syndrome. Reversed cardiac orientation and understanding of triplet repeat expansion and the resulting pathogen- disorganized gut patterning was seen when MOs were injected into esis. the left side of embryos, demonstrating a left-sided requirement for xtBcor in lateral determination in the frog. Ocular defects displayed no C63. Recessive severe/lethal osteogenesis imperfecta is caused left-right bias and included anterior and posterior segment disorders by deficiency of proteins comprising the 3-hydroxylation such as microphthalmia and coloboma. Expression of xtPitx2c was complex shown to be down regulated when xtBcor was depleted, providing a J. C. Marini1, W. Chang1, W. A. Cabral1, A. M. Barnes1, D. R. Eyre2, M. Weis2, mechanism by which xtBcor is required for lateral specification and an R. Morello3, B. Lee3, S. Leikin4, K. Rosenbaum5, C. Tifft5, D. I. Bulas5, C. Koz- explanation of how BCOR mutation may disrupt cardiac septal devel- ma6, P. Smith7, J. J. Mulvihill8, U. Sundaram9; opment via the left-right laterality pathway. 1BEMB, NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United C65. USF1 and Dyslipidemias; Insulin dependent expression States, 4SPB, NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Children’s National of a transcription factor in muscle and fat results in adverse Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States, 6Georgetown University Medi- regulation of target genes cal Center, Washington, DC, United States, 7Shriner’s Hospital for Children, J. Naukkarinen1, E. Nilsson2, H. A. Koistinen3, V. Lyssenko4, L. Groop4, M. R. Chicago, IL, United States, 8University of Oklahoma HSC, Oklahoma City, OK, Taskinen3, L. Peltonen1,5; United States, 9VCU/MCV, Richmond, VA, United States. 1National Public Health Institute of Finland and University of Helsinki, Depart- Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is well-known to be caused by domi- ment of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Steno Diabetes center, Gentofte, nant mutations in the genes that code for type I collagen, COL1A1 and Denmark, 3Department of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Hel- COL1A2. Collagen defects cause about 85% of OI cases. Mutations sinki, Finland, 4Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, that alter the type I collagen primary structure delay helix folding and Clinical Research Center, Malmo University Hospital, Lund University, Malmo, allow overmodification of the collagen helix by prolyl 4-hydroxylase, Sweden, 5The Broad Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cam- lysyl hydroxylase and glycosylating enzymes. We have discovered bridge, MA, United States. that essentially all cases of lethal/severe OI without a primary collagen We recently reported association in Finnish families of allelic variants defect, but with overmodification of the collagen helix, are caused by of USF1 with FCHL, a common dyslipidemia predisposing to cardio- null mutations in LEPRE1, encoding prolyl 3-hydroxylase 1 (P3H1), or vascular disease (CVD). This association with dyslipidemia has since Concurrent Sessions 1 been replicated in numerous studies in different populations. However, and give an outlook on how the data and technology may be used in evidence for the underlying mechanism how USF1 variants relate to an integrated (epi)genetic approach to common disease. dyslipidemia remains limited. www.epigenome.org We here show for the first time, allele-specific differences in USF1 transcript levels in two relevant tissues. In muscle biopsies from 142 C68. Mechanism of Alu integration into the human genome twins, following insulin challenge only subjects homozygous for the J. Chen1,2, C. Férec2,3, D. N. Cooper4; non-risk allele responded with significantly increased USF1 transcript 1Etablissement Français du Sang–Bretagne, Brest, France, 2INSERM, U613, levels, as measured by RT-PCR. Essentially the same phenomenon Brest, France, 3Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Faculté de Médecine de was observed in fat-biopsies of FCHL family members as insulin levels Brest et des Sciences de la Santé, Brest, France, 4Institute of Medical Gene- correlated with allelic imbalance. Quantitative sequencing of genomic- tics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. and transcribed RNA from subjects heterozygous for the best associ- LINE-1 or L1 has driven the generation of at least 10% of the human ating SNP, located in the 3’-UTR of USF1 revealed an average ~20% genome by mobilising Alu sequences. Although there is no doubt that lower expression of the risk-allele in fat. Alu insertion is initiated by L1-dependent target site-primed reverse In a set of 47 expression arrays of fat-biopsies, differential expres- transcription, the mechanism by which the newly synthesised 3’ end sion of numerous USF1 target genes was evident -among them many of a given Alu cDNA attaches to the target genomic DNA is less well genes of lipid metabolism and inflammatory-response. Interestingly, understood. Intrigued by observations made on 28 pathological simple the neighboring F11R gene recently implicated in development of ath- Alu insertions, we have sought to ascertain whether microhomologies erosclerotic plaques also showed allele-dependent expression, sug- could have played a role in the integration of shorter Alu sequences gesting the presence of multiple, potentially co-regulated CVD associ- into the human genome. A meta-analysis of the 1624 Alu insertion ated genes in this chromosomal region. polymorphisms deposited in the Database of Retrotransposon Inser- In summary, common allelic variants, defined by non-coding SNPs of tion Polymorphisms in Humans (dbRIP), when considered together the USF1 transcription factor gene and associated with dyslipidemia with a re-evaluation of the mechanism underlying how the three pre- risk, seemingly eradicate the insulin response of transcript levels. Sub- viously annotated large deletion-associated short pathological Alu in- sequently, they result in differential expression of numerous relevant serts were generated, enabled us to present a unifying model for Alu target genes predisposing carriers of risk alleles to dyslipidemia and insertion into the human genome. Since Alu elements are compara- CVD. tively short, L1 RT is usually able to complete nascent Alu cDNA strand synthesis leading to the generation of full-length Alu inserts. However, C66. The cohesion protein NIPBL recruits histone deacetylases the synthesis of the nascent Alu cDNA strand may be terminated pre- to mediate chromatin remodeling maturely if its 3’ end anneals to the 3’ terminal of the top strand’s 5’ W. Xu1, P. Jahnke1, M. Wülling2, M. Albrecht1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, F. J. overhang by means of microhomology-mediated mispairing, an event Kaiser1; which would often lead to the formation of significantly truncated Alu 1Universitätklinikum S-H,, Lübeck, Germany, 2Universität Duisburg-Essen, Es- inserts. Furthermore, the nascent Alu cDNA strand may be ‘hijacked’ sen, Germany. to patch existing double strand breaks located in the top-strand’s up- Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a rare malformation disorder stream regions, leading to the generation of large genomic deletions. with multiple congenital anomalies, a characteristic face, growth and mental retardation as well as gastrointestinal and C69. Evolution of mammalian gene expression promoted by limb abnormalities. About 50 % of the patients with CdLS carry muta- retroposons tions in the NIPBL gene. N. V. Tomilin; NIPBL encodes a homologue of the fungal Scc2-type and Drosoph- Russian Academy of Sciences, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. ila Nipped-B protein and is part of the chromatid cohesion complex. Expression of eukaryotic protein-coding genes is strongly affected by Recent studies show an association of chromatid cohesion with chro- specific sequence motifs which concentrate near transcription start matin-remodeling complexes, either in the recruitment of cohesion to sites (TSS) and bind transcription factors. These transcription factor particular sequences along chromosome arms or in the establishment binding motifs (TFBM) may arise in promoters by slow accumulation of cohesion. of base changes in a random sequence but recent data indicate that In yeast-two hybrid assays we could identify the chromatin remodeling promoter TFBMs can also arise rapidly through insertion of mobile el- factors histone deacetylases 1 and 3 (HDAC1 and 3) as potential NIP- ements already having functional motifs or having sequences which BL-interacting proteins. Using different fragments of NIPBL in liquid β- may be converted to TFBMs by a small number of mutations. For ex- galactosidase assays, we could narrow down the interacting region for ample, single C to T transition at specific position can create functional HDAC1 and 3 to a stretch of 162 amino acids (aa) within a highly con- estrogene-response element in human Alu retroposons. We studied served region of NIPBL which was predicted to be a HDAC-interacting abundance of retroposon-derived sequences in human and mouse domain by in silico studies. In luciferase reporter gene assays we could promoters (-1000 to +200 bp segments relative to TSS) and found that show that this HDAC-interacting domain of NIPBL fused to the GAL4- >15000 of human promoters and >11000 of mouse promoters have DNA-binding domain (GAL4-DBD) is able to repress reporter gene Alu-derived or B1/B2-derived elements, resp. Global distribution of transcription. Moreover, cotransfections of HDAC1 and 3 enhance this these retroposons in human and mouse chromosomes strongly corre- effect significantly. To confirm whether this effect is based on histone lates with clusters of CpG islands present in promoters of ~75% genes. deacetylation we used an antibody recognizing the acetylated histone In active genes CpG islands are not methylated but major fraction of 3 in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and could identify specific retroposons, especially LINEs and LTRs, are heavily methylated. deacetylation of histone 3 adjacent to the NIPBL-GAL4-DBD binding It is unknown how promoter CpG islands are protected from spread sites. Our data show that NIPBL is able to recruit chromatin remodeling of methylation initiated at adjacent LINEs and LTRs. Human Alu and enzymes mediating histone deacetylation. mouse B1 elements can be transcribed by RNA polymerase III be- cause their internal promoters bind transcription complex TFIIIC. This C67. The Human Epigenome Project (HEP) complex can limit spread of repressive histone methylation in S.pombe S. Beck; and we suggest that Alu- and B1-associated TFIIIC sites have similar Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. function in mammals. Epigenetic processes play an essential role in biology with wide-rang- ing implications for human health and disease. To understand and har- C70. Prominent use of distal 5’ transcription start sites and ness these processes we need to read and interpret the epigenetic discovery of a large number of additional exons in ENCODE code with the same rigour and vigour that made reading the genetic regions code one of the greatest scientific achievements. To this end, a num- A. Reymond1, F. Denoeud2, J. Harrow3, C. Ucla4, A. Frankish3, C. Henrichsen1, ber of efforts have already been initiated of which the EU-funded HEP C. Wyss4, T. Alioto2, J. Drenkow5, J. Lagarde2, T. Hubbard3, S. E. Antonarakis4, was among the first to be set up in 2000 with the aim to map one of the R. Guigo2, P. Kapranov5, T. R. Gingeras5; epigenetic marks, DNA methylation. On behalf of the HEP Consortium, 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Swit- I will present our findings to date, discuss some of the lessons learnt zerland, 2IMIM, Barcelona, Spain, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Concurrent Sessions 2 United Kingdom, 4University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Affymetrix Inc., We mapped the human and mouse SNPs from dbSNP (http://www. Santa Clara, CA, United States. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/) onto the 138 annotated entries for the The aim of the ENCODE project (http://genome.gov/10005107) is to human and/or mouse experimentally supported miRNA target sites identify all the functional elements of the human genome. The pilot from TarBase database (http://www.diana.pcbi.upenn.edu/tarbase. phase focuses on a specified 1% of its sequence. As part of this proj- html). This mapping revealed only five human miR-target sites that ect, the GENCODE consortium by combining manual annotation with harbor SNPs. experimental validation, produced a high quality annotation to be used We further experimentally investigated one of these target sites, an as the “reference set” by the ENCODE consortium. hsa-miR-155 target site within the 3’ UTR of the human AGTR1 gene To uncover further the complex architecture of the human transcrip- that contains SNP rs5186. Using reporter silencing assays, we show tome and potentially identify new gene elements (exons), we combined that hsa-miR-155 downregulates the expression of only the 1166A, 5’Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends in twelve adult human tissues and and not the 1166C allele, of rs5186. Remarkably, the 1166C allele has three cell lines with high-density 22 nucleotides-resolution tiling arrays. been associated with hypertension in many studies. Thus the 1166C We identified previously unannotated and often tissue/cell line specific allele may be functionally associated with hypertension by abrogating transcribed fragments (RACEfrags), both 5’ distal to the annotated 5’ regulation by hsa-miR-155, thereby elevating AGTR1 levels. terminus and internal to the annotated gene bounds for the vast ma- We have also shown that miR-155that maps to chromosome 21. This jority (81.5%) of the tested genes. Half of the distal RACEfrags span could explain the observation that individuals with Down syndrome large segments of genomic sequences away from the main portion have reduced blood pressure compared to controls. of the coding transcript and often overlap with the upstream-annotat- ed gene(s). Several lines of evidence suggest that these sequences C73. Unravelling the diploid genome - The synaptonemal correspond to bona fide exons. First, the 5’ distal RACEfrags exhibit complex as a molecular machine. a statistically-significant trend to map in the vicinity of Transcription E. Bolcun-Filas1, Y. Costa2, R. Speed1, M. Taggart1, H. J. Cooke1; Start Sites identified using independent methods such as CAGE tags, 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2National Institute for 5’PETs, promoter mapping and/or hypersensitivity to DNAse. Second, Medical Research, London, United Kingdom. the splice site strength of the novel exons appears as high as that of Generating haploid gametes from diploid germ cells is central to both GENCODE UTRs and CDSs. Third, the transcripts that contain novel genetics and reproduction. Around 10-15% of couples are classed as exons could be independently isolated. Fourth, these novel exons infertile at some point in time and the genetic contribution to this is show some conservation in the mammalian lineage. thought to be about half. To expand our understanding of the basic biology and to provide new candidate fertility/infertility genes we have C71. Mapping of small RNAS (smRfrags) in the human encode used transcriptional profiling to identify new genes involved in meio- regions sis. C. Borel1, M. Gagnebin1, C. Gehrig1, A. Hatzigeorgiou2, E. Kriventseva1, E. Two of these genes encode proteins of the Synaptonemal Complex Zdobnov1, S. Antonarakis1; (SC). In mammals including humans this structure, which holds the 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva aligned sister chromatids together prior to recombination, is essential Medical School, CH, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetics, School of for the completion of repair of meiotic double strand breaks and for Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,, Philadelphia, PA, United States. meiosis. Failure of this process in some individuals results in infertil- The elucidation of the largely unknown transcriptome of small RNAs ity. is of considerable interest. We report here the results of an analysis We have modelled the effects of mutation of both of these genes of the small RNAs (<50nt) in the ENCODE regions of the human ge- (SYCE1 and SYCE2) by targeted mutagenesis in mouse. Heterozy- nome. gous animals are fertile but homozygous null mutants are sterile with Size fractionated RNAs (between 19 and 50 nts) from 4 different cell females producing occasional abnormal follicles and males show- lines (HepG2, HelaS3, GM06990, SK-N-SH) were mapped using ing a Stage IV arrest of spermatogenesis. At the chromosomal level the forward and reverse ENCODE tiling arrays of 22 bp resolution. homologues align but complete SC’s are not formed, double strand The small RNA probe was prepared by labelling a newly synthesized break repair is incomplete and crossover is does not occur. Based on poly(A)tail. a detailed examination of the biochemical interactions between these Our smRfrags (small RNA fragments; ~7500 positive signals; top 1% proteins and other SC proteins coupled with immunocytochemistry in signal) overlap only 8% of the exons of known genes (Gencode an- the mutant mice we propose a molecular basis for the zipping up of the notation), whereas the majority map to intergenic (34%) and intronic Synaptonemal Complex. (53%) regions. As much as 18% of the 3’ or 5’ UTRs contain smRfrags. In addition, 9.6% and 16.8% of smRfrags in the 5’UTR regions overlap C74. Low copy repeats: few make the most noise significantly with His.PolII.TAF250 and DNase I Hypersensitive sites R. Ciccone1, R. Giorda2, M. Bonaglia3, P. Magini1, M. De Gregori1, T. Pram- respectively (compared to 5.3% and 9% expected). Interestingly, 19- paro1, M. Seri4, M. Prieur5, C. Turleau5, L. Rodríguez6, M. L. Martínez-Frías6, M. 26% of smRfrags show evidence of overlapping transcription on both Silveira6, C. Contesotto6, M. Rocchi7, O. Zuffardi1; strands. Approximately 4.8% and 1.7% of smRfrags in non-annotated 1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica - Universty of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2IRCCS regions overlap transfrags in HeLa and GM06990 cell lines respec- E. Medea, Bosisio Parini - Lecco, Italy, 3IRCCS E. Medea, Bosisio Parini - tively. We hypothesized that a fraction of the identified smRfrags cor- Lecco, Italy, 4UO genetica medica - Sant’Orsola-Malpighi Hospital - University responded to microRNAs. We tested by northern-blot a set of 30 high- of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Service de Cytogenetique, Hopital Necker Enfants likelihood predictions of potential microRNAs candidates that overlap Malades, Paris, France, 6Cytogenetic lab CIAC (ECEMC), Madrid, Spain, 7Dip. with smRfrags. We validated 3 novel microRNAs (~20nt length); how- di Genetica e Microbiologia, University of Bari, Bari, Italy. ever most of the remaining candidates showed a larger band (~100nt) We demonstrated that some recurrent rearrangements of chromo- likely to be a microRNA precursor. some 8p such as the inv dup del(8p), the supernumerary analphoid der(8p) and the interstitial deletion of 8p23.1 are mediated by the two C72. Human miR-155 on chromosome 21 differentially interacts homologous segmental duplications (proximal and distal repeats: 8p- with its polymorphic target in the AGTR1 3’UTR - a mechanism REPP and 8p-REPD) constituted by olfactory receptor gene clusters for functional SNPs related to phenotypes (ORGC). We also demonstrated that the t(4;8)(p16;p23) usually de- C. Borel1, P. Sethupathy2, M. Gagnebin1, C. Gehrig1, G. Grant2, S. Deutsch1, A. tected in Wolf-Hirschhorn individuals carrying the der(4) is a recurrent Hatzigeorgiou2, S. E. Antonarakis1; translocation mediated by two pairs of REPs, highly homologous to 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Med- those at 8p23, that are located at 4p16. We demonstrate by in silico ical School, CH, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Penn Center for Bioinformatics, School analysis that a 200 Kb portion of the 8p-REPs share over 95% iden- of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, PA, United States. tity with several other chromosomal locations, including 4p16, 11p15, Animal microRNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression through base 11q13, 3p12, 3q21, 16p13. We report a new series of constitutional re- pairing to their targets within the 3’ UTR of protein coding genes. Sin- arrangements mediated by some of these segmental duplications and gle Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) located within such target sites we confirm the mechanism leading to the t(4;8)(p16;p23) translocation can affect miRNA regulation. in two new cases. We also demonstrate that the same mechanism is Concurrent Sessions  involved in an apparently non-recurrent t(8;11)(p23.2;p15.5) transloca- somal anomalies. These findings suggest that PGS results must be tion and we describe a cryptic 11q13 deletion mediated the same class interpreted with caution. of repeats. We also analyze the evolutionary origin of these segmental duplications and demonstrate that they originate from a sequence re- C77. Multiple cryptic deletions are a common finding in lated to human chromosome 16p13. The genome of M. mulatta has “balanced” complex chromosome rearrangements: a study of only one copy of the region, but its sequence contains a 2.3 Kb invert- seventeen cases. ed repeat localized to one end of the region generating the different M. De Gregori1, R. Ciccone1, F. Cifuentes2, T. Pramparo1, P. Magini1, S. Gimel- duplications. This repeat is not found in non-primate species and may li1, J. Vermeesch3, J. Messa1, F. Novara1, P. Maraschio1, M. Bonaglia4, G. Ferre- be the first step in the genesis of ORGC segmental duplications. ro5, M. Silengo6, A. Zatterale7, S. Belli8, A. Ferlini9, G. Calabrese10, T. Mattina11, F. Bernardi12, M. Riege13, M. Rocchi14, A. Schinzel15, O. Zuffardi1,16; C75. Diagnostic DNA copy number screening in patients with 1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Agilent unexplained mental retardation using whole genome tiling- Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 3Center for Human Genetics, resolution array CGH University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 4IRCCS E. Medea, Bosisio D. A. Koolen, R. Pfundt, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa, N. de Leeuw, L. E. L. M. Vissers, W. Parini, Lecco, Italy, 5Dip. di Scienze Pediatriche, Universita’ di Torino, Torino, M. Nillesen, E. Sistermans, A. Geurts van Kessel, H. G. Brunner, J. A. Veltman, Italy, 6Dip. di Scienze Pediatriche Universita’ di Torino, Torino, Italy, 7Servizio D. Smeets, B. B. A. de Vries; di Citogenetica ASL-NA1, Napoli, Italy, 8Consultorio Genetico, Trento, Italy, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 9Genetica Medica, Università di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 10Genetica Medica, Uni- Genome-wide array based Comparative Genomic Hybridization (ar- versità di Chieti, Chieti, Italy, 11Genetica Medica, Università di Catania, Catania, ray CGH) using tiling path DNA microarrays was diagnostically imple- Italy, 12Patologia Genetica e Prenatale, Policlinico G.B. Rossi, Verona, Italy, mented at our department in 2005. Since then we have tested 350 13Institute of Medical Genetics University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 14Dip. individuals with unexplained mental retardation. This is the largest di Genetica e Microbiologia, Università di Bari, Bari, Italy, 15Institute of Medical clinically well-defined cohort analyzed by array CGH so far. We de- Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 16IRCSS Policlinico San tected 51 DNA copy number alterations in genomic regions that are Matteo, Pavia, Italy. not known to harbor copy number variation and were able to proof We report array-CGH findings in seventeen carriers of de novo com- de novo occurrence in the majority of these. In total 26 copy number plex chromosome rearrangements, involving from 3 to 8 chromosomes, losses and 25 copy number gains, varying in size from 0.1 to 12.4 all but one interpreted as balanced through conventional cytogenetic Mb, were identified. Interestingly, the average size of the losses in our examinations. Thirteen of them were detected in individuals with ab- series was larger compared to the gains (2.5 Mb versus 1.7 Mb) and normal phenotypes and mental retardation, two in normal females with 20 cases showed alterations smaller than 1 Mb. Although the vast ma- repeated abortions, the remaining two in fetuses with normal ultraso- jority of all aberrations is non-recurrent, several recurrent aberrations nographic findings investigated for advanced maternal age.Two rear- have now been identified. The first and most frequent novel microdele- rangements, one present in one of the females with repeated abortions tion identified by array CGH is characterized by a 600 kb deletion at and the other in a male with mental retardation, were balanced. The 17q21.31 and is associated with a clearly recognizable phenotype1. remaining 15 cases had up to four deletions both at the breakpoints The 17q21.31 region contains several low copy repeats that might act and elsewhere. All the deletions had occurred de novo as confirmed as recombination substrates for nonallelic homologous recombination in all cases by the array-CGH performed in the parents and by the and a common inversion polymorphism. Other loci at which recurrent paternity tests performed in eight of the cases. Ten of these deletions genomic aberrations and a recognizable clinical phenotype were iden- could be tested for the parental origin and all turned out to be paternal. tified are 2q23.1 and 15q24. Using a customized array for seven patients we have narrowed the In conclusion, array CGH technology considerably increases the di- deletion breakpoints at few hundreds of bp; no peculiar motif of DNA agnostic yield in patients with mental retardation and reveals novel sequences associated to the imbalance was detected. Our findings recurrent microdeletion syndromes for which the frequency remains demonstrate that 1) phenotypic abnormalities, reported in half of the to be established. cases of apparently balanced de novo complex rearrangements are 1) Koolen, et al. Nat Genet 2006;38:999-1001. mainly due to cryptic deletions mostly but not exclusively at the break- points, 2) in order to exclude cryptic imbalance with impact on the phe- C76. The chromosomal constitution of an embryo changes notype, detection of a CCR in prenatal diagnosis requires array-CGH during preimplantation development analysis and 3) male gametogenesis is more prone to create multiple T. Frumkin, Y. Yaron, M. Malcov, A. Amit, D. Ben-Yosef; chromosomal imbalances than female one. Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel. Introduction: Preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) using single- C78. External Quality Assessment (EQA) in Europe cell FISH analysis is proposed for selecting euploid embryos in recur- B. Quellhorst-Pawley1, R. T. Howell1, K. Held2, C. Ramos3, M. Rodriguez de rent IVF failures. An additive value for this procedure is the ability to Alba3, B. H. Faas4, G. Floridia5, O. Bartsch6, K. Simola7, M. Doco-Fenzy8, N. analyze early embryonic development at different stages, allowing to Dastugue9, F. Sole10, Z. Zemanova11, R. Hastings1; characterize post zygotic chromosomal changes. 1John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Fertility Centre, Hamburg, Aim: To track post zygotic chromosomal changes during preimplanta- Germany, 3Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 4University Medical Centre tion development. Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5Instituto Superiore de Sanita, Rome, Materials & Methods: FISH analysis was performed on day 3 of de- Italy, 6Universitaet Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 7Tampere University Hospital, velopment. For each embryo, 1-2 blastomeres were analyzed, using Tampere, Finland, 8CHU Reims, Reims, France, 9Hopital PURPAN, Toulouse, probes for 3 to 9 chromosomes (13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21, 22, X, Y). France, 10Hospital del mar, Barcelona, Spain, 11General Faculty Hospital, Chromosomally normal embryos were transferred to the uterus on day Prague, Czech Republic. 4 or 5. Aneuploid embryos were re-analyzed on day 5, using the same The Forum of Cytogenetic EQA providers, assembled under the um- probe panels. brella of the EuroGentest Network two years ago, agreed it would be Results: A total of 52 aneuploid embryos (as determined on day 3), desirable to establish a European EQA scheme independent of Na- were reanalyzed on day 5. In 25 embryos (48%), the day 5 reanalysis tional schemes. It is not intended that this European scheme would confirmed the results observed on day 3. In 14 embryos (27%), „self replace existing schemes but rather provide opportunities for labora- correction“ of the chromosomal aberration was observed, in some or tories that have no access to a National scheme. Currently there are in all of the blastomeres. In 13 embryos (25%) different chromosomal about 700 cytogenetic laboratories in Europe of which less than 50% aberrations were noted than those observed on day 3. participate in or have access to EQA. Discussion: PGS provides the opportunity to study the chromosomal CEQA (Cytogenetics European Quality Assessment) consists of a constitution of preimplantation embryos. Our results demonstrate that web-based EQA providing images for analysis which can be evaluated embryos, designated as “aneuploid” on day 3, may demonstrate a on line or downloaded to an image analysis system. This EQA has high rate of mosaicism for chromosomal aberration. Some of these been developed to closely mimic the diagnostic situation and over- mosaic embryos are capable of developing into normal embryos by comes some of the limitations of other forms of EQA. It allows the „self correction“. However, some embryos accumulate further chromo- participant to choose appropriate follow-up tests (for example, FISH) Concurrent Sessions  to elucidate the chromosome abnormality. This is a major improvement 28-item questionnaire. The measures were based on ethical issues on conventional distribution of slides or images where the inclusion of related to genetic testing in minors identified in the literature and from additional test material inevitably reveals the answer. Participants can previous research. submit reports in Czech, English, French, Finnish, German, Italian or Results At this moment we have a response rate of 60%. We just start- Spanish. A prenatal and postnatal pilot EQA was completed by 19 lab- ed a preliminary statistical analysis of the data using non-parametric oratories from 18 countries. Seven laboratories had never participated statistics. (22 February 2007) Results are planned in March and April. in EQA before. The reports reflected the variation in interpreting and reporting cytogenetic results within Europe. Some poor performance C81. An operational checklist for evaluation of molecular genetic was identified. tests destined to clinical use: development and description. The pilot will be expanded to allow more laboratories to participate F. Rousseau1,2, C. Lindsay3, M. Charland4, J. Bergeron5, I. Blanqueart6, R. next year. Participation in EQA will improve the provision of genetic Delage7, B. M. Gilfix8, M. Miron9, G. A. Mitchell10, L. Oligny11; services for the benefit of the patient. 1CanGeneTest consortium & Université Laval, Quebec, PQ, Canada, 2Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier universitaire de Québec, Québec, PQ, Ca- C79. Regulations and practices of genetic counselling in 38 nada, 3CanGeneTest consortium & CRCHUQ, Quebec, PQ, Canada, 4CanGe- European countries neTest consortium, Quebec, PQ, Canada, 5Réseau de médecine génétique ap- E. Rantanen1, M. Hietala1, U. Kristoffersson2, I. Nippert3, J. Schmidtke4, J. Se- pliquée et CRCHUQ, Québec, PQ, Canada, 6CanGeneTest consortium & Agen- queiros5, H. Kääriäinen1; ce d’Évaluation des technologies et modes d’intervention en santé du Québec, 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Depart- Montréal, PQ, Canada, 7Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier universitaire ment of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of Lund, Lund, Sweden, 3Institute affilié de Québec & Université Laval, Québec, PQ, Canada, 8McGill University of Human Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 4Institute of Hu- Hospital Centre, Montréal, Montréal, PQ, Canada, 9Centre Hospitalier de la man Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 5Department of Sagamie, Saguenay, PQ, Canada, 10Réseau de médecine génétique appliquée Human Genetics, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. & Centre de recherche de l’Hopital Ste-Justine, Montréal, PQ, Canada, 11Centre Background: As genetic tests are increasingly offered across the bor- de recherche de l’Hôpital Ste-Justine, Montréal, PQ, Canada. ders of the European countries, EuroGentest, a NoE aiming at im- Background: The completion of the Human Genome Project has in- proving the quality of testing, also aims at harmonizing the quality of creased the pace of genetic markers of disease. Despite tremendous genetic counselling. fundamental research efforts, clinical applications are still lagging be- Objective: To review what kinds of regulations and practices related to hind expectations, partly due to the lack of effective tools to summarize genetic counselling there are in different European countries. published data relative to the clinical assessment of new diagnostic Methods: An electronic survey was performed among the National So- molecular tests. cieties of Human Genetics in 29 countries and contact persons in the Methods: We used a collaborative process using published tools and 9 countries where a Society could not be traced. The president or the an expert panel to develop a detailed checklist of the evidence that board of the society, or a selected expert provided the answers to the needs be collected or produced to evaluate the potential usefulness of questions about existing legislation, guidelines and generally applied a new molecular diagnostic test in medicine. practices of genetic counselling. The respondents also estimated how Results: We present a checklist that allows 1)stakeholders to collect well genetic counselling is organized in their country and what future data related to a given molecular test and improve their decision making changes can be predicted. process and 2)researchers to summarize known evidence and direct Results: There is legislation related to counselling in 13 and guide- research efforts towards studies to fill knowledge gaps. This checklist lines in 21 countries. It was hoped that the amount of regulations comprises 29 clearly defined items, grouped into 10 categories, includ- would increase. The topics that were most often covered in legislation ing an overview of disease epidemiology and genetics, available diag- and guidelines, and also considered as generally applied practices, nostic tools and their analytical and clinical performances, availability were counselling in the context of prenatal testing, informed consent, of quality control programs, methodological and clinical best practice confidentiality, training of the person who performs counselling, and guidelines, clinical utility, impacts on health care, psycho-social, ethical non-directiveness. The seldom-covered topics were counselling in the and legal aspects of the analysis. It also comprises a summary of the context of predisposition testing for multifactorial diseases, duty to re- evidence available and the identification of research priorities to fill the contact the patient afterwards, and counselling persons from ethnic knowledge gaps relative to the test. minorities. Of the respondents, 70 % considered that national regula- Interpretation: This systematic checklist is intended to streamline col- tions are necessary, and 90 % thought that some improvements are lection of the available evidence to appraise the potential for clinical needed in the organization of genetic counselling in their country. application of new molecualr diagnostic tests and help prioritize re- search to complete the evidence base relative to the clinical implemen- C80. Attitudes regarding genetic testing in minors. A survey of tation of molecular tests. European clinical geneticists P. Borry, T. Goffin, H. Nys, K. Dierickx; C82. Public Perception of Genetic Medicine - A survey of Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, KULEUVEN, Leuven, Belgium. attitudes in the United Kingdom Background Various professional guidelines have discussed genetic P. Finegold1, J. Ayres1, M. Boon2, M. J. Leech1, K. Mathieson1, H. R. Middleton- testing in minors and provided recommendations on the topic. As we Price1, S. Nicholls1, D. Donnai1; have described earlier (Borry et al. 2005, 2006) professional guide- 1North West Genetics Knowledge Park, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2ICM, lines have shown to disagree on a various issues. Regarding carrier London, United Kingdom. testing guidelines varied regarding (a) the role of genetic services in The UK’s North West Genetics Knowledge Park (Nowgen) sets out ensuring that children are informed about their carrier status and as- as one of its aims to act as a forum for education, engagement and sociated risks when they are older; (b) exceptions to the general rule dialogue around human genetics that will empower people to make de- of withholding or deferring carrier testing; (c) the communication of cisions about health management. In August 2006, Nowgen commis- incidentally discovered carrier status. In the case of predictive and pre- sioned a telephone interview based survey amongst a sample of 1006 symptomatic genetic testing ambiguity exists for childhood-onset dis- subjects from around the United Kingdom. The survey questions were orders for which preventive or therapeutic measures are not available designed to establish public perception of the role genetics plays in and for the timing of testing for childhood-onset disorders. health, how genetic medicine is seen in relation to genetic modification Objective The aim of our study was to gather information from clinical of food, the level of acceptability amongst the population to undergo geneticists about their practices and attitudes with regard to carrier a genetic test for health reasons and to gauge public expectations in testing in minors. relation to future genetics and healthcare. Method 316 medically qualified specialists in genetics who have of- The research carried out by polling organisation ICM is broken down fered genetic counseling to patients in the last year were asked to into standard demographic categories of age, gender, social class and complete a survey of items assessing their attitudes and practices region, with the intention of providing an evidence base for Nowgen’s regarding genetic testing in minors. The data collection took place be- continuing public engagement work. tween October 2006 and March 2007. All respondents completed a The survey results indicated that just over 70 per cent of the popula-Concurrent Sessions  tion considers that their genes significantly influence their health sta- cialty consultants (N=66). tus whereas over 40 per cent feel that an individual’s genetic makeup The Centre has defined genetics learning outcomes relevant to clinical guides their behaviour. Just under half of the sample felt that heart practice for different stages of medical training in the UK. These out- disease and cancer are significantly caused by genes, with a third con- comes, available from www.geneticseducation.nhs.uk, may be a use- sidering mental illness to have a high heritable dimension. The figure ful tool for those involved in genetics education across Europe. of 40 per cent who said that they would not consider having a pharma- cogenetic test to see whether a medicine would work for them, poses C84. Implementation of a medical genetics distance education some interesting questions for future public engagement work. programme for registered nurses M. Glass1, S. L. Walters1, A. Christianson1, B. Henderson2; C83. Teaching genetics to medical trainees: grounding genetics 1National Health Laboratory Services and University of Witwatersrand, Johan- in clinical practice at each level of training nesburg, South Africa, 2University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa. M. Martyn1, S. Burke2, A. Stone3, C. Bennett1, P. Farndon1; The South African National Department of Health Policy Guidelines for 1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, the Management and Prevention of Genetic Disorders, Birth Defects United Kingdom, 2Centre for Research in Medical and Dental Education, Uni- and Disability, recommended the development and implementation of versity of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Partner Thornley Street a postgraduate distance-learning programme for primary health care Practice, Wolverhampton, United Kingdom. nursing staff in South Africa. With reference to this, the aim of this study To highlight the relevance of genetics to the clinical practice of medical was to produce a Medical Genetics Education Programme (MGEP) practitioners outside specialist genetics services, it is important to work incorporating a birth defects manual (BDM) to assess the knowledge with them to define where and how genetics impacts on their practice. and skills of Primary Health Care Registered Nurses, and to evaluate This knowledge can then be used to define educational outcomes for the results after offering a distance education course. The sample for trainees. the study was selected from registered nurses working in rural and Genetics knowledge, skills and attitudes needed by medical students, semi-rural areas in South Africa. The instrument used was a pre-test/ general practice trainees and specialty trainees for their clinical roles post-test questionnaire. Combined with distance learning, four contact have been defined by the UK NHS National Genetics Education and days with lectures and “hands-on” workshops with “Recognising Birth Development Centre in partnership with a number of groups. These Defects” as a consistent theme were held. Pre-course knowledge of have been used to develop genetics learning outcomes. the six groups was poor with an average of 48%. Pre-course skills, Learning outcomes for medical students were developed in consulta- including the drawing and interpretation of a three-generation family tion with UK medical school genetics leads based on topics previously tree scored an average of 4,5%. Post-course knowledge increased agreed as important for medical students. These lay the foundation of to an average of 75%, and post-course skills improved to an average core genetic concepts which can be built upon in later training. Learn- of 86%. The long-term goal of this study is to produce at least one ing outcomes for general practice trainees are outlined in ‘Genetics in certificated “genetic specialist” nurse at each primary care facility, with Primary Care’, curriculum statement 6 of the Royal College of Gen- the aim to improve management and care of children and families with eral Practitioner’s new Training Curriculum. These learning outcomes genetic conditions. It is planned that after successful completion of the are based on genetics items identified by GP trainees and trainers, BDM, a two-week “hands-on” course in basic genetic counselling be programme directors and geneticists as important for general practice offered and implemented. (N=60). Learning outcomes for specialty trainees are based on the findings of a similar needs assessment involving geneticists and spe-Clinical genetics  Posters notypic spectrum ranging from a severe classical form (CL, 1/15000) with or without salt wasting, through to a mild nonclassical form (NC, Po01. Clinical genetics 1/100), to a hyperandrogenic adult form. The active gene and the inac- tive pseudogene CYP21P are organized in a complex locus on chro- P0001. A 17q21.31 microduplication (including MAPT) and a mosome 6p21.3. Most of the genetic lesions that cause 21OHD are 2q22.3q23.1 microdeletion (including ACVR2A) detected by deletions/conversions (often giving rise to chimeric CYP21P/CYP21 routine array-CGH analysis using 244k Agilent oligoarrays in two genes) or various gene conversion-type mutations resulting in CYP21 patients with mental retardation and dysmorphic features genes carrying one/multiple pseudogenic mutations. Mutations arising M. Kirchhoff1, A. M. Bisgaard1, M. Duno1, F. J. Hansen2, H. Rose1, M. independently of the pseudogene are rare. Schwartz1; A molecular strategy analysis that combines specific PCR (designated 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2De- to avoid allele dropout phenomena caused by pseudogene sequences partment of Pediatric Neurology, Rigshospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. and to discover a chimeric gene), sequencing of the entire CYP21A2 Two cases with de novo chromosomal imbalances detected by rou- gene region (from nt-420 to nt+2907), as well as intragenic polymor- tine screening using 244k Agilent oligoarrays are presented. In case phism segregation analysis, enabled us to characterize a total of 1050 1, a microduplication of 17q21.31 was found (approximately 0.5 Mb). alleles of: 383 21OHD patients (162 CL, 231 NC) and 136 hyperan- The duplication is reciprocal to the recently described 17q21.31 micro- drogenic subjects with 98.8% of mutation detection. Mutations were deletion and includes the MAPT gene. The patient is a nine-year-old confirmed in the parents in 85% of the cases. Single/multiple pseu- girl with severe psychomotor developmental delay. Her facial dysmor- dogene-derived mutations account for 93.2% of the alleles, whereas phism includes a low anterior and posterior hairline, a small nose with 5.6% carry a rare/new mutation, mostly missense mutations affecting a flat root, a long philtrum, and small widely spaced teeth. In addition, a conserved residue. Functional studies of 3 new mutations confirmed she has microcephaly, abnormal fingers and toes, and hirsutism with their implication in the phenotype observed. The genotype/phenotype very long hairs on her back. In case 2, a microdeletion of 2q22.3q23.1 relationship was generally good. Further studies will focus on rare vari- was found (approximately 0.4 Mb). The deletion includes the ACVR2A ants in the non coding regions associated with mild forms. gene, which has been associated with cranio-facial development in mice. The patient is a three-year-old girl. Her psychomotor develop- P0004. A boy with 3q29 microdeletion and congenital mitral ment is approximately 12 months delayed. Her facial dysmorphism valve stenosis includes lateral extension of eyebrows, a low anterior hairline, long A. Stray-Pedersen1, K. L. Eiklid2, K. Ramstad1, O. K. Rødningen2; palpebral fissures, a high nasal bridge giving the impression of deep- 1Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 2Ulleval University Hospital, set eyes, a bulbous nasal tip, a thin upper lip, and micrognathia/retrog- Oslo, Norway. nathia. In addition, she is microcephalic, hypermobile and hypotonic. We present an 8 year old boy with congenital mitral valve stenosis Beside the two patients an outline will be presented from seven months and mental retardation. Clinical findings: progressive microcephaly, of routine CGH-analysis using 244k Agilent oligoarrays of patients with epicanthus, antimongoloid eye shape, oedematous eyelids, prominent mental retardation and dysmorphic features. nasal tip, irregularly and widely spaced teeth. He has hypotonic mus- culature with pronounced joint laxity both elbows. He has overriding 2nd P0002. Clinical and cytogenetic aspects in two children with toes, fetal pads toes and fingers. He is developmentally retarded. He trisomy 18 started to walk at 23 months of age. His language is severely delayed, M. Budisteanu1, A. Arghir1, I. Minciu2, S. Magureanu2, G. Chelu1, A. Lungeanu1; and he has autistic-like features. 1”Victor Babes” National Institute of Research and Development, Bucharest, Array CGH using CytoChip™ (BlueGnome Ltd.) revealed an intersti- Romania, 2Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry “Prof. Dr. Al. Obregia”, Bucharest, tial microdeletion of chromosome 3q29. This microdeletion is reported Romania. in only 7 patients worldwide. The clinical phenotype in the reported Objective: The authors present two cases of trisomy 18 with different cases is variable despite an almost identical deletion size. It includes clinical and cytogenetic characteristics. mild/moderate mental retardation and progressive microcephaly with Material and methods: The children were admitted to the Department mildly dysmorphic facial features (long and narrow face, short philtrum of Pediatric Neurology of the Clinical Hospital Al. Obregia, Bucharest and high nasal bridge). for evaluation of a delayed psychomotor development. They were in- The phenotype in our patient is very similar to the other cases, but cluded in a large study, part of a national research program, which mitral valve stenosis is not reported in the 7 other patients. However, investigate the cytogenetic causes of MR in children. First case, an early death (at 3mo-5y) caused by cardiac events has been reported eight years old girl, showed: dysmorphic features, severe MR, hyper- in some of the other patients with 3q29 microdeletion, and terminal kinesia with self-injurious behavior. Second case, a four months old deletions of chromosome 3q are associated with congenital heart de- girl, displayed the clinical phenotype characteristic of Edwards syn- fect. The microdeletion encompasses several genes including PAK2. drome (including dysmorphic features, failure to thrive, arthrogryposis, This gene is the autosomal homologue of a known X-linked mental epileptic seizures, brain malformation). The children were investigated retardation gene (PAK3), and might be the cause of mental retardation cytogenetically by karyotype with GTG-banding. in the patients. The specific gene causing the heart defect reported in Results: In the first case, the cytogenetic investigation revealed a par- our patient is unknown. Our patient’s phenotype broadens the clinical tial trisomy 18pter-18q21. In the second case, the diploid karyotype spectrum of the 3q29 microdeletion syndrome. showed a duplication of the long arm of chromosome 18. Conclusions: The phenotype of the patients with trisomy 18 can be dif- P0005. Subtelomeric 6p deletion: clinical and array-CGH findings ferent depending on the specific triplicated chromosomal region. For in two patients a better description of the sequences involved in the breakpoints in I. Filges1, D. Martinet2, F. Bena1, N. Besuchet2, I. Bouchardy1, A. C. Gaide2, S. this two cases, we intend to extend the study by applying molecular E. Antonarakis1, J. Beckmann2, M. A. Morris1, A. Bottani1, M. C. Addor2; genetic methods. 1Medical Genetics Service, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Medical Genetics Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, P0003. CYP21A2 genotyping in an Italian population with 21- Switzerland. hydroxylase deficiency: molecular characterization of 1050 Approximately 30 patients with subtelomeric 6p deletion have been alleles reported. A recognizable phenotype, including hypertelorism, down- L. Baldazzi1, S. Menabò1, A. Balsamo1, M. Barbaro1,2, A. Nicoletti1, G. Cange- slanting palpebral fissures, flat nasal bridge and dysplastic ears, has mi1, A. Cicognani1; been delineated. In addition to variable mental retardation and poten- 1Pediatric Department S.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, tial hearing deficit, there is a distinctive malformation pattern, which 2Center for Molecular Medicine Karolinska University Hospital, Stockolm, Swe- comprises anterior eye chamber malformations, posterior fossa/cer- den. ebellar anomalies, and heart defects. Steroid 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21OHD), an autosomal recessive Patient 1 is an 8-month-old female born with normal growth param- disorder caused by mutations in the CYP21A2 gene and responsible for eters, typical facial features of 6pter deletion, bilateral corectopia, and >90% of cases of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, presents a wide phe- protruding tongue. She has severe developmental delay, profound bi-Clinical genetics  lateral neurosensory deafness, poor visual contact and hypsarrhythmia with severe vertebral dysplasia, some metaphyseal involvement, and from 6 months. Patient 2 is a 5-year-old moderately mentally-retarded severe epiphyseal delay. There was no ossification of the pubis or is- boy born with normal growth parameters and unilateral hip dysplasia; chiadic bones. The histology shows a conspicuous lack of cartilage he has a characteristic facial phenotype and bilateral embryotoxon. matrix with ballooning and vacuolization of chondrocytes. Routine karyotypes were reported as normal. Subtelomeric MLPA or All data indicate that the fetus had achondrogenesis type 2/hypochon- multi-FISH and parental testing revealed de novo 6pter deletions. Mi- drogenesis. The monitoring with ultrasound was decided to perform in croarray testing (Agilent Human Genome kit 244K) showed that pa- case of another pregnancy in this family. tient 1 has a 7.8 Mb 6pter-6p24.3 deletion and a contiguous 5.5 Mb 6p24.3-6p24.1 duplication. Investigations to explain the origin of the P0008. Acro-oto-ocular syndrome: a malformation disorder with duplicated segment are ongoing. Patient 2 has a 5.7 Mb 6pter-6p25.1 psychiatric features deletion, partially overlapping that of patient 1. C. du Souich1, J. Austin2, R. Friedlander2, C. F. Boerkoel1; Few 6p subtelomeric deletions have been characterized by microarray 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, analysis and at present it is not possible to make accurate conclusions BC, Canada, 2Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Van- concerning genotype-phenotype correlations. The identification of the couver, BC, Canada. contiguous duplication in patient 1 may provide a clue to the mecha- Acro-oto-ocular syndrome (OMIM #264475) is an autosomal reces- nism of the deletion. sive disorder characterized by mixed hearing loss, pseudopapillede- ma, malformation of the face, ears, hands, and feet. We extend the P0006. Molecular analysis of ABCA4 and CRB1 genes in one phenotype to include psychiatric symptoms. The propositus was born mixed Spanish family segregating Stargardt disease (STGD) and to consanguineous parents and had minor facial and limb anomalies. Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) His facial features were remarkable for a high prominent forehead R. Riveiro-Alvarez1, E. Vallespin2, C. Diego2, A. Jana1, A. Almudena1, G. As- with bitemporal narrowing, broad nasal base, malar hypoplasia, and censión1, T. Mª Jose1, A. Carmen1; blepharophimosis. His ears, which had thick over-folded helices, were 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz-Capio-CIBER-ER (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain, 2Fundacion small, posteriorly rotated, and low set. His mouth had a high arched Jimenez Diaz- Capio- CIBER-ER (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain. palate with crowded dentition, shallow eruption of the teeth from the Stargardt disease (STGD) is the most common juvenile macular dys- gingiva, and abnormally shaped molars. His hands and feet were dis- trophy, characterised by central visual impairment. All recessively in- tinctive. He had unusual palmar creases, marked fifth finger clinodac- herited cases are thought to be due to mutations in the ABCA4 gene. tyly, broad fingertips, mild soft tissue syndactyly of fingers 3 and 4, and Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is the most severe inherited reti- mild hypoplasia of the thenar, hypothenar, and inter-digital areas. He nopathy with the earliest age of onset. LCA has been associated with had brachydactyly of his toes, increased space between the first and mutations in ten genes, being CRB1 the most mutated gene in Span- second toes, mild soft tissue syndactyly and camptodactyly of toes ish population. The aim of this study is to describe one mixed pedigree 2-5, valgus deviation of the halluces, and bilateral pes planus. Addi- segregating two different retinal dystrophies, STGD and LCA. tionally he displayed bilateral gynecomastia, diffuse café-au-lait spots, This family was identified through the course of a conventional muta- and ataxia as well as moderate global developmental delay. However, tional screening performed on 223 Spanish families. Mutational analy- in contrast to previously described individuals, he presented with audi- ses were performed by screening on genotyping microarray, dHPLC tory hallucinations and behavioral problems. Our observations confirm and direct sequencing. the previous hypothesis that psychiatric features are a component of The patient with STGD was homozygous for the p.Asn1805Asp muta- Acro-oto-ocular syndrome. To better understand the underlying patho- tion in the ABCA4 gene. Therefore, the involvement of ABCA4 in the physiology and phenotypic spectrum, we seek other patients with this etiopathogenesis of the STGD patient was clear but not for the case disorder. of LCA. Further analyses showed that the LCA patient was double heterozygous for the p.Cys948Tyr and p.Trp822ter mutations in the P0009. Wide clinical spectrum of Adams Oliver syndrome in a CRB1 gene, the second mutation was found in our laboratory. These new family mutations are consistent with her retinal phenotype. S. Sifakis, E. Papadopoulou, P. Vorgia, I. Germanakis, M. Kalmanti; A correct ophthalmologic examination is necessary for providing ac- University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece. curate clinical diagnoses to the patient and therefore an appropriate Introduction: Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare congenital disor- molecular analysis can be concluded. Therefore, identifying the muta- der, characterized by scalp defects and distal transverse limb reduc- tion responsible of the disease is helpful for confirming diagnosis and tion anomalies. counselling. Note that in one family different phenotypes and genetic Case presentation: a 14 month-old boy, the 2nd child of phenotypically causes can coexist, so it is very important to study all affected mem- normal parents, who was born at 36 weeks’ gestation, SGA. Current bers. clinical examination shows growth retardation and central hypotonia. The patient presents an area 2x4cm of hairless atrophic skin, large P0007. A case of achondrogenesis in Kaunas Medical University anterior fontanel, nail dystrophy of hands and feet, camptodactyly of Hospital the right thumb and 3rd finger, and left inguinal hernia. X-rays show a L. Kucinskas1, D. Serapinas2, R. Sereikiene2, V. Sarauskas3; variety of hypoplasia or aplasia in different phalanges in thumbs and 1Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Kaunas Medical in fingers of the hands and feet. Cardiac sonogram reveals a wide University Hospital Genetic Consultation, Kaunas, Lithuania, 3Kaunas Medical atrial septal defect. Brain MRI shows bilateral asymmetrical dilatation University Hospital Department of Pathology, Kaunas, Lithuania. of lateral ventricles, periventricular leukomalacia, and hypoplasia of Achondrogenesis is a rare disorder subtyped according to radiologic corpus callosum. The karyotype is normal. The father has a hairless and histopathologic characteristics. The are three subtypes of achon- scar over his posterior scalp. Father’s father presented cutis aplasia drogenesis: achondrogenesis type 1A , achondrogenesis type 1B and and nail dystrophy. achondrogenesis type 2 .Within the achondrogenesis group, clinical Discussion: Variable clinical expression of the AOS syndrome has been and radiologic distinction between subtypes of achondrogenesis is not reported in the literature. In our patient the combination of aplasia cutis always possible. congenita, distal limb anomalies and transverse dystrophy of the nails We are presenting a case of achondrogenesis type 2/hypochondro- indicated the diagnosis of AOS. A vertical transmission is recognized genesis in Clinics of Kaunas University of Medicine. The diagnosis in this new AOS family, which is consistent with autosomal dominant was confirmed by clinical, radiological and histological data. The pa- inheritance. Our patient presents cardiac defects, which are present in tient was born from the first unaffected pregnancy, 36 weeks gestation approximately 20% of cases. Some affected children have intracranial age. The prenatally preformed ultrasound detected polyhydramnion, anomalies including hypoplasia of corpus callosum, or periventicullar regression of normal genesis of sacrococcygea. Newborn was born leucomalacia, such as in our patient. This may be the result of abnor- hypotrophic, with dysplastic signs: large head, flattened face, small mal small vessel structures manifesting in embryogenesis. narrow eyes openings, short neck and displastic ears. Some skin ar- eas had blisters. After a few day patient dead of pulmonary insuffici- entia. The radiological data was a marked delay in bone maturation Clinical genetics  P0010. Adrenal hypolasia congenita (AHC) in monozygotic In 20% of the cases tested the CBC values were normal after iron twins-a contiguous gene syndrome treatment .Deletions and point mutations were found in reaming 70% E. J. Steichen-Gersdorf1, K. Kapelari1, W. Hoegler1, T. M. Strom2; and in 10% of the cases no known point mutations or deletions were 1Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute of Humangenet- found our. Further investigation should be performed to determine the ics, TU, Munich, Germany. type of mutations in these samples. In cases where MCV were >75 and Mutations in the DAX1 (NR0B1), which is encoded in the Xp21 chro- MCH>25 .only could see a single gene deletion or point mutations(e. mosomal region, can lead to adrenal insufficiency with glucocorticoid g. 3.7 del,4.2 del , 5Nt del or Codon19).For two gene deletions or point and mineralocorticoid deficiency. These mutations also cause hypogo- mutations (i.e. 20.5 and Med deletion) MCV and MCH were always nadotropic hypogonadism, which is consistent with the expression of less than 75, 25 respectively. DAX1 in the hypothalamus and pituitary. DAX1 belongs to the nuclear receptor family and acts with a number P0013. Late diagnosis of alpha-mannosidosis in four adult of transcription factors in a transcription regulatory network under its patients. control. L. Pinson1,2, P. Blanchet1, C. Abadie1, C. Coubes1, P. Sarda1, A. Guichet2, C. In some patients the deficiency is part of an Xp21 contiguous gene Verny3, D. Bonneau2; deletion The deletion extends proximal and distal to the DAX1 gene. 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Montpellier, France, 2Service de Géné- (Gene order Xper...IL1RAPL1- DAX1-GK_DMD... Xcen.) tique Médicale, CHU, Angers, France, 3Service de Neurologie, CHU, Angers, Usually there is considerable phenotypic variability associated with France. DAX1 mutations even within the same family. This is due to genetic Alpha-mannosidosis is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage and environmental influences. disease characterised by accumulation of oligosaccharides in various We report on monozygotic twins with a contiguous gene syndrome, tissues. A continuum of phenotypes has been described ranging from who presented with an identical clinical course. The male twins were severe infantile forms through milder forms with survival into adult- born to a 23 years old mother with low normal IQ. Caesarean sec- hood. tion was performed at 36/6 weeks (BW 1st twin 2580g, BW 2nd. twin We report four individuals (18- to 38-year-old) from two unrelated and 2090g) non consanguineous Caucasian families. Both twins developed a moderate respiratory distress syndrome and In the first family a brother and sister share common features: mild were on CPAP for 4 days. Within the second week of life they pre- mental retardation, late deafness, malar hypoplasia and minor radio- sented with feeding problems, lethargy and weakness - adrenal insuf- graphic skeletal abnormalities. ficiency was diagnosed. The adrenals were severeley hypoplastic on Although the brother and sister have similar IQs, the girl’s clinical his- ultrasound. tory reveals earlier and more severe onset of neurodevelopmental Genetic investigation revealed a large deletion of at least 3Mb com- retardation. At the time of examination the patients do not have char- prising the IL1RAPL1, DAX1, GK (Glycerol kinase), and the distal part acteristic coarse features. of the DMD gene. The deletion is one of the largest ever reported. The girl of the second family has skeletal symptoms including focal lytic vertebral lesions on X-Rays, mild mental retardation and malar P0011. Molecular analysis in two siblings African patients hypoplasia. She had early hearing loss. Her brother has severe devel- with severe form of Hunter syndrome: Identification of a novel opmental delay in addition to progressive cerebellar dysfunction. He is (p.Y54X) nonsense mutation living in an institute and was unavailable for examination. L. Mutesa1, N. Muganga2, W. Lissens3, F. Boemer1, R. Schoos1, G. Pierquin1, In all individuals the diagnosis of alpha-mannosidosis was based on V. Bours1; reduced leucocyte alpha-mannosidase activity and confirmed by mo- 1University of Liège, Liège, Belgium, 2National University of Rwanda, Kigali, lecular study of the LAMAN (MAN2B1) gene in the first family. Rwanda, 3Dutch-speaking Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium. This report brings out the wide variability in age of onset, rate of pro- Hunter syndrome (or Mucopolysaccharidosis type II, MPS II) is an gression and severity of this storage disease. Owing to unusual clinical X-linked recessive disorder due to the deficiency of the iduronate- course or absence of striking symptom pattern, alpha-mannosidosis 2-sulfatase (IDS) enzyme, resulting in the accumulation of heparan may be under diagnosed. Consequently, one should consider the pos- and dermatan sulfates in the lysosomes. The heterogeneity of clinical sibility of alpha-mannosidosis, especially when confronted with pro- phenotypes, ranging from mild to severe forms, is a result of different gressive deafness in adults with mental deficiency. mutations in the IDS gene. We report here a novel nonsense mutation (p.Y54X) in two siblings MPS II African patients affected with a severe P0014. Further evidence that D90A mutation is recessively form of the disease. We postulated that the p.Y54X mutation which inherited in ALS patients in Southern Italy causes a loss of the IDS region highly conserved among sulfatase T. Sprovieri1, R. Mazzei1, C. Ungaro1, A. Tessitore2, G. Tedeschi2, A. Patitucci1, enzymes, could be predicted as a severe disease-causing mutation A. Magariello1, A. L. Gabriele1, V. Labella3, I. L. Simone4, G. Maiorana5, P. Val- for Hunter syndrome. entino6, M. Muglia1, F. L. Conforti1; 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), P0012. Alpha-Thalassemia prevalence and hematological Italy, 2Second Divison of Neurology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy, findings in Iranian population 3Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, V. Lotfi1,2, H. Hanaee1, P. Fouladi1,2, A. Fahim1, M. Feizpour1, S. Foroghi1, F. 4Department of Neurological and Psychiatric Sciences, University of Bari, Bari, Molazadeh1, S. Zeinali1,3; Italy, 5Department of Neurosciences Psychiatric and Anaesthesiological Sci- 1Medical Genetics Lab of Dr Zeinali, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Young ences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 6Institute of Neurology, University Researchrs Club of research and science branch of Islamic Azad University, Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Biotechnology Pasteur Institu- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), a fatal adult-onset motor neu- tion of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ron degeneration is caused by mutations in the Cu/Zn superoxide dis- Thalassemia is the most prevalent monogenic disorder in the world. mutase (SOD1) gene. All the SOD1 mutations are autosomal domi- This paper reports our experience of molecular screening of α-thalas- nantly inherited with the exception of D90A, very frequent in Scandi- semia as a part of thalassemia prevention program in Iran. To deter- navian population, that can act as recessive. Only few cases of D90A mine statues type (α or β thalassemia) we performed a total of 750 heterozygous ALS in non-Scandinavian patients have been reported, couples at risk for thalassemia. Those couple with low MCV (<80), low all of them inherited as dominant trait. In Italy, only two sporadic ALS MCH (<27) and normal A are most probably α-thal carriers. To investi- cases carrying the D90A mutation have been reported in homozygous 2 gate α-globin genes mutations we can either test for deletions or point state. The aim of this study is to investigate the presence of D90A mu- mutations. Deletions can be detected by Multiplex gap PCR and point tation in ALS patients in Southern Italy. One hundred and fifty-four ALS mutation by ARMS PCR or DNA sequencing. patients (8 familial and 146 sporadic cases) from Southern Italy were DNA samples are usually tested for deletions like 3.7, 4.2, 20.5kb and screened for SOD1 mutations in exon 4 by standard procedures. In our Med deletions by multiplex PCR. The samples subjected to point mu- study, of 154 cases investigated three ALS patients with mild pheno- tation tests such as point mutation in polyA (2 types), Codon19, 5Nt type showed the homozygous D90A mutation in SOD1 gene. Two out Del, Constant Spring, if no deletion detected in previous tests. of three patients were familial cases and the remaining patient was an Clinical genetics  apparently sporadic case. We also screened the available members of counselling, and subsequent management. one of the FALS cases. In this family we identified an affected and an unaffected individual carrying the D90A mutation in homozygous and P0017. Androgen receptor gene mutations in 46, XY females heterozygous state respectively. According to previous data that re- M. D. Omrani, S. Saleh-Gargari; ported for all D90A homozygous ALS patients a phenotype character- Uromieh Medical Science University, Uromieh, Islamic Republic of Iran. ized by slow progression of the disease, also our patients show a mild The androgen insensitivity syndrome is a heterogeneous disorder with phenotype with a prolonged survival. In conclusion, our study provides a wide spectrum of phenotypic abnormalities, ranging from complete further evidence that D90A is an autosomal recessively inherited muta- female to ambiguous forms that more closely resemble males. The tion in ALS patients in Southern Italy. primary abnormality is a defective androgen receptor protein due to a mutation of the androgen receptor gene. This prevents normal andro- P0015. High level of hypermetabolism in patients with familial gen action and thus leads to impaired virilization. A point mutation of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis the androgen receptor gene affecting two siblings with complete an- B. Funalot1,2, J. C. Desport3, M. Lacoste1, F. Sturtz2,4, P. Couratier1; drogen insensitivity syndrome is described. On examination they both 1Dept of neurology, Limoges, France, 2EA4021 Faculté de médecine, Limoges, had normal external female genitalia. France, 3Nutrition unit, Limoges, France, 4Dept of biochemistry and molecular Genomic DNA was extracted from EDTA-preserved blood samples genetics, Limoges, France. and isolated according to standard procedures. The androgen recep- An abnormally elevated level of resting energy expenditure (REE, tor gene was screened for mutations using an automated sequence measured by indirect calorimetry) has been reported in a subset of analyzer (ABI Prism 310). Both girls possess one substitutions (G>A patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Hypermetabolism at position 2086 in exon 4), leading to D695N mutation. Mother was (measured REE/calculated REE ≥ 1.1 or 110%) was found in 42/62 found to be a heterozygous carrier for this mutation. GTG banded ALS patients in a previous study. Interestingly, hypermetabolism has karyotype of the girls showed they both have male karyotype (46, XY). also been observed in transgenic mice harbouring ALS-causing mu- In addition, the SRY gene screening showed they both have intact tations in the SOD1 gene. We tested whether patients with familial SRY gene. The labioscrotal folds contained palpable gonads measur- ALS (FALS) had a REE level differing from patients with sporadic ALS ing 1.5 cm in largest diameter. Ultrasound examination of the pelvis (SALS). Eleven patients with FALS (from ten different families, all neg- revealed absence of the uterus. ative for the screening of SOD1 mutations by direct sequencing) who Serum follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), had performed an indirect calorimetry in our centre during the last sev- and testosterone values were higher than normal range. en years were compared with 33 SALS patients matched for age and To our knowledge this is the first confirmed instance of AIS due to an sex. 11/11 (100%) patients with FALS were hypermetabolic, compared AR mutation occurring in familial cases in this country. Furthermore, with 17/33 (52%) patients with SALS (p=0.009). The mean level of the phenotype has complete association with this mutation. hypermetabolism was significantly higher in FALS patients (124±8%) than in SALS patients (113±12%, p=0.01). Subjects with FALS are P0018. Aniridia in a three-generation family supposed to carry mutations or strong genetic risk factors predispos- C. C. Albu, E. Severin, D. Albu; ing to the disease, which may also be responsible for the higher REE Carol Davila Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. observed in these patients. In the absence of infection, inflammation or Background: Aniridia is a rare development eye anomaly.As an isolated hyperthyroidism, the observed hypermetabolism is likely to result from ocular abnormality, aniridia is an autosomal dominant disorder. Clinical mitochondrial uncoupling. Several other lines of evidence support the phenotypes of aniridia are associated with PAX6 mutations. We report occurrence of a mitochondrial dysfunction in the course of ALS. Our a case of aniridia in a three-generation family in which the proband results suggest that this mitochondrial dysfunction may be genetically has a severe ocular phenotype similar to her maternal grandmother. driven in patients with FALS and could therefore be directly involved in Objectives: to describe and compare clinical manifestations of aniridia the pathogenesis of FALS. in younger and older generations; to study the intrafamilial variability of aniridia and management implications. Patients and Methods: A three- P0016. Phenotypic diversity in androgen insensitivity syndrome: generation Caucasian family with aniridia was investigated. Four of About two families the family members (a one-year-old girl, her mother, her maternal aunt F. Kallebi1, M. Fourati2, D. Sallemi2, R. Frikha1, T. Rebai1, N. B. Abdelmoula1; and her maternal grandmother) were affected and expressed variable 1Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Private sector, Sfax, Tunisia. ocular phenotypes. Evaluation included physical examination and a The androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS), a rare X-linked disorder detailed medical history and family history. Genomic DNA was isolated caused by defects in Androgen Receptor (AR). Variable phenotypic ex- from affected individuals (clinically diagnosed aniridia) and analyzed pression has allowed the classification of AIS into complete and partial by PCR. Results: The clinical expression of aniridia was variable in this forms. Mutational screening of the AR gene have revealed over 300 family: bilateral complete or partial aniridia, unilateral complete aniridia mutations. and iris coloboma. Aniridia was associated with other ocular defects: Here, we describe pedigrees of two families with three affected sub- cataract, glaucoma, nystagmus, amblyopia and strabismus. The fam- jects. Pedigrees patterns were consistent with X-linked recessive in- ily pedigree showed an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance with heritance. Index cases were referred to our consultation at adult age complete penetrance and variable expressivity. The patient and her for genetic counselling. grandmother shared similar phenotype (more severe than their rela- At the first family, a 28 year old female consults because primary tives). All cases were defined by clinical signs. All cases had the same amenorrhea and hirsutism. She had a blind vaginal pouch without PAX6 mutations.Conclusions: aniridia appears as a hereditary condi- uterus. Abdominal surgery with bilateral gonadectomy was done at tion with clinical variation; molecular-genetic data should be integrated age 18 years but histology report was not available. Two nieces have with the corresponding clinical findings; all patients with aniridia should an inguinal hernia with an apparently female phenotype. Karyotype be evaluated by an ophthalmologist and a geneticist. of 3 patients reveal a 46,XY formula and diagnosis of Complete AIS was done. P0019. SOX2 anophthalmia syndrome: point mutations, large At the second family, a 31 and 32 year old cousins had under mas- deletions and a broader phenotype. culinised external genitalia, pseudofemale hairless and breast devel- N. K. Ragge1, P. Bakrania1, D. J. Bunyan2, A. Salt3, A. Martin1, J. A. Crolla2, A. opment. Gonads were absent even after chirurgical exploration. The Wyatt1, A. Fielder4, J. Ainsworth5, A. Moore3, D. Laws6, D. Pascuel-Salcedo7, C. nephew of the first patient has ambiguous genitalia. A male karyotype Ayuso8, L. Allen9, J. Collin3, D. O. Robinson2; was revealed for the three cases and diagnosis of incomplete AIS was 1University of Oxford,Dept of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, Oxford, done. United Kingdom, 2Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District AR molecular investigation are conducted. Correlation between the Hospital, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 3Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United phenotypic features and the abnormalities identified on mutational Kingdom, 4Western Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5Dept. of Ophthal- analysis of the AR gene will be discussed. mology, Birmingham Children’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6Single- We emphasize through this report the need for accurate and early di- ton Hospital, Swansea, United Kingdom, 7Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, agnosis of AIS which govern bearing on the sex of rearing, genetic 8Fudacion Jiminez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 9Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, Clinical genetics 0 United Kingdom. tures telomere shortening. SBDS is thought to function in fundamental, Developmental eye anomalies including anophthalmia or microphthal- nucleolar-localized cellular processes. We therefore hypothesized that mia (AM) occur in around 2-3 per 10, 000 children and are responsible SBDS may participate in telomere repair and that its mutation predis- for approximately 25% of childhood severe visual impairment. Hetero- poses to acquired AA. We report heterozygosity for the 258+2 T→C zygous mutations in the SOX2 gene, a SOX1B-HMG box transcription SBDS mutation (commonly found in SDS patients) in 4 of 91 patients factor, have been identified in around 10% of individuals with severe with acquired AA but not in 276 ethnically-matched controls (P=0.0037, microphthalmia or anophthalmia associated with a range of non-ocu- Fisher’s exact test). Affected patients had reduced SBDS expression lar abnormalities, principally motor, speech and developmental delay, but no evidence of the pancreatic failure or skeletal abnormalities seizures, and hypothalamo-pituitary abnormalities. SOX2 is therefore typical of SDS. Telomeres in AA SBDS+/- patients’ granulocytes were the most common causative gene for AM identified to date. We have significantly short in comparison to age-matched controls and even screened a new cohort of 95 patients with congenital eye abnormali- shorter in SDS (SBDS-/-), inversely correlating in length with SBDS ties, mainly anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma, for SOX2 expression. Increased telomere length heterogeneity was found cor- mutations. Ten cases with mutations were identified, 5 with intragenic related with SBDS mutations in both acquired AA and SDS. This char- mutations creating premature translational stop codons and 5 with acteristic has previously been observed in activation of the pathway deletion of all or part of the SOX2 gene. The 5 deletion cases were of alternative telomere lengthening. However, telomerase activity of identified by MLPA analysis of a subgroup of 47 patients with severe patients’ lymphocytes was comparable to controls and no physical in- AM. Four were deleted for the whole SOX2 gene and one had a partial teraction between SBDS and telomerase complex components (TERT gene deletion. In two of these FISH analysis identified sub-microscop- and TERC) was indentified. These data indicate that heterozygosity for ic deletions involving a minimum of 328Kb and 550Kb of DNA. The the 258+2 T→C SBDS mutation is a risk factor for apparently acquired SOX2 phenotypes include a patient with anophthalmia, oesophageal AA by causing hastened telomere shortening via a telomerase-inde- abnormalities and horseshoe kidney, and a patient with a retinal dys- pendent mechanism. trophy implicating SOX2 in retinal development. Our results provide further evidence that SOX2 haploinsufficiency is a common cause of P0022. Application of HR-CGH and Chromosomal Microarray severe developmental ocular malformations. Given the high incidence Analysis (CMA) in the Cohort of 112 Patients with Mental of whole gene deletion we recommend that all patients with severe Retardation. microphthalmia or anophthalmia are screened by MLPA and FISH for B. Nowakowska1,2, E. Bocian1, P. Stankiewicz1,2, M. Smyk1, E. Obersztyn1, Z. SOX2 deletions. Ou2, J. Li2, K. Borg1, S. Cheung2, T. Mazurczak1; 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, P0020. Additional defects in congenital anorectal malformations 2Baylor College of Medicine, Dept. of Molecular & Human Genetics, Houston, M. Roth, Y. Alembik, B. Dott, C. Stoll; TX, United States. Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France. Advances in molecular cytogenetics enable detection of small chromo- Patients with congenital anorectal malformations (CAM) often have somal aberrations in 5-20% of patients with mental retardation (MR). other associated congenital defects. The reported incidence and the The aim of this study was to compare two genome-wide screening types of associated malformations vary between different studies. The techniques, high-resolution CGH (HR-CGH) and targeted array CGH, purpose of this investigation was to assess the prevalences at birth termed also Chromosomal Microarray Analysis (CMA). In contrast to of associated malformations in patients of a geographically defined conventional CGH, HR-CGH enables genome-wide screening for DNA population with CAM which were collected between 1979 and 2003 in copy-number changes with 3-5 Mb resolution. Array CGH is a new 334,262 consecutive births. Of the 169 patients with CAM during the powerful technology capable of identifying chromosomal imbalances study period, 45.0% had associated malformations.Patients with asso- with the resolution depending only on the size and distance between ciated malformations were further classified into groups with chromo- the arrayed interrogating probes. CMA version 5.0 (853 BAC/PAC somal abnormalities,and malformation syndromes,including Townes- clones) enables detection of DNA copy-number changes in more than Brocks syndrome,Klippel Feil syndrome,Di George syndrome;sequ 60 chromosomal regions of known diagnostic significance and in all ences,including OEIS,Pierre Robin and Prune belly sequences;and subtelomeric regions in a single test. In this study, we analyzed 112 associations including VATER(13 patients) and MURCS associations, patients with unexplained MR and other features suggestive of chro- Malformations of the urogenital system and of the skeletal system mosomal abnormality, with apparently normal or balanced karyotypes were the most common other anomalies in multiply malformed pa- using HR-CGH (35 patients) and/or CMA (92 patients). HR-CGH de- tients without recognized syndromes, followed by malformations of the tected seven interstitial deletions in 35 (20%) patients. CMA revealed cardiovascular system,the digestive system,and the central nervous 34,8% (32/92) abnormalities, among which 11 (11,8%) were clinically system. Weight, length, and head circumference of children with CAM relevant, 19 (20,5%) cases were interpreted as polymorphic variants and multiple associated malformations were lower than in controls, and two (2,1%) were of uncertain significance. HR-CGH and CMA as was the weight of the placenta. Prenatal diagnosis by fetal ultra- findings varied in size between 0.5-12.9 Mb and were all validated sonographic examination was rarely done in isolated CAM. However, by FISH. Our results show that HR-CGH and array CGH techniques even in multiple associated malformations, prenatal diagnosis by fetal have high detection rates of genomic imbalances in the tested groups. ultrasonographic examination had a low sensitivity, 33.9%.In conclu- Both methods have become important components in cytogenetic di- sion the overall prevalence of malformations, which was close to one agnostics, particularly for detecting cryptic constitutional chromosome in two infants, emphasizes the need for a thorough investigation of imbalances in patients with MR, in whom the underlying genetic defect patients with CAMs. A routine screening for other malformations may is unknown. be considered in patients with CAM, and genetic counseling seems warranted in most of these complicated cases. P0023. A boy with a small deletion of chromosome 10p with incomplete Scimitar syndrome and mental retardation P0021. SBDS gene mutations predispose to acquired aplastic C. von der Lippe1, O. Rodningen1, E. Ormerod1, C. B. van der Hagen2, M. anemia by causing telomere shortening of leukocytes Fannemel1, L. Retterstol1; S. A. Graf1,2, R. T. Calado1, S. Kajigaya1, P. M. Lansdorp3, N. S. Young1; 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Ulleval University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Institute 1National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2How- of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. ard Hughes Medical Institute, Research Scholars Program, Bethesda, MD, We present a 3.5 year old boy with cardiopulmonary anomalies and United States, 3University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. mental retardation. Clinical findings include broad short neck, frontal Aplastic anemia (AA), defined as low blood cell counts and a hypo- bossing, low-set ears, skinfolds behind ear helices, high muscular to- cellular bone marrow, can be either acquired or constitutional. Com- nus, height 2.5-10 perc., weight 50 perc., head circumference 25-50 mon to both types are short-for-age telomeres, and mutations to the perc. and bilateral testis retention. He had normal hearing, but no lan- telomerase complex underlie dyskeratosis congenita and some cases guage. There was no history of heart disease or mental retardation in of acquired AA. Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS), a recessive the family. Pregnancy and birth was normal. marrow failure syndrome resulting from mutation to SBDS, also fea- His cardiopulmonary anomalies were consistent with incomplete Scim-Clinical genetics 1 itar syndrome, which is a rare anomaly of pulmonary venous return to P0025. An Unusual Clinical Presentation Accompanying Cardiac, the vena cave inferior. Renal, Neurologic abnormalities with Asplenia Chromosome analysis on routine G-banded chromosomes was nor- S. Unlubay1, O. Cogulu2, A. Alpman2, A. Anik2, A. Aykut2, F. Ozkinay2; mal. 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, However, CGH showed a deletion on chromosome 10(p11.2p12.1). Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Extended G-banding (900 band-level) and array CGH confirmed the Turkey. deletion, and breakpoints were suggested to be (p11.23p12.1). Congenital asplenia is mostly found in association with other anom- Several deletions in the short arm of chromosome 10 have been pub- alies, particularly cardiac, hepatic, renal anomalies, and structural lished in literature and in the ECARUCA chromosome database, but abnormalities of the gastrointestinal tract. It is a feature of a number to our knowledge these deletions are all larger than the deletion our of genetic disorders such as Stormorken syndrome, Kartagener syn- patient has. In addition, all patients described have a more severe phe- drome and particularly asplenia [Ivemark] syndrome. Asplenia syn- notype than our patient. Deletions in the short arm of chromosome drome is the association of congenital absence of the spleen with a 10, at or near 10p13, are associated with a DiGeorge syndrome-like variety of visceral abnormalities, predominantly of the cardiovascular phenotype, DiGeorge 2 syndrome (DGS2). Yatsenko et.al (2004) re- system. The incidence is estimated at 1 in 10.000 to 20.000 live births. viewed 19 patients with deletion in 10p and congenital heart defects We report a 6-month-old female presented with multiple congenital (CHD) and found that atrial septum defect (ASD) is a common cardiac anomalies associated with asplenia and seizures with abnormal EEG anomaly associated with DGS2. Thus, the short arm of chromosome findings. She had macrocephaly, frontal bossing, microphtalmia, blue 10 may comprise one ore more critical regions for normal development sclera, long eyelashes, low set ears, broad base to nose, full cheeks, of the cardiopulmonary system. long filtrum, cleft palate, micrognathia, hypoplastic nails, sacral dimple, skin syndactyly of 2nd,3rd,4th toes. She had a history of an operation for P0024. Arterial tortuosity syndrome: clinical and molecular congenital umbilical hernia after birth in newborn period and seizures. findings in 12 newly identified families Neurologic evaluation revealed motor retardation and hypertonicity. B. L. Callewaert1, A. Willaert1, W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse2,3, J. De Backer1, Magnetic Resonance Imaging showed the cystic changes in germinal K. Devriendt4, B. Albrecht5, M. A. Ramos-Arroyo6, M. Doco-Fenzy7, R. C. M. matrix and agenesis of the corpus callosum. Atrial septal defect and Hennekam8,9, R. E. Pyeritz10, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach11, E. L. Wakeling12, S. Nik- ventricular septal defect were detected in echocardiography. Abdomi- Zainal13, C. Francannet14, P. Mauran15, C. Booth16, M. Barrow17, P. J. Coucke1, nal ultrasound showed hidronephrosis in the left side. Her karyotype B. L. Loeys1, A. M. De Paepe1; and subtelomeric FISH were normal. The combination of asplenia with 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, the anomalies detected in this case can be the variation of one of the 2University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Univer- known asplenia syndromes or a new syndrome. sity of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 4Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Univer- P0026. The MDR1 polymorphism C3435T in bronchial asthma sitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 6S. Genética Médica, Hospital Virgen (BA) and steroid-resistant idiopathic fibrosing alveolitis (IFA) del Camino, Pamplona, Spain, 7Service de Génétique, CHRU Reims, UFR de patients médecine, Reims, France, 8Institute for Child Health, London, United Kingdom, M. Simakova, Z.A.Mironova, V.I. Trofimov, E.D. Iantchina, M.V.Dubina, U.M. 9Academisch Medisch Centrum, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 10Division of Ilkovich; Medical Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, I.P. Pavlov׳ State Medical University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. PA, United States, 11Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig- The objective of this study was to estimate the frequency of polymor- Holstein, Lübeck, Germany, 12NW Thames Regional Genetics Service, Ken- phism C3435T of MDR1 gene occurrence and associations between nedy Galton Centre, Northwick Park and St Mark’s Hospitals, Harrow, United this polymorphism and features of glucocorticosteroids therapy. Blood Kingdom, 13Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrooke’s Hospital NHS samples were taken from 55 asthmatics and 18 patients with steroid- Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 14Service de Génétique Médicale, CHRU resistant IFA. Genotypes were detected by PCR-RLFP. Frequencies Clermont-ferrand, Clermont-ferrand, France, 15Cardiologie Pédiatrique, Ameri- of MDR1 alleles C and T were not different - 0.55 and 0.45 in BA and can Memorial Hospital, CHU Reims, Reims, France, 16Genetics department, 0.53 and 0.47 in IFA, respectively. Distribution of MDR1 genotypes Lutheran General Children’s Hospital, Park Ridge, IL, United States, 17Depart- in BA were CC-36% (n=20), CT-40% (n=22), TT-24% (n=13); in IFA ment of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of Leicester, NHS Trust, Leices- were CC-17% (n=3), CT-72% (n=13), TT-11% (n=2). The frequency of ter, United Kingdom. MDR1 CT genotype was higher in IFA (χ2=8.00, p=0.005). Daily doses Background: Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is a rare autosomal of oral glucocorticosteroids (GC) according to MDR1 genotypes in IFA recessive connective tissue disease, mainly characterized by wide- were: CC-15.0+7,6mg prednisolone, CT-24.6+1.7mg, TT-30+10mg spread arterial involvement with elongation, tortuosity and aneurysms (no significant). Daily doses of inhalation glucocorticosteroids (iGC) in of the large and middle-sized arteries. Recently, mutations were identi- BA group were: CC-955+106mcg, CT-941+113mcg, TT-1057+74mcg, fied in the SLC2A10 gene. This gene encodes the facilitative glucose without significant too. But in patients with BA, which had daily dose transporter GLUT10 and was previously suggested as a candidate of iGC more than 800 mcg, genotype TT was found significantly of- gene for diabetes mellitus type 2. ten, than in patients with smaller dose: 34%(n=13) versus 7%(n=1), Methods: Twelve newly identified ATS families with 16 affected indi- χ2=3,81, p=0,051. viduals were clinically and molecularly characterized. In addition, ex- Consequently, we found significant association of MDR1 CT genotype tensive cardiovascular imaging and glucose tolerance tests were per- with steroid resistant IFA. We assumed that asthmatics with MDR1 TT formed in both patients and heterozygous carriers. genotype needed higher doses of iGC. It is related with possible role of Results and conclusions: All 16 patients harbor bi-allelic mutations in genetic control mechanism in corticosteroids transport from the cell. SLC2A10 and haplotype analysis suggests founder effects for all 5 recurrent mutations. P0027. New genetic variants of complex V,ATPsynthase 6&ATP 6 In this series, patients are significantly older than those previously re- B. I. Radeva, E. Naumova, M. K. Stancheva; ported in literature (p=0.04) and only one affected relative died, most University Children’s Hospital,Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. likely of an unrelated cause. Although the natural history of ATS seems Five new cases of genetic variants of mutation of ATP synthase 6 gene less severe, it does indicate a risk for ischemic events. Two patients were diagnosed with clinical and laboratory methods.The mutations initially presented with a stroke, respectively at age 8 months and 23 were identified by PCR method sequence of mitochondrial regions in years, due to a carotid artery dissection in the former. Tortuosity of the peripheral intravenose blood.The clinical symptoms,which help the di- aorta or large arteries is invariably present in all patients. Two adult agnosis were:microbrachicephaly,muscle hypotonia,normo to areflex- probands have mild aortic root dilation and 8 patients have arterial ia, atrophy nervi optici and etc.The mental retardation was from light stenoses. Heterozygous carriers do not show any vascular anoma- motor retardation to generalized mental retardation. The investigated lies. In 5 unrelated families, HbA1c levels and glucose tolerance tests mutation were unknown up to now and were not registrated in www. are normal in all 6 patients and 8 heterozygous individuals tested. As mitomap.org yet. In the first case: base changes A91355G in ATP-syn- such, overt diabetes is not related to SLC2A10 mutations associated thase 6 gene,C9335T in CO III gene.In second case :base changes with ATS. T8538C MT ATP6gene ,transversion of aminoacid isoleucin / treonin.Clinical genetics 2 In third case : mutation G8494 A in ATP-ase gene and C11674T in ND and Breeding, Veterinary College, Gujarat Agriculture, University, Anand, India, 4 gene . In fourd case G 8573A mutation of ATP -ase 6 region.In ad- 4Department of Dermatovenereology & AIDS Medicine, G.T. Hospital, Grant dition were found two nonsense bases changes .The PCR method for Medical College, University of Mumbai, Mumbai, India, 5Arthritis and Immunol- sequence of mt DNA open new possibility for optimize the diagnosis ogy Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma and treatment of these patients in Clinical genetics. City, OK, United States. Loose anagen hair syndrome (LAHS: OMIM 600628) is a non-in- P0028. Partial duplications of the ATRX-gene cause the ATR-X flammatory hereditary hair disorder characterized by anagen hairs of syndrome abnormal morphology that are easily and painlessly pluckable from B. Thienpont1, T. de Ravel1, H. Van Esch1, D. Van Schoubroeck2, P. Moerman3, the scalp. The hair is usually sparse, thin, slow growing and naturally J. R. Vermeesch1, J. Fryns1, G. Froyen4, C. Badens5, K. Devriendt1; does not grow beyond the nape of the neck. The phenotype has been 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Obstetrics, Leu- recently described and its prevalence is yet to be defined. It affects ven, Belgium, 3Department of Pathology, Leuven, Belgium, 4Human Genome both the genders equally. The condition is usually isolated; however Laboratory, Center for Human Genetics, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for few cases associated with other genetic conditions are also reported. Biotechnology, Leuven, Belgium, 5Centre d’Enseignement et de Recherche en There are several isolated cases and families reported with LAHS. Génétique Médicale, Faculté de médecine, Marseille, France. We have studied one large Indian LAHS pedigree, with an autoso- ATR-X syndrome is a rare X-linked disorder characterized by profound mal dominant mode of inheritance, containing 63 individuals includ- mental retardation, a characteristic face, skeletal abnormalities and ing 22 affecteds (12 males and 10 females). The phenotype appears alpha thalassaemia. We show that some of the patients suspected of to be100% penetrance in this family since no skipping of generation having ATR-X carry do not carry small mutations at the single bp level, was observed. All affected had typical characters of loose anagen hair but instead carry intragenic duplications in the ATRX gene, further ex- syndrome. The expression of the phenotype was an early age of on- panding the spectrum of mutations found in ATRX. We identified such set. A hair pull test of all affected individuals extracted multiple hairs a duplication in two families. easily and painless and there were no sign of scalp inflammation or In the absence of an etiological diagnosis, array CGH analysis was scarring. Light microscopic examination was also consistent with LAS. performed on two siblings. This showed they carry a complex chromo- Majority of the affected members including all females never cut their somal aberration: an intragenic duplication in ATRX and an additional hair, however three males has the history of seldom cutting their hair. duplication upstream of this gene. We show that these duplications Nine patients had an additional clinical phenotype of partial woolly hair lead to an absence of ATRX mRNA and of the protein. and five females had fair hair color. There were no other associated We next extended this observation to a group of 50 patients suspected anomalies observed in this family. Cytogenetic analysis of four affected of having ATR-X but without a detected sequence alteration. Quantita- individuals did not show any abnormality. We are planning to perform a tive PCR screening identified one additional patient, carrying a small high-density genome-wide linkage analysis to identify the responsible intragenic duplication. These findings underscore the need for includ- LAHS susceptibility locus. Email: madam_fille@yahoo.com ing quantitative analyses to mutation analysis of the ATRX gene. P0031. Genetic abnormalities in patients with azoospermia in P0029. Interstitial duplication 15q11-13 in a patient with Asperger ART programs autism and seizures N. V. Zotova, E. V. Markova, N. V. Kazmina, O. A. Serebrennikova, T. A. Zait- B. Oehl-Jaschkowitz1, T. Martin1, E. Goettert1, A. Christmann1, C. Freitag2; seva, A. V. Svetlakov; 1Praxis fuer Humangenetik, Homburg/Saar, Germany, 2Klinik fuer Kinder -und Center for Reproductive Medicine, Krasnoyarsk, Russian Federation. Jugendmedizin, Universitaet des Saarlandes Homburg/Saar, Germany. Azoospermia is the most severe form of male infertility. Thanks to We present a boy who was diagnosed to have Asperger autism at the developing of assisted reproductive techniques (ART) many patients age of 19 years. come to reproductive centers for infertility treatment. Azoospermia may Furthermore the boy suffers from seizures since the age of 16 years. be caused by number of genetic abnormalities. In this study we inves- Intelligence is in normal range. tigated molecular and cytogenetic defects in 57 azoospermia patients The patient finished non-classical secondary school with good marks. (age 31.6±0.7). Azoospermia was defined as the total absence of sper- Afterwards he tried to matozoa in ejaculate even after it centrifugation. DNA was extracted graduate from expert school for social sciences which could not be from peripheral blood. We analyzed 12 mutations of CFTR gene and completed because of his special defects in social competence and 11 STS involving the AZFa, AZFb and AZFc regions using PCR and communication skills, and his deficiency of empathy which, at the end PCR/RELP. The karyotype analyses were performed by GTG-banding of the initiated diagnostic procedure, led to the diagnosis of Asperger technique for at least 12 metaphases of standard lymphocyte culture. autism. In all cases of mosaic forms in karyotype FISH technique was used for Since recent studies (1) were able to show a defined interstitial dupli- 1000 cells. Y chromosome microdeletions were found in six cases of cation of chromosome15q11-13 in a few patients with autism disorder azoospermia men (10.5%): three with AZFc, one with AZFb, and two (1-3%) we investigated this region with respect to this abnormality. with both AZFc and AZFb. Mutations of CFTR gene (only F508del/- We were able to show a duplication of the region of interest with the ) were revealed in 4.4%. Chromosome abnormalities were observed proof of three alleles for the internal markers D15S122, D15S822 and in 21.6% cases, including 47,XXY karyotype in six cases (three of D15S1234. them were mosaic variants). One patient had an XX male syndrome, Furthermore we could confirm this result with FISH using the probe with presence of SRY gene. Two patients had combined defects: one GABRB3 (15q11-12),which showed three signals on meta- and inter- with cytogenetically detected deletion of Y chromosome and AZFb/ phase chromosomes. c microdeletion, and one with both AZFb microdeletion and mosaic Parental investigations (FISH and molecular analysis) were inconspic- Klinefelter`s syndrome. Thus, genetic abnormalities were determined uous. Microsatellite-analysis showed that the duplication did arise from in 32% of azoospermia cases. Genetic testing is necessary to deter- the boy`s maternal chromosome 15, as described in the literature (2). mine aetiology of azoospermia and to choose ART strategies between The proposed mechanism is misalignment in maternal meiotic recom- ICSI with testicular spermatozoa, PGD, or sperm donation. bination. The influence of parental imprinting on phenotype will be discussed; the P0032. Barth syndrome associated with compound hemizygosity variation of the symptoms of the yet published cases will be shown. and heterozygosity of the TAZ and LDB genes A. Brega1,2, N. Marziliano3, S. Mannarino4, L. Nespoli5, M. Diegoli6, M. Pasotti6, P0030. An autosomal dominant loose anagen hair syndrome: C. Malattia5, M. Grasso6, A. Pilotto6, E. Porcu6, A. Raisaro7, C. Raineri8, R. Clinical and genetic analysis Dore9, P. P. Maggio10, E. Arbustini6; S. Ari1, U. Ratnamala1, U. C. Patel2, J. V. Solanki3, D. G. Saple4, S. K. Nath5, U. 1University, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sci- Radhakrishna1; ences, Milan, Italy, 3Centre for inherited cardiovasculat diseases, Foundation 1Green Cross Blood Bank & Genetic Research Centre, Paldi, Ahmedabad, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 4Pediatric Cardiology, Foundation India, 2Departments of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Veterinary College, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 5Pediatric cardiology, Foundation Gujarat Agriculture University, Anand, India, 3Departments of Animal Genetics IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 6Centre for inherited cardiovascular Clinical genetics  diseases, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 7Cardiology, P0034. A case of isolated neonatal hyperinsulinism due to an Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 8Cardiology, Foundation atypical Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 9Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Ra- D. R. Amrom1, J. Wayenberg2, L. Duprez3; diology, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 10Cytogenetic 1Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Hôpital Français Unit, Sacro Cuore di Gesù Hospital, Gallipoli, Italy. - ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Pediatrics, Hôpital Français - ULB, The X-linked recessive Barth syndrome is caused by the Tafazzin Brussels, Belgium, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Hôpital Erasme - ULB, (TAZ) gene mutations and is characterized by dilated cardiomyopa- Brussels, Belgium. thy (DCM) with left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC), neutropenia, Background: The Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an over- skeletal myopathy, abnormal mitochondria and 3-methylglutaconic ac- growth syndrome with macrosomia, visceromegaly, macroglossia and iduria. Autosomal dominant DCM with LVNC has also been associated abdominal wall defects. Many of the affected patients have episodes of with LIM-Domain-Binding-3 (LDB3) gene defects. hypoglycemia during the first days of life. During childhood, a frighten- We describe a family in which the 12-year-old-proband had a past his- ing complication of BWS is the development of specific tumors. BWS tory of LVNC and DCM. His mother had five miscarriages and two is caused by different types of anomalies at the 11p15.5 imprinted lo- postnatal deaths. The proband showed LVNC-DCM, skeletal myopa- cus. thy, recurrent oral aphthae and cyclic neutropenia. The DCM progres- Case report: A female patient was born at 36 weeks by cesarian sec- sively improved with age; medical therapy was discontinued at five tion because of preeclampsia. She was eumorphic, her birth occipito- years of age. At present, LV function is normal and arrhythmias are frontal circumference was 33 cm (P50-P75), weight 3 140 kgs (P90), absent. Cardiac Magnetic Resonance documented LVNC. Oral aph- length 46.5 cm (P50). From day 3, repetitive episodes of severe hy- thae recur, as does cyclic neutropenia. poglycemia occurred, leading to increase the glucose intake up to 12 In the proband we identified two novel mutations, one of maternal ori- mg/kg/min for stabilizing glycemia. At day 15, normoglycemia was ob- gin in the TAZ gene (p.[Glu202ValfsX15]) and one of paternal origin tained by continuous enteral alimentation and diazoxide. As a diffuse in the LDB3 gene (p.[Thr350Ile]). The mother, brother and father are form of hyperinsulinism was evidenced, a subtotal pancreatectomy healthy; the latter two show prominent LV trabeculation without dys- was performed at 2 months of age which was followed by normogly- function. cemia even with normal discontinuous alimentation. There was no or- Expression studies of TAZ and LDB3 genes were performed in fam- ganomegaly. At 6 years of age, neurological assessment was normal ily members and controls. In the proband, brother and father, LDB3 except for cognitive functions with an IQ in the lower normal range and expression was similar to control cases. TAZ and LDB3 expression attention deficit. At 8.5 years, FISH analysis was performed on lym- progressively declined with age in control both blood and myocardial phocytes using the RP11-534I22 probe, containing the IgF2 gene, and samples: only an endomyocardial biopsy performed in the proband at the CDKN1C probe. Using these probes a duplication in the 11p15.5 six months of age, showed significantly lower TAZ and LDB3 expres- region was shown in 50% of patient’s lymphocytes. At 10 years of age, sion than in age-matched myocardial controls. follow up did not reveal any tumoral pathology. The clinical, genetic and expression data support the hypothesis that Conclusions: Neonatal hyperinsulinism could be the only manifesta- tafazzins are essential during fetal and early post-natal life. tion of BWS. P0033. Complex morphological phenotype of a child with Wolf- P0035. Distribution of beta thalassemia mutations in Northern Hirshorn syndrome and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome due to provinces of Iran der(4)t(4;11)(p16.1;p15.3)pat P. Derakhshandeh-Peykar1,2, H. Akhavan-Niaki3, A. Tamaddoni3, S. Ghawidel- A. Lebiedzińska1, T. Eggermann2, P. S. Iwanowski1, B. Krzykwa3, A. Kruczek3, Parsa4, K. Holakouie Naieni5, M. Rahmani2, F. Babrzadeh2, M. Dilmaghani-Za- A. T. Midro1; deh1, D. D. Farhud2; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical Academy, Bialystok, Poland, 2In- 1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dr. stitute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen, Germany, Farhud Genetic Clinic, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetic Laboratory, 3Department of Pediatrics, Polish-American Children’s Hospital, Jagiellonian Amirkola Children Hospital, Babol University of Medical Sciences, Babol, Is- University, Medical Academy, Krakow, Poland. lamic Republic of Iran, 4Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Aria Partial monosomy of the short arm of chromosome 4 has a strong Hospital, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Department of Epidemiology, School effect on phenotype resulting as a rule in the Wolf-Hirschhorn syn- of Public Health and Institute of Public Health Research, Tehran, Islamic Re- drome ( WHS #OMIM 194190) with growth delay, microcephaly, char- public of Iran. acteristic facial appearance, and distinct developmental profile and β-thalassemia is one of the most common autosomal recessive disor- paternal trisomy of 11p can lead to Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome ders in Iran. There are more than two million carriers of β-thalassemia ( BWS, #OMIM 130650) associated with exomphalos, macroglossia, and over 15,000 people affected with β-thalassemia major who live in and gigantism in the neonate. We present an unusual morphological Iran. Prevalent mutations were identified by examining genomic DNAs phenotype in a six months-old boy with 4p monosomy and 11p triso- isolated from 392 blood samples of β-thalassemia carriers from three my resulted from paternal t(4;11)( p16.1;p15.3). Phenotype has been Northern provinces of Iran. Furthermore, 172 pregnant women were described using a catalogue of 807 well-defined traits according the analyzed among couples with a request for PND of β-thalassemia. Al- concept of Stengel-Rutkowski. In order to evaluate the phenotypic im- lele identification was carried out using a routine Reverse Dot Blot, pact of either of the imbalanced segments we used have formulated a ARMS, and genomic sequencing. The most common mutation, IVS spectrum of phenotype traits obtained from analysis of the six children II-I, is followed, in order of frequency by Cd-30, FSC-8-9, FSC-22-24, with simple monosomy 4p16.1→pter, and a spectrum traits from analy- IVS-I-110, IVS-I-5, IVS-II-745, IVS-I-2, FSC-8, IVS-I,3’-end;-25bp, IVS- sis of 11 children with BWS performed by this same method. Among I-1, FSC-36-37, IVS-I-6, FSC-5, -28, Cd-37, IVSII-2,3 (+11/-2), -30, - 58 clinical / developmental and anthropological traits identified in our 88. We have also identified seven rare mutations. The results showed patient 6/17 (35.5%) corresponded to traits of WHS and 17/38 (44.7%) a clear drift in the distribution and frequency of some mutations in of BWS. Unexpectedly quantitative participation of set traits belongs Northern Iran in comparison to a significant different frequency in the to both syndromes were similar. In addition, methylation-sensitive Southern Iran. This is the first report of the β-thalassemia mutation Southern-Blot analyses were performed and hypermethylation in the presentation in three provinces of Northern Iran. These results could imprinting centre region 1 (ICR1) in the telomeric imprinting domain of help with establishing a center for prenatal diagnosis, prevention, and chromosome 11p was found confirming the diagnosis of BWS. To our control of thalassemia in the Northern provinces of Iran. knowledge the phenotype resulting from the unbalanced chromosome translocation der(4)t(4;11)(p16.1;p15.3) has not been hitherto reported P0036. Dental Blaschko Lines in a boy with Triploid/Diploid . mosaicism (BMBF project POL no 03/025 and KBN Polish-German project no K. Ludwig, M. Bordignon, R. Tenconi; 5253) Servizio di Genetica Clinica, Padova, Italy. A 16 year old boy was seen in our clinical genetics unit for further eval- uation after having been diagnosed with Triploid/Diploid mosaicism syndrome at the age of five years. He had a history of mental retarda-Clinical genetics  tion, cardiac malformations, cranio-facial dysmorphisms and pigmen- German, M. Sanz, E. Passarge, unpublished data). The skin manifes- tary skin anomalies following the lines of Blaschko. The chromosomal tations tend to improve with age. We conclude that the phenotype of analysis of peripheral blood cells was normal, but 69,XXY/46,XY mo- Bloom´s syndrome is wider than recorded previously. It remains to be saicism was detected in skin fibroblast culture.A thorough examina- seen whether the molecular type of mutation present in an individual tion of the patient at the age of 16 revealed the usual features typical influences the phenotype. for this type of chromosomal mosaicism (asymmetric face, prominent We thank J. German, N.A. Ellis, and M. Sanz, New York, for coopera- and wide nasal bridge, clinodactyly, mental retardation, hypotonia, tion and mutational analysis. patchy pigmentation and depigmentation of skin, cardiac malforma- tions, and truncular obesity), but also the absence of one of the inferior P0039. Implementation of a new high throughput sequencing incisors and alternating vertical bands of opaque white and translu- service for BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene screening to comply with cent enamel most evident on the central and lateral incisors. These UK Government Genetics White Paper 40 day turnaround time dental abnormalities represent the anatomic equivalent of cutaneous Y. Wallis, N. Motton, N. Morrell, C. Morgan, E. Ormshaw, J. Bell, F. Macdonald; Blaschko lines. Extracutaneous analogies of Blaschko lines have been West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom. described in various organs, such as the brain, bone, lens and teeth. In response to UK Government targets for BRCA gene screening (Ge- These lines do not follow any known nervous, vascular or lymphatic netics White Paper) the West Midlands Regional Diagnostic Genet- structures but do follow and represent the developmental growth pat- ics Laboratory (Birmingham, UK) devised a novel sequencing-based tern of the skin. The embryological basis of these lines has not up to strategy to screen the large BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. The strategy is now been elucidated. plate-based therefore facilitating the use of highly automated process- es. 63 new primer sets were designed to amplify the coding regions of P0037. Blepharophimosis, Ptosis, and Epicantus inversus both BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes simultaneously using a 2-plate system Syndrome (BPES). Clinical study about three cases for each patient panel. Between September 2005 and January 2007 L. I. Butnariu1, C. Rusu1, M. Covic1, V. Gorduza1, L. Trandafir2; a total of 731 diagnostic BRCA reports were issued as a result of the 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr. T. Popa”, Department of Human high throughput sequencing strategy. More than 98% of these reports Genetics, Iassy, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr. T. Popa”, were issued within 40 working days (from the date of sample receipt “Saint Mary” Children Hospital, Iassy, Romania. to date of report authorisation) with an average turnaround time for all BPES is a rare autosomal dominant disease (less than 1:5,000). It is 731 samples of 24.9 days. 79% of samples were reported in less than a complex eyelid malformation invariably characterized by four major 30 days. 128 clearly pathogenic mutations have been identified in ad- features: blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicantus inversus and telecan- dition to 121 missense mutations and other unclassified variants. The thus. There are two types of BPES: type I associate the typical fea- Birmingham lab has also performed a number of follow-up studies to tures with female infertility caused by premature ovarian failure and investigate the pathogenicity of missense and unclassified variants as type II includes only palpebral anomalies. well as undertaking RNA studies to determine the effect on splicing of We present two familial and one sporadic case of BPES. The diagno- deep intronic variants. The high throughput service has been used by sis was based by clinical signs. a number of diagnostic genetics service laboratories and to date 100 Case 1, sporadic, G.L, male, 1 years old. There are no other relatives reports have been issued to them with an average reporting time of affected. We note, normal pregnancy, newborn haemolytic disease, 23 days. This high throughput BRCA sequencing service is available febrile seizures and spastic tetraparesis. Clinical and paraclinic evalu- upon request from the West Midlands Regional Genetics Service. ation revealed: typical BPES features, low-set ears, narrow external auditory meatus, bifid uvula, internal hydrocephaly, atrial septal defect P0040. Familial Breast Cancer With Positive History In Father and developmental delay. And Mother : A Case Report . Case 2, I.B, male, 6 years old, present clinical features of BPES type R. Habibi; I, like his own father; his mother had sensorineural hypoacusy. Other Royan Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. features are tall stature, sparse hair, normal intelect. There are no Background: A family history of breast cancer in a first-degree relative other relatives affected. is reported in 13% of women with the disease. In turn, over 87% of Case 3, A.D, female,1 years old, present on clinical evaluation typical women with a family history will not develop breast cancer. However, ocular features, low nasal bridge, low-set ears and normal intelect. The only 1% of women have multiple affected relatives, a history sugges- father and other 7 relatives on paternal side (males and females) have tive of a highly penetrant germ-line mutation. the same features of BPES type I: only males are transmitting, affected The probability of breast cancer associated with a mutation in BRCA1 females are infertile. The karyotype was normal in all three patients. and BRCA2 genes increases if there are affected before menopause In conclusion, we emphasize the importance of the clinical features for and /or have multiple cancers, if there is a case of male, breast cancer, diagnosis, leading further to an apropiate management. or if family members also develop ovarian cancer. BRCA2 is associ- ated more frequently with male breast cancer. P0038. Changes in Phenotype of Bloom´s Syndrome with New Case report: We report a female case of invasive carcinoma who had Manifestations in Adult Individuals 37-year-old, and positive family history with paternal and maternal in- E. Passarge, H. Löser; volvement. She had fibrosis, inflammation, and fact necrosis in right Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. breast that negative for malignancy and also she had invasive carci- Bloom´s syndrome results from autosomal recessive mutations in the noma in left breast. For left breast, lumpectomy was performed . BLM gene located on human chromosome 15 at 15q26.1, encoding Conclusions: First, in such a cases probability of the BRCA1 muta- a DNA helicase with homology to RecQ in E. coli (MIM 210900). Its tion increases and BRCA2 mutation is possible. Then screening for phenotype includes (i) pre- and postnatal growth retardation, (ii) fa- these genes should be performed for them and the other members cial features with dolichocephaly and a narrow face, (iii) light-sensitive of relatives and genetic counseling is required, and as soon as clini- facial telangiectasia in most patients, (iv) manifestations of genomic cal approach for other related cancers may be performed. Second, instability as revealed by a 10-fold increase of spontaneous sister also other nongenetic causes in such a family may predispose cancer chromatid exchanges, breaks and homologous exchanges between susceptibility . chromosomes, and an increased rate of somatic mutations. Affected individuals develop similar types of cancer as in the population, but at a much younger age (about 1 in 4). We have observed the natural history in 15 individuals with Bloom´s syndrome during the past 38 years in Germany. We found that the phenotype in adult individuals becomes less distinctive with age than it is in children. In spite of per- sistent feeding difficulties, such as lack of appetite or regurgitation, adult individuals tend to gain weight. A new finding is development of diabetes mellitus type 1 or type 2. This has been observed in 27 of 117 patients (23%) of individuals in the Bloom´s Syndrome Registry (J. Clinical genetics  P0041. The first evidence of a pathogenic insertion in the Children’s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia. NOTCH3 gene causing CADASIL The 22q11.2 microdeletion is one of the most common human micro- C. Ungaro1, F. L. Conforti1, D. Guidetti2, M. Muglia1, A. Patitucci1, T. Sprovieri1, deletion syndromes. It is usually diagnosed by FISH analysis using TU- G. Cenacchi3, A. Magariello1, A. L. Gabriele1, L. Citrigno1, R. Mazzei1; PLE1 probe at 22q11.2 and N85A3 clone control probe at 22q13.3. 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), This study includes 335 patients investigated for CATCH22 microdele- Italy, 2UOC di Neurologia, Ospedale di Guglielmo di Saliceto, Piacenza, Italy, tion by FISH analysis during 2000-2007. In 19 patients abnormal find- 3Department of Radiological and Istocytopathological Sciences, Section of ing was found (6%). Fifteen patients had classical 22q11.2 microde- Pathology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. letion (79%), in 4 cases other abnormalities were found (21%). Two CADASIL is an autosomal dominant disorder leading to cognitive de- had 22q11.2 microduplication, one had 22q13.3 deletion and in one cline and dementia caused by mutations in NOTCH3 gene. These 22q13.3 duplication was diagnosed. highly stereotyped mutations are located within the 22 exons, encoding In patients with 22q11.2 deletion the indications for FISH investigation for the extracellular domain of the Notch3 receptor, all mutation result- were classical: heart anomaly with different additional problems; 3 had ing either in a gain or loss of a cysteine residue. It has been suggested typical facial phenotype with cleft palate or immunological problems that the unpaired cysteine residue might cause aberrant interaction only. In the patient with 22q13.3 deletion (developmental delay and of the Notch3 receptor with its ligands. Here we report the case of a muscular hypotonia) the main indication for FISH analysis was the patient with clinical and radiological findings consistent with CADASIL cleft palate in his mother. Similarly, a patient with 22q13.3 duplication having distinctive GOM deposits in her skin biopsy. We examined the (developmental delay and abnormal face) had heart anomaly in one exons of NOTCH3 gene in this patient and we found a novel NOTCH3 sister. Two patients with 22q11.2 duplication in one family had minor gene mutation consisting in a 3 base pair insertion in the exon 3. This facial abnormalities and failure to thrive, and were investigated only mutation was not observed in 560 control chromosomes. In the sub- because referral doctor was a cardiologist. None of four patients with ject carrying the mutations in exon 3, no mutation was found in the other abnormalities found had cardiac anomaly. other exons containing EGF-like repeats (exons 2-23), examined with In summary: among the cases with abnormal CATCH22 FISH results both DHPLC analysis and direct sequence. This insertion resulting in we found in 21% other abnormality than classical 22q11.2 microdele- a gain of a cysteine residue together with the neurologic and clinical tion. The indication for FISH analysis in these cases was rather super- phenotype, suggests it is the causative mutation in our patient. The ficial. This shows that the indications should be widened for CATCH22 current findings demonstrate that this insertion of a cysteine residue in FISH analysis: developmental delay only (+/- dysmorphic face, muscu- the NOTCH3 gene can cause CADASIL. This is the first evidence of lar hypotonia or failure to thrive). a pathogenic insertion found in a CADASIL patient, and it is important to confirm the hypothesis that the change toward an unpaired reactive P0044. Caudal duplication syndrome with unilateral hypoplasia cysteine residue within EGF repeat domains is a very critical molecular of the pelvis and lower limb and ventriculo-septal heart defect event in CADASIL. K. Becker1, K. Howard1, D. Klazinga2, C. Hall3; 1North Wales Clinical Genetics Service, Glan Clwyd Hospital, Bodelwyddan, P0042. Association of MTHFR gene polymorphism C677T with Rhyl, United Kingdom, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Glan Clw- dilated cardiomyopathy and severe LV hypertrophy yd Hospital, Bodelwyddan, Rhyl, United Kingdom, 3Department of Radiology, R. Valiev1, A. Pushkareva2, R. Khusainova1, N. Khusnutdinova1, G. Enikeeva2, Great Ormond Street Hospital For Sick Children, London, United Kingdom. G. Arutunov3, E. Khusnutdinova1; Dominguez et al. (1993) reported six cases with caudal duplication 1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State syndrome and reviewed eight reports from the literature. Kroes et al. Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Russian State Medical University, (2002) reported another two cases, including discordant monozygotic Moscow, Russian Federation. twins. The phenotypic spectrum encompasses gastrointestinal anom- Cardiomyopathies are heart-muscle diseases of unknown cause. alies (intestinal duplication including double appendix, anal duplica- There are several theories of cardiomyopathies origin, including auto- tion, small bowel atresia or webs, intestinal malrotation, imperforate immune hypothesis. In our study we investigated three known genetic anus, omphalocele, esophageal cysts), genitourinary tract anomalies polymorphisms in MTHFR, TNFa and TNFb genes in patients with dif- (duplication of external genitalia, vagina, bladder, urethras, cervix and ferent cardiomyopathies and controls (N=200). All patients have been uterus, single pelvic or malrotated kidney) and abnormalities of the divided into three groups - dilated cardiomyopathy (ejection fraction 20- spinal cord. We report a 22 year old female with caudal duplication 45%, N=83), moderate left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy (wall thickness syndrome, who in addition to intestinal duplication, imperforate anus, a less than 1,5 mm, N=79) and severe LV hypertrophy (wall thickness dydelphic uterus and a single kidney also had a VSD and hypoplasia of more than 1,5 mm, N=118). MTHFR, TNFa and TNFb genotypes were the left pelvis, leg, labia majora and left side of a duplicated vagina. determined by polymerase chain reaction with subsequent restriction fragment length polymorphism technique. There were no differences P0045. Forget the classic CDG phenotype; a broad spectrum of in TNF (alpha and beta) allele frequencies between studied groups congenital anomalies in CDG type II and controls (p>0,05). Significant differences in C677T (MTHFR) al- E. Morava1, R. Zeevaert2, M. Guillard1, D. Lefeber1, R. Wevers1; lele frequencies distribution have been found between patients with 1UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2UMC Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. dilated cardiomyopathy and controls (chi2 test with Yets’s correction CDG type Ia, the most common form of Congenital Disorders of Gly- =5,4; df=1, p=0,024) as well as between severe LV hypertrophy and cosylation presents with characteristic symptoms of hypotonia, strabis- controls (chi2 test with Yets’s correction =6,6; df=1, p=0,0109). Geno- mus, arachnodactyly, cerebellar hypoplasia, abnormal lipid distribution type TT of MTHFR polymorphism have been associated with severe and gastrointestinal, endocrine and coagulation abnormalities. LV hypertrophy development (odds ratio = 3,15; [95% CI 1,04 - 9,86]). Patients with CDG type II, diagnosed with a glycosylation disorder due There was no correlation between C677T allele frequencies and pa- to Golgi dysfunction and abnormal transferrin isoelectric focusing in tients with moderate LV hypertrophy. Despite association with other blood, have very different clinical features. Mutations in COG7, coding heart dysfunction diseases, neither TNFa nor TNFb are related with for one of the 8 subunits of the Conserved Oligomeric Golgi complex, cardiomyopathy. MTHFR point mutation (cytosine to thymine substitu- lead to a new clinical syndrome of growth retardation, severe progres- tion; C677T) is a known risk factor for many cardiovascular diseases, sive microcephaly, adducted thumbs, gastrointestinal pseudo-obstruc- including atherosclerosis, heart attack and peripheral arterial disease. tion, cardiac anomalies, wrinkled skin and episodes of extreme hyper- Our data shows a possible role of C677T polymorphism in develop- thermia. Features in COG1 deficient patients include hypotonia, de- ment of dilated cardiomyopathy and severe LV hypertrophy. velopmental delay, ventricular hypertrophy/cardiac dysfunction and a rhizomelic short stature. The single patient described so far with COG8 P0043. The indications for CATCH22 phenotype FISH analysis mutation showed a phenotype similar to that in mitochondrial disease. should be widened Other defects affecting the biosynthesis of both N- and O- linked gly- K. Õunap1,2, K. Kuuse1, T. Ilus1, K. Muru1, R. Zordania3, K. Joost3, T. Reimand1; cosylation with hyposialylation include a new subtype of autosomal 1Medical Genetics Center, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, recessive cutis laxa syndrome with neonatal cutis laxa, microcephaly Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Tallinn with large fontanel, hypotonia and failure to thrive. Despite the clinical and biochemical diagnosis in an increasing number of patients with Clinical genetics  this form of CDG type II the gene defect has not been discovered yet. P0048. Brain imaging in patients with KRAS, BRAF and MEK Based on the recently defined clinical syndromes with N- and O-linked mutations glycosylation defects one should consider the diagnosis of Congenital C. Nava1, C. Michot1, N. Hanna2, S. Pereira1, B. Parfait2, J. Elion1, A. Verloes1, Disorders of Glycosylation in patients with a broad spectrum of differ- H. Cavé1; ent features, including pachygyria, hypotonia with adducted thumbs, 1department of genetics APHP hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Inserm cutis laxa, cardiac and cranio-skeletal anomalies. U745, Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Université Paris V, Paris, France. P0046. Neurological manifestations of the Cardio-facio- Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC) is a severe developmental cutaneous Syndrome (CFC) disorder clinically related to Noonan syndrome and Costello syndrome G. Yoon1, J. Rosenberg1, S. Blaser1, K. Rauen2; (CS), which has been recently linked to mutations in 4 genes of the 1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of California San Fran- RAS/MEK/ERK signaling pathway. Developmental delay is frequent in cisco, San Francisco, CA, United States. those diseases but abnormalities of brain imaging aren’t often report- The cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC) is a multiple congenital ed in these patients. In this study, we performed mutation analysis of anomaly disorder characterized by craniofacial dysmorphia, ectoder- KRAS, BRAF, MEK1, and MEK2 in 40 patients with a CFC, 20 patients mal abnormalities, congenital heart defects, developmental delay and with a CS without HRAS mutations, and 82 patients with NS without growth retardation. Neurological complications associated with CFC PTPN11 mutations. We found 22 BRAF mutations, 7 KRAS mutations, remain to be clearly defined. Recent discovery of causative mutations 11 MEK1 mutations, and 5 MEK2 mutations. 21/45 patients with a mu- in the MAPK pathway now permit accurate molecular diagnosis of tation had a brain imagery. It was abnormal in 11/21 of cases (table 1). CFC. Objective: To characterize the neurological features of patients 5/14 CS with a mutation in KRAS, BRAF or MEK had abnormal MRI (4 with molecularly-confirmed CFC. Methods: Medical records, labora- patients: normal, 5 patients : unrealized). Cerebral malformations were tory and imaging data were reviewed for 37 mutation-positive CFC less frequent in CFC patients (abnormalities in 3/23, 5 normal, 15 un- patients. Patients with a clinical diagnosis of CFC but a negative result realized). 3 patients with NS present a ventricular dilatation associated on mutation screening of the BRAF, KRAS, MEK1 and MEK2 genes with a cerebral atrophy. were excluded from the study. Results: Hypotonia, motor delay, speech Brain abnormalities are frequent in all gene mutated and clinical di- delay and learning disability were universally present in this cohort. agnosis and a brain imaging seems to be justified in medical care of Macrocephaly was present in 59%, ptosis in 50%, strabismus in 64% these patients. and nystagmus in 50% of patients. Corticospinal tract findings were Brain RMI abnormalities in patients with KRAS, BRAF, MEK mutations present in 32% of the group. Ventriculomegaly or hydrocephalus was present in 66% of patients. Other findings on MRI included prominent CFC CS NS Virchow-Robin spaces (19%) and abnormal myelination (13%). Sei- 2 (/3) zures were present in 46% of patients. No specific genotype-pheno- 1(/1) KRAS ventricular dilata- type correlations were observed. Interpretation: Alteration of function ventricular dilatation and (/7) tion and cerebral through the Ras/MAPK cascade has traditionally been associated with cerebral atrophy atrophy oncogenesis. Germline mutations in this pathway have an adverse im- 4 (/5) pact on neurodevelopment, and appear to play an important role in - ocular function, structural brain anatomy and electrical activity. ventricular dilatation BRAF - periventricular grey matter 0 (/3) (/22) heterotopia and thin corpus P0047. BRAF gene mutation in a patient with cardio-facio- callosum cutaneous (CFC) syndrome presenting with lipoma of corpus - ventricular dilatation and callosum, hepatic and renal cysts gyral abnormalities E. Papadopoulou1, S. Sifakis1, K. Gripp2, S. Kirwin2, K. Sol-Church2, D. Stab- 1 (/1) ley2, P. Vorgia1, M. Kalmanti1; MEK1 1 (/2) 0 (/3) ventricular dilata- 1University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece, 2Department of Biomedical (/11) ventricular dilatation tion and cerebral atrophy Research, Nemours’ Children Clinic, Willmington, DE, United States. 2 (/3) Introduction: Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC) is characterized -cerebral atrophy by craniofacial features, cardiac defects, ectodermal abnormalities, MEK2 -tuberous sclerosis and psychomotor delay. It has phenotypic similarities with Noonan and (/5) (Bourneville disease Costello syndromes. associated) Case presentation: a 20-month-old boy, the first child of phenotypically normal parents, who during infancy presented poor suck, and failure to P0049. Contiguous gene deletions involving EFNB1, OPHN1 and thrive. At 20th month of life he presents dysmorphic features, postnatal PRAJA1 in patients with craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS) onset growth deficiency, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hypotonia, and and mild developmental delay mental retardation. Dysmorphic features include relatively large head, I. Wieland1, C. Weidner1, R. Ciccone2, E. Lapi3, D. McDonald-McGinn4, W. downslanting palpebral fissures, broad nasal base, protruding nostrils, Kress5, S. Jakubiczka1, H. Collmann6, O. Zuffardi2,7, E. Zackai4, P. F. Wieacker1; high arched palate, papilloma-lile lesion on midline of the fontal region, 1Institut für Humangenetik, Otto-von-Guericke-Universität, Magdeburg, Germa- deep palmar and plantar creases, sparse curly hair, and hyperexten- ny, 2Institute of General Biology and Medical Genetics, University of Pavia, Italy, sible fingers. Brain MRI reveals a lipoma of corpus callosum. Abdomen 3Medical Genetics Unit, Children’s Hospital AOU Meyer, Florence, Italy, 4Clinical ultrasound shows hepatic and renal cysts. DNA analysis initially per- Genetics Center, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Med- formed excluded Noonan and Costello syndromes. Further examina- izinische Genetik im Institut für Humangenetik, Universität Würzburg, Germany, tion revealed a 770A-G transition in exon 6 of the BRAF gene, predict- 6Kinderklinik und Poliklinik, Universität Würzburg, Germany, 7IRCCS San Mat- ing a gln257-to-arg (Q257R) amino acid change. teo Hospital, Pavia, Italy. Conclusion: CFC syndrome can be caused by gain of function muta- Craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS [MIM 3404110]) is an X-linked tions in 1 of 4 different genes: KRAS, BRAF, MEK1, and MEK2. The malformation syndrome characterized by craniofrontonasal dyspla- protein products of these genes interact in a common RAS/ERK path- sia, body asymmetry, midline defects and abnormalities of the fingers, way that regulates cell differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis. The toes and hair. Unlike classical X-linked diseases, CFNS manifests in mutation found in our patient has been earlier described in 3 unrelated females, whereas male carriers are usually mildly affected. CFNS is CFC patients (BRAF, gln257arg), by Niihori et al. (Nat Genet, 2006). caused by mutations in the EFNB1 gene (MIM 300035) encoding the Hepatomegaly and absence or hypoplasia of corpus callosum has transmembrane ligand ephrinB1 of cognate ephrin (Eph) receptor ty- been described in CFC syndrome. To our knowledge, our patient is the rosine kinases. However, psychomotor delay has been observed only first who presents lipoma of corpus callosum, as well as hepatic and in a few patients. We identified three females with classical CFNS and renal cystic formations. mild developmental delay harbouring de novo deletions of the EFNB1 gene. Applying haplotype analysis, Southern blot hybridisation and array-comparative genomic hybridisation (array-CGH), deletion of Clinical genetics  EFNB1 was found to be part of contiguous gene deletions including in lymphocytes was identified, underscoring the importance of offering oligophrenin-1 (OPHN1, [MIM 300127]), and Praja 1 (PRAJA1, [MIM CHD7 analysis to parents of an affected child. 300420]) in two of the patients. In the third patient EFNB1 gene dele- tion may include deletion of regulatory regions 5’ of OPHN1. Previ- P0052. Interstitial deletion 1p in a child with mental retardation ously, the OPHN1 gene has been shown to be responsible for X-linked and multiple anomalies diagnosed by Array-CGH. recessive mental retardation. Although it is too early to predict the M. Doco-Fenzy1, E. Landais1, C. Leroy1, A. Schneider1, N. Bednarek2, G. mental performance of the two patients with contiguous gene deletion Delebarre2, P. Souchon2, B. Santerne2, M. Viprey1, F. Lefevre3, J. Motte2, D. of OPHN1 - EFNB1 - PRAJA1, psychomotor development is slightly Gaillard1; delayed in one. A mild learning disability has been recognized in the 1Service de Génétique, CHU-Reims, UFR de médecine, IFR 53, Reims, third patient. It is important for genetic counselling to be aware that France, 2Service de Pédiatrie, CHU- Reims, UFR de médecine, IFR 53, Reims, their male offspring may be affected by mental retardation and may be France, 3Service de Chirurgie Pédiatrique, CHU- Reims, UFR de médecine, carriers of CFNS, whereas half of their female offspring will be affected IFR 53, Reims, France. by CFNS and will be carriers for mental retardation. Less than 10 patients were reported with interstitial 1p35 or 1p34 dele- tion. We report the first observation with del(1)(p35.2p34.3). P0050. Charcot-Marie-Tooth phenotypes are defined by The patient was the second child from non-consanguineous parents. the myelin protein zero (P) structure. An analysis of the P During pregnancy ultrasound examination revealed an increased nu- 0 0 extracellular domain chal translucency, fetal bowel hyperechogenicity, oligoamnios and G. J. Braathen1,2, J. C. Sand2, H. S. Vollan3, G. Bukholm1,4, M. B. Russell1,4; abnormal growth parameters. A prenatal karyotype revealed no chro- 1Faculty Division Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, Nor- mosomal abnormality. way, 2Department of Neurology, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Nor- The child was born at 37 WG with birth weight : 2370g (-2SD); length way, 3Institute for clinical epidemiology and molecular biology (Epi-Gen), Ak- : 45cm (-3SD); and OFC: 32cm (-3SD), APGAR score was 7/8/10. ershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway, 4Center of Research, Akershus She showed hypogenitalia and she had a peculiar facial dysmorphism University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway. characterized by microcephaly, flat face, microstomia, hypertelorism, Background. The Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) phenotype caused by narrow and small palpebral fissures, small nose, a Pierre Robin se- mutation in the myelin protein zero (MPZ) gene varies considerably, quence with high arched palate, glossopharyngeal-laryngeal respira- from early onset and severe forms to late onset and milder forms. The tory obstruction, early feeding difficulties, and vagal syncope. Pyloric mechanism is not well understood. stenosis and severe gastro-oesophageal reflux were cured by pylo- Methods. We performed a computational analysis of the myelin protein rotomy realised at 30 days-of-age, and Nissen fundoplication and gas- zero (P) extracellular domain encoded by the MPZ gene. The effects trostomy at 4 months. Thank enteral nutrition, at 23 months, weight 0 of the amino acid change in two novel missense mutations as well as was 13kg (+1.5SD) ; length 83 cm (-0.5SD). mutations in the same or neighboring codons were analyzed. A severe axial hypotonia was present at birth and persisted, seizures Results. The angle between the membrane plane and P extracellu- appeared at 7 month-of-age, a global developmental delay was obvi- 0 lar domain is crucial. Major deviation caused early onset phenotypes, ous at 23 months. Cerebral ultrasound observation and RMI at 1.5 while a minor angle deviation was associated with allelic heterogene- month-of-age, showed abnormal cerebellum and thin corpus callo- ity (CMT type 1 or 2, or distal hereditary motor neuropathy). Mild and sum. major conformational changes resulted in late and early onset phe- A 550 R-band resolution karyotype on blood sample was normal. We notypes, respectively. Conclusions. The phenotypic variation can be used the 1Mb BAC and PAC Array-CGH (VIB Leuven-J.Vermeesch) explained by the structural change of the P extracellular domain. and diagnosed an interstitial deletion in the dark R-region 1p35-p34. 0 This result was confirmed by FISH. Parental karyotypes and FISHs P0051. CHARGE syndrome, searching for the mild end of the were normal. phenotype The results will be detailed and compared to the literature. M. C. J. Jongmans1, L. H. Hoefsloot1, K. P. van der Donk1, R. J. Admiraal1, B. Grant : PHRC-2005-CHU-Reims B. de Vries1, A. Magee2, I. van de Laar3, Y. M. Hendriks4, J. B. G. M. Verheij5, I. Walpole6, H. G. Brunner1, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij5; P0053. An Interstitial Deletion del(10)(q23.32q24.1) In a Mother 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, And Her Two Offspring 2Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom, 3Erasmus Medical Centre, Rot- H. Faghfoury, C. Li; terdam, The Netherlands, 4Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Neth- Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, erlands, 5University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, Toronto, ON, Canada. 6Princess Margaret Hospital, Subiaco, Australia. We describe a previously unreported familial interstitial deletion in a CHARGE syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition, caused by woman and her two pregnancies. This 33-year-old G0P0 woman un- mutations in CHD7. The first reported spectrum of associated features, derwent amniocentesis after a prenatal ultrasound showed findings of later coined by the acronym CHARGE (coloboma, heart defects, cho- increased nuchal translucency and isolated left talipes equinovarus. anal atresia, retarded growth and development, genital hypoplasia, ear The fetal karyotype was found to be 46,XX,del(10)(q23.2q24.1). The anomalies and deafness), was extended by features such as cranial fetus was subsequently miscarried and a maternal karyotype revealed nerve palsy, hypoplasia of the semicircular canals, defects in olfactory the identical interstitial deletion. A subsequent pregnancy produced a bulb development and tracheo-esophageal fistula. Following identifica- son with the same unbalanced karyotype and a solitary right kidney, an tion of the CHD7 gene, we have studied the clinical spectrum of a co- atrioventricular septal defect, and a patent ductus arteriosis. Maternal hort of 47 CHD7 positive patients. Evaluation of this cohort confirmed medical history was significant for right talipes equinovarus, uterine di- the broad clinical variability among CHARGE syndrome patients. delphys, short stature, and mild developmental delay. The mother and Among these first series were two familial cases; a pair of monozygotic child share dysmorphic features that includes microcephaly, a long twin sisters and a sib pair consisting of two affected brothers. Pheno- face, short palpebral fissures, hypotelorism, a widened nasal bridge typic evaluation of these patients revealed a striking intrafamilial vari- with a large bulbous nose, a long philtrum, a large mouth with micro- ability, notwithstanding their identical CHD7 mutations. These findings gnathia, and prominent ears. FISH analysis using a probe for the PTEN prompted us to study more CHD7 positive familial cases in order to gene (10q23.31) was performed on both the patient and her son. No extend our genotype-phenotype studies in CHARGE syndrome. Five deletion was noted in either patient, and their karyotypes were subse- more families were identified. All families were characterized by an quently revised to del(10)(q23.32q24.1). Interstitial deletions involving intrafamilial clinical variability, confirming our previous findings. We en- the long arm of chromosome 10 are rare and there are only three other countered two mutation positive parents of independent families with case reports documenting specific deletions in the chromosome 10q23 very mild manifestations of the syndrome, further widening our knowl- segment. These patients share some features with our cases, but a edge of the mild end of the CHARGE syndrome phenotype. These consistent pattern of clinical features cannot be concluded. mildly affected persons shared the same missense mutation in CHD7, providing the first evidence for a genotype-phenotype correlation in CHARGE syndrome. Up till now, in two parents a somatic mosaicism Clinical genetics  P0054. Population investigation of alpha-1-antitypsin in some the highly conserved Runt domain, abolishing the DNA-binding ability regions of the Azerbaijan Republic of the transcription factor. We report a case presenting with the clas- A. B. Ismayilova; sic phenotype of cleidocranial dysplasia, in which mutation analysis of Baku State University, Baku, Azerbaijan. the RUNX2 gene revealed a previously unreported missense mutation Alpha-1-antitrypsin (α1A) is low molecular protease inhibitor, synthe- (391C>T), that replaces an arginine residue with a cysteine at position sized by liver cells, which destroys neutrophil elastase of lung alveo- 131, in the Runt homology domain of the RUNX2 protein. The muta- lar cells. So far, 90 mutant and normal alleles of the α1A gene are tion occurred the novo, neither of the parents, who were phenotypically known. normal, carried the mutation identified in the patient. We describe our In our researches we have identified α1A phenotypes in healthy per- detailed investigation of the patient, expanding the data related to the sons as well as in patients with lung and liver disease. Capillary blood phenotypic expression of different mutations in the RUNX2 gene. (0,2 ml) with anticoagulation agent-heparin was collected in eppen- dorf tubes. Two regions of Azerbaijan Republic (Siyazan and Kazakh) P0057. Further Expansion of the Behavioral and were involved in population studies. Siyazan area is located 110 km Neurodevelopmental Phenotypic Prensentation of Boys with 49 northward and Qazakh area 450 km west-northward from Baku city. XXXXY ( A variant of XXY) Altogether 897 person’s blood samples were screened. C. A. Samango-Sprouse1, A. Gropman1, S. A. Rosenson2, A. Rogol3; Phenotype testing was carried out by isoelectric focusing (IEF) in thin 1George Washington University, Washington, DC, United States, 2University layer polyacrylamide- ampholine gels (PAAG), pH 4-6. of Texas, Austin, TX, United States, 3University of Virginia, Charlottsville, VA, Three normal phenotypes of PiM alleles were identified in homozy- United States. gous as well as in compound state with frequencies of: M1M2- 32%, This is a comprehensive study completed on a large cohort of boys M1M3-20% and M2M3-12%. The frequency of PiM alleles was : M1- with 49 XXXXY (49XY) describing intact nonverbal IQ and receptive 38%,M2-38% and M3-24%. comprehension skills with severe developmental dyspraxia. 15 boys In six families two types of mutations were defined as with PiZ (6 per- were evaluated using standardized measures by a multi-disciplinary sons) and PiS (4 persons). team including pediatric neurology, genetics, endocrinolgy, develop- IEF method in PAG with pH 4-6 is recommended for identifying pheno- ment, physical therapy and speech/language. types of alpha-1-antitrypsin in population studies. The mean age of the cohort was 37 months with mean birth weight of 5lbs. 7ozs. The average age at the time of diagnosis was 4 mos. Mean P0055. Microstomia- cleft palate: a new syndrome? Nonverbal IQ was 92 with receptive comprehension standard scores S. A. Boyadjiev1, R. Saadeh2, A. Scott2, W. Tian3, A. Mian3, E. Wulfsberg3, T. of 81.7 in contrast to depressed verbal capacities with standard scores Beaty4, C. Vander Kolk5, R. Redett5; of 66.5. There was severe motor praxis deficits with global hypotonia in 1Section of Genetics, Sacramento, CA, United States, 2McKusick-Nathans In- all children. Sensory integration dysfunction was evident. stitute of Genetic Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, These findings describe for the first time intact nonverbal skills and Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Mary- comprehension with severe motor planning deficits in boys with this land, Baltimore, MD, United States, 4Department of Epidemiology, The Johns rare disorder. This study expands the phenotypic presentation of 49 Hopkins University School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5De- XY to include better nonverbal IQ capacities than appreciated previ- partment of Surgery, Division of Plastic Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University ously. Speech is severely delayed secondary to verbal and oral mo- School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. tor dyspraxia. The presence of limb dyspraxia affects graphomotor The unusual combination of extremely small mouth with U-cleft palate function. Behavioral issues were evident in some but not all children. was observed in two unrelated families. While mild micrognatia was These finding support evidence of frontal lobe dysfunction as previ- described in infancy, it was not obvious in later life. In fact, prominent ously demonstrated in boys with XXY. and pointed chin was present in the affected adults. In the first family, Counseling for newly diagnosed families needs to highlight variability a mother and her daughter had these oral anomalies and downslant- of intellectual capabilities, the need for aggressive EI services with di- ing palpebral fisssures. No associated birth defects or delays were rect SPL and OT for motor planning deficits. Further studies are under- present. In the second family, the affected mother had a son and fra- way to further investigate phenotypic variability, MRI abnormalities and ternal twin daughters with the same combination of oral features and the presence of mosiacism in the higher functioning children. brachydactyly and 5th finger clinodactyly. In addition to the oral defects, the youngest boy in this family had craniosynostosis and ureteral ob- P0058. Cockayne Syndrome Type II: a unique phenotype struction resulting in chronic renal failure. Whole-genome genotyping among Druze Population in Northern Israel Caused by a Highly with Illumina 317K SNP Beadchip did not detect chromosomal rear- Prevalent Novel Mutation in the CSB Gene. rangements. The diagnosis of Pierre Robin sequence was considered T. C. Falik-Zaccai1,2, M. Laskar1, N. Kfir1, W. Nasser3, H. Slor4, M. Khayt1; unlikely based on the clinical presentation and extracranial dysmor- 1Istitute of Medical genetics, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel, 2Rappa- phisms. More than 50 syndromes featuring microstomia and cleft port Faculty of Medicine, Technion- Israel Institue of Technology, Haifa, Israel, palate were reviewed and excluded. We propose that this condition 3Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel, represents a new autosomal dominant dysmorphic syndrome. Linkage 4Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of analysis of these and additional families with similar features is likely Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel. to pinpoint the location of a gene essential for proper development of Cockayne Syndrome (CS) (OMIM # 216400) is a rare autosomal re- the oral region. cessive disease characterized by severe growth and developmental retardation, progressive neurological dysfunction and symptoms of P0056. Novel missense mutation: R131C in the RUNX2 gene in a premature aging. The primary cause of the disease is a defect in the case with cleidocranial dysplasia transcription-coupled DNA repair, specifically the Nucleotide Excision V. Belengeanu1, D. Steinberger2, S. Farcaş1, C. Popa1, K. Rozsnyai1, D. C. Repair (NER) pathway. To date, four genes along this pathway CS- Bratu3; A, CS-B, XP-D and XP-G have been reported to be involved in the 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, pathogenesis of CS. Timişoara, Romania, 2Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, We have identified a large, highly consanguineous, Druze kindred Germany, 3Department of Orthodontics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, descended from a single ancestor, with six CS patients. All patients Timişoara, Romania. presented with congenital severe phenotype that includes severe fail- Cleidocranial dysplasia is a skeletal dysplasia characterized by persis- ure to thrive, severe mental retardation, congenital cataracts, loss of tently open or delayed closure of sutures, hypoplastic and/or aplastic adipose tissue, joint contractures, bird-like faces with small, deep-set clavicles, wide pubic symphysis, dental anomalies, and short stat- eyes and prominent nasal bridge, and kyphosis. All patients exhibited ure. The disorder is caused by heterozygous mutations in the CBFA neither language skills nor independent sitting or walking and died by (core binding factor alpha1) gene, also known as RUNX2 (runt-related the age of 5 years. gene 2) on chromosome 6p21, that encodes an osteoblast-specific Cellular studies in patients‘ fibroblasts showed significant defect in transcription factor. Mutations scattered throughout the entire CBFA1 transcription-coupled DNA repair (TCR) and a marked correction of gene have been related to this disorder, however, most of them affect the abnormal cellular phenotype with a plasmid containing the cDNA Clinical genetics  of the CSB gene. Molecular studies that followed led to the identifica- Table 1 Summary of the clinical findings and COH1 detected mutations tion of a novel insertion mutation c.1034-1035insT in exon 5 of the CCalinsiec al findings 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10a 10b CS-B gene. This mutation has been found in 1:20 healthy individuals Sex F M M M M F M M M F F from the same village indicating a tremendously high carrier frequency. Identification of the causative mutation might enable further charac- Cpaornesnatsn guineus No No No No No No No No Yes No No terization of the CSB protein function in this unique family, as well as Age of assesment 10y 17y 18y 30y 5y 24y 5y 12y 6y 52y 51y prevention of this devastating disease among the population at risk OFC at birth 5 25 <3 25 25 <<10 25 from this village. OFC at assesment <<3 <3 <3 <3 <3 75 <<3 <3 <3 P0059. Hepatic involvement in Cockayne syndrome type A Height <3 <3 <3 97 50 10 3 D. R. Bertola1, G. Porta1, M. P. Gonçalves1, S. R. Cardoso1, L. Suzuki1, L. M. J. Truncal Obesity Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Albano1, R. A. Hegele2, C. A. Kim1; Neonatal Feedings No No No Yes No Yes 1Instituto da Criança, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Robarts Research Institute, London, ON, Canada. Laryngomalacia No Yes Yes Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder Apogrete sdat unsup- 8m 16m 1y 12m characterized mainly by cachectic dwarfism, premature aging, men- Age first walked 14m 2y6m 3y 18m 2y10m 1y10m 2y tal deficiency, microcephaly, intracranial calcifications, neurological degeneration, retinal abnormalities and sensorineural hearing loss. Age first word 15m 1y spNeeoc h 2y6m 4y 3y 2y6m There are two subtypes: CS-A, the less common one, whose gene Asegnet esnpcoekse 3y Not yet 4y 3y responsible is called ERCC8 and CS-B, present in 75% of the cases clinically diagnosed, whose gene responsible is ERCC6. These genes Mental retardation Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes sinhvoowlv ead .p Gleaiosttrroopinict eesftfiencatl, awniothm aselievse rhaal vdeif fbeereenn tr eoprgoartnesd aoncdca ssyiosnteamllys, TGyepsictaallt Facial Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes including especially elevated plasmatic levels of liver enzymes and Retinopathy Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes hepatoesplenomegaly. These abnormalities have been mild, unasso- Myopia Yes Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes ciated with jaundice or other clinical symptoms and have not involved coagulation factors. Narrow Hands/ Feet and slender/ Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes We describe the hepatic findings in a cohort of eight CS patients diag- tapering fingers nosed by molecular analysis as subtype A. One of our patients, a 12 year-old-girl, presented with recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding, due JHoyipnetsr extensibility Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes to esophageal varices. The other seven patients, without any hepatic signs/symptoms, showed elevated liver enzymes, ranging from slightly Neutropenia Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes higher than normal to very high levels. The bilirrubin levels and coagu- Mutation IcV.S114112+51dGe>lCA cp.1.1Q132757d2eXlC c.11125delC p.R2535X p.R1143X p.A590T c.p2.0R4277d0eXlC p.S3142G c.1d1e5le6t4iodnelA dteiolen- dteiolen- lation studies were normal. With better management of the individuals affected by CS, the survival could be longer and problems, otherwise not recognized, may well be P0061. High frequency of submicroscopic DNA copy number of importance in this syndrome. The hepatic involvement could be, changes in patients with congenital heart disease sometimes, life threatening, as demonstrated in one of our patients. R. Ullmann1, L. A. Larsen2, F. Erdogan1, L. Zhang2, Z. Tümer2, W. Chen1, J. R. Therefore, we recommend that all patients affected by CS should be Jacobsen3, M. Schubert1, J. Jurkatis1, A. Tzschach1, N. Tommerup2, H. H. Rop- screened for hepatic involvement. It would be interesting to evaluate ers1; hepatic involvement in patients affected by type B, in an attempt to 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Wilhelm Jo- establish a genotype-phenotype correlation. hannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Paediatric Cardiology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. P0060. Clinical and molecular heterogeneity in Italian patients Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most frequent birth defect and affected by Cohen syndrome. affects nearly 1% of newborns. The etiology of CHD is largely unknown E. Katzaki1, I. Longo1, C. Pescucci1, F. Papa1, F. Ariani1, I. Meloni1, M. Priolo2, and only a small percentage can be assigned to environmental risk A. Selicorni3, R. Fischetto4, M. Celle5, R. Grasso6, B. Dallapiccola7, M. Bordi- factors such as maternal diseases or exposure to mutagenic agents gnon8, R. Tenconi8, F. Mari1, A. Renieri1; during pregnancy. Chromosomal imbalances have been identified in 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Hospital of many forms of syndromic CHD, but next to nothing is known about the Reggio Calabria, Reggio Calabria, Italy, 3Pediatrics Unit, University of Milan, impact of DNA copy number changes in non-syndromic CHD. Here we Italy, 4Citogenetics Unit , Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bari, Italy, 5G. Gaslini Istitute, present a submegabase resolution array CGH screen of 105 patients University of Genova, Italy, 6IRCCS MEDEA, Bosisio Parini Lecco, Italy, 7Me- with CHD as the sole abnormality at the time of diagnosis. We have dical Genetics, University of Rome, Italy, 8Clinical Genetics and Epidemiology, detected 18 chromosomal changes that do not coincide with frequent University of Padova, Italy. DNA copy number variants, including 2 de novo deletions, 4 de novo Cohen syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder with variability duplications, 5 familial duplications and one familial deletion. Our data in the clinical manifestations, characterized by developmental delay, show that sub-microscopic deletions and duplications play an impor- visual disability, facial dysmorphisms and intermittent neutropenia. We tant role in the aetiology of this condition, either as direct causes or describe a cohort of 11 patients affected by Cohen syndrome from 10 as genetic risk factors for CHD. These findings have immediate con- Italian families and between 5 and 52 years of age at assessment. sequences for genetic counselling and should pave the way for the Characteristic age related facial changes are well documented. Eyes elucidation of the pathogenetic mechanisms underlying CHD. anomalies are found in 10/11 patients (retinopathy in 10/11 and myopia in 6/11). Truncal obesity is present in 9/11 patients. DNA samples from P0062. Severe Autosomal Recessive Congenital Neutropenia all patients were analyzed for mutations in COH1 by Denaturing High (Kostmann disease) in an Iranian family with two affected Performance Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC). We detected fifteen children, and homozygous mutation in HAX1 gene. COH1 mutations; most of them are truncating mutations, only 2 being G. Vakili1, Y. Shafeghati1, H. Abolghasemi2, M. Horwitz3; missense changes in functional domains. Gene deletions were found 1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Baghyatallah in two alleles. All mutations except one are private. A single base dele- Hosp. and Medical Science University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medi- tion leading to p.T3708fs3769 was found, in heterozygous state, in cal Genetic Div., Dept. of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, three apparently unrelated families deriving from a restricted area of United States. the Veneto’s lowland, between Padova and Tagliamento. Given the Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) or Kostmann syndrome is a rare geographical conformation of this region, a recent origin of the muta- type of neutropenia. It is inherited by autosomal recessive pattern. tion could be hypothesized. Consanguinous marriages mostly is a predisposing factor. Patients suffer from severe and recurrent bacterial infections (pneumonia, oti-Clinical genetics 0 tis media, abcesses, and…..). This disease was reported by Kostman the cases. We conclude that the offspring of family intermarriages in a large consanguineous family from Northern part of the Sweden have a significantly increased incidence of hereditary diseases. (1956). In this report we will present an Iranian family, with two affected chil- P0065. Deletion of 8p23.1 with Features of Cornelia de Lange dren. Parents are second cousins. Both of the sibs showed neutropenia Syndrome and Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia and a Review from early infancy. They have had recurrent severe bacterial infections. of Deletions of 8q23.1 to 8pter. ? A Further Locus for Cornelia de The older one was a boy, that showed Myelodysplastic(MDS) changes Lange Syndrome after the age of 15 and died from AML when he was 16-year-old. The G. S. Baynam, I. Walpole, J. Goldblatt; younger one is a 14-year-old girl just with the similar symptoms. Genetic Services of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. The response of both of them was favorable to G-CSF. Cornelia de Lange syndrome is characterised by facial dysmorphism; Mutation analysis of the ELA2 gene by direct DNA sequencing of PCR- hirsutism and internal organ anomalies, including diaphragmatic her- amplified genomic DNA did not identify any abnormalities. nia, and limb defects. Causative mutations in two genes have been In searching of mutations in other candidate genes a homozygous mu- identified: (1) NIPBL on chromosome 5q13 is dominantly inherited tation found in HAX1 gene in the proband, and each of the parents was and accounts for approximately 50% of cases and (2) SMC1L1 (also heterozygous carrier for the mutation. known as SMC1) on the X chromosome, shows X-linked inheritance The mutation was W44X, same as described by Klein & Welte in their and accounts for an unknown proportion of cases. However, the aeti- Nature Genetics paper. ology of a significant number of cases remains unknown. A variety of chromosomal anomalies have been described in a minority of cases. P0063. A de novo novel missense mutation in Connexin 26 in a We report on a child with an 8p23.1 deletion with features of CdLS sporadic dominant case of non-syndromic deafness. and congenital diaphragmatic hernia. We review cases with cytoge- L. C. Trotta1, P. Primignani1, P. Castorina1, F. Lalatta1, C. Curcio1, U. Ambroset- netic anomalies involving 8p23.1 and discuss potential relationships ti1, A. Cesarani1, D. Cuda2, A. Murri2, M. Travi1, D. A. Coviello1; between 8p23.1 deletions and CdLS or impaired cohesin complex 1Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, function. Milan, Italy, 2A.O. “Guglielmo da Saliceto”, Piacenza, Italy. Mutations in the Connexin 26 gene (GJB2) can cause non-syndromic P0066. NIPBL mutational analysis in 56 individuals with Cornelia recessive or dominant hearing loss (HL) or both sensorineural hearing de Lange Syndrome impairment and keratoderma. M. Zarhrate, G. Borck, L. Colleaux, A. Munnich, V. Cormier Daire, J. Bon- We report here a novel missense dominant mutation of GJB2 gene as- nefont; sociated with non-syndromic deafness, identified in a 3 year old Italian INSERM U781 and Department of Genetics, Hospital Necker Enfants Malades, girl who has congenital profound sensorineural HL without skin dis- Paris, France, Paris, France. ease or other clinical features. Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is characterised by facial dys- Patient’s DNA sequencing revealed an heterozygous C→G change at morphism, microcephaly, growth and mental retardation, hirsutism, nucleotide 172 resulting in a proline to alanine substitution at codon gastroesophageal reflux and congenital anomalies including limb de- 58 (P58A). fects. Mutations in the gene NIPBL, the human homolog of Drosophila No further sequence variants were revealed in the remaining coding Nipped-B, have recently been found in approximately 50% of CdLS sequence and in the 5’UTR exon1. cases. The function of NIPBL in mammals is unknown. We present We also excluded the reported deletions of Cx30, that is tightly linked to here the molecular analysis of a series of 56 children with typical fea- GJB2 at 13q12, the Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) and the Δ(GJB6-D13S1854) tures of CdLS including two-father-to child transmissions . Multiplex that are the cause of deafness in patients carrying one recessive GJB2 ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) screening failed to de- mutation in trans. tect either partial or whole-gene NIPBL deletions in 15 patients tested. Parents were shown not to carry the P58A mutation and no other fam- Direct sequencing of the 47 NIPBL exons and corresponding exon-in- ily members were reported to have a significant hearing impairment. tron boundaries enabled to identify 21 heterozygous NIPBL mutations Segregation analysis of 10 polymorphic microsatellite markers (from including eight missense (38%), one nonsense (4%), four frameshift chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and X) confirmed the correct presence of (19%), one 5’UTR (4%) and seven splice site mutations (33%). These bi-parental contribution. mutations were not found in 100 control chromosomes. This mutation was not observed among 100 healthy controls and 720 Our study confirms that NIPBL mutations account for about 40% of unrelated affected individuals, excluding it as a common polymor- CdLS cases. We detected three SMC1L1 mutations in the same pa- phism. tient series. Absence of NIPBL mutation in the remaining cases further Proline at codon 58 is conserved among all connexins, suggesting that supports genetic heterogeneity of the disorder. Finally, the observa- this residue is critical for the function of the protein. This mutation oc- tion of two familial mutations in our series suggests that parent-to-child curs in the first extracellular domain of the protein (EC1), which seems transmission may have been underestimated so far. to be very important for connexon-connexon interaction and for the control of voltage gating of the channel. P0067. Incidence and clinical features of X-linked Cornelia de Lange syndrome due to SMC1L1 mutations P0064. Frequency of consanguinity and positive familial history G. Borck, M. Zarhrate, J. P. Bonnefont, A. Munnich, V. Cormier-Daire, L. Col- of disability or birth defect in yazd province leaux; A. S. H. A. Dehghani Tafti; Department of Medical Genetics and INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker- Enfants Yazd Welfar Org, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. Malades, Paris, Paris, France. Consanguinity (family intermarriage) is commonly practiced in many Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a multisystem developmen- Asian, African and Latin American communities. In some countries tal disorder characterized by facial dysmorphism, growth and mental such as Iran consanguinity as in mating of first cousins is encouraged retardation, microcephaly, and various malformations. Heterozygous as part of social customs. This study was performed on 3957 couples mutations in the NIPBL gene have been detected in approximately that were referred to genetic counseling center of Yazd welfare orga- 45% of affected individuals. Recently, a second CdLS gene, mapping nization (from 2001 to 2007). Of these, 690 couples had a child with to the X chromosome, has been identified: SMC1L1 (structural main- disability or birth defect. The frequency of non-consanguineous mar- tenance of chromosomes 1-like 1; or SMC1A). In order to estimate riages was 31.6 % (218 couples) and the frequency of consanguine- the incidence and refine the clinical presentation of X-linked CdLS, we ous marriages was 68.4 % (472 couples). 52.9% of consanguineous have screened a series of 11 CdLS boys carrying no NIPBL anomaly. couples were first cousins and 15.5% were other relationship .In fact We have identified two novel de novo SMC1L1 missense mutations consanguinity was so high and considerable. Furthermore, 34.5 % (238 (c.587G>A [p.Arg196His] and c.3254A>G [p.Tyr1085Cys]). Our results cases) had a positive familial history of the same disability (in parents, confirm that SMC1L1 mutations cause CdLS and support the view that siblings and relatives). The most common kind of disability was mental SMC1L1 accounts for a significant fraction of boys with unexplained retardation (45.8%) and the least frequent problem was skin disorder CdLS. Furthermore, we suggest that SMC1L1 mutations have mild- (0.3%). Children with chromosomal abnormality constituted 6.4% of er effects than NIPBL mutations with respect to pre- and postnatal Clinical genetics 1 growth retardation and associated malformations. If confirmed, these Conclusions : Albeit each symptom observed in TUBA1A mutated data may have important implications for directing mutation screening patients is not specific, our data highlight a potentially specific distin- in CdLS. guishable combination of developmental features that is not seen in neurodevelopmental disorders resulting from mutations in DCX, LIS1 P0068. Mutation analysis of the NIPBL and the SMC1L1 gene in and ARX. We suggest that this specific neuro-clinical combination German patients with suspected Cornelia de Lange syndrome. should lead the clinician to the search of TUBA1A mutations. H. Gabriel1, D. Glaeser2, A. Dalski3, M. Gencik1, D. Lohmann4, G. Gillessen- Kaesbach3; P0070. Diversity, parental germline origin and phenotypic 1Zentrum fuer Medizinische Genetik, Osnabrueck, Germany, 2Zentrum für spectrum of de novo HRAS missense changes in Costello Humangenetik, Georg Mendel Laboratorien, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 3Institut fuer syndrome Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Lübeck, Germany, 4Institut fuer Humange- G. Zampino1, F. Pantaleoni2, C. Carta2, G. Cobellis3,4, C. Neri5,6, A. Sarkozy5,6, netik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany. F. Atzeri7, A. Selicorni7, K. A. Rauen8, R. Weksberg9, B. Dallapiccola5,6, A. Bal- Cornelia-de-Lange-syndrome (CdLS) is a heterogeneous autosomal- labio3,4, B. D. Gelb10, G. Neri1, M. Tartaglia2; dominant disorder characterized by typical facial features, growth re- 1Università Cattolica, Rome, Italy, 2Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, tardation, developmental delay, upper-extremity malformations and a 3Università “Federico II”, Naples, Italy, 4TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 5IRCCS-CSS, San variety of other abnormalities. Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 6Istituto CSS-Mendel, Rome, Italy, 7Clinica Pediatrica The prevalence of CdLS is estimated to be around 1/10,000. Most De Marchi, Milano, Italy, 8University of California, San Francisco, CA, United cases are sporadic, although several familial cases are described. States, 9Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 10Mount Sinai School Since 2004 it is known that up to 50% of CdLS cases are caused of Medicine, New York, NY, United States. by mutations in the NIPBL gene on chromosome 5p13, the human Activating mutations in HRAS have recently been identified as the homolog molecular cause underlying Costello syndrome (CS). To investigate of the Drosophila Nipped-B gene. This gene consists of 47 exons and further the phenotypic spectrum associated with germline HRAS muta- mutations were found in the entire coding region. tions and characterize their molecular diversity, subjects with a diagno- Recently, Musio et al. described an X-linked form of mild CdLS caused sis of CS, Noonan syndrome, cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome or with by mutations in the gene SMC1L1 (=SMC1). a phenotype suggestive of these conditions but without a definitive Both genes code for proteins, which are part of the cohesin complex diagnosis were screened for the entire coding sequence of the gene. A involved in chromosome cohesion. de novo heterozygous HRAS change was detected in all the subjects We investigated the prevalence of NIPBL gen mutations in 108 Ger- diagnosed with CS, while no lesion was observed with any of the other man patients with suspected CdLS by DGGE and/or direct sequenc- phenotypes. While eight cases shared the recurrent 34G>A change, ing. a novel 436G>A transition was observed in one individual. The latter Additionally, mutation analysis of the SMC1L1 gene was performed affected residue Ala146, which contributes to GTP/GDP binding, defin- in all patients tested negative for mutations in the NIPBL gene. We ing a novel class of activating HRAS lesions that perturb development. detect_ Clinical characterization indicated that Gly12Ser was associated with ed NIPBL gene mutations in 29 (=27%) of our patients, although pre- a homogeneous phenotype. By analyzing the genomic region flanking vious studies reported a higher detection rate (ca. 50%). Our lower the HRAS mutations, we traced the parental origin of lesions in nine detection rate is probably due to patient selection. informative families and demonstrated that de novo mutations were Furthermore, the prevalence of SMC1L1 mutations in our cohort will inherited from the father in all cases. We noted an advanced age at be discussed. conception in unaffected fathers transmitting the mutation. P0069. Genotype -phenotype analysis of cerebral dysgenesis P0071. Crane-Heise syndrome: a further case broadening the associated with TUBA1A mutations clinical spectrum N. Bahi-Buisson1,2, K. Poirier2, N. Boddaert1, Y. Saillour2, I. Desguerre1, S. M. Holder-Espinasse1, L. Devisme2, V. Houfflin-Debarge3, C. Chafiotte4, A. Joriot3, S. Manouvrier3, M. Barthez4, A. Toutain4, V. Drouin-Garaud5, A. Gol- Dieux-Coeslier1, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1; denberg5, S. Marret5, H. Van Esch6, L. Lagae6, D. Ville7, L. Hertz-Pannier1, M. 1Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Ser- Moutard8, C. Beldjord9,10, J. Chelly2; vice d’anatomopathologie, Eurasanté, Lille, France, 3Maternité, Hôpital Jeanne 1Necker Enfants Malades, APHP, Université Paris V, Paris, France, 2INSERM de Flandre, Lille, France, 4Service de Radiologie, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, U567, University Paris V, Paris, France, 3Lille University Hospital, Lille, France, Lille, France. 4Tours University Hospital, Tours, France, 5Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, Crane-Heise syndrome is a rare lethal and autosomal recessive condi- France, 6Leuven University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium, 7Lyon University Hospi- tion which has been first reported in 1981 in three siblings presenting tal, Lyon, France, 8Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 9Cochin, APHP, Université with intrauterine growth retardation, a poorly mineralised calvarium, Paris V, Paris, France, 10INSERM U567, University Paris V, Paris, Austria. characteristic facial features comprising cleft lip and palate, hyper- Cortical dysgeneses are, in most cases, associated with profound telorism, anteverted nares, low-set and posteriorly rotated ears, ver- neurodevelopmental disability, including severe mental retardation tebral anomalies and absent clavicles. Since then, to our knowledge, and epilepsy. Two major genes DCX and LIS1 account for almost 40% only one isolated case and two siblings were reported with similar find- of the cases of agyria-pachygyria, and three additional genes (RELN, ings. In 2003, distal phalangeal hypoplasia, mild cardiac and gastroin- ARX, VLDL receptor) are exceptionally mutated. Recently, mutations testinal anomalies were suggested as additional features. We present in TUBA1A (NM_006009) gene that encoded for an alpha tubulin that a further case, diagnosed after a termination of pregnancy at 24 weeks’ interacts with doublecortin, have been involved in a large spectrum of gestation, very similar to the previously reported ones, and broaden the neuronal migration disorders. In order to better define the phenotype, clinical spectrum of this entity. On the 20 weeks’gestation ultrasound we retrospectively studied seven unrelated patients with pathogenic scan, a laparoschisis was identified, with poor fetal movements and TUBA1A mutations. polyhydramnios. Fetal chromosomes were normal 46XX. Pathological Patient and methods : Clinical and imaging assessments were per- examination confirmed the laparoschisis but also revealed facial dys- formed in seven patients, aged from to 2 to 16 years with pathogenic morphic features, multiple joint contractures, a cleft palate, and severe de novo missense TUBA1A mutations. vertebral as well as limb anomalies. Skeletal x-rays showed absent Results : Patients exhibited congenital microcephaly (6/7), moderate clavicles, undermineralisation of the skull, micrognathia, and abnormal (5/7) to severe (2/7) mental retardation, spastic diplegia (6/7). Asso- phalanges. We discuss the clinical and radiological phenotype of this ciated clinical features were more occasional: facial diplegia (5/7), rare condition.To our knowledge, no molecular mechanism has been oropharyngoglossal dysfunction (4/7), and strabismus (3/7). Epilepsy identified in Crane-Heise syndrome so far. was reported in 3/7 but only 2 patients have intractable epilepsy. Brain MRI revealed dysmorphic basal ganglia with balloon shape (7/7), peri- sylvian (5/7) to diffuse pachygyria with a posterior to anterior grading (2/7), dysmorphic (5/7) or hypotrophic (2/7) corpus callosum, mild (3/7) to severe (2/7) vermian hypoplasia. Clinical genetics 2 P0072. Cranioectodermal dysplasia (Sensenbrenner’s insufficiency (n=1), aorta dilatation (n=1), pulmonary arterial hyperten- syndrome): Report of two siblings sion (n=1), vaginal prolapse (n=1), dysuria (n=3). Skin presented as A. Latos-Bielenska1, J. Walczak-Sztulpa2, M. Szczepańska1, M. Krawczyński1, inelastic on the face with inguinal folds during infancy (n=4), thick folds J. Zachwieja1, A. W. Kuss2, H. H. Ropers2, D. Zwolińska3, A. Tzschach2; on the face during the third decade (n=5), and loose skin on the neck 1University of Medical Sciences in Poznan, Poznan, Poland, 2Max Planck Insti- after 40 years (n=7). three deletions of 1 bp (n=13) and one deletion of tute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3University of Medical Sciences in 15bp (n=2) were detected in ELN gene. Wrocław, Wrocław, Poland. A 11y old boy and his 8 y old sister, presented both with loose skin, Cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED, Sensenbrenner’s syndrome, OMIM bilateral inguinal hernia and hoarse voice, right ventricle dilatation 218330) is a rare disorder characterized by dolichocephaly, rhizomelic (n=1), pulmonary emphysema (n=1). Homozygous missense mutation dwarfism, dental and nail dysplasia, sparse hair and renal problems. in FBLN5 was identified. Among about 20 cases reported to date, most are sporadic, but few familial cases suggest autosomal recessive inheritance. So far, the CL is a systemic disorder with dermatologic, pulmonary and cardiovas- underlying genetic defect is unknown, and linkage analyses were not cular features. Patients with mutations in FBNL5 all present a severe possible due to the limited number of patients and small family sizes. phenotype, whereas intrafamilial clinical heterogeneity is observed in Here, we report on a 5-year-old girl and her 1-year-old brother with cra- families with mutations in ELN. nioectodermal dysplasia. Their healthy parents (16- and 25-year-old at Skin involvement evolves over time: thick folds during infancy, wrinkled the birth of the first child) are remotely consanguineous which supports chin during third decade and loose skin after 40 years. the assumption of autosomal recessive inheritance. Clinical features Patients affected by CL should undergo systematic exploration of clini- included short stature with rhizomelic shortening of limbs, brachydac- cal features, but should also take advantage of molecular analysis to tyly, narrow chest, craniosynostosis, dolichocephaly, full cheeks, tele- confirm the genetic basis of their phenotype. canthus, broad nasal bridge, small and widely spaced teeth, dysplastic auricles and fine, sparse hair, bilateral inguinal hernia and hyperelastic P0075. Identification of two Alu insertions in the CFTR gene skin. Psychomotor development is normal. Both children suffer from E. Masson1, M. Audrézet1, M. Macek2, O. Raguénès1, B. Fercot1, J. Chen3, C. tubulointerstitial nephropathy with more severe features in the brother. Férec1; We present detailed clinical features of the patients in comparison to 1CHU-INSERM U613, Brest, France, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, previously reported cases, as well as prenatal features of the syn- Prague, Czech Republic, 3EFS–Bretagne, Brest, France. drome detected on ultrasound examinations. LINE-1 (long interspersed element-1) or L1-mediated retrotransposi- tion is a potent force in human genome evolution and an occasional P0073. Spectrum of HLXB9 gene mutations in Currarino cause of human genetic disease. Since the first report of two de novo syndrome and genotype-phenotype correlation L1 insertions in the F8 gene causing hemophilia A, more than 50 L1- C. Crétolle1, D. Sanlaville2, M. Zérah1, C. Fékété1, A. Munnich1, S. Lyonnet1; mediated retrotranspositional events have been identified as causing 1Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, PARIS, France, 2Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu, LYON, human genetic disease. France. On the basis of the observation that both L1 elements and Alu se- Currarino syndrome (CS) (OMIM 176450) is a rare congenital disease quences are abundant in the human genome, the increasing number described in 1981 as an association of three main features: typical of genomic rearrangements reported in the CFTR gene, and the fairly sacral malformation (sickled-shape sacrum or total sacral agenesis large size of the CFTR gene, we surmised that some previously unre- below S2), hindgut anomaly and pre-sacral tumor. Moreover, neuro- solved CF chromosomes might carry hitherto undetected L1-mediated logical defects, namely tethered cord and/or lipoma of the conus, are retrotranspositional insertions. also frequent and has to be search for as they may lead to severe This study report the identification of two simple Alu insertions using complications if not treated. quantitative high-performance liquid chromatography (QHPLC), tech- CS is ascribed in half of cases to heterozygous mutations of the HLXB9 nique previously employed to delineate the boundaries of large ge- gene (OMIM 142994) located at 7q36, with an autosomal dominant nomic deletions in the CFTR gene. mode of inheritance. HLXB9 gene encodes the HB9 protein, a 403 The first one, identified in a 24-year-old French girl, carrying F508del amino acid transcription factor that interacts with DNA through a highly on the other chromosome, correspond to a 103 pb antisense insertion evolutionarily conserved homeodomain, involved in embryological de- in exon 16 containing an Alu sequence of 46pb and a poly(A) tail of velopment. Thus far, 41 different heterozygous mutations have been 57pb. The second one, identified in a 28-year-old Czech man, corre- described in clinically typical CS patients, mostly in familial cases (90 spond to a 337pb sense insertion of an Alu sequence of 281 pb and a % of cases). poly(A) tail of 56 pb. Both mutations are presumed to lead to aberrant In this work, we describe 23 novel mutations in 26 mutated patients splicing. of a 50 index patients’ series harbouring clinical CS (22 males and 28 The identification of these two simple Alu insertions in the CFTR gene females). Mutations concerned 19/20 familial forms and 7/30 sporadic revealed a previously unknown mutational mechanism responsible for cases. Sex predominance was not observed. Truncating mutations CF and also represents an important addition to the already diverse (frameshift or non-sens) represents 56.4 % of cases, suggesting that spectrum of CFTR gene mutations. haploinsufficiency is the basis of CS. No obvious genotype-phenotype correlation could be identified. A genetic heterogeneity is suspected as P0076. Attempts to explain why Cystic Fibrosis is of lower at least 16 from the 24/50 not mutated patients harboured subtle phe- prevalence in the Greek-Cypriot population notypic variations, and other genes probably account for cases with no N. Stavrou1, K. Voskarides1, V. Neokleous2, C. Deltas1,2; mutation of the HLXB9 gene. 1Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Lefkosia, Cyprus. P0074. Clinical and Molecular study of 17 patients with Cutis Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most frequent autosomal recessive Laxa diseases in Europe. In Cyprus, the prevalence appears lower com- S. Hadj-Rabia1, M. Devillers2, C. Bodemer2, H. Megarbané2, J. Pauchard2, C. pared to the rest of European populations (carrier frequency 1/44). Blanchet-Bardon2, P. Sommer2, J. Fischer2; An exception is a village in which 1:14 individuals is carrier of muta- 1Dermatology, Paris, France, 2*Cutis laxa Network, contact: p.sommer@ibcp.fr tion F508del probably because of a founder effect. We hypothesised or mdevillers@afm.genethon.fr, Evry, France. that undiagnosed mild cases on the island may give an erroneous im- Among different disorders with elastic fibres deficiencies, cutis laxa pression of lower prevalence while mild mutations may be responsible (CL) comprises a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of for cases of male sterility.Mild mutations R117C and L346P were not acquired and genetic disorders characterized by loose, sagging and found in 200 Greek-Cypriot samples, concluding that their frequency is inelastic skin. Mutations in at least two genes, elastin (ELN) and fibu- lower that 0.25%. Variant M348K was found in two individuals in het- lin5 (FBLN5), are known to be causative for CL. erozygosity, giving allele frequency of 0.5%. Two other polymorphisms next to each other in intron 8 are: a TG repeat with known alleles of 11, Fifteen patients from four families presented: herniae (inguinal n=7, 12 or 13 repeats and a stretch of 5, 7 or 9 thymines. We designed a umbilical n=1), pulmonary emphysema (n=5), ankle laxity (n=2), mitral new approach for detecting the disease allele 5T, that includes nested Clinical genetics  PCR with a modified primer and use of the restriction enzyme PsiI and The analysis of CF patients performed with MLPA techniques has agarose gel electrophoresis. By testing 100 individuals of the general made possible to reach a 94.4% detection rate, improving the process population we found that allele 5T has a frequency of 3.5%. In six men of carrier detection and genetic counselling in Italian population. with azoospermia or CF patients with a single known mutation, the 5T allele was not found. Also, allele 13TG was not found in 10 random P0079. Cystic Fibrosis: A frequent disease with heterogenous samples that were sequenced. The 5T allele does not seem to con- mutation spectrum in Iran tribute to pathology in our population, unless it is found in combination R. Mirfakhraie1, M. Gorgipoor2, M. Houshmand3, H. Kianifar4, M. Rafiee5, E. with other mutations on undiagnosed patients. Talachian6, F. Mirzajani3; 1Islamic Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, P0077. Estimation of CFTR mutation carrier frequency in Iran Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, based on known frequency of p.F508del 3National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic H. Nezari1, S. S. Banihosseini2, R. Kalhor3, A. Khodadad4, F. Mirzajani5, E. Republic of Iran, 4Mashhad Medical University, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Elahi1; Iran, 5Tabriz Medical University, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Iran Medical 1University of Tehran, Faculty of Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Uni- Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal recessive disorder versity of Tehran, Dept Biotechnology, Faculty of Sciences, Tehran, Islamic in European populations with about 1:25 carrier frequency and regional Republic of Iran, 4Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Tehran University of Med- variation. Since the identification of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane ical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5National Institute for Genetic regulator (CFTR) gene, over 1000 mutations have been reported in Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. which ΔF508 is the most frequent. However for non European popu- Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is the most common life-threatening autosomal lations, the incidence of CF and the spectrum of mutations that are recessive disease in many Caucasian populations. Approximately one responsible for the disease are not critically assessed. in 2500 newborns in populations of European ancestry are affected, A few comprehensive studies are focused on the molecular basis of wherein the average carrier frequency is 1:25. The disease is caused CF in the Iranian population. In this research we are going to present by mutations in CFTR gene. Among the more than 1000 mutations the results obtained from a 4 year study on the 110 Iranian CF patients identified in the CFTR gene, the p.F508del allele is the most common including molecular analysis of the CFTR gene. worldwide. Its frequency exhibits a northwest to southeast gradient, Our results suggest that CF is a very heterogenic disease among our ranging from a high of 88% in Denmark to a low of approximately 16% population in which about 15 different mutations and polymorphisms in Iran. It has generally been believed that the incidence of CF also have been detected till now. DelF508, G542X, N1303K, G551D and follows a northwest to southeast gradient and that incidence in low W1282X, the 5 most common mutations in Europeans with the overall in non-European populations. However, relatively high incidences of frequency of 75%, only contain 23% of CFTR mutant alleles in Iran. CF were predicted in Turkey and Iran based on data of frequency of The other detected mutations are rare with relative frequencies of individuals carrying homozygous mutations and extent of inbreeding lower than 1%. in those populations. Specifically the carrier frequency in Iran was es- The information provided here on the distribution of CF mutations in timated to be 1:40, similar to that of European populations. We have Iranian population may assist in the development of more appropriate now experimentally determined the frequency of p.F508del carriers diagnosis tests in Iran and also it may facilitates the mutation analysis among 500 randomly selected Iranians. Based on the number of car- in the neighboring countries. riers identified and the observation that this allele accounts for 16% of the CFTR mutated alleles of the Iranian population, the frequency P0080. 8-Years experience in cystic fibrosis neonatal screening of carriers of CFTR mutations was calculated to be 0.037 (95% confi- in Castilla-Leon (Spain) dence level of 0.037+/- 0.016). This figure corresponds to 1:27, close M. Alonso1,2, J. Telleria1,2, I. Fernandez1,2, A. Blanco1,2; to the carrier frequency previously estimated. It is concluded that CF is 1IBGM (Instituto de Bioloogía y Genética Molecular), VALLADOLID, Spain, a disease of considerable public health importance in Iran, and prob- 2Universidad Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain. ably in other countries of the Middle East. Since the implementation of the Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Newborn Screen- ing in our region in 1999, we have analysed 126.385 newborn samples P0078. Description of large CFTR gene rearrangements in Italian for CF. According to the Guidelines of the European Concerted Action population of Cystic Fibrosis our protocol combines the assay of immunoreactive V. Paracchini1, C. Colombo2, L. Porcaro1, L. Costantino1, P. Capasso1, D. De- trypsinogen (IRT) with the analysis of the most common mutations of giorgio1, D. Coviello1, L. Claut2, R. Padoan3, M. Seia1; the CFTR gene in our population . Thus, the IRT raised samples are 1Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, analysed for the F508del mutation with the PAGE method, and for the Milan, Italy, 2Cystic Fibrosis Centre - Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore exons 7, 11, 12, 13, 14b and 17b by DGGE . The coverage of this Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 3Cystic Fibrosis Support study in our population reaches the 83% of CF causing mutations. The Centre - A.O. Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy. diagnose is established when two CF causing mutations are detected, Cystic fibrosis (CF) is mainly caused by small molecular defects of the or when only one mutation is detected but the sweat test is positive. CFTR gene; despite the genotype is define in the majority of patients, Newborns with only one mutation detected but negative sweat test are a number of CF cases still remain uncharacterized. These unidentified considered carriers . mutations may escape detection using PCR-base techniques. The CF RESULTS: mutation database lists more than 25 large rearrangements. Irt RAISED YEAR NEWBORNS CF CARRIERS We report here the results of our screening for CTFR gene rearrange- SAMPLES ments, performed on Italian CF patients. 1999 17.128 141 5 1 A sample of 689 unrelated Italian patients (for a total of 1378 alleles), 2000 17.698 97 2 8 followed at CF Centre of Regione Lombardia (Milan, Italy), was col- 2001 17.380 146 5 10 lected. All patients had classical form of CF with typical pulmonary and 2002 17.835 195 5 9 2003 18.395 210 3 15 gastrointestinal findings, and positive sweat test. 2004 18.900 150 4 10 The Innogenetics assay and the DHPLC screening showed a mutation 2005 19.049 169 7 11 detection rate of 93%. After these analyses , 100 alleles still remain 2006 19.431 159 2 11 unidentified (7%). TOTAL 126.385 1267 33 75 In order to detect the rearrangements in the CFTR gene, the 27 exons were screened in these patients with the MLPA assay based on com- Additionally, we have extended the mutation detection to other members in some mercial Kit “SALSA P091 CFTR MALPA Kit” . families, including: The MLPA assay was performed for 38 patients (76 alleles). 18 siblings We characterized 10 different deletions for a total of 19 deleted alleles. 11 couples of carriers In conclusion, 25% (19/76) alleles had a large gene deletion. The dele- 3 prenatal diagnosis tion of exons 22-23 (6/76) is the most frequent in our cohort. The frequency of the F508del mutation in CF alleles was 60.6% (40/66)Clinical genetics  P0081. Cystic Fibrosis testing among Israeli Arabs performed, followed by sequencing of the remaining exons in case the Y. M. Hujeirat1, V. Adir2, Z. Borochowitz2, F. Fars3, M. Ben-David3, S. A. Sha- R275C mutation was not identified. lev1; Results: We identified the R275C substitution in two of the original pa- 1Institute of Genetics, Ha Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, 2The Simon Win- tients reported with Czech dysplasia and three additional patients. All ter Institute for Human Genetics, Bnai Zion Medical Center, Technion-Rappa- affected individuals had a similar phenotype characterized by normal port Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel, 3Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Carmel height, spondyloarthropathy, short postaxial toes and absence of ocu- Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. lar and orofacial anomalies. The R275C mutation was excluded in a Since the cloning of cystic fibrosis (CF) gene in 1989, more than 1,000 third patient reported with Czech dysplasia. However, the identification mutations were identified. CF is recognized in all ethnic subgroups of the Y1391C mutation in this patient with disproportionate short stat- of Israeli Arabs. Tweleve mutations were found in the CFTR gene of ure made the diagnosis of spondyloperipheral dysplasia (SPD) more individuals affected with CF from Israeli Arab origin. A total of 1080 likely. The Y1391C mutation is located in the carboxy-propeptide of healthy Arab individuals underwent CF carrier screening, 712 (65%) the procollagen chain and has been reported before in a patient with individuals at high risk and 368 individuals at lower risk. All individuals the Torrance type of lethal platyspondylic skeletal dysplasia (PLSD-T). were tested for the twelve “CF Arab mutations” and three mutations Our observation of the same Y1391 mutation in an additional unrelated that were found in non Ashkenazi Jews. patient with SPD further supports the evidence that PLSD-T and SPD A total of 55 CF carriers were identified among the 1080 individuals represent a phenotypic continuum. screened, leading to an overall observed carrier frequency of 1/15 Conclusions: The R275C mutation in the COL2A1 gene causes a pe- among the group at higher risk, and 1/60 among the lower risk one. culiar type II collagen disorder that was recently delineated as Czech We conclude that any screening for CF among Arab Israeli com- dysplasia. munity should therefore include at least the more common 7 mu- tations (N1303K, deltaF508, W1282X, G85E, 4010delTATT, P0084. Investigation on Mitochondrial DNA deletions in Iranian 3120+1Kbdel8.6Kb and 2183AA>G) found in both groups examined. Dilated Cardiomyopathy patients We doubt the benefit of testing the other mutations which seems to be M. Montazeri1, M. Houshmand1, M. Eftekharzadeh2; rare and confined to only a small populations, unless the counselees 1NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Arrhythmia Clinic, Tehran, are known to be at higher risk for their presence based on family/vil- Islamic Republic of Iran. lage history and investigation. Cardiomyopathies are complex disease process that can affect the heart of a person of any age. In addition, an important cause of morbid- P0082. Psychomotor delay, facial dysmorphism and multiple ity and mortality among the world is aging population. Cardiomyopa- cysts of the corpus callosum: a new syndrome? thies are conditions in which the normal muscular function of the myo- A. Masurel-Paulet1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, F. Huet2, L. Guibaud3, M. Chou- cardium has been altered by specific or multiple etiologies, with vary- chane2, L. Faivre1; ing degrees of physiologic compensation for that malfunction. Persons 1Centre de Génétique, Dijon, France, 2Service de Pédiatrie 1, Dijon, France, with cardiomyopathy may have asymptomatic left ventricular systolic 3Département de Pédiatrie et d’Imagerie Foetale, Lyon, France. dysfunction, left ventricular diastolic dysfunction, or both. The reported We report on a 16 months old child presenting with psychomotor delay, incidence is 400,000-500,000 cases per year, with a prevalence of 2- facial dysmorphism and multiple cysts of the corpus callosum. Family 3 million people. Recently mitochondrial DNA mutations have been history was negative and he was born at term (BW: 2730g, OFC: 33,5 associated with cardiomyopathy. Mitochondria are the major site of cm). He had generalised hypotonia and could sat at age 14 months energy production in the cell. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that only. At age 16 months, the language was limited to sounds. Facial energy dependant tissues such as heart, affected by mitochondrial dysmorphism included a large forehead, bilateral epicanthic folds, rare dysfunction. In this study, we screened 40 Iranian DCM patients for eyebrows, anteverted ear lobes, micrognathism and glossoptosis. A mitochondrial DNA deletions. With specific primers, four different de- micropenis was also noted. There were no seizures. Etiological inves- letions were found 37.5% 9/5 kb, 22.5% ≈7/9 kb 22.5 % ≈8 kb and tigations included normal audiograms, electroencephalogram, heart one patient (2.5%) had 4977 bp “common deletion. Mitochondrial DNA and abdomino-renal ultrasound scans, standard and high resolution deletions may occur because of aging; on the other hand, mtDNA dele- chromosome analyses, plasmatic amino-acid and urinary organic-acid tions may affect myocardium and lead to secondary DCM. However, chromatographies. Ophthalmologic investigations revealed anisocoria the question regarding primary or secondary role of mtDNA deletions and a strabism. Finally, cerebral MRI showed multiple cysts of the cor- in dilated cardiomyopathy remains unanswered pus callosum. The gyration and myelinisation were normal, and the cysts did not take the contrast. A traumatic or vascular etiology was P0085. A novel 355-356 delGA framshift mutation and frequency ruled out and there was no evidence of a toxic intake or infection dur- of connexin-26 (GJB2) mutation in Iranian patients ing pregnancy. A foetopathy cannot be ruled out but the association M. Hamid1,2, M. Hashemzadeh chaleshtori3, S. Zare2,4, F. Mahjoubi5, M. T. Ak- of facial dysmorphism and micropenis argue for a syndromic origin. bari6,2; A review of the literature did not permit to find similar observations, in 1Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Akbari Medical favour of a new syndromic association. Genetic labaratory, No.98, Taleghani Street, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical P0083. Czech Dysplasia Metatarsal Type: Another Type II sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Islamic Azad Unversity Science and Collagen Disorder Research Compus, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5National Institute for Ge- K. P. Hoornaert1, I. Marik2, K. Kozlowski3, T. Cole4, M. Le Merrer5, J. G. Leroy1, netic Engineering & Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, P. J. Coucke1, D. Sillence6, G. R. Mortier1; 6Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modaras 1Center for Medical Genetics, Gent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 2Ambu- University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. lant Centre for Defects of Locomotor Apparatus, Prague, Czech Republic, 3De- The commonest form of non-syndromic recessive deafness is caused partment of Medical Imaging, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, by mutation in GJB2, encoding gap junction beta 2 protein on chromo- Australia, 4Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, some location 13q11. It is known as DFNB1 responsible for half of United Kingdom, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Hopital Necker, Paris, autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness. The most frequent mu- France, 6Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Hospital at West- tation 35delG accounts for about 30-63% of mutations in white people mead, Sydney, Australia. of European. Background: Czech dysplasia metatarsal type is an autosomal domi- In this study we report the frequency of the GJB2 gene mutations in 51 nant disorder characterized by an early-onset, progressive spondylo- Iranian individuals affected by hearing loss. arthropathy with normal stature. Shortness of 3rd and/or 4th toes is a Eight different variants were detected in 13 individuals (25.5%) by us- frequently observed clinical feature. Similarities between individuals ing direct-sequencing technique in coding region of GJB2 gene. Cx26 with this dysplasia and patients with an R275C mutation in the CO- related deafness mutations (35delG, R127H, V27I+E114G, Y155X, L2A1 gene, prompted us to analyze the COL2A1 gene in the original M163V and a novel 355-356 delGA) were identified in 9(17.6%) sub- families reported with Czech dysplasia. jects in heterozygous form, 3(5.9%) (35delG/35delG and R143W/ Methods: Targeted sequencing of exon 13 of the COL2A1 gene was R143W) and 1 (2%) (R32H+35delG) were homozygous and com-Clinical genetics  pound heterozygous respectively. analyzed 102 children and adolescents, with developmental delay/ S86T polymorphism was observed in all families (100%), V153I and mental retardation and dysmorphic features, using array-CGH with (F154F +F146F) polymorphisms also were detected in 5 persons. a resolution of approximately 0.8-1 Mb (IntegraChip, Technogenet- In this population study our data showed that the rate of GJB2 mu- ics, Milan). Standard cytogenetics (>450 bands per haploid genome) tations is high in heterozygous form so other loci and genes related showed no chromosome rearrangements. In addition, subtelomeric to deafness must be investigated in these individuals. Moreover the FISH analysis, carried out in most of our patients, did not detect any most frequent mutation was 35delG because 9 out of 18(50%) mu- abnormality. Using array-CGH we detected copy number imbalances tant alleles had this mutation .This is comparable with White European in 10 patients (9.8%). There were 4 deletions, 4 duplications, 1 inter- population. stitial deletion, and 1 deletion/duplication. Five of them were de novo, one derived from a malsegregation of a maternal reciprocal transloca- P0086. Absence of mutations in GJB2 (Connexin-26) gene in an tion, and one was inherited from the phenotypically normal mother. Ethnic Group of Iranian Population Array-CGH is a powerful tool for the accurate detection of genomic H. Galehdari1, A. Foroughmand1, M. Naderi soorki11, G. Mohammadian2,3; imbalances in clinical practice, and has the potential to identify genes 1University, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Welfare Organization, Ahwaz, involved in mental retardation. Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetic Consulting Centre, Welfare Organization,, Ahwaz,, Islamic Republic of Iran. P0089. Novel mutations in Pejvakin are associated with We have investigated the prevalence of mutations in the GJB2 gene autosomal recessive non syndromic hearing loss in Iranian in Iranian deaf population with Arabian background using direct DNA families sequencing methods. A common GJB2 gene mutation (35delG) was M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori1, E. Farrokhi1, M. A. Simpson2, M. Dolati3, L. screened in 25 families with at least two deaf members. To investigate Hoghoughi Rad3, M. Shahrani1, A. H. Crosby2; other GJB2 mutations, we have amplified and sequenced DNA from 1Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical 59 deaf patients and 25 control subjects. None of the samples stud- Sciences, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Ge- ied, by sequencing, revealed any deafness-associated mutations in netics, St Georges Hospital Medical School, University of London, Cranmer the coding region of the GJB2 gene. These findings differ from many Terrace, London SW17 ORE, UK., London, United Kingdom, 3Department of reports on the GJB2 gene, describing various mutations as the cause Biology, School of Basic Sciences, Sciences and Research Campus, Islamic of congenital recessive deafness. Azad University, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Hearing loss is a very heterogenous disorder and may be due to ge- P0087. Phenotype and molecular mapping of the breakpoints in netic or environmental causes, or both. More than 100 genes may be a new case with del(4) (q33) involved in non syndromic hearing loss. A novel gene, DFNB59 encod- S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, C. Sismani2, G. Koumbaris2, M. Ioannides2, V. Touliatou1, A. ing pejvakin located on chromosome 2q31.2, has been very recently Kolialexi1, A. Mavrou1, E. Kanavakis1, P. C. Patsalis2; shown to cause neuronal deafness in four Iranian families. We have 1Aghia Sophia Childrens Hospital, University of Athens, Department of Medical conducted mutation analysis of the DFNB59 gene in a cohort of 30 Genetics, Choremio Research Laboratory, Athens, Greece, 2The Cyprus Insti- large autosomal recessive non syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) tute of Neurology and Genetics, Department of Cytogenetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. families from Iran. We have identified Two polymorphisms (R265C, The 4q deletion syndrome, comprising all microscopically visible (inter- R265G) and three novel allelic variants (726delT, G292R, 988delG) stitial and terminal) is a well-recognized distinctive malformation entity, from which two family-specific DFNB59 mutations including 726delT with an estimated incidence of 1: 10.000. Here we present the clinical and 988delG were detected. Our finding revealed that DFNB59-as- and molecular findings in a 3 year old male with a de novo deletion sociated deafness accounting for 6.7% of ARNSHL families examined, of 4q33 [46,XY,del(4q)(q33)]. The breakpoint of the deletion was re- suggesting DNB59 mutation is of significant clinical importance in fined by 1Mb resolution array-CGH where 23 clones on chromosome Iran. 4q were found deleted. Subsequently, several FISH analyses using 3 BAC clones, subtelomeric and paint probes were performed. Based P0090. Studies of DMD/BMD deletion carriers by microsatellite on the array and FISH results the breakpoint of the deletion is located markers analysis and FISH at the beginning of 4q33 and extending to the telomere. The size of J. G. Zimowski, B. Pawlowska, M. Holding, J. Bogdanowicz, A. Ilnicka, E. the deletion was estimated to be approximately 18.9-22.9Mb. Clinical Fidzianska; findings of the patient include: hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge, short Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland. nose with anteverted nares, long upper philtrum, thin upper lip, micro- Detection of carriers is very important to offer genetic counseling and retrognathia, low-set and protruding ears, right pre-auricular tag uni- prenatal diagnosis to families with Duchenne/Becker muscular dystro- laterally, low posterior hairline, clinodactyly of the 5th fingers, tappering phy. Results of DNA and FISH studies on 54 women at risk of being fingers, hypospadias, and severe psychomotor retardation. Soon after carriers (only one son affected with Duchene muscular dystrophy in birth he developed severe hypotonia and feeding difficulties. Echocar- the family) are presented. In 27 females microsatelite markers and diography at 15 months documented aortic supravalvular membrane pedigree analysis allowed to confirm or exclude carriers. In 27 remain- resulting in mild aortic stenosis and dysplasia of the pulmonary valve. ing females microsatellite markers analysis was not informative - ho- At age of 18 months the cleft palate was surgically repaired. The de- mozygosity of polymorphic sites was found. In 4 of these cases FISH scription of additional cases with similar deletions in proximal 4q will using exon-specifc DNA probes was applied. As a control of correct allow a more precise prognosis and is therefore of great value for ge- hybrydisation reaction X centromere probe was used. All 4 suspected netic counsellors, while detailed molecular characterization in any well females were identified as a deletion carriers in metaphase or inter- clinically characterized patient is expected to track down individual phase nucleus. candidate genes for specific features of the 4q-syndrome. P0091. Advanced grandmaternal age is not a risk factor for the P0088. Detection of chromosomal imbalances in children with occurrence of Down syndrome (DS) in St. Petersburg, Russian developmental delay/mental retardation and dismorphic features Federation by array-CGH. M. Tahmasebi-Hesari, N. V. Kovaleva; A. Battaglia1, J. Carey2, A. Novelli3, T. Filippi1, L. Bernardini3; St. Petersburg Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies under the Federal 1Stella Maris Research Institute, CALAMBRONE (Pisa), Italy, 2Dept. of Pediat- Agency of Health Care, Saint-Petesburg, Russian Federation. rics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 3CSS-Mendel Insti- Background. Advanced maternal age is a well-established factor of tute, Roma, Italy. DS occurrence. However the majority of DS cases are born to young Chromosomal aberrations are a common cause of MCA/MR syn- couples. Despite great efforts, etiological factors different from those dromes. Novel high resolutions, whole genome technologies, such as proposed for maternal age have not been clearly defined. Malini and array based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH), improve Ramachandra’s recent study [BMC Med Genet 2006,7:4] has revived the detection rate of submicroscopic chromosomal rearrangements, the old idea that grandmaternal age may increase the risk of their allowing reinvestigation of patients in whom conventional cytogenetic grandchild being born with DS. Objectives. Analysis of grandparental techniques and subtelomeric FISH failed to detect abnormalities. We ages in families of DS babies with regular trisomy 21 to study if ma-Clinical genetics  ternal grandmother’s age in DS families where the mother is young P0094. DHPLC-based whole-gene mutation scanning of the is higher comparing to controls. Methods. Extraction of the data on dystrophin gene in Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy grandparental ages in DS families and in families of healthy newborns patients from questionnaires collected in the course of a case-control study on K. Storm1, E. Reyniers1, W. Wuyts1, J. J. Martin2; congenital malformations in St.Petersburg, 1990-1999. The data were 1Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of Neurology, analyzed according to two categories of maternal ages, <35 yr and ≥35 Antwerp, Belgium. yr. Results. Data on 243 families of DS and 330 control families were Background: Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD and obtained. We did not find systematic differences in grandparental age BMD) are caused by mutations in the dystrophin gene. Large rear- distribution between studied groups. Specifically, in 148 young couples rangements in the gene are found in about two-thirds of DMD/BMD with DS, mean maternal grandmother’s age (26.6 yr) was not higher patients, with ~ 60 % carrying deletions and 5-10 % carrying duplica- comparing to paternal grandmother’s age (26.3 yr) and corresponding tions. Most of the remaining 30-35 % of patients is expected to have figures in 284 young controls (27 yr and 27.1 yr). Similarly, there was small nucleotide substitutions, insertions, or deletions. Since the dys- no difference in age distribution between 95 older couples with DS and trophin gene is very large, 79 exons spanning 2.4 Mb and pathogenic 44 control couples. Conclusion. We failed to support the suggestion changes are scattered throughout the gene, most molecular diagnostic that advanced age of the DS grandmother is responsible for meiotic laboratories focus only on the identification of large deletions/duplica- disturbance in her daughter. tions. Objective: To detect the remaining 30-35 % of small mutations within the coding and splice site determining sequences of the dystro- P0092. Sensitivity and frequencies of Dystrophin gene mutations phin gene, we optimized denaturing high performance liquid chroma- in Thai males as detected by multiplex PCR tography (DHPLC) mutation screening followed by direct sequencing. J. Eu-ahsunthornwattana, M. Busabaratana, S. Pingsuthiwong, T. Sura; Validation was performed using DNA samples harboring known dys- Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. trophin variants. Clinical inclusion criteria for extended analysis of the Background .Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal X-linked dystrophin gene were set. Results and discussion: DHPLC mutation disease affecting 1 in 3500 male births. Both DMD and its more be- scanning was applied to analyze a cohort of DMD/BMD patients with- nign variant, Becker’s muscular dystrophy (BMD), are caused by mu- out large deletion/duplication. We identified sixteen clear pathogenic tations in the dystrophin gene. It is not possible to analyse the whole changes and one unclassified variant. The inclusion criteria were used gene because of its enormous size. Methods have been developed to to evaluate the detection efficiency of our DHPLC-conditions. detect the commonest mutations, namely the deletions of the exons. Although these tests are highly specific, their sensitivity is inherently P0095. Association of dysferlinopathy and Antley-Bixler less than perfect and should be quantified. syndrome in the same patient mimicking muscular dystrophy Methods. We reviewed our database for the results of Dystrophin gene with early contractures mutation detection by means of multiplex PCR in Thai males, diag- K. Nguyen1, C. Vial2, M. Krahn1, N. Wein3, V. Labelle1, B. Eymard4, N. Lévy1,3, nosed clinically with DMD or BMD from July 1994 to November 2006. N. Philip1,3; Only one index patient was chosen from each family for statistical 1Département de Génétique Médicale, APHM, Marseille, France, 2Hopital Neu- analysis. The overall sensitity of the test, the number of exon deleted, rologique Pierre Wertheimer, Lyon, France, 3INSERM U491, Faculté de Méde- and the deletion frequency of each exon were calculated, along with cine, Marseille, France, 4Institut de Myologie, Pitié Salpétrière, Paris, France. their 95% confidence intervals (C.I.). Dysferlinopathies are autosomal recessive muscular dystrophies Results. We found deletions in 99 out of the 202 index patients (49%; caused by DYSF mutations and are clinically heterogenous, including Agresti-Coull 95% C.I. = 42%-56%). 51% of these had deletion in one Miyoshi myopathy, LGMD2B and proximo-distal myopathy. Onset is exon, while the patient with the most extensive deletions had 14 ex- usually in the young adult, and early contractures are not a character- ons deleted. The mean number of deleted exons were 2.84 (bootstrap istic feature of the disease. 95% C.I. = 2.37-3.48). The region spanning exons 44-52 was the most We report a 40 year-old woman born to related French parents. She frequently deleted. was referred for muscle weakness of the lower limbs starting at age 25, Conclusion. The multiplex PCR detected deletions only in about half associated with severe contractures, affecting mostly the elbows, and of the cases, and if DMD/BMD is strongly suspected, should be con- at a lesser extent the knees and the ankles, and thus was suspected to firmed by more sensitive tests. have muscular dystrophy with early contractures. Of importance, she had a craniosynostosis treated by surgery at age 2. At examination, P0093. Dystrophin gene’s hotspots in Iranian patients suspected she presented with proximal weakness of the lower limbs and severe to DMD orBMD atrophy of the calves. In addition, we noted dysmorphic features related M. Ebrahimi1, M. Dehghan Manshadi2, M. Rostami2, T. Majidi zadeh2, M. seyed to craniosynostosis, such as frontal bossing and proptosis, and severe hassani2, M. Houshmand2; elbow contractures which turned out to result from radiohumeral syn- 1Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute ostosis. All those features were consistent with Antley-Bixler syndrome Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. (ABS) (OMIM 207410). Chromosomal analysis was normal. The dystrophinopathies_Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and Creatine Kinases were massively increased and muscle biopsy Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD)_are the most common inherited showed a dysferlin deficiency consistent with the diagnosis of primary disorders of muscle. Although reliable prevalence data are lacking, the dysferlinopathy, further confirmed by genetic investigations that identi- prevalence of DMD is generally estimated at 1:3,500 live male births. fied a homozygous intragenic deletion in DYSF predicted to produce a Both DMD and BMD are due to mutations in the dystrophin gene, locat- truncated protein. To confirm the diagnosis of Antley-Bixler syndrome, ed at Xp21, which comprises 79 exons and 8 tissue-specificpromoters FGFR2 and POR genes, which cause autosomal dominant ABS and Distributed across 2.2 Mb of genomic sequence_making dystrophin autosomal recessive ABS-like respectively, are under investigation. the largest gene yet described. Therefore, this case associating Antley-Bixler syndrome and dysfer- Dystrophin gene deletions are found in 55%of patients with BMD and linopathy, illustrates the clinical diagnostic pitfalls in patients carrying 65% of patients DMD; point mutations account for 30% of mutations, fortuitously two rare genetic disorders with overlapping features. and duplications account for the remainder. Genetic testing for deletions relies on a multiplex PCR technique, with P0096. The patient with severe dysmorphic features and amplification of fragments containing 20 of the gene’s 79 exons and chromosomes abnormality with unidentified marker with deletions detected as absent or size-shifted bands on poly Acryl A. Matulevičienė1, B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, E. Zarakauskaitė2, V. Kučinskas1,2; amide gel analysis. Because deletions tend to occur in “hotspots” with- 1The Center for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariškių in the dystrophin gene, analysis of this limited number of exons can Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vil- detect 98% of dystrophin deletions. nius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. Hot spots are exons 3-19 and 42-60.We studied all of these exons for We present a patient with chromosomal abnormality with unidentified 23 Iranian families. marker and severe dysmorphic features of phenotype. Our patient is a In our study most common of deletion were in exon6, exon44, exon50, three-year-old girl, third child of healthy non consanguineous parents exon4 respectively. from uncomplicated pregnancy. The genealogy of this family is com-Clinical genetics  plicated: two cousins - brother and sister with symptoms of psycho- dermal signs are combined with other anomalies. We studied two sibs, motoric retardation and one child with Down syndrome from the other a 26 year-old man and his 9 year-old sister, born to unrelated healthy cousin‘s family. The dysmorphic features were seen from the birth of parents showing a distinct phenotype. Hair, eyebrows and eyelashes this girl. Facial dysmorphism is characterised by the triangular high were sparse, coarse and brittle with areas of progressive scalp alo- forehead with expressed sagital suture, hypertrichosis, wide spaced pecia. The older patient showed axillary and pubic hypotrichosis and eyes, ptosis, down-slanting palpebral fissures, strabismus, broad na- mildly dystrophic nails. Oral findings included multiple frenula, small, sal root, very short nose with anteverted nares, short grooved philtrum, wide-spaced teeth with peg-shaped and conical crowns. Spontane- triangular mouth, thin upper lip, everted lower lip, high narrow palate, ous sweating was normal. There were also broad nasal bridge, short micrognathia, malformed ears with preauricular sinus on one of sides. philtrum with anteverted nares, and small ears with thickened, over- The characteristic skin lesions are typical for chromosomal mosaicism: folded helices. The older brother showed 2-3 toes syndactyly and un- they involve streaked, whorled and mottled areas of hypopigmentation derwent surgical correction of 2-3 and 3-4 cutaneous syndactyly at the on trunk and limbs. The psychomotor development of our patient is hands, while his sister had 3-4 hands syndactyly and toes 2-3 and 4-5. with severe features of delay: she sat alone only at two years. Clini- An abnormal pattern of palmar flexion creases was present in both cal follow-up showed these clinical findings: CT scan showed corpus sibs, with bilateral four-finger lines in the male. The oldest patient had callosum agenesis and hydrocephaly, X-ray: abnormal feet position also mild mental retardation (MR) and unilateral conductive deafness. - equinovarus bilaterally. These subjects add to the 7 previously reported (one family with 4 af- Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed a mo- fected sibs and 3 sporadic cases) presenting the association of hidrotic saic karyotype 47,XX, +mar/46,XX in girl with dysmorphism of pheno- ectodermal dysplasia, cutaneous syndactyly and variable mental retar- type. Chromosome analysis was performed from GTG banded meta- dation and ease the delineation of an autosomal recessive (AR) ED- phases. The resolution level was 400-500 bands. The exact nature of syndactyly-MR syndrome. Differential diagnosis, among AR syndromic the marker chromosome could not be identified in our patient. Parental EDs, include Zlotogora-Orun syndrome, consisting of ectodermal dys- karyotypes were normal. plasia, syndactyly, mental retardation in addition to cleft lip/palate. P0097. Disproportional high frequency of CLCN1 mutations P0099. Lessons from two families affected with borderline among patients with myotonic dystrophy type 2. forms of Vascular Elhers-Danlos syndrome: Genetic testing is T. Suominen1, B. Schoser2, O. Raheem3, S. Auvinen4, R. Krahe5, H. Lochmül- necessary! ler2, W. Kress6, B. Udd7; A. Plancke1, N. Ruiz-Pallares1, I. Quere2, H. Plauchu3, M. Claustres1, P. Khau 1Neurogenetics, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 2Friedrich-Baur-Insti- van Kien1; tute, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany, 3Department of Pathol- 1CHU Montpellier/INSERM U827, Montpellier, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Mont- ogy, Pirkanmaa Hospital District, Center for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere, pellier, France, 3Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. Finland, 4Department of Neurology, Central Finland Central Hospital, Jyväskylä, Vascular Elhers-Danlos syndrome (V-EDS) is a rare dominantly in- Finland, 5Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Ander- herited disorder cause by mutations in the type III procollagen gene son Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States, 6Institute of Human Genetics, (COL3A1). The diagnosis is particularly difficult to establish and a University of Wuerzburg, Germany, 7Department of Neurology, Tampere Univer- marked intra/inter-familial phenotypic variability occurs with frequent sity Hospital, Tampere, Finland. sub-clinical manifestations revealed by genetic testing and familial in- Background: Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is a multiorgan disease vestigations. In view to help to the diagnosis work-up, the Villefranche caused by (CCTG)n repeat expansion mutation in ZNF9 gene. Clini- criteria define the indications of laboratory testing that in practice only cal core features are myotonia, muscle weakness and cataracts. The provides diagnosis certainty. phenotype is highly variable ranging from mild to severe forms, which We had the opportunity to study two unrelated young women with a V- makes clinical classification difficult. DM2 mutation causes aberrant EDS suspicion and a strong familial history of Familial Thoracic Aortic splicing of different genes including CLCN1. Mutations in ClC1 chloride Aneurysm and/or Aortic Dissection (TAA/AD). Attentive familial inves- channel gene (CLCN1) cause recessive and rarely dominant myotonia tigation also suggested the possibility of V-EDS manifestations. Thus, congenita (MC), characterized by myotonia and muscle hypertrophy. we performed a first screening of the COL3A1 gene from skin cultured Objective: to clarify whether co-segregation of frequent recessive fibroblast. We identified heterozygous transversion in each probant: CLC1 mutations may have a modifier effect on the DM2 phenotype. c.1835G>A and c.2357G>T. Both mutations are predicted to result in a Methods: CLCN1 mutations R894X, F413C and A531V were analysed glycine substitution (p.Gly612Asp and p.Gly786Val). Theses missens- in 200 Finnish and German DM2 patients and 200 controls by TaqMan es alter an obligatory glycine residue of the Gly-X-Y tripe-helix repeat- Sequence Detection System (ABI) using specific primers for PCR and ed domain of the type III procollagen. The mutations were confirmed at fluorescent oligonucleotide probes. the genomic level and mutation-based familial investigation allowed to Results: CLCN1 mutations R894X, F413C and A531V in DM2 patients clarify affected-status in relatives with ambiguous phenotype. and controls. In conclusion, V-EDS must be carefully evaluated at a familial level. Cohorts R894X hoz R894X hez F413C hez A531V hez total Suggestive familial history such TAAD/AD, sudden death but also Finnish DM2 patients other events may reinforce the V-EDS suspicion and genetic testing is 0 3 2 0 5 (n=100) crucial for diagnosis certainty, efficient familial screening, risk assess- German DM2 patients 1 4 0 0 5 ment and preventive follow-up. (n=100) Finnish controls (n=100) 0 2 1 0 3 P0100. Adult onset forms of eIF2B related disorders: diagnostic German controls value of MRI and molecular analysis 0 1 0 0 1 (n=100) P. Labauge1, F. Niel2,3, L. Horzinski2, M. Petit3, C. Confavreux4, D. Rodriguez5, Conclusions: In German DM2 patients the frequency of CLC1 co-segregation was C. Goizet6, S. Vukusic4, F. Maugière4, F. Bouhour4, G. Casterlnovo1, A. Fogli2,3, 5-fold and in the Finnish DM2 patients almost twofold compared to control population. O. Boespflug-Tanguy2,7; The results clearly indicate a considerable contributing effect on the clinical symptoms 1CHU Carmeau, service Neurologie, NIMES, France, 2INSERM UMR 384, and the likelihood of a patient to be diagnosed with DM2. Thus recessive CLCN1 Clermont ferrand, France, 3CHU de Clermont Ferrand, service de Biochimie mutations are genetic modifiers in DM2. Médicale, Clermont ferrand, France, 4Hospices civils de Lyon, Service de Neurologie A, Hôpital Neurologique, Lyon, France, 5Assistance publique-Ho- P0098. A novel Italian family with ectodermal dysplasia- pitaux de Paris, service de neuropédiatrie, Hopital Armand Trousseau, Paris, syndactyly-mental retardation syndrome France, 6CHU Pellegrin, Service de Neurologie, BORDEAUX, France, 7CHU de F. Brancati1,2, G. D’Amato1,2, R. Mingarelli1, B. Dallapiccola1,2; Clermont Ferrand, service de génétique Médicale, Clermont ferrand, France. 1IRCCS CSS Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medi- Mutations in the five subunits of the eIF2B translation initiation fac- cine and Pathology, “La Sapienza” University, Rome, Italy. tor have been reported in a heterogeneous group of autosomal re- Ectodermal Dysplasias (EDs) are a heterogeneous group of conditions cessive leukodystrophies characterized by a CSF-like aspect of the presenting with hair, tooth, nails and sweat glands abnormalities. EDs white matter (vanishing white matter)on magnetic resonance imaging may be sub-classified into pure forms and syndromic EDs, where ecto- (MRI), leading to the concept of eIF2B related disorders. The key role Clinical genetics  of eIF2B in stress response explains the episodes of rapid deteriora- and risk of myocardial infarction (MI). tion following febrile infection or head trauma. Severity is correlated Design: The study was conducted in the Rotterdam Study, a large sin- to age at disease onset, distinguishing between early infantile (<2 gle-center prospective cohort study in people aged 55 years and older. years), childhood (2-5 years, CACH) and juvenile-adults (>5 years) Lipid levels were analyzed using linear regression models and risk of forms. Adult onset forms have been initially individualized as ovarioleu- MI was assessed with Cox’ proportional hazards models. kodystrophies due to associated primary ovarian failure (POF). We Results: The hepatic lipase variant was associated with an increase in report 14 eIF2B mutated patients (2 males, 12 females) with an adult serum HDL levels of 0.11 mmol/L in both genders, while an increased onset (mean age 30). Initial neurological symptoms were motor (9) risk of MI was observed only in men (hazard ratio=1.32 [95% Confi- as well as cognitive/psychiatric (4), whereas two patient has no neu- dence Interval (C.I.): 1.05-1.66] for CT versus CC and 1.75 [95% C.I.: rological signs (1 POF, 1 asymptomatic). Abnormal stress response 1.39-2.20] for TT versus CC). This effect was independent of serum was observed in 5 patients and POF in 50% of females. MRI showed HDL levels. LIPC -514C>T interacted with CETP I405V with respect extensive leukoencephalopathy in all cases with cavitation in only 9. to serum HDL levels. Those homozygous for both mutations saw a Disease evolution was rapid in one case (death after 9 months) but marked elevation in HDL levels (0.29 mmol/L, p = 0.05). These interaction slowly progressive (7) or stable (5) in the 13 others (mean follow-up increased HDL levels, however, were not inversely associated with 10 years). The eIF2B5 recurrent mutation, c.338G>A or p.Arg113His, atherosclerosis or MI risk. was present in the majority of patients (11) mainly at an homozygote Conclusions: LIPC genotype affects HDL levels, and risk of MI in state (9). In adult patients, despite an heterogeneous clinical presenta- males. The interaction of this variant with CETP on HDL levels helps tion, diagnosis of eIF2B related disorders could be suggested by the elucidate the underlying mechanisms and suggests that the beneficial MRI features and rapidly confirmed by detection of the p.Arg113His effects of CETP inhibition may vary in particular subgroups. mutation. P0103. Female monozygotic twins with Familial juvenile P0101. Genotype influences epilepsy outcome in patients with nephronophthisis - a case report CDKL mutations M. Gafencu1, G. Doros1, R. Costa2, M. Puiu1, M. Serban1; N. Bahi-Buisson1,2, A. Kaminska1, N. Boddaert1, M. Rio1, A. Afenjar3, M. Ge- 1Univ. of medicine V. Babes Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Emergency Chil- rard4, F. Giuliano5, J. Motte6, D. Heron7, M. N’Guyen Morel8, C. Richelme5, P. dren Hospital Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania. Plouin1, C. Chiron1, C. Philippe9, T. Bienvenu10; Nephronophthisis (NPHP) or Familial juvenile nephronophthisis (FJN) 1Necker Enfants Malades, APHP, Université Paris V, Paris, France, 2INSERM is an autosomal recessive condition equally distributed in males and U567 Faculté Cochin,, Paris, France, 3Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 4Robert females that almost always progresses to end-stage renal disease Debré, APHP,, Paris, France, 5Nice University Hospital, Nice, France, 6Reims usually during adolescence. Smith and Graham first reported NPHP University Hospital, Reims, France, 7Pitié Salpétrière, APHP,, Paris, France, in 1945, but the first description has been attributed to Fanconi et al in 8Grenoble University Hospital, Grenoble, France, 9Nancy University Hospital, 1951. A gene involved in the disease - NPHP 1 has been mapped to Nancy, France, 10Cochin, APHP, Université Paris V, Paris, France. chromosome 2q13. It has been estimated that FJN is responsible for Mutations in the X-linked cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) approximately 2.4% of the cases of end-stage renal disease in children gene are responsible for a severe encephalopathy with early epilepsy. in the United States but this it may be underestimated as studies from So far, the electroclinical phenotype remains mostly unknown and no Europe have revealed a higher frequency of 15% (Konrad et al). We clear genotype-phenotype correlation has been established. present here a case of monozygotic twins emphasizing the identical Objective: To characterize the epilepsy associated with CDKL5 muta- progresion of the disease and importance of examination in children tions and look for a relationship between the genotype and the course with deterioration of renal function, for determining a correct diagnosis. of epilepsy. The first symptoms developed in our twins after the age of 10 and they Methods: We retrospectively analyzed the electroclinical phenotype of consist of polyuria with polydipsia and than anemia. Renal ultrasonog- 13 CDKL5 mutated girls and examined whether the severity of the raphy revealed normal-sized kidneys. epilepsy was linked to the type and location of mutations. Results: Epilepsy course discloses three successive stages: early epi- P0104. The second observation of familial congenital tetramelic lepsy (Stage I) (onset 1-10 weeks) with normal interictal EEG (10/13) oligodactyly despite frequent convulsive seizures; epileptic encephalopathy (Stage A. Tészás1, R. Møller2, N. Tommerup2, G. Kosztolányi1, K. W. Kjaer2; II) with infantile spasms (8/8) and hypsarrhythmia (8/8). At the age of 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, evaluation (2.5-19 years), 7 patients were seizure free and 6 had de- Pécs, Hungary, 2Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, veloped refractory epilepsy (stage III) with tonic seizures and myoclo- University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. nia (5/6). According to the presence of a functional catalytic domain Congenital limb deficiencies are rare conditions, occurring in 5-6 of of the protein, patients were divided in two groups: those with early every 10,000 live births. Most are sporadic, additional malformations truncating mutations that lead to a truncation of the catalytic domain can be detected in approximately one third of the cases. Upper limbs (7/13) and those with late truncating mutations (6/13). We observed are involved significantly more often than lower; both are affected only that the former developed refractory epilepsy (5/7) more frequently in 10% of the cases. Postaxial/ulnar deficiencies are often elements than the latter (1/6). Moreover, infantile spasms were more frequently of more common disorders, like the ulnar-mammary syndrome - an controlled in patients with late truncating mutations. autosomal dominant disorder caused by a mutation of the TBX3 gene. Interpretation: Our data suggest that the course of the epilepsy is more The TBX2 gene considered to have similar roles in limb development severe in patients with CDKL5 mutations that impair the catalytic do- as the TBX3. Deletion of the 4q33 region has been also described in main of the protein than in patients with late truncating mutations. the background of ulnar ray deficiencies. We report on a family, an affected mother and her 2 affected children, P0102. Epistatic Effect of CETP and LIPC on Serum HDL Levels: with apparently autosomal dominant postaxial oligodactyly and/or The Rotterdam Study brachydactyly affecting the 5th fingers and toes, in non-syndromic A. Isaacs1, Y. Aulchenko1, A. Hofman1, E. Sijbrands1, F. Sayed-Tabatabaei2, O. form. Postaxial deficiency occurs in a number of genetic and sporadic Klungel3, A. Maitland-van der Zee3, B. Stricker1, B. Oostra1, J. Witteman1, C. syndromes, but isolated inherited tetramelic, postaxial oligodactyly - van Duijn1; exactly similar to our case - has been described to our knowledge 1Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Dutch Medicines only once (Wulfsberg et al., 1993). We performed G-banded chromo- Evaluation Board Agency, Den Haag, The Netherlands, 3Utrecht Institute of somal analysis with normal result. ArrayCGH revealed a small deletion Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht, The Netherlands. and duplication; however, both of the mutations have been described Objectives: Polymorphisms in the hepatic lipase (LIPC -514C>T) and earlier as normal variants. Linkage to the chromosomal region har- cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP I405V) genes affect HDL lev- bouring the TBX2 and TBX3 gene and 4q33 chromosomal region was els but their relationship with cardiovascular disease, and their com- tested with STS markers. Although the exact genetic background has bined effect, is unclear. The objectives of the current study were to remained unclear, we could exclude the most likely candidate regions’ characterize the effect of the hepatic lipase variant, and it’s interaction role in the development of this condition. Further investigations may with the CETP variant, in terms of cholesterol levels, atherosclerosis, reveal the cause of this new, existing syndrome.Clinical genetics  P0105. APC gene mutations in Polish FAP patients FAS, 6 -p-FAS and 5 -ARND). The 11 children left remain in observa- A. Plawski1, M. Podralska1, T. Banasiewicz2, P. Krokowicz3, D. Lipinski1, R. tion due to young age. Slomski1; We have analyzed the frequency of defining characteristics for every 1Instytitute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of General, category: for FAS children - microcephaly (100%), postnatal growth re- Gastroenterological and Endocrinological Surgery, University of the Medical tardation (76%), smooth/flattened philtrum rank 5 (56%), thin upper lip Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Surgery University of the Medical rank 5 (60%), moderate mental retardation (80%), learning difficulties Sciences, Poznan, Poland. and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (100%). Prenatal alcohol ex- Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant, pre- posure was confirmed in 44% of cases. Other defects recorded: heart disposed disorder that results in the development of numerous polyps defects, genitourinary, ocular abnormalities and hernia. in the colon and rectum, usually beginning in childhood or adolescence. Patients diagnosed with p-FAS and ARND present similar characteris- Other extracolonic features may include polyps in the upper parts of tics. The screening questionaire for maternal alcohol history didn’t fit to the gastroenterological tract, desmoid tumours, ocular lesions, osteo- our population and we have adapted it. The detailed protocol as well mas, dental abnormalities, and malignancies in other organs. FAP inci- as the differential diagnosis will be presented. dence is estimated at 1:10,000. FAP arises due to germ line mutations In conclusion, we appreciate that the guidelines are very useful for in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, consisting of 8.529 bp FASD diagnosis and we have adapted the protocol for our population open reading frame and encoding a 2.843 amino acid protein. in order to optimize FASD diagnosis. Seven hundreds DNA samples from persons belonging to 280 Polish FAP families were collected. 380 patients were diagnosed with FAP. P0108. Clinical features in patients with Opitz-Kaveggia (FG) The entire APC gene was screened for mutations in 240 families. The syndrome and a recurrent mutation, p.R961W, in the MED12 APC gene point mutations were identified in 115 FAP families. Thirty of gene them have not been described before. Seven mutation types recurred J. M. Graham1, H. Risheg2, R. C. Rogers2, R. D. Clark3, K. Jones4, J. B. Moe- two or more times. The recurrent mutations were detected in 52% of schler5, M. May2, S. M. Joseph2, J. R. Jones2, C. E. Schwartz2, M. J. Friez2, R. diagnosed families. The large rearrangements of the APC gene were E. Stevenson2; studied in 95 FAP families without the point mutation. In this group we 1Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2Greenwood identified 14 large APC gene rearrangements with two cases of whole Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 3Loma Linda University Chil- APC gene deletions. dren’s Hospital, Loma Linda, CA, United States, 4USCD School of Medicine, This work was funded by the Ministry of Education and Science, Po- San Diego, CA, United States, 5Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, land, grant number 2PO5A10728 NH, United States. Opitz and Kaveggia (1974) reported a family of 5 affected males with P0106. A new familial case of Gollop-Wolfgang syndrome mental retardation, macrocephaly, imperforate anus and hypotonia, confirming an Autosomal Recessive mode of inheritance and Risheg et al. (2007) reported an identical nucleotide substitution B. I. Dimitrov1, A. Debeer2, L. Johan3, K. Devriendt1; (c.2881C>T) in exon 21 of MED12 causing tryptophan to replace ar- 1Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, ginine at amino acid 961 (p.R961W) in 6 families with Opitz-Kaveggia 2Neonatology Unit, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department syndrome (13% of 45 clinically-diagnosed cases), including the only of Orthopedics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. surviving affected male from the original Opitz-Kaveggia family. Mod- Gollop-Wolfgang syndrome is a rare condition of unknown aetiology erately severe mental retardation with behavioral abnormalities was characterized by the presence of femur bifurcation, tibial agenesis and present in all males old enough for cognitive assessment. Partial or ectrodactyly. Several additional abnormalities such as congenital heart complete absence of the corpus callosum was noted in all six cases defects, vertebral segmentation defects, ribs and CNS anomalies have in which brain imaging was available, and congenital hypotonia was been described. Based on an affected child of a consanguineous Arab noted in all but one case. High prominent forehead and small, low set, family with additionally similarly diseased relatives, an autosomal re- simple ears were the most consistent craniofacial manifestations. Only cessive type of inheritance was supposed. However the presence of one individual had macrocephaly (OFC >97th centile), although the oc- sporadic cases with unrelated parents as well as an association of a cipitofrontal circumference centile was greater than the height centile single case with proximal deletion of chromosome 8p suggests the in 7 of 9 cases. Imperforate anus and wide flat thumbs and great toes existence of a dominant form. were present in 7 of 10 cases. Cryptorchidism, inguinal hernia, car- We report on a newborn child of consanguineous Turkish family pre- diac defects, and short stature were noted in less than half of affected senting unilateral bifid femur and ipsilateral ectrodactyly of the hand males. Constipation was noted in 5 of 8 cases, one case had dystonia and foot. No additional abnormalities have been observed. Later on of the head and neck, one case had sagittal craniosynostosis, and one we were able to examine her 13 year old uncle who has similar but bi- case had duplicated great toes with a split right hand. Hyperactivity, lateral hand and limb anomalies. Mental development was normal, and affability, and excessive talkativeness were frequent manifestations, he presented no other anomalies. The present case strongly supports along with socially-oriented, attention-seeking behaviors. an autosomal recessive type of inheritance of this condition. A possible pathway and classification of the femur bifurcation-tibial a/hypoplasia P0109. Fibrous Dysplasia: report of two portuguese patients complex will be discussed. A. M. Fortuna1, J. Silva1, M. Barbosa1, M. Gonçalves2; 1Instituto Genetica Medica, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital Pedro Hispano, Porto, P0107. Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder - a clinical study and Portugal. suggestions for an adapted questionaire concerning fetal Fibrous Dysplasia (McCune-Albright syndrome #MIM 174800), of exposure in Romania bone is characterized by the replacement of bone by dysplastic fibrous R. Popescu1, C. Rusu2, M. Volosciuc2, E. Braha2, L. Butnariu2, M. Covic2; tissue. It is classified on the basis of whether the lesions involve one 1Children’s Hospital Iasi - Medical Genetics Center, Iasi, Romania, 2University bone or more than one bone. The cutaneous lesions consist of brown of Medicine and Pharmacy- Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, Romania. flat patches of pigmentation that follow an irregular contour. Sexual Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) refers to disabilities caused precocity and hyperthyroidism are common features. The condition is by prenatal exposure to alcohol - fetal alcohol syndrome(FAS), partial mostly sporadic and usually results from postzygotic activating muta- fetal alcohol syndrome(p-FAS) and alcohol related neurodevelopmen- tions in GNAS1. tal disorders(ARND). FAS is defined by: pre/postnatal growth retarda- We present a short review of the McCune-Albright syndrome and two tion, facial dismorphysm and SNC dysfunction. clinical cases of patients with the clinical diagnosis of this syndrome We have used the Canadian guidelines for FASD to analyze our pa- from our genetic clinic. tients in order to appreciate their importance in establishing the diag- Patient 1, a female, age 17, with vaginal bleeding at age 3, and at nosis. This involved evaluation score for upper lip, philtrum, palpebral present time with one café-au-lait spot in the dorsal region respecting fissures, impaired pre/postnatal growth, CNS/neurobehavioural disor- the midline and polyostotic fibrous dysplasia affecting the skull caus- ders and gestational exposure to alcohol. ing facial asymmetry and the long bones of the four members, with 63 children (FASD in observation between 1994-2006) were selected more expressive lesion near the right knee. Patient 2 is a male, age for the study. Only 47 patients fulfilled the criteria for FASD (25 -definite 31, presented at age 25 an expansive and suggestive lesion of two left Clinical genetics 0 ribs causing compression and the need for surgical treatment. He later FMF patients (predominantly M694V homozygotes) had ankylosing developed some more severe lesions and there is also a café-au-lait spondilitis-like syndrome. For Armenian FMF children the onset of the spot in the dorsal region. disease presented by monoarthritis is peculiar phenomenon. In 141 Diagnosis of McCune-Albright syndrome is established on clinical patients with some FMF features no MEFV mutations were found. grounds. Early diagnosis allows for opportune intervention and for spe- In 90% of cases, Colchicine is effective to keep the inflammation under cific aspects of follow-up and management of skeletal and endocrine control. involvement that should be considered. We address the issue that this condition probably remains underdiagnosed. We emphasize the im- P0112. Goltz syndrome or focal dermal hypoplasia: family case portance of early referral for genetic counselling. report with affected mother and two stillborn daughters N. Canki-Klain; P0110. The recessive form of Larsen syndrome is not due to Univ. Med.School and Univ.Hospital Centre, Croatian Institute for Brain Re- FLNB mutations search and Dept. of Neurology, ZAGREB, Croatia. L. Devisme1, M. Holder-Espinasse2, A. Valat3, O. Boute-Benejean2, A. Dieux- INTRODUCTION. Focal dermal hypoplasia or Goltz syndrome is a rare Coeslier2, S. Robertson4, S. Manouvrier-Hanu2; mesoectodermal dysplasia with multisystem involvement. Patient suf- 1Service d’anatomopathologie, Eurasanté, Lille, France, 2Service de Génétique fers from skin, skeletal, dental, ocular and other anomalies. Although Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 3Maternité, Hôpital de Lens, the mutated gene has not been identified, there is predominance in Lille, France, 4Department of Paediatrics, University of Otago, Dunedin, New affected females, suggesting X -linked dominant inheritance with le- Zealand. thality in men who are hemizygous for the X chromosome. Larsen syndrome shows a broad spectrum of clinical manifestations PATIENTS. We describe a family in which affected mother with one ranging from a lethal form of the disorder to a mild clinical expression apparently normal daughter was undiagnosed until the birth of se- with absence of major diagnostic features. Autosomal recessive as verely affected female stillborn of 34 weeks gestation. The diagnosis well as autosomal dominant mode of inheritance have been reported. was confirmed by the second very malformed stillborn daughter of 25 We report on two cases of this rare condition. The first child was a weeks gestation. Clinical features of the mother were characterized by dizygotic twin born at 29 weeks’ gestation from non-consanguineous typical ,,lobster claw“ deformity of the right hand, ectrodactily of right and healthy parents, after a normal pregnancy. She presented with foot, typical cutaneous lesions with rather asymmetrical distribution, multiple congenital anomalies and died soon after birth. Pathological and upper median incisors spacing. Stillborns had diffuse distribution examination and x-rays showed intrauterine growth retardation, hy- of typical skin lesions, ectrodactily, exomphalos, microphthalmia and drocephalus, short limbs, talipes, severe vertebral anomalies, multiple anophthalmia, dysmorphic face with malformed pinnae and microgna- costal synostosis and dislocated knees. The diagnosis of autosomal thia. recessive Larsen syndrome was suggested, and genetic counselling DISCUSSION. Reported family seems interesting because ,,mildly“ was cautious. During a further pregnancy, the first trimester ultrasound affected mother with rather asymmetrical (right sided, as majority of scan revealed bilateral talipes, abnormal vertebrae and dislocated reported cases) lesions’ distribution could be somatic and germ line knees. Fetal chromosomes were normal 46XX. Termination of preg- mosaic for an X-linked dominant mutation which would explain her less nancy was performed at 14 weeks’ gestation. Pathological examina- severe phenotype in comparison with two very malformed female still- tion and x-rays confirmed the talipes and revealed associated features borns. Unavailable mother’s family study does not permit the exclusion such as cleft palate and multiple skeletal anomalies, compatible with of transmitted mutation. the diagnosis of autosomal recessive Larsen syndrome. In CONCLUSION. The extraordinary variable expressivity of X-linked Recently, mutations in the gene encoding filamin B have been identi- disorders should be explained by multiple mechanisms including fied in four human skeletal disorders, i.e. autosomal recessive spon- skewed X-inactivation, clonal expansion, cell autonomous expression dylocarpotarsal syndrome, autosomal dominant Larsen syndrome and and somatic mosaicism that can result in disease expression in fe- atelosteogenesis type I and III. Since the spondylocostal aspects of males. autosomal recessive Larsen syndrome resemble the autosomal reces- sive spondylocarpotarsal syndrome, we performed FLNB molecular P0113. MS-MLPA as a tool to distinguish FMR1 premutations analysis in the second case, but no mutation was identified. from full mutations Therefore, we conclude that FLNB mutations do not cause autosomal R. Carvalho1, W. Friedl2, S. Lens1, J. P. Schouten1, A. O. H. Nygren1; recessive Larsen syndrome. 1MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Bonn, Germany. P0111. MEFV gene mutations in armenian FMF patients The FMR1 gene is directly associated with three distinct conditions: T. F. Sarkisian, H. Hajrapetyan, G. Shahsuvaryan, A. Beglaryan; fragile X syndrome, fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FX- Center of medical genetics, Yerevan, Armenia. TAS) and premature ovarian failure (POF). FMR1 is highly conserved Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an inherited inflammatory and contains a CGG trinucleotide repeat in the 5’ UTR of exon 1. condition usually occurred in populations from Mediterranean decent Based on the number of repeats, it is possible to distinguish four types with prevalence as high as 1 in 5 individuals. Identification of MEFV of alleles: normal (5-50 repeats), intermediate (45-60), premutation gene mutations have been of tremendous help for diagnosis of difficult (55-200), and full mutation (>200). Excess FMR1 transcription occurs cases. Testing is helpful for carrier screening and pregnancy planning in the premutation setting and is associated with both FXTAS and POF, since certain mutations have been shown to have significant correla- whereas FMR1 silencing through promoter hypermethylation and/or tion with renal amyloidosis, the worst possible manifestation of FMF. 12 translational suppression of FMR1 occurs in the full mutation setting, MEFV mutations are identified in 6500 Armenian patients. Identifica- and is strongly linked to fragile X syndrome. tion of MEFV mutations in FMF patients (heterozygotes, homozygotes Experimental determination of expansions greater than ~100-150 re- and compound heterozygotes) in comparison with healthy individuals peats is difficult to achieve through standard PCR, due to high GC have revealed the most frequent mutations and genotypes, and give content of the target sequence. Analysis of cases not amplifiable by the information of carriers and genotype - phenotype correlation. In PCR is normally performed using Southern blot analysis, a low-resolu- heterozygote carriers the most prevalent and severe cases are caused tion, time-consuming technique that requires large amounts of patient by the presence of a single M694V mutation. material. We have revealed the FMF cases with following concurrent morbidity: In this study, we use methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent epilepsy (M694V/M694V; V726A/M680I); Sjogren syndrome (M694V/ probe amplification (MS-MLPA) to analyse fragile X syndrome cases M694V); monozygotic twins, heterozygous carriers for M680I muta- not amplifiable by PCR. tion: one with FMF, and the other - non-FMF, but with epilepsy; bron- Whereas results of male unaffected controls, premutants and full mu- chial asthma (M694V/V726A, V726A/M680I, M680I); β-thalassemia tants were unequivocal, analysis of female patients was complicated (M694V/M694V); hyperthyroidism (M694V/M680I); Tourette syndrome by the variability of both the level of imprinting and of hypermethylation (M694V/M694V); ulcerative colitis (M694V/M694V); renal amyloido- of fully mutated alleles. sis and multiple sclerosis (M680I/M680I). Neurological features are We conclude that MS-MLPA can be used to correctly diagnose male accompanied along with administration of colchicines. About 20% patient material not amplifiable through conventional PCR, and gives Clinical genetics 1 an indication of the presence of FMR1 mRNA in female patients, which ciency. The mean age of participants under 18 years was 8,06 (the might have clinical implications regarding subsequent therapy. eldest 17 years old). We compared our results with the data provided in the largest study yet (n=40) by Loehr et al. (1986). The comparison P0114. Prevalence of Fragile X Premutation and Intermediate/ suggests that the prevalence of MVP is somewhat lower 8/32 (25%) Grey Zone Alleles in a Basque Sample in our study, while it was 35.2% in the latter, with a similar mean age I. Arrieta Saez1, O. Peñagarikano2, M. Telez1, L. Valverde1, B. Criado3, J. of 8.6 years, while aortic annulus dilation was higher in the current Ramirez1, B. Ortega1, A. Gonzalez4, P. Flores5, C. Lostao1; study, 5/32 (15,6%) versus (10%). There was no significant correlation 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of the between metacarpophalangeal joint hyperextensibility and MVP. This Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 2Departments of Human Genetics, Emory Uni- data supports previous recommendations towards routine echocardio- versity School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, 3High School Da Maia, CESPU, graphic evaluation in individuals with FXS. Re-evaluation of the same Porto, Portugal, 4Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Basque group especially follow-up measurements of aortic annulus diameters Country University., Bilbao, Spain, 5Department of Nursery, School of Nursery, in our ongoing longitudinal study will reveal the natural history of car- University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain. diac complications in FXS. The Fragile X Syndrome (FXS; OMIM: 309550) is the most common inherited form of mental retardation. The molecular basis is usually the P0117. Audiological evaluation of 63 males with Fragile X unstable expansion of a CGG trinucleotide repeat in the FMR 1 gene D. Aktas, Y. Alanay, G. Utine, B. Volkan-Salancı, A. Genç, F. Başer, S. Sevinç, witch resides at chromosome position Xq27.3 and is coincident with U. Akyol, K. Boduroğlu, M. Alikaşifoğlu, E. Belgin, E. Tunçbilek; the fragile site FRAXA.Based on the size of CGG secuence individu- Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. als are classified as having normal (6-54 CGG), premutation (55-200 Fragile X syndrome is the most common inherited cause of mental CGG) and full mutation alleles (>200 CGG). In adition the term inter- retardation. Medical problems other than cognitive and behavioural is- mediate/grey zone alleles has been used to define alleles with sizes sues have been rarely addressed in individuals with FXS. at high range of normal alleles (35-54 CGG). Our previous cytogenetic In this study 36 individuals molecularly diagnosed with FXS were eval- and molecular screening for Fragile X Syndrome among mental re- uated. Mean age of the participants was 8,41 yrs [1,5-27]. Median IQ tarded people of Basque and no Basque origin showed and absence score was 45 [25-103] Seventy-two percent were having occupational of full mutation among Basque Sample. In the present work we anal- therapy, while 25% also attended a public school. ized the prevalence of FMR 1 premutated and intermedite/grey zone ENT examination revealed cerumen in 12 (33%), opaque ear drum in 4 alleles, because recent clinical and molecular studies have changed (11%) Audiologic evaluation revealed normal hearing in 29 participants the view that premutated alleles serve only as a source for full muta- (80,5), while 7 (19,5) had minimal conductive type hearing loss. In gen- tion alleles in transmision of FXS and that functional and phenotyphic eral , infants from birth to 6 months underwent observation audiometry; effects are not associated with FMR 1 repeat size in the high end of children between 6-36 months of age underwent Visual Response Au- the normal range alleles. A total of 298 unrelated male individuals were diometry (VRA) in soundfield; and children 36 months of age and older included in this study. The results obtained showed that the estimated underwent play audiometry in soundfield or with earphones according prevalence of the intermediate/grey zone alleles 1/10 in Basque males to the degree of the child’s cooperation. Cooperation problems due (7.32 %) was lower than that reported in Caucasian populations. The to mental retardation affected this rule negatively. 19 non-cooperative prevalence of premutation alleles is 1/298 in males. The prevalence patients (52,78%)(age range 7-27 yrs) were tested by VRA or play of premutation alleles in the general populated is estimated in 1/813 audiometry. In 7 patients(19,45%), suprathresholds responses were males. observed. For these patients, objective test methods were used effec- tively for final decision. There was no correlation between IQ scores P0115. 47,XYY male with the fragile X syndrome: rare genetic and hearing status. Objective test methods were more feasible for di- assotiation agnose in patients with Fragil X syndrome. Mean age at diagnosis was M. Simandlova, D. Novotna, Z. Musova, M. Havlovicova; significantly lower in the group with hearing loss. This may reflect the Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University Second Medical earlier referral to a physician with recurrent infection or speech delay School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. may have prompted earlier diagnosis. We report on a 26 year-old developmentally disabled man referred to our clinic for evaluation because of pregnancy of his younger sister. P0118. Fragile X syndrome in Estonia Cytogenetic and molecular analysis revealed a 47, XYY karyotype and H. Puusepp1,2, T. Kahre3, I. Lind3, E. Raukas3,4, V. Soo3, H. Sibul1,4, A. Kurg1, K. the presence of a trinucleotide repeat expansion resulting in fragile Õunap2,3; X syndrome. Direct detection of the pre- and full mutation for the af- 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2De- fected individual and his at-risk female relatives were performed . To partment of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3United Laboratories, our knowledge, this is the third report of concurrence of XYY and frag- Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. ile X syndrome in the medical literature ( but one of these patients was The Fragile X syndrome is the most common human chromosomal 46,XY/47,XYY mosaic male with fragile X syndrome) . Review of sex monogenic disease associated with heritable mental retardation, and chromosome abnormalities associated with fragile X syndrome and is the second most frequent cause of mental retardation after Down phenotypic considerations are presented. syndrome. Our study consists of the screening of 561 Estonian chil- This work is supported by the Grant number: 00000064203-MZCR. dren having mental retardation, autism, delayed speech and/or behav- ioral problems. The patient samples were sent to the United Laborato- P0116. Cardiac evaluation of 34 individuals with Fragile X ries of Tartu University Hospital for screening of fragile X mutation from Syndrome year 1997 to 2006. The molecular study for the diagnosis has been M. Alikaşifoğlu, Y. Alanay, D. Alehan, G. Utine, B. Volkan-Salancı, K. performed by two different techniques. During 1997-2001 the South- Boduroğlu, D. Aktaş, E. Tunçbilek; ern blot analysis and later PCR with fluorescently marked primers fol- Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. lowed by CGG repeat length detection at ABI PRISM 377 was used. Fragile X syndrome is the most common inherited cause of mental Among 561 (477 boys/84 girls) patients we found 15 full mutations retardation. Patients with fragile X syndrome have cardiac defects (14 boys/ 1 girl), and 1 premutation in a girl. The main indication for similar to those seen in other disorders of connective tissue such as the analysis in diagnosed boys was mental retardation in 11 patients, Marfan’s syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. These, and other autism in 2 patients, and characteristic phenotype in 1 patient. The girl somatic features, suggest an underlying connective tissue dysplasia. with a full mutation was investigated due to psychomotor retardation The underlying connection between Fragile X Mental Retardation and delayed speech. The girl with a premutation had mild mental re- Protein (FMRP) and the connective tissue dysplasia seen in FXS is tardation and primary ovarian failure. The birth prevalence of full muta- still unclear. The limited numbers of studies evaluating cardiovascular tion in FMR1 gene causing fragile X syndrome is 1 in 25,308 among aspects of FXS have yielded different results. In this study, transtho- individuals born during 1984-2006. We found that birth prevalence of racic echocardiogram and ECG were available in 34 male participants. the fragile X syndrome is significantly lower in Estonia than in other Mean age was 9,17 years [2-34 yrs]. There were two adult patients, countries. The reason for that is still unknown for us. one with mitral valve prolapsus (MVP), the other with aortic insuffi-Clinical genetics 2 P0119. Is she a carrier of fragile-X? Discrepancies in the results intensive signals in cerebellar peduncles, pons, or subcortical white of fragile-X tests using different agarose. matter. R. Shomrat, T. Naiman, S. Tsabary, D. Barel; Postmortem studies show eosinophilic intra-nuclear inclusions through- Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel. out the brain of affected males, and more recently it was shown that Routinely, we perform genetic and prenatal testing for the fragile-X FXTAS occurred in males with elevated levels of FMR1 mRNA, leading syndrome using Gene Scan (GS) and Southern Blot (SB) analyses. to the suggestion that the syndrome is caused by toxic gain-of-function About 140 women are being tested each month and the DNA extrac- of mRNA. tion is being done by routine salting-out procedure for all women. We describe a family with Fragile X syndrome, in which two broth- When using EL-agarose (Seakam) for SB, about 3% of the women ers with the pre-mutation show a neurological pattern, slightly distinct reveal a „smear“ of the upper allele, suspected as an unstable allele. from the symptoms normally seen in FXTAS. It might be a variable This smear starts in the normal range of the repeats and reaches into presentation of the syndrome or a coincidental picture, not linked to the premutation zone. This unstable allele appears stable in GS rang- the pre-mutation. ing between of 42-55 repeats. These women undergo a second DNA extraction from fresh blood sample and again the same pattern of in- P0122. Long term outcome in 20 Iranian galactosemia patients stability appears in SB. This result leads us to suspect that there is a F. Mirzajani1, R. Mirfakhraie1, H. Kianifar2, E. Talachian3, M. Houshmand1; biological background for this discrepancy. When the women showing 1National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic the „smear“ undergo prenatal diagnosis, all fetuses revealed a stable Republic of Iran, 2Mashhad Medical University, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of allele. Testing the same women with other agarose gels (agarose1gel Iran, 3Iran Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. -Amaresco, or agarose D1 hylabs), the „smear“ of the upper allele was During last 6 years more than on hundred and fifty cases suspected to not apparent and the band appears stable. be affected by Galactosemia were refered to the National Institute for A double dilemma thus ensues. First, which of the technique reflects Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB) for biochemical and the biological reality? To answer this, we are currently performing se- molecular analysis. quencing of the FMR1 gene in women who show the smear in SB In a retrospective study, 20 galactosemic patients, were traced during and in women with a stable SB allele. Second, until the reason for the 2001-2007 and their long term outcome were evaluated. Correlation discrepancy is made clear, should we consult the women with a sus- between genotype and phenotype was studied. pected „unstable allele“ to undergo a procedure of invasive prenatal Although most of the patients were diagnosed on the basis of clinical diagnosis? symptoms in advance, Investigation of long term results of treating ga- lactosemia by clinical, psychometric and laboratory testing has shown P0120. A case report of monozygotic twins discordant for poor results. frontonasal dysplasia: The etiology of this affection is probably Three cases with normal GALT activity but with clinical manifestations not genetic of galactosemia (cases of non classic galactosemia) were found. F. Giuliano1, S. Monnot1, F. Casagrande2, C. Dageville2, H. Karmous-Benailly1, All the findings emphasis on the need of a new look and a new chal- J. C. Lambert1; lenge for galactosemia in Iran concerning screening tests, differential 1Department of Genetics, Nice, France, 2Department of Pediatrics, Nice, diagnosis tests and metabolites assays for Iranian newborns. France. Frontonasal dysplasia (FND), also called the median cleft face syn- P0123. Two cases of subacute neuronopathic type of Gaucher drome, encompasses a pattern of anomalies limited to the face and disease head. The main features include marked hypertelorism, lack of nasal N. V. Olkhovich1, N. A. Pichkur1, A. N. Nedoboy1, O. N. Kochneva1, T. P. Iva- tip, anterior cranium bifidum occultum and a “widow’s peak”. Associ- nova1, N. G. Gorovenko2; ated midline defects include median clefting involving the nose, upper 1Ukrainian Children Hospital “OKhMATDET”, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2National Academy lip, or rarely the palate and alae nasi and an anterior encephalocoele. of Postdiploma Education, Kyiv, Ukraine. Intellectual development is usually normal and most of cases are spo- We report two Gaucher disease (GD) patients with subacute neurono- radic. Sometimes, the cranio facial malformations of the FND are as- pathic type of disease with rare genotypes. sociated with extra cranial malformations such Fallot tetralogy, absent Patient 1 was an 11 years old girl. She was diagnosed at the age of tibia or auricular abnormalities. In this syndromic form, mental retarda- 2 years as GD. The first clinical symptoms were hepatomegaly with tion is a common feature and familial cases are described. The etiol- marked splenomegaly, mild or moderate anemia, thrombocytopenia ogy of non syndromic and syndromic FND is probably not the same. In and weakness. Bone marrow showed the presence of Gaucher cells. the literature several sets of monozygotic twins in which only a single At age 2 years old she had undergone total splenectomy. Bone lesions twin was affected with non syndromic FND were reported. in the both femur were appeared when she was 3 years old. The pa- Here we describe a patient issue from a monozygotic pair of twins tient suffered from bone crises. Neurological symptoms appeared at with pronounced hypertelorism, short palpebral fissures, coloboma in- age of 9 years. There were mild disturbance of eye movements and volving cranial nerves, choanal atresia, broad and bifid nasal tip, cleft severe involuntary movements like as choreoathetoses, which made palate and anterior encephalocoele corresponding to the set of cranio- gait impossible. She has had three episodes of generalized seizures. facial malformations of FND. The other twin is normal. This case leads Now she has mild hemiparesis. MRI of the brain with contrast revealed us to discuss the embryologic support of these malformations with the moderately extensive changes in the capsula interna. Height and hypothesis that FND is non-genetic in origin but a form of embryonic weight were below normal. The ß-glucocerebrosidase activity was 2,9 disturbance that can result from the twinning process itself. nmol/h/mg protein, genotype G377S/c999G→A. Patient 2 was a 15 years old boy. He was diagnosed as GD after bone P0121. Multi-infarct dementia in two brothers with a pre-mutation marrow biopsy. The initial clinical symptoms were disturbance of eye in the FMR1 gene : different presentation of FXTAS ? movements that appeared at the age of 2 years. At the age of 3 years J. J. van den Ende, F. Kooy, K. Storm; mild hepatosplenomegaly with mild anemia and thrombocytopenia Department of Medical Genetics, Wilrijk (Antwerp), Belgium. was noted. Height and weight were normal. The patient did not suffer Fragile X syndrome is one of the most common causes of mental retar- from bone crises. Now his main problems are mild hyperkinesis of the dation, caused by expansion of the CGG repeat in the FMR1 gene. A head and disturbance of eye movements. The ß-glucocerebrosidase full mutation (>200 repeat) leads to serious neurodevelopmental prob- activity was 4,2 nmol/h/mg protein, genotype D409H/R120W/G202R. lems, especially in males, while males with a pre-mutation are gener- ally spared the mental retardation. P0124. Results of 5 years Genetic Counseling in Iranian Since several years however, it is known that more than one third of Province of Hormozgan male pre-mutation carriers (55-200 repeats) over 50 years of age de- P. Nikuei, G. Tabasi, M. Saberi; velop neurological symptoms, most frequently characterized by ataxia, Social Welfare Organization, Bandarabbas, Islamic Republic of Iran. tremor, dementia and Parkinsonism. The condition was called FXTAS - Genetic diseases have high frequency in Iran because of consan- (fragile X associated tremor/ataxia syndrome). gious marriages.According to clerical approval of therapeutic abortion Typical MRI changes are seen, with cerebral atrophy and T2 hyper- for some genetic diseases after 1997 in Iran genetic counseling has a Clinical genetics  great importance prior pregnancy. ment in glucose level during 2-h glucose tolerance test (OGTT) <3 From 2001-2006 we performed a total of 1523 genetic counselings. mmol/l, and a family history of type 2 diabetes mellitus (type 2 DM) or Results were as follows: gestational diabetes. In 11 probands (9%) we detected three GCK mu- - 679 couples (44.5%) came for genetic counseling because of involve- tations: G448fs, E312Q, S383L and four intronic variants: IVS2-12C>T, ment with a genetic disease and 844 couples (55.5%) came without IVS3-8G>A, IVS7-13A>G, IVS4+26C>A. All mutations were absent any genetic problem and only for assurance. Consangious marriages from 210 control subjects (P< 0.05). In families carrying GCK muta- 905 cases (59.4%) was more common than unconsangious marriages. tions the genotype- phenotype correlations were analyzed. In HNF1α Requesting for genetic counseling was: 678 couples (44.5%) prepreg- gene we identified 11 polymorphisms and 1 rare variant sequence nancy, 588 couples (38.6%) prior marriage and 257 couples (16.9%) IVS5-27C>T. Our results indicated, that the frequency of mutations in during pregnancy. The most genetic disorders were: GCK in Polish population of gestational diabetes patients is not high. Hemoglobinopathies: 307 cases (45.2% includes β- thalassemia,α- thalassemia,sickle cell anemia and other hemoglobinopathies) P0127. Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez-Syndrome in a 6-yaers old boy Mental Retardation: 228 cases (33.9%) with behavior problems but normal intelligence Genetic syndromes: 40 cases (5.9% like apert,Turner,Ehlers-Dan- M. Hempel1,2, A. Pfeufer1,2, A. Weitensteiner3, P. Freisinger3, T. Meitinger1,2; los,…) 1Institute of Human Genetics, TU Munich, Munich, Germany, 2GSF National Recurrent abortion: 29 cases (4.2%) Research Center, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, TU Mu- Physical disabilithies: 29 cases (4.2%) nich, Munich, Germany. Deafness: 17 cases (2.5%) We are reporting a boy who is the first child of healthy parents, born Infertility: 12 cases (1,7%) in time after an uneventfull pregnancy with normal birth weight, lentgh Neural tube defects: 8 cases (1.2%) and head circumference. In the first year of his life feeding problems Blindness: 4 cases (0.5%) occurred, failure to thrive, hypotonia and strabismus were noted. Mo- Primary amenorrhea: 4 cases (0.5%) tor development was delayed. The boy started to walk at 18 month The main conclusion is importance of genetic counseling prior mar- and ataxia was diagnosed. The parents observed a sleep disturbance riage and pregnancy because of high frequency of autosomal reces- beginning in the first weeks after birth. During the day the boy exhibited sive diseases due to consangious marriages in Iran. hyperactive and aggressive behavior, as well as attention deficits. An intelligence test revealed a normal IQ of 118. MRI of the brain at the P0125. Incomplete penetrance of G61E and R390H mutations in age of 6 years showed fusion of cerebellar hemispheres and agenesis CYP1B1 among Iranian Primary Congenital Glaucoma patients of the cerebellar vermis, the typical features of rhompencephalosynap- F. Suri1,2, H. Amini Saroei3, S. Yazdani4, M. Pakravan4, N. Nilforooshan5, B. sis. No further abnormalities were found. An examination at the age of Bayat1, E. Elahi1,2,6; 6 years showed a long face with a high forehead, mid-face hypoplasia, 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic deeply set eyes, telecanthus, epicanthus inversus, broad nasal bridge, Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biological Sciences, University of Tehran, pointed chin, deeply set posterior rotated ears and bitemporal alopecia Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Farabi Eye Research Center, Department of areata. Syndactyly of the toes II/III on both feet was present. Alopecia Ophthalmology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Repub- and rhombencephalosynapsis together with trigeminal anesthesia are lic of Iran, 4Ophthalmic Research Center, Shaheed Beheshti University of Medi- the major symptoms of Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez-Syndrome, a very cal Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Department of Ophthalmology, rare sporadic syndrome. Since the first report in 1979 ten cases of Iran University of Medical Sciences, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez-Syndrome have been reported. Additional Republic of Iran, 6Bioinformatics Center, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophys- symptomes frequently described in Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez-Syn- ics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. drome are facial dysmorphism and craniosynostisis/asymmetric skull. Glaucoma is a heterogeneous group of optic neuropathies character- While the intellectual impairment is common in this syndrome our pa- ized by degeneration of the optic nerve, usually associated with elevat- tient showed normal intelligence. Difficulties in behaviour may be due ed intraocular pressure. It is the cause of 15% of blindness worldwide. to the cerebellar abnormalities. Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), one of the three major forms of the disease, becomes apparent at birth or before the age of three and P0128. Gorlin syndrome in seven patients is a major cause of childhood blindness. Mutations in both alleles of E. Tunçbilek, G. E. Utine, F. Taşar, Y. Alanay, C. Tümer, H. Çetin, M. Saysel, S. the cytochrome P4501B1 (CYP1B1) gene, which is the only gene thus Balcı, D. Aktaş, K. Boduroğlu, M. Alikaşifoğlu; far linked to PCG, result in the disease phenotype. It has been re- Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. cently shown that mutations in this gene is cause of disease in approxi- Gorlin syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized mately 70% of Iranian PCG patients and that the common mutations by cutaneous basal cell carcinomas, odontogenic keratocysts and in the population are G61E, R368H, R390H, and R469W. We have skeletal anomalies. The prevalence is estimated from 1:57000 to now done a mutation screen in apparently unaffected family members 1:164000. Seven patients with Gorlin syndrome are presented. First of pedigrees whose proband carried the G61E or R390H mutations. patient presented with macrocephaly, thick and prominent eyebrows, Two apparently unaffected individuals carried G61E in the homozy- a flat maxillary region, prognathism with mandibular hypertrophy and gous state and one carried the R390H mutation in the homozygous cystic mandibular lesions, multiple hyperpigmented lesions and hypo- state. This indicates incomplete penetrance for these two mutaitons. gonadotropic hypogonadism. Triventricular widening and aqueductal Incomplete penetrance for R390H has not been previously reported. narrowing were detected. Chromosome analysis revealed 46,XX/ Incomplete penetrance has implications for role of the CYP1B1 gene 46,X,t(X;11)(q24;q13). The second patient had palmar pits, maxillary in pathogenesis and for diagnosis. hypoplasia and prognathism, odontogenic keratocysts and pigmen- tary skin abnormalities. Third patient had mandibular and maxillary P0126. Screening for GCK and HNF1α mutations in Polish odontogenic keratocysts and at two years of age hydrocephaly was women with gestational diabetes. diagnosed. He had macrocephaly, thick eyebrows, synophrys, down- D. Januszkiewicz1,2, M. Zurawek3, E. Wender-Ozegowska1, J. Nowak3; slanting and wide palpebral fissures, generalised skin hyperpigmen- 1Academy of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, tation and mild prognathism. Other two patients were a mother and Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, her daughter. The mother had maxillary and mandibular cysts, basal Poznan, Poland. cell carcinoma and scoliosis. Her father died of skin cancer. Her 5- Mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1α year-old daughter had macrocephaly, coarse facies, partial agenesis (HNF1α) gene cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) of corpus callosum and café-au-lait spot. Last two patients were two type 2 and 3, respectively. The aim of the study was to examine the brothers, both having gingival hyperplasia and odontogenic cysts. The prevalence of mutations in GCK and HNF 1α genes, in Polish women elder brother had millimetric calcifications on the anterior part of falx with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). SSCP analysis and/or direct cerebri, as demonstrated by cranial tomography. Both had atrophic sequencing of the coding regions of GCK and HNF 1α gene were done depigmented skin lesions and the elder brother had palmar pits. The in 119 Caucasian gestational diabetic subjects, fulfilling tree from the younger brother was unable to read, he had diffuse calvarial thicken- following criteria: age <35 years, BMI before pregnant <30, an incre- ing in cranial CT and his chromosome analysis was 47,XXY. Gorlin Clinical genetics  syndrome is a very heterogeneous condition and the patients should P0131. Screening of TMC1 gene mutations in DFNB7(11) locus be followed for future development of clinical criteria. in autosomal recessive non- syndromic hearing loss Iranian population. P0129. Psychological manifestations in Romanian haemophilics N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Meyer2, K. Kahrizi1, M. Mohseni1, P. Imani1, N. Nikzat1, M. Mihailov, M. Serban, S. Arghirescu, M. Puiu; S. Arzhangi1, M. Seifati1, K. Jalalvand1, J. Malbin1, K. Javan1, M. Farhadi3, R. J. University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. H. Smith2, H. Najmabadi1; Introduction. Haemophiliacs often have to adjust their aspirations, life- 1Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- style and employment options. In Romania and in other developing ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research countries, lack of adequate therapy generates fear and uncertainty. Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Universi- Patients with high complications rate may develop psychological dis- ty of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 3Research Centre of Ear, Nose, Throat, and orders. Head and Neck Surgery, Iran university of Medical sciences, Tehran, Islamic Aim of the study was to evaluate frequency and type of psychological Republic of Iran. manifestations in haemophiliacs. Mutations in the transmembrane channel-like gene 1 (TMC1) cause Material and method. Our study group consisted of 234 haemophiliacs prelingual autosomal recessive (DFNB7/11) and postlingual progres- registered and treated in Haemophilia Center Timisoara. We analyzed sive autosomal dominant (DFNA36) nonsyndromic hearing loss sug- psychological complications according to haemophilia severity and pa- gesting that this protein plays an important role in the inner ear. These tients’ age. loci map to the same interval on 9q13-q21. The TMC1 protein is pre- Results. In our patients, psychological complications appeared in dicted to contain 6 transmembrane domains and to have cytoplasmic 16.24% of cases. 31.58% of patients with psychological complications orientation of N and C termini. Mutations in this gene have been re- presented associated psychological manifestations. In 4.27% of hae- ported in North America in a family with autosomal dominant inheri- mophiliacs with psychological manifestations neuro-sensitive-senso- tance, Sudan, also in our two neighbor countries Pakistan and Turkey. rial complications were noticed. Therefore we decided to study this locus in our population. The majority of patients with psychological complications (81.6%) had Thirty nine families with autosomal recessive and one family with auto- severe haemophilia. High frequency of haemartrosis in these patients, somal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss that include two or more frequent and long hospitalizations, high chronic arthropathy rate which affected children were screened for DFNB7(11) locus by linkage analy- produces disability and affects body image are important factors of psy- sis. These families originated from different ethnic groups of Iranian chological manifestations appearance. Most patients with psychologi- population and were negative for GJB2 and GJB6 mutations in locus cal complications (76.3%) were from other counties, major deficiencies DFNB1 . We used D9S301, D9S175, D9S1876 and D9S1837 STR in haemophilia care representing a permanent distress. Mean age of (short Tandem Repeat) markers for this study. patients with mental complications at diagnose was 14.2 (SD=9.840. Three out of forty families were linked to this locus. Mutation screen- Opioid abuse (12 cases) was the main complication and was signal- ing of TMC1 gene in these families revealed a homozygous framshift ized only in adults, the explanation being that in this age group, most mutation (P.N150kfrx26) in one of the recessive families and a hetero- of the patients present severe chronic haemophilic arthropathy, which zygous mutation (G417R) in dominant family. Mutation detection for causes chronic pain and disability. the other recessive family is undergoing. Discussions and conclusions. Despite all difficulties, it is essential We concluded that after DFNB1 and DFNB21 mutations, TMC1 gene to diagnose and treat psychological complications in haemophiliacs, mutations are responsible for the most prevalent cause of non- syn- presence of a psychologist in the multidisciplinary haemophilia care dromic hearing loss in Iranian population. team being indispensable. P0132. Screening for 15 loci in the Iranian patients with P0130. Role of mtDNA in Iranian patients with Hypertrophic autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss Cardiomyopathy H. Najmabadi1, C. Nishimura2, K. Kahrizi1, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Mohseni1, M. Montazeri1, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya2, M. Houshmand1, M. Peyghambari3, G. Y. Riazalhoseini1, G. Asaadi Tehrani1, A. Daneshi3, M. Farhadi3, S. Yahyavi3, E. Estahbanati3; Taherzadeh1, P. Imani1, R. Vazifehmand1, A. Anousheh1, A. Nazeri1, S. Abedini1, 1NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2RussianResearch Center of Medi- N. Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, R. J. H. Smith2; cal Genetics, Laboratory of DNA Research, Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian 1 Genetics Research Center, The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences Federation, 32Iran University of Medical Sciences, Shaheed Rajaei Cardiovas- University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Re- cular Medical Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. search Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by hypertrophy IA, United States, 3Research Center of Ear, Nose, Throat, and Head and Neck of ventricles and intrventricular septum. Patients could develop serious Surgery, Iran university of Medical sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. complications including heart failure, arrhythmias and sudden death. Autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss is the most common Recently mitochondrial DNA mutations have been associated with car- form of severe inherited hearing impairment. Mutations in GJB2 gene diomyopathies. Mitochondria are the major site of energy production have been reported to be the most common cause of ARNSHL in the in the cell. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that energy dependant Northern European populations. These mutations are followed closely tissues such as heart, affected by mitochondrial dysfunction. Mito- by GJB6 deletion. Our previous studies showed that GJB2 mutations chondrial (mt) DNA mutations are hypothesized to be involved in the and the GJB6 deletion do not play a significant role in the etiology of pathogenesis of HCM. In this study, 31 Iranian HCM patients were deafness in Iran. In this study, we assessed the contributions made by screened for mitochondrial DNA point mutations and deletions. Our other loci to the ARNSHL genetic load in Iran. We have been screening result showed three patients (5.76%) with a 7.4 kb deletion and one 50 families with normal GJB2 and GJB6 alleles for DFNB1, DFNB2, patient (1.92%) with 4977 bp “common deletion. Mutations in G3338A DFNB3, DFNB4, DFNB9 , DFNB21 and DFNB40 by linkage analy- (Val>Met), G9053A (Ser>Asn), G9055A (Ala>Thr) and T3285C in sis using, 3 STR markers for each locus. Some of the families have tRNA Leucine were found. We detected 41 polymorphisms in mtDNA been localized to above- mentioned loci. Then with exclusion of linked that 15 polymorphisms of them have not been reported before. Our families, the rest of families were screened for DFNB6, DFNB7(11), results suggest that an increased level of mitochondrial mutations may DFNB8 (10) , DFNB12, DFNB16, DFNB18 , DFNB23 and DFNB29 be an indicator of DNA instability. Furthermore, mtDNA mutations may loci. Seventeen families showed linkage to some of these loci. Three play an important role in pathogenesis of cardiac arrest which has re- families have been localized to DFNB4 with G334V, R409H and T420I/ mained unexplained for long. We are investigating pathogenesis these 1197DelT mutations in SLC26A4 gene , two families to DFNB21 with a findings 9611 bp deletion in exon 10 and 266 delT mutation in TECTA gene and one family to DFNB7(11) with P.N150kfrx26 mutation in TMC1 gene. Mutation screening of SLC26A4, MYOVIIA, TMPRS53, MYO15A, Harmonin and TMC1 genes for other 11 families is undergoing . Our results suggest that other loci may have the major causative roles in ARNSHL in Iran. Key words: Linkage analysis, ARNSHL, DFNB.Clinical genetics  P0133. Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in a Tunisian family geneity underlying the remaining ~60% of cases. We have previously R. M‘rad1,2, F. Maazoul1, K. Lilia1, E. Chabchoub1, M. Chaabouni1,2, L. Ben je- shown for SPG4 that large genomic deletions represent a surprisingly maa1,2, I. Chelly1, I. Ouertani1, Z. Marrakchi3, H. Chaabouni1,2; frequent class of disease-causing alterations. We subsequently wid- 1Department of human genetics, Charles Nicolle hospital Tunis, Tunisia, 2De- ened pertinent analyses to (i) investigate the very extend of SPAST partment of human genetics, Faculty of medicine Tunis, Tunisia, 3Department of deletions and (ii) screen for copy number aberrations in other HSP neonatology, Charles Nicolle hospital Tunis, Tunisia. genes. Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED, Clouston syndrome, MIM 129500) In 18/18 cases investigated so far, deletion of SPAST exon 1 is ac- was 1rst described in 1895 and later by Clouston, in families from Que- companied by deletion of the promotor. This finding establishes a loss bec. Although most common in French Canadians, the disorder has of function mechanisms, i.e. haploinsufficiency, as underlying at least been identified in several ethnic groups. Clouston hidrotic ectodermal some cases of SPG4 HSP. We also identified copy number aberrations dysplasia (HED) is transmitted as an autosomal dominant condition in SPG3A, SPG6, SPG7, and SPG31. As not all of these are associ- with complete penetrance and variable expressivity. The main features ated with an HSP phenotype, haploinsufficiency is of no relevance for of this rare form of genodermatosis are partial to complete alopecia, the corresponding HSP genes. This information impacts on the strate- palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, and nail dystrophy. Sweat gland func- gies for choosing appropriate cellular and animal disease models as tion in these patients is normal. Recently, mutations in the GJB6 gene well as on molecular therapeutic considerations. Current efforts there- encoding the gap junction protein connexin 30 have been shown to fore aim at uncovering the disease-association of copy number altera- cause this disorder. tions in the complete spectrum of known HSP genes. Here we report a girl born to consanguineous parents presenting with complete alopecia and onychodysplasia without neither oligodentia P0136. Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome: report of two portuguese nor sweat gland function anomalies. Her father, her paternal uncle and families her paternal aunt are similarly affected. The paternal grandparents are C. Dias1, J. Silva1, S. Morais2, E. Oliveira3, E. Silva4, S. Gonçalves5, J. Barbot6, normal .The comparison with other ectodermal dysplasias is present- M. Sousa3, M. Reis Lima1; ed and discussed. The possibility of an autosomal recessive form of 1Genetics Clinic, Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2Haematology hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is raised. Department, Hospital Geral de Santo António, Porto, Portugal, 3Cell Biology Lab, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Porto, Portugal, 4Ophtal- P0134. Mutation IVS2-2A>G in SLC2A (Prestin) gene in two mology Department, Hospitais da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, Estonian families with hearing loss 5Ophtalmology Department, Hospital de Crianças Maria Pia, Porto, Portugal, R. Teek1,2, E. Raukas2, E. Oitmaa3, K. Kruustük4, R. Zordania5, K. Joost5, P. 6Haematology Department, Hospital de Crianças Maria Pia, Porto, Portugal. Gardner6, I. Schrijver7, M. Kull1, K. Õunap2,8; Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS) [MIM#203300] is a geneti- 1Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, cally heterogeneous autossomic recessive disorder, characterized 2United Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 3Asper Biotech, by oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) and platelet dysfunction, caused Tartu, Estonia, 4Ear Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 5Tallinn by defects in lysosome-related organelles. Eight human subtypes of Children’s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 6Department of Medicine, Stanford Univer- HPS have been described. Patients show hypopigmentation of hair sity Medical Center, Stanford, CA, United States, 7Department of Pathology and and skin. Ocular findings include nystagmus, iris transillumination, Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, hypopigmentation of retina and decreased visual acuity. They have 8Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. prolonged bleeding with easy bruising. Severe bleeding diathesis is Introduction: Prestin is a multipass transmembrane protein of the outer more frequent in subtypes 1 and 4. Patients may also have pulmonary hair cells of the mammalian cochlea and it was encoded by human fibrosis in the third and fourth decades. Granulomatous colitis is highly gene SLC26A5. In humans, a single nucleotide change - IVS2-2A>G variable. Electron microscopic examination of platelets shows absent in the second intron of SLC26A5 has been reported in association with or greatly decreased number of platelet dense granules. hearing loss. We present two unrelated families with a clinical and electron micro- During 2005-2006 we have screened 183 individuals with hereditary scopic diagnosis of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome. The first family, with impaired hearing (HIH) by arrayed primer extension method, which consanguineous first cousin parents, has two affected children: the el- covers 201 mutations in 8 genes (GJB2, Connexin-30, Connexin-31, dest daughter has clinical features of HPS along with epilepsy and mild Connexin-43, Prestin and Pendrin gene, and 2 mitochondrial genes). mental retardation; the youngest son has identical clinical features but In 3 individuals we found IVS2-2A>G mutation in one allele of Prestin with normal development. gene (1.6%). In the second family, parents are non-consanguineous and their only We report two families with mutation IVS2-2A>G in SLC26A5 (Prestin) son is affected. He was initially diagnosed as having OCA. When easy gene. First family: 2 children with severe hearing loss (HL) and geno- bruising was noticed, the investigation of platelet function revealed ab- type 35delG/IVS1+1G>A. Mother has mild HL and mutations 35delG/ normalities. V37l; father has normal hearing, mutation IVS1+G>A in GJB2 gene Patients were submitted to platelet function tests and electron micro- and IVS2-2A>G in SLC26A5 gene. Second family: mother and daugh- scopic evaluation of platelets. The clinical presentation of HPS is re- ter have genotype IVS2-2A>G. Mother has severe HL and 3 years old viewed, as well as differential diagnosis. Though this condition is more daughter has normal hearing. frequent in Puerto Rican patients it has been described in many other Conclusions: We found 3 persons with IVS2-2A>G mutation, only in parts of the world. one of them sensorineural hearing loss was found. However, hearing loss may still develop of two others. In 1.6% of investigated persons P0137. The syndrome comprising myopathy with excess of with HIH IVS2-2A>G mutation in Prestin gene was found. This in the muscle spindles, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and Noonan-like correlation with previous data: 4% Caucasians and 1.3% Hispanics phenotype is caused by mutations in HRAS; The severe end of carry this mutation (Tang et al. 2005). Our data support the hypothesis Costello syndrome that heterozygosity for the mutation IVS2-2A>G in SLC26A5 gene may I. van der Burgt1, W. Kupsky2, S. Katechis3, A. Nadroo3, C. Kratz4, H. ter Laak5, be not be, by itself, sufficient to cause hearing loss. E. Sistermans5, M. Zenker6; 1University Medical Centre St Radboud, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands, P0135. Copy number alterations in hereditary spastic paraplegia 2Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, United States, 3New York Methodist Hos- genes pital, New York, NY, United States, 4University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, C. Beetz1, A. Brice2, P. Byrne3, C. Depienne2, A. Durr2, A. O. H. Nygren4, E. 5University Medical Centre St Radboud, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 6Univer- Reid5, L. Schoels6, T. Deufel1; sity of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. 1Uniklinikum, Jena, Germany, 2INSERM, Paris, France, 3University of Dublin, In the recent time, great progress has been achieved in the under- Dublin, Ireland, 4MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 5Adenbrooke’s standing of the molecular basis of Noonan syndrome (NS; OMIM Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Uniklinikum, Tübingen, Germany. 163950), Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous syndrome (CFC; OMIM 115150), Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a neurodegenerative condi- and Costello syndrome (CS; OMIM 218040). These disorders rep- tion causing progressive leg spasticity and weakness. SPG4 (SPAST resent distinct entities wich share a common pattern of congenital gene, spastin protein) is the major HSP locus; there is large hetero- anomalies. They are all caused by mutations in genes involved in the Clinical genetics  Ras-MAPK signaling cascade, leading to constitutive activation of the matory processes and primary hormonal dysfunction were excluded. pathway, with specific mutations in HRAS being detected in the major- 1H NMR spectroscopy on plasma did, however, distinguish HD pa- ity of individuals with CS. tients at different stages of the disease and presymptomatic carriers We screened four unrelated patients (2 male , 2 female) previously from controls. This distinction was attributable to low levels of the reported with myopathy, muscle spindle excess in striated muscle, branched chain amino acids (BCAA), valine, leucine and isoleucine. HOCM, variable features of NS and early death for mutations in BCAA levels were correlated with weight loss and, importantly, with PTPN11, KRAS, NRAS and HRAS. Heterozygous de novo HRAS disease progression and abnormal triplet repeat expansion size in the mutations were found in three of the four patients examined. In the HD1 gene. Levels of IGF1, which is regulated by BCAA, were also first case the 2 bp substitution c.35-36GC->TT predicting the amino significantly lower in the HD group. Therefore, early weight loss in HD acid exchange G12V was present, and in the second case another is associated with a systemic metabolic defect. BCAA levels may be missense mutation at the same codon, G12S (c.34G->A). In the third used as a biomarker, indicative of disease onset and early progres- patiënt a novel HRAS mutation c.187G->A (E63K)was detected in sion. The decreased plasma BCAA levels in HD likely represent a criti- DNA derived from blood cells. cal need for Krebs cycle energetic substrates provided by peripheral We present the clinical details and results of the molecular studies in organ metabolism for the brain. the four patients with HOCM, myopathy with muscle spindle excess and NS features and conclude that these patients represent the severe P0140. Vitamin D dependent Rickets Type II; Report of Two end of CS. Affected Siblings in a Consanguineous Iranian family with a Novel Mutation in VDR Gene P0138. HTRA1 Polymorphism in Dry and Wet Age-Related N. Momenin1, Y. Shafeghati1, S. Esfahani2, E. Reyniers3, W. Wuyts4; Macular Degeneration 1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Children`s Hospi- J. Lin, F. Tsai, Y. Tsai; tal Medical Center,Tehran Medical Science University, Tehran, Islamic Republic China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. of Iran, 3Medical Genetics Center, University and University Hospital, Antwerp Objective: To investigate HTRA1 polymorphisms in unrelated Taiwan (UA/UZA), Belgium, 4Medical Genetics Center, University and University Hospi- Chinese patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and tal of Antwerp (UA/UZA)., Antwerp, Belgium. control subjects without AMD. Hereditary vitamin D resistant rickets type II(HVDDRII) is a rare auto- Methods: 95 unrelated Taiwan Chinese patients with AMD and 90 age- somal recessive disorder, most often caused by mutations in the VitD and sex-matched control subjects were enrolled in our study. Genomic receptor gene. It is usually presented with rickets not responsive to DNA was prepared from peripheral blood obtained from all AMD pa- VitD treatment. Circulating levels of 1,25(OH)2 VitD3 are elevated. tients and control subjects. Polymerase chain reactions were used to Alopecia of the scalp or totalis is seen in some families with HVDDRII. analyze two HTRA1 single-nucleotide polymorphisms [rs11200638 (G/ This is usually associated with a more severe phenotype. A) and rs10490924 (G/T)]. In this report, we present clinical findings on a family with the typical Results: Of the 95 participants with AMD, dry AMD was diagnosed clinical features and molecular findings in two affected siblings.. in 52 patients and wet AMD in 43 patients. Both rs11200638 (G/A) The cardinal findings in the index patient were: alopecia totalis, renal and rs10490924 (G/T) were significantly associated with all AMD tubular acidosis, mild generalized aminoaciduria, refractory rickets, [rs11200638: P = 6.7 × 10-7 for an additive allele-dosage model, OR high alkaline phosphatase, and hyperparathyroidism. Other routine het = 1.97 (0.81, 4.81), OR = 8.59 (3.28, 22.49), A allele: 73% in all AMD biochemical tests were WNL. Skin biopsy was performed and was hom versus 47% in controls; rs10490924: P = 9.2 × 10-6, OR = 1.86 (0.79, compatible with alopecia areata. Proband has had an older brother just het 4.35), OR = 5.08 (2.21, 11.70), T allele: 73% in all AMD versus 50% with the same disease he deceased at the age of 32 months. Mutation hom in controls]. In terms of significance of association, rs11200638 was analysis of the VDR gene by direct sequencing analysis of all coding the most significantly associated variant. Subtype analysis including exons showed a homozygous c.122G>A(p.Cys41Tyr) variant in exon dry and wet AMD also revealed the similar results. Haplotype analy- 2 with several arguments pointing to a pathogenic effect. It was a novel sis demonstrated that AT was significantly associated with wet and all mutation in VDR gene has not been reported before. AMD (P = 0.011 and 0.004, respectively), whereas GG was signifi- Two children of a consanguineous Iranian family showed the classical cantly associated with the control group when compared with all AMD clinical features of HVDRR II and a novel mutation in VDR gene. We (P = 0.035). should be aware of this very rare disease, whenever we see a patient Conclusions: Our study demonstrated that both SNPs were significant- who is suffering from refractory rickets with alopecia. ly associated with dry and wet AMD and the rs11200638 was the most significantly associated variant in a Taiwan Chinese population. P0141. Early neurological phenotype in 4 children with biallelic PRODH mutations P0139. Early energy deficit in Huntington disease: identification A. Afenjar1, M. Moutard1, D. Doummar1, L. Burglen2, D. Heron3, D. Campion4, of a plasma biomarker traceable during disease progression. T. Billette de Villemeur1, D. Rodriguez1; F. Mochel1, P. Charles2, F. Seguin3, J. Barritault3, C. Coussieu4, L. Perin5, Y. 1AP-HP, Service de neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, 75012 Paris, Le Bouc5, C. Gervais6, G. Carcelain7, A. Vassault8, J. Feingold2, D. Rabier8, A. France, 2AP-HP, Service de génétique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, 75012 Durr1,2; Paris, France, 3AP-HP, Service de génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, 75012 1INSERM U679, Hôpital La Salpetrière, Paris, France, 2Département de géné- Paris, France, 4INSERM U614 Faculté de Médecine, Rouen, France. tique et cytogénétique, Hôpital La Salpetrière, Paris, France, 3Faculté de mé- Hyperprolinemia type I (HPI) results from a deficiency of proline oxi- decine et de pharmacie and Hôpital La Milétrie, Poitiers, France, 4Laboratoire dase (POX), involved in the first step in the conversion of proline to d´endocrinologie, Hôpital La Salpetrière, Paris, France, 5Explorations fonction- glutamate. Diverse phenotypes were described in patients with HPI, nelles endocriniennes, Hôpital d´enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, prior to the identification of the POX gene (PRODH): whereas various 6Service de diététique, Hôpital La Salpetrière, Paris, France, 7Laboratoire patients were asymptomatic, others had neurological and extraneuro- d´immunologie, Hôpital La Salpetrière, Paris, France, 8Laboratoire de biochimie logical defects. PRODH gene is located in the region deleted in velo- métabolique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, France. cardiofacial syndrome (VCFS). Heterozygous and homozygous mu- Huntington disease (HD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder, without tations have been identified in patients with variable hyperprolinemia effective treatment. In the absence of clear underlying mechanisms and various features (patients with schizophrenia, chromosome 22q11 in HD, weight loss is an appealing phenotype associated with chorea microdeletions and/or neurological defects). A functional study has di- and cognitive decline. We performed a multiparametric study explor- vided the PRODH missense mutations into three groups: those lead- ing body weight and the mechanisms of its loss in 32 presymptomatic ing to mild, moderate, or severe reduction of POX activity. In this study, carriers and HD patients in the early stages of the disease, compared we report four unrelated children with HPI and a homogeneous se- to 21 controls. We combined it to a multivariate statistical analysis, vere neurological phenotype. We identified biallelic abnormalities in based on proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) spectroscopy PRODH in these patients that led to severe reduction of POX activ- of plasma. We demonstrated an early hypermetabolic state in HD. ity. These included missense and nonsense mutations, deletions of Weight loss was observed in the HD group even in presymptomatic PRODH and a 22q11 microdeletion. Four other children have been re- carriers, although their caloric intake was higher than controls. Inflam- ported with severe biallelic PRODH mutations. The phenotype of these Clinical genetics  eight patients associates early psychomotor development delay with Serum alkaline phosphatase in mother and father was investigated; predominant cognitive defects, autistic features and epilepsy. Their it revealed 35 UI/l (n.35-104 UI/l) and 16 UI/l (n.40-129 UI/l), accord- values of hyperprolinemia ranged from 400 to 2200 µmol/L. Patients ingly. with biallelic PRODH alterations resulting in severely impaired POX activity had an early onset and severe neurological features. Thus, P0144. A new clinical picture with hypopigmented hair, children with this phenotype and those with a microdeletion in chromo- microcephaly, motor-mental retardation and renal anomalies some 22q11, especially those with mental retardation and autistic fea- A. Aykut, A. Akarslan, B. Durmaz, F. Tuzun, O. Cogulu, F. Ozkinay; tures, should be tested for hyperprolinemia. Hyperprolinemic patients Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey. should be screened for PRODH mutations Anomalies of hair pigmentation are very important signs for the diag- nosis of a number of genetic, metabolic and neurological disorders. P0142. A novel mutation L324V in the fibroblast growth factor These findings may be of considerable value in the diagnosis of genet- receptor 3 in familial hypochondroplasia ic syndromes such as Griscelli syndrome, Menkes syndrome, Elejalde C. Collet1, A. Verloes2, M. Lenne1, J. L. Laplanche1; disease, Chediak-Higashi syndrome and Werner syndrome. Here we 1Service de biochimie et biologie moléculaire, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, Fran- report a 4-year-old female who presented sparse, hypopigmented sil- ce, 2Unité fonctionnelle de génétique clinique, Fédération de génétique, Hôpital very gray hair with microcephaly, dysmorphological facial features and Robert Debré, Paris, France. renal anomalies. She was born to consanguineous parents at thirty- Hypochondroplasia is an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia char- two weeks. She was small for gestational age. Her developmental acterized by short-limb dwarfism with rhizomelic shortening. This phe- milestones were delayed. She was hospitalized due to her recurrent notype is similar to achondroplasia, but the features tend to be milder, lung and urinary infections. Her clinical findings were microcephaly, as macrocephaly with relatively normal facies. Diagnosis is made by low frontal hairline, telecanthus, long eyelashes, broad nasal bridge, careful physical examination and x-rays. The diagnosis is also often micrognathia and joint laxity. She had a history of kidney stone, ecto- made later in childhood (2-4 years of age). Before three years of age, pic kidney, vesicoureteral reflux and recurrent urinary infections. Chro- the diagnosis is difficult, as skeletal disproportion tends to be mild and mosome analysis by routine G-banding revealed a normal karyotype. many of the radiographic features are subtle during infancy. Its inci- Other laboratory investigations were normal. Her clinical and labora- dence is 1:30000 live births. Actually, about 80 percent of hypochon- tory findings were not supporting any genetic syndrome which was as- droplasia cases are caused by heterozygous mutations in the FGFR3 sociated with hair pigmentation anomalies. In conclusion, a new clini- gene, unique gene known to be associated with hypochondroplasia. cal picture covering silvery gray and sparse hair with urinary system Two recurrent mutations in exon 13, c.1620C>G or c.1620C>A, result- anomalies and mental-motor retardation is presented ing in an p.N540K substitution in the proximal tyrosine kinase domain represent ~ 60% of all cases of hypochondroplasia. Sequence analy- P0145. Experience of the complex genetic counselling for the sis of others FGFR3 exons detects rare mutations. We report a new patients with inherited arrhythmias in Russia heterozygous mutation in exon 9 of FGFR3, p.L324V, c. 970C>G, in E. V. Zaklyazminskaya, A. V. Polyakov; a familial hypochondroplasia. The father and his son presented mild Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. phenotype with a more severe expression in the father than in his son. Estimated to affect up to 1 in 3000 individuals, the inherited arrhyth- This mutation, not reported as SNP, is located in the third immunoglob- mias are a common reason for referral to a medical genetics unit. Since ulin (Ig)-like domain, in a highly conserved tripeptide sequence residue 1998, 110 families with inherited arrhythmia’s have been inspected in within the FGFR family. This result strongly suggests that p.L324V mu- our Center: Long QT syndrome (76%), Brugada Syndrome (11%), Id- tation is responsible for hypochondroplasia. iopathic Ventricular Tachycardia (4.5%), sick sinus syndrome (4%), Short QT syndrome (2%) and mixed phenotypes (2.5%). It seems that P0143. Dental symptoms - clue to the diagnosis of this ratio does not reflect the true distribution of the inherited arrhyth- hypophosphatasia of childhood type mias in Russia but it could mirror the different awareness of the car- B. Tumiene1, A. Utkus1, R. Cerkauskiene2, K. Becker3, W. Reardon4, R. Janavi- diologists about genetic basis of these diseases, and the benefits of cius1, J. Songailiene1, L. J. M. Spaapen5, V. Kucinskas1; genetic counseling. The clinical course was dependent on the affected 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius gene, and the type of mutation for most of these disorders. Silent mu- University Children’s hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3North Wales Clinical Genet- tation carriers have been detected in 12%. About 7% of probands had ics Service, Glan Clwyd Hospital, North Wales, United Kingdom, 4Our Lady’s two mutations in responsible genes. We hypothesize that identification Hospital for Sick Children, Crumlin, Ireland, 5Dept. of Biochemical Genetics, of more than one mutation in these genes is unfavorable and can be Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. considered as an independent genetic risk factor for cardiac sudden Hypophosphatasia is an inherited disorder characterized by defective death, and could therefore be a reason of surgical intervention. Based bone and teeth mineralization. The disease is due to mutations in the on complex analysis of familial, personal, clinical and molecular ge- ALPL gene. Variable clinical expression of the disease ranging from netic data we developed an algorithm for genetic counseling, molecu- stillbirth to pathologic skeletal fractures in adult years reflects allelic lar screening and results reading, and provide recommendations for heterogeneity in this disease. patients with the inherited arrhythmia’s studied here. Our presented patient is a 4 year old female with uneventful pre- and This work was partly supported by Russian President’s grants NSh- postnatal history until the age of 3 months. A head deformity was no- 5736.2006.7; RFFI 06-04-08363-ofi ticed at that time (turricephaly) and progressed thereafter with prema- ture closure of cranial sutures and fontanelles. Increased intracranial P0146. Intractable diarrhea with “phenotypic anomalies” & pressure developed and became symptomatic (bulging fontanelle, tricho-hepato-enteric syndrome : time to scrape up? bilateral edema of optical nerve, exophthalmos, prominent subcuta- A. Fabre1, N. André2, C. Badens1, A. Breton3, C. Lacoste1, P. Broue3, B. Roque- neous veins, nausea and vomiting). Skeletal symptoms appeared at laure4, J. Sarles4; about 6 months of age with the signs of rickets and waddling gait. 1Department of genetics, Marseille, France, 2Department of oncology pediat- Dental symptoms included delayed eruption of deciduous teeth (the rics, Marseille, France, 3Department of pediatric gastro-enterology, Toulouse, first at 9 months of age), premature loss of both incisors and later ad- France, 4Department of pediatric gastro-enterology, Marseille, France. ditional 6 teeth and severe caries. These dental symptoms specifically Tricho-hepato-enteric syndrome and syndromic diarrhea are quite rare pointed to a possible diagnosis of hypophosphatasia. Additional signs conditions with only 15 cases described to date. Both include severe were small stature and muscular hypotony. Biochemical assays re- diarrhea requiring total parenteral nutrition, facial dysmorphism, im- vealed low-normal serum alkaline phosphatase (37.3 UI/l, n.35-281 UI/ munity defect and hair abnormalities (mostly trichorrhexis nodosa). A l), significant hyperphosphaturia (fractional excretion 19.1→24.8 %), definite clear clinical description of the 2 syndromes lacks and the out- and low serum intact parathormone (1-6 pg/ml, n.10-69 pg/ml). Clearly come is poorly known. increased phosphoetanolamine in urine was detected (152 μmol/mmol Here, we report 2 additional cases: one boy born with low birth weight creat., n.0-21 μmol/mmol creat), plasma pyridoxal 5’-phosphate was at 32 weeks, presenting intractable diarrhea associated with facial dys- also highly elevated (1233 nmol/l, ref.<100 nmol/l). This has confirmed morphism, hair anomaly and immunologic defect; the second born at the diagnosis of hypophosphatasia, childhood type. term presenting the same set of symptoms associated with a cirrhosis Clinical genetics  due to iron storage resolving with time. Metabolic investigations and JBS patients per year ranged between 0 and 2. Numbers increased karyotype were normal for both. over the years, with a maximum and stable number of around 2 new- Analysis of these observations together with a review of previously born JBS patients per year from 1998 to 2005, probably due to im- published cases suggests that patients suffering from tricho-hepato- proved ascertainment. This renders a mean birth prevalence of JBS of enteric syndrome and/or syndromic diarrhea actually present the same 1 in 113,797 over the period 1998-2005. When also counting the un- heterogeneous disease that has been wrongly and confusingly sepa- certain cases, the birth prevalence over this period was 1 in 83,850. rated into 2 differents entities. The 5 mains signs are the same ( Low We conclude that, for practical purposes, a JBS birth prevalence of 1 in birth weight, Intractable diarrhea, hair anomaly, facial dysmorphism 100,000 can be used. This is considerably higher than the estimate of and immunological defect) and the cirrhosis is found inconsistently but 1 in 258,000 by Flannery & Hudson in 2004. On the basis of the Har- in both groups. dy- Weinberg equilibrium and the relative contribution of the different The acknowledgment that these two syndromes represent the same genes involved in JBS, carrier frequencies can be calculated. For the disease is a crucial step toward a better description of this syndrome, AHI1 gene, that was estimated to be responsible for 7 to 16 percent of of its outcome and to set studies trying to identify a putative underlying JBS cases, this results in a carrier frequency of 1 in 598 to 1 in 395. genetic defect. P0150. BMPR1A gene mutations status in Polish JPS patients P0147. Mild phenotype in a child with low-rate mosaic 11q M. Podralska1, W. Cichy2, E. Czkwanianc3, D. Nowakowska4, M. Teisseyre5, R. deletion Slomski1, A. Plawski1; E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Kocova, N. Angelkova, G. Ilieva; 1Instytitute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Karol Marcinkowski University Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Pediatrics and Gastro- Monosomy of the long arm of chromosome 11 is a rare structural chro- enterology, Institute of Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital, Lodz, Poland, Lodz, mosomal aberration with facial dysmorphism and severe mental re- Poland, 4Genetic Counseling Unit Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, tardation. Folate-sensitive fragile site of this chromosome, located at Warsaw, Poland, 5Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Immunol- the band 11q23.3, facilitates breakage of this part of the chromosome. ogy, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. Distal part of the chromosome is being lost, and causes characteristic The Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome (JPS), OMIM 174900 is an autoso- features of Jacobsen syndrome. Mosaic deletion of the chromosome mal dominant hamartoma polyposis syndrome predisposing to gas- 11q has rarely been reported. trointestinal cancer. Autosomal dominant inheritance of the disease is We report on a girl aged 2 years with slight developmental delay. Fa- associated with the mutations in one of the tumor suppressor genes cial dysmorphism included bitemporal narrowing, prominent glabella, MADH4 (mothers against decapentaplegic, drosophila, homolog of, 4) hypertelorism, up-slanted eyes, short upturned nose and wide-opened or BMPR1A (bone morphogenetic protein receptor, type 1A). The JPS mouth. The height and head circumference were at the 3rd percentile is characterized by the occurrence of juvenile polyps in colon and up- curve. Short arms and narrow thorax were present. Neurological evalu- per parts of the gastrointestinal tract, the average frequency of JPS ation showed slight degree of hypotonia, but motor achievements were is 1:100000. The polyps occurring in childhood in most are the ham- satisfactory for the age. Speech delay was present. Ultrasound ex- artoma polyps. The solitary or not numerous and self-limited polyps amination of the heart showed atrial septal defect. Cerebral computed are not associated with the genetic predisposition. The characteristic tomography, renal studies and hematological evaluation were normal. feature of the occurrence juvenile polyps is rectal bleeding what is an The karyotype was 46XX/46,XX,del(11)(q24-> qter) (90%/10%). The indication for further diagnostics. The JPS encompasses the cases of parental karyograms were normal. This finding suggests a postzygotic numerous polyps and/or a familial component. The characteristic fea- event resulting in a child with mild clinical findings of Jacobsen syn- ture of the juvenile polyps are a markedly expanded lamina propria drome. The follow-up of the child and genetic counseling is needed containing dilated cystic glands, inflammatory cells, and prominent since the mosaic cell line could be found in ovaries as well. stroma with a normal overlying epithelium. The five juvenile polyposis patients were diagnosed in specialized P0148. Johanson-Blizzard Syndrome - The importance of genetic clinics. The recognition of the JPS syndrome in 3 cases was based counseling and multi-disciplinary approach to rare diseases and on observations over 100 juvenile polyps in colon and in two cases neurodevelopmental delay on observation over 5 juvenile polyps in colon. The entire coding se- B. Bozorgmehr, A. Karimi-Nejad, A. Mirblooki, M. H. Karimi-Nejad; quences of the MADH4 and BMPR1A genes were sequenced by direct Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, PCR product sequencing. The novel BMPR1A gene mutations were Islamic Republic of Iran. detected in three JPS families. We are reporting a 11-month-old Iranian girl with Johanson-Blizzard The study was financed by the Ministry of Education and Science, Po- Syndrome, third offspring of first cousin parents. Their first and second land, grant number 2PO5E02630 child died in the neonatal period due to midline scalp defect and sec- ondary infection. We believe they were also affected with Johanson- P0151. A new case with homoplasmic mitohondrial mutation of Blizzard Syndrome. This syndrome is an extremely rare ectodermal MT-ATP-6 and MCAD dysplastic disorder considered to be an autosomal ressecive disor- M. K. Stancheva; der. Each clinical manifestation has different differential diagnosis so University Children Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria. it shows the importance of genetic counseling to help the family. The The authors report a 2 year and 5 months old girl from second nor- proband had growth and developmental delay, short stature, micro- mal pregnancy and delivery.Family history- grandmother with cerebral cephaly, hypoplastic alae nasi, scar of a repaired scalp defect, up- stroke, with delay in psychomotor development, convulsions, hypoto- sweeped hair, hypothyroidism, deafness, and malabsorption, consis- nia, bilateral ptosis of eyelids, more pronounced at left, divergent alter- tent with Johanson-Blizzard Syndrome. nating strabismus, atrophy of nervi optici, complementary chordus in left ventricle-variant of normal, hypoplasia of right ramus communicans P0149. The birth prevalence of Joubert syndrome: a population -variant of normal, selective metabolic screening showed MCAD and based study in the Netherlands. investigation of mit. DNA / PCR-SBT method, showed polymorphisms, H. Y. Kroes, D. E. Fransen van de Putte, C. J. Ravesloot, D. Lindhout; C7028T/MT-CO1/, T 1700C/MT-RNR2, T 3197C/MT-RNR 2, A1479G/ Dept. of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, The Netherlands. MT-CYB/, A1146G, MT ND4, G11719A/MT-ND4/, A 8860G/MT-ATP6, The Joubert syndrome (JBS) is a clinically variable and genetically T9477A/MT-CO3/, T5495/MT-ND2, A16399G/D-loop/, A263G/D-loop, heterogeneous developmental brain disorder with autosomal reces- 309inc C/D-loop and homoplasmic mutation T8705CC in the gene of sive inheritance. The birth prevalence of JBS, necessary for carrier MT-ATP 6, with aminoacid change methionin with treonin, with MRI frequency calculation in genetic counseling, is not clear yet. We un- finding of delay in white matter and hiasmic atrophy.The reported child dertook a nationwide survey of JBS in the Netherlands. Since 2002, is the fifth Case in Bulgaria with mitohondrial mutation of the MT-ATP6. patients were systematically ascertained prospectively and retrospec- The mutation is not described in literature and has unknown effect on tively from multiple sources. mitohondrial function.The clinical picture is common in all cases .The A total of 54 patients were ascertained. The date of birth ranged from presence of MCAD will be further evaluated. 1973 to 2005. Male:female ratio was 32:22. The number of newborn Clinical genetics  P0152. Kabuki syndrome - clinical study of six cases. poplasia, supernumerary carpal and tarsal ossification centers, distal R. Zordania1, O. Kostina2, K. Joost1; phalyngeal, cervical vertebral anomalies, and thoracolumbar scoliosis 1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Institute of General and Molecular all were common findings in our patients. Pathology Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia. Patients were evaluated clinically and radiographically. After ascertain- Kabuki syndrome (KS) (OMIM 147920) is a syndrome, estimated at ment they screened for mutations in FLNB gene, using a combination 1:32000 births. KS is a complex disorder characterized by distinctive of dHPLC, direct sequencing and restriction endonuclease digestion. facial features, dermatoglyphic abnormalities, short stature and men- In this large family intrafamilial phenotypic variations for LS was stud- tal retardation. Some cases associate congenital anomalies of heart, ied and segregation of a recurrent mutation 679G>A, leading to the kidneys, cleft palate and/or lip and recurrent infections. The underlying substitution of E227K was detected. Recent molecular studies showed genetic mechanism of KS remains unknown. Most cases are sporadic. that distribution of mutations within the FLNB gene is non-random. Our KS diagnosis is based on phenotypical signs and clinical investiga- findings in this large family collectively show an autosomal dominant tions. Larsen syndrome and demonstrate causative mutation in FLNB gene. We focus on the medical data and present clinical data of six children So we can provide accurate genetic counseling and prevent further diagnosed Kabuki syndrome (five boys and one girl), at the age of cases in future pregnancies. 7-17 years. All the patients had specific ocular and auricular defects: long palpebral fissures, eversion of lower lateral eyelid, arched eye- P0155. A novel mutation in SURF1 gene in Russian patient with brows, long eyelashes and large/prominent ears, fetal pads at finger- Leigh syndrome tips and mental retardation. Two children were born praematurely with E. Y. Zakharova1, P. G. Tsygankova1, I. D. Fedonyuk2, E. S. Il’ina2; antenatal hypotrophy, three patients had short stature (< 2 SD) during 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian investigation. Congenital anomalies were diagnosed in five patients- Federation, 2Russian Child Hospital, Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian Fed- horseshore kidney (one child), thoracolumbal scoliosis (two children), eration. thoracal kyphosis (one child), pectus excavatum (one child). None of Leigh syndrome (LS) is one of the most frequent forms of mitochon- our patients had congenital heart defect, none had microcephaly. drial diseases in infancy and childhood. Typical presentation of LS is Kabuki syndrome is a complex condition, guidelines for preventive in the first year of life with failure to thrive, psychomotor regression, managment are given: 1.growth and development should be moni- ataxia, signs of brainstem dysfunction, and peripheral neuropathy. LS tored, 2.overweight can occur in early puberty, 3.recurrent ear infec- is characterized by symmetrical bilateral lesions in the brainstem and tions and possible hearing loss are important issues. basal ganglia. Etiologies of LS includes both mitochondrial and nuclear DNA defects. Mutations in SURF1 have been shown to be the main P0153. Benign lymphoepithelial lesion of parotid gland in a cause of LS with cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency. The human patient with Keutel syndrome and her two sibs with classic SURF1 gene encodes a protein localized in the inner mitochondrial Keutel syndrome membrane and is thought to be involved in the assembly and biogen- A. Yüksel1, G. Acar2, E. Karaca1, B. Tüysüz1, S. Boyd3; esis of the cytochrome c oxidase complex. Most of known SURF1 mu- 1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Medical Genetics, İstanbul, tations in LS patients predict a truncated protein product. We describe Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, department of Otorhi- a new mutation in Surf1 gene found in one Russian patient with LS. nolaryngology, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Children’s Miracle, Network Endowed Chair, It is related to the group of complex rearrangements and represents a MIND Institute, UC, CA, United States. 114bp duplication with the 2bp deletion inside of the duplicated frag- Keutel syndrome is a rare autosomal ressesive disorder that mainly ment. The duplicated fragment starts with 45bp upstream exon 8 and consists of abnormal cartilage calcification, sensorineural hearing ends in exon 8 at nucleotide 816. This fragment except nucleotide AG loss, peripheral pulmoner stenosis, brachiotelephalangism and maxil- at the position 749 (749delAG) is inserted after nucleotide 816. The lar hypoplasia. The molecular etiology of disorder was shown with the duplication shifts the reading frame and predicts a preliminary stop-co- mutation in human matrix GLa protein gene. Defect in this gene is don at the 278 amino acid position and as a consequence skipping the thoughted to be responsible for this disase. We report 3 sibs with Keu- exon 9 of the gene. The phenotypic features of the patient are typical tel syndrome. One of them with Keutel syndrome findings and she also for Leigh syndrome. has a recurrent benign lymphoepithelial lesion of the left parotid gland. In this patient we identified a new nonsense mutation in exon 2 (at c. P0156. Atypical Leigh syndrome caused by T8993C mtDNA 79C>T causing termination codon at aminoacid position 27). Other two mutation sibs had classic Keutel syndrome whose parents were first cousins. P. G. Tsigankova, G. Rudenskaya; Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. P0154. Molecular and clinical findings of Larsen syndrome in a A case of early-onset Leigh syndrome with atypically mild course in large Iranian family caused by a mutation in FLNB gene. a 11-year-old girl is presented. Family history is negative apart from Y. Shafeghati1, N. Al-Madani2, M. H. Karimi-Nejad2, K. Azadbakht3, L. S. Bick- ischemic stroke with complete recovery at the age of 52 years in ma- nell4, S. P. Robertson5; ternal grandmother. The child was born of uncomplicated pregnancy 1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Karimi-Nejad and delivery. Since infancy she presented spasticity, generalized hy- Najmabadi Genetics Centre, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Science and perkinesia, and ataxia with motor and speech delay but normal mental Research Unit, Azad university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department development. With age, her movement disorders and dysarthria dimin- of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Otago, Otago, New Zealand, ished. The girl walked independently, managed some everyday activi- 5Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Otago, Dunedin, ties, and was educated at home up to age. Her diagnosis was cerebral New Zealand. palsy, there were no somatic disorders or ocular signs. MRI showed Larsen syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant osteochondrodyspla- moderate lesions of capsula externa and putamen. At the age of 9 sia characterised by years, epileptic seizures appeared but regressed soon with anticonvul- large joint dislocations and craniofacial anomalies such as cleft palate sants. In 10 years, with no provoking factors, she developed an acute and midface episode of somnolence, severe dysarthria, ataxia, hyperkinesias, and hypoplasia. Recently LS was shown to be caused by missense muta- inability to walk. Second MRI showed no deterioration. Moderate lactic tions or small in-frame deletions in FLNB gene, encoding the cytoskel- acidosis in plasma (2,33 mM) and homoplasmy for T8993C mtDNA etal protein filamin B. mutation in blood cells confirmed a supposed mitochondrial disorder. We found a large Iranian family with at least 30 affected members. With treatment, the girl’s status improved and returned to initial in Clinical findings were typical. Cardinal features were: short stature, 5_6 weeks. Nine months later, she remains stable and seizure-free. multiple joints dislocation or subluxation, prominent forehead, midface T8993C mutation of ATP synthase 6 gene is known to be responsible hypoplasia, hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, carpal, tarsal, for diverse phenotypes of Leigh syndrome including juvenile forms. phalyngeal bone abnormalities, and spatulate fingers. Cleft palate was However, a prolonged and relatively mild course with normal mental detected only in one case. Most of them were suffering from deaf- development in a very early-onset case, like ours, is uncommon. The ness, but none was mentally retarded. Club feet was common. A wide observation contributes into phenotypic variability of Leigh syndrome. range of skeletal abnormalities such as craniofacial, distal humeral hy-Clinical genetics 0 P0157. Associated malformations in cases with limb reduction dioverter defibrillator which allow, in contrast to pace-maker, to prevent defects sudden death. C. Stoll, Y. Alembik, B. Dott, M. P. Roth; Genetique Médicale, Strasbourg, France. P0159. Retrospective study of a cohort of 49 french patients Infants with limb reduction defects(LRD)often have other associated with Lowe syndrome. No evidence for genotype-phenotype congenital defects.The purpose of this investigation was to assess the correlation. prevalence and the types of associated malformations in a defined G. Baujat1, V. Satre2, A. Postel-Vinay1, I. Giurgia1, I. Desguerre1, M. Polak1, L. population.The associated malformations in infants with LRD were Robel1, O. Roche1, A. Munnich1, R. Salomon1, J. Lunardi2; collected in all livebirths,stillbirths and terminations of pregnancy dur- 1Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Universitaire, Greno- ing 25 years in 334,262 consecutive births in the area covered by our ble, France. population based registry of congenital anomalies.Of the 255 LRD in- Background: Oculocerebrorenal Lowe syndrome is a rare X-linked dis- fants born during this period,58.1% had associated malformations.As- order, characterized by major anomalies affecting the eye, nervous sociated malformations were more frequent in infants who had upper system and kidneys. This syndrome is caused by mutations in OCRL1 limb reduction defect(63.2%) than in infants with lower limb reduction gene, which encodes OCRL1, an inositol polyphosphate 5-phospha- defects(48.4%).Malformations in the cardiac system and in the central tase. nervous system were the most common other malformations,15.2% Objective: To describe the clinical features of a large cohort of Lowe and 10.6% of the associated anomalies,respectively,followed by patients and to correlate genotypes to phenotypes. anomalies in the genital system(10.1%),in the renal system(6.8%),and Methods: A retrospective multicentric review of the medical, surgical in the digestive system(6.3%).There were 16(6.5%)cases with chro- and socio-educative records of patients clinically diagnosed as Lowe mosomal abnormalities,including 8 trisomies 18,and 2 22 q 11 dele- syndrome. Molecular investigations included sequencing analysis of tion, and 56(22.8%) nonchromosomal dysmorphic syndromes.There the OCRL1 gene. were no predominant dysmorphic syndromes,but VA(C)TER(L) as- Results: Forty nine patients were included (2 to 50 years). sociation.However numerous dysmorphic syndromes were regis- a) Proximal tubular dysfunction was found in 100% of cases with se- tered including,among them,the following : EEC,OFD,Klippel-Tre- vere acidosis in 1/3, rickets in 1/2, and among the 27 older patients, naunay-Weber,OAVS,CHARGE,Townes Brocks,Moebius,Du Pan, the mean age for the beginning of reduced glomerule filtration rate SLO,hypoglossia-hypodactyly,amniotic band,De Lange,Rubinstein- was 15 years. Taybi, Fanconi,TAR,Roberts,Holt-Oram,and fetal diethylstilbestrol. b) Significant bilateral cataracts were diagnosed in 47/49 patients. The Seventy one(28.8 %)of the cases were multiply,non syndromic,non mean age at cataract extraction was 3.4 months. Glaucoma was de- chromosomal malformed infants.Prenatal diagnosis was performed in tected in 63% of cases. 48.8 % of dysmorphic syndromes with LRD,whereas prenatal ultraso- c) Mean age for walking alone was 48 months. Mental retardation was nographic detection was only 23.9 % in cases with isolated LRD.The estimated severe in 40% of patients but moderate in 60% of the se- overall prevalence of associated malformations,which was more than ries. one in two infants,emphasizes the need for a thorough investigation of d) Atypical minor features were also observed, including anemia, li- infants with LRD.A routine screening for other malformations especially poma, hemorragic manifestations and hypercholesterolemia. cardiac,central nervous system,urogenital system,facial clefts,and di- e) All the patients harboured an OCRL1 gene abnormality. No cor- gestive system may be considered in infants and in fetuses with LRD. relation between the type or position of the mutation and the clinical phenotype was demonstrated. P0158. The phenotypic variability of laminopathies: a trap for the Conclusion: This clinical description about the largest Lowe cohort clinicians ever published emphasizes the phenotypic heterogeneity in OCRL. V. Drouin-Garraud1, L. Guyant-Maréchal2, A. Bedat-Millet2, F. Anselme3, G. The lack of genotype-phenotype correlation may result from unknown Savoure3, A. Laquerrière4, P. Richard5, T. Frebourg1; factors including modifier genes. 1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, and Inserm U614, Institute for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 2Department of Neurology, Rouen P0160. Clinical report: a new case of macrocephaly/autism University Hospital, Institute for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 3Depart- syndrome (MIM00) with a germline PTEN tumor suppressor ment of Cardiology, Rouen University Hospital, Institute for Biomedical Re- gene mutation search, Rouen, France, 4Department of Pathology, Rouen University Hospital, E. Bieth1, N. Sévenet2, N. Chassaing1, C. Cances3, P. Calvas1, M. Longy2; Institute for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 5Molecular Cardiogenetics, 1Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 2Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France, 3Hôpi- La Pitié-Salpétrière University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France. tal des Enfants, Toulouse, France. Laminopathies constitute a group of diseases caused by mutations of Macrocephaly is found in approximately 20% of patients with autism. the LMNA gene which encodes two nuclear envelope proteins, lamin In a subset of 18 individuals with autism spectrum disorders and ex- A and lamin C. Since the identification in 1999 of LMNA mutations in treme macrocephaly, Butler et al. recently reported 3 young boys with a the autosomal dominant form of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, germline missense PTEN mutation (J Med Genet 2005;42:318). Here, LMNA mutations have been shown to result in a wide range of pheno- we report on a 6 year old girl referred for global developmental delay, types including autosomal recessive form of EDMD, dilated cardiomy- language regression and pervasive developmental disorder. The asso- opathy, familial partial lipodystrophy of the Dunnigan type, mandibu- ciation with progressive macrocephaly (+3DS at birth and +5DS at 6y) loacral dysplasia, Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy, Hutchinson-Gil- prompted us to perform a PTEN gene analysis in the leucocyte DNA of ford Progeria or Werner Syndrome, lethal restrictive dermopathy and the patient. We identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition in exon 6 of other complex phenotypes. Here we report our clinical experience on PTEN, resulting in an arginine173-to-histidine (p.Arg173His) substitu- the inter- and intra- variability of the LMNA mutation phenotype based tion. Arginine173 is a highly evolutionarily conserved residue whose on the extensive investigation of 38 patients from 13 families. Fourteen subsitution by histidine has been shown to lead, in an in vitro assay, patients from 5 families showed a muscular disease associated with to a drastic reduction (95%) of the phosphatase activity of PTEN. In- cardiac involvement, and 2 of these patients had clinical involvement terestingly, this p.Arg173His missense mutation has already been re- since infancy. Eighteen patients from 3 families had isolated severe ported by several authors but only as a somatic mutation identified in cardiac disease and these families were dramatically affected by an glioblastomas and astrocytomas. Initially, germline mutations of PTEN autosomal dominant form of sudden death. Three patients had partial have been found in patients with Cowden disease or Bannayan-Riley- lipodystrophy. Finally, 3 patients from 2 families showed an unusual Ruvalcaba syndrome. However, as in the three previously reported complex phenotype associating cardiac involvement, mild dysmorphic cases, the present patient had no mucocutaneous lesions suggestive facial features and acrogeria. Most of these patients had a severe car- of these two hamartoma syndromes. The possibility of developing spe- diac disease. This series highlights that the diagnostic of laminopa- cific alterations of Cowden disease during the second decade should thies should be considered in patients with supraventricular arrhythmia be considered. Our findings confirm that molecular testing for PTEN and conduction system disease, even in the absence of dilated cardio- mutation should be performed in patients with autistic behaviour and myopathy. The frequency of ventricular arrhythmia justifies to perform macrocephaly. presymptomatic diagnosis in order to implant in mutation carriers car-Clinical genetics 1 P0161. Intrafamilial phenotypic variability in Malpuech Paris, France, 4Institut de Puériculture, Dept. of Fetal Pathology, Paris, France, Syndrome: Report of Three Siblings and a Review. 5Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker – Enfants Malades, T. Ben-Omran1, M. Almureikhi1, A. Teebi2; Dept. of Obstetrics, Paris, France, 6INSERM U563, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, 1Section of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Hamad France. Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar, 2Department of Pediatrics, Weil- Cornell Retinoic acid (RA) is a potent teratogen in all vertebrates when tight Medical College, Doha, Qatar. homeostatic controls on its endogenous dose, location or timing are We report on three sibs (2 girls, one boy) with Malpuech syndrome, perturbed during early embryogenesis. STRA6 encodes an integral born to a phenotypically normal first cousin Qatari Arab parents. This cell membrane protein that favors RA uptake from soluble retinol-bind- is an extremely rare autosomal recessive syndrome first described in ing protein; its transcription is directly regulated by RA levels. Molecu- 1983 by Malpuech et al., with few (13) patients reported so far. It is lar analysis of STRA6 was undertaken in two consanguineous human characterized by facial clefting, hypertelorism and ptosis; malar hy- fetuses we previously described with the Matthew-Wood syndrome poplasia, urogenital anomalies, caudal appendage and sacral dimple; [MIM 601186] in a context of severe microphthalmia, pulmonary agen- and growth and mental retardation. All three sibs showing the range of esis, bilateral diaphragmatic eventration, duodenal stenosis, pancreat- anomalies found in Malpuech syndrome. They have growth and men- ic malformations and intrauterine growth retardation. The two fetuses tal retardation, facial dysmorphism including ptosis, thick eye brows had both homozygous truncating mutations predicting a premature and flat malar region; and eye abnormalities. In addition, one sister stop codon in STRA6 transcripts. Five other fetuses presenting at and the brother have hypertelorism, caudal appendage, and bilateral least one of the two major signs of clinical anophthalmia or pulmonary cleft lip and palate and pseudocleft respectively. While expression of hypoplasia with at least one of the two associated signs of diaphrag- the syndrome was relatively mild in the older sister, the brother and matic closure defect or cardiopathy had no STRA6 mutations. These the younger sister showed the full-blown syndrome. This family fur- findings suggest a molecular basis for the prenatal manifestations of ther supports the autosomal recessive inheritance for this syndrome. Matthew-Wood syndrome and and that phenotypic overlap with other The constellation of clinical manifestations in this sibship emphasizes associations may be due to genetic heterogeneity of elements com- the phenomenon of intrafamilial variability that may lead to difficulty in mon to the RA and fibroblast growth factor signaling cascades. diagnosis. We will review the previously published reports and further expand the phenotype of this rare condition. Attention is drawn to the P0164. Genotype-phenotype correlations at the MKS1 and MKS clustering of such rare syndromes in this area. loci in Meckel-Gruber and Joubert syndromes S. Audollent1,2, U. Smith3, C. Ozilou1,2, L. Baala2, R. Khaddour2, J. Martinovic1, P0162. Clinical factors associated with the occurrence of an S. Romano4, C. Esculpavit2, S. Lyonnet1,2, A. Munnich1,2, F. Encha-Razavi1,2, C. aortic dilatation within a cohort of 1013 patients with Marfan Antignac1,5, M. C. Gubler5, C. A. Johnson6, M. Vekemans1,2, T. Attié-Bitach1,2; syndrome or another type I fibrillinopathy 1Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, L. Faivre1, G. Collod-Beroud2, B. Loeys3, A. Child4, C. Binquet5, G. Elodie5, B. France, 2Unité INSERM U-781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Callewaert3, E. Arbustini6, K. Mayer7, M. Arslan-Krichner8, P. Comeglio4, C. Ber- Paris V, Paris, France, 3Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University oud9, C. Bonithon-Kopp5, M. Claustres9, L. Ades10, J. De Backer3, P. Coucke3, of Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4Département U. Francke11, A. De Paepe3, C. Boileau12, G. Jondeau13; de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, 5Unité 1Departement de Genetique, Dijon, France, 2INSERM U827, Montpellier, INSERM U-574, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris V, Paris, France, 3Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 4St George’s Hospital, London, France, 6Institute of Molecular Medicine, St. James’s University Hospital, United Kingdom, 5CIC-EC, Dijon, France, 6Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, Leeds, United Kingdom. 7Human Genetics, Martinsried, Germany, 8Institut fur Humangenetik, Hannover, Meckel syndrome (MKS) is a lethal autosomal recessive syndrome Germany, 9Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, France, 10Marfan research characterized by cystic kidneys, a brain malformation (usually oc- group, Sidney, Australia, 11Genetics and Pediatrics, Stanford, CA, United cipital encephalocele), polydactyly, and bile duct proliferation of liver. States, 12Génétique Moléculaire, Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France, 13Centre de Recently, two genes have been identified: MKS1/FLJ20345 on 17q in Référence Marfan, Hopital Bichat, Paris, France. Finnish kindreds and MKS3/TMEM67 on 8q in families from Pakistan The cardinal features of MFS involve the ocular, cardiovascular and and Oman, encoding ciliary proteins. skeletal systems. Clinical care is complicated by variable age of onset In order to evaluate the involvement of MKS1 and MKS3 in MKS, and and the wide range of severity of aortic features. Taking advantage of to determine phenotype-genotype correlations, we performed the mo- the data of a large collaborative study designed for a genotype-phe- lecular studies of MKS1 and MKS3 in a large multhiethnic cohort of notype correlation study including 1013 probands with a pathogenic 120 MKS and 45 Meckel-like fetuses. Our results indicate that MKS1 FBN1 mutation, we searched for clinical factors associated with the and MKS3 genes are each responsible for about 10 % of MKS cases occurrence of ascending aortic dilatation (AAD) over time. Probabili- with various mutations in different populations. A strong phenotype- ties of AAD were described using Kaplan-Meier method and compared genotype correlation depending on the mutated gene was observed, using logrank tests according to the following clinical signs: 1) 5 or regarding the type of central nervous system malformation, the fre- more skeletal features of the MFS spectrum (n=272); 2) ectopia lentis quency of polydactyly, bone dysplasia and situs inversus. The iden- (n=542); 3) mitral valve prolapse (n=533); 4) striae (n=444); 5) pneu- tification of MKS3 mutations in sibs presenting vermis agenesis and mothorax (n=73) or 6) dural ectasia (n=154). Baseline was considered small cysts in renal medulla, lead us to hypothethise that mutations in as the date of birth. Among the 1013 included probands, aged in me- MKS genes may cause Joubert syndrome (JS). Analysis of MKS1 and dian of 29 years old (IQR [15-40]) at their last follow-up, 775 (77%) MKS3 in a series of 22 JS patients identified MKS3 mutations in three had AAD. Ectopia lentis and pneumothorax were not significantly as- JS cases, defining MKS3 as the sixth JS locus (JBTS6). No MKS1 sociated with the risk of AAD. Striae and dural ectasia were associated mutations were identified in this series, suggesting that the allelism is with a lower risk of developing an AAD (p=0.001 and p=0.03 respec- restricted to MKS3 . tively). Conversely, patients with 5 or more skeletal features, or a mi- These data along with our previous identification of severe prenatal tral valve prolapse had a higher risk of AAD (p<0.0001 and p<0.0001 forms of Bardet-Biedl syndromes among MKS - like fetuses further respectively). In conclusion, the presence of a high number of skeletal demonstrate that MKS is the severe end of spectrum of human cil- features and cardiac features appear to be the prognostic factors of iopathies. AAD in FBN1 mutations carriers. P0165. MecP2 Duplication Syndrome: Description of two P0163. Matthew-Wood syndrome is caused by truncating additional cases mutations in the retinol binding protein receptor gene STRA6 E. Kirk1, N. Philip2, N. Martini2, N. Levy2, C. Badens2; C. Golzio1,2, J. Martinovic-Bouriel3, S. Thomas1, S. Mougou-Zrelli3, B. Gratta- 1Sydney’s children hospital, Sydney, Australia, 2Hospital La Timone, Marseille, gliano-Bessières4, M. Bonnière3, S. Delahaye5,2, A. Munnich1,2, F. Encha-Ra- France. zavi3,2, S. Lyonnet1,2, M. Vekemans1,3, T. Attié-Bitach1,2, H. C. Etchevers1,6; In 2005, small duplications at Xq28 including MecP2 and L1CAM have 1INSERM U781-Hopital necker, Paris, France, 2Université René Descartes-Pa- been shown to cause syndromic X-linked Mental Retardation (XLMR) ris 5, Hôpital Necker – Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Assistance Publique in 4 families. Since then, 2 other series of respectively 6 and 7 fami- – Hôpitaux de Paris; Hôpital Necker – Enfants Malades, Dept. of Genetics, lies have been reported, where affected patients exhibit a remarkably Clinical genetics 2 homogeneous phenotype. The clinical picture of affected males con- tion. Patients 4 and 5 presented with autistic features. MECP2 analysis sisted of severe mental retardation, neurological abnormalities, severe of the exons 3 and 4 was performed by Denaturant Gradient Gel Elec- recurrent respiratory infections and death before 25 years of age. trophoresis, sequencing and GAP-PCR, using specifically designed Here, we report two additional cases found by genomic Q-PCR in 35 sets of primers. XLMR families. The polymorphism p.T203M was identified in Patient 1, but not in Case A is of French origin and presents with profound mental retarda- his mother, raising questions about its contribution to the phenotype. tion, absence of speech, spasticity and recurrent respiratory infections Patient 2 and 3 had a novel deletion at the deletion-prone region of necessitating partial pneumonectomy. Currently aged 43, he is the MECP2 (c.1140del86) inherited from their unaffected carrier mother. eldest patient reported so far, all previously reported patients being The GAP-PCR in Patient 4 showed evidence of a large rearrangement under 25 or being deceased before 25. Case B is 8 years old and is of encompassing exons 3 and 4, which requires further evaluation. His Nepalese and Lebanese origins. He presents also profound mental re- mother was normal. Patient 5 presented the p.R106W classic RS mu- tardation, absence of speech and recurrent respiratory infections. His tation, although his mother was unavailable for analysis. maternal uncle died at 11 from pneumonia and presented the same MECP2 mutations should be considered as a rare cause of MR in clinical features. Both mothers carry the duplication and show marked males , although great phenotypic variation hinders genotype-pheno- skewing of chromosome X inactivation.The predisposition toward se- type correlation. vere pulmonary infections is the hallmark of this XLMR syndrome. It is a common feature shared to some extent, with Rett syndrome in which P0168. MED12 (HOPA) mutation in a family overlapping Opiz- pneumonia has been shown to be the most frequent cause of death. Kaveggia (FG) and Lujan-Fryns syndromes It remains to determine if, like in Rett syndrome, this clinical feature is A. Verloes1, C. E. Schwartz2, R. E. Stevenson2; associated to breathing disturbances due to dysfunction of the autono- 1Dept of Genetics, Robert DEBRE University Hospital, PARIS, France, 2JC Self mous nervous system. Research Institute of Human Genetics, Greenwood Genetic Center, Green- wood, SC, United States. P0166. Brothers with a microduplication including the MECP2 The MED12 (aka HOPA/TRAP230) gene located in Xq12 is a subunit gene: rapid head growth in infancy and transient tendency to of the TRAP/Mediator complex, a multi-component complex that can recurrent infections regulate transcription by transducing the signals between activators T. E. Prescott1, A. Bjørnstad1, O. K. Rødningen2; and RNA polymerase II. A recurrent p.R961W mutation in the MED12 1Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway, 2Ullevål Uni- was recently reported in five FG families including the original FG fam- versity Hospital, Oslo, Norway. ily (Risheg, Nature Genet 2007). A p.N1007S was then found in the Males with microduplications of Xq28 encompassing the MECP2 gene original Lujan syndrome family (Schwartz, J Med Genet 2007). We re- have been reported to have a phenotype characterized by severe de- port here further clinical details on the 2d family reported by Schwartz. velopmental delay, infantile hypotonia, spasticity evolving in childhood, In this family, a p.N1007S was found in a male proband and his two absent or limited speech, absent or limited ambulation, seizures, mild nephews, who were clinally diagnosed as FG syndrome. The proband, facial dysmorphism and severe, recurrent respiratory tract infections. examined at age 19 (in 1989) had global developmental delay (mod- We report two mentally retarded brothers who are mildly dysmorphic. erate to severe), agenesis of the corpus callosum, normal OFC, long The older boy is 11 years old. He was shunted for communicating narrow face with high square forehead, bulbous nasal tip, flat malar hydrocephalus at age 7 months. He walked at age 2 ½ years. The area, short philtrum, bowed upper lip, prominent lower jaw, a hairy younger boy is 6 ½ years old. He walked at age 3 years. He was nevus on the right forearm and normal neurological examination. He investigated in infancy because of rapid head growth, but had normal had poor speech abilities and showed temper tantrums and aggres- intracranial pressure. Both boys had normal development in the first siveness. The two nephews showed mild to moderate developmental few months of life. They are generally healthy but without speech.They delay, and ectomorphic habitus. Both were tall and slender, with long had frequent respiratory tract infections, but only during the first few face and high forehead, short philtrum, small mouth, narrow palate and years of life. Neither boy has required mechanical ventilation because crowded teeth. Brain CT was normal in both, and constipation was not of respiratory tract infections. a problem. One of the children had skull surgery for scaphocephaly. The parents have no other children. The family history is otherwise They showed similar behavioral problems, with hyperactivity, attention non-contributory. deficit, tantrums and aggressiveness, worsening with time. Nosologic The mother who is cognitively normal, has a completely skewed X- overlap between FG and Lujan-Fryns syndrome will be discussed. inactivation pattern in blood (98:2). MLPA analysis revealed that both boys have a microduplication which includes the MECP2 gene. Fur- P0169. Megalencephaly, thick corpus callosum, dysmorphic ther studies are being done to delineate the extent of the duplication. facial features, seizures, and mental retardation in two unrelated These brothers suggest that the phenotype which results from micro- patients: a new syndrome ? duplications including MECP2 may be broader than previously appre- M. RIO1, I. Desguerre2, N. Boddaert3, M. Le Merrer1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier- ciated. Rapid head growth in infancy may be present in some individu- Daire1; als and persistence of serious recurrent respiratory infections may not 1Medical Genetics, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 2Pediatric Neurology, Neck- be a mandatory feature. er Hospital, Paris, France, 3Pediatric Radiology, Necker Hospital, Paris, France. Macrocephaly associated with mental retardation is a part of various P0167. Phenotypic features of males with mental retardation syndromes including overgrowth conditions, cutis marmorata telangi- (MR) and mutations of the MECP2 gene ectatica, Cowden disease, and neuro-metabolic disorders. We report S. Psoni, J. Traeger-Synodinos, C. Sofocleous, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli, A. Mavrou, E. here a new association characterized by megalencephaly, thick corpus Kanavakis, H. Fryssira; callosum, mental retardation, seizures, specific facial features in two Medical Genetics/Choremio Research Laboratory/Univ. of Athens/St Sophia’s unrelated boys. Case 1 was able to walk alone at 3 years of age, de- Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece. veloped seizures at the age of 5 and had limited speech. The physical The MECP2 gene causes Rett syndrome (RS) (OMIM: 312750), a examination at the age of 9 revealed normal weight and length but a well-defined X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder affect- large head circumference (+3SD) and dysmorphic features including ing primarily girls. Until recently RS was considered lethal in males, downslanting palpebral fissures, long and expressionless face, small although now approximately 60 cases have been reported. Males with mouth, enamel defect, and strabismus. Case 2 developped seizures at MECP2 mutations present with a broad spectrum of phenotypes rang- 3, was able to walk at 8 and had limited speech. Head circumference ing from neonatal encephalopathy to non-syndromic MR. curve was above + 4 SD whereas length and weight curve were in the Five males (aged 3-16 years) evaluated for MR, had normal karyotype normal. He had the same dysmorphic features (long expressionless and four of them were evaluated for molecular variation associated face, downslanting palpebral fissures, small mouth, enamel defect). with the FMR1 locus, with negative results. Patient 1 presented with Extensive metabolic and cytogenetic studies were normal in the two features of FXS, including long face, protruding ears and behavioral boys. In addition, molecular screening of NSD1, GPC3 and the 11p15 problems. Patient 2 had spasticity, pyramidal signs and trunk stereoty- region was negative in case 2. In the two children, brain MRI detected pies, while his brother (Patient 3) showed slight psychomotor retarda- bilateral megalencephaly, a thick corpus callosum, an enlarged white Clinical genetics  matter and normal ventricles.This association of megalencephaly and P0172. Experiences of a routine diagnostic laboratory with oligo- thick corpus callosum has been previously reported by G. Göhlich-Rat- based array CGH in the diagnosis of mental retardation mann in 1998 in 3 children who had in addition pachygyria and com- A. Lott, P. Jagiello, H. Gabriel, M. Gencik; plete lack of motor development, features not observed in our cases. ZMG Osnabrueck, Osnabrueck, Germany. We hope that ongoing cytogenetic and molecular studies will further Array CGH is a novel diagnostic tool for the detection of submicro- define this new entity. scopic chromosomal imbalances. Such imbalances are regarded as an important cause of congenital mental retardation. In June 2006 P0170. Study about the family history in a population with oligo-based array CGH was diagnostically implemented in our genetic mental deficiency service in order to reach a resolution for screening the whole genome I. Tomulescu, C. Pusta; that extends far beyond routine cytogenetic analysis. Array CGH was University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania. performed using 44k or 105k 60mer oligonucleotide arrays (Agilent) Introduction. Mental deficiency is a very severe and common disease. with a theoretical resolution of about 100kb or 40kb, respectively. There are many causes of mental deficiency. Thus, we can mention First we give an overview of our cases so far examined by array CGH, the congenital abnormalities, metabolic diseases, cranial trauma, frag- followed by the representation of selected cases. These examples will ile X syndrome, monogenic or polygenic syndromes and chromosomal demonstrate the usefulness of high resolution array CGH for differ- syndromes. Also, we can mention the critical age of parents (especially ent tasks: (1) further analysis of patients with syndromic mental re- of mother’s), some physical, biological and chemical factors in appear- tardation, showing initially a normal karyotype; (2) confirmation and ance of mental deficiency. breakpoint analysis of imbalances detected by standard cytogenetic Objectives. In this study we show the importance of hereditary factors analysis, sometimes finding additionally submicroscopic chromosomal in appearance of mental deficiency. aberrations; (3) screening of apparently balanced translocations for Material and methods. We investigated 596 children interned in Neuro- cryptic imbalances. psychiatry Infantile Section of Neurology and Psychiatry Clinical Hos- Additionally, the selected cases will show the challenges of the vali- pital of Oradea, during the 1999-2001 period. Out of 596 children that dation and interpretation of results revealed by array CGH analysis. were examined, 393 presented different levels of mental deficiency. Since the discovery of a rapidly increasing number of so called ,,copy We performed family studies and inspected the pedigrees. number variations“ (CNVs) in the genome of normal individuals, the Results. More than 65% of children with mental deficiency have one assumption of an imbalance as casual for a specific phenotype must or more affected relatives in their family. The relatives may be affected be carefully considered. by congenital abnormalities and/ or mental diseases. The frequency of In conclusion, our experiences show that array CGH should be con- similarly affected relatives is greatest in groups with mild and moder- sidered as an essential tool for the genetic analysis of patients with ate mental deficiency. In the group with severe mental deficiency, the syndromic mental retardation. incidence of affected relatives is lower. Conclusion. This result may be an argument for the hypothesis that P0173. Subtelomeric FISH ananlysis in 92 patients with mental genetic factors are very important in the inheritance of mental defi- retardation ciency. The increased incidence in groups with mild and moderate E. F. Belligni1, J. Messa2, M. Pierluigi3, M. DeGregori2, L. Sorasio1, G. B. Fer- mental deficiency may be partly explained by harmful factors, critical rero1, F. Faravelli4, O. Zuffardi2, M. Silengo1; age of parents and the presence of fragile X syndrome. It seems that 1Department of Paediatrics - University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Department of severe mental deficiency commonly reflects the effects of genes and Genetics - University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Genetics - Galliera chromosomal disorders. Hospital, Genova, Italy, 4Department of Genetics - Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy. P0171. Contributions as concerns to the incidence of cranial and Mental retardation (MR) affects approximately 1 to 3% of the general facial dysmorphism in a population with mental deficiency population. Cryptic subtelomeric aberrations have been found in 5 to C. Pusta, I. Tomulescu; 7% of all cases. We performed a subtelomeric FISH analysis in 92 unre- University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania. lated children with normal standard karyotype ascertained by a check- Introduction. The mental deficiency is a very severe illness because it list that evaluates the grade of developmental delay, dysmorphisms, is associated in many cases with different other malformative diseas- growth defect and congenital malformations. Ten cryptic chromosomal es. Also, the etiology of mental deficiency is diverse, and depending on anomalies have been identified (10,8%): three de novo deletions, four etiological cause, the number and types of traits in mentally affected unbalanced translocations of parental origin, a t(9;16)(9pter;16q24.3 person varies in large limits. qter) pat; der(20)t(16q24;20q13.3)pat; a der(6) t(6;1)(p22.3,q44) mat Objectives. Our study is about the incidence of cranial and facial dys- and a der(7)t(7;12)(q34;q24.32)mat; and three de novo unbalanced morphism in a population with mental deficiency. We decided to make translocations: t(6pter; 6qter); a t(5;10)(pter;qter); a t(1;13)(p31.3;q22. this research because of different etiology of mental deficiency. Also, 2),ish.. Interestingly a patient presenting a dysmorphic phenotype and we wanted to establish if the cranial and facial dysmorphism is an im- multiple malformations, not associated to neurodevelopment delay portant element in description of different types of mental deficiency. carried a de novo t(6pter; 6qter). Microcephaly, agenesis of corpus cal- Material and method. This research was realised on 393 children with losum, upslanting palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, synophris, short diverse types of mental deficiency. The children were interned in Neu- nose, anteverted nares and low set ears were the clinical features ropsychiatry Infantile Section of Neurology and Psychiatry Clinical observed in the cases affected by 9q34-qter deletion, in agreement Hospital of Oradea, during the 1999-2001 period. The children were with the literature. In the patient carring t(9;16)(9q34qter;16q24.3qte clinical examinated. Also, we used the methods for chromosomes r)pat, the clinical diagnosis of Donnai-Barrow syndrome was initially analysis. proposed; in this case, subtelomeric FISH analysis allowed us to sug- Results. We observed that the incidence of cranial and facial dysmor- gest the hypothesis that some o Donnai-Barrow cases observed might phism increase in accordance with the level of the mental deficiency. be ascribed to 9q terminal deletion. Clinical features of most of these In the group with severe mental deficiency, we obtained an incidence patients are consistent with the corresponding new emerging chromo- over the 40% of this abnormality. The explanation for these results may some phenotypes, further supporting the role of cryptic subtelomeric be the presence of some genes and chromosomes syndromes which analysis in the work-up of children affected by MR. associate cranial and facial dysmorphism, too. Conclusion. The cranial and facial dysmorphism is a common feature P0174. Mental retardation disease among Israeli Arab: Clinical in description of mental deficiency disease. The incidence of this ab- and epidemiological study in a single village normality increase in accordance with the worsening of the mental R. A. Sharkia1, Q. Kaiyal2, N. Zelnik2, M. Mahajnah2; deficiency. 1The Triangle Regional Research and Development Center, P. O. Box-2167, Kfar Qari’- 30075, Israel, 2Child Neurology and Development Center and Pedi- atric Department, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. Mental retardation (MR) is a frequently occurring disease with a major impact on the life of affected person, the family and society. MR is Clinical genetics  defined as a disability characterized by a remarkably low intellectual accordingly. The initial sings of disease appeared at the age 14 in both functioning (IQ<70) in conjunction with significant limitations in adap- patients in similar way. The major features were the teaching difficul- tive functioning and it is estimated 1-3% of the general population. ties, memory disturbance, marked emotional lability with irrational fear, The genetic etiologies of MR are diverse and include chromosomal marked decrease of self-criticism and unequal behavior. The MRI of anomalies, recognizable malformation syndromes, monogenic syn- the brain revealed typical changes in the perivenricular zones. After dromes, structural brain abnormalities and environmental factors. the five years observation there are no movement disturbance in both About 1,400 different conditions associated with mental retardation patients. The psychiatric problems are stable in sister but progressive have been recognized to date and many more are yet to be character- in brother. Generally the brother’s disease progress faster than sister’s ized. The prevalence of genetic diseases and congenital malformation one. This report illustrates the importance of differential diagnostics of in the Israeli Arab community is relatively high, as a result of high rate MLD in cohort of psychiatric patients with behavior disturbances. of consanguinity, but their distribution is not uniform. The aim of this study was to determine the frequency of neurological manifestations P0177. Prevalence and phenotypes associated with double with a special emphasis on the MR spectrum disorders and its asso- Fibrillin 1 gene heterozygosity: clinical relevance for diagnosis, ciation with consanguinity within a single village. Out of 4,166 children prognosis and prenatal diagnosis (below 18 y of age), the prevalence of neurologically related hereditary M. Grasso1, E. Disabella1, N. Marziliano2, M. Pasotti1, A. Brega3,4, S. Man- disease was 4.3% (180 children) with about 40% of these cases (73 narino5, C. Lucchelli1, D. Larizza6, L. Lanzarini7, E. Antoniazzi8, R. Dore9, M. patients) were identified with MR. About 65% of neurologically related Mosconi10, L. Magrassi11, E. Arbustini1; hereditary disease cases and 80% of MR cases were outcome paren- 1Centre for Inherithed Cardiovascular Diseases,Foundation IRCCS Policlinico tal consanguineous marriages. The high prevalence of neurologically San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Centre for inherited Cardiovascular Diseases, Foun- related hereditary disease that significantly associated with consan- dation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Biology and guinity prompts the necessity of implement preventive programs and Genetics, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Genetics and Microbi- design future strategies leading to avoiding the occurrence of these ology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 5Pediatric Cardiology, Foundation IRCCS inherited genetic disorders. Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 6Pediatrics, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 7Cardiology, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Mat- P0175. C8002T polymorphism in endothelin-1 gene and teo, Pavia, Italy, 8Ophthalmology, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, metabolic syndrome Pavia, Italy, 9Magnetic Resonance Radiology, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico S. Manea, C. Heltianu; San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 10Orthopaedics, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology “N. Simionescu”, Bucharest, Roma- Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 11Neurosurgery, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, nia. Pavia, Italy. BACKGROUND: Metabolic syndrome (MS) is characterized by a cluster Marfan syndrome type I (MFS1) is an autosomal dominant disorder of of disorders including type 2 diabetes mellitus, obesity, glucose intoler- the connective tissue diagnosed following Ghent criteria and caused ance, dyslipidemia, prothrombotic and proinflammatory states. Insulin by mutations of the Fibrillin 1 gene (FBN1). Double FBN1 compound resistance, the main contributor to MS is associated with endothelial heterozygosity seems to be exceptional and associated with neonatal dysfunction. The latter represents the clue element in appearance of severe and early lethal phenotypes. the vasoconstriction when the level of vasoconstrictors factors, mainly We describe the prevalence and the clinical phenotypes of carriers of endothelin-1 (ET-1) increases. There is an important role of ET-1 in the double FBN1 gene mutations. microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes mellitus. OBJECTIVE: We identified five unrelated double FBN1 compound heterozygotes (9 This study investigates a possible association of the C8002T poly- mutations) in five out of 141 consecutively genotyped families (3.5%). morphism in ET-1 gene with MS-associated microvascular disorders In three of five families, each parent carried a different mutation and including diabetic retinopathy, neuropathy and nephropathy. METH- one of the offspring inherited both: one mutation (major) was associ- ODS: We screened 208 Romanian subjects (123 MS patients and 85 ated with MFS in at least one family member and one (minor) with mild, control individuals). ET-1 genotypes were determined by polymerase incomplete or nearly normal phenotypes not satisfying Ghent criteria chain reaction-restriction fragment-length polymorphism analysis. Cor- for MFS. Carriers of the major mutation alone or of double mutations relations between C8002T polymorphism and clinically manifested mi- (compound heterozygotes) fulfilled Ghent criteria for MFS while car- crovascular disorders in MS patients were performed by multivariate riers of “minor” mutations did not. In two families, the major mutation regression analysis using SPSS Advanced Statistics 10.0. RESULTS: was de novo and the “minor” one was inherited from the mother or the No significant differences were found for ET-1 gene variant between father, both healthy and showing minor, non-diagnostic MFS traits. MS patients and control, or between sub-selected MS patients with Our data are in accord with the dominant pattern of inheritance of the or without diabetic retinopathy or nephropathy. Multivariate logistic re- MFS, however they document the double FBN1 compound heterozy- gression analysis in MS patients showed that C8002T polymorphism gosity in a minority of MFS cases. The clinical implications must con- was an independent risk factor (P=0.03) for diabetic neuropathy, which sider the contribution of the positive family history for the diagnosis, remained significant after adjustment for potential risk factors (age, the recognition of the “major” mutation for prenatal diagnosis and the gender, body mass index, smoking, fasting blood glucose, total-cho- possible contribution of the “minor” mutation to the overall phenotype lesterol and triglycerides). CONCLUSION: These data suggest for the in double mutation carriers. first time that C8002T polymorphism of ET-1 gene may influence the development of diabetic neuropathy in MS patients. P0178. Using microarray based CGH for studying the Delleman This study was supported by Romanian Academy and Romanian grant phenotype CEEX (no. 100/2006). D. P. Cavalcanti1, L. Bernardini2, A. Novelli2, I. Torrente2, M. Cintra1, F. Cen- des1, B. Dallapiccola2; P0176. The dinamic observation of the adult form of 1UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2Istituto CSS-Mendel, Roma, Italy. metachromatic leukodystrophy in two sibs Delleman syndrome (DS) or oculocerebrocutaneous syndrome has N. A. Pichkur1, N. V. Olkhovich1, A. N. Nedoboy1, N. G. Gorovenko2; been described in a heterogeneous number of patients presenting all 1Ukrainian Children Hospital, Kiyv, Ukraine, 2National Academy of Postdiploma or some the following main syndrome’s features: orbital cysts/microph- Education, Kiyv, Ukraine. thalmia, cerebral malformations, and skin lesions specifically charac- Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is the lysosomal storage dis- terized by focal dermal hypoplasia and cutaneous appendages. Array- ease with arylsulfatase A (ASA) deficiency. The adult form of MLD CGH method has been successfully used to identify submicroscopic averages approximately 15% of all MLD cases. In contrast to other rearrangements in different series of mentally retarded patients with or forms of MLD that start with movement problems, adult form of this without associated dysmorphic signs. The purpose of this presentation disease is presented as psychiatric disturbance with schizophrenia- is reporting the study of three patients with the phenotype of DS by like disorder. There are two sibs (male and female) with adult MLD using the microarray-CGH methodology. The first patient, a sporadic was being under our observation during five years. The diagnosis was case, has presented all the main clinical signs of DS. The others two confirmed by enzymatic assay at the age 15 for brother and at the age patients were sibs that showed discordant phenotypes between them, 20 for sister, the ASA activity was found 1% and 3% of control value but suggesting the DS. All the studied three patients had normal karyo-Clinical genetics  type at 550 bands resolution level. No microrearrangements were served memory functions. The youngest, aged 10, has an OFC at - found in the first patient by array-CGH method at 0.8Mb resolution. 5SD. His IQ was 70 with normal memory functioning but weaknesses However, using the same method and also microsatellite marker stud- in executive functions. He was still in mainstream schooling. Mutation ies it was possible founding a reciprocal translocation t(6;7)(q27;q34) screening showed an homozygous 2 bp deletion leading to frameshift in the father and a different segregation of the both involved chromo- p.Lys2595fsX6. Our patients illustrate intrafamial variability of ASPM some to the two sibs. While one sib carried out a deletion at 6q27 band mutants, confirm surprisingly good preservation of cognition despite associated with a duplication of the 7q34-q36.3 region, the other sib major reduction in brain size, and confirm the absence of specific his- presents the inverted microrearrangement - a partial duplication 6q tological anomalies in ASPM-related MCPH. Detailed neuropsycho- plus a partial deletion 7q. We conclude that the Delleman phenotype logical profile of family 2 will be presented. is etiologically heterogeneous and that the involved chromosomal re- gions, 6q27 and 7q34 should be considered as candidate regions to P0181. Familial microduplication 22q11.2 without cardiac looking for genes related to DS. anomaly T. Reimand1, K. Muru1, K. Kuuse1, K. Õunap1,2; P0179. A study of candidate genes for dominant non-syndromic 11Medical Genetics Center, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, microcephaly in a family with inherited chromosomal Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. translocations t(5q35.2;18q22.3) The chromosomal rearrangements in region 22q11.2 lead to various A. Crepel, T. Voet, B. Thienpont, A. Vogels, J. Fryns, J. Vermeesch, K. Devr- types of congenital malformations and mental retardation. The most iendt; common molecular defect in region 22q11.2 is microdeletion, but re- Center of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. cently the microduplication 22q11.2 syndrome has been identified. We In a large pedigree a balanced chromosomal translocation describe mother and daughter with microduplication 22q11.2. t(5q35.2;18q22.3) segregates with non-syndromic microcephaly (-2 Twenty-seven-year old patient was referred for genetic evaluation by to -3.7 SD) in 7 carriers, with the exception of 1 macrocephalic (+3.2 cardiologist because of facial dysmorphism. She has short stature, fa- SD) carrier. No genes were directly disrupted by the breakpoints, sug- cial dysmorphism, velopharyngeal insufficiency, toes anomalies, and gesting a positional effect to alter gene expression levels. 2 candidate learning disabilities. She had also one seizure episode without special genes were identified near the breakpoints of the translocation: STC2 findings in EEG. She has also diagnosed depression and arthropathy (stanniocalcin 2) ~72 kb downstream of the breakpoint on chr5 and with contractures. She had no cardiac anomaly, only some tahhycar- NETO1 (neuropilin-and-tolloid precursor 1) ~105kb downstream of the dial episodes. breakpoint on chr18. Routine chromosome analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes was Both candidate genes are expressed in brain and the neuropilin-do- performed using standard laboratory protocols and the karyotype was main in NETO1 points towards a possible role in axonal guidance. Pa- normal. Metaphase FISH-analysis with DiGeorge/VCFS TUPLE1 Re- tients with microdeletions of 5q35 encompassing STC2 present mild gion Probe (Cytocell, Aquarius) was performed only due to the refer- microcephaly. ral doctor was a cardiologist. The analysis revealed unexpectedly two Measurement of RNA-expression levels for the candidates was ham- signals with different intensities on 22q11.2 (TUPLE1) regions. Further pered by variable expression of the genes in EBV cell-lines, the only analysis of interphase nucleus revealed three signals of TUPLE1 of patient material available. Heterozygous transcribed SNPs to test similar intensity and two signals of control probe located on 22q13.3 mono-allelic expression on cDNA level were absent. (N85A3) in each cell. The relatives of the proband were investigated. No mutations were detected in either genes in 3 other patients with Her mother had the same cytogenetic finding - karyotype: 46,XX.ish non-syndromic microcephaly. Using a morpholino knock-down (KD) dup(22)(q11.2q11.2). She has similar, but milder facial features. She approach in zebrafish, severe cell death spreading from the dienceph- had had some problems with fertility before her first pregnancy (now alon was observed for stc2 KD during somitogenesis (~10-24 hpf), she has 5 children), she has premature menopause (39 years). She coinciding with the time of primary brain development. For neto1, one has no seizures, cardiac disturbances or psychiatric disorders. The morpholino generated similar cell death, 2 other independent morpho- other members of the family are under investigation. linos only generated general developmental delay. Confirmation of the role of one of these genes in microcephaly will be P0182. Implications of Spontaneous Excess Expression of Fra done by further mutation analysis in additional patients as well as fur- (16)(q22): An Emerging Syndrome? ther structural studies in the knockdown zebrafish embryo’s. D. Babovic-Vuksanovic, M. Lega, Y. S. Zou, S. M. Jalal; Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. P0180. Clinical, neuropathological and neuropsychological A twelve year old girl was referred to Medical Genetics following as- phenotype in two families with primary microcephaly due to sessment in Craniofacial Clinic for a possible cosmetic surgery. This ASPM/MCPH5 mutations patient had microstomia, cleft palate, micrognathia and dental crowd- L. Titomanlio1,2, F. Guimiot3, A. Afenjar4, L. Burglen4, T. Billette de Villemeur5, K. ing. Physical and mental development was normal. Her father and one Hernandez1, J. Gadisseux1, B. Gerard1, A. Verloes1,2; of her sisters had remarkably similar physical features. Upon examina- 1Dept of Genetics, Robert DEBRE University Hospital, PARIS, France, 2IN- tion, it was thought that this family had a condition similar to what had SERM U676, Paris, France, 3Dept of Fetal Pathology, Robert DEBRE Universi- been described previously in four other families, whom had an elevation ty Hospital, PARIS, France, 4Dept of Genetics, Armand TROUSSEAU Hospital, of spontaneous 16q22.1 fragility and overlapping clinical features with PARIS, France, 5Dept of Pediatric Neurology, Armand TROUSSEAU Hospital, our patients. Chromosome analyses were performed on metaphase PARIS, France. lymphocytes grown in PHA-stimulated blood cultures by standard pro- Human autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a het- cedures. Our patient had an unusually high spontaneous expression of erogeneous disorder with at least six genetic loci (MCPH1-6). MCPH5, chromosome fragility at 16q22.1, with an otherwise normal karyotype. caused by ASPM (Abnormal Spindle-like, Microcephaly-associated - The fragility was expressed as either a deletion or a chromosome gap location: 1q31) gene mutations is the most commonly involved. We in 5 of the 30 metaphase cells (16.7%) analyzed. Likewise, the sponta- report new mutations in 2 families with MCPH5. In family 1 (non-con- neous expression of the fragile site was found to be 20% and 30% for sanguineous), the proband was born with an OFC of 32 cm. At age 4, this patient’s sister and father, respectively. An unaffected sister had a OFC is -5SD and height is at -1SD. The boy shows mild psychomotor normal karyotype and no expression of 16q22.1 fragility. Our observa- delay. A further pregnancy was terminated after echographic diagnosis tion of fragility at 16q22.1 seems to segregate with phenotypic features of microcephaly. Neuropathology showed a small brain (biometry of of microstomia, cleft palate, micrognathia and dental crowding in this 27-28 GW for 33 GW) with a mildly simplified gyral pattern for age, de- family. Our findings, in conjunction with those of previous case reports, creased neuronal population in cortical plate and premature depletion have lead us to speculate that fragility at 16q22.1 and microstomia is of the germinal zone. We found coumpound heterozygocyty for 1 non- an emerging syndrome, possibly caused by a regulatory disturbance sense and 1 frameshift (1 bp deletion) mutations: p.Gly26AlafsX42/ of genes involved especially in jaw development. p.Arg2078X. In family 2 (consanguineous), two brothers were af- fected, although with different severity. The eldest one, aged 25, had an OFC < -8SD. His IQ was 55, with homogeneous scores and pre-Clinical genetics  P0183. Minor physical anomalies in children and teenagers with DNA analysis, blood samples were collected from patients, their af- neurological disorders fected and unaffected relatives. Results - All patients and their affected D. Stoicanescu1, M. Cevei2, A. Belengeanu1, V. Belengeanu1; family members presented hypodontia of permanent incisors as an 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of isolated trait. Affected members within the families exhibited variable Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania. expression of hypodontia with regard to the region, symetry and num- Minor physical anomalies are defects that in themselves, have neither ber of teeth involved. Significant parent-offspring (father-son, father- medical, nor cosmetic importance. They may occur even in healthy daughter and mother-son) correlations in lower incisors hypodontia individuals. The incidence of minor anomalies has been studied in were observed. The type of inheritance was autosomal dominant with search for a relationship between different non-syndromic diseases variable expressivity and complete penetrance. No mutations were and abnormal embryogenesis. They are used as indicators of altered detected in the PAX9 gene known to cause hypodontia. Conclusions embryonic differentiation. Their positive correlation with disturbances - Hypodontia in one family member increased the likelihood of another of neurological development occurring during embryogenesis has family member missing a tooth. Genetic cause of congenitally missing been established. Patients with mental retardation, cerebral palsy and lower incisors is attributable to a single dominant gene, but not PAX9 autism were evaluated for the presence of minor anomalies. Data were gene. compared with those obtained from a control group. The frequency of the minor anomalies was not significantly different in the two groups. P0186. Mutational screening of the mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) When expressing the mean values as minor anomalies per child, the and tRNAGlu genes in leucocytes and mucosal cells of Tunisian figures were 2.92 in affected individuals and 1.43 in the healthy ones. A patients with mitochondrial Diabetes positive correlation with the severity of mental retardation was noticed. N. Mezghani1, E. Mkaouar1, M. Mnif2, N. Charfi2, M. Abid2, F. Fakhfakh1; 64% of the cases with cerebral palsy and 56% of the patients with 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine. Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, autism had at least three minor anomalies. The presence of minor con- Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service d’Endocrinologie. CHU Hedi Chaker. Sfax, Tunisia, Sfax, genital anomalies, especially more than three, may predict the future Tunisia. onset of a neurological disorder. Mitochondrial diseases are very heterogeneous group of disorder with respiratory chain deficiency caused by either mutations in mitochon- P0184. Unilateral mirror-image polydactyly of the hand, with drial DNA or nuclear DNA encoding mitochondrial proteins. Several cutis aplasia polymorphisms and mutations occurring in the mitochondrial tRNALeu S. Farrell1, S. Unger2,3; (UUR) and tRNAGlu genes were found to be associated with mitochondrial 1Division of Genetics, Credit Valley Hospital, Mississauga, ON, Canada, 2Insti- diabetes. tute for Human Genetics, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 3Centre for In this study, 5 patients belonging to 5 unrelated Tunisian families Human Genetics, Univeristy of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. with a clinical presentation highly suggestive of mitochondrial diabe- Mirror-image polydactyly is rare. It is syndromic or isolated. Laurin- tes have been tested. Either mitochondrial DNA from leucocytes and Sandrow syndrome (LSS) includes fibular and ulnar duplication, ab- from buccal mucosa has been extracted in these 5 patients. Mutational sent radius and tibia, polysyndactyly of the hands and feet, often de- analysis in tRNALeu (UUR) and tRNAGlu genes have been performed by scribed as mirror-like, and nasal/philtral anomalies. Transplantation of PCR-RFLP and direct sequencing in ABI PRISM® 3100 Avant auto- a zone of chick distal limb bud polarizing activity to the anterior limb mated DNA sequencer. margin causes mirror image duplication of limb elements. This sug- After PCR-RFLP analysis, none of the five patients were found to carry gests mutations in genes for limb differentiation might be associated A3243G tRNALeu(UUR) gene in the homoplasmic or in the heteroplasmic with mirror-image polydactyly. A number of possible candidate genes forms in leucocytes and in buccal mucosa. Sequencing of tRNALeu(UUR) contributing to pathways directing limb development have been de- gene did not revealed any other mutations or polymorphisms in this scribed. Dominant inheritance has been proposed, based on a few gene. families with vertical transmission. The features of isolated and familial After PCR-RFLP and direct sequencing of the mitochondrial tRNAGlu cases are variable, suggesting etiologic heterogeneity is possible. The gene, we revealed the T14709C mutation in this gene in heteroplasmic cause of isolated cases affecting only one limb is not clear and is not form in leucocytes and buccal mucosa of 4 out of the five diabetes pa- necessarily genetic in origin. tients. Searching of this mutation in members of the proband’s families The right hand of this female infant had seven triphalangeal fingers ar- is in process. rayed around a central digit, ulnar duplication resulting in limited wrist and elbow movement, and a small area of cutis aplasia of right an- P0187. Use of MLPA testing in subtelomeric rearrangements terior shoulder. No other anomalies were noted. Chromosomes were detection normal. At 6 weeks, motor/social development was appropriate. Her C. Rusu1, M. Bembea2, C. Skrypnyk2, M. Volosciuc1, A. Sireteanu1, E. Tomes- parents had normal extremities and were not consanguineous. cu3, M. Puiu4, L. Barbarii5; Innis and Hedera [2004] speculated that isolated single limb mirror- 1University of Medicine, Iasi, Romania, 2University of Medicine, Oradea, Roma- image (SLMIP) polydactyly might represent natural variability of LSS nia, 3IOMC, Bucuresti, Romania, 4University of Medicine, Timisoara, Romania, but there are no reports of familial transmission of SLMIP. Postzygotic 5INML, Bucuresti, Romania. somatic mosaicism of affecting one limb bud is another possible expla- Genetic causes of mental retardation (MR) are very heterogeneous. nation. Cutis aplasia is unique to our case and suggests disruption of Subtelomeric rearrangements play an important role in idiopatic MR limb bud development as a possible cause. determinism. Different methods have been used to identify subtelo- meric rearrangements, but recently introduced MLPA (Multiplex Liga- P0185. Familial aggregation of congenitally missing lower tion Probe Amplification) technique seems to provide the best results. central incisors We have used MLPA to identify subtelomeric rearrangements in chil- E. Severin, C. Albu, D. F. Albu, R. Purcarea; dren with idiopatic MR. The protocol included the following sequence “Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. of steps: clinical selection based on de Vries score; karyotype; anti- Background - The isolated form of congenitally missing teeth is often FMRP test for Fragile X syndrome screening; MLPA testing using 2 familial.Family studies have suggested that hypodontia may aggregate independent kits in order to separate polymorphisms. We have se- within families. Familial aggregation of a trait can suggest genetic etiol- lected cases using de Vries diagnostic score, only those with a score ogy. Absence of lower central incisor is less common than the other of 3/ more being selected. All patient data were recorded in a database forms of hypodontia. Objectives - To describe the clinical phenotypes, that will be presented. The initial group was formed of 142 children familial aggregation, inheritance and molecular diagnosis of congeni- with idiopatic MR. In 24 of them (16.9%) the karyotype revealed differ- tally missing incisors. Patients and Methods - Familial aggregation was ent abnormalities. 16 cases (11.3%) presented speech delay/ autism, investigated in 5 unrelated families with at least 2 cases with lower but antiFMRP test was normal. 60 MLPA tests were done: 46 cases central incisors hypodontia. Patients were evaluated clinically and ra- (76.7% were normal, 6 (10%) abnormal, 4 (6.7%) had polymorphism diographically. A pedigree analysis was performed to determine famil- and 4 (6.7%) could not be interpreted. Clinical features of the cases ial correlations and pattern of inheritance of the hypodontia phenotype. identified with different subtelomeric rearrangements and polymor- Familial aggregation was measured by relative reccurrence risk. For phisms are illustrated with photos and discussed in detail. The results Clinical genetics  will be confirmed with FISH. In conclusion, the diagnostic score is use- ate studying, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. ful in case selection for further testing and MLPA proves to be efficient In memoriam of Dr. Leonora M. Sandomirskaya. in diagnosing subtelomeric rearrangements as a possible cause of Mucopolysaccharidose type 1 (MPS1, Hurler syndrome) is an inher- idiopatic MR. ited lysosomal storage disease caused by deficiency of the lysosomal en- P0188. A 2-years old girl with hypoplastic glomerulocystic zyme alpha-L-iduronidase (IDUA; EC 3.2.1.76) that results in under- kidney disease caused by a novel de novo mutation in HNF1- β graded glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs are either stored in the gene lysosome or excreted in the urine. IDUA gene maps to 4p16.3. B. Brasseur1, N. Godefroid2, K. Dahan3; We report on a family with monozygotic sisters suffered from MPS1. 1Pediatric Endocrinology and Nephrology, UCL Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, They were born after the third properly prolonged gestation from 32 2Pediatric Nephrology Unit, UCL Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 3Centre for Hu- yr-old female by spontaneous vaginal delivery. Their parents deny con- man Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. sanguinity and hereditary diseases. At birth twins weights were 2690g We report the case of a 2-years old girl with renal cysts. She initially and 2470g, their length were 49cm and 47cm. They have two elder presented with a suspicion of febrile urinary tract infection. Biological healthy sisters, 11 and 9 yr. aged. The first year of twins’ life was calm work-up revealed an increased creatinine and ultrasound showed re- but their mother noted twins to have lackluster eyes. Probands came nal cysts. Both kidneys were small for age displaying 20 small bilateral to clinical attention with umbilical hernia at the age of 14 months. By cysts. Familial history was relevant for unilateral renal agenesia in the the age of 5 yr clinical symptoms conformed to MPS 1: course facial paternal grandfather and one isolated renal cyst in the father. Personal features, corneal clouding, hearing loss, short stature, joint stiffness, history was uninformative, except for a neonatal pyelocalicial hypoto- skeletal deformities, liver and spleen enlarged and GAGs urinary ex- ny. She was transferred to our university hospital with a diagnosis of cretion elevated. In addition to these symptoms upper respiratory in- ADPKD. Because of the family history and the presence of tubular pro- fections, ear infections and continuous nasal discharge were frequent. teinuria, HNF1β gene was screened for mutation. Sequencing analysis Molecular diagnosis was performed in Moscow (Centre of Medical revealed a heterozygous p.His149Gln substitution in the DNA binding Genetics) and the twins were found to be homozygous (Q70X, MIM region of HNF1-β factor (TCF2). This mutation not reported sofar was 252800.0002). Now we try to find sponsors to start enzyme treatment surprisingly undetectable in both parents, confirming a de novo trans- for these girls from a large family mission. There is no perturbation of liver enzymes nor cholestasis, and no arguments for glucose intolerance. In conclusion: HNF1-β gene P0191. MPS 1H (Hurler) mutations are often associated with renal findings that can manifest S. Mahdavi1,2, M. Asgarshirazi1; early in life. They should be included in the differential diagnosis of 1MPS, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Institute, Tehran, Islamic Re- cystic renal diseases in children. Positive family history of various renal public of Iran. pictures, early deterioration of renal function, the presence of tubular I would like to introduce a dizygotic twin (boy & girl) who are affected proteinuria and the presence of extrarenal manifestations may distin- by hurler disease (mps 1h) a lysosomal storage disorder. They have guish the HNF1-β-related renal cystic disease from the others. Genetic mental retardation, coarse facies, enlarged tongue , skeletal deformi- analysis will bring definite diagnosis. ties ,short stature, short and wide hands, hepatosplenomegaly, umbli- cal hernia (only in the girl),and conductive hearing loss. P0189. Monosomy 1p36; an atypical case with duodenal atresia The radiologic changes of dysostosis multiplex are seen.These include and an interstitial deletion a thickened calvarium, shallow orbit, enlarged j-shaped sella, anterior J. Rankin1, C. Delmege2, N. Canham3, A. Allwood4, V. Maloney5, J. Crolla5; hypoplasia of lumbar vertebrae whith kyphosis, oar-like ribs, pelvic 1Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Bristol Genetics dysplasia, and shortened tubular bone+expanded diaphyses. The uri- Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3North West Thames Regional Genet- nary excretion of dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate is increased . ics Service, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Paediatrics, Derriford Their parents have third degree of family relationship. Hospital, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 5National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom. P0192. Facial dysmorphy, blindness and a mutation in the Monosomy 1p36 is one of the commonest chromosomal deletion syn- mtATP6 gene dromes affecting about 1 in 5000 newborns. Clinical features include R. S. Tincheva1, S. Mihailova2, E. Naumova2; microcephaly, developmental delay, hypotonia, seizures, hearing loss, 1University Pediatric Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Central Laboratory of Clinical feeding difficulty, structural heart defects and dilated cardiomyopathy. Immunology, University Hospital “Alexandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria. Typical facial features include deep set eyes with straight eyebrows, Mitochondrial ATP production via oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) midface hypoplasia and small mouth with pointed chin. Most patients is essential for normal function and maintenance of human organ sys- have subtelomeric deletions but interstitial deletions have been report- tems. Since OXPHOS biogenesis depends on both nuclear- and mi- ed in a minority of cases. tochondrial-encoded gene products, mutations in both genomes can We report a 2 year old girl with duodenal atresia, atrial septal defect, result in impaired electron transport and ATP synthesis, thus causing mild developmental delay and the facial gestalt of monosomy 1p36. tissue dysfunction and human disease. Over 30 mitochondrial DNA Microcephaly, epilepsy and hearing loss were absent. Initial blood (mtDNA) point mutations and over 100 mtDNA rearrangements have chromosome analysis and in situ hybridization using the Vysis To- now been identified as etiological factors in human disease. These TelVysion telomeric probe set were normal. However, analysis of a mutations result in an extraordinarily broad spectrum of clinical phe- further G-banded chromosome preparation revealed a very subtle notypes. anomalous banding pattern in the short arm of chromosome 1. FISH We present an 1 and ½ year old girl from first uneventful pregnancy using the 1p36 microdeletion probe set (Vysis), which includes a sub- and delivery, born on time with birth weight 2800g , length 51cm and telomeric probe and an additional probe located 600kb more proxi- head circumference 31 cm.. At the age of 28 days atrophia of n.opticus mally, showed normal signal patterns but an interstitial 1p36.3 deletion was suspected. A brain MRI showed severe internal and external hy- was subsequently confirmed by FISH with a panel of tiling path BAC drocephaly and athrophia cerebri. Dysmorphic features consisting of clones mapping to distal 1p. This report illustrates the importance of microcephaly, high palate, exsophtalmus and low placed ears were testing for interstitial deletions in patients with a phenotype suggestive noted. The child is with increased deep tendon reflexes, hyper muscle of monosomy 1p36 and, to our knowledge, is the first reported case tonus and profound mental retardation. She can not seat and walk with duodenal atresia. and she is practically blind. An EEG suggested a locus of paroxis- Julia.rankin@rdeft.nhs.uk mal activity in the left frontal region. Convulsions are not observed. Sequence-based analysis on mtDNA genom revealed G8573A-muta- P0190. Monozygotic sisters with Hurler syndrome tion in MT-ATP6 gene reflecting in amino acid change glycine-aspartic D. Poliakov1, S. E. Ornitsan2, M. O. Mkheidze3; acid (second base pair of the codon). The same mutation was recently 1Paediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Children reported in Italian patient with LHON phenotype and the influence of Hospice, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Medical Academy for postgradu- this substitution on mitochondrion respiratory function remain to be determined.Clinical genetics  P0193. Investigation of Polymorphisms in Non-coding Region of fied by linkage analysis. This disease is characterized with short stat- Human Mitochondrial DNA in 31 Persian HCM Patients ure, multiple osteochondromas, asymmetric growth at the knees and M. Montazeri1, M. Houshmand1, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya2, M. Paygambari3, M. ankles, which may result in deformities. Paygambari3, G. Stahbanati3; We report on a family with rare coexistence HME and chromosomal 1NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research Center of Medical aberration in three generations. For the first time we examined the pro- Genetics, MoscowLaboratory of DNA Research, , Russia, Moscow, Russian band at the age of 14 yr. He was born after the first properly prolonged Federation, 3University of Medical Sciences, Shaheed Rajaei Cardiovascular gestation from 21 yr-old female by spontaneous vaginal delivery. At Medical Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. birth proband weight was 3250g, his length was 51cm, Apgar score The D-loop region is a hot spot for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) altera- was 7/8. The first bony lumps were found on tibiae and right scapula tions, containing two HyperVariable Segments, HVS-I and HVS-II. In at proband’s age of 4 yr. At the age of 14 yr his height was 154cm, order to identify polymorphic sites and potential genetic background his weight was 55kg, head circumference was 57cm. He also had hy- accounting for Hypertrophic CardioMyopathy (HCM) disease, the com- poplastic scrotum, cryptorchidism and progressive osseous lesions. plete non-coding region of mtDNA from 31 unrelated HCM patients X-ray examination confirmed multiple scapular exostoses and exos- and 45 normal controls were sequenced. The sequences were aligned toses in juxtaepiphyseal regions of long bones, genu valgum, short upon the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS) and any metacarpal, Madelung-like forearm deformities. His mother suffered incompatibilities were recorded as numerical changes in homoPoly- from dysarthria and dyslexia, painless multiple exostoses of tibiae. meric C Tract (PCT), single base substitutions (SBS), insertions and His grandmother from the maternal side has short stature and mul- deletions (Indels). Nucleotide substitutions were found to make up the tiple exostoses of the distal part of fibulae. Karyotypes of the proband, majority of the mutations, rather than indels. We drew significantly his mother and his grandmother were found to be abnormal 46XY, high transition rate (81.8%) versus lower frequency of transversions inv(5)(q13.1;q15) and 46XX, inv(5)(q13.1;q15) (18.2%). 12 polymorphisms were identified in this study which had not been published in the MitoMap database. PCT changes at positions P0196. Mulvihill-Smith progerioid syndrome: clinical evaluation 303-309 were detected in 83% of our samples. Our results suggest and molecular characterization of a complex phenotype that an increased level of HVS-I and HVS-II substitutions may be an A. G. Delmonaco1, C. A. Bena1, E. Biamino1, F. Cerutti1, A. Veltri2, F. Gennari3, indicator of mitochondrial DNA instability. Furthermore, mtDNA mu- O. Zuffardi4, M. Silengo1, G. B. Ferrero1; tations may play an important role in pathogenesis of cardiac arrest 1Department of Paediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Radiology - San which has remained unexplained for long. Giovanni Battista General Hospital, Torino, Italy, 3Department of Surgery - San Giovanni Battista General Hospital, Torino, Italy, 4Department of Genetics - Uni- P0194. Prevalence and Genetic Profile of versity of Pavia, Torino, Italy. Mucopolysaccharidosis Type 1 in the Irish population Mulvihill-Smith syndrome (MS) (McKusick 176690) is an extremely A. Murphy1, E. P. Treacy1, A. O’ Meara2, S. Lynch3; rare disorder, with only eight cases described. It is characterized by 1National Centre for Inherited metabolic Disorders,The Children’s University premature aging, multiple pigmented nevi, lack of facial subcutane- Hospital,Temple Street,, Dublin, Ireland, 2Department of Hematology and On- ous adipose tissue, microcephaly, short stature and mental retarda- cology, Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick Children, Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland, 3The tion. The proposita, a 10 years old girl, was the first child of healthy National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick Children, non-consanguineous parents, with a phenotype characterized by Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland. premature aging appearance, pinched nose, microcephaly, microgna- Aims: To document prevalence rates of the three clinical phenotypes of tia, oligodontia, deep set-eyes and narrow nasal bridge, scarce sub- Mucopolysaccharidosis Type 1 Hurler (severe), Hurler-Scheie (inter- cutaneous adipose tissue in the face, abdomen and limbs, multiple mediate) and Scheie(mild) in the Republic of Ireland using population cutaneous pigmented lesions. Reduced mobility of knee and elbow data from the Government of Ireland census in April 2002. joints associated with multiple skeletal abormalities was documented Methods: Database and chart review of all live patients with MPS1 by x-rays. The patient was found to have an atrial septal defect. Neu- attending two specialised centres in 2002.Patient genotypes, iduroni- rologic examination was normal, and a conductive hypoacusia and dase activity, ethnic background, province of origin, age at diagnosis photophobia were present. Our patient presented diabetes mellitus and presenting clinical features were recorded. type II associated with fatty liver and lypodistrophy, glucose levels and Results: 30 patients were alive.One patient had Scheie, four Hurler liver steatosis decreased after metformine therapy. Abdominal ultraso- - Scheie and 25 had Hurler syndrome, giving an overall prevalence nography, CT and MRI disclosed remarkable liver steatosis with mul- of 7.66 per million for MPS 1 in Ireland. 19/25 (76%) patients from tiple hyperecogenic nodules, evolved in hepatocarcinoma within few the Hurler group (age range 4 months to 14 years 10 months) were months and treated by endoscopic radio-frequency local coagulation. members of the “Irish Traveller” community.All had the same W402X G-banded karyotype was 46,XX. LAMIN A/C gene mutation screening homozygous mutation.There are 23,681 Travellers in Ireland. 10,001 disclosed an heterozygous C>T substitution at the codon 1698 in exon are under 15 years of age giving a prevalence of 19 per 10,001 or 1 in 10, previously described as a polymorphism. CGH Arrays analysis 526 for Hurler’s syndrome amongst Irish Traveller children. showed a 4 Mb interstitial deletion on chromosome 3 (3q26.1) inher- The patient with the mild phenotype and all for patients with the inter- ited from the phenotypically normal mother. The genetic bases of MS mediate phenotype hail from the same province.3/4 carry the same remain to be established. The etiopathogenetic relevance of the large heterozygous W402X/P496L mutation. deletion on chromosome 3 in our patient and in her normal mother is Conclusion: A prevalence 1/526 for hurler syndrome amongst “Trav- open to speculations. eller” children is the highest recorded for this condition worldwide and equates with a carrier frequency of 1/11. Given the catastrophic P0197. Expanding the phenotype of the 22q11deletion morbidity of delayed treatment and availability of effective treatment syndrome: the MURCS association. (Enzyme replacement therapy by iv infusion and stem cell transplant) V. Uliana1, N. Giordano2, R. Caselli1, F. T. Papa1, F. Ariani1, I. Meloni1, I. Longo1, we recommend screening all babies from this population for Hurler F. Mari1, R. Nuti2, A. Renieri1; syndrome 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Internal Medicine, Univer- sity of Siena, Siena, Italy. P0195. Chromosome aberration and multiple exostoses in 3 The MURCS association consists of Müllerian Duct aplasia or hypo- family generations plasia, unilateral renal agenesis and cervicothoracic somite dysplasia. N. A. Gladkova1, V. V. Krasilnikov1, V. A. Tikhonov1, M. O. Mkheidze2; We report a 22 year-old female with bicornuate uterus, right renal agen- 1Municipal Centre of Medical Genetics, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, esis and C2-C3 vertebral fusion (MURCS association) and 22q11.2 2Medical Academy for postgraduate studying, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- deletion identified by array-CGH. Angio-MRI revealed aberrant origin tion. of arch arteries with brachiocephalic vessels agenesis and hypoplas- Hereditary multiple exostoses (HME) is a genetically heterogeneous tic left carotid artery originating from the aortic arch, left subclavian autosomal dominant disorder with near-complete penetrance that is artery originating from descending thoracic aorta and hypoplastic left associated with mutations in at least 3 different genes termed EXT vertebral artery. Hashimoto thyroiditis, micropolycystic ovaries with a ones. Three separate loci at 8q24, 11p11-12 and 19p11-13 are identi- dermoid cyst in the right ovary and mild osteoporosis were also diag-Clinical genetics  nosed. Accurate revision of Xrays permitted to identify cervical lordo- sporadic patient with p.Gln37X mutation nephropathy was present and sis, C2-C3 fusion, lumbar scoliosis, thoracolumbar vertebral differen- typical limb anomalies were associated with radio-ulnar synostosis. tiation defects with lumbar ribs and S1 lumbarization. Audiometry and The identified mutations were more frequent in exons 2, 4 and 5. No echocardiogram were normal. clear genotype-phenotype correlation appeared in this small series. Presently, she has short stature, obesity (BMI 30.7) and head circum- The non-mutated cases were 3 typical familial NPS with renal involve- ference at the 3rd percentile. Long face, tubular nose with bulbous tip, ment in two instances, and one sporadic typical NPS case with protein- low-set and small ears, high palate, nasal speech and slender hands uria. We are searching for LMX1B deletion in these cases. are noted. The karyotype was normal. Unexpectedly, array-CGH anal- ysis (75 kb resolution) revealed a 22q11.2 deletion, of about 2,5 Mb in P0200. A novel type of TPM mutation causing autosomal size. MLPA analysis showed that the deletion was absent in her par- recessive nemaline myopathy in two Turkish families ents, demonstrating that the deletion was de novo. In 2006, Cheroki et V. L. Lehtokari1,2, K. Pelin3, K. Donner4, T. Voit5, S. Rudnik-Schöneborn6, C. al., reported another case of a 22q11 deletion in a patient with Mayer- Wallgren-Pettersson1,2; Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser anomaly (Müllerian Duct aplasia), Hashi- 1The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Medial moto thyroiditis and renal, cardiac and skeletal defects. We discuss Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Biological whether this is a casual association or one additional syndrome due to and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Re- the well known extensive phenotypic variability of the 22q11 deletion search Program for Molecular Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Fin- syndrome. land, 5Institut de Myologie, Paris, France, 6Institute for Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. P0198. Screening human genes for small alterations performing Congenital myopathies include a wide spectrum of clinically, histo- an enzymatic cleavage mismatched analysis (ECMA) protocol logically and genetically variable neuromuscular disorders defined by N. Vogiatzakis, K. Kekou, C. Sophocleous, S. Kitsiou, A. Mavrou, E. Kanava- structural abnormalities in the muscle fibres. Nemaline (rod) myopathy kis; (NM) is a rare congenital myopathy diagnosed on the basis of muscle University of Athens,School of Medicine, Athens, Greece. weakness and nemaline bodies in the muscle fibres. The nemaline Many human diseases are caused by small alterations in the genes bodies are protein aggregates derived from sarcomeric Z discs and and in the majority of cases sophisticated protocols are required for thin filaments. The six known NM genes all encode proteins for the their detection. In this study we estimated the efficacy of an enzymatic thin filament of the muscle sarcomere: nebulin, alpha-actin1, beta- and protocol, which using a new mismatch-specific DNA plant endonucle- gamma-tropomyosins, troponin T1 and cofilin 2. In order to identify the ase from celery (CEL family) recognizes and cleaves mismatched al- seventh NM gene we performed a genome-wide linkage study using leles between mutant and normal PCR products. The protocol was microsatellite markers in 12 Turkish families with recessive NM. The standardized on a variety of known mutations, in 11 patients with cystic hunt for the new gene is still ongoing, but in the context of this link- fibrosis (CF), Fabry’s disease (FD), steroid 21-hydroxylase deficiency age study we identified a novel mutational mechanism for nemaline (21-HD) and Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD). The myopathy caused by alterations of the TPM3 gene. results showed that the method is rapid, effective, safe, reliable and Two consanguineous Turkish families with two children each affected very simple, as the mutations are visualized on agarose or nusieve/ by a severe form of nemaline myopathy were found to have a homo- agarose gels where the location of the alteration is indicated by a size zygous deletion of the first nucleotide, an adenine, of the last exon marker. The method does not require special equipment, labeling or of TPM3. The mutation in the last nucleotide before the STOP codon standardization for every PCR product, since conditions of heterodu- disrupts the reading frame and causes read-through across the STOP plex formation and enzyme digestion are universal for all products. codon. The parents are healthy mutation carriers. RT-PCR predicts The protocol was furthermore evaluated in three DMD patients with the this to result in a TPM3 protein elongated by 75 amino acids. This is detection of three alterations, which after sequencing, were character- the first deletion to be identified in TPM3, and it may turn out to be ized as disease causative mutations (all of them nonsense on exons a founder mutation among Turkish NM families. Further studies are 21 and 44). The proposed assay, which was applied for the first time ongoing. in a variety of monogenic disorders, indicates that point mutation iden- tification is feasible in any conventional molecular lab. Alternatively it P0201. Processing of Data Records on Patients with could be performed for cases where other techniques have failed. Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Using the Artificial Intelligence Methods P0199. LMX1B and Nail patella syndrome: experience in 16 T. Marikova1, S. Bendova1, B. Petrak1, L. Kinstova1, M. Zakova2, L. Novakova2, families and genotype-phenotype correlation O. Stepankova2; S. N. Manouvrier1, F. Escande2, A. Dieux-Coeslier1, A. Mezel3, M. Holder-Es- 12nd Medical School, Prague 5 - Motol, Czech Republic, 2Czech Technical pinasse1; University, Prague, Czech Republic. 1Clinical genetic departement, university hospital, Lille, France, 2Molecular Biol- 250 patients with NF1 were clinically examined in detail. The patients ogy laboratory, University Hospital, Lille, France, 3Paediatric Surgery depart- were tested according to the NIH diagnostic criteria. The DNA bank ment, University Hospital, Lille, France. for these patients was created containing 110 DNA samples. We have NPS is characterized by cardinal limb anomalies (nail dysplasia, ab- implemented direct DNA analysis of the NF1 gene using the MLPA sent or hypoplastic patellae, iliac horns, abnormality of the elbows…), and DHPLC methods and found NF1 mutations in 17 patients: 15 in some cases nephropathy (glomerulonephritis) and/or eye involve- causal mutations were detected exploring the DHPLC method. Using ment (glaucoma, cataract). Hearing loss and scoliosis have also been the MPLA method, two large deletions have been identified.12 of the described. NPS is due to mutations in LMX1B, a gene located at above mentioned mutations were newly found. 9q34.1. LMX1B codes for LIM-homeodomain transcription factor in- The patient records are stored in the form of text files. Their content volved in normal patterning of the dorsoventral axis of the limb and has to be presented in a database format to analyze them by available early morphogenesis of the glomerular basement membrane machine learning techniques. To support this transformation we have We sequenced LMX1B gene in 16 families (22 patients) with nail-pa- implemented MedAT - a tool for annotation and analysis of text files. tella syndrome (NPS). Our program currently contains four knowledge ontologies - anamne- The diagnosis of nail patella syndrome was typical in 13 index pa- sis, clinic symptoms, genealogy and mutations, which shape computer tients, due to characteristic limb anomalies. The tree remaining pa- supported extraction of important information from patients’ records. tients were a boy with limb features of NPS and mental retardation, The set of ontologies can be easily modified. This approach enables but no 9q34.1deletion; a man with isolated nephropathy, and a woman dynamic processing and efficient analysis of available patients’ data with atypical limb anomalies. and it significantly contributes to achieving the main goals of this re- We found LMX1B “stop” or “frame shift” mutations in 8/13 (62%) typi- search: cal index patients and nonsense mutations in two atypical patients (the • specification of diagnostic criteria for NF1 for Czech population boy with NPS and mental retardation, and the woman with atypical • genotype/phenotype correlation for patients with different types of NPS). mutations, In all but one mutated families limb anomalies were isolated. In one • determining the incidence and prevalenceClinical genetics 0 Particular results will be presented. V, Paris, France. supported by grant AV-CR-1ET 101210513 Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder charac- terized by short stature, congenital heart defect, typical facial dys- P0202. A clinical and molecular study in a child under 1 year of morphism and mild intellectual deficit in less than half of cases. NS age affected by Neurofibromatosis type 2 is genetically heterogeneous. In 40% to 50% of cases, the disease A. L. Gabriele1, M. Ruggieri2,3, C. Nucifora3, A. Patitucci1, T. Sprovieri1, A. is caused by missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene, resulting in a Magariello1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, G. Di Palma1, M. Muglia1, gain of function of the phosphatase SHP2 resulting in overactivation A. Quattrone1,4; of the Ras-MAPK signaling pathway. Recently mutations have been 1Institute of Neurological Sciences (ISN), National Research Council (CNR), identified in two other genes in the same pathway: KRAS is mutated in Mangone (CS), Italy, 2ISN, CNR, Section of Catania, Catania, Italy, 3Depart- approximatively 2.5% of NS and SOS1 in roughly 10% of cases. Most ment of Paediatrics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 4Institute of Neurology, KRAS mutations result in CFC syndrome. Here, we report mutation University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. analysis of KRAS in 82 NS patients without PTPN11 mutations. We The aim of present study was to identify the earliest (i.e., disease on- found 4 KRAS mutations in these patients (p.Val14Ile in 2 patients, set < 1 year of age) clinical presentations of neurofibromatosis type 2 p.Thr58Ile, and p.Phe156Ile). All patients present the classic dysmor- (NF2) in childhood and to investigate the presence of NF2 mutations phism of NS. They appear to have a severe phenotype: short stature, at this young age. A NF2 child had his first disease manifestations un- developmental delay and heart defect were present in all patients. der 1 year of age and was prospectively followed up and investigated Failure to thrive (3/4 patients), sparse hair (2/4) and eyebrows (1/4) according to our protocol for paediatric NF2. Molecular analysis of the indicated a significant clinical overlap with CFC in these patients, but NF2 gene was carried out by means of Denaturing High Performance keratinisation defects . Dilatation of the ventricles was observed in 2 Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC) and sequence analysis. The child patients, confirming that abnormal CNS development could be more presented at age 4 months right lens opacities and MRI scan showed common with KRAS mutants than with other genetic etiologies. colpocephaly and lesions in the posterior periventricular regions. MRI scans at age 8 months confirmed these findings and revealed bilateral P0205. Molecular, clinical and new haematological insight in vestibular schwannoma and the presence of multiple (> 40) skin NF2- Noonan Syndrome. plaques in the limbs. At his last head and spinal MRI the schwannoma G. Baldassarre1, F. Timeus1, N. Crescenzio1, E. Banaudi2, C. Rossi3, M. Si- and the periventricular lesions did not progress with any additional lengo1, G. B. Ferrero1; lesions. Molecular genetic analysis revealed a novel mutation in the 1Department of Paediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Cardiology - Regina exon 3 of the NF2 gene: this mutation was a small insertion of 4 bases Margherita Children’s Hospital, Torino, Italy, 3Department of Genetics - Univer- pair at codon 94 (c.281_282 ins CCTT). This mutation was not detect- sity of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. ed in 100 control chromosomes from matched healthy individuals. This Noonan syndrome (NS, OMIM 163950) is an autosomal dominant dis- is the first time that: (1) a bilateral eight nerve tumour in a NF2 child do order, with a prevalence at birth of 1:1000-1:2500 live births, character- not show progression after a long follow-up period; and (2) a NF2 child ized by short stature, facial and skeletal dysmorphisms, cardiovascu- develops large numbers of skin NF2-plaques in atypical localisations. lar defects and haematological anomalies including an increased risk of leukaemia. Missense mutations of PTPN11 gene (12q24) account P0203. Evidence for high rate of gonadal failure in female for approximately 50% of NS cases, while molecular lesions of other patients with Nijmegen breakage syndrome - a Polish study genes of the Ras pathway - KRAS and SOS1 - play a minor role in M. Gajdulewicz, K. H. Chrzanowska, M. Szarras-Czapnik, M. Walewska-Wolf, the molecular pathogenesis of the disease. Twenty-two patients were J. Szufladowicz-Woźniak, K. Spodar, H. Rysiewski, R. Janas, M. Syczewska, enrolled in the study with a PTPN11 mutation detection rate of 35%, M. Krajewska-Walasek; and no additional mutation in KRAS gene. A statistically significant as- The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. sociation with pulmonic stenosis was found in the group positive for Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is an autosomal recessive dis- PTPN11 mutations whereas a statistically significant association with ease with defects in DNA repair and is characterized by microcephaly, HCM was observed in negative ones. We heve observed a novel mis- growth retardation, immunodeficiency, radiosensitivity, and an elevat- sense mutation, Phe285Ile, in a familial case. Cultures of peripheral ed risk of cancer. The relatively frequent occurrence of NBS in Poland, blood haematopoietic progenitors were performed in the presence of which is in line with the relatively high frequency of 657del5 mutation decreasing concentrations of GM-CSF. Circulating haematopoietic carriership in the Polish population (0.6%), allowed us to undertake in- progenitors of PTPN11- mutated NS subjects did not show the hyper- tensive follow-up studies of a large and uniform group of patients. Lon- sensitivity to GM-CSF observed in PTPN11-mutated juvenile myelo- gitudinal observation drew our attention to lack of a pubertal growth monocytic leukaemia patients. Therefore, we propose this functional spurt and to primary amenorrhea in all but one girl who reached pu- evaluation of circulating haematopoietic progenitors as a non-invasive bertal age. A total of 36 female NBS patients, aged from 1 to over 20 technique useful in the follow-up of NS patients for early detection of years, observed at a single centre (CMHI) were enrolled in this study. leukaemic evolution. The aim was to verify our earlier observations and to establish the frequency of ovarian failure among NBS females. The gonadotropin P0206. The investigation of NPHS2 gene coding region in group concentrations were found to resemble the pattern described in pa- with Hereditary Proteinuria Syndromes. tients with Turner syndrome: high levels 1-3 years after birth, normal N. Poltavets1, L. Prihodina2, O. Ryzhkova1, E. Zaklyazminskaya1, A. Polyakov1; in mid-childhood, increasing to postmenopausal levels at puberty. Our 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re- findings indicate a very high rate of ovarian failure in NBS, which leads search Сenter of Pediatrics and Child Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. to psychological problems related to lack of acquisition of secondary Hereditary Proteinuria Syndromes (HPS) is a group of inherited dis- sex characteristics and to reduction of bone density. Puberty must be eases in which proteinuria is the main clinical manifestation. The induced or completed in such patients. Given the enhanced general courses of these diseases vary in the age of onset, in the severity of predisposition for malignancy in NBS, and the additional danger of injury, and in the morphologic diagnosis. The genetic cause of these ovarian tumors arising from dysgenetic gonads, female NBS patients diseases is mutations in genes providing the structure and function of should be carefully monitored and diagnosed in this context. filtration barrier. This study was supported by grant MNiSzW 2P05E06628. We have examined 48 children with biopsy proven SRNS and 15 chil- dren with isolated proteinuria syndrome (IPS) in age ranged from 2 to P0204. Germline KRAS mutations in Noonan syndrome: study 17 years (SRNS group). The disease manifestation has been observed of 4 NS patients with KRAS mutation in a cohort of 82 patients at the age ranged from 1 month to 16 years. We have investigated without PTPN11 mutations DNA samples for mutation in NPHS2 gene coding areas by SSCP, C. Michot1, C. Nava1, N. Hanna2, S. Pereira1, B. Parfait2, J. Elion1, A. Verloes1, ACRS methods and direct sequencing. We have identified new poly- H. Cavé1; morphism c.872+7A>G. The allele frequencies of this polymorphism 1department of Genetics, APHP, Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Inserm among our patients and in population group is similar (5% and 4.76%). U745, Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et biologiques, Université Paris We have found heterozygous mutation c.328G>T (p.87Glu>Stop) in coding region of the first exon in one having been transplanted patient, Clinical genetics 1 which has not been reported previously. This is SRNS patient of 2 typical OFCD syndrome. One twin transmitted this large deletion ho- years old, with manifestation of disease at the age of 1 month with mogeneously to her daughter. In addition, three novel mutations were rapid progression to the End Stage Renal Disease. In this case we can identified in three unrelated females: two frameshift (p.Pro288ArgfsX90 propose digenic type of inheritance. Perhaps, the most our patients` and p.Pro190ProfsX26), and one nonsense (p.Arg1480X) mutation. disease is caused by mutation in over genes coding proteins being in- No mutation of BCOR was found in the male patients with Lenz mi- volved in the structure and the function of the kidney filtration barrier. crophtalmia. This work was partly supported by Russian President`s grant NSh- In conclusion, we report four novel BCOR mutations in females with 5736.2006.7. OFCD syndrome. These results broaden the clinical spectrum of OFCD syndrome, as three patients did not present heart defects, and one pa- P0207. Mutation screening of melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) in tient had mild mental retardation, thus suggesting that the condition is a Norwegian cohort of obese patients reveals a low prevalence underdiagnosed. The first description of somatic mosaicism in OFCD and four novel mutations. syndrome is of particular relevance to genetic counselling. T. Wangensteen1,2, M. Pollestad3, M. Mattingsdal4, S. Tonstad5, D. Undlien2,1, L. Retterstøl1; P0209. A natural history of a six years-old girl with Ohdo 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, syndrome 2Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of R. Posmyk, A. T. Midro; Pediatrics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Medical Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical Academy, Bialystok, Poland. Informatics, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 5Department of Ohdo blepharophimosis syndrome (OBS) (249620 #OMIM) is a rare Preventive Cardiology, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. genetic entity characterized by blepharophimosis, blepharoptosis, Backgound: Heterozygous mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor dental hypoplasia, heart disease, short stature and intellectual disabil- (MC4R) gene are the most frequent monogenic cause of obesity. Pre- ity. The phenotypic variability in OBS has been reported . We present vious studies of such mutations have given prevalences varying from a natural history of a girl observed during six years from the birth. OBS 0.5 up to 5.8%. has been recognized on the basis of following features: short stature, Materials and methods: We sequenced the coding region of the MC4R blepharophimosis, ptosis of eyelids, epicanthic folds, microphtalmia, gene in 703 obese Norwegian subjects. The patients were recruited flat, wide nasal bridge, narrow mouth fissure, long philtrum, thin upper from an ongoing study at Ullevål University Hospital. Adults with lip, high palate, hypoplastic teeth, dysplastic, low-set ears, joint laxity, BMI>35 kg/m² and children whose bodyweight was above the 97.5 scoliosis, sacral dimple, congenital heart anomaly (pulmonary steno- th percentile for height were asked to participate. All novel mutations sis, VSD, PDA, PFO), severe hypotonia and distinct developmental were analyzed by a bioinformatic approach and family studies. profile. Morphological phenotype has been described according to Results: 6 mutations were identified, two previously described and four the catalogue elaborated by Stengel Rutkowski et al. and evolution of new ones. A total of three different mutations were found among the some traits has been found. Interestingly, some features as: a very soft 459 adults, giving a prevalence of 0.65%. Four patients with muta- skin, curly, fragile hair , a lack of nose cartilage, small maxilla and, a tions were found among 244 children corresponding to a prevalence of radiological abnormalities in knees resembling Blout disease were not 1.6%. Several known polymorphisms were also identified. previously described in relation to this syndrome. All mutations identified in the pediatric group were in second-genera- We suggest that a better knowledge of the clinical and anthropological tion immigrants, who made up more than half of this group. The same spectrum of OBS can be helpful for setting a diagnosis as molecular novel mutation was found in two siblings whose parents are first cous- basis of this disorder remains still unknown. ins. Both children are homozygous for a 3-bp-deletion in the MC4R- gene. The other patients were all heterozygous for their mutation. P0210. Ophthalmic status of patients with Goldenhar syndrome Two previously described mutations, p.Tyr35X and p.Thr150Ile were O. K. Yanvareva, E. Drozdova, M. O. Mkheidze; found in female patients with adult onset obesity. Medical Academy for postgraduate studying, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- Conclusions: Mutations in the MC4R gene are not a common cause of tion. obesity in Norway. Four of the six mutations identified have not been Aim of the work: investigation of ophthalmic status of patients with described previously. Goldenhar (facio-auriculo-vertebral) syndrome. Material and methods. There were 5 patients (10 eyes, 3 males and P0208. Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental (OFCD) syndrome: Somatic 2 females aged from 6 to 27 yr) with Goldenhar syndrome under our mosaicism of a large BCOR gene deletion in 2 monozygotic observation. Routine basic ophthalmic investigation was performed for twins and three novel mutations all patients. S. Whalen1, S. Manouvrier2, O. Boute2, F. Fellmann3, F. Dastot-Le Moal1, P. Bi- Results. Ophthalmic status of all patients included sclera-corneal li- toun4, M. Cordier5, I. Bailleul-Forrestier6, M. Goossens1, A. Verloes6, I. Giurgea1; podermoid (6eyes) followed by reduced vision and demanding partial 1Dpt de génétique et INSERM U841, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, fibered keratoplasty (1 case) and optic correction picking up of all the 2Service de génétique clinique, Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de patients because of astigmatism (5 patients). Two clients had petite Lille, Lille, France, 3Service de génétique médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universi- lipodermoid of sclera without surgical correction. One client had inborn taire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Dpt de génétique, Hôpital Jean Verdier, anomaly in the form of the upper lid coloboma removed with surgical Bondy, France, 5Dpt de génétique médicale, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Lyon, intervention. All clients were operated on in early childhood apropos of France, 6Dpt de génétique médicale, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. a cleft lip and a palate. A 10 year-old boy had atresia of the auditory Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental (OFCD) syndrome is a rare disorder as- passage and the malformed ear followed by unilateral inborn hear- sociating congenital cataract, microphthalmia, characteristic dys- ing disorder. Mental development of all clients was intact. Our clients’ morphia, congenital heart defects, oligodontia, and radiculomegaly. relatives denied congenital and inherited pathology. Correction of re- OFCD syndrome results from mutations in the BCOR gene, located fractional amblyopia with spectacles resulted in stable and high visual on Xp11.4, encoding a key transcriptional regulator during early em- function. Development of xerotic cornea of the eye with the upper lid bryogenesis. X-linked dominant inheritance is suggested, although a coloboma was prevented. singular BCOR missense mutation, whose relevance remains contro- Conclusion. To make diagnosis at proper time and correct face, eye versial, was described in a male presenting with Lenz microphtalmia and ear dysplastic features using surgical intervention by ophthalmolo- syndrome (microphtalmia, mental retardation, and multiple congenital gists, orthodontists and specialists of aesthetic surgery are sine qua abnormalities). non for successful life and disease prognosis. To further delineate the clinical spectrum of these disorders, we stu- died seven females with OFCD syndrome and four males with Lenz P0211. Orofacial clefts with associated anomalies in Lithuania microphtalmia, from six unrelated families. BCOR mutations were E. Zarakauskaitė1, A. Matulevičienė2, A. Utkus1,2, L. Linkevičienė3, V. screened by direct sequencing, QM-PSF, and deletions were confir- Kučinskas1,2; med by FISH analysis. 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithu- Somatic mosaicism for a large deletion of BCOR (45 % in peripheral ania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu leukocytes) was identified in two monozygotic twins presenting with Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Institute of Odontology, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Clinical genetics 2 Lithuania. P0214. Epidemiological study of some familial cases with The aim was to investigate the incidence and type of orofacial clefts primary osteoporosis. (OCs) associated with congenital defects in Lithuanian population. M. Cevei1, D. Stoicanescu2, M. Mihailov1, D. Farcas1; Patients and methods. There were included 235 cases of OCs with one 1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, or more major congenital anomalies investigated from 1993 to 2005 in 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. the study. OCs were subdivided into three groups: cleft palate alone Osteoporosis is a multifactorial disease characterized by a decrease (CP), cleft lip alone (CL) and cleft lip with cleft palate (CLP). Each case in bone mass and deterioration of bone architecture. Genetic factors was assigned to one of categories: nonchromosomal syndromes, OCs are determinants of peak bone mass and may influence age-related with chromosomal anomalies and unidentified syndromic OCs with decreases of bone mass. WHO has established an operational crite- one or more associated major anomalies, which were grouped accord- rion based on bone density measuring, the T-score. 122 cases were ing British Pediatric Association Classification of Diseases. studied, 51 diagnosed with primary osteoporosis. Mean age was 57.6 Results. There were 70 cases of nonchromosomal syndromes (20 dif- years. The main inclusion criterion was the acceptance of affected in- ferent syndromes), 26 cases of OCs with different chromosomal ab- dividuals to participate in the study. Accurate family history was taken. normalities and 141 non-syndromic patients with OCs and one or more Daughters of affected persons were evaluated by DEXA technique. associated major anomalies of total 235 persons with OCs and addi- 67.2% of them had T-score values that indicated osteopenia or osteo- tional anomalies. There were 420 different anomalies in patients with porosis (mean value -2.3SD). Molecular testing was not available. We unidentified syndromic OCs, a mean of 2,9/proband. The commonest are interested in future collaborations. In conclusion, descendents of organ system affected was the musculoskeletal system (133 anoma- affected parents are at a high risk for osteoporosis, important aspect lies), followed by cardiovascular (90) and anomalies of face (including for primary prevention. eye and ear) and neck (64). Conclusions: This study expanded the phenotype of patients with P0215. Otopalatodigital type I syndrome: report of a familial case OCs. According to the results of this study we can propose that all pa- L. M. J. Albano1, S. P. Robertson2, L. A. N. Oliveira1, D. R. Bertola1, C. A. Kim1; tients with OCs should be examined by the team of specialists such as 1Instituto da Crianca, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Dept Paediatrics and Child Health, pediatricians, plastic surgeons, orthodontists, cardiologists and others Dunedin School of Medicine, Otago University, Dunedin, New Zealand. with closer collaboration of clinical geneticists. A routine screening for Otopalatodigital syndrome spectrum disorders include four phenotypi- other associated malformations, especially skeletal, central nervous cally related conditions: otopalatodigital syndrome (OPD) type I and system, and cardiac defects, is required. II, frontometaphyseal dysplasia and Melnick-Needles syndrome . Mu- tations in the FLNA gene have been reported in the majority of the P0212. Tunisian family with ocular, squelettal and abdominal patients. Most pedigrees are consistent with X-linked inheritance. We malformations report on a typical OPD type I familial case, a 7y7mo-old boy present- R. M‘rad1,2, F. Maazoul1, I. Chelly1, M. Chaabouni1,2, L. Kraoua1, L. Ben jemaa1, ing characteristic dysmorphisms with prominent supraorbital ridges, H. Chaabouni1; hypertelorism, submucous cleft palate, deafness, short broad thumbs, 1department of human genetics, Charles Nicolle hospital Tunis, Tunisia, 2depart- spatulate finger tips, partial syndactily of the fingers, overlengthening ment of human genetics, faculty of medicine Tunis, Tunisia. of the second toes and foreshortening of the great toes, broad terminal We report on two sisters who had a unique association of facial, ocu- phalanges of the other digits. His mother was considered normal with lar , skelettal defects and abdominal muscle hypoplasia. They are the normal stature (1.55m), without facial dysmorphism, exhibiting only bi- fourth and the fifth sibs, born to healthy first cousin parents originating fid uvula and longitudinal darkish lines striates on nails of the 1th, 2 th from Tunisia. The family history is unremarkable. The phenotypic find- and 3 th fingers, similar to the ones found in craniofrontonasal dyspla- ings are compared with the previously reported patients referred to as sia. They showed unimpaired intellect. A mutation in the FLNA gene Carnevale, OSA, Michels and Malpuech syndromes. All are autosomal was detected in both mother and son. Our case reinforces the phe- recessive. We conclude that the present patients resemble most pa- notypic variability in OPD syndrome type I, and also the importance tients with OSA syndrome previousely reported in 1996 by Mingnarelli of molecular analysis in mild phenotypes and in females to confirm a et al . carrier status, in order to perform a more precise genetic counseling. Despite the presence of apparently distinctive key features, it appears that these four entities share multiple similarities in the facial and the P0216. Parkinsonism and essential tremor in a family with pattern of malformations. pseudodominant inheritance of PARK2 F. E. Rocca1, F. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, S. Carrideo1, D. P0213. Osteopetrosis mutation study among an Iranian family; Civitelli1, M. T. Pellecchia2, P. Barone2, G. Provenzano1, E. V. De Marco1, G. TCIRG1 gene Squillace1, V. Greco1, G. Annesi1; T. Majidizadeh1, M. Dehghan Manshadi1, M. Rostami1, K. Banihashemi2, S. 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Department of Akbaroghli3, M. Houshmand1; Neurological Sciences, University Federico II, Napoli, Italy. 1National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- The Parkin gene (park2) plays an important role in the early onset lamic Republic of Iran, 2GPEF, Ministry of Science, Research and Technology, forms of Parkinson’s disease (PD). Mutations in this gene have been Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Iranian Behzisti Organization, Tehran, Islamic described in approximately 50% of familiar cases and in the 10-20% of Republic of Iran. sporadic cases with an onset age ≤ 45 years. This study shows the re- Autosomal-recessive osteopetrosis is a severe genetically heteroge- sults of a parkin gene analysis in a family from Southern Italy.This fam- neous disorder due to osteoclast failure. Dense bones prone to frac- ily included five affected individuals showing either essential tremor ture, severe hematological failure, and neurological impairment are (ET), parkinsonism, or both, consistent with pseudo-dominant inheri- among the prominent features of the disease. tance of PARK2. The affected patients were screened for mutations It has been shown that mutations in the TCIRG1 gene may result in in the parkin gene by a combination of gene dosage and sequencing three disaese phenotypes characterized as autosomal recessive, in- of entire coding region. We identified a 226 C>G homozygous mis- fantile malignant and also in association with bone mass forms associ- sense mutation leading to the amino acid substitution R42P in two ated with 38, 10 and 1 mutations respectively. parkinsonian subjects and in 2 other not affected members of the fam- Previous studies showed that 19 out of total 50 known mutations (38%) ily. Four subjects carried the R42P substitution in heterozygotic form. were splicing mutations, which may also be expected to be the most Exon rearrangements were excluded. Striatal dopamine transporter common mutations in Iran. density was reduced in accordance with phenotype and number of In our study a family of 37 members was the subject of investigation for mutated alleles. Apparently, this family did not show consanguinity, but TCIRG1 gene mutations for 3 cases of severe osteopetrosis after the haplotype analysis revealed a common chromosomic region shared by clinical diagnosis of the proband who have been involved with the dis- some members of both branches of the kindred, suggesting a single order through the first seven years of his life using the standard PCR founder. Whether postural and kinetic tremor in this family really rep- method for all 20 exons and then sequencing to detect the risk of next resents ET or is a first manifestation of parkinsonism requires further pregnancies involvements in the parents of the dead proband. follow-up. Nevertheless, we suggest that parkin mutations may have a role in families with occurrence of both diseases.Clinical genetics  P0217. Partial mosaic duplication (X)(q21.3q24) in a girl with +8 alanine, twos truncating mutations and one missense within the clinical signs of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease homeodomain. Semi quantitative PCR showed somatic mosaicism B. Albrecht1, B. Schweiger2, S. Fuchs3, A. Küchler1; in one case only. This has major consequences in terms of genetic 1Institut fuer Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 2Institut fuer diagnostische und counselling. In this series, one adult with LO-CHS had a child with interventionelle Radiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany, 3Institut fuer CCHS. These data raise also the question of the follow-up of appar- Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum, Hamburg, Germany. ently healthy parents of a CCHS child who were found to harbour a We report on the first child of a healthy non consanguineous German somatic mosaicism for a PHOX2B gene mutation (5% of the parents couple. During pregnancy prenatal diagnosis was performed because in our series). Among the 12/26 patients with no PHOX2B mutation of advanced maternal age. An interstitial duplication Xq in about 40 3 presented hypothalamic-related endocrinopathies and behavioral percent of amniotic cells was detected. The girl was born after 41 problems, suggesting genetic heterogeneity of idiopathic LO-CHS. weeks of gestation with normal birth measurements (weight 2820g Altogether, these data demonstrate a genetic link between CCHS = 3rd-10th percentile, length 50cm = 10th-25th percentile) and normal and, at least, a subgroup of LO-CHS. Furthermore, combined genetic APGAR score (10/10). Feeding difficulties and muscular hypotonia and environmental factors may explain the variability of disease onset were noted after birth. Motor delay became obvious between six and ranging from neonatal period to adulthood for an identical PHOX2B twelve months (no sitting, no crawling, no turning), but good social gene mutation (+5 alanine expansion). communication was observed. Clinical investigation at the age of 12 months showed no facial dysmorphisms and normal body measure- P0220. Clinic and genetic study in a family with a clinical picture ments (length 73cm = 25th percentile, weight 7.7 kg = 10th percentile, of pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration OFC 45cm = 25th percentile). As a clinical sign of chromosomal mosa- I. Cirò Candiano, F. Annesi, S. Carrideo, E. V. De Marco, D. Civitelli, P. Ta- icism streaky and patchy hypopigmentation of the right leg was noted. rantino, F. E. Rocca, M. Caracciolo, G. Provenzano, G. Squillace, V. Greco, G. Cytogenetic investigations of blood lymphocytes showed a similar dis- Annesi; tribution of normal and duplicated cells compared to amniocytes (mos Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy. 46,XX[17]/46,X,dup(X)(q21.3q24)[13]). Parents had normal karyo- Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) is a dis- types. MRI of the brain of the girl with 10 months showed no myelina- order characterized by dystonia, parkinsonism, and iron accumulation tion like in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. FISH analysis with probes in the brain. Many patients with PKAN have mutations in the gene specific for the PLP1 region confirmed the suspected duplication in encoding pantothenate kinase2 (PANK2) and a specific MRI pattern of 40% of cells. A duplication of the PLP1 gene is the cause of Pelizaeus- hyperintensity within the hypointense medial globus pallidus (eyes of Merzbacher disease in most male patients with this X-chromosomal the tiger). Abnormal accumulation of iron in the brain is detected also in recessive disorder and was described as cause of clinical symptoms other neurodegenerative diseases such as neuroferritinopathy associ- in several female heterozygote carriers, so we speculated that the Xq ated to mutations in the ferritin light polypeptide (FTL) and in the ferritin duplication might explain the girl’s developmental delay. heavy polypeptide (FTH1) genes. We performed a molecular study in a family with a PKAN classic phenotype. The patient, a 21-year-old P0218. Genetic variants of the phosphodiesterase (PDE) gene woman, originated from Southern Italy. Her parents were healthy and superfamily in patients with bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasias consanguineous. Brain MRI study showed the eyes of the tiger pat- A. D. Horvath1, C. Giatzakis1, E. Levine1, P. Osorio1, S. Boikos1, J. Siegel1, J. tern. Serum ferritin was 16 ng/mL (N= 20 to 300). On the basis of the Moran1, V. Kamvissi1, I. Bossis1, J. Bertherat2, C. Stratakis1; clinical and neuroimaging features, a diagnosis of classic PKAN was 1National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Institut National de made but the sequencing analysis of PANK2 gene revealed absence la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale U567, Paris, France. of mutations and microsatellite analysis with 7 microsatellite markers Several types of adrenocortical tumors that lead to Cushing syndrome from the PANK2 region (20p12.3-p13) excluded linkage with PANK2 may be caused by aberrant cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling. In search locus. Considering the abnormally low levels of ferritin in the serum for cAMP-signaling related genetic factors involved in adrenocortical of the patient, we supposed a ferritin-related neurodegeneration but tumorigenesis we have performed association and loss-of-heterozy- the sequences of the FTH1 and FTL genes were found to be normal. gosity analysis based on genome-wide 10K SNP mapping of both These findings suggest a probable involvement of other iron regulatory tumor and germline DNA from patients with bilateral adrenocortical proteins. Recently, a locus for neurodegeneration with brain iron ac- hyperplasia (BACH). We found inactivating mutations in 2q32-located cumulation was mapped to chromosome 22q12-q13 and mutations in phosphodiesterase (PDE) 11A (PDE11A) gene to be associated with PLA2G6, encoding a calcium-indipendent phospholipase, was identi- the disease in a subset of our BACH patients. We further selected sev- fied. Sequencing of PLA2G6 gene is being carried out. eral other genes from the PDE superfamily including PDE3A, PDE4A, PDE4B, PDE7A, PDE8A, PDE8B, and PDE9A that were favored by P0221. Familial occurrence of Poland‘s Syndrome: further our analysis and have shown relatively high expression in the adrenal evidence of the genetic component. gland. We identified a number of synonymous and non-synonymous M. Scutifero, G. Di Gregorio, L. Passamano, A. Palladino, V. R. Petretta, L. substitutions to be present in our BACH patients and not in normal Politano; control individuals from a variety of sources. We further investigated Second University of Naples- Dept. of Experimental Medicine- Cardiomyology the effect of these variations on cAMP and cGMP degradation in vi- and Medical Genetics, Naples, Italy. tro. We speculate that variations in genes coding for PDEs may be Poland’s syndrome consists of variable clinical features, but always involved in adrenocortical tumorigenesis by affecting the efficiency of includes unilateral aplasia of the chest wall muscles and ipsilateral cyclic nucleotide degradation and other means that lead to increased anomalies of upper extremities. The incidence of Poland’s syndrome, cAMP signaling. reported by different authors, ranges from 1:10,000 to 1:100,000. It is observed more frequently in males than in females, with the right P0219. Germline and somatic mosaicism at the PHOX2B locus in side of the body affected more often than the left. The aetiology of the Late-Onset Central Hypoventilation syndrome. Poland’s syndrome is still discussed and different etiologic factors are D. Trochet, L. de Pontual, A. Munnich, S. Lyonnet, J. Amiel; taken into account: genetic, embriogenetic but also teratogenetic ef- Département de Génétique et Unité INSERM U781, PARIS, France. fects of environmental xenobiotics . Idiopathic late-onset central hypoventilation syndrome (LO-CHS) is a However most of described cases were sporadic, rare familial inci- rare disorder occurring from early childhood to adulthood. The phys- dence of Poland’s syndrome was also reported, suggesting a possible iopathological relationships between LO-CHS and congenital central autosomal dominant transmission. hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) have been debated and it has now We present 5 familial cases in which absence of the right pectoralis been shown that they are allelic disorders. major muscle (RPMM) and aplasia of the ipsilateral breast was ob- Here we report a series of 26 patients with LO-CHS referred from 5 served in 4 males and hypoplasia of the RPMM in 1 female. The ab- weeks of age to adulthood. We identified a heterozygous PHOX2B sence was confirmed by muscle ultrasound and MRI. Although none gene mutation in 14/26 patients. The most frequent mutant allele re- of 5 patients had congenital upper limb abnormalities, we believe that sults in a +5 alanine expansion of the series of 20 alanines C-terminal they still qualify as having a Poland’s syndrome. to the homeodomain of the protein (10 cases). We observed also one Mild forms of Poland’s syndrome are in fact more frequent than severe Clinical genetics  forms, and may go undiagnosed, especially in females. Hypoplasia of P0224. Lack of Evidence of Monosomy 1p36 in Patients with one breast or a horizontal anterior axillary fold may be the sole clinical Prader-Willi-Like Phenotype manifestation of this syndrome. V. R. Rodriguez1, L. F. Mazzucatto2, J. M. Pina Neto2; Data here reported while adding further evidence of the genetic com- 1Genetic department Medicine School of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, ponent of the Poland’s syndrome and of the AD pattern of inheritance, 2Genetic Department Medicine School of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. in the same time suggest a reduced penetrance and a variable pheno- Some researchers suggested the existence of two possible pheno- typic expression of the disease. types for the 1p36 Monosomy. We would like to describe our experi- ence about the possible correlation between 1p36 microdeletion and P0222. Paternal deletion 15q11-q13 versus maternal disomy the Prader-Willi phenotype. - how different are these two Prader-Willi syndrome phenotypes 22 patients aged 8-23 years-old who tested negative for Prader-Willi in a Polish cohort? syndrome by Souther blot. K. Spodar, A. Gutkowska, D. Jurkiewicz, K. H. Chrzanowska, M. Gajdulewicz, Clinical characterization of the patients was performed using a pro- H. Rysiewski, E. Popowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; tocol with the characteristics of 1p36 microdeletion Prader-Willi-Like The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. syndrome. Hight Resolution Cytogenetic Studies performed at a We present the results of a study whose aim was to determine the im- 550-850 bands level, and eleven polymorphic markers of 1p36 re- pact of a different genetic background on the phenotype of individuals gion (D1S243, D1S468, D1S2660, D1S2795, D1S2870, D1S2145, with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). D1S214, D1S2663, D1S450, D1S244, D1S2667) were analyzed. The molecular screening was performed in patients referred to our After cytogenetic analysis, no subtelomeric deletion was observed centre with a clinical diagnosis of PWS. The patients were divided into over 40 metaphases by patients, and all the polymorphic markers for following groups: 25 with maternal disomy, 62 with de novo deletion 1p36 were negative for microdeletions too. 15q11-q13, 2 with deletion resulting from a balanced paternal trans- According to the results, our sample is consistent with the Prader-Willi location and 3 with a microdeletion in the imprinting center (IC). Two phenotype (mental retardation/obesity 100% hyperphagia 86.4% de- affected sibs inherited the microdeletion from their father and their pa- velopmental delay 59% hypotonia 68.2% infant feeding problems 79% ternal grandmother was the carrier. The third child’s father was mosaic abusive behavior 63%). for microdeletion which occured de novo. Forty seven patients with It also can be suggested that our methodology is adequate, 98% of the normal methylation pattern at 15q served as a control group. Detailed 1p36 microdeletions could be detected by high resolution cytogenetic clinical investigations and data collected from the original question- and, the number and position of the markers used which are located in naire enabled us to characterise each group. all six intervals suggested by Wu et al. 1999 observed clearly by Heisl- Although there were many statistically significant differences between stedt et al. 2003, even more we used 2 polymorphic markers inside the patients from the control group and patients with confirmed PWS, obesity/hyperphagia chromosomal segment 1p36.33-36.32 (D’Angelo comparison of individuals with deletion and disomy showed only slight et al. 2006). differences. The children with disomy were taller, had longer trunk, The phenotype defined by Heilstedt et al. 2003 excluded hyperpha- broader chest, milder dysmorphic traits, less severe behavioral prob- gia/obesity. Our results do not confirm the suggestion of D’Angelo et lems and started to walk earlier than those with deletion. The outcomes al. 2006 about a specific hyperphagia/obesity chromosomal region in of the study are discussed in view of a current literature. The charac- 1p36. teristics of cases with unbalanced translocations and IC microdeletion will also be shown. P0225. Detection of the G646C polymorphism of DYT1 gene in The work was supported in part by grant No 2PO5E06228 from the patients with primary focal dystonia. State Cometee for Scientific Research of the Republic of Poland. E. Sarasola1, F. Sádaba2, B. Huete2, M. García-Barcina1; 1Unidad de Genética del Hospital de Basurto, Osakidetza (Servicio Vasco de P0223. Genotype and Phenotype Analyses of Prader-Willi Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Servicio de Neurología del Hospital de Basurto, Osaki- Syndrome Patients in Taiwan detza (Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain. S. P. Lin1, H. Y. Lin1, C. K. Chuang1, C. Y. Huang1, J. L. Yen2, L. P. Tsai3, D. M. Introduction: Early-onset generalized primary dystonia is a dominantly Niu4, M. C. Chao5, P. L. Kuo6; inherited movement disorder, mostly caused by a 3-bp (GAG) deletion 1Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Branch for Women and Children, in exon 5 of DYT1 (TOR1A) gene encoding torsinA. It‘s penetrance is Taipei City Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Tzu-Chi Hospital in Xindian, Taipei, Tai- estimated to be 30-40%. Moreover, in some families, members carrying wan, 4Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Kaohsiung Medical the same mutation could be either asymptomatic or display dystonia, University Chung-Ho Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 6National Cheng- which may be focal, segmental, multifocal, or generalized in distribu- Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan. tion, suggesting the role of other genetics modifiers. It was shown that Aim: To compare the genotype and phenotype correlation of patients cells expressing the G646C polymorphism in exon 4 of DYT1 gene with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) in Taiwan. (replacement of aspartic acid with histidine at residue 216) developed Methods: We performed a retrospective analysis of 67 molecularly inclusions similar to those associated with GAG-deleted torsinA. The confirmed diagnoses of PWS from January 1980 through July 2006 in aim of this study is to determine the putative role for this polymorphism five medical centers in Taiwan. Clinical manifestations were compared in primary focal dystonia. between the deletion and maternal uniparental disomy (UPD) groups. Patients and Methods: Genomic DNA from 50 patients with focal pri- Results: The genetic analysis identified deletion in 56 (84%), UPD in mary dystonia, in whom no GAG deletion in DYT1 gene had been 10 (15%), and a probable imprinting center deletion or imprinting de- identified, was purified by „salting-out“ method. The detection of the fect in 1 (1%). Compared with UPD type, PWS patients with deletion polymorphism was performed in an ABI PRISM 7500 Real-Time PCR type were more likely to have the phenotypes of hypogonadism (p < system using a validated TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay from Applied 0.001), small hands and feet (p < 0.001), and hypopigmentation (p < Biosystems. Data were analyzed with ABI PRISM Sequence Detection 0.002). We also found a higher maternal age (p = 0.015) and a higher Software. paternal age (p = 0.021) in the UPD group. No other clinical features Results and Discussion: 7 patients were heterozygotes G/C for G646C were found to be significantly different between the two groups. polymorphism. The rest of the samples were homozygotes G/G and no Conclusion: Our study in Taiwan is in contrast to most previous re- homozygotes C/C were identified. No relationship between the poly- ports in Western populations that indicated a higher incidence of UPD morphism and the severity and evolution of the disease was found. In in PWS. The possible subtle phenotypic differences between patients order to complete this work, G and C allele frequencies will be studied with PWS on the basis of deletion type versus UPD type would be use- in healthy Basque Country population. ful both in clinical diagnosis and in understanding the genetic basis of the subtypes of PWS. P0226. “Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch syndrome”: new case report N. Rumyantseva, I. Naumchik, V. Kulak; Republican Medical Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. We presented a clinical data of new case of “Wiedemann-Rauten- strauch syndrome” (WRs) - a rare autosomal recessive disorder, mani-Clinical genetics  fested progeroid features from infancy (OMIM 264090). (PSORS1-9). The strongest genetic association has been found with Proposita - 6 month age male is a single child of young healthy non- the HLA-C region (PSORS1) on chromosome 6p21. Altogether, eigth consanguineous couple (G1;P1). He was born at 38 weeks gestation, genes are characterized in this completely sequenced region: HLA-C, labor was unremarkable (BW=2540; BL=47cm; OFC=34cm). Prenatal OTF3, TCF19, HCR, CDSN, SEEK, SPR1, STG. Aims: To assess the hypoplasia and aged signs was present at birth. At age of 6 months genetic contribution of HCR single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) old progeroid appearance became more pronounced, patient showed and HLA-C in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. growth delay (W=4.6kg; L=60cm,; OFC=41cm all<3rd centile), muscle Methods: A case-control study with 400 psoriasis patients and 410 hypotrophy, mental retardation, dystonia, prominent veins on scalp, controls in Russian populations was conducted. All individuals were aged face, wide forehead, sparse eyebrows, eyelashes and scalp hair, genotyped for SNPs of HCR-305, 325, 477, 2327 and HLA-C associa- posteriorly rotated dysmorphic ears, shallow orbits, protruding eyes, tion. nystagmus, angioretinopathy, thin lips, arched palate, severe micro- Results: Significant increase of the HLA-Cw6 allele was found in pso- gnathia, small narrow beaked nose with hypoplastic alae, subcutane- riasis patients (44% vs.18%, OR=3.46, 95% CI 2.70-4.45, p=0.0005). ous tissue loss, abnormally visible subcutaneouse veins, thin limbs, The frequencies of the HCR-325*T, HCR-2327*G alleles were sig- camptodactyly II-V, adducted thumbs, heart defect (small ASD), large nificantly increased in psoriasis patients compared with controls abdomen, scleroderma-like changes of skin on the buttocks. Sonog- (OR=3.61, p=0.005 and OR=2.45, p=0.0005, respectively). In subset raphy of brain and abdomen was normal. Chromosomal, biochemical analysis there were no other significant differences in allelic frequen- analyses were normal. cies for the HCR-305G/A, HCR-477T/C polymorphisms. Clinical features of our patient were compared with published data of Conclusions: Our results suggest that HLA-Cw6 remains the major risk WRs, other premature aging syndromes, nonclassified progeroid con- allele in Russian psoriatics, and that the HCR gene may play a role in ditions. We have established “neonatal progeroid Wiedemann-Rauten- the development of psoriasis. strauch syndrome” based on association of characteristic aging ap- pearance present at birth, failure to thrive, mental delay, hypotrichosis, P0229. Radial hypoplasia in an infant with trisomy 18 signs of generalized lypodystrophy and paradoxal fat accumulation. G. Utine, K. Erdoğan, Y. Alanay, D. Aktaş, K. Boduroğlu, M. Alikaşifoğlu, E. Because of high genetic risk early diagnostics is important for progno- Tunçbilek; ses in affected families. New cases of progeroid disorders must be col- Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. lected for further delineation of phenotype and counseling improving. Trisomy 18 is a rather common autosomal trisomy with well-known pattern of malformations. These include prenatal growth deficiency, P0227. Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum - a four-generation family craniofacial dysmorphism, congenital heart disease, and overriding with typical features but apparent absence of the ocular fingers. A five-months old baby girl, referred for multiple congenital phenotype anomalies including right radius hypoplasia and facial dysmorphic find- M. L. P. Robert1, S. Tomkins2, M. James2, F. M. Pope3, R. Florijn4, P. D. Turn- ings, is presented. She was born at 34th gestational week with a birth penny1; weight of 1900 gr (25th-50th percentile) as the second child of healthy 1Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2United Bristol consanguineous parents. During the first month of life, she had feed- Healthcare Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3Northwick Park Health Institute, ing problems. On physical examination, she was 54 cm, 3800 gr with London, United Kingdom, 4The Netherlands Ophthalmic Research Institute, a head circumference of 37 cm (all below 3rd percentile). She had Amsterdam, The Netherlands. thick eyebrows, wide and flat nasal bridge, bilateral epicanthic folds, Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a progressive disorder of elastic strabismus, a prominent philtrum and low-set ears. Facial asymmetry fibres with ocular, dermatological and cardiovascular manifestations. with right facial microsomia was evident. Hypoplasia of the right ala Mutations in the ATP binding cassette transporter gene (ABCC6) have nasi and posterior rotation of the right ear were noted. She had right- been identified and most familial cases show autosomal recessive sided radial hypoplasia, hypoplastic right thumb, bilateral club feet and inheritance. Autosomal dominant (AD) inheritance is rare. Plomp et overriding toes. Right side of the body appeared hyperpigmented as al (Am J Med Genet 2004;126A:403-412) found only 3 families with compared to the other side. A systolic murmur of 2nd degree was pres- definite PXE in 2 successive generations and no families with definite ent and echocardiography revealed ventricular septal defect, patent PXE in 3 or more generations. ductus arteriosus and pulmonary hypertension. Cranial MRI showed We report a large, four-generation family showing typical skin signs of mega cisterna magna. The karyotype was 47,XX,+18. The patient rep- PXE and evidence of a major vascular phenotype with cardiac com- resents an interesting presentation of trisomy 18, as radial aplasia and plications, strokes and claudication. However, the ocular phenotype other preaxial limb deficiencies are seen rarely in patients with trisomy appears to be absent, and ABCC6 screening in one affected individual 18. did not identify a pathogenic mutation. Linkage analysis at the ABCC6 locus is planned for this family, with the possibility of progressing to P0230. Establishment of Rare Disease Services in the West genome-wide scanning. Midlands: Translation of Research into Routine Molecular This family has >60 individuals of whom 15 are believed to be affected. Diagnosis. Fifty-three individuals are available for study, of whom 10 are affected. P. K. Rehal, J. Forsyth, E. Perrot, F. Macdonald; Clinical evaluation has been completed for 17 individuals, of whom West Midlands Regional Genetics Services, Birmingham, United Kingdom. eight are affected. Cutaneous signs were present in all affected indi- The West Midlands Regional Genetics laboratory has recently set up viduals and elastorrhexia was confirmed on lesional skin biopsy in one. routine services for a number or rare genetic disorders. These include Most affected individuals have suffered cardiovascular complications Wolfram syndrome (DIDMOAD), Combined Pituitary Hormone De- but there is no evidence of angioid streaks in these cases. ficiency (CPHD), Sotos syndrome, Alstrom syndrome and CHARGE The evidence for AD inheritance in this family is overwhelming. They syndrome. This is mainly due to the establishment of local clinical may represent a variant of PXE without an ocular phenotype, and are expertise within these medical sub-specialities which has driven re- likely to provide evidence for genetic heterogeneity in this condition. search into these areas. Furthermore, guidelines set out by the UK De- partment of Health with regard to test rationalization, reporting times P0228. Association of PSORS1 genes with psoriasis in Russian and increased automation have resulted in the production of a very populations successful rapid high-throughput screening strategy, which is now ap- E. Galimova, V. Akhmetova, E. Khusnutdinova; plied as a model for many new disorders within this laboratory. Institute of Biochemistry ang Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Acad- The recent identification of genes involved in Micro syndrome, ARC emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. syndrome and Infantile Neuroaxonal Dystrophy by the closely linked Background: Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory dermatosis affecting Medical Genetics Department has resulted in several requests for pre- approximately 0,3-5% world-wide. Numerous population-, family- and natal diagnosis in advance of the establishment of a routine diagnostic twin-based studies point to a very strong genetic component of this dis- service.Results from interesting cases will be discussed together with ease. Knowledge of the genetic factors leading to this disease will lead the challenges faced in the provision of rare disease services. to an understanding of the genetic, immune and pathogenetic aspects of psoriasis. So far 9 psoriasis susceptibility loci have been identified Clinical genetics  P0231. Renin-angiotensin system gene polymorphisms and MLPA and methylation analysis of the promoter, in cooperation with arterial hypertension in children. other oncological centres a population study to verify the causality of S. V. Kuzmina1, M. A. Bogdanova2, A. N. Voitovich2, O. A. Mutafyan1, V. I. Lari- the found mutations. onova2; 1St.Petersburg State Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, Saint-Peters- P0233. Determination of direction of skewing demonstrates burg, Russian Federation, 2St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, effect of X chromosome inactivation on phenotype of Rett Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. syndrome associated with mutation in the X chromosome gene, The I/D polymorphism of the angiotensin converting enzyme gene MECP2 (ACE), the M235T polymorphism of the angiotensinogen gene(AGT), H. Archer1, J. Evans1, H. Leonard2, L. Colvin2, D. Ravine2, J. Christodoulou3, S. and the A1166C polymorphism of the angiotensin II type 1 receptor Williamson3, T. Charman4, M. Bailey5, J. Sampson1, N. de Klerk2, A. Clarke1; gene (AGTR1) were identified in 85 children with arterial hypertension 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2University of Western Australia, (aged 7-17), 146 controls (aged 7-17). Perth, Australia, 3University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 4University College Arterial hypertension was defined as systolic/diastolic blood pressure London, London, United Kingdom, 5University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United measurements higher than 95 age-gender-height percentile of the ad- Kingdom. opted reference values. Previous attempts to demonstrate a genotype-phenotype correlation DNA was extracted from blood samples according to standard proto- among patients with Rett syndrome (RTT) have shown some effect of cols and analyzed by the PCR technique. the type of mutation (e.g. nonsense or frameshift versus missense) on Table 1 shows the genotype distribution and allele frequency in two severity of phenotype. It has been clear that the pattern of X chromo- groups. The distribution of ACE genotypes and allele frequency did some inactivation has been important - as with the recognition of some not differ significantly between patients with arterial hypertension and clinically unaffected mutation carriers with highly skewed XCI - but it control subjects. The frequency of the AGT TT genotype and T al- has been difficult to demonstrate the effect of XCI in lymphocytes on lele were significantly higher in hypertensive patients than in controls. the severity of phenotype among affected individuals because only the There were significant increase in the CC genotype frequency and C extent of skewing but not its direction was known. This led us to exam- allele of AGTR1 in children with arterial hypertension compared with ine the relationship between XCI in lymphocytes and disease sever- control subjects. ity in a group of UK and Australian patients in whom the direction as These results suggest an association of the M235T polymorphism well as degree of skewing of XCI could be determined. Although lim- AGT and A1166C polymorphism AGTR1 with essential hypertension ited by lack of informativeness for SNPs within the MECP2 gene, we in children. have been able to show that the clinical severity in RTT patients with Table1. The allelic and genotypic frequencies of the renin-angiotensin a p.R168X or p.T158M mutation is statistically related to the direction system polymorphisms in hypertensive and control subjects. and degree of skewing of XCI in lymphocytes but that this is not likely ACE Hypertensive (n=85) Control (n=146) p to be helpful in establishing the prognosis in an individual case. II 24 (28,2%) 44 (30,2%) ID 41 (48,2%) 72 (49,3%) 0,861 P0234. Novel mutation in the cellular retinaldehyde-binding DD 20 (23,6%) 30 (20,5%) protein gene RLBP1 associated with severe juvenile flecked I 89 (52,3%) 160 (54,8%) retinal dystrophy D 81 (47,7%) 132 (45,2%) 0,681 B. Krabichler1, I. Baldissera2, E. Schmid2, G. Haznedaroğlu3, G. Utermann1, A. AGT Hypertensive (n=85) Control (n=96) Janecke1; MM 16 (18,8%) 52 (54,2%) 1Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Medi- TM 41 (48,2%) 37 (38,5%) 0,001 cal University, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Medical Uni- TT 28 (33%) 7 (7,3%) versity, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Eye Department, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey. M 73 (42%) 141 (73,4%) Retinitis punctata albescens (RPA) is a rare form of autosomal reces- T 97 (58%) 51 (26,6%) 0,001 AGTR1 Hypertensive (n=85) Control (n=56) sive (and rarely dominant) retinal dystrophy characterized by early- AA 21 (24,7%) 31 (55,4%) onset severe night blindness, and aggregation of irregular white flecks AC 39 (45,9%) 19 (33,9%) 0,001 throughout the fundus. RPA is progressive and evolves to generalized CC 25 (29,4%) 6 (10,7%) atrophy of the retina. A 81 (47,6%) 81 (72,3%) A distantly similar but distinct clinical entity, Fundus albipunctatus (FA) 0,001 C 89 (52,4%) 31 (27,7%) is also characterized by white dots of the fundus but is apparently a rare form of stationary night blindness. RPA is caused mostly by muta- P0232. Molecular genetic analysis of Rb1 gene - differentiation tions in the cellular retinaldehyde-binding protein (RLBP1), and occa- of hereditary and non-hereditary forms of retinoblastoma sionally in rhodopsin (RHO), retinal degeneration gene (slow) (RDS), R. Gaillyová, A. Kratochvílová, I. Valášková, T. Kepák, J. Štěrba, R. Autrata; and retinol dehydrogenase 5 (RDH5). Three patients from a consan- University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. guineous family displaying a flecked retinal dystrophy were examined Retinoblastoma is an uncommon malignant tumour of the eye in chil- for best-corrected visual acuity, and by visual field and color-vision dren( 1:18,000 - 30,000 in live born). It is a model example of ge- testing, electroretinography, dilated fundus examination, and fundus netic disposition for tumour disorder. The fundamental part in genesis photography. We analyzed RLBP1, RDH5 and RHO by both linkage of retinoblastoma represents the tumour suppressor gene Rb1. The analysis and direct sequencing in this family. While an initial clinical presence of at least one functional alela of the gene leads to normal diagnosis of FA was made in these patients, follow-up investigations production of protein pRB. The exact analysis of Rb1 gene in children revealed a significant progression of the disorder within a few years, with retinoblastoma influences the way of treatment received by the which let to a reclassification of RPA. RDH5 and RHO sequencing patients with retinoblastoma and their families. The hereditary form of did not reveal any variants, but in RLBP1 we identified a novel homo- retinoblastoma is in about half of the patients and is due to mutations zygous 12-bp in-frame deletion (c.666-677del12). We conclude that in Rb1 gene. The differentiation of hereditary and non-hereditary forms mutation analysis of RLBP1 is suited to help differentiate between FA has a fundamental influence on the treatment, prognosis and genetic and RPA, which is important for counselling of concerned families, and counselling in the family. We perform an analysis of Rb1 gene in all RLBP1 is a major gene for RPA. children with retinoblastoma. With conventional cytogenetics we can detect 8% of changes in Rb1 P0235. The first report of two cases of spino cerebellar ataxia gene, with FISH 10%, with Southern blot hybridisation 16%, with PCR (SCA) in Hamadan province, Iran and sequence analysis about 75%. At University Hospital Brno we use E. Ahmad, M. S. Fallah, F. Ostadi, M. Shahghadam; a combination of PCR amplification of all 27 exons of Rb1 gene and Kowsar Medical genetics Center, Hmedan, Islamic Republic of Iran. subsequent sequence analysis in DNA from peripheral blood. Up to Two cases with ataxia and gait disturbance with first diagnosis as MS the present time we have found a mutation in Rb1gene in 6 patients was referred to our Genetic counseling clinic in Hamadan, Explained with hereditary form of retinoblastoma and in one foetus. as below: In the future we will introduce RNA and subsequent DNA analysis, Case 1: Clinical genetics  A 29 years old man with problem in walking and diagnosis of ataxia arthria, motor, cognitive and psychiatric abnormalities. which was began from 5 years before with alternating dizziness, atax- In this study, we describe a SCA patient from Southern Italy with atax- ia, tremor, vision disturbance and chocking. ia, pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs and peripheral neuropathy. Normal mental state, cranial nerve, autonomic function, motor exam We investigated this patient for CAG repeat expansions in the genes of in inspection with mild hypotonia and normal sensory were seen in the spinocerebellar ataxias SCA1, SCA2, SCA3 SCA6, SCA7, SCA8, examination. SCA12, SCA17 and DRPLA. In ophthalmologic exam all was normal but nystagmous with low speed Genomic DNA was amplified with fluorescent primers spanning the and range. SCA expansions. PCR products were separated onto a capillary se- All cerebellar exam was disturbed including, ataxic gait, scanning quencer (3130XL genetic analyzer-Applied Biosystems) and the length speech, intention tremor, hyperreflexia, dysphagia, dysmetria and dys- of specific SCA fragments was calculated referring to a size standard diadokinesis. Brain MRI was normal. and to related SCA controls. We identified an abnormal CAG/CAA re- There was history of such a problem in his mother, his mother’s 3 peat expansion of 46/47 size, within the TBP gene, confirmed by direct sibling and also grandfather which was presented in higher age and in sequencing of the expanded SCA17 alleles showing the following struc- their children in lower age. ture: (CAG)3 (CAA)3(CAG)9CAACAGCAA(CAG)26/27CAACAG. Case 2: This is the second case of homozygous expansion reported in a pa- A 36 years old man with progressive ataxia and tremor which was be- tient with SCA17. Currently, genetic and clinical analysis of other fam- gan from 6 years before with one apparently normal child, normal men- ily members are ongoing to evaluate the genotype-phenotype correla- tal state, disturbed cerebellar exam including progressive ataxic gait, tion in this family. dysartheria, intention and postural tremor, dysmetria, dysdiadokinesis was seen in exam. Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy. P0238. Identification of genomic dosage variation of CNTNAP2 There was some history of such a problem in his father, sib line and in patients with schizophrenia and epilepsy also in pedigree T. Vrijenhoek; Diagnosis: Radboud University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Extracted DNA was investigated for the GAA expansion repeat in the Contactin-associated protein-like 2 (Caspr2) clusters voltage-gated FRDA gene and SCA types including 1,2,3,6,7. potassium channels (K v1.1) at the nodes of Ranvier and is encoded The two probands showed abnormal pattern for SCA 7 and SCA 2 by CNTNAP2 - the largest gene in the human genome. Homozygous respectively. stop mutations in exon 22 of this gene were recently identified in Old Order Amish children with cortical dysplasia, focal epilepsy, relative P0236. Juvenile and young adults SCA1 patients in Poland - macrocephaly, and diminished deep-tendon reflexes. We identified genetic and clinical features. deletions affecting (part of) CNTNAP2 in three patients by routine E. Zdzienicka, M. Rakowicz, R. Rola, A. Sulek-Piatkowska, T. Jakubowska, W. chromosome analysis and microarray-based genomic copy number Szirkowiec, R. Poniatowska, U. Zalewska, J. Zaremba, E. Bertrand; analysis methods. Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland. A deletion covering the chromosomal region 7q34-7q36.1 was re- Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is the most common form of vealed in one severely mentally retarded epilepsy patient by routine ADCA in Poland. The phenotype and age at disease onset are highly chromosome analysis, and shown to be de novo by Fluorescent In- variable. The aim of the study was to investigate the influence of the Situ Hybridisation (FISH) analysis. The deletion was 10.7 Mb in size, transmission pattern on genetic and clinical features of juvenile SCA1 affecting 58 genes including CNTNAP2. A second deletion was identi- patients. fied by array-based Comparative Genomic Hybridisation (arrayCGH) Methods: 125 SCA1 patients from 101 families were analysed retro- in a patient suffering from both epilepsy and schizophrenia. This dele- spectively. The mean age at onset was 35.6 +/- 9.6 and the average tion of 1.5 Mb was confirmed by Multiplex Logation-dependent Probe CAG repeats in affected family members was 50.7 +/- 5.5, ranging Amplification (MLPA), and also affected CNTNAP2. To study the link from 42 to 72. Paternal and maternal transmission was equal. In 21 between schizophrenia and CNTNAP2 further, we developed a target- SCA1 families with 25 juvenile patients, the relation of clinical severity, ed Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) array for this gene and its sex, CAG repeats number and age at disease onset of transmitting surrounding genomic region. Out of 315 patients and an equal number parents was analysed. The International Cooperative Ataxia Rating of controls, we identified a deletion in intron 3 of CNTNAP2 in a third Scale (ICARS), electrophysiological and psychological examinations schizophrenic patient, which also has a history of epilepsy. were compared in regard to transmission pattern. Together these results confirm that CNTNAP2 is associated with epi- Results: In 14 cases with paternal and in 11 patients with maternal lepsy, but they also show that genomic rearrangements resulting in transmission the mean age at onset 20.5 +/-3.6 y. (range 12 - 25 y.), haploinsufficiency of CNTNAP2 may lead to a more complex pheno- disease duration 6.3 +/-3.7 y. and the CAG repeats number, mean type that also includes schizophrenia. 58.0 +/- 5.7 were not different. However, mean age at onset of fathers was 33.0 y. and of mothers 29.1y. Severity of non-cerebellar signs and P0239. A Case of Seckel Syndrome conceived by Assisted ataxia were more pronounced in patients with paternal than with ma- Reproductive Technology ternal transmission: ICARS 34.8 and 32.8, Intelligence Quotient 92.9 N. Andıran1, E. Tuncbilek2, E. Odemıs1, D. Aktas2; and 107, respectively. 1Fatih University, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe Univer- Conclusions: In our SCA1 patients the anticipation was more promi- sity School of Medicine, Department of Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. nent in subjects with paternal than with maternal transmission. Seckel syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized Supported by Polish Ministry of Science grant 3PO5B 019 24, partly by by severe pre- and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, mental EUROSCA/LSHM-CT-2004-503304. retardation and typical facial appearance. It has also been called “bird- headed dwarfism”. Related with Seckel syndrome, three loci have been P0237. A case of spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) mapped and to date the only causative mutation has been observed associated with homozygous 46/47 repeats of the TBP gene as a hypomorphic mutation in Ataxia telengiectasia and Rad3-related P. Tarantino1, E. V. De Marco1, E. Pisano2, F. Annesi1, F. E. Rocca1, D. Civitelli1, (ATR) gene. Although assisted reproductive technologies (ART) in- I. C. Cirò Candiano1, S. Carrideo1, G. Provenzano1, V. Greco1, G. Squillace1, M. cluding in vitro fertilization (IVF) and intracytoplasmic sperm injection Caracciolo1, G. Annesi1; (ICSI) are generally considered safe, some studies have suggested an 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Department of excess occurrence of birth defects and low birth-weight. Recently, vari- Neurology Hospital Cosenza, Cosenza, Italy. ous syndromes involving epigenetic alterations have been reported to Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) is a dominant progressive occur in individuals following ART. Here we report a patient with Seckel neurodegenerative disorder, caused by a triplet repeat expansion Syndrome conceived by ICSI. To the best of our knowledge, Seckel within the TATA-binding protein gene (TBP); normal expansions range syndrome has not been reported in patients conceived by ART and we from 29 to 42 repeats, whereas abnormal expansions range from 43 think that epigenetic mechanisms may be related with this syndrome to 63 repeats. A reduced penetrance is associated to 43-48 repeats. in our patient. The disease is characterized by progressive limb and gait ataxia, dys-Clinical genetics  P0240. Extended pedigree with multiple cases of XX sex reversal 3Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France, 4Laboratoire d’Ex- in the absence of SRY and of a mutation at the SOX and RSPO1 plorations Fonctionnelles, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France. loci Uniparental disomy (UPD) describes the inheritance of a chromosome S. G. Temel1, T. Gulten1, T. Yakut1, H. Saglam2, N. Kilic3, E. Bausch4, W. Jin4, pair from only one parent. This anomaly can result in human diseases M. Leipoldt4, O. Radi5, G. Camerino5, G. Scherer4; when it affects chromosomes with imprinted genes. Silver-Russell syn- 1Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics Department, BUR- drome (SRS) and myoclonus dystonia syndrome (MDS) can be both SA, Turkey, 2Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Pediatric Endocrinology related to imprinting defects on chromosome 7. Approximately 10% of Department, BURSA, Turkey, 3Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Pediatric SRS have a maternal UPD7, and 20% of MDS have a mutation on the Surgery Department, BURSA, Turkey, 4Institute of Human Genetics and Anthro- paternal allele of the maternally imprinted gene epsilon sarcoglycan pology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 5Istituto di Biologia Generale (SGCE) located on 7q21.3. e Genetica Medica, Universita di Pavia, Pavia, Italy. We report here on a 36 six-year-old man with both SRS and MDS. It is well established that testicular differentiation of the human embry- His features consistent with SRS included severe intrauterine and onic gonad depends on the action of the Y-chromosomal gene SRY. postnatal growth retardation with normal OFC, feeding difficulties in However, exceptional cases such as SRY-negative cases of 46,XX infancy, triangular face, prominent forehead, prominent low-set pos- testicular disorder of sexual development (DSD) (previously known as teriorly rotated ears, micrognathia and brachydactily. At the age of 17, 46,XX males) and of 46,XX ovotesticular DSD (previously known as he developed movement disorder with progressive worsening. On 46,XX true hermaphrodites) document that testicular tissue can de- examination, he had shock-like myoclonic jerks of upper limbs, trunk velop in the absence of the SRY gene. These SRY-negative XX sex and face. In addition he had mild cervicofacial dystonia with retrocollis reversal cases are very rare and usually sporadic, but a few familial and increased blinking. Neurophysiological study showed sub-cortical cases have been reported. We present a large, consanguineous fam- myoclonus. ily with nine affected individuals with phenotypes ranging from 46,XX Mutation screening of SGCE was negative. Karyotype showed that testicular DSD to 46,XX ovotesticular DSD, with predominance of male 75% of cells had a supernumerary small ring chromosome which hy- characteristics. Absence of SRY in peripheral blood was documented bridized with the chromosome 7 centromeric probe. Supernumerary by fluoresence in situ hybridization (FISH) and PCR analysis in all nine marker chromosomes are known to be associated with UPD, there- affected individuals, and by FISH analysis on gonadal sections with fore, we would like to propose that our patient carry an UPD7(mat) testicular tissue in four affected individuals. By quantitative PCR, a that could explain both SRS and MDS. Validation of this hypothesis is duplication of the SOX9 gene was excluded. In addition, as linkage under process. analysis showed that the nine affected members of the family do not share a common SOX9 haplotype, any mutation at the SOX9 locus P0243. Angulated Femurs and the Skeletal Dysplasias: could be ruled out. Furthermore, no mutation within the RSPO1 gene Experience of the International Skeletal Dysplasia Registry that was recently implicated in XX sex reversal was found by sequence (1988-2006) analysis. Together, these findings implicate a mutation at a sex-deter- Y. Alanay1,2, D. Krakow2,3, D. Rimoin2,4, R. Lachman2,5; mining locus other than SRY, SOX9 and RSPO1 as the cause for the 1Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 2Medical Genet- XX sex reversal trait in this family. ics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 3Departments of Human Genetics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen P0241. Unique phenotype associated with SHOX gene deletion School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Human Genet- M. D. Schwab1,2, R. Wallerstein1,2, R. Wolf1, M. Liebling3; ics, Internal Medicine, Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 1Genetics Service, Department of Pediatrics, Hackensack University Medical Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5Departments of Pediatrics and Radiological Center, Hackensack, NJ, United States, 2Center for Human and Molecular Sciences David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United Genetics, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, United States, States. 3Department of Radiology, Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, Angulated or bent femur (isolated or associated with other long bone NJ, United States. bowing) in the fetus or newborn is relatively common when evaluat- SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing) gene haploinsufficien- ing patients with skeletal dysplasias. To determine the extent and het- cy has been implicated in Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and erogeneity of disorders associated with angulated or bent femurs, we SHOX-related short stature, while SHOX nullizygosity is associated analyzed cases in the radiographic database (1998-2006) of the In- with Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD). The classic clinical findings ternational Skeletal Dysplasia Registry (ISDR) and determined which in SHOX-related disorders include short stature, Madelung deformity established skeletal dysplasias and genetic syndromes are associated and mesomelia. We present a 10-month old male with short stature, wtih this finding. The results show that more than 40 distinct disorders height of 62 cm. (< -2 SD), arm span/height ratio of 0.95, with promi- with varying frequency (very rare to more commonly-occuring disor- nent forehead, rhizomelic shortening of the extremities, bowing of the ders) can be associated with bowed/bent/angulated femurs. Sixty-six lower extremities, increased soft tissue folds and lordosis of the back. percent of the cases with angulated femurs belonged to three well de- The skeletal survey revealed decreased interpedicular distances of the scribed groups of disorders; campomelic disorders (24.4 %), thana- lower lumbar vertebrae, squaring of the iliac bones, small sciatic notch- tophoric dysplasia (23.9 %) and finally osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) es and flattened acetabular angles; shortening of the tubular bones (18.1 %). With specific emphasis on these, this cross-sectional cohort especially proximally with metaphyseal flaring; and an increased skull provides discussion of data on other rare disorders associated with an- size. These findings were clinically and radiographically consistent gulated femurs and the importance of the finding relative to its occur- with achondroplasia. Molecular analyses for FGFR3 1138G>A and rence within a diagnostic group. This study aims to provide differential 1138G>C mutations, which account for over 99% of individuals with diagnosis of entities to be considered when a fetus or newborn is found achondroplasia, were negative. Similarly, analysis for hypochondro- to have congenital bowing/angulation of the femur. plasia, specifically FGFR3, N540K mutation was also negative. How- ever, analysis of the SHOX gene coding region showed a whole gene P0244. Identification of SLC26A4 gene mutations in Iranian deletion. To our knowledge, the above clinical and radiographic find- Families with hereditary Hearing Impairment ings have not been described as part of SHOX gene deletion/mutation M. Mohseni1, K. Kahrizi1, F. Azizi2, C. Nishimura3, N. Bazazzadegan1, A. Deh- syndromes in the literature. This case report describes a unique phe- ghani1, M. Seifati1, M. Malekpour1, M. Taghdiri1, P. Jamali1, A. Daneshi4, R. J. H. notypic expression of SHOX gene deletion and indicates a need for Smith3, H. Najmabadi1; further investigation of the SHOX gene and its modifiers. 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Endocrine Research Center , P0242. Should Silver-Russell patients with UPD7(mat) develop Taleghani hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology myoclonic dystonia ? Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, B. Keren1, M. F. Portnoi2, E. Roze3, E. Guettard3, S. Rossignol4, P. Charles1, M. University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 4Research Center of Ear, Nose, Vidailhet3, D. Héron1; Throat, and Head and Neck Surgery, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Département de Génétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, Mutations in the SLC26A4 gene in DFNB4 locus is responsible for France, 2Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France, syndromic (Pendred syndrome) and non-syndromic hereditary hear-Clinical genetics  ing loss (HHL). In many populations mutations in this gene have been The special point in this family is the existence of several cases of SMA reported as a second cause of HHL. We investigated the prevalence of type 1 due to multiple consanguinous marriages in three consecutive SLC26A4 mutations in our HHL consanguineous families. After com- generations, in the pedigree. pleting clinical investigation the signed consent form was taken from each family. We included 80 families with two or more affected individ- P0247. Clinical forms of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome and their uals, who have been referred to GRC. All families who had previously relation to mutations in the DHCR gene _ classification based been tested negative for the DFNB1 locus, were considered as can- on a group of 50 Polish patients didates for homozygosity mapping using STR (Short tandem repeat)s A. Jezela-Stanek1, E. Małunowicz2, E. Ciara1, E. Popowska1, M. Piotrowicz3, M. linked to DFNB4 locus. Families localized to this region were subjected Gajdulewicz1, E. Kostyk4, K. Spodar1, A. Kruczek4, A. Pyrkosz5, E. Obersztyn6, to complete DNA sequencing for SLC26A4 gene. Ten out of eighty D. Wolnik-Brzozowska7, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; families were mapped to DFNB4. Sequence analysis of ten linked 1Dept. Of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, families revealed eight mutations in seven families (T420I, 1197delT, Poland, 2Dept. of Laboratory Diagnostics, The Children’s Memorial Health In- G334Y, R409H, T721M, R79X, S448L, L445W) and stitute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Dept. of Medical Genetics, Polish Mother’s Memorial The T420I , G334V and R79X were novel mutations. We have been Hospital - Research Institute, Łódź, Poland, 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, Uni- able to localize total of 10 families (12.5%) from non-DFNB1 families versity Children’s Hospital, Kraków, Poland, 5Department of General, Molecular to the DFNB4 locus. We detected in all ten families some degrees of Biology and Genetics, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 6Dept. diffuse or nodular goiter, eight out of 10 families showed normal thyroid of Medical Genetics, National Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, function and in six of ten families we found positive prechlorate dis- 7Dept. of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Poznań, Poland. charge test. All of affected had normal temporal bone scan. Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a metabolic malformation dis- This investigation, demonstrated that the SLC26A4 gene mutation is order, caused by impaired activity of 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase, the most prevalent syndromic hereditary hearing loss in Iran.This re- the last enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis. Its best known dysmorphic sult is in accordance with reports from other countries. features include: microcephaly, ptosis, short and up-turned nose, 2/3 Key words:, SLC26A4, hearing loss,pendred toe syndactyly, and external male genital malformations. Neverthe- less, as the spectrum of observed features is very broad, a question P0245. Molecular analysis of SMN1 gene common deletions in about phenotype-genotype correlations still emerges. some Iranian Spinal muscular Atrophy patients Poland represents a unique distribution of mutations in the DHCR7 M. T. Akbari1,2, s. zare1,3, f. mahjoubi1,4; gene. Moreover, one of them is thought to be spreading in our country, 1Akbari Medical Genetic labaratory, No.98, Taleghani Street, Tehran, Is- hence our effort to delineate the clinical variability of SLOS in relation lamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics,Tarbiat Modares to the causative molecular defect. University,Al-Ahmad Expressway, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic The study was based on a group of 50 patients with proven diagnosis Azad Unversity Science and Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic Republic of (13 f and 27 m), classified into 3 severity forms: mild (13 cases), mod- Iran, 4National Research Center for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Teh- erate/classical (20 cases) and severe (17 cases). We analyzed: facial ran, Islamic Republic of Iran. dysmorphy, congenital malformations (expressed as a Severity Score: Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neuromus- 0 - 100 points), biochemical chromatographic data (cholesterol and 7-, cular disorder caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene, mainly intra- 8DHC) and molecular data (mutations in DHCR7 gene). genic deletions, the commonest of which are deletion in exons 7 and While chromatographic data shown its significant correlation with clini- 8. The disorder is subdivided into three clinical groups (type I - III). cal forms of SLOS, the genotype-phenotype correlation was no so The molecular basis for variation in clinical manifestation depends on clear and we found as below: the copy number of SMN2 gene in each patient. In this study we pres- Class of Number of Severity Score Congenital anomalies ent fifteen families who had at least one live affected SMA patient, mutation patients selected for molecular characterization. They fulfilled criteria for inclu- microcephaly, heart and renal defect, polidac- 0/0 3 55 (n=2), 60 tyly, abnormal male external genitals; CNS sion by demonstration of the characteristic clinical features of SMA - dilated ventricles (1) phenotype. These clinical diagnoses were corroborated with EMG and microcephaly (13); heart defect (11); cleft pal- 20, 30 (n=3), NCV investigations as well as CPK measurement for the majority of 35 (n=2), 40, ate (6); renal anomaly (5); GI tract defect (4); 0/TM7 15 CNS malformation (3); cataract (1); polidactyly the cases. The patients DNA samples were prepared from whole blood 50, 55 (n=4), 60 (10); syndactyly other than 2/3 toe (1); abnor- by standard salting out method. Characterization of deletions in exons (n=2), 65 mal external genitals: male (9/11), female (2/4) 7 and 8 of SMN 1 gene was carried out by utilizing a pair of mis- microcephaly, hart defect, 2/3 and 4/5 toe 0/4L 3 40, 50, 65 syndactyly, cleft palate, enlarged clitoris (2/2) matched primers which differentiate between SMN1 and SMN2 genes. microcephaly, cleft palate, hart defect, polidac- We found deletion in seven patients, about 50%. Five patients had 0/TM3 3 40, 55, 60 tyly, abnormal male external genitals both exons 7 and 8 deleted and two patients had just exon 7 deletion. microcephaly, abnormal male external genitals 20 (n=2), 30 Although the present sample size is small, it may be concluded that 0/TM8 5 (n=2), 40 (4); pyloric stenosis (2); cleft palate, heart defect, cataract (1) the observed deletions has lower frequency compared to European TM1/CT 2 5, 5 microcephaly, slight 2/3 toe syndactyly populations which is 95%. Therefore other SMN1 gene defects should microcephaly, cryptorchidism, hypospadias (2); be looked in Iranian patients. TM7/1L 2 10, 15 2/3 toe syndactyly (1) microcephaly, cleft palate (2); heart and renal P0246. Case study: “A family with several cases of SMA type 1 TM7/TM7 3 15, 20, 30 defect, cryptorchidism, CNS - dilated ventri- cles (1) due to multiple consanguinous marriages in three consecutive generations, in the pedigree.” We hope that our study will give new insights into the genetics of Smith-Lemli-Opitz S. Akbaroghli1,2, M. Houshmand3, T. Majidizadeh3; syndrome. 1Deputy for Cultural Affairs and Prevention of Welfare Organization, Tehran, This work was supported in part by grants 2P05E06727 and PBZ-KBN 122/P05/01- Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dr. Susan Akbaroghli Genetic Counselling Center, 10. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Re- public of Iran. P0248. Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome - novel mutation with a mild The propand is a three months old floppy boy who is the result of third phenotype degree consanguinous marriage (the first sibling). M. Krajewska-Walasek1, L. Korniszewski2, E. Ciara1, E. Malunowicz1, A. Jez- At birth his mother had hard NVD and the baby was born with cyano- ela-Stanek1, M. Gajdulewicz1, K. Spodar1, E. Popowska1, A. Materna-Kiryluk3, sis. K. H. Chrzanowska1, A. Latos-Bielenska3; He had apnea and poor feeding for the first days of his life. 1The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Genetic Counsel- He was hospitalized for 12 days. ling Unit, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, His grandparents from both sides have third degree relationships. 3University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. He has the typical clinical features and characteristics of SMA type Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive disor- 1.His molecular test for SMA type 1was positive and he has deletion of der of cholesterol biosynthesis, caused by mutations in DHCR7gene. exons 7 & 8 of SMN1 gene. Although its phenotype is well characterized, SLOS is recognized Clinical genetics 0 rarely with one of the reasons being underdiagnosis of mild variants. karyotype, subtelomeric analysis (MLPA), and FISH studies (22q11.2, Our extensive 3-year prospective study (based on the structure of the 11p15) showed no anomaly. Molecular analysis for Beckwith-Wiede- Polish Register of Birth Defects) aimed at identifying all new cases of mann syndrome was also normal. This new observation of a patient SLOS in Poland allowed us to detect a four year old boy with a mild with delayed speech development combined with facial asymmetry phenotype of SLOS, in whom molecular study of DHCR7 gene dem- and transverse earlobe creases confirms the existence of this new onstrated a novel mutation. syndrome. Transverse earlobe creases are a cardinal feature which He was born at 41 weeks of gestation with birth weight 3070 g, OFC - is easily found on physical examination. To date, inheritance is not 33,5 cm. Infancy was marked by poor weight gain and recurrent pneu- defined. monia. He walked at 24 months. At the age of diagnosis he was able to communicate with only few P0251. Analysis of the SMN and NAIP genes in Brazilian Spinal words and had psychomotor hyperactivity. Weight was ~ 10 centile, Muscular Atrophy Patients length > 50 centile and OFC < 3 centile. On physical examination sub- V. G. Ramos1, A. P. Araújo2, P. H. Cabello1; tle dysmorphic features were noted: bilateral epicanthal folds, blepha- 1Oswaldo Cruz Institute - IOC (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Instituto de roptosis, short nose with anteverted nares. There was unilateral partial Puericultura e Pediatria Martagão Gesteira da Universidade Federal do Rio de 2nd and 3rd toe syndactyly and - within external genitalia - hypospadias Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. and cryptorchidism. CT of the head revealed hypoplasia of corpus cal- Spinal muscular atrophies (SMAs) are inherited motor neuron degen- losum. erative disorders that cause progressive muscular weakness, with Laboratory tests confirmed the clinical diagnosis of SLOS. We found high mortality. Three types of SMA were studied, type I, which is the elevated serum 7-dehydrocholesterol and two missense mutations of most severe form, type II or intermediate form, and type III. There are the DHCR7 gene: a novel one mutation c.655T>G (p.Y219D) and a two genes linked to SMA: the survival motor neuron (SMN) and neu- previously described mutation: c.461C>T (p.T154M), responsible in a ronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP). This work has the objective compound heterozygous state for a mild form of SLOS. of showing it is possible to make an efficient molecular diagnosis of The work was supported by grant PBZ-KBN-122/P05/01-10. the SMAs by studying genotypic composition of SMN and NAIP genes in individuals suspected clinically as SMA patients. Nested PCR was P0249. Mutation spectrum and clinical features of SPG4 HSP used for both exons 7 and 8 of SMN gene, frequently deleted in SMA C. Depienne1,2, E. Fedirko2, B. Bricka2, E. Denis2, S. Forlani1, A. Brice1,2, A. patients, followed by enzymatic digestion and 12% poliacrilamide gel Durr1,2; electrophoresis. For exons 5 and 6 of NAIP gene, PCR was performed 1INSERM U679, Paris, France, 2Departement de genetique, cytogenetique et followed by 2% agarose gel. In all groups but SMA patients, no dele- embryologie, Paris, France. tions were observed neither in exons 7 and 8 of SMN gene, nor in Mutations in SPAST/SPG4, the gene encoding spastin, are the most exons 5 and 6 of NAIP gene. This study showed a high frequency frequent cause of autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia of deletions in SMA patients (88%), and 32% in NAIP gene. It was (AD-HSP). In the context of a systematic routine diagnosis, we inves- not possible to avoid SMA diagnosis, even in those patients without tigated the spectrum of SPG4 mutations and the associated clinical deletions. DNA study represents an efficient confirmatory test for SMA phenotypes. A large series of 543 patients with either pure or complex patients, demanding a non-invasive sample. spastic paraplegia, was screneed by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and/or multiplex ligation-dependent P0252. A rare autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia: Spondylo- probe amplification (MLPA). We identified 164 (30%) positive families, meta-epiphyseal dysplasia, short limb- abnormal calcification 133 (25%) of which have substitutions or small deletions/insertions type detected by DHPLC and 31 (6%) which have larger exonic deletions B. Tüysüz, S. Başaran Yılmaz; ranging from one exon to the whole gene, detected by MLPA. The Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Medical Genetics, İstanbul, great majority of the mutations were associated with pure HSP in the Turkey. families. However, few families also showed additional features includ- A boy 1-month-old boy was referred to our department because of ing cognitive impairment, dementia, mental retardation, peripheral considered achondroplasia on prenatal USG. The parents are first neuropathy or extra-pyramidal signs. A high proportion of mutations, cousins. He had one healthy older brother. His weigth and heigth were especially of missense type, were found in sporadic patients. Pheno- 3. centile and his head circumference was between 2 and 50 cen- type-genotype correlation showed reduced and age-dependant pen- tile. Clinical findings consist on short limbs with small hands, narrow etrance, and we also identified a de novo mutation associated with mo- chest, flat face, hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge with wide nostils, saicism in one patient. Our findings support the hypothesis of several hypertelorism, microretrognathia and wide open anterior fontanelle mechanisms underlying the penetrance and age at onset variability (6X5 cm). Radiological investigations showed severe platyspondyly, including genetic modifiers. very short ribs, short tubular bones with irregular and flared metaphy- ses, flared iliac wings with convex inferior iliac magrin. The patient was P0250. Delayed speech development with facial asymmetry and followed-up until he was 2 years old. His height is very short (61 cm) transverse earlobe creases and he had language and social development were compatible with 2 P. Sarda, L. Pinson, C. Coubes, C. Abadie, P. Blanchet; years of age but gross motor skill was delayed at that age. Re-evalu- Service de Génétique Médicale, Montpellier, France. ation of radiologic finding revealed premature calcification on costal Delayed speech is one of the most frequent features in patients with cartilages and femoral epiphyses . We diagnosed Spondylo-meta- MCA/MR phenotype. In 1993, Mehes described a Hungarian family epiphyseal dysplasia (SMED), short limb-abnormal calcification type. with three patients, a mother and her son and daughter, presenting This condition is a very rare autosomal recessive inheritance disorders delayed speech development, facial asymmetry, strabismus and trans- characreristic by platyspondyly, short limbs with short hands, short verse earlobe creases (TEC). In 2005, four new unrelated Hungarian ribs, meta-epiphyseal irregularity and cartilage calcification. Shorting children were reported with similar features. of the tubuler bones, platyspondyly, meta-epiphyseal irregularity and We describe a new patient, of Spanish and French origins, who pres- cartilage calcification are also seen in chondrodysplasia punctata, re- ents a similar phenotype. cessive type but severe platyspondyly, short hands and ribs associ- The girl was the eutrophic product of a 36 week gestation. No motor ated with SMED, short limb- abnormal calcification type. delay was observed but delayed speech marked the development of the girl. At 4 years autistic behaviour was suspected and psychiatric P0253. Mutations in TBX1 genocopy the 22q11.2 deletion and therapy was instored. The proposita began to speak at 5 years and her duplication syndromes: a new susceptibility factor for mental course was marked by mild mental retardation with anxious behaviour. retardation At 20 years, weight, height and OFC are in the normal range. The D. Heine-Suñer1, L. Torres-Juan1, X. Busquets1, M. Morla1, N. Govea1, M. Ber- patient presents facial asymmetry, narrow down-slanting palpebral fis- nues1, C. Vidal-Pou1, F. Garcia-Algas1, M. de la Fuente1, A. Perez-Granero1, M. sures, low-set ears with TEC. She has umbilical hernia and hyper- Juan2, A. Tubau2, J. Rosell1; trophic small labia. Skeletal X-rays were normal, cerebral MRI shows 1Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2Hospital Fun- abnormal signal of right putamen. Chromosome studies : metaphase Clinical genetics 1 dació Son Llatzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. [β(123)> Asn] (ACC > AAC) and the wife had Hb Ernz as above and A screen for TBX1 gene mutations identified two mutations in patients also codon 22 /24 (-AAGTTGG) → (GAA GTT GGT > G T).Based on with some features compatible with the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome our finding Hb Ernz is harmless and is not the cause of raised A2 level but with no deletions. One is a de novo missense mutation and the or low MCV or MCH levels. other is a 5’ UTR C>T change that affects a nucleotide with a remark- This is the first case of Hb Ernz reported in Iran and Second in the able trans-species conservation. Computer modelling shows that the literature. 5’UTR change is likely to affect the mRNA structure, and in vitro trans- lation experiments demonstrate that it produces a two fold increase P0256. Partial trisomy 10q in a boy due to a paternal in translation efficiency. Recently, duplications in the 22q11.2 region translocation t(7,10)(q36;q25.2) were reported in patients referred for fragile-X determination because M. S. Militaru1, R. Popp1, V. Pop1, M. Militaru1, E. Ormerod2, A. P. Trifa1; of cognitive and behavioural problems. Because the 5’UTR nucleotide 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2University of change may be a functional equivalent of a duplication of the TBX1 Oslo, Oslo, Norway. gene, we decided to screen 200 patients who had been referred for We report a 2 years and 8 months old boy with a moderate psychomotor fragile-X determination and 400 healthy control individuals. As a result, retardation and characteristic dysmorfic features.He is the first child of we found the 5’UTR mutation to be present in three patients with men- unrelated,healthy and yong parents.The pregnancy has a normal evo- tal retardation or behavioural problems and absent in control individu- lution.He was born at term by caesearian section.The infant presented: als of the same ethnic background. This observation suggests that it micropthalmia,epicanthus inversus,hypertelorism,blepharophimosis,p may be reasonable to screen for such mutation among patients with alpebral ptosis,low-set ears,congenital heart disease,undescendend unspecific cognitive deficits and we provide an easy and quick way testis and anomalies of hands(bilateral simian creases,clinodactyly of to do it with an Amplification Refractory Mutation System (ARMS) ap- the fifth finger) and feet(syndactyly).The weight and the length were at proach. To our knowledge this is the first human mutation showing that 3-rd centile correspondingly.Conventional chromosome analysis(GTG- TBX1 is a candidate to cause mental retardation associated with the banding) revealed additional material on chromosome 7q.The father 22q11.2 duplication syndrome. has a balanced translocation t(7;10)(q36;q25.2).The additional mate- rial on chromosome 7q was characterized by FISH using chromosome P0254. Association between Telomerase Complex Mutations and paints as part of chromosome 10. Autoimmune Diseases J. A. Regal, R. T. Calado, N. S. Young; P0257. Patau Syndrome - Clinical and gentical discussions over National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States. two cases Some mutations in TERT or TERC impair telomerase activity by haplo- I. V. Pop, R. A. Popp, M. S. Militaru, A. P. Trifa; insufficiency, and heterozygosity of these mutations is a risk factor for University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. acquired aplastic anemia (AA), a disease in which the hematopoietic Patau syndrome, also known as trisomy 13, represents a chromosom- tissue is the target of an autoimmune process. We investigated wheth- al disorder with an incidence of 1 case per 8,000 live births. Its clinical er loss-of-function mutations in the telomerase components TERT features consist of multiple malformations that involve the central ner- and TERC predispose their carriers to the development of other au- vous system, the internal organs, the upper and lower extremities and toimmune diseases that are associated with short telomeres. Among the cranio-facial extremity. 91 patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), 49 patients with ulcerative Our paper presents two cases (patient S.A. aged 2 months and pa- colitis (UC), and 96 patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus tient S.A. aged 20 days), which were suspected of chromosomal (IDDM), we found three novel TERT mutations; MS and UC patients aneuploidy (trisomy 13 or 18) based on clinical features. For an ac- were also found to carry a mutation that encodes TERT H412Y, which curate diagnosis, the karyotype was determined in both cases using has been described previously in AA patients. Notably, TERT H412Y the classical cytogenetic technique with a 72-hour lymphocyte culture, has only 50% the telomerase activity of wild-type TERT. The overall followed by the G-banding of the chromosome preparations. The chro- mutant allele frequency was significantly higher for patients with MS mosomal formulas obtained were 46,XX/47,XX, 13+ for patient S.A. (1.6%; Fisher’s exact test, P=0.0343) and UC (2.0%, P=0.0424) as and 47,XX, 13+ for patient P.A. In the case of patient S.A., clinical well as all patients with autoimmune disease (1.5%, P=0.0143) than features correlate very well with the chromosomal formula determined in 188 healthy controls. Additionally, the TERT A1062T-encoding poly- by karyotyping; in the case of patient P.A., however, clinical features morphism, which may be associated with reduced telomerase activity, and child evolution at the moment of diagnosis would have pleaded for was more commonly found in patients with autoimmune disease (al- a somatic cellular mosaicism. Anyway, in cases of trisomy 13, patient’s lele frequency=1.5%) than in 528 controls (0.7%) though the difference evolution is difficult to evaluate and in most cases is unfavorable, being was not statistically significant (P=0.0781). Functional studies are un- strongly related to the number and severity of malformations. derway to determine whether the novel mutations affect telomerase activity. Our findings suggest that abnormal telomere maintenance is a P0258. One female patient with trisomy 18 and bilateral risk factor for multiple autoimmune diseases. congenital corneal opacity A. Del Toro-Valero1, I. E. Arce2, R. E´Vega-Hernandez1, M. P. Casillas-Avila1, P0255. Observation of Hb Ernz [β(123)Thr-->Asn] for the first V. C. Ledezma-Rodriguez1, M. G. Lopez-Cardona1, A. Vargas2, S. Barrios2, N. time in IRAN O. Davalos1; P. Fouladi1,2, A. Fahim1, A. Ghahremani1, V. Lotfi1,2, M. M. Sajedi far1,2, R. Va- 1Instituto de Genética Humana, Universidad de Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico, hidi1, S. Zeinali3,4; 2Hospital Regional Valentín Gómez Farías del ISSSTE, Jalisco, Mexico. 1Medical Genetics Lab of Dr. Zeinali, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Young Introduction: Trisomy 18 was first described by Edwards et al. in 1960. Researchers Club of research and science branch of Islamic Azad University, It occurs in 1/8,000 live births. The principal features are clenched Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medical Genetics Lab of Dr.Zeinali, Tehran, hands, rocker bottom feet, low set or malformed ears and ventricular Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dep’t of Biotech, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, septal defect. Low birth weight has been reported. We present one Islamic Republic of Iran. patient with prenatal diagnosis by kariotype of amniotic fluid of trisomy Betha - thalassemia is one of the major genetic problem world wide 18 and bilateral congenital corneal opacity. Case report: Propositus in Iran. We have been running a national program for prevention of is a female of 2 months of age, product of the III full term pregnancy, thalassemia since 1997. characterized by polyhydramnios, intrauterine growth delay and moth- Families come to our center for prenatal diagnosis. When a person has er, with gestational diabetes during the pregnancy, of 42 (Gravida:3; MCV<80 Fl , MCH<27 Pg and A2>3.5% . we regard them as carriers abortion:2; caesarean:1) and the father 39 years-old at the time of and start molecular analysis. Sometimes, due to different reasons, we conception. Bilateral congenital corneal opacity and dysmosphism may notice near normal values for MCV or MCH or normal A2 level. was detected. Actually somatometry under 3rd centile, dolichocepha- A family had came to our center for prenatal diagnosis (PND). The ly, microphthalmia, hypertelorism, bilateral corneal opacity, ears with husband had MCV 76/3 Fl, MCH 24/9 Pg, A2 2/8% and the wife had overlapping of helix over antehelix and down rotate, hands show 1st MCV 62/3 Fl, MCH 20/2 Pg and normal A2 5%. and 2nd fingers with bilateral ulna deviation, overlapping of 2nd over 3rd We sequenced their DNA. and the husband only showed Hb Ernz and 4th over 5th fingers, feet with hypoplasia of nails, 1st trigger toe and Clinical genetics 2 brachydactyly and generalized hypotonia. Discussion: Trisomy 18, is University Cagliari, Italy. the second most common autosomal trisomy in newborns. The fre- Turner’s Syndrome(TS) is characterized by the total or partial absence quency of the associated findings are: heart (38.1%), gastrointestinal of one normal second X chromosome. TS occurs in 1/2500-3000 live- (25.4%), limb (24.6%), head (20.3%), eye (11%) and genital anoma- born females. The phenotype is variable and include short stature and lies (9.3%). Conclusion: We present a case with trisomy 18, showing gonadal dysgenesis. Approximately 50 percent of the patients has a unusual clinical findings. This case should make us to be careful at 45,X0 karyotype with no second sex chromosome, and 5 to 10 percent the time to establish the diagnosis and to suspect a chromosomopaty. have a duplication (isochromosome) of the long arm of one X. Most of By the wide clinical spectrum of this syndrome the karyotype give the the remaining cases involves mosaic karyotypes in which only a pro- final diagnosis. portion of cells is 45,X, with one or more additional cell lineages. X/X translocations are quite rare in man. The effect of this anomaly on P0259. A novel mutation in SLC19A2 gene in an Iranian patient the phenotype depends on the amount of deleted material and wheth- with TRMA syndrome. er the chromosomes are joined by their long or short arm. S. Zare1,2, b. keikhaei3,4, f. mahjoubi1,5, M. T. akbari1,6; We report an unusual case of Turner’s Syndrome mosaicism in a six- 1Akbari Medical Genetic labaratory, No.98, Taleghani Street, Tehran, Islamic teen year old girl, who was referred to our Institution for primary amen- Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad Unversity Science and Research Campus, orrhea and short stature. Endocrine evaluation revealed hypergonado- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Faculty of Medicine, Ahwaz Medical Science tropic hypogonadism, which required a study of the karyotype. Cyto- University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Ahwaz Research Center for Thal- genetic analysis, performed on peripheral blood leucocytes, showed assemia and Hemaoglobinopathy, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5National a 45,X/46,X,der(X),ter rea (X;X)de novo karyotype. The prevalent cell Research Center for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic line was 45,X(90% cells). A second cell line(10% cells) showed a very Republic of Iran, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Tarbiat Modares University, large marker chromosome, similar to a large metacentric chromo- Al-Ahmad Expressway, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. some. FISH and molecular analysis revealed that the marker chromo- Thiamine - Responsive Megaloblatic Anemia (TRMA) or Roger syn- some was dicentric and totally derived from the paternal X chromo- drome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with childhood onset. some. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of This disorder is characterized by the occurrence of multiple clinical TS mosaicism with a marker 45,X/46,X,der(X), de novo, that has been manifestations including megaloblastic anemia, diabetes mellitus and characterized by molecular and FISH analysis. sensorineural deafness, responding in varying degrees to thiamine treatment. The gene SLC19A2 which codes for a thiamine transport- P0262. Molecular investigation of Angelman and Prader Willi er is responsible for this syndrome and it is located at chromosome syndromes. Screening for UBE3A mutations: preliminary results 1q. To date 15 different mutations have been reported in 28 families E. Tzagaraki1,2, C. Sofocleous1, S. Kitsiou1, H. Frysira1, G. Goulielmos2, E. worldwide. Here we present a new case with a novel mutation, a 20 Kanavakis1, A. Mavrou1; years old male patient with characteristic features of TRMA with good 1University of Athens, School of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 2University of Crete, response to thiamine therapy. His SLC19A2 gene was screened by School of Medicine, Herakleion, Greece. direct sequencing and a single nucleotide base substitution in homo- Molecular defects within chromosomal region 15q11- q13, which con- zygous form was found. This mutation leads to a premature stop co- tains genes regulated by the imprinting centre (IC), are responsible don (W233X), and can be considered diseases causing because of its for Angelman (AS) and Prader Willi (PWS) syndromes. Differentially nature. Considering the limited number of affected cases reported so methylated regions of the IC play a major role in the establishment far in the literature, it is evident that TRMA is a very rare condition with of the methylation pattern and genomic imprinting of the locus. PWS heterogenous molecular basis. As far as its distribution is concerned, is considered a “contiguous gene syndrome”, while UBE3A imprinted out of 28 reported TRMA families worldwide, five families including this gene has been implicated as the AS gene, since genomic mutations present case are from Iran who had different mutations. The rest of the of which have been identified as the sole molecular defect in AS pa- patients were from Indian subcontinent (India, Kashmir and Pakistan) tients. suggestive of higher frequency in Asian populations. Routine molecular analysis with Methylation Specific PCR and Dinou- cleotide Repeat Polymorphism analysis was performed in 185 patients P0260. Six pregnancies in a woman with Turner syndrome, referred for AS (87) and PWS (98).The diagnosis was confirmed in including a case of holoprosencephaly 11 AS and 16 PWS patients. 30 patients referred for AS were further E. S. Ramos1, A. Araújo1, C. D. Martinhago1, L. R. Martelli1, R. M. Reis1, D. G. analyzed by mutation screening of the UBE3A gene by automated se- Melo2; quencing of exons 9,12, 15 and 16. 1University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2Federal University of São Large deletions were excluded by the presence of the expected PCR Carlos, São Carlos, Brazil. product and no mutations were identified. Ovarian failure is a typical feature of Turner syndrome (TS). Only 2% 4- 6% of AS patients are predicted to have mutations in UBE3A gene, of these patients (pure 45,X or mosaic) have natural pregnancies. most of which are located in exons 9, 12, 15, 16. Since 75- 80% of Furthermore, these pregnancies have been plagued not only by chro- these mutations are familial characterization of the defect and genetic mosome anomalies and fetal malformations, but also by spontane- counselling are essential. Although this study, has not as yet detected ous abortions. We report an unusual case of a woman with TS and any mutations, further screening of all exons of UBE3A, as well as chromosome mosaicism (karyotype 45,X[2]/46,X,r(X)[4]/46,XX[94]) other genes, related to AS like phenotypes (MECP2 gene) will prob- and normal fertility. At 12 years and 6 months of age, her height was ably identify mutations, confirming the clinical diagnosis and providing 127.5cm and she was forwarded to a clinical evaluation due to short information about the molecular mechanisms. stature. Menarche was at age 13 years and her menstrual cycle had varied from 25 to 30 days. At 24 years of age, she has had six docu- P0263. The “characteristic” clinical phenotype of maternal mented pregnancies, including one child with holoprosencephaly with UPD(14): does it really exist? A clinical, cytogenetic, and normal karyotype. For patients with TS and spontaneous puberty, ge- molecular study of three new unrelated subjects netic counseling and prenatal diagnosis are indicated. M. Giovannucci Uzielli1, N. Dayan1, L. Giunti2, S. Guarducci2, V. Gimino1, A. Zeffiri1, E. Lapi2, U. Ricci2, M. Ottaviani1, M. Isoldi1, G. Scarselli1; P0261. Turner Syndrome mosaicism: an unusual case with 1University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Children’s Hospital “Anna Meyer”, Flor- a large dicentric marker chromosome: 45,X/46,X,der(X), ter ence, Italy. rea(X;X), de novo. Maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 14 [UPD(14)mat] is firm- A. Nucaro1, P. Melis2, M. Casini3, R. Rossino4, M. Cau4, R. Congiu4, M. Melis4, ly associated with abnormal phenotypes, including pre- and postnatal S. Loche3; growth retardation, features overlapping PWS, and other abnormal 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Monserrato( Cagliari), Italy, 2Di- clinical aspects. The presence, in a diploid genome, of a chromosome partimento di Scienze Pediatriche e Medicina Clinica, University Cagliari, Italy, pair (or of a chromosome fragment) derived from one genitor, carries 3(2) Servizio di Endocrinologia Pediatrica,, Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie, two main types of developmental risk: the occurrence of an imprinting ASL8 Cagliari, Italy, 4(4) Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, disorder, or the inheritance of a duplicated mutant of a recessive trait leading to the homozygosity (Engel E., 2006).Clinical genetics  These preliminary remarks well support the hard comparison of the sor gene. clinical phenotype and natural history of three new italian patients, two We evaluated the association between the GSTM1 null-allele, CYP1A1 females and one male, with complete maternal isodisomy (two cases) Ile462Val, COMT Val158Met, ESR1 PvuI and XbaII, p53 Arg72Pro, or heterodisomy of chromosome 14. Growth parameters, including PR Progins and 3´-untranslated ApaI- IGF2 gene polymorphisms and pre- and postnatal length, weight, and OFC, heavily differ from border- uterine leiomyoma risk in a case-control study: 200 women with and line values to a hypochondroplasia-like phenotype. Similar variability 200 without uterine leiomyoma living in the Bashkortostan (South Ural was observed for the psychomotor development, completely normal region of Russia). in a subject, respectively mildly or seriously retarded in the two others. The frequency of the low-activity COMT Met/Met genotype was sig- Feeding problems and obesity also differentiate the natural history of nificantly higher in patients than in the healthy control group (44 % the three subjects. Precocious puberty was observed only in one of and 15%, respectively: x2= 29.96, p=0.0005; OR= 4.46, 95% CI 2.51- the two girls. In conclusion, we confirm the advisability of consider- 7.96). ing upd(14)mat in patients with low birth weight, growth retardation, The frequency of AA homozygous (mutant allele) was significantly neonatal feeding problems, muscular hypotonia, motor delay, preco- higher in women with leiomyomas than without (32 % and 16%, re- cious puberty and truncal obesity, as well as in patients with PWS like spectively: x2= 11.0014, p=0.0017; OR=2.32, 95% CI 1.39-3.89). phenotype, negative for SNRPN mutation. The rapid testing, by using There was no significant difference between the two groups regarding the methylation status of the imprinted MEG3 locus represents a new the distribution of the GSTM1, CYP1A1, ESR1, PR and p53 genes useful diagnostic tool. polymorphisms frequencies. Our results suggest that the Val158Met polymorphism in COMT gene P0264. Molecular Analysis of Usher Syndrome Types 1 and 2 in and the 3´-untranslated ApaI-IGF2 gene polymorphism are associated Iranian Usher Patients with increased risk of uterine leiomyoma in Bashkortostan population. K. Kahrizi1, G. Asaadi Tehrani1,2, N. Sadeghpour1, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Mohseni1, M. Jaberi3, K. Jalalvand1, S. Arzhangi1, H. Emamjomeh4, R. J. H. P0266. Severe kaposiform hemangioendothelioma associated Smith5, H. Najmabadi1; with Kasabach-Merritt Syndrome - genes need to be identified 1Genetic Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- G. S. Doros1, B. S. Zoica1, M. Bataneant1, M. Serban1, M. Gafencu1, O. C. ence, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Department, Science and Re- Ciocarlie2, J. Puiu1; search Unit , Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Retinitis 1Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, Ti- Pigmentosa Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Research Center of Ear, misoara, Romania, 2Louis Turcanu Emergency Hospital for Children, Timisoara, Nose, Throat, and Head and Neck Surgery, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Romania. 5Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories , Department of Otolaryngol- Background: Vascular anomalies are localized errors of vascular de- ogy Head and Neck Surgery , University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. velopment. Vascular tumors include: hemangioma, kaposiform he- Usher syndrome (USH) is the most frequent cause of combined deaf- mangioendothelioma (KH) and tufted angioma. Genetic studies led to blindness. It is clinically and genetically heterogeneous and mainly the identification of a number of genes that cause vascular malforma- inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. A total of 12 loci have been tions. reported to be associated with the usher syndrome, assigned to the KH is a rare vascular tumor usually presenting at birth or shortly there- USH types (USH1A-G, USH2A-C and USH3A). From the three types after. The tumor is locally aggressive and produces major complica- are known for usher syndrome, type 1 and 2 are the most frequent tions. forms and type 3 is the modest form, so the objective of this study was Aim: To present a rare case of severe KH in a 5yo girl, diagnosed at to investigate USH1 loci and USH2B between USH2 loci. 7 months, unresponsive to medical treatment. She developed major We have performed linkage analysis for 30 families using STR poly- complications: Kassabach-Merritt-Syndrome and CHF. morphic markers, for DFNB2, DFNB12, DFNB18, DFNB23 and DFNB6 Matherial: At 7 months, the infant was admitted with a large vascular which mutation in the gene located in these loci cause ARNSHL as lesion involving the left side of the abdomen, left vulva and left leg. A the same as USH1B, USH1C, USH1D, USH1F and USH2B. Our data large, rapidly growing, vascular tumor, warm, non pulsatile, red purple, up to now showed that in three families 3 STR markers (D10S1432, tense, with significant distortion of anatomy was palpable in the abdo- D10S537 and D10S535), used in this investigation linked to DFNB12, men. Clinical examination, Doppler ultrasound, MRI, biopsy and labo- in which results conclude usher syndrome 1D in these families and ratory tests were performed. in one family 3 STR markers ( D10S1226, D10S546 and D10S1762 Results: KH was the diagnosis. Kassabach-Merritt-Syndrome was the ) linked to DFNB23, which is related to usher syndrome 1F in this first severe complication, manifested as thrombocytopenia and DIC. family. We found a mutation in MYO7A (USH1B) and a mutation in Parents refused chemotherapy; hence, treatment was: Prednisone, α- VLGR1(USH2C). 2a-IFN, blood products. Surgery was considered too dangerous given Based on our results we suggest that the gene CDH23 causing non the size and location of the tumor. Despite all efforts, the tumor be- syndromic autosomal recessive deafness (DFNB12) and deafness as- came giant, invalidating the child and life-threatening. sociated with retinitis pigmentosa and vestibular dysfunction (USH1D) Conclusions: Kasabach-Merritt-Syndrome and heart failure in unre- has a higher prevalence in our population in comparison with other sponsive hemangioendothelioma to medical therapy raise the mortal- Usher loci. ity risk from 30-40% to 50-55%. Gene therapy could be life-saving and despite the rarity of the disease no efforts should be spared to identify P0265. The development of uterine leiomyoma is associated with the genes involved in KH. In such cases gene therapy could be the Val158Met polymorphism in COMT gene and the 3´-untranslated only chance for survival. ApaI-IGF2 gene polymorphism in Russian population (Bashkortostan) P0267. Reverse-hybridization-based genetic testing for the O. Egorova1, M. Bermisheva1, E. Khusnutdinova1, N. Glebova2, A. Dodonov2; prediction of anticoagulant dose requirement 1Institute of Biochemistry ang Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Acad- H. Puehringer1, C. Stoellberger2, W. Krugluger3, C. Oberkanins1; emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkortostan State Medical Uni- 1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Second Medical Department, versity, Ufa, Russian Federation. Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Vienna, Austria, 3Department of Clinical Chemistry, Leiomyoma, the most common benign uterine neoplasm, occurs Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Vienna, Austria. in around one-forth of women during their lifetimes. Leiomyoma is Coumarin derivatives (Warfarin, Phenprocoumon, Acenocoumarol) caused by a complex interaction between multiple genes, hormone, are the most widespread oral anticoagulant drugs for the prevention growth factor, cytokines, and the environment. Cytochrome P4501A1 and treatment of arterial and venous thromboembolic disorders. How- (CYP1A1), catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and glutation-s- ever, these vitamin K antagonists have a narrow therapeutic range and transferase (GSTM1) are key enzymes in the estrogen metabolism a wide inter-individual variability in dose requirement. Despite adjust- pathway that result in the hydroxylation, methylation and conjugation. ment for clinical variables, adverse events, such as delay in achieving Estrogen (ESR1) and progesterone (PR) receptors are mediators of a stable maintenance dose or bleeding complications, are frequently hormonal bioeffects. The IGF-II growth factor is known to support myo- encountered during the initial phase of therapy. Genetic polymor- blasts differentiation among other cell types. P53 is a tumor suppres- phisms in the drug-targeted vitamin K epoxide reductase complex 1 Clinical genetics  (VKORC1) and in the drug metabolizing cytochrome P450 isozyme state in this gene which leads to substitution of Met by Ile at posi- CYP2C9 have been reported to account for the majority of variations tion 387 (p.M387I). Also we found out single nucleotide substitution in the therapeutic response to warfarin. c.355+4G>C and didn’t find it in 100 control DNA samples. We have developed a genetic test (StripAssay) for the detection of Also we investigated by SSCP-analysis LMNA gene, which encoded -1639G>A and 3730G>A in the VKORC1 gene, and 430C>T and two protein products lamin A and C, and take part in beginnings of 1075A>C in the CYP2C9 gene. The StripAssay is based on multiplex atypical Werner syndrome. Here we didn’t find any mutation in the PCR, followed by reverse-hybridization of biotin-labeled amplifica- patients. tion products to a parallel array of allele-specific oligonucleotides on This work was partly supported by Russian President’s grant NSh- membrane teststrips. Genotyping for VKORC1 polymorphisms and the 5736.2006.7. functionally defective CYP2C9 variants *2 and *3 allowed the clas- sification of patients into high, intermediate and low dose responders P0270. Neonatal progeroid Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch to phenprocoumon (Marcumar), the most commonly used oral antico- syndrome: follow-up of new case in Belarus agulant in Central and North European countries. Favourable proper- S. V. Holubeva1, N. V. Rumyantseva2; ties, such as the rapid DNA extraction protocol, ready-to-use reagents 1Vitebsk Regional Diagnostic Center, Vitebsk, Belarus, 2Belarusian Medical and teststrips, as well as the potential for automation of the hybridiza- Academy of Post-Graduate Education, Minsk, Belarus. tion/detection step, make the StripAssay convenient and easy to per- Neonatal progeroid syndrome, or Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch (WRS) is form within less than 6 hours. The results obtained in our study will as- a rare autosomal recessive disorder, with few published case reports. sist clinicians to achieve a more individualized anticoagulant therapy. WRS is characterized by progeroid appearance at birth, lipoatrophy, (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at) slow growth (MIM 26409). We present results of 3 years observation of female patient, the first child of a young healthy nonconsanguine- P0268. ‚De novo‘ SOX10 mutation in a 2-year-old child with Type ous Belarusian couple. Pregnancy and labor were unremarkable. The 4 Waardenburg syndrome: case report and literature review newborn (BW 1890 g, BL 44 cm) showed typical progeroid features C. I. Coldea1, F. Meire2, R. Touraine3, I. Delpierre4, T. Sekhara5, A. Mansbach6, (aged triangular face, beak-shaped nose, telecanthus, microstomia, Y. Sznajer7,8; pseudohydrocephalus, widened fontanelles and sutures, hypotricho- 1Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, 2Ophthalmology Dept, sis, wrinkled skin, prominent veins and lipoatrophy). The infant had Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, 33Service de Génétique feeding problems and small weight gain. Initial follow-up at 4 months Clinique Chromosomique et Moléculaire, Hôpital Nord, St Etienne, France, 4Ra- demonstrated growth and mental retardation; myopia and hip joints diology Dept, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, 5Neurology, dysplasia were revealed. Ultrasound examination of brain and heart Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, 6Ear Nose Throat Dept did not reveal any abnormalities. At 12 months dentition was delayed, (ORL), HUDERF, U.L.B,Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, contractures at knees and elbows and paradoxical caudal fat accumu- 7Clinical Genetics, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, 8Cen- lation occurred. At age of 3 years progeroid signs became more pro- ter for Human Genetics, ULB, Brussels, Belgium. nounced and psychomotor retardation was preserved. Chromosomal Type 4 Waardenburg syndrome (WS4) is part of neurocristopathy and biochemical analyses were normal. Differential diagnosis was diseases resulting in absence of melanocytes in inner ear cells, on done with other similar genetic syndromes (Cockayne syndrome, cutis skin and variable degree of parasympathetic enteric neurons absence. laxa-growth defect, lipodystrophy syndrome, oculo-mandibulo-facial SOX 10 gene acts as a key regulator for peripheral glial development. syndrome, progeria including progeroid syndrome with Ehlers-Danlos SOX10 gene haploinsufficiency was associated with a distinctive phe- features). We have established WRS on the basis of association of notype combining WS type 4, mental retardation and dysautonomic neonatal progeroid appearance, lipoatrophy with consequent caudal features. (1) fat accumulation, growth and mental retardation. Clinical features of We report the natural history of a 2 year-old child with congenital deaf- the patient were compared with published data, which vary in expres- ness, delayed psychomotor development. Language retardation and sion and severity. The case presented differs in absence of natal teeth. autistic-like behaviour were noted. The cerebral MRI showed bilateral The patient is alive; the parents are informed of the diagnosis and absence of the semi-circular canals and delayed myelinisation. The recurrence risk of 25%. ophthalmological exam identified deep blue iris along with an albinotic- like retina. These clinical features authorize the screening for SOX10 P0271. Intracranial space occupying lesions could be the forth gene mutation encountered in WS4 spectrum. The patient was identi- component of Wildervanck (cervicoocculoacustic) syndrome fied with a 698-2 A→C SOX 10 gene substitution, responsible for a S. Balci1,2; premature STOP codon. This mutation occurred ’de novo’ since both 1Hacettepe University, Clinical Genetics (emeritus), Ankara, Turkey, 2Kibris parents did not carried this substitution. Among 12 patients, Touraine Sokak 17/8 Asagi Ayranci, Ankara, Turkey. et al. identified 3 children with SOX 10 mutation who developed WS 4 Cervicooculoacoustic (Wildervanck) syndrome (MIM 314600) is char- phenotype with additional neurological symptoms: mental retardation, acterized by the triad of Klippel-Feil anomaly, bilateral abdusence cerebellar ataxia, nystagmus, spasticity. They also had dysautonomic palsy with retractio bulbs (Duane’s syndrome) and hearing loss. Since features (alacrima(2/3), asialia(1/3) or reduced sweating(1/3)). Notice- it is commonly observed in female patients, X-linked dominant mode ably, our patient so far did not show any digestive anormaly nor any of inheritance with increased chance of lethality in males has been dysautonomic sign. The precise phenotype features in this patient lead suggested. We have observed a total of 10 Wildervanck cases (8 fe- to specific molecular investigation. The genetic counseling is now ac- males, 2 males) within a range of 7 months to 36 years old. All of curate to the patient and for his family. them had cervical vertebral fusions and hemivertebrae, two of them Reference (1)- R. Touraine et al. Am J Hum Genet 2000;66:1496- had diastometamyelia, three of them had dermal sinus into intradural 1503 space. Along with these typical manifestations seven of them had oc- cipital bone defects and mid-line masses. Closure defect examples P0269. A novel point mutation (Met387Ile) in the RECQL2 gene in such as, dermoid cysts, hamartomatous cyst, meningeal cyst, menin- a patient with Werner syndrome gomyelocelle and encephalocelle located in the posterior fossa were N. Galeeva, A. Chuhrova, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov; documented histopathologically in different cases with cranial masses. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. One female patient was suffer from three times meningitis due to der- Werner syndrome is autosomal recessive disease, which character- mal sinus. Postmortem examination of this patient demonstrated that a ized by symptoms of the adult-onset premature aging. The features chronic infected dermoid cyst. Cleft palate malformation was observed of Werner syndrome are scleroderma-like skin changes, especially in in another female patient associated with typical symptoms. Those clo- the extremities, cataract, subcutaneous calcification, premature arte- sure defects could be more frequent than it was previously anticipated riosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, and a wizened and prematurely aged in Wildervanck syndrome. MR examinations should be added in the face. The RECQL2 gene, also known as WRN, is in charge of this diagnostic procedure of this syndrome in order to identify additional disease and encodes a helicase. posterior fossa abnormalities and/or other intracranial space occupy- We have investigated 4 Russian patients with Werner syndrome. We ing lessions. found out one novel mutation (ATG→ATA) in exon 9 in heterozygous Clinical genetics  P0272. Williams Syndrome in young child - case report Immunogenetics and Tissue Culture, Bu-Ali Research Institute, MUMS, Iran, T. Marcovici1, I. Sabau1, I. Simedrea1, M. Puiu1, P. Lesovici2, E. Gamaniuc2; Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, National 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2”Louis Turcanu” Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Is- Children’s Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. lamic Republic of Iran, 6NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Williams syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by mild Continuous Wilms’ tumor gene (WT1) expression is a typical feature mental retardation, distinctive facial appearance, abnormalities in cal- of leukemic blasts in AML, ALL, and blast crisis CML patients. WT1 is cium balance and blood vessel disease. It is present at birth and af- only transiently expressed in normal hemopoiesis. levels of leukemic fects males and females equally.The syndrome is caused by a deletion cells (MRD) in peripheral blood samples from children with ALL using in the locus of the elastin gene localized at 7q11.23. WT1 as a marker should have clinical importance. We aimed to de- We present a 24 months old male admitted in our clinic for fever and velop a quantitative method based on the RQ-PCR in order to monitor vomiting. He is the second child of a healthy couple, the pregnancy WT1 level in children with ALL and assess its prognostic importance. was not followed-up and the birth weight was low. Feeding problems Furthermore, we wished to compare the sensitivity, efficiency, and reli- and slow weight gain were noticed. ability of this method with the conventional semi-quantitative RT-PCR By clinical examination we noticed failure to thrive (weight of 9400 g), . short stature, characteristic facial features (microcephaly, broad fore- Fourteen newly diagnosed ALL children were included in this study. head, short palpebral fisures, left eye strabismus, periorbital fullness, The peripheral blood samples were collected before induction, at the flattened nasal bridge, long philtrum, wide mouth with full lips, low second week of induction, at the start of consolidation and beginning of placed proeminent ears). There were present musculoskeletal anoma- the maintenance phase of chemotherapy. The last blood sample was lies (hyperextensible joints and lumbar scoliosis), anxiety, a friendly collected from each patient at random 2 to 6 month after the mainte- behaviour and mild delay in intellectual, motor and language skills. nance phase started. Calcium blood level was elevated and echocardiography was normal. The proportion of patients with detectable WT1 was 92% at diagnosis Conclusions: We diagnosed the syndrome by clinical features and hy- and 42% at the second week of therapy, 38% at the start of consolida- percalcemia. Variable expression in the phenotype makes the absence tion, and 0% at the beginning of maintenance. The absence of WT1 of one of the main anomalies possible. FISH analysis may certify the showed accordance with the clinical course of patients. CQ PCR and diagnosis. RQ PCR results were correlated together. The child requires a comprehensive multidisciplinary approach to his results indicate that real time PCR can be employed to monitor MRD in care and periodic cardiovascular evaluations. the leukemic patients during chemotherapy. Successful development of RQ PCR by SYBR Green I resulted to an easier method with lower P0273. Presenting phenotype and clinical evaluation in a cohort cost in comparison to probe based methods. of 22 Williams-Beuren syndrome patients E. Biamino1, C. A. Bena1, L. Sorasio1, S. Forzano1, E. Banaudi2, L. Peruzzi3, G. P0275. Clinical manifestation and molecular-genetic diagnosis B. Ferrero1, M. Silengo1; of Wilson’s disease in Republic of Moldova 1Department of Paediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Cardiology - Regina P. P. Cojocaru1, V. C. Sacara2; Margherita Children’s Hospital, Torino, Italy, 3Department of Nephrology - Re- 1State University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Nicolae Testemitanu”, Chisinau, gina Margherita Children’s Hospital, Torino, Italy. Republic of Moldova, 2National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Williams-Beuren Syndrome is a rare multi-system genomic disorder, Genetics, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. caused by 7q11.23 microdeletion with a prevalence of 1/10000-1/20000 Hepatolenticular degeneration is an inherited disorder of copper me- live births. Clinical phenotype includes typical facial dysmorphism (elf- tabolism in an autosomal recessive manner. The gene is located on in face), mental retardation associated with a peculiar neuropsycho- chromosome 13 and encodes a copper-transporting P-type ATPase logical profile and congenital heart defects. We investigated 22 WS protein, which controls the insertion of copper into apoceruloplasmin patients (mean age of 9.7 years, range 1 day-39 years) with a multi- in the trans-Golgi network and the biliary excretion of excess copper specialistic follow-up protocol comprehensive of neuropsychological, through a vesicular-lysosomal-apical membrane route. cardiologic, nephrologic, ophthalmologic, endocrinologic, gastoen- Our patients from 30 Wilson’s disease(WD) families had presented terologic, odontostomatologic and orthopaedic evaluations. The mean with predominantly hepatic, neurological or psychiatric manifestations. age at diagnosis was 5.38 years, being 1.02y when genetic evaluation The varied neurological abnormalities displayed by patients include was requested for congenital heart defects (CHD) and 10.68y in case any combination of dyskinesia, rigidity, resting and intention tremor, of mental retardation/abnormal neuropsychological profile without an dysarthria, dysphagia, abnormal gait and psychological disturbances. evident CHD. All patients showed facial dysmorphisms, with supra- The search was effectuated on two ATP7B exones(14, 15) using single valvular aortic stenosis (SVAS) as the most common cardiovascular strand conformation polymorphism method (SSCP) of DNA molecule. anomaly (12/22) associated, followed by peripheral pulmonary steno- In the 14th exone was determined His1069Glu missense - mutation, sis (9/22); interestingly, we detected in one patient a total anomalous which corresponds to the Thomas’s G. data recorded in 38% of Euro- pulmonary venous return (TAPVR), confirming the possible associa- peans. Analysing 60 chromosomes of WD patients, missense - muta- tion of this rare CHD with WS. Hypertension was detected by 24 hours tion determined in 13,3%. In 2 patients the mutation was detected the ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in 7/22 cases. Mental retarda- homozygote form, but in 4 patients was detected the heterozygous tion was observed in 9/22 patients, mostly (7/9) in a mild form and form. The presences in patients with certain clinical manifestations the Chiari malformation type 1 was found in 3 patients. Our study under- heterozygous occurrence of missense - mutation can presumably take lines a remarkable diagnostic delay in patients who present to genetic part a compound phenomenon. evaluation because of mental retardation/neuropsychological profile During the SSCP analysis of the 15th exone in our trials was not de- lacking an evident cardiopathy and confirms the multi-systemic nature tected the frames with abnormal electrophoretic activity. Thereby, of WS leading to a high clinical presentation’s variability and complex the search of deletion in the 15th exone(C3400delCgene) in studied follow-up strategies. patients hadn’t any results. Searching Prp1134Pro-fs mutation in 60 chromosomes showed its absence. P0274. Monitoring minimal residual disease in pediatric ALL Conclusion: The missense mutation His1069Glu has been established using real-time quantitative PCR for Wilms tumor gene (WT1): in 13.3% cases, but the deletion Prp1134Pro-fs has not been deter- Prognostic significance, and correlation with disease status mined. S. Talebi1, Z. Badiei2, J. Tavakkol Afshari3, A. Brouk4, M. Golalipour5, F. Mah- joubi6; P0276. Epilepsy in adults with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome 1MUMSImmunology Research group, Division of Immunogenetics and Tissue J. C. Worthington1, O. W. Quarrell2; Culture, Bu-Ali Research Institute, MUMS, Iran, Mashhad, Islamic Republic 1Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Sheffield Children’s of Iran, 2MUMS, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Immunology Research Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom. group, Division of Immunogenetics and Tissue Culture, Bu-Ali Research Insti- Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a well recognised malforma- tute, MUMS, Iran and Tissue Culture, Bu-Ali Research Institute, MUMS, Iran, tion syndrome resulting from a partial 4p deletion. Features include Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Immunology Research group, Division of pre- and post-natal growth delay, microcephaly, characteristic facies, Clinical genetics  midline defects and epilepsy. The cause of WHS is heterogeneous; of Pathology, Rikshospitalet -Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway, some individuals have deletions which may be large or small whereas 5Department of Dermatology, Rikshospitalet -Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, others have unbalanced translocations. The epilepsy may be of early Oslo, Norway, 6Bussedalen Legekontor, Kongsberg, Norway, 7Department of onset and difficult to control but there have been some reports of the Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet/Karolinska University seizures ceasing after a period of years. However, relatively limited Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 8Department of Pediatrics, Rikshospitalet -Radi- information exists detailing the seizure activity in adults with WHS. umhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway. We investigated seizure onset and frequency in 21 young adults over Our patient is a 7 year old girl with blood karyotype 47,XYY. Her de- the age of 16 years diagnosed with WHS. They had a mean age of 24 velopment has been normal with the exception of growth retardation. years; range 17-34 years. Data were obtained by contacting parents On examination at age 5 years height was 5cm below the 2.5th centile, using a telephone interview. weight at the 50th centile for height and head circumference at the 10- Epilepsy was found to occur in all 21 cases, with one exception onset 25th centile. Her neck was broad and her posterior hairline somewhat of seizures was between 1 and 2 years of age. In 8 cases (mean age low. She had minimal cubitus valgus. A striking feature was a hyper- 26 years; range 17 - 34 years), a seizure had occurred within the last 3 trichosis which was congenital and had increased over time. She had years. Whereas in 13 cases (mean age 23 years; range 17 - 33 years), long, coarse, fair, hairs along her entire spine, most pronounced in the the most recent seizure had occurred more than 3 years previously lumbar region, as well as hypertrichosis of her forearms. (mean number of years 15; range 6 - 28 years). For those 13 cases Her external genitalia were normal. A normal sized uterus, but no go- the last year of seizure occurred at a mean age of 9 (age range 2 - 15 nads, were identified on ultrasound. At laparoscopy she was found to years). have small gonads which were excised. Histological examination re- These data may be valuable in counselling families of a newly diag- vealed ovarian stromal cells and bilateral gonadoblastoma. No testicu- nosed child. lar differentiation was seen. The karyotype of all 34 analysed lymphocytes was 47,XYY. The karyo- P0277. Detection of genomic copy number changes in patients type in cultured fibroblasts was 45,X in 7 and 47,XYY in 14 of 21 meta- with idiopathic mental retardation by high-resolution X-array- phases. FISH analysis of 199 interphases also revealed mosaicism: CGH: frequent increased gene dosage of known XLMR genes XYY in 68, X in 114, XY in 4 and XX in 13 cells. Gonadal mosiacism G. Froyen1, H. Van Esch2, M. Bauters1, S. Frints3, J. Vermeesch2, K. Devri- was present with 45,X in 37 and 47,XYY in 13 of 50 cell. Sequencing endt2, J. Fryns2, P. Marynen1; of the SRY gene revealed no mutation. 1VIB, Dept. Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2University Hospi- A 47,XYY karyotype in lymphocytes is usually associated with a male tal, Dept. Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 3University Hospital, Dept. Clini- phenotype. The presence of cells without a Y chromosome in the go- cal Genetics, Maastricht, The Netherlands. nads may explain the female phenotype in this patient. A tiling X-chromosome-specific genomic array with a theoretical reso- lution of 80 kb was developed to screen mental retardation (MR) pa- P0279. Mutation screening of ARX gene in male patients with tients for submicroscopic copy number differences. We first validated non-specific mental retardation from Russia the X-array using 4 MR patients with aberrations previously detected D. V. Islamgulov, A. S. Karunas, E. K. Khusnutdinova; at lower resolution. This allowed for delineation of the location and Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. extent of the aberration at high resolution and subsequently, more Mutations of the ARX gene, considered to be the second most com- precise genotype-phenotype analyses. Next, we screened a cohort of mon cause of X-linked mental retardation (XLMR), give rise to a wide 108 patients with idiopathic MR consisting of 57 patients suspected variety of distinguishable syndromes (Partington syndrome, X-linked of X-linked mental retardation (XLMR), 27 probands of brother pairs, infantile spasm, etc.), and they are also an important cause of non- and 24 sporadic patients. We identified 15 copy number changes in 14 syndromic XLMR. The striking finding concerning ARX is the pheno- patients (13%). These include 2 deletions and 13 duplications rang- typic heterogeneity associated with the most frequent and recurrent ing from 0.1 - 2.7 Mb. The aberration is considered to be associated mutation (identified in >5% of XLMR families): the in-frame 24-bp du- with the phenotype in 5 patients (4.6%) based on the following crite- plication (c.428_451dup24) expanding the 16 polyalanine tract to 23 ria: de novo aberration; involvement of a known or candidate MRX(S) (amino acids 100-115). In order to evaluate the frequency of ARX mu- gene; segregation with the disease in the family; absence in control tation in mentally retarded (MR) males from Volga-Ural region of Rus- individuals, and skewed X-inactivation in carrier females. These in- sia, we performed mutational analysis of ARX gene in 214 unrelated clude deletions that contain the MRX(S) genes CDKL5, OPHN1 and MR (diagnosis based on the ICD-10) male patients (Russians N=72, CASK, and duplications harboring CDKL5, NXF5, MECP2 and GDI1. Tatars N=56 and Bashkirs N=34) with average age of 13.02±3.47 In addition, seven unbalances are apparent novel polymorphic regions years (range, 5-18 years) negative for mutations in the FMR1 and because they do not follow the proposed criteria. Taken together, our MECP2 genes. The recurrent c.428-451dup24 mutation was identi- data strongly suggest that not only deletions but also duplications on fied by sequencing in three (1.4%) MR males (Russians N=1, Tatars the X chromosome might contribute to the phenotype more often than N=1 and Bashkirs N=1). The subsequent genotype-phenotype analy- expected, supporting the increased gene dosage mechanism for de- ses confirmed that polyalanine tract expansion can result in a highly regulation of normal cognitive development. variable disease phenotype, even with respect to mental retardation a great deal of variability, with intellectual impairment ranging from mild P0278. Female phenotype with karyotype 47,XYY to severe, which mitigates against early clinical diagnosis. These data, K. Ørstavik1, C. van der Hagen2, E. Ormerod2, T. Saether Hagen3, L. Walaas4, together with those reported in the literature, imply that screening for C. Mørk5, B. Andersen6, A. Wedell7, A. Myhre8; c.428_451dup24 mutation should be recommended in males with non- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet -Radiumhospitalet Medical specific MR, especially in population Volga-Ural region of Russia. The Centre, Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevål University work was supported by grant of RFH, project (No.05-06-06168a). Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Section of Pediatric Surgery, Surgical Department, Rikshospitalet -Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway, 4Department Cytogenetics  Po02. Cytogenetics nal for LSI ARSA was present in all cells on the short arm of one of the chromosomes 22. Therefore the diagnosis of terminal duplica- P0280. Further delineation of the 13q deletion syndrome: clinical tion 22qter was made. By means of 1Mb array-CGH the duplication report and molecular characterization of an interstitial 13q31 was confirmed and further characterized as a 5.5 Mb region: 46, XX, deletion. dup(22)(q13.31qter)(CTA-268H5->CTB-99K24)x3. FISH analysis for H. Karmous-Benailly1, F. Giuliano1, E. Dor2, A. Angelozzi1, S. Perelman3, J. LSI ARSA was normal in both parents. Lambert1; Duplications of the distal segment of 22q seem to be very rare. Twenty 1Service de Génétique, Hôpital l’Archet 2, Nice, France, 2Service de Pédopsy- four patients have been described with only 3 of them carrying a very chiatrie, Fondation Lenval, Nice, France, 3Service de Médecine Pédiatrique, small duplication (22q13.3 to 22qter) like in our case. Two of these Fondation lenval, Nice, France. 3 patients are a father and his son with very similar facial features The 13q deletion syndrome usually comprises a wide variety of clinical compared to the patient we describe. They also have mild to moderate manifestations including developmental delay, mental and growth re- mental retardation and microcephaly. Terminal duplications of 22qter tardation, hypotonia, microcephaly, trigonocephaly, dysmorphy, ocular may be more common than generally assumed and may be detected anomalies, and diverse malformations of limbs, brain, heart, and kid- more frequently by the application of array-CGH. ney. This variability of clinical expression depends on the size and lo- cation of the deleted segment. So a classification was proposed point- P0283. Screening of 22q11.2 Microdeletion and ing band 13q32 as the ‘’minimal critical region’’ of the 13q- syndrome. Microduplications in 110 Patients With Clinical Findings of Deletions involving this band are associated with major malformations, Digeorge/Velocardiofacial Syndrome those limited to proximal bands q13-q31 share no major anomalies but G. Luleci1, Z. Cetin1, E. Mihci2, S. Yakut1, F. Kardelen3, S. Tacoy2, S. BERKER mainly growth retardation and, distal deletions are rather complicated KARAUZUM1; by severe retardation but minor abnormalities.Here, we report the case 1Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and of an 11 years old boy who presented mental and growth retardation, Genetics, ANTALYA, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Depart- dysmorphic features, hand and foot abnormalities, hyperactive behav- ment of Pediatric Genetics, ANTALYA, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University Faculty of iour and an atypical West syndrome. Chromosome analysis identified Medicine Department of Pediatric Cardiology, ANTALYA, Turkey. a de novo interstitial deletion on the long arm of a chromosome 13. 22q11.2 microdeletion associated with Di-George Syndrome/ Velocar- Further characterization of this deletion was conducted by FISH with diofacial Syndrome (DG/VCFS) is the most common chromosomal de- use of BAC probes extending from 13q21.33 to 13q32.3. We found a letion in humans affecting 1 in 4000 live births. Main clinical features of deletion of 11 Mb long limited to band 13q31. The observed phenotype this syndrome includes conotruncal cardiac anomaly, velopharyngeal in the proband is supposed to be related to haplo-insufficiency of the insufficiency, nonvisible/hypoplastic thymus, immunodeficiency, char- genes contained in the deleted region. Interestingly, abnormal behav- acteristic facial dysmorphism, palatal anomalies, language impairment, iour and west syndrome are two clinical entities never described in the developmental delay/ learning difficulties and immunologic anomalies. 13q- syndrome. This could be explained by the fact that deletions con- Recently microduplication 22q11.2 sydrome which presents overlap cerning only band 13q31 have never been reported. This observation with DG/VCFS has been identified. In this study we screened 22q11.2 underlies the importance of an accurate characterization of deletions microdeletions and microduplications in 110 patients (60 female and in order to better establish a karyotype/phenotype correlation. 50 male) with clinical findings of DG/VCFS by Fluorescence in Situ Hy- bridization (FISH) using dual color TUBLE1 and N25 probes and con- P0281. Chromosme 18q paracentric inversion in a family: Report ventional cytogenetics. We detected 22q11.2 microdeletion for both of of a case the TUBLE1 and N25 region probes in 14 of 110 (13%) cases (5 male S. M. Brankovic Niksic, M. Milutinovic, G. Radivojevic Pilic, T. Mitrovic; and 9 female). Clinical findings of our cases with 22q11.2 deletion will Institute of Mental Health, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. be discussed according to literature. We could not detect microdupli- Paracentic inversion is a rare cytogenetic abberation, especialy para- cation of the analysed region showing that microduplication is a rare centric inversion of chromosome 18q. We have found only a few case event in patients with clinical findings of DG/VCFS. reports on that subject. We report a married couple that was send to a Genetic laboratory P0284. Distal 22q11.2 deletion: a new microdeletion syndrome because of a problem with infertility (3 missed abortions). Both, man with predispostion to rhabdoid tumors. and woman, are healthy normal people, with normal gynecological N. Philip1, C. Missirian1, J. McGaughran2, C. Coze1, A. Moncla1; status. He has also normospermia. Cytogenetic analysis, G band, 1Hopital d’Enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 2Royal Children Hospital, and additional YUNIS analysis confirmed the karyotype of the probant Herston, Australia. 46,XY,inv18( q21q22.3). Analysis of the karyotype of the probants fam- Few cases of 22q11.23 deletions, distal to the 3Mb VCFS/DGS re- ily confirmed that the probants mother has the same chromosomal gion have been reported. We report two new patients. Patient 1 was abberation. diagnosed at birth with a severe CHD. He was hypotonic with delayed The family of the probant has no mentaly retarded members or preg- motor skills. At 14 months, an atypical teratoid/rhabdoid intracranial nancy losses. The probants sister has two normal children but she is tumour was diagnosed. Patient 2 was investigated at age 4 for devel- not available for further investigation. opmental delay. He developed a rhabdoid tumour of the kidney at age The paper will discuss different effect of the same chromosomal ab- 7. Patient 1 had a cytogenetically visible inversion of chromosome 22. normality on fertility. Also our results will be compaired with the results FISH studies, demonstrated inversion of genes proximal to 22q11.23, of other authors. associated with a 0.9-1.8 Mb deletion encompassing BCR locus. Pa- tient 2 had a pure deletion extending from clones RP11-379N11 and P0282. A duplication of the distal segment of 22q in a patient RP11-20P18 suggesting that the recombination event occurred be- with mental retardation, microcephaly and mild facial tween LCRs 4 and 7. We compared the phenotype of our patients with dysmorphism. other patients reported in the literature. Most of the patients reported H. Peeters, J. Vermeesch, J. P. Fryns; to date had CHD but none had velopharyngeal insufficiency, clefting Department of Human Genetics KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. or hypocalcemia. All these patients had a similar facial appearance, We present a patient with a terminal 22q duplication due to an un- rather different from the gestalt of VCFS/DGS patients, including low- balanced translocation 46, XX, der(22)(qter->q13.31::p11->qter). She set and posteriorly rotated ears, anteverted nares, thin lips and full presented at the age of 4.5 years with a mild to moderate mental re- cheeks. All patients with deletions encompassing the SMARCB1 gene, tardation, microcephaly and mild dysmorphic facial features including developed rhabdoid tumors. Since the 22q11.2 region contains sev- a large forehead, a broad nasal bridge, a thin upper lip and a large eral LCR, different recombination events can give rise to non-over- mouth. A high resolution karyotype was apparently normal. Because lapping deletions. Patients with a distal 22q11.2 deletion must not be of nasal speech, FISH analysis for the DiGeorge/VCFS region was considered as VCFS variants and require different clinical assessment performed with a commercial probe mix containing TUPLE1 (22q11.2) and follow-up. It is important to determine precisely the status of the and a control probe LSI ARSA (22q13). Normal signals were seen SMARCB1 locus, since patients hemizygous at this locus are at risk of for TUPLE1 and LSI ARSA on both chromosomes 22q. A third sig- developing rhabdoid tumors.Cytogenetics  P0285. Chromosome 22q13.3 deletion syndrome with a de novo Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. interstitial 22q13.3 cryptic deletion retaining SHANK INTRODUCTION: Deletion of the terminal region of the long arm of A. Delahaye1, A. Toutain2, A. Aboura1, A. Tabet1, B. Benzacken1, A. Verloes1, chromosome 4 results in a series of clinic features including develop- S. Drunat1; mental delay, cleft palate and limb defects. Due to the similarities of 1Genetics department, Robert Debré Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 2Genetics the clinical symptoms a 4q-deletion syndrome has been suggested. department, Bretonneau Hospital, CHRU, Tours, France. This study aims to find the critical region responsible for the 4q-dele- The 22q13.3 deletion syndrome (MIM 606232) is characterized by tion syndrome through fine mapping the terminal 4q deletions in two developmental delay, absent or severely delayed speech, autistic unrelated patients. behavior, normal to accelerated growth, and minor dysmorphic facial METHODS: The patients were analysed using array CGH and FISH. features. Among the three genes of the minimal critical region (from Array CGH was carried out using a submegabase resolution whole centromere to telomere: SHANK3, ACR and RABL2B), SHANK3 is genome tiling path BAC array and the results were verified by FISH considered to be at the origin of the neurobehavioral symptoms. analysis, using standard protocols. We report a child with a de novo interstitial 22q13.3 deletion detected RESULTS: by MLPA and confirmed by FISH. The 4q terminal deletions of two patients with cleft palate, limb de- She demonstrates mental retardation, severe speech delay, epicanthic fects and developmental delay were fine mapped using array-CGH. fold, and protruding ears with normal growth. This non specific pheno- Both deletions were positioned at 4q33-4qter. Furthermore, one of the type is concordant with the classical presentation of 22q13.3 deletion patients displayed a cryptic unbalanced translocation between chro- syndrome. mosome 4 and chromosome 20, resulting in the loss of 4q33-4qter Subtelomeres analysis by MLPA showed a discrepancy between the and trisomy of the 20p13-20pter region. The chromosomal aberrations P036B and P070 kits (MCR Holland): P070 MLPA probe (targeting were de novo in both patients. ARSA gene) showed a deletion but P036B (targeting RABL2B gene) CONCLUSION: In the present study we investigated two patients with showed a normal result. FISH analysis using LSI TUPLE1/LSI ARSA deletion of the terminal long arm of chromosome 4. Our data support (Vysis) probes confirmed deletion of ARSA, whereas FISH with N25/ that 4q33 may be the critical region for the 4q-syndrome. This study N85A3 (Cytocell) probes, targeting SHANK3 locus was normal. This also underlines the power of array-CGH in identifying cryptic unbal- was confirmed by quantitative real time PCR of exons 23 and 24 of anced translocations. SHANK3. Supplemented FISH analysis using BAC clones were per- formed to delineate both breakpoint regions of the interstitial deletion. P0288. Clinical aspects of the deletion 9p syndrome - two new These data highlight the difficulty of performing an appropriate test in cases order to search for cryptic 22q13.3 deletion. Furthermore the molecu- E. Braha, M. Volosciuc, I. Ivanov, A. Sireteanu, M. Covic; lar characterization of this interstitial 22q13.3 deletion contributes to University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. clinical and genetic delineation of the 22q13.3 deletion syndrome. Nearly 100 cases of deletion 9p has been published. Often, the dele- tion occurs de novo. We reported two unrelated children who share P0286. Double trisomy involving chromosome 21 and the sex particular clinical findings including trigonocephaly, microstoma, hypo- chromosome (48,XXX,+21) - a case report and literature review telorism, broad nasal root, upslanted fissures, motor retardation. One R. Smigiel1, B. Halina1, M. Sasiadek1, N. Blin2; patient has a congenital cardiac anomaly (VSD and PDA). Family his- 1Genetic Department Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland, tory did not reveal any other family members with similar findings or 2Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University of different congenital anomalies. Tuebingen, Germany. The similar findings of these cases suggested a chromosomal disor- Occurrence of double trisomy in the same individual is a relatively der. Cytogenetic investigation demonstrated del(9)(p22->pter) in both rare phenomenon. In most cases double nondisjunction leads to an cases. The chromosomal analysis for parents are in progress. inevitable prenatal lethality. Multiple aneuploidy, observed in live born The first patient has a number of clinical findings invariably found in children usually involves sex chromosomes together with trisomy 13, the 9p- syndrome. However, the other patient has a partial optic nerve 18 or 21. Multiple aneuploidy occurs as a consequence of a minimum atrophy which has not been reported before. of two errors during meiosis. The zygote carrying a double aneuploi- dy usually results from a double nondisjunction in a single germ cell P0289. Cytogenetic, morphologic and immunophenotypic however the coincidence of a single nondisjunction occurring in both pattern in omani patients with de novo acute myeloid leukemia gametes was also observed. More than 90 cases of nonmosaic tri- A. M. Udayakumar1, A. Pathare2, S. Alkindi1, H. Khan2, J. Ur Rehman2, F. Zia2, somy 21 and numerical sex chromosome aberrations were presented A. Al Ghazaly2, N. Nusrat2, I. Khan2, M. Zachariah2, Y. Wali1, D. Dennison2, J. by Kovaleva and Mutton, but among them only 14 cases were diag- Raeburn1; nosed with 48,XXX,+21. We report a case of double trisomy involving 1College of Medicine & Health Sciences, Muscat, Oman, 2Sultan Qaboos Uni- chromosomes 21 and X in a female infant (karyotype 48,XXX,+21). versity Hospital, Muscat, Oman. The child presented dysmorphic features such as hypotrophy, micro- Objective: To characterize the cytogenetic, morphologic and immuno- cephaly with a flat occiput, midface hypoplasia, up-slanting palpebral phenotypic pattern in ethnic Omani patients with de novo Acute My- fissures, epicanthic folds, low set ears, open mouth with macroglos- eloid Leukemia (AML). sia and protruding tongue, short neck, small hands and feet, simian Material and Methods: Successful cytogenetic results were obtained creases, wide space between first and second toes, a umbilical hernia, from 63 de novo AML patients. Forty-one were male and 22 female dislocated hips, congenital heart defect, a mild hearing loss and hypo- with a median age of 25 years. Chromosomes were obtained by short- thyroidism. The observed dysmorphic features as well as other defor- term cultures and interpreted after G-banding. The diagnosis of AML mities are consistent with those characteristic for trisomy 21. However, was based on French-American-British (FAB) cytomorphology criteria genetic counselling in such cases is difficult. Neither data concerning & the immunophenotyping of bone marrow. the clinical outcome of the double trisomy children nor any information Results: Karyotypic abnormalities were present in 39 patients(61.9%) concerning the recurrence risk for their parents exist to date. with 44.2% in adults and 17.7% in children. Karyotypes with sole ab- normalities amounted to 31.7%(n=20). Chromosomal abnormalities P0287. Delineation of the deletion breakpoints in two unrelated were more common in patients with FAB-M2 subtype (n=22;68.2%). patients with 4q terminal deletion syndrome The most frequent subtype observed was M2 (n=22;34.9%). Among S. S. Kaalund1, R. S. Møller1,2, A. Tészás3, M. Miranda2, H. H. Ropers4, R. the normal karyotypes (n=24;38.1%) M2 -subtype was again the most Ullmann4, N. Tommerup1, Z. Tümer1; frequent (n=7;29.2%) followed by M4(n=4;16.67%). Among balanced 1Wilhelm Johanssen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department translocations t(8;21) and t(15;17) were observed in 11.1% and 9.5% of Cellular and Molecular medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, respectively. Inv(16) was seen in 3.2%. Trisomy 8 was the most fre- Denmark, 2Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, 3Department of Medi- quent numerical anomaly found in 11.1%. Monosomy 7 was seen 4.7%. cal Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, Hungary, 4Max Planck Discussion: This is the first systematic cytogenetic report from the eth- nic Omani population [1.78 million] studied over the last 5 years from a single institution. We observed that findings in our study were similar Cytogenetics  to reports from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait but the frequency of abnor- protruding ears, heart septal defect, and slightly delayed psychomotor malities varied with a mixture of +8, t(8;21) & t(15;17). Morphologically development. These characteristics should be taken into account in our patients differed with M2 subtype as the commonest, whereas, order to identify other patients. their reports showed M4 and M3 subtypes as most frequently occur- ring subtype in their patient population respectively. Table 1. New deletions Chr. P0290. Screening of subtle copy number changes in Aicardi P. Clinical features Deletion size Reference Syndrome Patients with a high resolution X-chromosome array- Breakpoints CGH 4y2m girl with postnatal growth retardation, S. Yilmaz1, H. Fontaine1, K. Brochet1, M. Grégoire1, M. Devignes2, J. Schaff1, C. microcephaly, ptosis, down-slanting palpebral fissures, long eyelashes and micrognathia. Philippe1, C. Nemos1, J. McGregor3, P. Jonveaux1; Pescucci et Halluces are long, broad and medially deviated, 2q24.3-31.1 1University hospital of Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 2CNRS-UMR 1 while the other toes are laterally deviated and 10.4 Mb al, Eur J Med Genet, 2007, 7503, LORIA, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 3INSERM Unité 689, Paris, remarkably short with hypoplastic phalanges. 165.580-175.871 Mb 50:21-32 She shows developmental delay, seizures, lack France. of eye contact, hand stereotypies and sleep Aicardi syndrome is a very uncommon neurodevelopmental disorder disturbances with breath holding affecting almost exclusively females. Chief features include infantile 13y8m boy with severe mental retardation, spasms, corpus callosal agenesis, and chorioretinal abnormalities. absence of speech, sleep disturbances, behav- ioural problems. He presents macrocephaly, high Aicardi syndrome is a sporadic disorder and hypothesized to be caused 2q31.2-32.3 Mencarelli et al, forehead, thick and coarse hair, thick eyebrows, 2 13 Mb in press, Am J by heterozygous mutations in an X linked-gene but up to now without synophris, increased inner and outer canthal dis- 180.13-192.88 Mb Med Genet any defined candidate region on the X chromosome. Array based com- tance, bifid nasal tip, high palate, micrognathia, dysmorphic, right ear, bilateral sandal gap and parative genomic hybridisation has become the method of choice for long and tapering fingers. the detection of microdeletions and microduplications at high resolu- 7y6m female with neurodevelopmental delay, tion. In this study, for the first time, 18 Aicardi syndrome patients were postnatal short stature and atrial septal defect. analyzed with a full-coverage X-chromosomal BAC arrays at a theoret- Patent ductus arteriosus and tricuspid insuf- 6q24.3-25.1 Caselli et al, ficiency were also noted at birth. Medial flare ical resolution of 82 kb. Copy number changes were validated by real 3 eyebrows, dysmorphic helix of the right ear, 2,6 Mb in press, Eur J 148.785-151.289 Mb Med Genet time quantitation. No disease-associated aberrations were identified. cupshaped left ear, anteverted nares, long and smooth philtrum, thin upper lip, high vaulted For such conditions as Aicardi syndrome, in which there are no familial palate are noted. cases, additional patients should be studied in order to identify rare cases with submicroscopic abnormalities, and to pursue a positional Table 2. Other results. candidate gene approach. Chr. Position Type of rear- Clinical features Conclusions (approximate rangement P0291. The role of chromosomal abnormalities in primary size) amenorrhoea Case 1. Hypotonia, seizures, ataxia, sleep B. O. Petrovic, A. Ljubic; disturbances, gastroesophageal reflux, 15q11-13.1 Institute for gynecology and obstetrics, Belgrade, Serbia. dolichocolon, hypospadia, monolateral 165.8-175.8 deletion Amenorrhoea is absence or cessation of menses. If menstruation does ionfg tuoiensa.l hernia, bilateral 2-3 syndactyly (5 Mb) not begin by the age of 16 years in the presence of female second- Case 2. Bilateral corneal leukoma, iris and 22q11.21 ary sexual maturation, or does not begin by 14 years in the absence retinal coloboma, cleft lip and palate, VSD, 17.2-19.7 deletion of secondary sexual maturation, the condition is classified as prima- postaxial polydactyly of hands and feet. 2.5 Mb ry amenorrhoea. This paper deals with investigation of how primary Case 3. MURCS association , short stat- Known deletion amenorrhoea and chromosomal abnormalities are related. For the unroes,e d weliathy ebdu lbboonues taipg,e h, ilgohn gp afalactees a, ntudb ular 1272.q21-11.92.17 deletion in atypical patient period of last ten years we have analyzed 62 patients with primary nasal speech, small and low-set ears, left 2.5 Mb. amenorrhoea. Karyotype from the peripheral blood lymphocytes and carotid artery hypoplasia. G banding were performed according to standard protocols. Chromo- Case 4. Psycomotor delay, obesity, round somal abnormalities were detected in 16 cases (25,8%). Male karyo- fparcoigensa, tmhiascmro, gslyonsospiah raisn,d t hmicakc reoysetobmroiwa,s , 1167.5p-1210.2.1 deletion type (46,XY) was found in seven cases. In three cases monosomy X strabism, depressed nasal bridge, bulbous 3.6 Mb nasal tip, small feet. (45,X) was found. In two cases isochromosome X (46,XiXq) was de- tected, as well as a case of X chromosome trisomy (47,XXX). Mosaic Case 5. Neonatal hypotonia, mild mental karyotypes 45,X/46,XiXq, 46,XX/47,XXY and 45,X/46,XX were found raetttiaturddaet,i ohno,a vrisseu ov-osicpea,t isatlr daebfiiscmit,u sso, cdiyasbmleo r- 17p11.2 RSemciipthro-Mcaalg oefn tihse in one case each. These findings suggest that a consistent number of phic features such as telecantus, epican- 16.5-20.1 duplication syndrome dele- cases with primary amenorrhoea (about 25%) can be associated with tus, down-slanting palpebral fessures, 3.6 Mb tion medial flared eyebrows. genetic anomalies. Case 6. Truncal obesity, tall stature, hypoa- Xq25.1 cusya, hypothyroidism. 124.7-127.5 deletion P0292. Array-CGH analysis: new deletion syndromes and 2.8 Mb atypical phenotype in old deletion syndromes Case 7. Mental retardation, obesity, thick 2q37.3-qter Polymorphism R. Caselli, F. Mari, F. T. Papa, M. A. Mencarelli, V. Uliana, F. Ariani, I. Meloni, I. lips, large prominent teeth, tapering fingers, 242.4-ter deletion wave shaped eyelids. 0.5 Mb Longo, A. Renieri; Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. A group of 28 unrelated MCA/MR patients with normal karyotype, se- P0293. Array-CGH screening in 100 patients with mental lected from those attending the Medical Genetics Unit of the Univer- retardation sity of Siena has been analyzed by oligo array-CGH with an average E. Landais1, A. Schneider1, N. Bednarek2, P. Sabouraud2, J. Motte2, J. resolution of 75Kb (Agilent Human Genome CGH Microarray Kit 44B). Couchot3, M. Khoury4, R. Klink4, E. Lagonotte1, C. Leroy1, M. Mozelle1, D. Gail- A new “de novo” deletion has been identified in 3 patients (table 1). lard1, M. Doco-Fenzy1; During the screening, we have also identified, 3 known deletions in 1Service de Génétique, CHU Reims, UFR de Médecine, Reims, France, 2Ser- atypical patients, 1 duplication reciprocal of the deletion responsible vice de Pédiatrie, American Memorial Hospital, Reims, France, 3Service de for Smith-Magenis and 2 polymorphisms (table 2). Pédiatrie, CHG, Charleville, France, 4Service de Pédiatrie, CHG, Laon, France. In conclusion, in this highly selected population we identified patho- Mental retardation (MR) is a major problem affecting 3% of the popula- genic segmental deletions/duplications in 7 out of 28 patients (about tion. Chromosome imbalances larger than 5 Megabases are detected 25%). We compared the clinical features of patients with new deletions by 550 band resolution R or G band karyotype. The Array-CGH is able with other rare cases described in the literature in order to define clini- to detect interstitial smaller deletions or duplications. cal diagnostic criteria useful in the clinical practice. In particular, for the We report on the results obtained by molecular karyotyping with 1Mb 6q25 deletion the emerging phenotype is characterized by short pal- BAC and PAC array-CGH screening in a population of 100 patients pebral fissures, smooth philtrum, thin upper lip, asymmetric dysplastic affected by MR with or without multiple congenital anomaly (MCA). For Cytogenetics 100 25 patients of this study, an abnormal karyotype had been previously sub-groups were cultured with different borax concentration (0.1 mg/ identified. ml, 0.15 mg/ml, 0.2 mg/ml and 0.3 mg/ml respectively). Human chro- We used the 1Mb BAC and PAC Array (VIB Leuven), six patients were mosomes were studied for abnormalities through Giemsa-staining and analysed by experiment using a triangle testing. The data were anal- G-banding. The results show that the number of metaphase chromo- ysed with the arrayCGHbase software provided by J.Vermeesch. somes are reduced when lymphocyte cells are cultured with 0.15 mg/ Results : Copy number variants (CNV) were found in 45% of patients : ml (57.22 %), 0.2 mg/ml (50.84%) and 0.3 mg/ml (42.27%) borax con- 24 known and 7 not yet described. centration. The results show statistically significant difference between Array-CGH confirmed and mapped the unbalanced karyotype rear- control and experimental sub-groups (P<0.05). The sister chromatid rangements in all the 25 patients with known cytogenetic abnormal- separation is found in the 0.3 mg/ml borax concentration experimental ity. For two of these patients, additional deletions and duplications subgroup. It shows that borax (0.15, 0.2 and 0.3 mg/ml) effect to cell improved the cytogenetic analysis and therefore modified the genetic and human chromosome abnormalities (both numerical and structural counselling. abnormalities). Borax may cause human chromosome abnormalities Among the 75 left MCA/MR patients : Two had large deletions and one and lead to genetic defect. had a large duplication involving homogeneously R-stained regions regarding 1p (3.2Mb), 10q (2.2Mb) and 11q (1.5Mb) loci. Nineteen pa- P0296. Significance of Her-2/neu, c-myc amplification and p53 tients had rearrangements involving a single BAC or PAC clone. inactivation detected by FISH in Egyptian patients with breast For three cases, the mother became pregnant during the study and a cancer prenatal diagnosis could be proposed. These results will be reported M. S. Aly1,2, M. F. Ismail3, H. M. Khaled4, H. M. Mohamed1; and discussed with the clinical data. 1Faculty of Science, Beni Suef University, Beni Suef, Egypt, 2Faculty of Sci- Grant : AOL 2003-2005 - PHRC 2005 CHU Reims ence, King Khaled University, Abha, Saudi Arabia, 3Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt, 4National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, P0294. Array-CGH characterization of familial and de novo Egypt. “apparently balanced” translocations in patients with abnormal Breast cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related deaths in women phenotype worldwide. The clinical course of this disease is highly variable and C. Sismani1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli2, M. Ioannides1, V. Anastasiadou3, G. Stylianidou3, clinicians continuously search for prognostic parameters that can ac- E. Papadopoulou4, Z. Kosmaidou5, E. Kanavakis2, A. Kolialexi2, A. Mavrou2, P. curately predict prognosis, and indicate a suitable adjuvant therapy C. Patsalis1; for each patient. Amplification of the two oncogenes: Her-2/neu and c- 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Department of Cytogenet- myc and inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene p53 are frequently ics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Aghia Sophia Childrens Hospital, University of Athens, encountered in breast carcinomas. The purpose of this study was to Choremio Laboratory, Athens, Greece, 3Arch Makarios III Hospital, Department use the fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for the assessment of Paediatrics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4University Hospital Of Heraklion, Department of Her-2/neu and c-myc amplification and p53 inactivation and to re- of Paediatrics, Heraklion, Greece, 5Alexandra Hospital, Department of Genet- late these molecular markers with the clinicopathological factors. The ics, Athens, Greece. study was conducted on 34 samples obtained from 33 females and We have applied 1Mb resolution array-CGH to investigate 12 cases 1 male with breast carcinomas and 17 samples obtained from 16 fe- of “apparently balanced” translocations in patients with mental retar- males and 1 male with benign breast lesions. Results revealed that the dation and congenital malformations. Six cases were de novo and level of her-2/neu, c-myc and p53 in the malignant group was signifi- six familial. In the familial cases the patients had an abnormal phe- cantly increased as compared to the benign group. On relating to clini- notype but their karyotype appeared identical to other phenotypically copathological factors, p53 was significantly associated with increased normal translocation carriers of the family. Chromosomal and various patient’s age. The sensitivity of the investigated markers significantly FISH analyses suggested that the rearrangements were “truly bal- increased with larger tumor size. Her-2/neu and p53 showed a signifi- anced” in all patients. Array-CGH however, revealed cryptic genomic cant increase in low-grade tumors whereas c-myc showed a highly sig- imbalances in three cases (25%), two de novo and one familial. All nificant increase in high-grade tumors. Her-2/neu and c-myc showed array-CGH findings were confirmed by FISH. The nature and type of significant increase at late stages of disease. p53 and her-2/neu were abnormalities differed among the three cases. In the first case a de significantly associated with positive lymph nodal status. A significant novo t(9;15)(q31;q26), a complex rearrangement was identified involv- correlation was obtained between the levels of the three biomarkers ing a ~6.1Mb duplication on chromosome 9, a ~10Mb deletion and an to each other. Conclusively, the combination of Her-2/neu, c-myc and inversion on chromosome 15. These imbalances were near but not p53 can stratify patients into different risk groups. directly associated with the translocation breakpoints. In the second case a de novo t(4;9)(q26;p24), a ~6.6Mb deletion was identified on P0297. Mosaic Down syndrome with i(21q) associated with chromosome 7 which is unrelated to the translocation. In the third der(22)t(21;22)(q11.2;q11.2) derived from the carrier mother with case (t(4;7)(q21;p15)-familial), a ~4.3Mb and a ~2.3Mb deletions were mosaic duplication of cat eye critical region. found at the translocation breakpoints. In the remaining cases the K. Kurosawa, K. Sameshima, H. Yoshihashi; translocations appeared balanced at 1Mb resolution. This study pro- Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan. vides additional evidence that cryptic genomic imbalances are com- Rearrangements of 22q11.2 region represent several genomic disor- mon in patients with abnormal phenotype and “apparently balanced” ders, including the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (VCFS/DGS), cat eye translocations not only in de novo but also in familial cases. The use syndrome (CES) and der(22) syndrome. The rearrangements are of microarrays with higher resolution such as high-density oligo-arrays thought to be caused by nonallelic homologous recombination be- may reveal that the frequency of cryptic genomic imbalances among tween low-copy repeats (LCR22s). The 22q11 rearrangements disor- these patients is even higher. ders have a wide variety of clinical features. We report a boy with mosaic Down syndrome with 46,XY,i(21)(q10) P0295. Effect of borax to human chromosome abnormalities and 46,XY,der(22)t(21;22)(q11.2q11.2), who has mild developmental M. Pongsavee; delay and dysmorphic appearance. His mother, phenotypically normal Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Patumthani, Thailand. female, also had the 46,XX,der(22)t(21;22)(q11.2;q11.2) clone with The effect of borax to human chromosome abnormalities was anal- normal female karyotype with the ratio of 2:8. FISH analysis using ysed in this study. Borax is a form of boron compound. The chemical BAC clones mapped 22q11 region (RP11-100K2, RP11-71J20, RP11- name of borax is sodium borate. Borax is toxic for the somatic cells 357H16) showed that the breakpoint was proximal to the LCR-2. The and may cause abnormal human genetic materials. Venous blood from duplicated region was correspondence with the CES type I region. The 30 male students in Thammasat University (age 18 - 25 years) were mechanism of mosaic i(21q) is likely to be associated with the rear- collected to do lymphocyte cell culture. This experiment was divided rangements and division of chromosomes in mitosis with unbalanced into two groups, the first group was the control group and the second translocation between the acrocentric chromosomes. This is the first group was the experimental group. The lymphocyte cells in the control case report of duplication of CES type I region with mosaic Down syn- group were cultured without borax. The experimental group was di- drome. We present phenotypic variation among the 22q11 rearrange- vided into four sub-groups. The lymphocyte cells in each experimental ments disorders including the boy and his mother.Cytogenetics 101 P0298. Female-specific instability of pericentromeric regions in P0300. Comparison of subtelomeric FISH, Multi-FISH and CGH human embryo development: the earliest clinically significant for the screening of chromosomal rearrangements in 90 patients manifestation of difference between the sexes with unexplained mental retardation and dysmorphic features N. V. Kovaleva; P. Callier, L. Faivre, N. Marle, C. Thauvin, J. Guy, A. Mosca, D. Assous, F. St. Petersburg Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies under the Federal Huet, F. Mugneret; Agency of Health Care and Social Development, St. Petersburg, Russian Fed- Département de Génétique, CHU le Bocage, DIJON, France. eration. Mental retardation affect 1-3% of the general population and the ae- Recent studies on the sex ratio (SR, male to female ratio) among chro- tiology remains unknown in many cases. Conventional cytogenetics mosome mosaicism carriers suggested female-specific chromosome detected rearrangements of more than 10 Mb in size. The develop- loss and centromere instability during early human development [1]. ment of molecular cytogenetic techniques permits to identify cryptic Mosaicism results from later gestation postzygotic formation, while for- rearrangements, but their frequency is uncertain in patients with un- mation of a chromosome rearrangement in the first zygotic cleavage explained mental retardation. Only few studies have been performed results in nonmosaics. Purpose: Nonmosaic homologous acrocentric to compare the potential of molecular cytogenetic techniques to detect rearrangements (Rea), both balanced (blRea) and unbalanced (un- chromosomal rearrangements. Here we present a study including 90 blRea) mostly result from post-fertilization events [2]. Therefore, the patients with unexplained mental retardation and dysmorphic features study on the SR in carriers of a de novo nonmosaic Rea might elucidate with normal high-resolution karyotypes, investigated by subtelomeric when sex-specific centromere instability becomes manifest. Method: FISH, CGH and Multi-FISH. Review of balanced and unbalanced homologous Rea cases of known A total of 6/90 abnormalities were found (6.6%), including three de sex and mode of ascertainment identified from the literature. Results: novo deletions (1pter, 4pter and 3q21.1-q21.3), two de novo unbal- (1) Increased proportion of females in prenatally detected carriers of anced translocations [der(8)t(6;8)(p25;p23] and [der(22)t(10;22)(q26;q both blRea (5M/8F) and unblRea (10M/13F). (2) Female prevalence 13)], and one unbalanced translocation inherited from the father [der(2 among postnatally ill-defined carriers of unblRea (25M/39F). (3) These )t(2;10)(q37;q26)pat]. Subtelomeric FISH evidenced 5/6 chromosomal data cannot be explained by a strong intrauterine selection against unbalances but could not detect the interstitial 3q21.1-q21.3 deletion. male carriers of unblRea since a female preponderance was found CGH revealed 6/6 chromosomal rearrangements but did not detected among miscarried fetuses (8M/13F). (4) Female prevalence among the 10qter duplication of the de novo unbalanced [der(2)t(2;10)(q37; patients with PWS due to 45,der(15q;15q) (6M/14F). (5) Overall, there q26)pat] translocation. Multi-FISH did not permit to detect any chro- were 54 males and 87 females in the study group (SR=0.62), signifi- mosomal abnormalities. Molecular cytogenetics studies with specific cantly different from the expected ratio of 1.06 (p=0.0023). Conclu- BACs probes of the rearrangements are in progress to better define sion: These observations indicate sex-specific centromere instability the size of the chromosomal abnormalities. We compared our results at the earliest stage of human embryo development. It is suggested with previously published studies. This study confirmed the significant that reactivation of the paternal X chromosome occurring in the female frequency of subtelomeric rearrangements in patient with unexplained zygote, might interfere with the chromatin remodeling process, thus mental retardation, dysmorphic features and demonstrates the impor- contributing to the increased fragility of pericentromeric regions. tance of CGH technology to detect interstitial and subtelomeric rear- [1]Kovaleva NV. AJMG 136A:401-13 rangements. [2]Robinson et al. AJHG 54:290-302 P0301. Identification of prognostic chromosomal aberrations in P0299. High resolution oligo array CGH analysis of challenging childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia samples. R. Lasan1, J. Konja2, L. Rajic2, R. Feminic2, D. Begovic1; S. Song, J. Collins; 1Genetics and Metabolism Division, Pediatrics Department, University Hospital Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, United States. Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Pediatrics Department, University Hospital In recent years, array-based Comparative Genomic Hybridization Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. (aCGH) has been refined to determine chromosomal changes at pro- Cytogenetic abnormalities emerge as a very important characteristic gressively higher resolutions. This evolving technology is, however, of chilhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with major diagnostic somewhat hampered by the large amounts of input DNA required and prognostic impact. - a minimum of 150,000 copies of a human genome, or 0.5 µg, are We report bone marrow cytogenetic analysis (CTG) at the time of generally needed to process one aCGH microarray. The GenomePlex diagnosis 85 children (36 females and 49 males) with de novo ALL Whole Genome Amplification (WGA) kit provides a rapid method for aged from 2 months to 15 years old. Uninformative investigations were processing biological samples of limited quantity, expanding the appli- 2.1%. Normal karyotype was detected in 40.0% (3 with constitutial cation of aCGH technology to analysis of nanogram quantities of DNA. +21) cases. The analysis was performed in the period of the last five Furthermore, this global exponential amplification method enables re- years. searchers to representatively amplify genomic DNA from samples that Clonal chromosomal abnormalities were present in 60% of the pa- have been fragmented to an average size of less than 1 kb. This fea- tients. Changes in ploidy were found in 65.3% of abnormal cases. ture may enable CGH analysis of FFPE samples that were previously The distribution of ploidy groups was: hyperdiploidy with >50 chromo- thought to be unusable due to their limited amounts of DNA and high somes in 34.7% (seven of them were associated with structural chro- level of degradation. The data presented in this poster demonstrate mosomal changes), hyperdiploidy (47-50 chromosomes) in 14.2%, the high quality data that can be generated using Agilent’s high den- pseudodiploidy in 4.1%, hypodiploidy (35-45 chromosomes) 12.2% sity oligo aCGH microarrays in combination with Sigma’s GenomePlex of the patients. The most frequently acquired numerical abnormalities WGA kit. Firstly, WGA lowers the required minimum amount of starting were: +4, +6, +8, +14, +17, +18, +21 and +X. Structural aberrations DNA to as little as 10 ng. In addition, the ability to amplify low molecular were found in 34.7% of the patients. The most frequent structural ab- weight DNA, less than 0.5-1 kb in size, is demonstrated. Finally, we errations were: del(6q), del(9p), t(9;22), rearrangments of chromo- compare the performance of the GenomePlex WGA method to that some 14q, 5q and 12p (mostly like a part of complex karyotype), and of a Phi29-based isothermal amplification method in generating high t(12;21)(p13;q22.3). quality aCGH data on Agilent microarrays. All aCGH testing has shown The stuctural and numerical aberrations observed in 69.5% patients GenomePlex amplified material to behave comparably to larger quan- were correiated by FISH. Translocations were: t(12;21), t(9;22), t(1;12), tities of purified genomic DNA. and one marker chromosome was identified as der (21)t(21;?). For re- sidual disease, interphase-FISH in combination with cell enrichment or RT-PCR is extremely useful. Cytogenetic investigations at diagnosis and during follow up docu- mented unique chromosomal aberrations which yielded diagnostic and/or prognostic significance for each relevant patient.Cytogenetics 102 P0302. Cytogenetic analysis of the human genome reactivity to P0304. Cytogenetic examination of healthy individuals for the the potentially mutagen environment represented by ionizing assessment of their individual sensitivity to ionizing radiation radiation N. Ryabchenko, E. Dyomina; D. Usurelu, D. Cimponeriu, P. Apostol, I. Radu, L. Gavrila; R.E. Kavetsky Institute of Experimental Pathology, Oncology and Radiobiology Institute of Genetics - University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania. of National Academy, Kyiv, Ukraine. One of the most important mutagen agents in developing different The increased level of chromosomal abnormalities in somatic cells is types of cancer is the ionizing radiation. So, in this study, we are focus- proposed as the marker of increased cancer risk. Recent reports have ing our analysis on persons who are working in a potentially mutagen suggested that elevated chromosome aberration yields observed fol- environment (near an accelerator for ionizing radiation). lowing irradiation of peripheral lymphocytes in G phase of cell cycle 2 We’ve analyzed twelve persons (one control and ten workers) by clas- caused by the impaired DNA repair and hereditary predisposition to sical cytogenetic technique and by FISH. cancer. After the cytogenetic analysis we’ve determined that there were not G assay is based on high chromosomal sensitivity of human periph- 2 any important chromosomal modifications, the only one present being eral blood lymphocytes to radiation. Examination of 103 relatively PCDs (premature centromere division) with a frequency of 5 -11%. healthy individuals was carried out by means of the adopted G-assay 2 Counting on the fact that the PCDs was present even in the control in consisting in the analysis of radiation induced cytogenetic effects in 2 % frequency and in the field literature being considered normal to peripheral blood lymphocytes in the most radiosensitive post-synthetic have 7-8% of PCDs, we have concluded that the percentage we’ve phase of cell cycle. The dose of test gamma-irradiation of cell cultures obtained for that subjects is normal and it is not due to the effect of the was 1,5 Gy. working environment. The obtained cytogenetic parameters induced by the test irradiation The most important targets for ionizing radiation being the telomeres, in G-phase of cell cycle revealed high interindividual variability: 0,18 - 2 we’ve tested from this point of view on our subjects the eventual ef- 1,24 aberrations/metaphase, with mean value - 0,410,10; coefficient of fect of radiation, presumptive to be in the environment, by FISH tech- variation (CV) - 24%. Chromatid breaks prevailed in aberration spectra nique. up to 98% with mean 0,370,097, CV = 27%. Analysis of the character Comparing the frequency of the telomeric signals obtained from the of chromatid aberrations distribution made it possible to reveal 12% control (98%-100 %/metaphase) to those from that subjects (91%- (12/103) individuals with increased chromosomal radiosensitivity. Indi- 96%/metaphase), we found that the differences can not be considered cations, which reflect the prime contingent for cytogenetic assessment significant. of individual radiosensitivity, were carried out. Corroborating the obtained data, we can conclude that for our eleven Taking into account connection between the radiation induced high analyzed subjects there are not obvious chromosomal modification de- levels of chromosomal aberrations, genome instability and the ten- termined by fact that they are working with a radiation source. dency toward increased risk of cancer, individuals with high values of chromosomal radiosensitivity can be related to the group of potentially P0303. Frequency of mosaic aneuploidy in children with increased radiation and cancerogenic risk who require thorough medi- idiopathic autism cal and cytogenetical monitoring. Y. B. Yurov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova2,1, I. Y. Iourov1,2, I. A. Demidova2, A. K. Bere- sheva2, V. S. Kravets2, V. V. Monakhov1, A. D. Kolotii2, V. Y. Voinova-Ulas2, N. L. P0305. Clinical findings in a patient with interstitial deletion 1q31 Gorbachevskaya1; and two patients with terminal deletion 1q syndrome 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa- E. Karaca, S. Başaran Yılmaz, U. Yanar, B. Bağlama, B. Tüysüz; tion, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Roszdrav, Moscow, Russian Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Federation. Turkey. It has been repeatedly suggested that numerous human diseases in- We report 3 cases of de novo 1q deletion. The first case is 3 years 6/12 cluding major psychiatric disorders could be associated with mosaic months old child that has a story of IUGR. His language and social aneuploidy. Here, we have attempted to test this hypothesis concern- developmant was delayed but gross motor skill was normal and he had ing autism, a common childhood psychiatric disorder. About 5-10% of microcephaly, fine and sparse hair, sparseness on medial parts of eye- autism cases are known to be caused by chromosomal abnormalities brows, flat-high forehead, broad nasal root, short nose, low-posterior or gene mutations. However, mosaic aneuploidy in autism has not ever set ears, simian crease on his left hand, clinodactyly and micropenis. been studied. We surveyed stochastic aneuploidy in children with/with- His weight, height and head circumference were under 3. centile. An out idiopathic autism by interphase multiprobe fluorescence in situ hy- accessory spleen found in abdomen USG. Karyotype analysis showed bridization (mFISH). The rate of chromosome loss and gain involving 46,XY, del (1)(q25.3-q31.3). Second and thirth cases are 3 years and six arbitrarily selected autosomes (chromosomes 1, 9, 15, 16, 17, 18) 4 years 7/12 months old of males. They both have a story of SGA and sex chromosomes was assessed in peripheral blood cells of 60 and clinical features of hyperactivity, severe neuromotor and mental unaffected male children and 116 male children with idiopathic autism. retardation, fine-sparse hair, microcephaly, epicanthus, hypertelorism, Studying over 420,000 cells, we have determined the mean frequency depressed nose root, hipospadias and seizures The second case also of stochastic aneuploidy in control and autism: has prominent glabella, pseudostrabismus, big ears, cryptorchidism and his MRI shows agenesia of corpus callosum. The thirth case was Control Chromosome loss Chromosome gain referred us with the complaint of frequent pulmoner enfections with Autosomes 0.58% (95% CI 0.42-0.75%) 0.15% (95% CI 0.09-0.21%) cellular immune deficiency and atypic face that consists of full cheek, Sex chromosomes _ 1.11% (95% CI 0.90-1.31%) microretrognathia apart from the second. These cases karyotype anal- ysis revelaed 46,XY, del (1) (q42.2-qter). In conclusion; our first case Autism has similar features with two other cases of 1q31 deletion reported in Autosomes 0.60% (95% CI 0.37-0.83%) 0.22% (95% CI 0.14-0.30%) the literature, however, motor development was normal. Second and Sex chromosomes _ 1.01% (95% CI 0.85-1.17%) thirth cases each have the characteristic features of del 1(q42-qter) CI - confidence interval patients reported before as hipospadias, severe motor-mental retarda- The difference of stochastic aneuploidy rate was insignificant. However, the frequency tion, seizures, depressed nose root, fine-sparse hair and agenesia of of mosaic aneuploidy over the background level was found in 19 (16%) of 116 children corpus callosum. with idiopathic autism, while outlier values were not found in controls. These data identify mosaic aneuploidy as a new autism genetic risk factor. Therefore, molecular cytogenetic analysis of somatic mosaicism is warranted in children with idiopathic au- tism. Supported by INTAS and RGNF (060600639a).Cytogenetics 10 P0306. Lipoatrophic panniculitis and developmental delay 7 patients (46.7%) and recurrent abortion in 2 patients, brain demy- associated with an interstitial deletion of chromosome 10q elination was present in 9 patients accompanied with hypgenesis of S. A. McKee1, A. Beckett2, M. Rooney3; corpus callosum in 3 patients and mental retardation was present in 7 1Department of Medical Genetics, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, United King- patients. Chromosomal studies showed 18 deletion in 7 patients (dele- dom, 2Northern Ireland Regional Cytogenetics Laboratory, Belfast, United tion of 18p in 5 patients and 18q in 2 patients), translocation in 3, and Kingdom, 3Rheumatology Department, Musgrave Park Hospital, Belfast, United duplication in 2 patients, inversion in 2 and ring in one patient. The Kingdom. collection of the cytogenetic and clinical data will help to delineate the A three year-old girl presented with a history of an erythematous rash phenotype associated with various chromosome 18 aberrations these on the lower limbs that was followed by widespread atrophy of fat all findings will be informative for the families at risk in genetic counsel- over the body, but sparing the head. Skin biopsy revealed findings in ing and prenatal diagnosis for subsequent pregnancies. In this study keeping with Weber-Christian panniculitis (WCP), but no other signs there was bilateral knee dislocation and hyperpigmentation in a case or laboratory findings of autoimmune disease. She later developed a of 18(q11.2) duplication a finding to our knowledge has not been de- patch of morphoea in the epigastric region. She had had a history of an scribed before, which indicate a possible relation ship between chro- operation to remove an area of fibroepithelial hyperplasia on the hard mosome 18 and knee dislocation. palate as a baby, and she had a known diagnosis of mild pulmonary valve stenosis and a small ventricular septal defect (now closed). She P0309. Case report. A newborn with ring chromosome 21. had a broad face but was not strikingly dysmorphic. Speech develop- I. Vool1, R. Zordania1, I. Neupakojeva1, L. Süvari1, K. Joost1, T. Ilus2, P. Tam- ment was very significantly delayed, and other aspects of development mur2; were only mildly delayed. Chromosome analysis revealed an intersti- 1Tallinn Children Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, tial deletion of chromosome 10q, ISCN: 46,XX,del(10)(q21.2q22.1). Estonia. Further analysis to refine the breakpoints is ongoing. WCP is a rare A newborn boy with congenital heart and cleft palate malformations autoimmune condition resulting in the inflammatory destruction of fat and with hypotrophy -2SD was hospitalized. The chromosome analy- cells and localised or generalised lipoatrophy. Deletions of this region sis from cultured lymphocytes was performed using trypsine-Giemsa of chromosome 10q are rare, although WCP has been reported in a method. The chromosome abnormality was established: 46,XY,- case of an unbalanced translocation of 10p material onto 10q26. We 21,+mar. There was very little dark part from chromosome left. postulate that a gene (or genes) within our patient’s deleted region is The FISH analysis was performed and revealed a ring chromosome involved in WCP (and potentially similar autoimmune disorders). 21: 46,XY,r(21)(::?-q22.13::q22.3->qter). P0307. Prenatal diagnosis of a de novo partial duplication of Usually such abnormalities originate de novo . the long arm of chromosome 17 in a foetus with polydactyly, The parents refused to give material for chromosome analysis. cardiopathy and hydrocephaly Several abnormalities was founded in the clinical evaluation of the D. J. Lederer1, C. Debauche2, J. Biard3, Y. Gillerot1, M. Ravoet1, C. Sibille1, W. patient: large bilateral cleft palate, microrethrognathia, deep-set eyes, Courtens1; short palpebral fissures, big nouse, bicuspidal aortic valve, pulmonar 1Center of Human Genetics, University Hospital St-Luc, 1200 Brussels, Bel- stenosis. gium, 2Department of Neonatology, University Hospital St-Luc, 1200 Brussels, The patient died about 12 month age. Belgium, 3Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital St-Luc, 1200 Brussels, Belgium. P0310. Five cases with chromosome anomalies involving We report a female dysmorphic infant born at 37 weeks of gestation chromosome 5 - genotype-phenotype correlation who presented polydactyly, hydrocephaly, short limbs, a VSD, and hy- A. Sireteanu, C. Rusu, M. Voloşciuc, E. Braha, V. Gorduza, M. Gramescu, M. potonia. Fetal ultrasounds performed at 29 weeks of gestation showed Covic; IUGR, short limbs, cardiopathy, and hydrocephaly. The clinical diag- Medical Genetics Center, Iasi, Romania. nosis of Ellis-van Creveld syndrome was evoked. Amniocentesis was We present 5 cases with different abnormalities involving chromosome performed and revealed a partial duplication of chromosome 17, con- 5 in order to illustrate suggestive features for the diagnosis, but also firmed by FISH analyses. Parental karyotyping was normal, indicating to discuss management directions (investigation protocol and follow- a de novo anomaly in the child. Parents decided to continue the preg- up). The cases were diagnosed between 2002-2006 in Iasi Medical nancy. At birth, the baby had dysmorphic features, including small and Genetics Center. low-set ears, long philtrum, micrognathia, midface hypoplasia, down- Patient 1: (3-year-old female): pregnancy- uneventful; birth- term, turned corners of the mouth with thin lips, low-set and wide-spaced Apgar score 5, Wt 2,700 g; clinical features- failure to thrive, micro- nipples, short neck, pre- and postaxial hexadactyly of upper and lower cephaly, typical cri-du-chat face and cry, stridor, hyperextensible joints, limbs, single palmar crease, rhizomelia, wide anterior fontanel, hyper- hypertrichosis, severe mental retardation; karyotype- 46,XX,del(5p). laxity of knees, and hirsutism. She was hypotonic, had feeding dif- Normal echocardiography and ophtalmologic examination. ficulties, and died after ten days of life from a necrotizing enterocolitis. Patient 2 (3-year-old female): pregnancy- polyhydramnios; birth- term, Postnatal karyotyping confirmed the partial duplication of chromosome intrauterine growth retardation, Apgar score 8; clinical findings- growth 17q. Microarray CGH confirmed the duplication of chromosome 17q retardation and microcephaly, dysmorphic face, typical cry, bilateral for the region localized between q21.31 and q23.2. A pure partial du- clynodactyly 5, moderate mental retardation. Echocardiography- su- plication of the long arm of chromosome 17 for this region has only baortic VSD, tricuspid insufficiency; karyotype- 46,XX,r(5)(p21;q35)/ rarely been reported so far. Clinical findings present in our case are 45,XX,-5/47,XX,r(5)(p21;q35),r(5)(p21;q35). Normal parental karyo- compared to those of other reported cases with dup(17q). types. Detailed phenotypical analysis is presented. Patient 3 (5-year-old male): pregnancy- uneventful; birth- term, Wt P0308. Phenotype-genotype correlation in Egyptian patients with 2,600 g; clinical findings- growth retardation, microcephaly, dysmor- chromosome 18 aberrations phic face, hypertrichosis, irregular toe insertion, severe mental retar- S. A. Hammad, H. T. El Bassyouni, A. S. El-Gerzawy, M. I. Shehab; dation. Echocardiography- incomplete atrioventricular canal. Karyo- National Research centre, Cairo, Egypt. type: 46,XY,add(5)(p15). The purpose of the present study was to provide an insight into the un- Patient 4 (male, aged 3 years): pregnancy- uneventful; birth- preterm, derstanding of the relationships between the clinical phenotypes and Wt 1,900 g; clinical features- failure to thrive, microcephaly, seizures, chromosome 18 abnormalities. mild dysmorphic face, moderate mental retardation; karyotype: 46,X Fifteen patients were recruited with chromosome 18 abnormalities (8 Y,ins(8;5)(p23;p11p13). Even if the chromosome formula looked bal- males 7 females). anced, we appreciate that the phenotype is related to the breakage Their age ranged from 2 months to 28 years. Positive consanguinity points. was present in 9 patients. Similarly affected sibs in the family were Patient 5: young, unrelated, apparently normal couple with repeated found in 5 patients. There was delayed milestones and broad forehead miscarriages. Female karyotype: normal; male karyotype: 46,XY,ins( in 9 patients (60%), ear abnormalities in 12 (80%), short stature was 5;4)(q31;q27q31). present in 3 patients (20%), epilepsy in 4 (26.7%), eye anomalies in Genotype-phenotype correlation and management protocol will be Cytogenetics 10 provided for every case. P0313. Molecular characterization of chromosome Y structural In conclusion, we present 5 different chromosomal abnormalities in- abnormalities in two cases of ambiguous genitalia volving chromosome 5 in order to discuss variability of clinical features A. G. Lungeanu1, A. A. Arghir1, S. Arps2, G. M. Cardos1, N. Dumitriu3, A. Rode- and management protocol. wald4; 1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2GeneteQ, Hamburg, P0311. Structural chromosome abnormalities and male fertility Germany, 3Children Hospital “Marie Curie”, Bucharest, Romania, 4Institute for E. M. Grishina, L. F. Kurilo, T. M. Sorokina, L. V. Shileiko, V. B. Chernykh; Human Biology, Hamburg, Germany. Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci- Malformations of the external and/or internal genitalia may be caused ences, Moscow, Russian Federation. by structural abnormalities of sex chromosomes. The aim of this study is to evaluate the prevalence of structural chro- With the aim to understand the underlying cause of ambiguous geni- mosome abnormalities in infertile men and to assess their effect on the talia, and to contribute at management of the patients with abnormal spermatogenesis and male fertility. phenotypic sex, we investigated two cases using GTG, CBG banding, The examined cohort consisted of 550 men from infertile couples. The accomplished by FISH and PCR techniques. semen analysis has been performed according to the WHO recom- FISH included: DAPI stain, Y-specific painting probe XCP-Y ( Meta- mendations (1999). According to the sperm tests all patients were Systems), Ycen DYZ3, Yq12 DYZ1, Yp11.3 SRY, Xcen DXZ1 (Vysis), subdivided into five groups: azoospermia (n=177), oligozoospermia subtelomeric probes for X- and Y-chromosome, locus DXYS130 and (n=203), asthenozoospermia (n=81), teratozoospermia (n=39), and DXYS224 (Q-Biogene). PCR method was performed with a short DNA normozoospermia (n=50). Chromosome analysis has been carried out sequence from Amelogenine gene on the short arm of both X and Y on peripheral lymphocytes using standard cytogenetic techniques with chromosomes (Xp22.31-p22.1, Yp11.2), plus DYS392 STR marker GTG- and C- staining. (Yq11.2). In 3.1% examined men structural chromosome abnormalities have GTG banding showed mosaic karyotypes in both patients: 45,X[84]/ been found. The translocations have been found in 16 patients, and 46,X idic(Y)(qter--pter::pter--qter) pericentric inversion of chromosome 5 - in one azoospermic patient. [16], and 45,X[65]/46,X idic?(Yp)[35], respectively. By CBG banding In 53% cases the chromosome rearrangements are Robertson trans- the provenience of idic(Y)(pter--qter) it was clear in the first case, but locations. Most commonly chromosome translocations between chro- difficult in the second one. By FISH, the karyotype was: mosomes 13 and 14 were found. 1).46,X,psu idic(Y)(p11?.2).ish psuidic(Y)(qter--pter::pter--qter)(wcpY Chromosome aberrations have been found in 1.7% azoospermic, +,DXYS130++,SRY++,DYZ3++. 4.4% oligozoospermic, 2.6% teratozoospermic, 3.7% asthenozoosper- DYZ1++,DYS224++). PCR revealed both Amelogenine gene se- mic, and 2.0% normozoospermic men. Between patients with revealed quence and DSY392 marker. chromosome abnormalities the azoospermia has been diagnosed in So, it was confirmed that abnormal Y is an isodicentric with breakpoint 17.6%, oligozoospermia - 52.9%, asthenozoospermia - 17.6%, terato- distal from subtelomeric locus DXY130 in Yp. zoospermia - 5.9%, and normozoospermia - in 5.9% cases. 2). FISH karyotype was: 46,X,?idic(Y)(q11).ish idic(Y)(pter--q11::q11- Our results have demonstrated obvious polymorphism of status of -pter)(SRY++). PCR revealed Amelogenine gene sequence, but not sperm parameters in men with structural chromosome abnormalities. DSY392 marker so, the fusion point is in the long arm Yq11. In most infertile men the chromosome translocations associated with By our results we can conclude that, various shapes of structural ab- oligozoospermia. normalities in Y chromosome may result in disorders of sex determina- tion pathway which are poorly understood. Only the presence of SRY P0312. Molecular characterization of terminal Xp deletions by gene is not enough for male phenotypic normality. m-Banding and Array-CGH in four families C. Leroy1, E. Landais1, V. Sulmont2, A. Hecart3, H. Grulet3, N. Michel1, N. Gru- P0314. Cytogenetic diagnosis of chromosomal pathology in son1, S. Clomes1, M. Mozelle1, J. Motte2, D. Gaillard1, M. Doco-Fenzy1; various stages of pregnancy 1Service de Génétique, CHU Reims UFR Médecine IFR53, Reims, France, G. J. Abildinova, G. S. Svaytova, K. A. Koshkarova, A. G. Baysbekova, N. Z. 2Service de Pédiatrie, American Memorial Hospital, CHU Reims, Reims, Musachanova; France, 3Service d’Endocrinologie, CHU Reims, Reims, France. The centre of molecular medicine, Almaty, Kazakhstan. Xp deletions are diagnosed in about 6% of Turner stigmata. The phe- The detection of chromosomal anomalies is one of the main tasks in notype is probably associated with haploinsufficiency of genes within prenatal diagnostics. It is known, that the majority chromsome abnor- the deleted regions but the correlation between the length of the dele- malities result fetal death or the birth of children with handicaps. We tion and the phenotype is still unknown. studied fetal karyotypes in a group of high-risk pregnancies. We studied the length of the terminal Xp deletion through four fami- Materials and methods of research. In total we analyzed chorion vil- lies. We report here the phenotypic and laboratory findings in 8 female lus and fetal blood of 879 pregnant women in various terms of preg- members affected by the Xp deletion. The deletions were diagnosed nancy. cytogenetically using 400 band R and G-Banding, X specific mBand- The preparations of chromosomes were prepared from chorion villus ing and were further delineated by array comparative genomic hybri- by direct culture. For preparation of preparations from fetal blood used disation (array-CGH). We used a 1 Mb BAC and PAC array (VIB Leu- standard methods with addition PHA. ven), DNAs were tested by experiment using a triangle testing with Results of research and discussion. The analysis cytogenetically of control DNAs. Data were analysed with the arrayCGHbase software results has shown, that in among chromosomal abnormalities, numeri- (J.Vermeesch). cal anomalies prevailed. In 53,3 % cases Down’s syndrome was diag- Results: nosed - 47, XY +21, both complete and mosaic forms. In 3,3 % cases Cytogenetic studies showed the following breakpoints: del(X)(p22.2), we diagnosed Patau syndrome - (47, XY+13). In 25,9 % cases we de- del(X)(p21.3), del(X)(p11.4), der(X)(qter->p22.2::q22->qter) in families tected marker chromosomes. Besides numerical changes we detected 1,2,3 and 4 respectively. structural changes in 10 % cases: Robertsonian translocation - 45, Array-CGH established the length of the Xp deletions: 7.5 Mb, 20.3 t(15;21), 46,isoX(q) and a reciprocal translocation - 45, t(3;Y). Mb, 24.2 Mb, 9.5 Mb in families 1,2,3 and 4 respectively. None of the 8 female patients had mental retardation. Their common P0315. Detection of mixed chimerism and minimal residual feature was short stature when present (height: 1.40m to 1.64m in disease after bone marrow transplantation in chronic myeloid adults). Interestingly SHOX region was deleted in all of them. Array- leukemia by conventional and molecular cytogenetics in CGH enabled a comparison of each genotype-phenotype association. tunisian patients An important interindividual and intrafamilial variability was observed, F. Talmoudi1, M. Ben Rekaya1, F. Boumaiza1, T. Ben Othman2, A. Amouri1; caused by parameters such as X inactivation bias, or specific gene de- 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Tunis, Tunisia, 2CNGMO, Tunis, Tunisia. letion or disruption. Our data showed no correlation between the adult Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is an hematopoietic malignancy height and the deletion length and may contribute to the evaluation of characterized by the proliferation of myeloid precursors. The hallmark GH treatment when proposed. of CML is the presence of Philadelphia (Ph1) chromosome that results Grant: PHRC-2005-CHU-Reims. from balanced reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and Cytogenetics 10 22 leading to the formation of bcr/abl fusion gene. localized on the derivative chromosome 2 but on a chromosome 5. Disease relapse still represents the major cause of treatment failure in Then, hybridization of whole chromosome painting probes WCP 2, 5 patients with CML, following bone marrow transplantation. Thus, the and 10 showed an increasing complexity of the rearrangement leading early detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) has relevant thera- to complex derivative chromosomes: der(2) and der(10) were found peutic implications. to have segments from the three chromosomes as a consequence of Sequential cytogenetic analysis was done using standard methods in terminal exchanges and insertions. Subtelomeric probes of chromo- bone marrow samples from10 patients with CML. Further dual colour somes 2, 5 and 10 revealed a terminal deletion of the long arm of chro- Fluorescence In Situ Hybridisation (FISH) analysis was done to assess mosome 2 (2qter). Finally, this complex chromosomal rearrangement molecular response using bcr/abl. The chimerism pattern and bcr-abl seemed to involve 3 chromosomes and 5 breakpoints. The pregnancy status were studied. The results of present study show that bone mar- was terminated and the fetopathological examination confirmed pre- row transplantation induce both cytogenetic and molecular response natal ultrasound report and showed additional congenital anomalies: in a significant proportion of CML thereby improving their prognosis facial dysmorphism, heart defects, corpus callosum and cerebellum and survival. The importance of using FISH analysis on interphase nu- abnormalities. 2qter deletions are associated with variable clinical fea- clei and poor-spread metaphases that cannot be analyzed using con- tures and in our case, the 2qter microdeletion should be responsible ventional cytogenetics was also highlighted. Thus the present study for the phenotype. Array-CGH will be performed in order to precise the stresses on the need for sequential cytogenetic and molecular analy- size of the 2qter deletion and to screen for additional cryptic genomic sis in diagnosis and disease management of myeloid leukemias. imbalances near the breakpoints or elsewhere. P0316. Molecular cytogenetic characterization of der (9) P0318. Cytogenetic and Molecular studies in Egyptian patients deletions in a case of Philadelphia-negative chronic myeloid with congenital heart defects, A pilot study. leukemia I. M. R. Hussein1, N. Helmy1, M. El-Rubi1, H. A. Hussein1, A. El-Gerzawy1, A. A. Bennour1, H. Sennana1, H. El Omri2, S. Mougou1, A. Khelif2, A. Saad1; Ahmad1, A. Fayez1, N. Abdel-Rahman2; 1Service de cytogenetique et de biologie de la reproduction CHU Farhat Ha- 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. ched, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service d’hématologie CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Objective: To analyze the frequency of chromosomal anomalies and Tunisia. molecular defects in Egyptian patients with congenital heart defects About 95% of the patients with chronic myeloid leukemia(CML) have (CHD). Patients and Methods: The study included 34 patients with a Philadelphia chromosome resulting from a reciprocal transloca- congenital heart defects; confirmation of the heart defect was ac- tion between bands 9q34 and 22q11.2 that juxtaposes the 3’ABL complished by echocardiography and/ or cardiac catheterization. gene to the 5’BCR gene. Recent studies using fluorescence in situ Chromosomal analysis was done using GTG-banding and FISH tech- hybridization(FISH) have reported deletions due to the loss of se- niques. Mutation detection in transcription factor GATA4 and NKX2.5 quences proximal to chromosome 9 breakpoint or distal to chromo- was done using PCR/ SSCP and DNA sequencing. Results: Patients some 22 breakpoint. In this paper we report on a detailed molecular were classified into isolated heart defects (n=21) and CHD associated cytogenetic characterization carrying der(9) deletions in an apparently with other congenital malformations (n-13). Associated malformations Philadelphia negative CML patient. were: (Down syndrome (2), Aarskog Scott S. (1), velocardiofacial S. FISH experiments were carried out in bone marrow sample from CML (2 sibs), Russel Silver (1), hand anomaly (2), trisomy 18 (1); and dys- patient at diagnosis. A detailed study using conventional cytogenetic morphic (4). Chromosomal anomalies were found in 9/30 patients (30 and FISH analysis was done using ES-FISHprobes, Whole chromo- %). They were: Trisomy 21 [47, XY,+21 (1); 46, XX, t(21;21) (1)]; 47, somes painting and BAC in order to elucidate the mechanism of 9q XX+13 (1); 47,XX,+18 (1); 46, XY, t (14; 18) (q11.2; p11.2) (1); 47, XY + deletion. mar (mat.) (1); 46, XX del 11q 23.3- qter (2 sibs); 46, XX, dup13q33-34 ES-FISH probes disclosed the BCR/ABL fusion gene on (1). DNA sequencing of NKX2.5 gene in 15 patients with isolated ASD der(22)chromosome and deletion of signal on der(9) chromosome. revealed normal sequence in all cases. Sequencing of GATA4 gene Whole chromosomes painting revealed deletion of ABL/BCR fusion in 12 patients with Fallot’s tetralogy has shown polymorphism in exon gene on der(9). 6 at nucleotide 53423 (A-G) in 2 patients. Conclusion: Chromosomal Using FISH with an appropriate set of BAC probes located proximally analysis of patients with heart defects and other congenital anomalies to BCR and ABL genes we have characterized the deleted region on has a great impact on diagnosis, prognosis and genetic counseling of both chromosomes 9 and 22. patients. The mutations in isolated defects might be mainly of somatic Our study shows that the location of the deleted sequences was down- origin that could not be observed in peripheral blood lymphocytes. stream of the BCR breakpoint and upstream of ABL gene and that ge- nomic microdeletions were concomitant with t(9;22) rearrangements. P0319. A case with Prader-Willi phenotype and a de novo FISH analysis allowed not only the identification of chromosome re- t(2;15)(q31;p11) arrangements that could not otherwise be detected by conventional T. Cora1, H. Acar1, A. Kalaycı1, E. Atabek2; banding procedures, but also the recognition of 5’ABL and 3’BCR de- 1Dept. of Medical Genetics,Meram Medical Faculty, Selcuk Unıversıty, Konya, letions which could carry with it a poor prognosis that indicates rapid Turkey, 2Dept. of Pediatics, Meram Medical Faculty, Selcuk Unıversıty, Konya, disease progression in CML. Turkey. In recent years, the spectrum of available methods for the characteriza- P0317. Prenatal diagnosis of an unexpected de novo complex tion of chromosomal rearrangement has dramatically increased. Thus, chromosomal rearrangement. the correlation between phenotype and genotype has been done ac- S. Jaillard1, C. Henry1, C. Dubourg2,3, M. Durou2, L. Loeuillet4, J. Milon5, E. curately. In the present report, we describe the clinical and cytogenetic Bauville6, J. Mosser3, V. David2,3, L. Pasquier7, J. Lucas1; findings of a patient with 46,XX,t(2;15)(q31;p11). A 2-year-old girl with a 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Rennes, France, 2Laboratoire de Géné- clinical feature show Prader-Willi phenotype. The patient and her fam- tique Moléculaire, CHU Rennes, France, 3UMR 6061 CNRS, Rennes, France, ily were studied by the conventional (GTG, NOR and C-bandings) and 4Département d’Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, CHU Rennes, France, molecular cytogenetic (for PW region) techniques. The results showed 5Département de Radiologie et Imagerie Médicale, CHU Rennes, France, 6Dé- the proband with a balanced de novo karyotype 46,XX,t(2;15)(q31;p11) partement d’Obstétrique, Gynécologie et Médecine de la Reproduction, CHU by using GTG-banding. Clinical and genetic findings were compared to Rennes, France, 7Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Rennes, France. the other patients published in the literature. We report a prenatal diagnosis of de novo apparently balanced recip- rocal translocation t(2;10)(q?24;p?15.1) which turned out to be a com- plex event after molecular cytogenetic analysis. Fetal conventional R-banded karyotype was performed on amniocytes at 32 weeks ges- tation because of sonographic findings: IUGR, single umbilical artery and arachnoid cyst of the posterior fossa. To precise the breakpoint on chromosome 10, molecular cytogenetic analysis by FISH was used with a 10p14 band-specific probe: unexpectedly, the signal wasn’t Cytogenetics 10 P0320. Balanced (9;11) translocation in a patient with mental dysmorphism (bitemporal narrowing, small mouth with down-turned retardation and dysmorphic features disrupts the protein corners, prominent chin), fair hair, small hands with tapering fingers tyrosine phosphatase delta (PTPRD) gene and small feets. Clinical impression was that the patient had features L. Nazaryan1, S. Midyan1, G. Shakhsuvaryan1, V. Kalscheuer2; consistent with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). The karyotype of the 1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Max patient was 45,XX,der(14;22)pat. The karyotype of the mother and Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. proband’s sister was normal. Methylation analysis showed abnormal Here we report on an 11-year-old girl presenting with mental retardation methylation pattern. Paternal deletion (15)(q11-q13) was identified and various dysmorphic features such as hypertelorism, depressed confirming the diagnosis of PWS (molecular investigations were per- nasal bridge, short nose and wide mouth with plump leaps. The patient formed in the Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich). The is friendly and able to smile but does not reply to any questions and derivate chromosome was found to be inherited from the phenotypi- demonstrates severe speech delay. She cannot write or do elementary cally normal father [45,XY,der(14;22)]. mathematical calculations. Computed tomography revealed commis- We present a new case of PWS with additional cytogenetic aberration. sural alterations in the cerebellum and cerebral hemispheres as well Our report confirms a statement about an increased risk for the par- as a subarachnoid spacand liquor cistern substantial narrowing. ents with Robertsonian translocations to have a child with unbalanced G-banding of patient metaphase chromosomes prepared from pe- karyotype. ripheral blood leukocytes revealed a de novo balanced translocation t(9;11)(p24;q12). We have mapped the breakpoints on both derivative P0323. Phenotypic characteristics of 9p deletion syndrome: a chromosomes by FISH with selected YAC and BAC clones. On chro- case report mosome 11 the breakpoint region contains several genes including B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, R. Janavičius1,2, L. Cimbalistienė1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; the brain-expressed reticulon 4 receptor-like 2 (RTN4RL2) gene. The 1Medical Genetics Center, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department Human and Medical much better candidate disease gene is on chromosome 9. This break- Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. point disrupts the receptor type protein tyrosine phosphatase delta (PT- Background Deletion 9p syndrome is a rare congenital syndrome, PRD) gene. PTPRD is highly expressed in the developing mammalian originally described in 1973. Approximately 100 reported cases have nervous system and Ptprd-deficient mice showed impaired learning been published worldwide. We present the first case of deletion 9p with enhanced hippocampal long-term potentiation. The present case syndrome diagnosed in Lithuania. reveals novel autosomal candidate genes for mental retardation. Case report Our presented patient is a 3 years old girl, the second child of healthy non consanguineous parents, born on time with com- P0321. Idiopatic mental retardation - importance of clinical plicated delivery due to craniostenosis. Major complains were irritabil- diagnostic scores for case selection ity, psychomotor retardation, hypersalivation, unstable gait. Charac- L. Caba1, C. Rusu2, M. Volosciuc2, L. Butnariu2, E. Braha2, M. Gramescu2, C. teristic findings included trigonocephaly, upslanted palpebral fissures, Bujoran3, V. Gorduza2, M. Covic2; epicanthal folds, arched eyebrows, depressed nasal bridge, poorly 1Children’s Hospital Iasi-Medical Genetics Center, Iasi, Romania, 2University of formed ears with hypoplastic helix, an extra flexion creases on 3-4 Medicine , Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, Romania, 3Children’s Hospi- phalanges, excess whorls on the fingers with short nails, corrected tal, Iasi, Romania. bilateral inguinal hernias and moderate mental retardation. Typical We present a retrospective study aimed to identify the correlation be- phenotype characteristics lead to the suspection of 9p deletion what tween de Vries clinical score and the detection of chromosomal abnor- was confirmed cytogeneticaly. Chromosome analysis of peripheral malities in mentally retarded (MR) children. We have used the score to blood lymphocytes revealed 46,XX,del(9)(p22) karyotype. Cytogenetic identify patients who should be tested by karyotiping and subsequently analysis was performed from GTG banded metaphases. The resolu- MLPA for subtelomeric rearrangements. tion level was 400-500 bands. Our group is formed of 36 children (21 females and 15 males) with Conclusion Karyotyping of both parents and detailed molecular as- variable MR associated with other anomalies. 18 children had chro- sessment of genes flanking the breakage site would be desirable. mosomal defects, whereas 18 had normal karyotypes. In the group Key words: deletion 9p syndrome, trigonocephaly, hypersalivation. with abnormal karyotype, total scores varied between 3 and 7. Chro- mosomal anomalies identified were: numerical (4) and structural P0324. DNA fragmentation and meiotic segregation in (14). Chromosomes involved were: 1,4,5,7,8,9,17,X. Deletions were spermatozoa of male carriers of a chromosomal structural the most common and correlate with a greater score (>/=4). Com- rearrangement. mon items were: short stature (66.7%), microcephaly (72.3%), nasal F. Morel1, E. Caer1, A. Perrin1, N. Douet-Guilbert1, M. J. Le Bris2, J. Amice1, V. (72.3%), ear (66.7%) and hand anomalies (83.4%). In the group with Amice2, M. De Braekeleer1; normal karyotype, 44.4% of cases had a low score, whereas 55.6% 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Cytologie et Biologie de la Reproduction, Fa- had a high score. Most frequent item is hand anomalies (61.2%). The culté de Médecine & CHU, Brest, France, 2Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Cyto- detailed analysis of the cases will be provided. The score proved very logie et Biologie de la Reproduction, CHU, Brest, France. useful for the identification of major chromosomal abnormalities. In the Frequency of somatic chromosomal abnormalities, mostly balanced second group, cases with a high score have to be further tested (e.g. reciprocal or robertsonian translocations and pericentric inversions, is using MLPA) in order to identify minor defects. In our opinion a high increased in infertile males. Different hypotheses, such as an increase score indicates the karyotype and then a MLPA testing.In conclusion, of spermatozoa with DNA fragmentation and / or with unbalanced we present a retrospective study that proves the use of de Vries diag- chromosomal equipment, could explain their infertility. This study in- nostic score in the identification of chromosomal abnormalities in MR vestigated the relationship between DNA fragmentation and meiotic children. segregation in the spermatozoa among carriers of a structural chro- mosomal abnormality. P0322. Prader-Willi Syndrome due to paternal deletion of DNA fragmentation of ejaculated spermatozoa from 23 carriers (12 chromosome 15q11-q13 in a girl with (14;22) Robertsonian reciprocal and 5 robertsonian translocations and 6 pericentric inver- translocation sions) and 24 fertile men were analyzed using TUNEL (terminal deoxy- O. G. Ievseienkova, T. E. Zerova, L. P. Sheiko, N. G. Gorovenko; nucleotidyl transferase mediated dUTP nick end label). The frequency National Medical Academy of Post-Graduate Education named after of unbalanced chromosomal spermatozoa among carriers was esti- P.L.Shupyk, Kyiv, Ukraine. mated using FISH with appropriate probes. We report a case presenting a combination of deletion (15)(q11-q13) A higher sperm DNA fragmentation rate was found among carriers of and der(14;22), both of the paternal origin. The proposita was a sec- a structural chromosomal abnormality (6.64% ± 5.59) compared to the ond child of unrelated, healthy and young parents. Prenatal history controls (1.20% ± 0.95) (p<0.001). was complicated by threatened abortion. The girl was born at 39 weeks The frequencies of unbalanced spermatozoa were estimated between of gestation through vaginal delivery. She had severe hypotonia and 45.32% and 65.60% among reciprocal translocation patients, between feeding difficulties in early infancy, increased appetite and rapid weight 8.78% and 21.62% among roberstonian translocation carriers and be- gain after 12 months. Clinical examination at the age of 25 months tween 0.33% and 39.06% among pericentric inversion patients. No showed short stature (< 3rd centile), overweight (90-97th centile), facial correlation was found between the frequency of unbalanced chromo-Cytogenetics 10 somal sperm and that of apoptotic sperm (p>0.05), suggesting that and Brainstem Auditory Evoked Potentials revealed delayed laten- there is no relationship between the apoptotic and meiotic mecha- cies. His karyotype revealed 47,XY,dmin+[7]/47,XY,min[2]/46,XY[16]. nisms in spermatozoa from these patients. 47,XX,+min[2]/46,XX[18] was detected in his mother’s cytogenetic In conclusion, based on the increase in DNA fragmentation and the el- analysis. To the best of our knowledge this unusual transmission and evated rate of unbalanced chromosomal spermatozoa, this study indi- presence of minute and double minute chromosomes have not been cates that these exams should be integrated in the genetic exploration reported in the literature. This unusual existence may contribute to the of male carriers of a structural chromosomal abnormality and used to literature regarding the possible association between extrachromo- predict the outcome of ICSI. somal gene amplification and congenital abnormalities. P0325. DNA methylation patterns in human adult and embryonic P0327. Xp duplication in two brothers: phenotypic and molecular metaphase chromosomes: similarities and differences cytogenetic characterization O. A. Efimova1, A. A. Pendina2, P. V. Kruglyakov3, J. A. Shalygina1, T. V. C. A. L. Ruivenkamp1, K. B. Hansson1, D. A. C. Linders1, J. Knijnenburg2, K. Kuznetsova2, V. S. Baranov2; Szuhai2, P. Helderman1; 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 2D.O.Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecololgy RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Rus- Netherlands, 2Dept. of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Cen- sian Federation, 3Transtechnologies Ltd, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. ter, Leiden, The Netherlands. DNA methylation plays key role in gene silencing and maintenance of Duplications within the short arm of the X-chromosome are rare in chromatin structure. In our previous study we have shown band-spe- males. Surviving males with Xp duplications are nearly all invariable cific distribution of 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA in human metaphase mentally retarded. Here we report a detailed characterization of a par- chromosomes from adult and fetal lymphocytes by immunofluores- tial Xp duplication in two brothers with severe mental impairment. cence with anti-5-methylcytosine antibodies(Eurogentec). This raised Conventional chromosome analysis illustrated a structurally abnormal question about reproducibility of 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA distribu- X chromosome in both brothers. The phenotypically normal mother tion along chromosomes from other tissues at different developmental carried the same abnormal X chromosome, which is preferentially stages. The present research was focused on study of 5-methylcytosine inactivated. The sister of the brothers had a normal karyotype. Fur- distribution in metaphase chromosomes from cells of different human ther characterization of the aberrant X chromosome by ±1 Mb spaced embryonic tissues: liver, lung, brain and cytotrophoblast at 5-12weeks large clone insert array-CGH revealed a duplication of approximate- of gestation, as well as from adult mesenchymal stem cells. Pattern of ly 13 Mb with the proximal and distal breakpoints located to Xp21.3 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA distribution was similar in all analyzed cell and Xp22.2. The exact karyotype of the brothers was defined as types: 5-methylcytosine-rich sites corresponded to all T-, majority of 46,Y,dup(X)(p21.3p22.2). R-bands, to short arms of acrocentrics and heterochromatin of chro- mosomes 1,9,16. Specificity of signal distribution along chromosomes P0328. Molecular cytogenetic analysis of a de novo interstitial allowed identification of specific landmarks for each chromosome pair. duplication at 1p36 in a female patient. These landmarks could be easily detected in any metaphase. In spite M. J. V. Hoffer1, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp1, M. Kriek1, K. B. Hansson1, J. M. van de of overall DNA methylation pattern similarity, local tissue-specific pecu- Kamp1,2, A. van Haeringen1; liarities were detected. Heterochromatin of chromosomes 1,9,16 was 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The hypomethylated in cytotrophoblast, as well as number of other bands, Netherlands, 2Dept. of Clinical Genetics and Anthropogenetics, VU University resulting in decreased overall methylation level, if compared to lym- Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. phocyte chromosomes. Overall decrease in methylation is also typical Chromosomal imbalances are a frequent cause of mental retardation for mesenchymal stem cells, whereas chromosomes from embryonic and congenital malformations. Although aneuploidy accounts for the tissues demonstrated either decreased or increased methylation level majority of imbalances, structural aberrations contribute to a significant in number of bands. Thus, due to high reproducibility, clearly distin- fraction of recognized chromosomal anomalies. guishable landmarks and minor tissue-specific differences, we sug- The female patient reported here was the first child of non-consan- gested that distribution of 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA can be consid- guineous parents. She had a healthy younger brother. The family ered as specific banding pattern of human metaphase chromosomes history was unremarkable. The patient had congenital bilateral ptosis - MeC-banding. Supported by CRDF&RFBR. and swallowing difficulties, necessitating tube feeding during some months. Examination at the age of 7 months showed severe ptosis, P0326. An unusual transmission of a supernumerary marker epicanthus, telecanthus, strabismus convergens, short upturned nose chromosome from a mother to a baby presenting congenital and open mouth appearance. Examination at the age of 11,5 years malformation showed in addition a very narrow palate, bifid uvula, narrow entrance H. Akin1, A. Alpman2, A. Aykut2, O. Cogulu2, F. Ozkinay2; to the pharynx, dental crowding with braces and micrognatia. She has 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, İzmir, a delayed development and mild mental retardation. Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, İzmir, Conventional karyotyping based on G-banding revealed a duplication Turkey. at the terminal end of the short arm of chromosome 1. Analysis of In humans, the presence of supernumerary chromosomes is an un- parental chromosomes revealed normal karyotypes suggesting a de usual phenomenon, which is often associated with developmental ab- novo duplication in our patient. The duplicated region was further char- normalities and malformations. Among supernumerary chromosomes acterized using a 250 k SNP array (Affimetrix). The duplication was 3.3 double minute (dms) are extensively associated with cancer cells. Mb in size with the breakpoints in band 1p36.33 and 1p36.32. There- There are few reports of their presence in the peripheral cells of normal fore, the karyotype was defined as 46,XX,dup(1)(p36.33p36.32). individuals. Double minutes (dmin) are small chromatin particles that Although monosomy 1p36 is very common, duplications of 1p36 are represent a form of extrachromosomal gene amplification. extremely rare. The genotype-phenotype correlation of this case will We describe a 5-month-old boy who had dysmorphological features contribute to a better understanding of the effect of copy number varia- with a karyotype presenting supernumerary marker chromosomes as tion of genes within the 1p36 region. minutes and double minutes in a mosaic pattern. There was no history of any teratogen exposure during the pregnancy. His developmental P0329. Epigenetic background of chromosomal mosaicism in milestones were delayed. He was brought to hospital for the first time human miscarriages at 2 months of age because of dysmorphological features and hypo- E. N. Tolmacheva, A. A. Kashevarova, I. N. Lebedev; tonia. He was noted to have depressed nasal root, blue sclera, hyper- Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. telorism, epicanthus, micrognathia, retrognathia, high arched palate, Chromosomal mosaicism is a feature of abnormal embryo develop- dysmorphic ears, hypopigmented skin lesion on thoracic wall, umblical ment. It results from mitotic non-disjunction in aneuploid or in primary hernia and hypoplastic nails. Laboratory tests including complete blood euploid cells. However, the ratio of both mechanisms as well as induc- count, urinalysis, thyroid function tests were normal. Cranial magnetic ing factors of mitotic instability are poorly investigated. It is interesting resonance imaging and skeletal X-ray survey were normal. Abdomi- that increasing of mosaicism frequency is coincided with the wave of nal ultrasonography revealed hepatomegaly. Visual Evoked Potentials epigenetic reprogramming. We have suggested that alterations in the Cytogenetics 10 methylation status of the cell-cycle checkpoints genes may be one of which did not coincide with a known variant and also were not repeat- the factors leading to genomic instability and mosaicism. To test this edly identified in a reference set of more than 700 samples analysed hypothesis methylation analysis of the RB1 and P14ARF genes in 50 on the same platform. Up to now, the hereditary basis has been inves- miscarriages with different pattern of chromosomal mosaicism was tigated for 23 of the aberrations. Eight were de novo, two segregate performed. A model of tissue-specific cell lines compartmentalization with epilepsy in the family and 13 were inherited from an apparently was developed after meta-analysis of available literature data about normal parent. mosaicism in human embryos. According to this model miscarriages CONCLUSION: In the present study we investigated 75 patients with with chromosomal mosaicism confirmed by interphase FISH-analysis epilepsy and congenital abnormalities. We identified copy number in our study were classified into 3 groups. Mitotic origin of aneuploidy variations that were likely to be pathogenic in 38% of the patients. This was suggested for 19% of embryos. Meiotic or mitotic errors were re- study suggests 25 new loci to the current list of candidate loci involved lated with aneuploidy in 27% of mosaics. Meiotic non-disjunction was in epilepsy. In conclusion, array CGH is the method of choice in iden- suggested for 54% of miscarriages. For the first time aberrant meth- tifying genetic changes in epilepsy patients with congenital abnormali- ylation of the promoters of the cell-cycle genes was observed. More- ties of unknown cause. over, the total frequency of epimutations was significantly reduced from 32.5×10-2 per allele in the group1 to 7.0×10-2 and 2.6×10-2 in the P0332. Cytogenetic contribution in diagnosis of Bloom groups 2 and 3, respectively. Our finding indicates that accumulation Syndrome and Fanconi Anemia in Tunisian patients of epimutations may increase genomic instability and mosaicism in the A. Amouri1, M. Ben Rekaya1,2, F. Talmoudi1,2, T. Ben Othman3, S. Ladab3, A. embryos with primary normal karyotype in the zygote. This study was Ben Abdeladhim3,4; supported by RFBR (N 05-04-48129) and FASI (N 02.512.11.2055). 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Tunis, Tunisia, 2(3) Molecular investigation of genetic orphelin desease: MIGOD, Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 3CNGMO, Tunis, P0330. Investigation of cytogenetic changes in late stage Tunisia, 4Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia. endometriosis by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) Fanconi Anemia (FA) and Bloom’s syndrome (BS) are rare autosomal technique genetic diseases that predispose to cancer and are associated with F. Teksen1, S. Keles2, H. Satıroglu3; genomic instability. Cytogenetic diagnosis can, in the most cases, con- 1Faculty of Health Sciences, Biotechnology Institution, Ankara, Turkey, 2Bio- firm the clinical diagnosis. technology Institution, Ankara, Turkey, 3Faculty of Medicine, Obstetrics and In this study we report the cytogenetic data of 4 BS patients and 147 Gynecology Department, Ankara, Turkey. patients suspected with FA. In the present study, the incidence of somatic chromosomal numeri- Spontaneous and induced chromosome damage was analyzed in cul- cal alterations in chromosomes 11 and 18 in late stage endometriosis tures of PBLs from patients with FA, with BS and healthy controls. cases were investigated in comparison with the endometrium and pe- The results show that the spontaneous frequency of chromosomal ripheral blood samples of the same patients and the same tissues of breakage was significantly higher in lymphocytes from all the patients normal healty women. than in the control cells. The study group was composed of six endometriosis samples (n:6). Sensitivity of FA cells to alkylating agents such MMC is much more Control group included; normal endometrium samples (n:6, control I) increased than controls cells, but sensitivity of BS cells to the action of and peripheral blood lymphocytes (n:6, control II) of the same patients MMC did not differ from that of control cells. with normal endometrium samples (n:5, control III) and peripheral Cells from patients with BS cultured in the presence of BudR exhibited blood lymphocytes (n:5, control IV) of the healty women. a striking increase in the number of sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs) Multicolor Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technique was in comparison to that in cells of a healthy patient. Thus, it appears that used in the study and the results were statisitically analysed by Khi an increased incidence of SCE in BS constitutes the syndrome’s most squared test. characteristic cytogenetic feature. For chromosome 11; the frequencies of trisomy and monosomy were In conclusion, although, the genetic instability syndromes of FA, XP, 3.6 % and 0.4 % respectively the endometriosis samples and control AT, are associated, respectively, with hypersensitivity to DNA cross- group I the frequency of trisomy was 1.3 %. These values were statisti- linking agents, UV and ionizing irradiation, the sensitivity of BS cells cally higher when compared with the other control groups. to DNA-damaging agents has been controversial.The basis of their For chromosome 18; in the endometriosis samples, the frequency of instability is totally different. monosomy was 1.3 % while, in the first control group the frequencies of monosomy and trisomy were 2.7 % and 1.0 % respectively and the P0333. Going deep into Fanconi Anemia chromosomal instability frquency of trisomy of the Control group II was 0.9 %. These values V. Altieri, P. Bassano, A. De Cicco, E. Montone, R. Calzone, A. Zatterale; were statistically significant in comparison with the other groups. ASL Napoli 1, Napoli, Italy. Finally, the genetic alterations in chromosomes 11 and 18 were found We studied a cohort of 136 Fanconi Anemia (FA) patients, diagnosed to be significantly different (p<0.0001) in the endometriosis specimens by DEB test in our laboratory. The chromosomal instability (CI) has than in normal endometrial cells and peripheral blood lymphocytes of been scored, the tests having been performed by the same cytogeneti- the same patients and healty control group. cist and all revised in blind by two others. The CI rates were subjected to statistical routine analyses in Statistica© 5.1 software (level of sig- P0331. Whole genome array CGH (Comparative Genome nificance α = 0.05) revealing a significant gender difference. Hybridization) of epilepsy patients with congenital abnormalities This result increases the knowledge of the cellular mechanisms under- R. Møller1,2, Z. Tümer1, C. Hansen2, H. Ropers3, N. Tommerup1, R. Ullmann3; lying the FA CI, seeming show that the CI can be an epiphenomenon 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Copenhagen, also depending on factors different from the specific genetic defect. Denmark, 2Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, 3The Max-Planck This evidence lead a strong implication on clinical management of FA Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. patients which must change if the patient is a “mosaic”, but “mosa- INTRODUCION: The search for chromosomal abnormalities in pa- icism” is now diagnosed only based on FA patient’s CI, rated indepen- tients with severe epilepsy and congenital abnormalities plays an im- dently from the gender. portant role in neurology and neuropediatrics. Disclosure of the etiol- Moreover, we studied chromosomal rearrangements by the molecu- ogy of the seizures may be of psychological value for the family, and it lar cytogenetic technique named “Spectral Karyotyping” (SKY - ASI is essential for proper genetic counselling. The aim of this study was to - Israel) obtaining evidence of a random chromosome involvement in estimate the significance of whole genome array CGH for patients with rearrangements, while some chromosomes seem to be preferentially epilepsy and congenital abnormalities. involved in breakages. METHODS: We recruited 75 epilepsy patients with different congenital abnormalities from The Danish Epilepsy Centre. All patients, except for P0334. Radiosensitivity of Fanconi anemia lymphocytes in vitro three, had been reported to have normal G-banded karyotypes. Array measured by CBMN assay CGH was carried out using a submegabase whole genome tiling path G. Joksic1, M. Guc-Scekic2, D. Vujic3, S. Petrovic1, A. Leskovac1, D. Jevtic4, D. BAC array. Micic4; RESULTS: In total 39 DNA copy number changes were detected, 1Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Biology, Cytogenetics 10 University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Faculty of Medicine, University of (25x low-grade astrocytoma, 17x anaplastic astrocytoma, 75x glio- Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia, blastoma, 25x oligodendroglioma/oligoastrocytoma). Results of I-FISH Belgrade, Serbia. were correlated with morphological and clinical findings. Molecular cy- Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive disorder character- togenetic analyses were successful in 137 patients (96.5%) and due ized by bone-marrow failure and cancer susceptibility. Early studies to non-adequate tissue specimen were not informative in five patients pointed to the specific sensitivity of FA cells to MMC and DEB which only. I-FISH in the most cases corresponded well with histological find- became the tools for the current diagnostic tests for FA. Although ings, in 58 patients I-FISH contributed to more precise diagnosis and/ there is the long-standing clinical impression of radiosensitivity, in vitro or prognosis. The most significant was finding of combined deletion studies have yielded conflicting results. We exposed peripheral blood 1p36/19q13.3 in patients with oligodendroglial tumours, which is con- mononuclear cells of FA patients (10 subjects) and carriers (20 sub- sidered to be a predictor of better prognosis. Deletion 1p36/19q13.3 jects) to γ-rays (60Co), dose of 2 Gy in vitro with aim to determine their was proved in 17 patients, in 12 cases as sole abnormality (progres- radiosensitivity using CB micronucleus (MN) test. Incidence of spon- sion in 33.3% of them) and in five cases in combination with other taneous occurring chromosomal aberrations and MN in unirradiated- aberrations typical for high-grade astrocytomas (progression and/or control samples also was examined. Mean incidence of chromosomal exitus in 80% of them). A systematic molecular cytogenetic analyses aberrations in FA patients was 0.088±0.08; which is 3.5 fold higher by means of I-FISH showed in our cohort advancement of diagnosis, than in carriers, baseline level of MN was 11.66±6.7 whereas average grading and classification of brain tumours. incidence of radiation-induced micronuclei was 122.63±95.6. Baseline Supported by VZ064165 and MSMLC535. level of micronuclei find in parents lymphocytes was 16.29±8.4 (fa- thers); 14.04±11.17 (mothers), which is 2.3 fold higher compared to P0337. Conventional and molecular-cytogenetic diagnosis of common population. Radioresponse of FA lymphocyte in vitro in most patients with sex chromosome abnormalities cases corresponds to resistant in vitro response, (with exception of O. Kilani1, O. Kacem1, I. El Kamel1, F. Talmoudi1, F. Zhioua2, A. Amouri1; one case where radiosensitive in vitro response was observed). In- 1Cytogenetics laboratory, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Service de Gynécologie, Hopital Aziza cidence of spontaneously occurring chromosomal aberration highly Othomana, Tunis, Tunisia. correlates with baseline incidence of MN, number of cell carrying aber- We report on 5 male cases who presented with male infertility and sex rations and radiosensitivity (r=0.81, p<0.05) Mild radioresistant in vitro chromosome abnormalities and 5 females referresd for suspicion of response was observed in mothers lymphocytes, whereas fathers re- Turner syndrome who have a mosaic karyotype. sponse could be described normal-as in the common population. The We performed RHG banding, FISH using whole chromosome painting authors will discuss the possible explanations for resistant response of probe (WCP) of X chromosome, specific locus identifier (LSI) for SRY FA lymphocytes in vitro. gene, and X and Y cocktail centromeric probe. The main problem with conventional karyotyping is that routinely 20 P0335. Conventional and FISH analysis of deletion and three- metaphases are analyzed and counted, this may miss low-grade mo- way complex bcr-abl rearrangement in chronic myeloid leukemia saicism. B. B. Ganguly, N. N. Kadam; The obtained results demonstrate the importance of FISH for the im- MGM Centre for Genetic Resrarch and Diagnosis, Mahatma Gandhi Mission’s provement of conventional cytogenetic diagnosis and further correct New Bombay Hospital, Navi Mumbai, India. and timely medical care for the patients with sex chromosome abnor- Chromosomal analysis was carried out in bone marrow sample of an malities. 11years old girl suspected myeloproliferative disorder. Conventional G-banding study detected a complex three-way translocation involving P0338. Evaluation of fragile X syndrome in moderate mental 7, 9 and 22, which has resulted in the formation of a variant Philadel- retardations in Rafsanjan city phia chromosome causing rearrangement of abl and bcr genes in 87% M. Mirzaei; cells. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) confirmed the fusion of School of medicine, Rafsanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran. bcr-abl oncogene. Thus the bone marrow karyotype was observed as Background: Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common cause of 46,XX (13%) / 46,XX,t(7;9;22)(q11;q34;q11) (87%). Metaphase paint- inherited mental retardation. Patients with this syndrome show vari- ing with whole chromosome probes (WCP) for 9 and 22 didn’t show able mental disabilities, long and narrow facial appearance with large transfer of chromosomal material from 9 to 22, due possibly to a cryptic ears and prominent fontanelle and frequent macro-orchidism. It is gen- deletion of derivative 9. Hyperdiploidy was present in two cells. In this erally associated with a fragile site at Xq27.3, which can be observed study, both conventional cytogenetic and FISH diagnosis proved to be in the metaphase chromosome following selective condition. Preva- significant to identify the variant nature of the Philadelphia chromo- lence rates of FXS have been estimated in different ethnic groups one some, cryptic deletion in derivative 9 and hyperdiploid condition for per 1500 in male individuals and one per 2500 in females the aim of introduction of a suitable treatment regimen and estimation of life ex- this study was to determine of FXS prevalence in moderate mental pectancy of the young girl. retarded individuals of Zohreh Shamsaei in Rafsangan city. Materials and Methods:52 moderate mental retardations (IQ=55-75) P0336. Molecular cytogenetic analyses in 142 patients with brain with clinical suspicion of FXS were screened for fragile X chromosome gliomas. by cytogenetic methods. Blood samples were collected and cultured Z. Zemanova1, K. Michalova1,2, L. Babicka3, S. Ransdorfova2, F. Kramar4, P. in selective condition. G-Banding method were used for karyotype Hrabal5, P. Kozler4; preparation. 1Center of Oncocytogenetics, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Faculty of Results: Patients include, 37 males (71.2%) and 15 females (28.8%) Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Hematology with mean age 12.7 (7-17) years and mean IQ 65.3 (55-74). From and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Center of Oncocytogenet- males 8.1% and from females, 6.6% were found to have fragile X site ics, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, at Xq27.3 (total 7.7%). The frequencies of fragile X-positive cells in Prague 2, Czech Republic, 4Department of Neurosurgery, Central Military Hos- males and female were between 8-52% and 12-27%, respectively. pital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, Conclusion: The frequency of fragile X positive cases found in this 5Department of Pathology, Central Military Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. study is similar to other reports of fragile X syndrome in preselected Diffuse gliomas form a heterogeneous group of primary tumours which patients. represent approximately 25% of all brain tumours in adults. New diag- nostic and prognostic indicators must be sought to enable stratification P0339. Determination of Heterozygosity at the FMR1 gene by an of treatment. One possibility is subclassification of patients according Enhanced Polymerase Chain Reaction Assay to specific chromosomal aberrations in tumour cells. M. S. Khaniani1,2, P. Kalitsis1, D. Z. Loesch2, R. J. Mitchell2, A. Choo1, H. Slater1; For detection of deletions of tumour-suppressor genes TP53, CDK- 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Tabriz Univer- N2A and RB1, deletion of 1p36 and/or 19q13.3, amplification of EGFR sity of Medical Science, Tabriz, Iran gene, trisomy 7 and monosomy 10 we used I-FISH with locus-specific The fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a common cause of X-linked mental and/or α-satellite DNA probes (Abbott Vysis). We examined fresh non- retardation. It is caused by a dynamic expansion mutation and subse- fixed tissue specimens in 142 patients with different types of gliomas quent hypermethylation of CGG repeats in the 5‘-untranslated region Cytogenetics 110 of FMR1 gene. Population screening is highly justifiable but no cost- chromosomes 21q, 20p, 15q, 6q, 5q, 17q and 18q. We observed both effective technical approach has been developed. Normal individuals isolated or associated genomic loss and gain, the latter suggesting show a range of allele sizes from 8 to 40 repeats with 20-22 and 29- an unbalanced translocation from parental origin. Detected alterations 31 being the most common allele lengths. Accurate measurement of ranged from less than 1Mb to 16 Mb. Our data strongly reinforce the allele size is crucial for diagnostic purposes and uses a combination multigenic and multihit origin in HPE and participate in the explana- of Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and Southern Blot (SB) tech- tion for the wide phenotypic spectrum described in this developmental niques. The latter is required to identify large alleles but it is expensive, disorder. time-consuming and requires a large quantity of DNA. One particu- lar use of SB is distinction of normal homozygous alleles in females, P0342. High Resolution CGH (HR-CGH) in the diagnosis of which are found in approximately 30% of cases, from pre-mutation patients with mental retardation, dysmorphic features and and full mutations. We developed a more sensitive PCR assay, which normal karyotype distinguishes alleles differing by only one repeat. Reanalysis of female S. Psoni1, G. Leventopoulos1, G. Bardi2, D. Iakovaki2, V. Papassava2, S. DNA samples alleletyped as homozygous using a previous PCR assay Kitsiou-Tzeli1, A. Mavrou1, E. Kanavakis1, H. Fryssira1; has shown that 50% are actually heterozygous and therefore do not 1Medical Genetics/Choremio Research Laboratory/Univ. of Athens/St Sophia’s need to be verified using SB. This method has considerable advantag- Children Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2BIOANALYTIKI-GENOTYPE Research and es compared with other diagnostic tests and greatly facilitates testing Applied Molecular Cytogenetics Center, Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece. of large numbers of samples. Introduction: Mental retardation (MR) is a common disorder, but etio- logic factors are not revealed in about half of the cases. CGH (Com- P0340. Loss of methylation in imprinting control region parative Genomic Hybridisation) techniques have been proved useful KVLQT1OT in first-trimester human spontaneous abortions not only in cancer genetics, but also in the diagnosis of MR . HR-CGH I. N. Lebedev, E. A. Sazhenova; is a whole-genome screening technique which detects cryptic subtelo- Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. meric or interstitial chromosomal aberrations, not visible by conven- Genomic imprinting plays a significant role in regulation of early embryo tional cytogenetic studies. development. The search of imprinted genes mutations in human mis- Subjects-Methods: Five patients, (3 boys-2 girls, aged 3 months-4 carriages is a way to determine its effects. However, there are little evi- years) were evaluated for MR. Although they presented multiple dys- dences about high level of imprinting alterations in spontaneous abor- morphic features and two of them had congenital anomalies (heart- tions, except of hydatidiform mole and single instances of uniparental renal), they could not be connected to any known genetic syndrome disomy. We have suggested that expected negative effect of imprint- in all cases. Karyotype by G-banding was normal. HR-CGH was then ing disruption could be realized through epimutations of imprinted loci performed in DNA samples labelled with FITC dUTPs (nick transla- rather than rare events of uniparental inheritance. The global changes tion). Normal DNA, labelled with Texas Red, was used as reference in genome methylation during preimplantation development as well as DNA. The results were analysed with the Applied Imaging software. a growing number of reports about association of assisted reproduc- Results: Four of the five patients had redundant chromosomal mate- tive technologies and imprinting disorders reinforce our suggestion. rial: 1) 46,XX, ish enh (1)(p31p34), enh(13)(q22), 2) 46,XX, ish enh In the present study we have performed methylation analysis of three (12p13.3), 3) 46,XX, ish cgh enh (1)(q24) and 4) 46,XX, rev ish enh imprinting control regions (SNURF-SNRPN, H19, KVLQT1OT) and im- (16p12p13.1) and 5) the fifth patient had a subtelomeric deletion [ish printed gene CDKN1C in 84 first-trimester spontaneous abortions by cgh 46,XX, del (18)(q21.1qter)]. For the confirmation of the results, the methyl-specific or methyl-sensitive PCR. Two tissues (extraembryonic patients’ parents were analysed with the same technique and were mesoderm and cytotrophoblast) with different patterns of epigenetic found normal. reprogramming were investigated. Twenty four induced abortions were Conclusions: HR-CGH contributes to the detection of chromosomal studied as a control group. Differential DNA methylation of SNURF- aberrations along with conventional karyotype, FISH analyses and SNRPN, H19 and CDKN1C was registered in all cases. As to KVLQ- quantative molecular methods are a useful adjunct and are well suited T1OT, loss of methylation (LOM) in maternal allele was found in 8 mis- in the diagnosis of mentally retarded and dysmorphic patients. carriages (9.5%). Surprisingly, LOM was confined by extraembryonic mesoderm or cytotrophoblast in 5 and 4 embryos, respectively. To our P0343. Stage-by-stage study of genome-wide DNA methylation knowledge this is a first report about epimutations of imprinting control patterns in metaphase chromosomes of human preimplantation region in human miscarriages. Moreover, tissue-specific restriction of embryos LOM allows suggesting independent sporadic epigenetic aberrations A. A. Pendina1, O. A. Efimova2, O. A. Leont’eva1, I. D. Fedorova1,2, T. V. in different embryonic germ layers. This study was supported by RFBR Kuznetsova1, V. S. Baranov1; (N 05-04-48129) and FASI (N 02.512.11.2055). 1D.O.Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecololgy RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Rus- sian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian P0341. CGH-array study of 40 holoprosencephaly patients Federation. C. Bendavid1, C. Dubourg1,2, I. Gicquel1, J. Seguin1, L. Pasquier3, C. Henry4, S. We aimed to study DNA methylation patterns of metaphase chromo- Odent1,3, V. David1,2; somes in human preimplantation embryos, which allows establishment 1UMR6061 CNRS, Rennes, France, 2Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Rennes, of differences between parental genomes and DNA remethylation tim- France, 3Génétique Médicale, CHU, Rennes, France, 4Cytogénétique, CHU, ing for individual chromosome loci. 83 metaphases from 54 IVF trip- Rennes, France. loid and abnormal diploid human embryos from zygote to blastocyst Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common developmental brain stage have been analyzed by immunofluorescence with monoclonal anomaly in humans, usually associated with facial features. Our group anti-5-methylcytosine antibodies(Eurogentec). At the first cleavage focuses on patients with HPE and normal karyotype. We previously one homologue was more or less methylated than another one(s), in- reported our results for point mutations screening and gene dosage in dicating different degree of methylation of parental genomes. In two- HPE genes (SHH, SIX3, ZIC2 and TGIF), describing genomic defects cell embryos all chromosomes were hemimethylated - one chromatid in up to 27% fetuses and 30% newborns. Recently, we screened sub- was more methylated than another one. Homologues differed only in telomeres by MLPA and found alterations in known HPE candidate loci methylation degree of old chromatids. Newly synthesized chroma- but also in new regions, including many unbalanced translocations. tids were hypomethylated in all homologues, showing that differential Therefore, we decided to screen HPE patients using CGHarray to as- DNA methylation of parental genomes is not maintained any more. sess the frequency, location and size of such disorders. Hypomethylation affected all regions along chromosome arms with We used Agilent CGH-array 44K technology. Out of 40 patients, we no band-specificity. Hemimethylated chromosomes were typical up to screened 10 DNA samples with known quantitative anomalies and 30 blastocyst stage, but their number decreased during subsequent divi- samples with no alterations identified to date. First we localized the sions. Chromosomes with both hypomethylated chromatids appeared breakpoints of the 10 DNA with known alterations (loss and/or gain in at four-cell stage and increased in number up to morula stage. Sur- specific loci) and showed no correlation between the size and severity prisingly, since four-cell stage proportion of hemimethylated and hypo- of the defect. Out of the 30 DNA with no genetic aetiology, we found methylated chromosomes varied from blastomere to blastomere, with 5 new rearrangements involving new potential HPE loci located on no preference of certain chromosome being hemi- or hypomethylated. Cytogenetics 111 Within the same metaphase hemimethylated and hypomethylated P0346. The shape, length and banded structure of chromosome homologues were represented in different combinations, which may 5 in interphase of HeLa cells result from random segregation of hypomethylated, undermethylated U. Claussen1, K. Sperling2, J. Claussen2; and methylated chromatids in daughter blastomeres. Band-specific 1Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, DNA methylation pattern, typical for fetal tissues and adult lympho- Berlin, Germany. cytes, was obvious in all metaphases since blastocyst stage. This is In contrast to metaphase chromosomes, little is known about the a pioneer study in human preimplantation metaphase cytogenetics. shape, length and the banding pattern of human interphase chromo- Supported by CRDF&RFBR. somes mainly due to technical problems in visualizing interphase chro- mosomes. We analyzed the structure of chromosome 5 in interphase P0344. Late cytogenetic effects of radiation expressed in human nuclei using high-resolution multicolor banding (MCB), which paints the cells following Chernobyl accident total shape of chromosomes and creates a DNA-mediated, chromo- M. A. Pilinskaya, S. S. Dibskiy, O. V. Shemetun, Y. B. Dibskaya, O. A. Talan, some region-specific, pseudo-colored banding pattern and allows the L. R. Pedan; identification of telomeres and the measurement of the length of chro- Research Centre of Radiation Medicine, Kijiv, Ukraine. mosomes. The investigations were performed on HeLa cells arrested We performed an evaluation of late cytogenetic consequences follow- at different phases of the cell cycle. The results show that the shape, ing the Chernobyl accident of human radiation exposure. These in- length and banding pattern of interphase chromosomes of HeLa cells clude hidden, delayed, and transmissible chromosome instability and are similar to those of the corresponding metaphase chromosomes at “bystander effect”. For the investigation of radiation-induced chromo- all stages of the cell cycle. The length of the chromosome axis of flat- some instability two methods had been applied - provocative muta- tened interphase chromosomes is 13.9µm (+/- 4.1) and comparable to genesis assay (G-dimatyph or G-bleomycin tests used for persons that of a metaphase chromosomes. The MCB pattern also allows the 1 2 differed on absorbed radiation doses) and two-termed (during 48 and detection and characterization of chromosome aberrations which may 144 hours) cultivation of peripheral blood lymphocytes received from be of fundamental importance in establishing chromosome analyses in children born to irradiated parents. In children that lived in a region non-dividing cells. Consequently, we strongly recommend to reassess contaminated by 137Cs as well as in clean-up workers with low radia- the concept of chromosome condensation during mitosis and to re- tion doses «adaptive response» had been detected; in high-doses pa- place it by the new concept of a hierarchically organized chromosome tients recovered from acute radiation sickness increased chromosome region specific protein swelling based on protonation and hydration sensitivity (hidden chromosome instability?) to additional mutagenic thereafter. exposure was revealed. In progeny of irradiated parents an increased frequency of chromosome aberrations (single fragments and abnor- P0347. Cytogenetic, molecular and clinical characterization on mal monocentrics) was established especially in long-termed cultures. an interstitial deletion of chromosome region 18q21 - a case Induction of chromatid breaks confirmed possibility of expression of report delayed chromosome instability in subsequent mitosis; appearance of N. M. P. O. Teles, M. Rocha, M. Martins, S. Pires, M. M. Freitas, J. Ribeiro, M. stable aberrations can be considered as a biomarker of transmissible L. Rodrigues, P. Jorge, R. Santos, M. Pinto; chromosome instability. In the model system proposed by us - “mixed Instituto de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal. human lymphocytes culture” consisted of cells differed by cytogenetic The 18q- syndrome (MIM 601808) originally described in 1984 is a sex markers - interaction between X-irradiated in vitro (in doses 250 relatively frequent chromosomal cytogenetic event normally resulting and 1000 mGy) and intact cells was discovered. A difference between from a terminal deletion that may include bands from 18q21.1→qter the spectrum of aberrations in exposed and intact cells was estab- and has a characteristic phenotype (midfacial hypoplasia, prominent lished - in targeted cells specific cytogenetic markers of irradiation antihelix and whorl digital pattern). Interstitial deletions involving the dominated, in “bystander” cells chromatid types of aberrations (chro- same region are rare events and include variable phenotypes, from matid breaks and terminal chromosome deletions - cytogenetic indica- moderate development delay and craniofacial asymmetry (Engelen et. tors of chromosome instability) were mainly induced. al , 2003) to profound mental retardation but no life-threatening, un- specific malformations (Wilson et al., 1979). P0345. An apparently balanced complex chromosome The authors present the clinical description, cytogenetic studies and rearrangement involving chromosomes 1, 10, and 14 in a man molecular findings of a male patient age 34 with severe mental re- with infertility tardation and marked dysmorphic features: plagiocephaly; asymetric B. Bajelan1, F. Mahjoub2, S. Karymee1, M. Khaleghian1, S. Tootain1, T. Tava- face, with midfacial hypoplasia and prominent antihelix. High resolu- kol1, Z. Saltanatpour1, M. Akbari3; tion GTG banding karyotypes of the proband and parents revealed a 1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of “de novo” del(18q21.2→18q21.3) in the proband. Cytogenetic molecu- Iran, 2Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran&nrcgeb, Tehran, Is- lar techniques (FISH) excluded the involvement of any other chromo- lamic Republic of Iran, 3Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran &De- some and MLPA probes within bands 18q21 and 18q23 (kit P095 An- partment of Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modaress University, Tehran, euploidy) allowed us to redefine the bands involved and will hopefully Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. be useful to improve the phenotype/genotype correlation in patients In study investigation was on Congenital complex chromosomal re- with interstitial 18q deletions. arrangement compatible (CCR) with life is rare in man. We describe The authors compare the present case with the ones previously de- a complex and unique apparently balanced translocation involving scribed in the literature and emphasize the importance of high resolu- chromosomes 1, 10, and 14 with 3 breakpoints, in a patient who was tion GTG banding in the characterization of dysmorphic/psychomotor referred to our clinic because of infertility. Conventional karyotyping delay syndromes and of making accurate clinical descriptions of the identified a complex rearrangement involving 3 breakpoints: chromo- patients to contribute to syndrome clarifications. some 1q21.2, 10q21.1, 14q22. The relationship between this apparently balanced and complex rear- P0348. A patient with Williams Beuren syndrome and inv dup(15) rangements and possibly produced unbalanced gametes responsible V. Petix1, E. Bevilacqua1, A. Fabretto1, D. Gambel Benussi1, E. Lenzini2, V. for high reproductive failure is discussed. The relationship between Pecile1; this apparently balanced and complex rearrangements and possibly 1S.C. Genetica Medica, I.R.C.C.S. Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Dipartimento produced unbalanced gametes responsible for high reproductive fail- di Pediatria, Università degli Studi di Padova, Padova, Italy. ure is discussed. In the literature, very few reports describe the concomitant presence of 2 anomalies leading to 2 different genetic syndromes. The contribution of each anomaly to the phenotype is still unclear. This report describes a case presenting contemporarily a Williams-Beuren Syndrome (WBS) and an inv dup(15) syndrome. WBS is a microdeletion syndrome characterized by typical cardiovas- cular defects, facial dysmorphisms, connective tissue abnormalities, mild mental retardation, specific cognitive profile, endocrine abnor-Cytogenetics 112 malities and feeding difficulties. Hypotonia and hyperextensible joints India. can result in delayed attainment of motor milestones. Inv dup(15) syn- Chromosomal abnormalities in infertile couples results in spermato- drome presents peculiar physical findings (muscle hypotonia, minor genic arrest, premature ovarian failure, implantation failure and conse- facial dysmorphisms), mental retardation, seizure, autism. quently failure of InVitro fertilization (IVF). The aim of the study was to An 11 years old boy with mild mental retardation showing some of these determine genetic basis for recurrent ART/IVF failure. Thirty eight in- anomalies was referred to our examination. He was born at term with fertile couples with IVF failure having poor blastocyst development and eutocic delivery with normal auxologic parameters. Phisycal exami- implantation were analyzed cytogenetically and for molecular analysis nation: talus valgus pronate feet, gastroesophageal reflux, hypotonia of AZF loci in the men. Two females with recurrent IVF failure showed and feeding difficulties. Later, he manifested systemic hypertension, partial deletion of Xq and the other female had 10% cell line show- growth (weight/height < 3rdcentile) and psychomotor delay. Echocar- ing deletion of pericenteromeric region of long arm of chromosome diography showed a mild supravalvular aortic stenosis, hypothyroidism number 1. Of these couples microdeletion analysis of 30 cytogeneti- was excluded. Calcium blood profile was normal. Cytogenetic analysis cally normal infertile men, only two cases showed deletion; one with revealed this karyotype: 47,XY,+inv dup(15)(q12)de novo. AZFc loci and the other case had deletion of AZFb loci. The couples Although some features of the patient such as cortex anomalies, short where female partner had deletion of long arm of X chromosome(Xq-) and stubby hands and feet were specific of the iso dic(15), the peculiar resulted in repeated failure of blastocyt development, in 4 IVF cycles. facies and cardiac defect suggested a WBS. The case with AZFb microdeletion had maturation arrest and case Molecular cytogenetic analysis (FISH) was performed with WBSCR- with AZFc deletion had hypospermatogenesis. In these cases sperms specific probe, the presence of specific microdeletion in 7q11.2 was could be retrieved from the testis and to be used for IVF or Intracyto- confirmed. In this work, we compare the phenotype of patient with both plasmic sperm injection. (ICSI). In cases with sex chromosomal and syndromes to evaluate the different contribution of concomitant chro- autosomal aberrations there is probability of poor embryo develop- mosomal anomalies. ment and consequently poor implantation, which may be a result of high segregation abnormalities and may negatively affect the outcome P0349. Clinical findings in pericentric inversion of chromosome of assisted reproductive techniques. ART is a very expensive tech- 9 - three years experience nique and recurrent ART/IVF failure results in severe financial stress M. Volosciuc, E. Braha, M. Gramescu, C. Rusu, M. Covic; coupled with emotional stress, thus all couples opting for ART must University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. undergo genetic analysis. Pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 is one of the most frequent structural balanced chromosomal aberrations. Commonly it is consid- P0352. An unusual 11q deletion derived from a complex maternal ered as a normal variant of karyotype. karyotype in a Jacobsen-like patient We reported 6 cases analyses over a three years period. Age of di- L. J. C. M. van Zutven, Y. van Bever, C. van Nieuwland, D. van Opstal, L. J. A. agnosis was under 18 years (2 cases) and over 18 years (4 cases). Corel, C. H. Wouters, P. J. Poddighe; The motivation for genetic consultation was repeated miscarriage (3 Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. cases), multiple malformations in a new-born who died in the neonatal We present a family with multiple cytogenetic abnormalities, identi- period (1 case) and mental retardation, dysmorphic face (2 cases). fied through a newborn girl with several dysmorphic features and The karyotype showed pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 in all cardiac problems, suspected for Jacobsen syndrome. Cytogenetic cases. In a single case we detected a complex anomaly - 45,X,inv(9)/ analysis showed a 46,XX,del(11)(qter) karyotype, which was con- 46,XX,inv(9) - Turner syndrome. firmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Cytogenetic in- It is difficult to assess the correlation between clinical signs and peri- vestigation of the parents showed a chromosome aberration in both: centric inversion of chromosome 9. Genetic counselling and prenatal the father presented a t(11;12)(p13;q22) and the mother was car- diagnosis is helpful for most families. rier of an ins(4;11)(p14;q24q25). Additional FISH analysis with BAC probes from chromosome 11q23.3-q25 showed that the maternal P0350. Breakpoint cloning and haplotype analysis of a ins(4;11)(p14;q24q25) was in fact the result of two subsequent events: novel cytogenetic variant consisting of a 12 Mb inversion on first, a small inversion in the long arm of one chromosome 11, and chromosome 10, inv(10)(q11.22;q21.1) second, an insertion of a small distal part of the long arm of the invert- M. Entesarian1, B. Carlsson1, E. Stattin2, E. Holmberg3, I. Golovleva2, M. R. ed chromosome 11 into the short arm of one chromosome 4. There- Mansouri1, N. Dahl1; fore, the maternal karyotype was revised into 46,XX,der(4)(4pter→ 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Umea University Hospital, Umea, Swe- 4p14::11qter::11q24.1→11q25::4p14→4qter),der(11)(pter→q23.3:: den, 3Sahlgrenska University Hospital/East, Gothenburg, Sweden. q25→q25:). The karyotype of the newborn girl was accordingly rewrit- We have identified an inherited paracentric inversion of chromosome 1 ten as 46,XX,der(11)(pter→q23.3::q25→q25:)mat. 0[inv(10)(q11.22;q21.1)] revealed by high resolution karyotyping. A de- The aberrant karyotypes in both parents implicated an increased risk tailed mapping of the inversion was done through fluorescence in situ of unbalanced fetal chromosome composition, and thus a high risk hybridization (FISH) and Southern blot hybridization in three non-re- for a child with multiple congenital abnormalities. Therefore, during lated Swedish individuals. Cloning and sequencing of the breakpoints the next pregnancy, the couple opted for invasive prenatal diagnosis revealed that the inversion was identical in the three individuals. The by amniocentesis. To obtain an early indication of the expected fetal inversion spans 12 Mb and it is almost perfectly balanced at the nucle- karyotype, an interphase FISH strategy for uncultured amniotic fluid otide level. No predicted transcripts or known genes are disrupted by cells was designed. Karyotyping of cultured amniotic cells confirmed the inversion breakpoints. The 10q11.22 breakpoint is located within a one of the two predicted cytogenetic options, demonstrating the im- long terminal repeat (LTR) and the 10q21.1 breakpoint is 900 bp away portance of an interphase strategy for couples with both parents being from a short interspersed nuclear element (SINE). Haplotype analysis carrier of a chromosomal abnormality. of the three individuals and their parents indicated that a shared hap- lotype was inherited with the chromosome 10 inversion which favours P0353. Jumping translocation and Prader-Willi syndrome: about a single event for the inversion. A retrospective study of amniocente- one case ses and blood analyses performed in Sweden showed presence of the F. Girard1, B. Doray2, S. Soskin3, V. Biancalana4, M. Fradin1, N. Carelle1, C. inversion in 7 out of 8,896 amniocenteses and in 3 out of 2362 blood Joumard1, E. Flori1; analyses. In all cases the inversion was inherited from one of the par- 1Service de cytogénétique, CHRU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Service ents. From our results, we suggest that the inv(10)(q11.22;q21.1) is a de génétique médicale, CHRU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Service de rare variant and that it is identical by descent. pédiatrie 1, CHRU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 4Laboratoire de diagnos- tic génétique, CHRU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. P0351. Molecular and cytogenetic analysis in IVF failure cases Jumping translocations are rare chromosomal events and are defined M. B. Shamsi1, R. Kumar1, R. Dada1, M. Tanwar1, G. Idris1, R. K. Sharma2, R. as chromosome rearrangements involving a donor chromosome seg- Kumar1; ment which is translocated to various receptor chromosomes. 1AIIMS, New Delhi, India, 2Army Research and Referral Hospital, New Delhi, The majority of jumping translocations have been observed in haema- tological malignancies.Cytogenetics 11 Less than 10 cases of Prader-Willi syndrome associated with a jump- intersex abnormalities are identified, those patients are more likely to ing translocation have been reported in the litterature. have ambiguous genitalia, especially those with perineal hypospadias Cytogenetic analysis performed on a 13 year old boy suspected of and cryptorchidism. Prader-Willi syndrome showed a constitutionnal mosaicism with dif- ferent cell lines : P0356. Sex chromosome abnormalities in asoospermic males 45,X,der(Y)t(15;Y)(Ypter→Yqter::15q13→15qter),-15 [27] / L. Letica, R. Lasan, M. Burek, H. Ljubic, D. Begovic; 45,X,der(Y)t(15;Y)(Yqter→Ypter::15q13→15qter),-15 [9] / Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University 45,XY,der(15)t(15;15)(15pter→15qter::15q13→15qter),-15 [1] / Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia. 45,XY,der(13)t(13;15)(13pter→13qter::15q13→15qter),-15 [1] / Cytogenetical analysis has been carried out on 32 patiens diagnosed 45,XY,der(17)t(15;17)(17qter→17pter::15q13→15qter),-15 [1] / with azoospermia or hypogonadism. Conventional cytogenetical G - 45,XY,der(22)t(15;22)(22pter→22qter::15q13→15qter),-15 [1]. banding method and Flurescent in situ hybridization technique were In all cases, the majority of the long arm of one chromosome 15 is considered in cultured peripheral blood. translocated on different receptor chromosomes and the centromere 22 cases showed karyotypes pure 47,XXY - Klinefelter syndrome, 2 of the derived chromosome seems to belong to the receptor chromo- cases 47,XXY/46,XY - mosaic Klinefelter sy., 1 case 47,XXY/48,XXXY, some. 2 cases 48,XXY,+ mar, 3 cases 46,XX male, 1 case 47,XYY, 1 case FISH studies show deletion of the region 15p11.2, the centromere and 45,X,psu dic(Y,13). the region 15q11-q13. FISH identified two marker chromosomes, detected SRY gene trans- The deletion of the region 15q11-q13 confirms Prader-Willi syndrome. location on X chromosome in cases with karyotyp 46,XX male, also in Hypothesis of the mechanism leading to this jumping translocation is karyotyp 45,X,psu dic Y,13. Cytogenetical research is very important to discussed. detect the cause of male infertility. P0354. A report of a case with partial trisomy 13q with P0357. Cytogenetic Investigation in 945 Iranian Leukaemic 46,XY,der(14)t(13;14) (q13;p11.1),+13q13 Karyotype Patients M. Rahnama1, F. Mahjoubi2, S. Soleimani3, F. Mortezapour3, F. Razazian3, M. M. Khaleghian1, F. Mahjoubi2, Z. Beheshty1, G. Togeh3, H. Jalalyfar4, M. Key- Zamanian3, F. Manouchehri3, M. Nourozinia3, M. Akbari3, M. Akbari4, F. Nasiri3; hani3, M. Akbari5; 1IBTOy, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2IBTO & NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic 1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Republic of Iran, 3IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Akbari Medical Ge- Iran, 2Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran& Clinical Genetic Dept, netics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, teh- This has been shown that the trisomy of the distal part of chromosome ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Dept of Hematology, Imam Hospital, Tehran, Iran, 13 is related to different clinic findings than cases with classic trisomy tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dept of Hematology, Tehran, Iran, tehran, 13. The different trisomic segments of the long arm of chromosome 13 Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran & have been reported which might be either translocated or inserted in Department of Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modaress University, Teh- different chromosomes. ran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Our case was a baby boy and the first child of an unrelated family. We analyzed bone marrow and peripheral blood samples of more He was born at term following a normal pregnancy. He referred to our than 550 Iranian Patients referred from Major hematology-oncology clinic at the age of 4 months. He had postaxial polydactyly and syndac- centers at Tehran and provincial capitals. They were either suspected tyly of the left hand. He was deaf and legally blind. of leukemia at presentation or being monitored for their response to He was generally presented with developmental delay, microcephaly, medication. Bone marrow or/and blood cells were cultured, harvest- trinogocephaly, hypotelorism, and with feeding problem. ed and G-banded according to the standard protocols. Chromosome Cytogenetic analysis carried out using Tripsin Giemsa G banding analysis was performed following ISCN guidelines. The patients were (GTG), the karyotype 46,XY,der(14)t(13;14) (q13p11.1)+13q13 was divided into six major groupings as far as the leukemia subtypes were determined in our patient . His mother and father were investigated concerned: CML, AML, ALL, MIDS, Lymphoma and others. They were and found to have normal karyotypes. To our best knowledge, this is more male patients than female (1.32: 1 ratio). In terms of sample type the first report of a case where the trisomic segment of chromosome most cases had bone marrow aspiration whereas peripheral blood was 13 is translocated on to chromosome 14. utilized only in fraction of cases. The common typical chromosomal abnormalities as well as rare and complex forms were observed. The P0355. Is routine karyotyping necessary in the evaluation of overall chromosomal abnormality rate obtained was around 50%. The hypospadias cryptorchidism and micropenis? breakdown figures for different categories were roughly as follows: M. Ben Rekaya1, S. Makni2, F. Talmoudi1, O. Kilani1, N. Abdelmoula3, A. 80% in CML, 40% in AML, 25% in ALL, 30% in MDS and 50% in other Amouri1; types. Compared to published data, the observed chromosomal ab- 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Hopital d’enfants, Tunis, Tunisia, Tu- normality rate in the present study is considered average nis, Tunisia, 3Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, Tunisia, SFAX, Tunisia. The incidence of intersex states has been reported to be 27% to 100% P0358. Cytogenetic characterization of a diffuse large B- in patients with hypospadias and cryptorchidism, and routinely deter- cell lymphoma case using multi-color fluorescence in situ mining karyotypes has been recommended. This incidence seems hybridization much higher than in our experience. We reviewed the records of pa- E. Arranz1, A. Sanz1, F. Sanz1, J. Argerich1, J. Cannata2, J. Steegmann2, A. tients with hypospadias, cryptorchidism and/or micropenis as well as Figuera2, A. Alegre2; those referred with ambiguous genitalia to determine whether these 1Genetics Dpt. Hospital La Princesa, MADRID, Spain, 2Hematology Dpt. Hospi- findings were associated with a high incidence of chromosomal ab- tal La Princesa, MADRID, Spain. normalities and whether they warrant routine karyotype screening. The diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive malig- We reviewed the records of patients with undescended testis, hypo- nancy of mature B-lymphocytes, and accounts for approximately 40% spadias and/or micropenis, and those with ambiguous genitalia who of all NHL cases. This entity shows great clinical and genetic hetero- presented between 2004 and 2006. Patients without karyotype deter- geneity. Conventional cytogenetic techniques (CCT) has provided a mination, and those with iatrogenic cryptorchidism, retractile testes, useful, but incomplete analysis of the chromosomal changes observed congenital adrenal hyperplasia or female-appearing external genitalia in this disease due to the complexity and poor morphology of chromo- were excluded from study. Of the 32 patients whose records matched somes that characterize the karyotypes obtained in this malignancy. study inclusion criteria, two patients (6,25%) had chromosomal abnor- This results in partially characterized karyotypes containing many malities.Ambiguous genitalia was associated with sex chromosomal chromosomal alterations unresolved in a large number of cases. The abnormalities in the 2 children and no case with autosomal chromo- multi-color fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) analysis has somal abnormalities. Most patients who present for the evaluation of helped to identify and characterize previously unidentified chromo- hypospadias, micrpenis and undescended testis have a normal karyo- somal abnormalities. type. Routine karyotype investigation of all patients with hypospadias, M-FISH was performed on lymph node from one DLBCL case in order cryptorchidism and micropenis does not seem warranted. If karyotypic to deliniate the complex chromosomal alterations that remained unre-Cytogenetics 11 solved after CCT analysis. In this study we aimed to evaluate the postnatally screened karyotype M-FISH analysis resolved 100% chromosomal aberrations that had results in the individuals who were referred to our department due to been misclassified by CCT analysis and masked as additional mate- primary infertility between 2000-2006 years in Izmir. A total of 179 cas- rial (adds) on unbalanced derivate chromosomes and marker chro- es with infertility were evaluated retrospectively in our study. The mean mosomes. age was 35.00±6.06 years. Twenty out of 179 (11.17%) cases showed Chromosomes preferentially involved in karyotipic aberrations were chromosomal abnormality. Thirteen (7.3 %) were 47,XXY, 3 (1.68%) 4, 8, 3, 5, 6 and 7 (in decreasing order). Breakpoints included 4q11, were 46,XY,inv(9) (p11;q13), one (0.56%) 46,XY/45,XO, one (0.56%) 4q31, 8q12~q13, 3q27, 5q23, 6q14 and 7q31. 46,XY/47,XXY/48,XXXY, one (0,56%) 46,XY,t(X;1) and one (0,56%) In conclusion, M-FISH represent an essential tool for clarifying karyo- 46,XX. In conclusion we point out the importance of cytogenetic evalu- types with abnormalities that are not completely defined by CCT. In ation in those cases with infertility. this sense, accurate cytogenetic characterization using a combination of M-FISH and CCT in DLBCL cases will facilitate comprehensive cor- P0361. Y chromosome abnormalities and male infertility relation with clinical features. S. K. Murthy1, A. K. Malhotra1, P. S. Jacob1, S. Naveed1, E. E. M. Al-Row- aished1, S. Mani1, S. Padariyakam1, A. Ridha2, M. T. Al-Ali1; P0359. Three patients with primary macroglobulinamia, strongly 1Genetics Department, Al Wasl Hospital, DOHMS, Dubai, United Arab Emir- seropositive to Hp infection and t(11;18)(q21;q21) ates, 2Pathology Department, Dubai Hospital, DOHMS, Dubai, United Arab S. N. Kokkinou, K. Tzanidakis, A. Lindou, K. Pavlou, H. Alafaki, G. Floropou- Emirates. lou, R. Hatzikyriakou, A. Haralabopoulou, G. Drosos; Genetic component is responsible for about 15% of male infertility. Cytogenetic Unit, Halandri Athens, Greece. Among them, constitutional chromosomal abnormalities are found Introduction: Primary macroglobulinemia (PMG) is a proliferative dis- in about 5% of oligozoospermic men and 15% of azoospermic men. order of an IgM producing B-cell clone with bone marrow infiltration Males attending the infertility clinic and seeking for assisted reproduc- by small lymphoid cells, plasma cells, anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, tive techniques (ART) are routinely referred to our center for genetic and hyperviscocity syndrome. On the other side Hp chronic infec- testing. During the year 2006, 7/33 males (21.2%) with infertility were tion can produce a MALT type lymphoma of the stomach, B-cell ori- found to have chromosome abnormalities; four with 47,XXY, three with gin in which commonly the MALT1 gene(18q21) is fused to the AP12 structural abnormalities of the Y chromosome and none with Y micro- gene(11q21). deletion for SRY, AZF and DAZ regions by PCR. Routine G-banding Aim of the study: We report 3 cases of PMG with t(11;18)(q21;q21) and appropriate FISH tests were carried out, and the karyotypes of the who were strongly seropositive to Hp. Our report demonstrates that three cases with Y chromosome abnormalities were confirmed as : part of PMG is the result of chronic Hp infection. Case 1 : 45,X,der(18)t(Y;18)(pter-p10::q10-qter).ish der(18)idic t(Y;18 Patients: 1st patient: A man 47y with diplopia. )(p10;q10)(SRY+,DYZ3+;D18Z1+)[80]/ 46,XY,i(18)(q10).ish Y(SRY+), 2nd patient: A man78y with mild anemia. i(18)(D18Z1+)[20] 3rd patient: A woman 80ywith severe bone pain. Case 2 : 46,X,idic(Y)(qter-p11.32::p11.32-qter).ish idic(Y)(CEP By immunoelectrophoresis all had IgMk paraproteinemia. Y++,SRY++) Their bone marrow was infiltrated by 10% abmormal lymphoid cells Case 3 : 47,XYY[10]/46,XY[40] CD5- and CD10-. Dicentric Y is the most common rearrangement of the Y chromosome, Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with biopsy showed small with varying break point regions, and is mostly present as part of a Bcells[L26+,CD3-] and Tcells[CD3+,L26-] mosaic karyotype. However, Only 5 cases of isodicentric Y with break- Serum antiHp IgG and IgA titers were increased. point at Yp11.32 are reported so far. We found a similar karyotype in Methods: Bone marrow specimens and PB lymphocytes were cultured an azoospermic male (case 2) but surprisingly non-mosaic. This could using standard techniques.Thirty GTG banded metaphases were ana- possibly be a germinal or a very early mitotic event. Since the entire lyzed (ISCN1995). Y chromosomes are present in this rearrangement, it is genetically FISH was performed using the LSIAP12/MALT1 t(11;18)(q21;q21) similar to the XYY individuals. Case 1 was predominantly monosomic dual color, dual fusion translocation probe (VYSIS). for 18p and loss of Yq, and presented with mild dysmorphic features Results: The karyotypes looked normal.With FISH we evaluated as a and rudimentary gonads. The genetic findings, genotype-phenotype translocation a one orange(MALT),one green(AP12) and two fusion correlation and possible reproductive options in the three cases are (AP12/MALT) signal pattern. discussed. Two hundrend interphase nuclei were counted.Up to 15% of the cells carryied the translocation. P0362. Supernumerary marker chromosomes derived from Conclusions: 1) PMG cases with t(11;18)(q21;q21) are clinically dis- chromosome 15 tinct from other B-cell origin cases with this translocation. 2) Since I. Marco1, E. Arranz1, O. González1, S. Ramiro1, C. Blas1, M. Calderón1, A. PMG and MALT lymphomas are of B-cell type and share the same Fernández-Jaén2, M. Renedo1; t(11;18)(q21;q21) it is suggestive that the chronic Hp infection can 1Gemolab, Madrid, Spain, 2Servicio de Neurología.Hospital de la Zarzuela, result to an abnormal proliferation of lymphoplasmacytic cells and to Madrid, Spain. participate in the machanism of lymphomagenesis. Supernumerary chromosomes markers (SMCs) of chromosome 15 are the most common SMCs in human accounting for 60% of all those P0360. Cytogenetic abnormalities in male infertility observed. Molecular cytogenetics methods are necessary to identify D. Ercal1, Z. O. Dogan2, M. Akgul3, C. Gunduz2, O. Cogulu4, C. Ozkinay3, F. these additional chromosomal markers. Conventional cytogenetics Ozkinay4; techniques are limited in terms of providing the necessary information 1Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, about their origin. We present two cases, initially studied with standard Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, GTG banding technique followed by complementary C-banding and Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical NOR-staining. Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Case 1: 47, XY, +mar Clinical features: Infertility Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey. The marker is dicentric and with the application of M-FISH we identify Infertility is the inability to get pregnant after trying for at least one that the marker was der (14) or der(15). Using specific centromeric year without using birth control methods. About 25 percent of couples FISH probes we were able to identify that it was derived from chromo- experience infertility at some point in their lifes. The incidence of infer- some 15. tility increases with age. The male partner contributes to about 40 per- The patient is infertile. cent of cases with infertility. This is a serious problem which concerns Case 2: 47, XY, +mar Clinical features: autism families in respect of economical and spiritual aspects. Recently the The marker is dicentric and using PW/AS FISH probe we have de- medical developments in the diagnostic procedure of those cases with tected that the marker was duplicated for this region, then the patient infertility provided opportunities for the families. There are several rea- presents parcial tetrasomy for chromosome 15. Microsatellite analysis sons that cause male infertility. The most common reason is varicosele of the 15q11-q13 region is undertaken. in male infertility which is followed by sex chromosome abnormalities. The comparison of the clinical data of our patients with those with simi-Cytogenetics 11 lar markers taken from the literature allowed us to establish pheno- and aggressiveness. He could finish his primary school. He worked type-karyotype correlations. as a mechanic. He suffered from spasm and muscle cramp. He had hypoplastic toe nails and short hands. Although he had a hydrocoele P0363. Chromosomal findings in 8727 Iranian patients with repaired, his genitalia were otherwise normal. The patients found to mental retardation be negative for Fragile X. However, He was found to be 47 XYY from F. Nasiri1, F. Mahjoubi1,2, S. Soleimani1, M. Rahnama1, F. Mortezapour1, F. Ma- chromosomal examinations.Our case is the second reported case of nouchehri1, F. Razazian1, M. Zamanian1; a XYY boy with malformations of the hands. We could find just one 1IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic previous article concerning XYY males with hands malformation. This of Iran. combination of XYY male and nails and hands deformities may be co- The identification of a de novo chromosomal imbalance in a patient incidental. However, we think it is important to report the patient. with mental retardation (MR) is usually considered causal for the phe- In summary, it is apparent that the mental and physical characteristics notype. Most of imbalances in patients with MR are inherited from a of the average XYY boy are yet to be determined. This is very impor- healthy parent. tant to help the parents who are seeking prenatal diagnosis and whom Here we review our cytogenetic investigations on 8727 Iranian patients found to have a fetus with XYY karyotype to make the right decision. referred to IBTO due to MR. Among these MR patients, 31 cases diag- nosed with Fragile X and 112 with Down syndrome. P0365. Chromosomal aetiology of congenital conotruncal heart In 721 patients the following chromosomal abnormalities could be de- malformations tected: I. Trabelsi1, B. Gargouri2, A. Amouri3, M. Cherif4, T. Rebai5, N. B. Abdelmoula5; 46,XY, rec(10)dup(10p),inv(10)(p11.2q26.3)mat 1Hopital Hedi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Faculy of Science, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Pasteur 46,XX,del5p Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 4Private Sector, Tunis, Tunisia, 5Faculty of Medicine, 46,XY,del22q(11.2) Sfax, Tunisia. 46,XX,add 15p ? Important advances in the diagnosis and treatment of congenital heart 46,XX,del18 (21.3)[18]/46,XX[33] malformations have been made in the past 50 years. Nowadays while 49XXXXY/48,XXXX echocardiogram plays an important role in the diagnosis, etiologic as- 46,XY,t(16 ;17)(q22 ;p13) sessment at the genetic level becomes mandatory. In order to identify 46, XXadd(22)(p13), the frequency of chromosomal rearrangements and 22q11 microdele- mos47,XY,+ mar[8]/46,XY[12] tions in patients with conotruncal heart defects, we studied by karyo- 47,XX,del(2)(q22q32.2)+r(2)(q22q32.2)[81]/ typing and FISH procedures 44 patients. Each patient was investi- 46,XX,del(2)(q22q32.20[9] gated by echocardiography. Anamnestic and clinical informations with 46,XX,del(6)(p25)[7]/46,XX46] regard to developmental milestones and dysmorphic features were 46,XY,del(18)(q23) recorded. Conotruncal heart defects, included tetralogy of Fallot (TF; 47,XX,+der(22),t(11,22)(q23;q11.2) n = 27), pulmonary atresia/ventricular septal defect (APSO; n = 7), 45,Xx,t(7,22)(q36.2;q11.1~11.21) double-outlet right ventricle (VDDI; n = 4), transposition of the great ar- 45,X teries (TGV; n = 1 ), truncus arteriosus (TA; n = 1), subaortic ventricular 46,XXinv6(p23q21) septal defect (SACIV; n = 3), and interrupted aortic arch (IAAo; n = 47,XY,+ 21, dic(21;21)(q22.1;q22.3) 3). Phenotypic features and associated abnormalities were examined $5,XXder(13,14)(q10;q10) in these patients. One patient (2.27%) who had a TF had a de novo 48,XXYY cytogenetic chromosomal abnormalities: 46,XY,der(16)t(16;?)(q24;?) 46, XX,inv6(q22.1;q25.1) and four (9.09%) had 22q11 microdeletions, including 33.33% of IAAo, 47,XXY 16.67% of APSO and 7.40% of TF. 45,XY,der (13,14))q10;q10) In patients with chromosomal abnormalities or 22q11 microdeletions, 46,XX,del5(p15.2) abnormal phenotypic features and associated abnormalities were ob- 46,XX,t(2,3)(q23;25) served. 45,X We conclude that children with congenital conotruncal heart malfor- 47,XY,+21,invY mations, should undergo karyotyping and microdeletion testing mainly 48,XXYY when heart defects are associated with other congenital anomalies. 46,XXr(18)(q21.2qter) Detection of chromosomal anomalies has a significant impact on prog- 46,XY,del(4)(p15.31) nosis and follow-up of patients, as well as on genetic counseling of 46,XX,del(11)(q23.2 families. 46,XY,add15p 48,XXX,+mar[2]/ 47,XXX[22]/46,X,+mar[8]/45,X[2] P0366. Whole genome amplification from microdissected 47,XX,+13 chromosomes 46,Xy,del50p15.2) M. Höckner, M. Erdel, G. Utermann, D. Kotzot; In the remaining 45 MR patients no chromosomal abnormalities could Division of Clinical Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria. be identifies. Our findings support the view that screening for chromo- The uniform whole genome amplification (WGA) of smallest amounts of somal rearrangements has a great positive role. If cost and resources DNA is a great challenge not only for single cell analysis in preimplan- permit, conventional karyotyping should be the next diagnostic test of tation diagnostics or oncogenetic research but also for investigation of choice in a child with unexplained MR. the parental origin of de novo balanced chromosome aberrations. In the latter it is not possible to differentiate marker alleles of the deriva- P0364. XYY in mentally retarded boy with tall stature, tive chromosomes from alleles of their normal homolog by analysis of prognathism, hypoplastic toe nails and malformations of the genomic DNA. For such investigations the derivative chromosomes hands and their normal homolog must be separated. For this purpose single S. Tootian1, M. Khalegian1, S. Karymee1, M. Akbari2, F. Mahjoubi3; chromosomes from lymphocyte metaphase spreads were dissected 1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic with a glass needle, and collected in a glass capillary filled with col- of Iran, 2Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran & ) Department of lection buffer. Then, the DNA of the microdissected chromosomes Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modaress University, Tehran, Iran, tehran, was amplified by different types of WGA strategies. I-PEP (improved Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran primer extension preamplification), a PCR based WGA using random &National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, priming, Genomiphi® and Repli-g® which are based on multiple dis- tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. placement amplification, and GenomePlex® single cell kit, which is Here we report a 25-year-old man referred to our laboratory for evalu- based on library preparation and amplification using adaptor primers ation of possible Fragile X syndrome on the basis of mild mental were compared according to their efficiency and practical application retardation. He was tall (194cm). His face was mildly dysmorphic. for subsequent microsatellite analysis. First preliminary data show a Prognatism was detected. He often showed excess negative mood more efficient WGA by the Genomiphi®/Repli-g® kit and the Genome-Cytogenetics 11 Plex® single cell kit than by the I-PEP approach. Further comparative P0369. MLPA in detailed characterisation of chromosomal investigations are in process and will be presented on the meeting. rearrangements: experience gathered from cases with Practical applicability will be demonstrated in some cases with rare psychomotoric retaradation, dysmorphic features and chromosomal rearrangements. In conclusion, WGA of single microdis- congenital anomalies sected chromosomes will be a new and powerful tool to improve our J. Camajova, M. Balascakova, Z. Vlckova, E. Kočárek, D. Novotna, T. Mariko- knowledge on meiotic and mitotic chromosomal behaviour. va, E. Rausova, M. Simandlova, J. Vejvalka, M. Krhounek, M. Macek Jr., M. Macek; P0367. Microdeletion in 17p13.3 telomeric to LIS1 and Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University, Prague, monosomy 21petr 21q21 in a man presenting azoospermia Czech Republic. S. Mougou, H. Hannechi, R. Bhouri, H. Elghezal, A. Saad; Exact characterisation of chromosomal rearrangements is important hopital farhat hached, sousse, Tunisia. for the identification of genes involved in different instances of psy- Monosomy for the segment 17(p13.3 pter) was first associated with chomotoric retardation (PMR), in patients with dysmorphic features the Miller-Dieker syndrome: recognized as a contiguous gene-deletion and/or congenital anomalies. Commercial MLPA SALSA kits (MRC- syndrome (MDS). It includes lissencephaly, significant facial dysmor- Holland; P036B, P070, P019, P020) were used in 26 cases that in phism and occasionally other congenital anomalies. These disorders parallel underwent cytogenetic and/or FISH examinations. MLPA da- result from a deletion of a common critical region including gene LIS1. tasets were analyzed by our ,,in house“ software and subtelomeric However some MDS cases have been previously described to been rearrangements (del./dupl., or their combinations) were found in 5 / associated with more distal deletions to LIS1 suggesting the implica- 26 probands (19.2%): 1/ del. 3q29, ΔT 745kb (distance from the telo- tions of others genes in the brain development and neuronal migra- mere) was associated with a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, tion. Here we describe a 24 years man consulting for azoospermia. psychomotoric retardation, including disintegration of white / gray brain Clinical findings associate moderate mental retardation and non spe- matter. However, this rearrangement was also revealed in the unaf- cific dysmorphic features. R banded chromosome analysis revealed fected mother and maternal grandmother, who also bears a duplica- 17p13.3 monosomy associated to a 21(pter,q21) monosomy as a re- tion at 21q22.3, ΔT 80kb, thus causal relationship was excluded; 2/ in sult of an unbalanced segregation of a reciprocal maternal translo- the case of Caudal regression syndrome with bilateral optical optical cation (45,XY,der17t(17;21)mat,-der21). Fluorescent in situ hybridisa- atrophy FISH revealed del./dupl. at 4p16.3. MLPA revealed the del. tion studies on the mother and the proposita confirmed the reciprocal with ΔT 346-874kb; 3/ subtelomeric dupl. 15q26.3 ΔT 334-337kb was translocation in the mother and a terminal deletion in the patient, which associated with microcephaly and PMR; 4/ del. 9q34.3, ΔT 706 kb and resulted in the retention of LIS1 and a deletion of the 17p telomere. dupl. 12p24.33 ΔT 176-316kb was detected in a patient with PMR and The study show also that the proximal breakpoint in chromosome 21 dysmorphic features and 5/ del. 18q23, ΔT 220-539 and dupl. 4q35, is proximal to the gene APP: the proximal boundary of the “monosomy ΔT 3872kb was associated with PMR, mutliple congenital anomalies 21” critical region implicated in the “monosomy 21” phenotype: arthro- and axial hypotony. In conclusion, MLPA supplements the FISH ex- griposis-like syndrome.Interstingly, telomeric 17p deletions without amination by more exact localization and characterisation of the range LIS1 deletions have been previously described frequently with severe of del./dupl. in heterogeneous clinical cases. Differentiation between mental retardation, hypotonia and abnormal brain imaging. However causal rearragements and variants is only possible via family analysis. in our case the discrete clinical features contributes to illustrate the Supported by VZFNM 000064203. relationship between 17p13.3 genes deletions, the spectrum of the as- sociated phenotypes and their implications in the brain development P0370. Molecular neurocytogenetic survey of intercellular and the neuronal migration. genomic variations manifesting as aneuploidy in the human brain P0368. High recombination density and low interference in the I. Y. Iourov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, T. Liehr3, I. A. Demidova2, A. K. Beresheva2, domestic cat A. D. Kolotii2, V. S. Kravets2, V. M. Vostrikov1, V. V. Monakhov1, N. A. Uranova1, P. Borodin, T. Karamysheva, N. Rubtsov; I. V. Soloviev1, F. Pellestor4, Y. B. Yurov1,2; Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa- During meiotic prophase hundreds of double-strand DNA breaks tion, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Roszdrav, Moscow, Russian (DSB) are generated. Majority of them are repaired in non-crossover Federation, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Grenada, way, while the minority are resulted in crossovers. In most organisms, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Montpellier, France. neighbouring crossover sites interfere with each other. The strength of Classical genetic views suggest all the cells forming the human brain the interference is estimated by the distance between adjacent cross- to possess identical genomes. However, recent molecular cytogenetic over sites and by the shape parameter of gamma distribution. This studies of the brain have refute these experimentally unproven as- parameter estimates a ratio of DSB randomly placed along the bivalent sumptions and proposed a new biomedical direction, molecular neuro- to the number of them resolved in crossover way. We analyzed the cytogenetics. Regardless previous molecular neurocytogenetic stud- chromosome-wide patterns of meiotic recombination and interference ies showing the brain populated by aneuploid cells, we are still far from in the domestic cat (Felis domesticus L.). We prepared synaptone- knowing in what extent aneuploid cells affect the human brain. Using mal complex (SC) spreads of meiotic chromosomes from the testes of state-of-art interphase molecular cytogenetic techniques (multiprobe three male cats and mapped 2633 sites of recombination along 1098 FISH with quantitative FISH, multicolor banding (MCB), PRINS, and individual autosomes, using immunolocalization of MLH1, a mismatch PNA) and scoring about 1 million nuclei, we were able to establish the repair protein marking recombination sites. We estimated a total re- rate of mosaic aneuploidy of chromosomes 1, 7, 9, 14, 16, 18, 21, X, combination length of the male cat genome as 2175.5 centimorgans. and Y in the unaffected, schizophrenia, and ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) The cats showed the highest recombination density per unit of SC and brain (cerebral cortex): lowest interference among mammals so far studied. Many recombina- tion sites were located in close vicinity to each other and to the cen- tromeres. Average distance between neighbouring sites was 22% SC length, while in humans and other mammals studied it usually exceeds 50-60%. For the chromosomes of comparable size the shape param- eter in the cats was equal to 4.1 while in mice and shrews was about 14-18, , i.e. as much as one quarter of the precursors were converted into crossover sites in the cats against only 5-7% in other mammals.Cytogenetics 11 Brain Autosomes Sex chromosomes 7q3 chromosome region. The infant presented hypotonia and poor (mean per autosome pair) growth of prenatal onset, microcephaly, cranial asymmetry with broad Losses forehead, upslanted palpebral fissures, strabismus, bulbous nose with Range: 0.1-0.7% Mean: 0.57% Chromosome X loss (females): 2% anteverted nares, short wide philtrum, short neck, enlarged and low Unaffected Chromosome X gain (males): 0.4% Gains - set malformed auricles, broad and short fingers, sacral dimple. CT Chromosome Y gain: 0.1% Range: 0.1-0.2% scan was normal, but cardiac ultrasonography showed congenital Mean: 0.12% heart defect. Losses Traditional R banding revealed a 7q terminal deletion involving segment Range: 0.8-1.7% Chromosome X loss (females): between cytogenetic bands 7q34 and 7q36 and mosaic form of 47,XXX Mean:1.2% 2.2% Schizophrenia Gains Chromosome X gain (males): 0.6% syndrome. The girl’s karyotype was 47,XXX,del(7)(q34q36)(16%)/ Range: 0.2-0.6 Chromosome Y gain: 0.2% 46,XX,del(7)(q3436)(84%). Mean:0.43% Two important genes have been described to the 7q3 region: the ho- Losses meobox HLXB9, for dominantly inherited sacral agenesis, and Sonic Range:1.3-3% Chromosome X loss (females): hedgehog, the major gene causing holoprosencephaly. Interestingly Mean: 2% 3.5% AT our patient had sacral dimple but not clinical features or CNS malfor- Gains Chromosome X gain (males): 2.8% mations of holoprosencephaly suggesting that the holoprosencephaly Range:0.5% Chromosome Y gain: 0.6% Mean:0.4% spectrum with 7qter deletion is extremely variable. For the prevention the genetic counselling was indicated. The cytoge- Thus, the data show that aneuploidy do present in the human brain. However, the rate netic examination of the parents was recommended. Parental karyo- of stochastic aneuploidy differs between unaffected individuals and those affected by types were normal. The deletion has occurred de novo. The risk of psychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases. We observed the schizophrenia brain to recurrence of monosomy 7q3 for patient’s sib was not increased. demonstrate significantly increased aneuploidy rate as to control. Furthermore, in AT The 47,XXX chromosome constitution is not associated with an obvi- (neurodegenerative disease featured by chromosome instability), the brain exhibited ously abnormal phenotype, and females with this karyotype cannot be even more significant increase of aneuploidy as to both control and schizophrenia. distinguished from normal 46,XX females. We conclude that aneuploidy in the human brain possesses the potential not only to produce neuronal diversity but also to be a mechanism for neuropsychiatric disorders. P0373. Molecular and cytogenetic analysis on multiple Supported by INTAS, AT Children’s project, and DFG. displacement amplification (MDA) products from single cells for Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD). P0371. A direct comparison between whole genome S. Glentis1, R. Wang2, S. SenGupta1, I. Craft3, A. Thornhill3, R. Palmer2, B. oligonucleotide microarrays and whole genome BAC Gibbons2, J. C. Harper1; microarrays and an evaluation of the use of whole genome 1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2North-East London oligonucleotide microarrays in a prenatal diagnosis setting. Regional Cytogenetics Laboratory, London, United Kingdom, 3London Fertility L. Xanthopoulou1, R. Wang2, R. Palmer2, B. Gibbons2, J. C. Harper1; Centre, London, United Kingdom. 1UCL, London, United Kingdom, 2North-East London Regional Cytogenetics Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) is a technique where only Laboratory, London, United Kingdom. a single cell is available for diagnosis. This limitation of the technique Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) allows a high resolu- may be overcome with the use of MDA which amplifies the entire ge- tion whole genome analysis of copy number changes and can reveal nome in few hours. submicroscopic duplications and deletions in individuals with normal Buccal cells, lymphocytes and fibroblasts were used as a source of G-band karyotypes. single cell DNA. Three cell lysis methods were used (Proteinase K, Two genomic DNA samples from patients with known chromosome alkaline lysis, and modified alkaline lysis). DTT was excluded in the abnormalities were tested using both BAC and 60mer oligonucleotide modified lysis. DNA from single cells was amplified either by MDA array-CGH platforms. or by DOP. Two multiplex fluorescent PCR reactions were applied to The dye swap experiment using BAC arrays produced the clearest the MDA products to test for MDA accuracy. MDA and DOP products results, whereas the oligonucleotide arrays picked up more regions of were also used for metaphase-CGH and array-CGH analysis to check possible copy number change for the same samples. Two of the de- whether known aneuploidies could be detected. tected regions of copy number change were followed up by FISH: one Molecular analysis showed that the modified lysis protocol provided of was confirmed, and one was found to be a genomic variant. more accurate results. Different accuracy rates were obtained from dif- The Oligonucleotide array platform was also used to test two samples ferent cell types for the loci tested (buccal cells: 44.3%, lymphocytes: with low DNA concentrations (a clump of 3-5 normal female buccal 74.3% fibroblasts: 73.4%). Allele dropout (ADO) ranged 18.8-24.5% cells and fibroblast DNA that had trisomy 21) by amplifying their DNA in MDA products. In metaphase-CGH, DOP products from single cells using multiple displacement amplification (MDA). The results of these produced clearer results compared to MDA products from the same experiments showed that biased whole genome amplification resulted starting material. 50% of MDA products from single cells could not be in some regions being over- or under-represented in the final mix. The interpreted because of high background noise. In array-CGH, two con- large amount of copy number variation in the human genome com- stitutional slides were tested with gDNA and MDA products with the plicates the distinction between normal variant and pathogenic copy latter giving unreliable results with high background noise. number changes, and in addition background noise from experimental In molecular analysis results seem promising for wider use of MDA for artefacts such as those found with the MDA amplified samples can PGD. Further optimisation is needed for cytogenetic analysis espe- further complicate data interpretation. cially in reducing the background noise. There is a need to standardize this technology and the methods of data analysis as well as a need to take into account variant regions in P0374. Cytogenetic and Fluorescence in situ Hybridization order to ensure proper data interpretation. Analysis of 229 Chinese Myelodysplastic Syndrome Patients Diagnosed Using the WHO Classification P0372. Monosomy 7q3 in a patient with karyotype L. Bao1, X. Wang2, J. Ryder3, H. Fu4, G. Lin2, R. Irons3; 47,XXX,del(7)(q3436)/46,XXdel(7)(q3436) 1Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, A. Laku1, V. Mokin1, M. Cikuli1, A. Mitre1, C. Pangalos2; 2Huashan Hospital, Shanghai, China, 3University of Colorado Health Sciences 1Medical Genetic Service, Tirana, Albania, 2Diagnostic Genetic Center, Athens, Center, Denver, CO, United States, 4Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Greece. Two hundred and twenty-nine Chinese myelodysplastic syndrome Structural anomalies associated with a mosaic form of aneuploidy are (MDS) patients were diagnosed prospectively according to the WHO rare events. classification. There were 151 (66%) RCMD, 60 (26.2%) RAEB, 11 Partial monosomy 7q is a rare chromosomal disorder, which results in (4.8%) RA, 4 (1.7%) MDS-u, 2 (0.9%) RARS, and 1 (0.4%) 5q- syn- multiple congenital anomalies syndrome with severe mental retarda- drome. Conventional banded chromosome analysis revealed 37.4% tion and growth failure. of the cases with clonal aberrations while FISH using the probes for We report a case of two month old female infant with a deletion of +8, 20q-, -7/7q-, -5/5q- and 11q23- showed the abnormalities in 33.3% Cytogenetics 11 of the cases. The common chromosomal aberrations were +8 (15%), P0377. Orientation of tri- and polysomic Chromosomes reflect 20q- (10.1%), -7/7q- (5.8%), and -5/5q- (4.3%). The majority of WHO Intranuclear Order MDS cases had karyotypic features that are considered as either low J. P. Chaudhuri, L. Song, L. Scott, S. Karamanov, J. R. McGill; or intermediate risk according to the International Prognosis Scoring Genzyme Genetics, Phoenix, AZ, United States. System. Relatively higher percentages of poor risk karyotypes were Ordered arrangement of chromosomes has been reported from many observed among MDS subtypes RCMD and RAEB. Our study also plants and animals including murine and human specimens [1, 2]. Ge- demonstrated that banded chromosome analysis is the method of netic observations also indicated similar order [3, 4]. We see many choice for MDS cytogenetic study and FISH is a useful adjunctive indications exhibiting the order, e.g., in deviations in copy number of tool. chromosomes. Tri- or polysomy is generated by mitotic nondysjunc- tion and by asynchronous replication of a chromosome. One of the P0375. The cytogenetic analysis of 79 prenatally detected neural two chromosomes of a homologue is generally involved in polysomy. tube defects among 8370 prenatal samples Orientation of these chromosomes conform to the basic order of ho- O. Cogulu1, S. Yilmaz2, A. Alpman1, C. Gunduz2, A. Ekmekci1, D. Ercal3, F. mologues, which lie opposite each other. Here we shall present evi- Ozkinay1, C. Ozkinay4; dences of intranuclear order from human cells at meta- and interphase 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, following GTG banding and fluorescence in situ hybridization. 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 3Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, P0378. Pericentric inversion in chromosome 9 in Indian Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Ge- population netics, Izmir, Turkey. B. B. Ganguly; Open neural tube defects (NTD) with an incidence of 0.1-0.15 % in MGM Centre for Genetic Research and Diagnosis, Mahatma Gandhi Mission’s West Europe and USA, are among the most common congenital anom- New Bombay Hospital, Navi Mumbai, India. alies. Prenatal detection of these birth defects has been increased by Pericentric inversion in chromosome 9 (p 11q 13) has been detected in improved ultrasound techniques and maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein 150 Indian individuals who had some clinical complications. Conven- screening. It has been reported that 2-10 % of fetuses with neural tube tional peripheral blood lymphocyte culture and G-banding employed defects have chromosomal abnormalities; however, there is no con- for individuals suspected carrying some chromosomal abnormalities sensus on whether to offer karyotype analysis to patients with isolated where other investigational parameters were inconclusive. Unstimu- neural tube defects detected by ultrasound examination. The aim of lated bone marrow culture and G-banding study was carried out in this study is to evaluate the chromosomal results of 79 prenatally diag- ten (10) teenage patients suffering from hematological malignancy. nosed fetuses with NTD in 8370 (0.94 %) prenatal samples during the Individuals carrying inversion in chromosome 9 detected in peripheral 7-year period from 2000 to 2007. Among those cases, open spina bi- blood had some kind of clinical problems related to either delayed pu- fida was detected in 37 fetuses (46.8 %), anencephaly in 24 (30.3 %), berty or infertility. Adults had the primary or secondary infertility as the encephalocele in 7 (8.9 %), meningomyelocele in 5 (6.3 %), holopro- major clinical expression. Pericentric inversion in 9 has earlier been cencephaly in 4 (5.0 %), and acrania in 3 (3.8 %). Cytogenetic analysis reported to cause infertility, however its association with adolescent was performed in all fetuses with NTD detected by USG examination. development has been found in teenage girls who have not attained Of the 75 fetuses who were successfully karyotyped, 69 were found to menarche. Since pubertal delay in girls is a serious concern among have normal karyotype, whereas one had 69,XXX, 2 inv(9)(p11;q13), parents, they have been found predominant. However, at adult stage one 46,XX,t(5;7) and one 46,XX,-13,+der13. The overall rate of con- mostly male carriers are the contributors to infertility. Apparently there sanguinity between the couples who had prenatally detected fetuses is no phenotypic anomaly among the carriers. In another group of teen- with NTD was 21.5 % (17/79). We point out the importance of prenatal age whose bone marrow was tested for cytogenetic diagnosis pericen- cytogenetic analysis in the patients with NTD tric inversion was additional abnormality, which was subsequently con- firmed as constitutive through peripheral blood culture. In this subset P0376. DNA secondary structure-forming propensity dictates of population, the inversion the inversion could be responsible for early translocation frequency onset of malignancy. Though human genome project (HGP) mapped T. Kato1, H. Inagaki1, H. Kogo1, T. Ohye1, K. Yamada1, B. S. Emanuel2, H. Kura- the genes located in chromosome 9 and there is no phenotypic abnor- hashi1,3; mality in carriers, clinical correlation of expression of this intra-chro- 1Division of Molecular Genetics, Fujita Health Univ, Toyoake, Japan, 2Division mosomal alteration needs to be investigated and establish to bring in of Human Genetics, Children’s Hosp Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United some solution to its infertility related problem. States, 3Development Center for Targeted and Minimally Invasive Diagnosis and Treatment, Fujita Health Univ, Toyoake, Japan. P0379. Pallister-Killian syndrome in a child with rare karyotype There is evidence accumulating to suggest that non-B DNA structures - a diagnostic problem have a potential for genomic instability that induces genomic rear- R. Smigiel1,2, J. Pilch3, I. Makowska1, R. Slezak1, M. M. Sasiadek1; rangements including translocations and deletions. One of the best 1Genetic Department Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland, studied examples in humans is the recurrent t(11;22)(q23;q11) con- 2Genetics Department, Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 3Department of stitutional translocation. The t(11;22) translocations have breakpoints Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. on both chromosomes within specific sequences named palindromic Pallister-Killian syndrome (PKS) is a rare disorder characterised by AT-rich repeats (PATRRs). We suggest that the PATRRs form adopt a a specific combination of anatomic anomalies, mental retardation cruciform structure that is the source of genomic instability. Previously, and dysmorphic features. PKS results from a mosaic tetrasomy 12p we demonstrated that the existence of de novo t(11;22)s in sperm and was first described, independently by two groups. PKS is one of samples from normal healthy males using translocation-specific PCR. the chromosome aberration syndrome in which clinical diagnosis is In this study, we show that polymorphism of the PATRRs affects the an important starting point in the cytogenetic diagnosis involving into frequency of de novo translocation events. Symmetrical and longer the analysis not only lymphocytes, but also fibroblasts. An additional alleles preferentially generate translocations, while asymmetrical and 12p in PKS patients are usually observed in only 2% of analysed lym- shorter alleles produce them at lower frequency. Further, we have vali- phocytes, in 50-100% of analysed fibroblasts while in 100% of am- dated the secondary structure-forming propensity of various PATRRs niocytes and bone marrow cells. We report a case of PKS presenting using in silico, in vitro, and in vivo analyses. As a result, symmetrical an unusual karyotype: mosaicism 12p - tetrasomy/trisomy/disomy in and longer alleles were more likely to form cruciform configuration. fibroblasts and trisomy/disomy in lymphocytes. Marker chromosomes The secondary structure-forming propensity correlated well with the were investigated with conventional cytogenetic techniques followed translocation frequency. Our results provide indirect but strong support by FISH. Only several reports of PKS presenting similar mosaic karyo- to the hypothesis that the PATRR adopts a cruciform conformation in type to this observed in our case were published. At the beginning of living cells that induces genomic instability leading to the transloca- diagnostic process we considered the diagnosis of 12p trisomy. Thus, tion. in combination with clinical manifestations and the fibroblasts karyo- type, the Pallister-Killian syndrome was diagnosed. In our proband we observed a characteristic facial dysmorphism, severe intellectual dis-Cytogenetics 11 ability with no speech ability, but we detected neither severe structural P0382. A new case of cryptic unbalanced t(1:12)(q44;p13.3) anomalies nor skin pigment abnormalities. Luebe et al. speculated that translocation with polymicrogyria PKS patients with rare, mosaic tetrasomy/trisomy/disomy have milder R. Genesio1, A. Conti1, F. Fabbrini1, P. Tedeschi1, M. Ferrara1, D. Melis1, G. phenotype and better prognosis than patients with the classic i(12p) Sebastio1, R. Ciccone2, O. Zuffardi2, L. Nitsch1; mosaic in fibroblasts. However, our case does not confirm this specu- 1University Federico II, Napoli, Italy, 2University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. lation. Each additional case of PKS presented in literature will contrib- Neurological disorders and seizures have been reported for most of ute to better understanding of this rare disorder. the patients with del(1q) syndrome, but polymicrogyria (PMG) has been described only in two patients affected by a familial unbalanced P0380. Male with delusional disorder, minor anomalies translocation with 1q44qter monosomy and 12p13.3pter trisomy. PMG and apparently balanced chromosomal rearrangement is a malformation in which the brain surface is irregular and the normal 46,Y,inv(X)(p11.23q23) pattern is replaced by multiple small gyri separated by shallow sulci, A. Zagorac1, M. Faganelj But1, N. Radosav Lartey2, A. Erjavec Skerget1, A. and it is possibly due to a defect in neuronal migration. Prosnik1, B. Zagradisnik1, B. Kores Plesnicar1, N. Kokalj Vokac1; Here we describe a new case of an unbalanced t(1;12) translocation 1Maribor Teaching Hospital, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia, 2Primary Health Center with PMG in a five-year-old child presenting with facial dysmorphisms, Ptuj, Ptuj, Slovenia. mental retardation, microcephaly, corpus callosum and cerebellar hy- We report on a 35 years old male patient with pericentric inversion of poplasia, abnormal feet, hypospadia and seizures. the X chromosome: 46,Y,inv(X)(p11.23q23) who was referred for cyto- No chromosomal anomalies were detected by standard cytogenetic genetic analysis because of delusional disorder and minor anomalies. analysis. Array CGH analysis, by Agilent 44K chip, unraveled a termi- At his first visit he denied the presence of any psychiatric symptoms, nal 12Mb deletion of the q arm of chromosome 1 and a 3Mb duplica- and complained only about the somatic difficulties. He was convinced tion of the distal segment of chromosome 12p. Features of the pro- of having a uterus, ovaries and enlarged breasts and he wanted a band were consistent with both the terminal del(1q) and the dup(12p) confirmation of being a female. During the psychiatric interview he was syndromes, except for PMG that has never been described in either calm, very talkative, with good eye contact, spontaneous and he pre- rearrangement. sented his life experiences in an interesting way. He stressed that he As PMG seems to occur in t(1;12) translocations, we speculate that had a menstrual bleeding once in the past. Somatic delusions, delu- this defect might be caused by concomitant haploinsufficiency of 1q44 sions about bodily functions were bizarre in the content and unargu- genes and trisomy of 12p distal genes. Candidate genes mapping in able for the patient. They were central to his concern and his life. He these chromosomal regions and related pathways involved in neuronal was in paranoid position towards family and his social circle. Psycho migration will be discussed. diagnostic tests revealed a borderline intelligence and no cognitive dysfunctions. P0383. Radiprotective effects of medicinal plants’ polyphenols In somatic examination pectus excavatum, kyphoscolyosis thoraco- on human lymphocytes in vitro lumbalis, gothic palate, convergent strabismus and the right eye am- A. Leskovac, G. Joksic, S. Petrovic; blyopia were found. Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences, Belgrade, Serbia. Cytogenetic investigations revealed an inverted X chromosome. Fluo- The objective of the present study is to evaluate radioprotective prop- rescent in situ hybridization (FISH) using subtelomeric DNA probes erties of Crataegus monogyna fruits, Cornus mas leaves and Gen- for Xp and Xq confirm the pericentric inversion of the X chromosome. tianella austriaca exctracts in cultured human peripheral blood lym- Further FISH analysis using a panel of BAC clones, allowed the identi- phocytes in vitro, after irradiation with 2 Gy of 60Co γ-rays. Plants were fication of BAC’s spanning both the Xp11.23 and Xq23 breakpoints. collected at the mountain Maljen in Serbia; air-dried, powdered and No microdeletions or microduplications were found but array CGH of X total phenolic content was analyzed. In C. mas leaves ellagic and gal- chromosome should be performed in the future. lic acid as dominant compounds were found, whereas C. monogyna Regarding genotype-phenotype correlations no such a case was de- fruit was rich in procyanidins and flavonoids. Main constituents of G. scribed in the literature. austriaca were ϒ-pyrones and secoiridoids. Significant radiorecovery potentials of C. mas and C. monogyna were observed, seen as re- P0381. Possible implication of NPAS gene in a boy with duced incidence of radiation induced micronuclei, reduced level of psychiatric disorder and interstitial deletion of chromosome 14 lipid peroxidation products and enhanced apoptosis. Enhancing the revealed by microarray analysis. apoptosis of irradiated cells enables removal of damaged cells from J. Puechberty1, A. Schneider1, G. Lefort1, J. Majorel2, J. De Vos3, P. Sarda1, A. irradiated tissue emphasizing physiological mechanism of cell death Baghdadli2; with no inflammation. Both extracts gently slow down the cell prolifera- 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Montpellier, France, 2Centre de Res- tion enabling more time for repair. Simultaneously, prolonged time for sources Autisme, CHU, Montpellier, France, 3Institut de Recherche en Biothéra- the DNA repair and elimination of heavily damaged cells via apopto- pie, CHU, Montpellier, France. sis will enable faster homeostasis among cells in irradiated tissue. G. We report the case of a 19-year-old boy, second born of three children, austiaca polyphenols acts as strong antioxidant: significantly reduces who presents psychomotor delay, moderate mental deficiency, selec- lipid peroxidation, incidence of micronuclei, enhances apoptosis with tive progressively worsening mutism and increasingly variable perfor- no perturbation in cell cycle. G. austriaca posses remarkable protec- mances. Clinical evaluation did not fit a specific psychiatric disorder tive properties, and should be examined further in detail. Investigation and the suggested diagnosis was pervasive developmental disorder of its biological activity could be important for many other diseases not otherwise specified. Chromosome studies on blood lymphocytes where lipid peroxidation products have been reported. This study may showed proximal chromosome 16p duplication inherited through a contribute in the search for novel radioprotective agents. phenotypically normal mother. DNA microarray studies (Affymetrix) showed a 1.68 Mb deletion in the chromosome 14q12-q13.1 region P0384. Over 60 cases of PGD-FISH during years 1999-2007 which was subsequently confirmed by FISH and molecular biology. N. Horelli-Kuitunen1, T. Tuuri2, S. Mäkinen2, C. Hyden-Granskog3, I. Reima4, A. Database analysis of the deleted region revealed at least 5 genes. Nordström5, A. Salumets6; Among these genes, Neuronal PAS domain-containing protein 3 1Medix Laboratories Ltd, Espoo, Finland, 2Family Federation of Finland, Infertil- gene is ubiquitously expressed in the adult brain and seems to play a ity Clinic, Helsinki, Finland, 3Women’s Hospital, IVF-Unit, Helsinki, Finland, role in neurogenesis. A previous study has shown its implication in a 4Fertinova Clinic, Helsinki, Finland, 5Felicitas Clinic, Helsinki, Finland, 6AS Nova translocation found in a mother and daughter, with schizophrenia and Vita Kliinik, Tallinn, Estonia. schizophrenia associated with mild learning disability, respectively. An Over 60 preimplantation genetic diagnostic cases have been per- anomaly of the NPAS3 gene could lead to psychiatric disorders such formed during years 1999-2007 using fluorescence in situ hybridiza- as those reported. tion (FISH) method in collaboration between IVF-clinics in Helsinki area (both private and public) and Medix Laboratories. The indications for the IVF-PGD procedures were an advanced risk for an abnormal chromosome number/material. The advanced risks were due to either one the parents being a translocation carrier, advanced maternal age Cytogenetics 120 or repeated failure in IVF treatments. The procedures included 9 AS- analysis on amniotic fluid at termination and on tissues at autopsy (aneuploidy screening), 13 sexing, 19 robertsonian translocation and (skin, lung, heart, kidney).The cytogenetic characteristics and partial 20 resiprocal translocation cases. The probes were chosen depend- trisomy 1 phenotype are discussed. ing of the detectable abnormality and all of them were commercially available. The probes were tested either on the carrier’s lymphocyte P0387. Trabecular meshwork structure in Primary congenital preparates in the cases of balanced translocation or on both spouse’s glaucoma and Sturge-Weber syndrome lymphocyte preparates. Altogether over 361 embryos and 533 blasto- M. Tanwar1, J. Kaur2, T. Dada3, R. Dada1; meres were studied. In these the success rate was 68-82 % depending 1Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New delhi, from the class of study (AS, sexing, reciprocal or robertsonian trans- India, 2Ocular Biochemistry, R.P. Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India location). From the studied embryos the rate of normal embryos were Institute of Medical Sciences, New delhi, India, 3Dr. R.P. Centre for Ophthalmic 40 % in As-cases, 58 % (desired=girl) in sexing, 22 % in reciprocal and Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New delhi, India. 41 % in robertsonian translocations. As a result of the IVF-PGD proce- Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is a genetic disease which mani- dures 9 healthy babies have been born. Altogether clinical pregnancy fests at birth or in infancy. PCG characterized by buphthalmos, high rate/ET was for AS 37,5%, sexing 30%, robT 21% and balT 21% and intraocular pressure, corneal edema and photophobia. We had done take home baby rate/ET was 12,5%, 30%, 16% and 7%, respectively. electrone-microscopy of seven trabeculectomy samples. In which To conclude PGD using FISH is a good option for couples having an one case was PCG with Sturge-Weber syndrome. Sturge-Weber syn- advanced risk for abnormal chromosome content to have a chromo- drome is defined as facial port-wine stain in association with ipsilateral somally normal child. pial,vascular anomalies and inconstant ipsilateral choroidal vascular lesions with glaucoma. Materials: Seven cases of PCG were enroled in P0385. FISH study of 45,X/46,XX mosaicism in patients with this study. One case was PCG with Sturge-Weber syndrome Method. idiopathic premature ovarian failure To look for any cytogenetic abnormality, lymphocyte culture was set b. lakhal, r. braham, h. elghezal, s. mougou, s. hidar, m. chaieb, a. saad; and chromosomes were analysed with GTG banding. After informed hopital farhat hached, sousse, Tunisia. consent trabecular tissue were collected to look for any structural Premature ovarian failure (POF) (OMIM 311360 and 300511) is a dis- changes in trabecular meshwork. Surgical trabeculectomy tissues order characterized by amenorrhea and elevated serum gonadotro- were sent for scanning electrone micropy. For EM study specimens phin level before 40 years of age that accounts for about 10% of all were fixed in glutraldehyde fixative for 12 hrs and then post fixed in female sterility. the osmium tetra oxide at 1% for 2 hrs. Tissue was dehydrated and Objective: to investigate the implication of low level 45,X/46,XX mosa- mounted and gold plated. Scanning electrone microscopy was done. icism in the development of idiopathic premature ovarian failure. Results: Cytogenetically all patients were normal. EM pictures of tra- Patients: 81 cases of POF-affected women with normal karyotype: 37 becular meshwork in all patients showed trabeculardysgenesis and with primary amenorrhoea and 44 with secondary amenorrhoea of me- some unidentified spherical structures of varying size were seen in dian age 25 years (range14 - 41) were analysed. case with Sturge-Weber syndrome Conclusion: Due to trabeculardys- 29 women with normal reproductive histories, having at least one child genesis IOP rises in the anterior chamber leading to glaucoma in PCG were selected as controls. The subjects in this group were approxi- cases. In Sturge-Weber syndrome, spherical structures of varying mately the same age as the patients with POF. sizes were seen, may obstructing the normal aqueous outflow. These Methods: Interphasic FISH was performed in peripheral blood lympho- structures are occupying the vital space and damaging structure of cytes using centromeric probe of X chromosome associated with cen- trabecular meshwork leading to blockages causing rise in IOP leading tromeric probe of chromosome 18 as a control. to glaucoma. Only nuclei with two signals for chromosome 18 were analysed for the signal pattern of the X chromosome in order to exclude hybridization P0388. Array-CGH analysis of products of conception with high artifacts. For each woman, 500 cells were analysed. density oligonucleotide arrays Results: In the control group, X chromosome monosomy was detected G. A. Toruner, D. Streck, J. J. Dermody, M. N. Schwalb; in 0.95 to 3.5 % of cells (mean ± 2 SD, 2,33 ± 1,34). UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, United States. Among patients, 15 (18,5 %) presented a significantly higher percent- Fifty percent of miscarriages are due to chromosomal abnormalities. age of monosomic cells (>2,33 ± 1,34). Cytogenetic analysis of products of conception (POC) provides infor- Conclusion: this study indicated that POF in some patients may be mation about the cause of miscarriage and recurrence risk. This analy- attributed to low-level 45,X/46,XX mosaicism. FISH is more sensitive sis depends on success in culturing of fetal tissue and preparation of than routine chromosome analysis in the detection of low-level X chro- metaphase cells. Tissue culture failures and suboptimal chromosomal mosome monosomy and could be recommended for all POF patients preparations render the cytogenetic analysis unsuccessful in 10-40% with normal karyotype. cases. In addition, selective growth of maternal cells may lead to er- roneous normal findings Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) is P0386. An unusual supernumerary marker chromosome a laboratory technique that enables assessment of relative DNA copy diagnosed following amniocentesis for advanced maternal age: number changes between fluorescently labeled patient and control cytogenetic characterization and phenotype. genomic DNA. Tissue culturing is not necessary for this assay and A. Schneider1, C. Abadie1, A. Chaze1, G. Lefort1, P. Blanchet1, P. Sarda1, P. it has more resolution than karyotyping. There are some reports of Vago2, J. Puechberty1; CGH studies on POC specimens. These studies are either classical 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Montpellier, France, 2Service de Cyto- CGH studies or array-CGH studies on BAC arrays. So far no oligo- génétique Médicale, CHU, Clermont-Ferrand, France. nucleotide array CGH study on POC specimens has been published. A 40-year-old woman was referred for amniocentesis at 16 WG. Am- That is the reason we decided to perform a validation array-CGH study niotic fluid chromosome studies diagnosed mosaicism for a “de novo” using custom oligonucleotide arrays from Agilent technologies. In this small supernumerary marker chromosome (SMC) in a male foetus: study, we analyzed 24 POC (fetal tissue and chorionic villi) specimens 47,XY,+mar [13] / 46,XY [8]. with known karyotype results and 6 tissue cultures failures. We were The marker was characterized using several molecular cytogenetic able to generate array CGH results from all samples. Cytogenetic re- techniques. M-FISH studies indicated that the SMC contained euchro- sults and CGH results were 100% concordant. In addition, previously matic chromosome 1 material and this result was confirmed by positive undetected deletions were observed in two specimens (16p21 and whole chromosome 1 painting. FISH with probes for centromeric chro- 22q11.22) were after oligonucleotide array-CGH. These results indi- mosome 1 and subtelomeric 1p and 1q regions was negative. Micro- cate that oligonucleotide array-CGH can be used as a rapid diagnostic dissection followed by reverse chromosome 1 painting suggested that tool for analysis of POC. the marker contained pericentromeric 1p and 1q material. In the light of these results, the parents elected to terminate pregnancy. Autopsy of the 25 WG foetus showed slight craniofacial dysmorphism, bilateral camptodactylia and rocker bottom feet, but no organ malfor- mation. Variable degrees of mosaicism was confirmed by cytogenetic Cytogenetics 121 P0389. An age based cytogenetic analysis in prostate cancer girl with a de novo dup(17)(q24.3-qter). She presented with severe patients in Southern India developmental and growth delay, microcephaly, hypotonia and the fol- B. Vellingiri, B. Lakshman Kumar, K. Sasikala; lowing dysmorphic features: narrow forehead, upslanting palpebral fis- Prostate cancer is a malignant tumor that arises in the prostate gland. sures, hypertelorism, low-set posteriorly rotated ears with pronounced It is located near the bladder and rectum, which creates and stores antihelix, large mouth, a simple and long philtrum, micrognatia, low components of semen.Prostate cancer is the second most leading posterior hairline, thenar hypoplasia, cutis marmorata, hypoplastic la- cause of death in men due to any cancer type in India. Human pros- bia and prominent clitoris. No brain or inner organ anomalies were tate cancer is characterized by multiple gross chromosome alterations. found. Conventional cytogenetics revealed an additional material on However the specific genes involved in the development of prostate 17qter identified by 244k Agilent oligoarrays CGH analysis as a dupli- tumors are still largely unknown. The chromosomal region largely af- cation of chromosome region 17q24.3-qter with a breakpoint between fected in prostate cancer patients are 1, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, 16, 17, 18, X 66,580,674 and 66,678,854bp. Our case is the first pure duplication and Y. of chromosome region 17(q24.3-qter) confined by array CGH studies Since chromosomal abnormalities are involved in tumorigenesis, we and it shows the usefulness of recently developed array CGH technol- selected karyotypic analysis in Prostate cancer patients in Southern ogy to accurately characterize chromosome abnormalities, especially India patients.. Prostate size in the patients is increased proportional when they are de novo. to their age, so we performed an age based cytogenetic analysis. In the present study blood samples were collected from various hospitals P0392. A novel reciprocal translocation t(l ;17) detected in a in and around Tamilnadu. woman with recurrent abortion Out of the 40 blood samples (Prostate cancer samples) 36% of the F. Manoochehri, S. Tootian, M. Rahnama, F. Razazian., F. Mortezapour barfi, slides showed chromosomal aberrations such as deletions, transloca- M. Zamanian, F. Nasiri, S. Soleymani., F. Mahjoubi; tions, mosaics and inversion. Among three groups Group II and Group Iran blood Transfusion Organization, 2 National Research Institute for Genetic III showed majority of chromosomal abnormalities when compared to Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Group I. In Group II ,46 XY,del (1q-),46, XY inv (16), 46,XY,t(6q;16q+), In the present study, we present a novel reciprocal translocation t(l;17) 46 XY,del(5p-), 46,XY,inv(9), 46XY,del(8q-) chromosomal aberrations (17pter.17p36.2::1p13 1pter)(1pter.1p13::17p36.2 17qter). A couple were observed. In Group III ,46,XY,t(6q;16q+), 46,XY,/46,XY del (5p- was referred to us for chromosomal analysis because of the history of ), 46 XY,del (Yq-), 46 XY, del (1q-) are identified. The chromosomes two spontaneous abortions. Both husband and wife had a phynotypi- mainly affected in the present study include 1, 6, 5, 8 and 16. Iden- cally normal child from their previous marriage. There had been no his- tification of chromosome alterations may be helpful on arising better tory of repeated spontaneous abortions in their families. Chromosomal therapeutic strategies in future. study was performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes. A balanced re- ciprocal translocation between chromosomes 1 and 17 was observed P0390. Report of a patient with duplication of proximal 20q: in the wife. Therefore, the karytotype was assecced as 46,XX,t(l;17) clinical and cytogenetic characterization (17pter.17p36.2::1p13 1pter)(1pter.1p13::17p36.2 17qter). The hus- N. Marle1, L. Faivre2, P. Callier1, C. Thauvin2, A. Mosca1, F. Mugneret1; band had normal karyotype. To the best of our knowledge these break- 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Le Bocage, Dijon, France, 2Centre de points have not been reported previously. Thus, we can assume that Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France. this is the first report of a translocation between chromosome 1 and 17, Partial trisomies of the long arm of chromosome 20 are rare. Most with such breakpoints cases reported in the literature are the result of malsegregation of a parental translocation and are complicated by additional partial mono- P0393. Importance of the correct designation of breakpoints for somy or trisomy of another chromosome region. Here we report the structural chromosomal aberrations in preimplantation genetic first child of healthy non consanguineous parents with pure 20q11.2 diagnosis strategies trisomy. He was first referred at age 2 months for facial dysmorphism S. A. Tashkandi1, A. Mantzouratou1, A. Mania1, E. Fragoul1, A. Doshi2, S. Nut- (prominent metopic suture, epicanthic folds, peripalpebral oedema, tall2, K. Fordham1, P. Serhal2, J. D. A. Delhanty1, J. C. Harper1; small and thick ears, prominent cheeks) and standard karyotype ap- 1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University College Lon- peared normal. He walked independently at age 25 months and speech don Hospital, London, United Kingdom. delay was noted. At 3 years of age, measurements were within normal Introduction: Three couples were referred to our PGD centre where the limits. Cytogenetic analysis of cultured peripheral blood lymphocytes male partner was a carrier of a balanced reciprocal translocation. PGD with high resolution banding revealed a male karyotype with an appar- protocols were designed according to the provided karyotypes. During ent interstitial duplication in the long arm of chromosome 20 of band the workup it was found that the breakpoints reported in the karyotypes 20q11.2. FISH studies with a whole chromosome paint probe (WCP) were incorrect. specific for chromosome 20 confirmed that the additional material was Methods: originated from chromosome 20. FISH studies with M-BAND and BAC Case 1: 46,XY,t(14;16)(q13;q11.1) and oligospermia probes specific for the long arm of chromosome 20 confirmed that the Case 2: 46,XY,t(1;4)(q12;q33) and poor sperm parameters duplicated band was restricted to band 20q11.2. The full karyotype Case 3: 46,XY,t(1;21)(q21.3;q22.1) and primary infertility was therefore 46,XY,dup(20)(q11.1q12).ish dup(20)(WCP20+,RP5- FISH protocols were designed using probes for the chromosomes in- 1184F4++,RP11-382A12++). Both parents had a normal karyotype, in volved in each translocation. Protocols were optimised on metaphase favour of a de novo duplication. To the best of our knowledge, only spreads from both partners. four cases of pure 20q trisomy resulting from duplication have been Results: Using the individual FISH protocols determined from the reported. We compare clinical features and cytogenetic findings of our karyotype, it was found that in all three cases the incorrect break points case with the previously reported observations. had been reporeted. Case 1: Breakpoint on 16q11.1 was incorrect as the breakpoint was P0391. Array CGH delineation of de novo pure partial trisomy below this region. The derivative chromosome 14 would be missed in 17q24.3-qter due to a terminal duplication in one-year-old girl the balanced embryo. M. Stefanova1, K. Kovacheva2, M. Simeonova2, H. Rose3, M. Kirchhoff3; Case 2: Breakpoint on 1q12 was incorrect as the breakpoint was at the 1Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2Medical University, Pleven, Bulgaria, centromere. This could have led to an extra signal for the centromere 3Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. of chromosome 1 in a balanced embryo. Pure partial trisomy 17q24.3-qter is only described in a few cases, Case 3: Breakpoint on 1q21.3 was incorrect as the correct breakpoint but it is an increasingly recognized clinical entity (Bridge et al., 1985; was 1q12. This could have led to an extra signal for the centromere of Orye and van Bever, 1985; Schwanitz et al., 1988; Ohado et al., 1989; chromosome 1 in a balanced embryo. Ghaffari et al., 1998). The characteristic features of this chromosome New protocols were designed and the patients underwent PGD. aberration include varying degrees of mental retardation, short stat- Conclusions: This study highlights the need to test PGD FISH proto- ure, narrow forehead, macrostomia, a simple and long philtrum, low cols on metaphase spreads from the patient to confirm the karyotype. posterior hairline, and genital anomalies (Schinzel, 2001). Here we Incorrect designation of breakpoints could lead to the use of an unin- report a detailed clinical and molecular investigation of a one-year-old formative protocol which could result in a misdiagnosisCytogenetics 122 P0394. Evaluation of the recurrent miscarriage by chromosome’s P0396. Subtelomere rearrangements in couples with repeated analysis in the Cytogenetic Laboratory of the Clinic Obstetric- miscarriages Gynecology Hospital “Dr. Dumitru Popescu” Timisoara E. Morizio1, C. Nuzzi2, P. Guanciali-Franchi1,2, D. Romagno1, G. Calabrese1,2,3, M. Mihaescu1,2, D. Navolan3,4, E. Taurescu3,4, C. Citu3,4, I. Sas5, D. Chiriac5, D. G. Palka1,2,3; Citu3,4; 1Genetica Medica, Pescara Hospital, Pescara, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Univer- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, TIMISOARA, Romania, sity of Chieti, Chieti Scalo, Italy, 3G. D’Annunzio Foundation, Chieti Scalo, Italy. 2Cl. Hosp. Ob-Gyn”dr. Dumitru Popescu”- Cytogenetic Laboratory, Timisoara, Subtelomeric rearrangements, currently detected by FISH, STR, MLPA Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy, TIMISOARA, Romania, 4Cl or Array-CGH approaches, are known to be associated with mental Hosp Ob-Gyn”dr. Dumitru Popescu”, Timisoara, Romania, 5Cl. Hosp Ob-Gyn, retardation and congenital malformations. Few reports describe sub- TIMISOARA, Romania. telomere rearrangements in women with repeated miscarriages. By Due to the age of the future parents, the consensus on the moment FISH analysis with a complete panel of subtelomere probes (Cytocell, of evaluation of a recurrent miscarriage has changed from after third UK; Vysis, USA; MP, France) we investigated 60 couples suffering or fourth to after second miscarriages. Chromosomal anomalies are for recurrent abortions (>2 aborted foetuses). All couples had normal known as one of the common causes of the spontaneous abortion. karyotype and no clinical or genetic anomalies. In 2 couples (3%) we The problem identification and the diagnostic procedures include a identified a subtelomeric rearrangement. In a couple referred for four large sample of practices: cytogenetic studies, studies regarding the consecutive 1st trimester spontaneous abortions, the spouse, nul- anatomic integrity of the genital organs, studies concerning the diag- lipara, had a reciprocal translocation t(9;16)(q34;p13.3) de novo. In nosis of the endocrine abnormalities, and the assessment of the blood another couple with three 1st trimester spontaneus miscarriages and coagulation protein/platelet defects. a healthy son, FISH using Multi-T probe device disclosed a 9q sub- In the Cytogenetic Laboratory of the Clinic Obstetric-Gynecology Hos- telomere duplication as an insertion onto chromosome 7p close to the pital “Dr. Dumitru Popescu”, founded in March, 2006, the chromosome apparently normal 7p subtelomeric region. The same rearrangement imbalance can be diagnosed by cytogenetic investigations of virtually was also present in her son, in her brother and her mother who was any tissue type. The cytogenetic studies of abortuses (7 cases), were reported as having experienced repeated abortions. FISH probes from carried on using entire abortus (2 cases), placental villi (2 cases), am- other commercial sources were not able to confirm duplication of 9q nion (2 cases), and, for the first time in our country, fetal biopsy (3 subtelomeric region onto 7p. Fiber-FISH experiments revealed that the cases). For advanced gestation, the fetus’ blood in a sodium heparin different commercially available 9q subtelomeric probes actually span was also utilized (2 cases). The culture success rate was increased different 9q regions being only the most distal one able to display the by using more sample types for the same case (4 cases). The used 9q duplication. culture techniques - fibroblast cultures, amnion cultures, placental villi Further studies on large series of patients will allow to establish re- cultures, blood cultures - were standardized and their processing was peated miscarriages as an indication for subtelomeric analysis. The done according to the standard protocols. The chromosomes analysis finding that various FISH probes reported as specific for the same sub- was carried on (Ikaros-Metasystem) after the GTG banding. We also telomeric region map at different chromosomal sites could be relevant analyzed, during the same period, blood samples of 10 couples with 2 for subtelomere analysis. or more spontaneous abortions. Results: aneuploidies (2 cases 45, X, and loss of various chromo- P0397. Case report: Patient with ring chromosome 4 somes), 2 cases of normal karyotype and 3 cases of culture failure. J. Huber1, E. S. Ramos1, D. G. Melo2, L. R. Martelli1; Among the couples we found 1 balanced translocation t(4;15), 1 case 1University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2Federal University of São inv 9 (p12;q13) and normal karyotype for the rest. Carlos, São Carlos, Brazil. Ring chromosome formations are rare structural chromosome aberra- P0395. Chromosome Abnormalities (ChrA) detected by tion. Most of them are sporadic cases. Patients with ring chromosome conventional and high resolution (HR) cytogenetic assessment 4 are rarely observed. They associate concomitant loss of the telomeric in tumor cells (TuC) and blood lymphocytes (BLy) from 18 4p and 4q regions and lead to variable clinical manifestations depend- patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) ing on the size of the deleted chromosomal material. The authors re- A. B. Falcón de Vargas1,2, R. E. Vargas Arenas1, H. Dávila1, M. Uribe1, M. port a 2 years old male patient with a near normal psychomotor devel- Seemann1; opment, some minor dysmorphism and with cytogenetic analysis from 1HCC-Institute of Inmunology, Caracas, Venezuela, 2Genetics Unit, Vargas lymphocytes showing a mosaic karyotype 46,XY,r(4)[86]/46,XY[14]. Medical School. Faculty of Medicine, UCV., Caracas, Venezuela. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) study was also performed. In 18 patients with diagnosis of RCC, 10 males and 8 females, mean We compare the phenotypic appearance of our patient with the previ- age 59.9+/-11.2 years (range: 17 to 74), conventional and HR studies ously reported cases of ring chromosome 4 in the medical literature. were carried out in Chr from TuC and BLy. A total of 322 metaphases in TuC and 534 in BLy of patients and 534 in BLy of 18 healthy controls P0398. Clinical features of a case with ring chromosome 18 matched by age and sex were studied. Results showed numerical and M. Zamanian1, F. Mahjoubi1,2, S. Soleimani1, M. Rahnama1, F. Mortezapour1, F. structural changes of Chr in patients with RCC (p<0.001). Razazian1, F. Manouchehri1, F. Nasiri1; Chr breakages were found in 60% of TuC and 10% of BLy of 15 and 1IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NRCGEB, Tehran, Indonesia. 7 patients. Rings of chromosome 18[r(18)] are frequent among ring chromo- In patients with RCC, CrA were found in TuC/BLy: acrocentric segrega- somes: depending on the size of the deleted regions in 18p and 18q, tion in 6/0, polyploidies (4/0), poly> 60 (12/1), endoreduplications (6/2), the clinical symptoms of r(18) correspond more or less to the typical double minute (6/2), dicentrics (3/0), triradios (3/0), quadriradios (3/0). signs of the 18p and 18q deletion syndromes. Ring chromosome 18 Numerical clonal changes: +7 in 4/1, +7+7 (2/0), +7+8 (1/0), +8 (7/0), [r(18)] syndrome is characterized by mild to moderate learning disabil- +10 (5/2), +11 (1/0), +13 (1/0), -3 (1/0) , -8 in 1/0, -10 (2/0), -X (2/0), -Y ity, behavioural disorders, and various dysmorphic features. (4/3). A translocation t(3;8) (3p14.2-8q24) was found in TUC of one pa- Here we report an additional case of a 14 months girl with r (18). The tient; deletion del 3p14 and a complex reorganization were also found girl was born at term after an uncomplicated pregnanacy and delivery. in one patient in each case. Birth weight was about 1.5 kg, length 48cm, and head circumference We conclude that ChrA are present in a high proportion of TuC and in 36cm. The girls presented hypertelorism, hypotonia, epicanthal folds, a lower proportion in BLy of patients with RCC. These ChrA should be abnormal fingers, low set ears, and abnormally growth teeth. Echocar- considered inespecific since could be seen in other conditions such as diography indicated dilation of the aorta. different types of cancer, hematooncological disorders and virus infec- Karyotyping after lymphocyte culture at the age of 14 months revealed tions, and also induced by mutagenic agents. 46,XX,r(18)(q21.2qter). The parent had normal karyotype. Further studies are required to determined the clinical value of these The clinical feature of our case is mostly compatible with the other re- changes from the prognosis and therapeutic viewpoint in RCC. ported cases of r(18) except the presence of abnormal teeth and heart problem. This report further contribute to to the clinical of the r(18).Cytogenetics 12 P0399. Molecular Characterization of a case of ring chromosome 9 replication studies with BrDU for r(X). O. González1, I. Marco1, S. Ramiro1, C. Fernández-R.1, A. Fernández-Jaén2, E. 13 cases had ring (X). By FISH, the origin of these rings was derived Arranz1, M. Renedo1; entirely from the X chromosome. XIST was found in all the rings. Ten 1Gemolab, Madrid, Spain, 2Servicio de Neurología.Hospital de la Zarzuela, cases had small rings, 3 had large rings. MR was found in 90% of Madrid, Spain. cases with small r(X), the large r(X) had normal mentality. A significant Ring chromosomes are rare and are typically de novo;the syndrome relation was detected between the presence of r(X) and the lower I.Q.. associated to the 9 ring is not commonly observed and is character- Replication pattern showed the I.Q. level decreased with the presence ized by constant signs, such as microcephaly, psychomotor retarda- of active r(X). tion of varying entity and facial dysmorphism. We conclude that abnormal stigmata different from the typical T.S. may We report a boy, born of non-consanguineous parents in 2005, and suggest the presence of the r(X). The mechanism of the presence of referred to the genetics laboratory because of microcephaly. Cytoge- active r(X) in our cases was not due to deletion of XIST gene and may netics study showed a karyotype interpreted as 46, XY, r(9). Parental be due to silencing of the gene due to interruption or mutation. Failure studies showed the ring was de novo in origin. of inactivation does not necessarily lead to MR. We recommend more C-banding showed the ring chromosome was monocentric. Using a extensive studies on XIST. painting chromosome 9 fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) probe we confirmed no other chromosome involved. To define the breakpoint P0402. Translocation Down syndrome; report of four de novo on the 9p and 9q arms, FISH was performed with Telvysion 9p and cases from Iran Telvysion 9q probes covering both regions. We detected at least a C. Azimi, M. Khaleghian, F. Farzanfar, M. Safavi; 95Kb deletion in 9q but no deletion was detected with the telomeric Cancer Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Re- 9p FISH probe. public of Iran. To define the chromosomal breakpoints more closely, FISH-mapping Down syndrome occurs in about one of 750 live births and is asso- with the RCPI-11 Human Male BAC Library using clones spanning ciated with a variety of karyotypes. Nearly 92.5% have simple triso- chromosome 9 telomeres is undertaken. my-21, which is related to the maternal age. In about 4.8% the extra Using FISH we have defined the loss of material more precisely and chromosome 21 material is present in the form of an unbalanced Rob- have shown that the subsequent monosomies are responsibles of the ertsonian translocation or as an isochromosome of the long arm of clinical evolution of the patient. chromosome 21, and does not vary with age. The remaining 2.7% are heterogeneous and include mosaicism, double trisomies and recipro- P0400. Inverted duplications associated with terminal deletions cal translocations. In about three-fourths of translocation Down syn- in six different ring chromosomes drome, neither parent is a carrier, and a mutation in the germ cells of E. Rossi1, J. Messa1, S. Gimelli1, P. Maraschio1, S. Perrotta2, T. Mattina2, P. one parent has caused the translocation. No one knows what causes Riva3, A. Schinzel4, O. Zuffardi1; these mutations. 1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Catania, We report four infants (three boys and one girl) from the four different Italy, 3Biologia e Genetica Medica, Milano, Italy, 4Genetica Medica, Zurich, families, all showed typical clinical features of the Down syndrome. Switzerland. The parental age of the four cases were between 20-30 years old. Inverted duplications associated with a distal deletion (inv dup del) Chromosomal analysis were made, using the standard banding tech- have been reported for several chromosomes, but hardly ever in ring niques, for the cases and their parents. The karyotypes of the three chromosomes. Characterizing, by array-CGH (Kit Agilent, 75 Kb and cases were 46,XY,der(21;21)(q10;q10),+21 and for the fourth one was 6,5 Kb) and FISH, 25 different ring chromosomes in patients with phe- 46,XX,der(14;21)(q10;q10),+21. The karyotypes of the parents of the notypic abnormalities, we identified in six of them inverted duplications four infants were normal. associated with a terminal deletion at one end. At the opposite end no deletion was present in four cases, whereas a second deletion was P0403. Segregation and pathogenesis of balanaced/unbalanced present in two cases. Moreover, in one case with an inv dup del(13q), homologous Robertsonian translocations, t(13;13), t(14;14); a further duplication of (13)(q12.21-3.1) was present in mosaic state. t(15;15), t(21;21) and t(22;22) - Case reports and review Peripheral chromosomes analysis of the patients showed the following D. S. Krishna Murthy, F. M. M. Al-Kandari, M. A. Redha, K. K. Naguib, L. A. karyoptypes: Bastaki, S. A. Al-Awadi; Case 1: 46,XX,r(13)(p11q34); case 2: 46,XX,r(15)(p11q26); case 3: Kuwait Medical Genetics Center, Sulaibikat, Kuwait. 46,XX,r(18)(p11q23); One in 900 humans is born with a Robertsonian translocation. The Case 4: 46,XX,r(13)(p11q34); case 5: 46,XX,r(22)(p11q26); case 6: most frequent forms of Robertsonian translocations are between 46,XX,r(18)(p11q23) chromosomes 13 and 14, 13 and 21, and 21 and 22. Robertsonian Mental retardation and dysmorphic features are common findings in translocations (balanced or unbalanced) involving acrocentric chro- the six patients. mosomes, 13,14,15 and 21, 22 are well known chromosomal abnor- Our results suggest that a more complex mechanism may be involved malities leading to multiple congenital anomalies, infertility, repeated in the formation of some ring chromosomes and that ring formation fetal loss, dysmorphism and mental retardation. However, homologous may represent a new mechanism involved in the stabilization of broken Robertsonaian translocations, t(13;13q),t(14;14),t(15;15) and t(22;22) chromosomes. are relatively rare. Carriers of balanced ROBs are at an increased This new mechanism of ring formation has important phenotype/geno- risk of having chromosomally unbalanced, phenotypically abnormal type implications since it implies that phenotypic correlations cannot offspring. These individuals are trisomic for one of the chromosomes be done assuming a simple deletion before having excluded this type involved in the translocation, with three copies instead of the normal of rearrangement. complement of two. Carriers of ROBs are also at an increased risk of uniparental disomy (UPD), the inheritance of both chromosome copies P0401. Characterization of ring X chromosome by FISH: Role of from a single parent. Uniparental inheritance of some chromosomes X inactivation has been shown to be deleterious due to the effects of imprinting (the A. M. Mohamed, A. K. Kamel, H. F. Kayed, N. M. A. Meguid, H. A. Hussein, H. differential expression of genes depending on the parent of origin). A. Atteia; Risk estimates vary depending on the type of rearrangement. Carri- National Research cetre, Cairo, Egypt. ers of homologous acrocentric rearrangements are at very high risk of Some ring X [r(X)], have been described with MR. This is the result having multiple spontaneous abortions and chromosomally abnormal of functional disomy of the genes in the r(X) secondary to loss of the offspring. Parents of fetuses and children with unbalanced homolo- X-inactivation locus (XIST). We aimed to study the effect of r(X) on the gous acrocentric rearrangements are rarely found to be carriers or mo- clinical features, to correlate the presence of XIST and the pattern of saic for the same rearrangement. X replications to the IQ level. The subject of this study was 54 cases with TS. Patients were subjected to clinical examination, estimation of I.Q. and cytogenetic analysis. Cases with atypical TS were further sub- jected to FISH using WCP for X , locus specific for XIST. , differential Cytogenetics 12 P0404. High frequency of robertsonian translocation in the female group (n=16 , %0.7) compare to male population (n=10 , idiopathic infertile men of North Indian population. %0.4). M. Singhal, Z. Arora, R. Kumar, R. Dada; We conclude in here, that simple conventional cytogenetic methods AIIMS, New Delhi, India. are very helpful to identify male or female with sex reversal in addition Robertsonian translocation (RT) is the most common structural rear- molecular cytogenetic technology such as fish and molecular method ragement of human chromosomes occurring at a rate of 1 /1000 live to investigate the presence or absent of some critical genes such as births. Of these, 60% inherit the rearrangement from one of their par- SRY would be very useful to explain phenotype heterogeneity among ents and 40% occur denovo. This proportion rises to 1% in infertile sex reversal group male or female. men & has been associated with infertility. This study was planned with the aim to determine the incidence of RT in men with spermatogenic P0407. The MLPA method in diagnostic of SHOX gene and PAR1 arrest and to correlate if cases with such structural aberrations lead to deletions recurrent ART failure. Our finding of chromosomal aberrations (3.7%) K. Zidkova1, A. Baxova1, J. Stekrova1, R. Mihalova1, E. Kantorova2, M. Kohou- in the infertile males are in good agreement with literature of 3.3%. In tova1; this study on men with non-obstructive azoospermia and oligozoosper- 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General mia, three men had 13q14q fusion. Thus the frequency of robertsonian Teaching Hospital, Charles University in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, translocation in our study was nearly 30 fold higher than in general 2Department of Medical Genetics, České Budějovice Hospital plc, České population (0.1%). Although robertsonian translocation is likely to be Budějovice, Czech Republic. found in chromosomes investigation of infertile men, their role in oli- The short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX; GeneID:6473) gospermia is not clear. The testicular histology of the men carrying is located in the major pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) of the human such a rearrangement shows a variable picture, ranging from severe sex chromosomes. Extensive deletions encompassing the SHOX impairment to near normality. Individuals carrying each of the ten pos- gene area or sequence changes that alter the gene product level or sible nonhomologous robertsonian translocations of the five humans its functional properties were identified as the molecular basis of Léri- acrocentric chromosomes (13,14,15,21, & 22) have been reported, but Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD), two combinations, rob(13;14) & rob (14;21) are observed at a greater and idiopathic short stature (ISS). In particular, approximately 60-80% frequency than the rest (73% & 10)%,respectively. Since there is a of cases of LWD are due to such mutations. The rearrangement of sex high frequency of robertsonian translocations in infertile men draw- chromosomes is the frequent cause of PAR1 deletions. ing a genotype and phenotype correlation in these studies will help to The presence and extent of SHOX gene and PAR1 deletions was de- asses the severity of spermatogenic arrest in these cases. tected using multiplex ligand-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis in a group of patients with dyschondrosteosis phenotype. In P0405. Incidence of satellite associations in lymphocytes of two female probands previous cytogenetic studies had revealed the breast cancer patients most frequent X;Y translocation, t(X;Y) (p22.3;q11). All other probands F. Mirfakhraie1, A. R. Kamyab2, R. Mirfakhraie2; displayed normal karyotypes. 1Shahid Beheshti university of medical sciences, Iran, Islamic Republic of Iran, The MLPA analysis fully confirmed the cytogenetic results in both fe- 2Islamic Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, Is- male probands with translocation. Moreover, the MLPA method was lamic Republic of Iran. able to refine the extent of the Xp deletion and to specify the clinical Satellite association (SA) was studied in lymphocyte cultures from nor- prognosis in case of bearing a male foetus. We further observed a mal individuals and patients with primary breast carcinoma, totally 40 PAR1 deletion, including SHOX gene and its regulatory sequences, individuals and 1049 metaphases. The degree of satellite association that does not exceed the pseudoautosomal region in a proband with a was estimated by the frequency of cells exhibiting associations, by the normal karyotype. A small deletion was detected covering the potential number of associations per cell, and by the number of chromosomes in regulatory region of the SHOX gene in several subjects. However, its an association. The degree of SA was found to be significantly higher relevance to LWD phenotype has yet to be confirmed. in patients than from those of control individuals (p=0.0001). Also there Our study proved the MLPA method as a rapid, sensitive, and suitable was a significant difference in the number of associations per cell be- for detecting the SHOX gene and PAR1 deletions. tween the two groups (p=0.0001). In the control group DD and DG associations were most frequent (41% for both) but in the patients DG P0408. Analysis of immature germ cells in sperm from men with was the most (58%). Scince satellite association is considered as a normal and impaired spermatogenesis phenomenon which often causes nondisjunction, it may lead to chro- I. Fedorova1,2, T. Kuznetzova1; mosomal abnormalities in tumor cells. 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federa- tion, 2St-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. P0406. Identification of Sex reversal syndrome using The first step for looking at male infertility is usually confined to semen conventional cytogenetic technique analysis. Such analysis gives valuable information about mature germ F. Razazian, S. Tootian, M. Rahnama, F. Mortezapour., F. Manouchehri, M. cells: their concentration, motility and morphology. However, semen Zamanian, F. Nasiri., S. Soleimani., L. Seyedmortaz, F. Mahjoubi; is also useful souse of immature germ cell. More detailed information IBTO, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. about spermatogenesis might be obtained by analysis of ejaculated Advance in experimental endocrinology, biochemistry, genetics, and immature germ cells using the method called Quantitative Karyological molecular biology have all contributed to our understanding of the pro- Analysis of Immature Sex Cells (QKAISC) (Kurilo, 1993). This method cess of human sex differentiation in the decades. is used to determine the relative portion of germ cells at different stag- Based on the recognition of the underlying anomaly in the process of es of spermatogenesis and the stage of spermatogenesis block. sexual differentiation intersex disorders may be divided into abnormal The samples of semen from 4 control subject (46,XY) and 24 patients gonadal determination and abnormal genital differentiation males with with impaired spermatogenesis (46,XY) were analysed by means of ambiguous genitalia but two differentiated testis are called MPH. QKAISC technique. In a control group the rate of immature germ cell Females with ambiguous external genitalia but normal ovaries and in ejaculate was about 1,5%. Frequencies of spermatogenetic cells be- normal internal genitalia are called FPH. fore and after MI division, and degenerated cell were 1,98%, 77,54% Abnormal gonadal determination is mainly dependent on sex chromo- and 20,48% respectively. No difference between control subjects and somal defects that can be detected by cytogentic analysis or by the patients with normal and slow abnormal semen parameters (8 sub- DNA probes for genes located on the Y chromosome. jects). In 6 patients with severe oligoastenoteratospermia and oligoa- The XX males may be divided in to 3 subgroups: stenosermia and 10 patients with azoospermia the increased number 46,XX males with the SRY gene(46,XX males without the SRYgene of degenerative spermatogenic cells and decrease number of sper- )and XX/XY mosaics. matocytes II and spermatides were detected. The moderate correla- DAX1 lies on the X chromosome. When it duplicates it causes an indi- tion between concentration of spermatozoa in ejaculate and rates of vidual who is genetically male to develop physically as a female. spermatogenetic cells after MI division (+0,55; P<0,0058) and rate of During the 8 years (from 1997 to 2006) we have reported 32 patients degenerating spermatogenetic cells (-0,53; P<0076) was found. These referred for sex reversal abnormality which was more common in results demonstrate the significance of QKAISC technique in perform-Cytogenetics 12 ing of complex examination of ejaculate from patients with infertility. Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland. Supported by CRDF&RFBR. FISH technique with subtelomeric probes was applied for cytogenetic Kurilo et al. Probl. Repr.(rus) 1995.v.3.p.33 examination of 96 patients with normal karyotype obtained with routine banding methods. Patients were divided into two groups. Group I com- P0409. Unusual small supernumerary marker chromosome posed of 76 patients with intellectual disability, dysmorphic features; (sSMC) in a woman with Triple X syndrome group II composed of 10 couples (20 individuals with history of several S. Soleimani1, F. Razazian2, F. Nasiri.1, S. Tootian.1, M. Zamanian.1, M. Rahna- miscarriages and offspring with abnormal phenotype. In group I in 4 ma1, F. Mortezapoor1, F. Mahjobi3; (5%) cases subtelomeric aberrations were found: 3 cases of subtelo- 11) The Blood Transfusion Organization research center, Tehran, Iran, tehran, meric deletion 1p36 ( 2 de novo and one due to inherited 1;12 translo- Islamic Republic of Iran, 2 The Blood Transfusion Organization research center, cation (with resulting monosomy of subtelomeric region1p and trisomy Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3NRCGEB &The Blood Transfu- of subtelomeric region of 12q). In all 3 cases phenotypic features were sion Organization research center, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of characteristic of 1p deletion syndrome. Iran. In the case No 4 balanced de novo translocation 19;22 was found. Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) are small ad- In the other 3 cases of group I subtelomeric polymorphic variants of ditional chromosomes. sSMC have been reported previously in four chromosome 2q (inherited deletion) and 7q (inherited duplication) types of syndromes associated with chromosomal imbalances: in ap- were found. proximately 150 cases with Turner syndrome, 26 cases with Down In group II three families with subtelomeric translocations were di- syndrome and only one case each with Klinefelter syndrome and agnosed: (7;14), (4;7) and (9;18): in two families chromosome 7q “Triple-X”-syndrome. Here we report the second case with an sSMC subtelomeric deletion was diagnosed ( one of them prenatally); ho- detected in addition to a Triple X karyotype. loprosencephaly and associated abnormalities (cleft lip and palate, The reported patient was referred to our clinic because of mild men- microcephaly) were observed in these cases (most probably sonic tal retardation, developmental delay, dysmorphic face. Three cell lines hedgehog gene being involved). was detected, one with 47, XXX, one with 46, X, +mar, and one with 46, XX. The presence of a marker chromosome in this case generally P0412. Molecular characterization of a mosaicism with a implicates a sex chromosome origin. It may also originate from a non- complex chromosome rearrangement: Evidence for coincident sex chromosome. chromosome healing by telomere capture and neo-telomere formation P0410. Sex chromosome aberrations associated with E. Chabchoub1, L. Rodríguez2, E. Galán3, E. Mansilla2, M. L. Martínez-Fernan- reproductive failure problems dez2, M. L. Martínez-Frías2, J. P. Fryns1, J. R. Vermeesch1; M. D. Miskovic1, M. Guc-Scekic1,2, S. Cirkovic1, N. Lakic1, A. D. Krstic1, D. 1Centre for Human Genetics - University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Bel- Radivojevic1, T. Lalic1, M. Djurisic1; gium, 2Estudio Colaborativo Español de Malformaciones Congénitas (ECEMC) 1Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic”, Belgrade, del Centro de Investigación sobre Anomalías Congénitas (CIAC), Instituto de Serbia, 2Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. Salud Carlos III, Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo, Madrid, Spain, 3Servicio de Patients with sterility, primary amenorrhea, azoospermia or other re- Pediatría. Hospital Materno Infantil de la seguridad Social de Badajoz, Badajoz, productive failure have indication for cytogenetic analysis. The aim of Spain. this study was to evaluate the contribution of sex chromosomal abnor- Broken chromosomes, such as terminal deletions, must acquire new malities in such cases. We report here results of 22 patients, who vis- telomeric “caps” to be structurally stable. Chromosome rescue could ited Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic” be mediated either by telomerase through neo-telomere synthesis or from 1996-2006. by telomere capture. The first process is the main mechanism healing Cytogenetic analysis was performed on 72-hour peripheral blood broken chromosomes in germline cells, the latter in somatic cells. Here, culture lymphocytes. Metaphases were karyotyped using G and C we describe a clinical and molecular study of a 14 year-old girl present- banding technique for chromosome identification. Molecular-genetic ing with mental retardation, facial dysmorphism, urogenital malforma- methods are used for solving cytogenetic dilemmas - FISH with X cen- tions and limbs anomalies. High resolution G banding shows a de novo tromeric region specific probes (DXZ1) and PCR with primers for SRY complex chromosome rearrangement in mosaic with two different cell gene and heterochromatin region of Y chromosome (HRY). lines, one cell line with a deletion 9pter and one cell line carrying an In 3 males with azoospermia karyotype: 47,XXY was found. At 6 cases of inverted duplication 9p and a non-reciprocal translocation 5pter frag- male sterility following sex chromosome aberrations were seen: 47,XXY; ment. Using array comparative genomic hybridization (a CGH), fluo- 46,i(X)(q10)Y; 46,XY[33]/47,XYY[4]; 46,XY[28]/47,XYY[8]; 46,X,der rescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) and polymorphic markers we de- (Y)t(Y;Y)(p11.3;q11.1) and 46,X,r(Y)(p11.3;q12),inv(9)(p12q13)[22]/ duced the most likely sequence of events that generated this complex 45,X,inv(9)(p12q13)[3]. In last two cases we provided presence of mosaic. Surprisingly, we show evidence for simultaneous stabilization SRY gene and HRY using PCR method. of rearranged chromosomes by telomere capture and neo-telomere Following karyotypes: 46,X,i(X)(q10); 46,X,i(X)(q10)[30]/45,X[3]; synthesis. During embryogenesis, a double-strand break occurred 47,XXX[3]/48,XXXX[1]/46,XX[96] were associated with female steril- on the paternal chromosome 9. Following mitotic separation of both ity. Primary amenorrhea diagnosed in 11 female was combined with broken sister chromatids, one acquired a telomere via neo-telomere karyotypes: formation, while the other generated a dicentric chromosome which 45,X; 46,X,del(X)(q13); 45,X[34]/46,Xder(X?)[30] and 46,XY(8 cases). underwent breakage during anaphase, giving rise to the del inv dup(9) To determine numerical aberration of X chromosome and define mo- that was subsequently healed by chromosome 5 telomere capture. saic karyotype FISH with X - centromeric region probe was used. The presence of Y chromosome was confirmed with PCR. P0413. Breakpoints analysis of a balanced de novo translocation Cytogenetic and molecular genetic approach is very important step to t(3;18)(q13.13;q12.1) in a patient with Opitz C trigonocephaly establish the genetic etiology in reproductive failure abnormalities. Our syndrome study shows that sex chromosomes aberrations are often associated T. Kaname1,2, K. Yanagi1, Y. Chinen3, K. Yoshiura4,2, N. Niikawa4,2, K. Naritomi1,2; with these disorders, which is crucial for genetic counseling and future 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Ja- possible preimplantation management. pan, 2SORST, JST, Kawaguchi, Japan, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Japan, 4Department of Human Genetics, Nagasaki P0411. Application of FISH to identification of subtelomeric University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan. rearrangement in cases of intellectual disability and in a couples We present molecular characterization for a balanced translocation with reproduction problem t(3;18)(q13.13;q12.1) in a male patient. He had clinical manifestations J. Bogdanowicz, A. Ilnicka, B. Pawlowska, A. Tomankiewicz-Zawadzka, B. of the Opitz C trigonocephaly syndrome (OCTS) including trigono- Sobiczewska, E. Zdzienicka, J. Kubalska, S. Gawlik-Zawiślak, A. Górna, J. cephaly, a prominent metopic ridge, upslanting palpebral fissure, epi- Zaremba; canthal folds, high-arched palate, thick and irregular alveolar ridge, long philtrum, redundant nuchal skin, a genesis of the corpus callosum, and hypotonia, who had been recently reported [Am. J. Med. Genet. Cytogenetics 12 140A:1655-1657 (2006)]. Since responsible genes for the OCTS have translocations were detected in six cases (all carriers were female|) not been isolated, though it is thought to be a heterogeneous condi- and pericentric inversion was found in one case. Sex chromosome tion, it would be important to investigate the precise structure for the abnormality was defined in one case with mosaic Turner syndrome. breakpoints. All cases of structural chromosome abnormalities caused the miscar- Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis identified a break- riages, except one where a child with different clinical manifestation point spanning BAC clones on the chromosome 3q containing a gene was born. As result of unbalanced gamete formation the translocation encoding a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily (IgSF). Fol- 46,XYt(4;9)(q26;p23) lead to partial trisomy of 4q26 region. lowing FISH analysis by cosmids subcloned from the BAC clone plus In our study the overall frequency of balanced chromosomal rear- Southern blot analysis demonstrated the breakpoint was in the gene. rangement as the main group of chromosomal aberrations was found Inverse PCR and sequencing revealed the breakpoint was in exon 5 to be 3,1%. of the gene. Sequence analysis for the other breakpoint at 18q12.1 In conclusion we insist on the advantage of systematically performing indicated that the translocation was occurred with 10-bp deletion in the a karyotype in case of RSA consisting on the detection of chromo- exon 5. We could not find any genes around the other breakpoint ac- somal abnormalities. The central concept in genetic counseling is the cording to the Genome Browser web site. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR estimation of the probability of unbalanced progeny at birth and other analysis showed that the IgSF gene expression in B cells of the patient unfavorable pregnancy outcomes as well the prognosis of success of was reduced approximately 50% of the normal level. assisted reproductive technologies. P0414. Translocation (2;5) (p21-p15): Clinical findigs in a female P0416. Two cases of unbalanced offspring due to rare adjacent-2 case segragation in non-relative translocation 4;15 carriers G. Hernandez-Zaragoza1, V. C. Ledezma-Rodriguez1, L. M. Aguirre-Salas2, M. R. Mihalova1, K. Vesela1, A. Baxova1, M. Zapadlo2, B. Zlatohlavkova2; Maya-Castillo3, R. E´Vega-Hernandez1, I. J. Garcia-Gonzalez1, V. M. Anguiano- 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles Alvarez1, M. P. Casillas-Avila1, J. Armendariz-Borunda4, N. O. Davalos5; University and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Depart- 1Instituto de Genetica Humana, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico, 2HRVGF, ment of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles Uni- ISSSTE. Departamento Endocrino-Pediatria, Zapopan, Jalisco, Mexico, 3Tele- versity and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. ton, Guanajuato, Mexico, 4Departamento de Biologia Molecular y Genomica, We report on two patients with partial trisomy of chromosome 4 and CUCS, U de G., Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico, 5Instituto de Genetica Humana, partial monosomy of chromosome 15 resulting from parental translo- CUCS, U de G. HRVGF, ISSSTE. Departamento de Genetica, Guadalajara, cation 4;15. Translocation carriers were non-relative, other unbalanced Jalisco, Mexico. offspring in these families have not been described although miscar- INTRODUCTION: The concurrence of this translocation involving a riages and stillbirths have as well as liveborns been reported in family t(2;5) (p21-p15) has not been previously reported. We report a female histories of both carriers. Further investigation with FISH has revealed case with this translocation. different breakpoints on chromosome 15, proximal from Prader-Willi/ CASE REPORT: The propositus a 5 years-old female, was the prod- Angelman specific region and distal, respectively. Obvious phenotypic uct of the second pregnancy from non-consanguineous parents. The difference was probably due to 15q11-13 loss of one of our patients. mother presents an obstetric history of gravida: 2, abortion 1, caesar- Because of different segregation during meiosis I, various unbalanced ean 1. The pregnancy was interrupted by caesarea at 7 months of ges- karyotypes can arise in balanced translocation carriers. The frequency tation by a premature rupture of membranes. At birth the weight was of unbalanced gametes varies from one translocation to another. Ad- 2 kg, and multiple dysmorphic features were characterized by marked jacent-2 segregation mode, in which each daughter cell gets chromo- hypotonia, developmental delay and poor growth. She presented py- somes with homologous centromeres, is quite rare - on an average loric hypertrophic confirmed by barium studies. Surgical repair was 5-10%. The type of unbalanced segregation depends on the nature performed at 4 months old without complications. The physical ex- of the chromosome involved and the breakpoints. Considering the amination at this time showed height 15,500 gr (10-20 centile) weight pachytene diagram determined by breakpoints, the balanced translo- 96.5 cm (3rd centile) and OFC 48 cm (10-20centile). Facial dismorfism cation t(4;15)(q21;q11.2) and t(4;15)(q21;q13.1), respectively seems characterized by strait biparietal diameter, prominent metopic suture, predisposed to chromosome imbalance through adjacent-2 segrega- sparse eyebrows, hipertelorism, internal epicanthal folds, downslating tion. Genetic counseling focused on prediction of the mode of imbal- palpebral fissures, high nasal bridge, broad nose, downturned corners anced segregation will be discused. of the mouth, thin superior lip and high palate; in hands: clinodactyly and camptodactyly of 5th fingers bilateraly was observed. P0417. Identification of a novel deletion in 3q23-25 in Treacher Hipoacusia was diagnosed by audimetry and craneal CT shown co- Collins Syndrome chlear bilateral agenesia. Laboratory studies were normal. Standard M. Kumar1, R. Kumar2, M. Tanwar2, R. Dada2, S. Ghose3, J. Kaur1; chromosome studies on blood with 550-banded resolution revealed a 1Ocular Biochemistry, Dr Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All karyotype of 46,XX, t(2;5)(p21-p15). India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Department of Anatomy, DISCUSSION: Few chromosomal translocation that involve chromo- All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 3Dr Rajendra Prasad some 2 and 5 were reported, but all are related with other breakpoints Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New (Kimberley 1999, Gilliam 2000). The molecular cytogenetic studies Delhi, India. should be made in the patient to identify the genes involve in the trans- Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) is a rare genetic disorder character- location breakpoints. ized by craniofacial deformities. TCS occurs in an approximate rate of 1:50,000 of live births. The disorder is inherited in an autosomal-domi- P0415. Chromosomal Rearrangements in Patients with nant pattern. The typical clinical features include downward slanting Reproductive Problem eyes, sparse eyelash, micrognathia, cleft palate, microtia and notch in S. Midyan, L. Nazaryan, G. Shakhsuvaryan, L. Khachatryan, T. Sarkisyan; the lower eyelid called coloboma. More than 129 different mutations Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia. have been reported in patients with TCS. Patients with TCS were re- Pregnancy loss, particularly early miscarriage is a common problem ported to be heterozygous for mutations in the TCOF1 gene, which is that affects many women and their partners. Most spontaneous mis- located in 5q32-q33.1. This gene codes for a protein of at least 1411 carriages are caused by an abnormal karyotype of the embryo. Bal- amino acids, treacle, which is a nucleolar phosphoprotein. The protein anced reciprocal translocations are present in 2-5% of couples who coded by this gene assists in protein sorting during particular stages in experience recurrent pregnancy loss. Structural chromosome rear- embryonic development, particularly that of the structures of the facial rangements may result in unbalanced chromosome errors in pregnan- bones. There are reports with a small interstitial deletion of 3p,46,XY, cies. We carried out cytogenetic investigations in 262 couples referred del(3)(p23p24.12) and pericentric inversion inv(2) (p11.2q21) associ- for recurrent spontaneous abortions (RSA). Chromosome analysis ated with TCS. We have done the cytogenetic analysis of a family with was performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes and GTG banding typical physical features of TCS. The high-resolution G-banding analy- analyses at 550-600 band level. FISH technique was applied using sis has shown a small novel deletion in 3q23-25. This novel deletion in WCP probes for 1 and 2 chromosomes. 3q23-25 has been found in two members of the family. Linkage of TCS We identified six cases of reciprocal translocations. Robertsonian to the 5q31.3q33.3 region has been established. We also confirm a de-Cytogenetics 12 letion in 5q33 in all members of the family. This finding may represent somal segment to another position in the same chromosome. Here the a more severe manifestation of the mandibulofacial dysostosis. TCS proband inherited an unbalanced recombinant chromosome following is a heterogeneous entity, and evaluation and counseling of affected a crossing over in the maternal shift chromosome. Shifts occurring in individuals should be undertaken with caution. the short arm of an acrocentric chromosome are rare. If the length of the segment is small, rearrangement mimics a short arm heteromor- P0418. Partial trisomy 12p and deletion 5p: an overlap of phism (pstk+). The present observation illustrates the importance of dysmorphic features investigating an unusual short arm of acrocentric chromosomes. L. Morozin Pohovski, I. Barišić, I. Sansović, I. Petković; Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. P0421. Refinement of unbalanced aberrations of chromosome 7 We describe a 2-year and 11 month-old girl who presented with dys- in two severely affected children by multicolor banding (MCB) morphic facial features, short neck, supernumerary nipples, short S. G. Vorsanova1,2, I. Y. Iourov2,1, T. Liehr3, V. V. Monakhov2, O. S. Kurinnaya1, wide hands, clinodactyly of the fifth finger, postnatal growth retarda- Y. B. Yurov2,1; tion, generalized hypotonia and developmental delay. Detailed clini- 1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Roszdrav, Moscow, Russian Fed- cal examination did not reveal associated congenital malformations. eration, 2National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Cytogenetic evaluation on high resolution G banding showed aberrant Federation, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. chromosome 5 in all metaphases. The karyotype was designated as 4 Although conventional cytogenetic analysis permits the diagnosis of 6,XX,der(5),t(5;12)(5p15.3;12p12.2)mat. Molecular analysis confirmed the majority of chromosome aberrations, almost all of them require deletion of subtelomere 5p and trisomy of subtelomere 12p. precision by molecular cytogenetic techniques. Here, we report on the A comparison of the clinical findings in our patient with previously de- application of MCB technique (FISH-based high-resolution multicolor scribed cases of pure 12p trisomies is presented. Pure trisomy 12p chromosome banding) to refine two chromosome abnormalities involv- has a well delineated dysmorphic features and is often associated with ing chromosome 7 in two female children with severe mental retarda- different major malformations. Our patient did not display these typi- tion and congenital malformations. Initial standard karyotyping by GTG cal features, phenotypic manifestations being more compatible with banding showed the first case to be a monosomy of chromosome 21 monosomy 5p. Rare structural rearrangements may lead to complex (45,XX,-21) and the second case to be a deletion of the chromosome clinical presentations. Detailed clinical description of patients is need- 7 short arm, 46,XX,del(7)(p21p15). After the application of FISH with ed in order to delineate the phenotype and improve genotype-pheno- a set of site-specific probes for chromosome 21 following by use of type correlation. whole-chromosome painting probes, the first case turned out to be an unbalanced translocation between chromosomes 7 and 21, but the P0419. Newborn with partial trisomy 11q resulting from mother′s breakpoints still were under question. To refine chromosomal aberra- t (11; 21) balanced translocation tions in these cases, an MCB approach with microdissection-derived S. Teofilova1, O. Miljanovic1,2; DNA probes for chromosomes 7 and 21 allowing painting of chromo- 1Center for Medical Genetics and Immunology - Clinical Center of Montenegro, somes at 550-band-resolution was applied. Thus, the first case was Podgorica, Montenegro, 2Institute for Children’s Diseases - Clinical Center of defined as partial monosomy 7q34-qter and 21pter-q22.13 due to an Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro. unbalanced translocation t(7;21) or 45,XX,der(7)t(7;21)(q34;q22.13),- There is small number of reported cases with partial trusomy 11q, 21 and the second case was defined as 46,XX,del(7)(p21.2p15.2). which do not result from the most frequently observed translocation in Hence, we concluded that MCB technique was efficient enough for humans: t (11; 22). breakpoint precision in aforementioned cases. When seen in this We report a female newborn, the first child in family, with phenotype perspective, one can further suggest MCB approach to represent an characteristic for partial 11q trisomy, present at birth: microcephaly, efficient tool for clinical molecular cytogenetics in addition to well-es- hypertelorismus, short, broad nose, long, prominent philtrum, high- tablished FISH protocols with site-specific probes or newly introduced arched plate, retraction of the lower lip, microretrognatia, low set, array CGH-based techniques. Supported in parts by INTAS. malformed ears, short neck, poor positioning of feet, wrinkled palm and feet skin and muscular hypotonia. Peripheral blood chromosomal P0422. Three unrelated cases with cryptic unbalanced analysis of index case and her family revealed partial trisomy 11q in subtelomere translocations newborn, resulting from rare mother′s t (11; 21) balanced transloca- R. Stoeva1, M. Kirchhoff2, I. Ivanov1, P. Ganchevska1, I. Popova1, I. Stoev1, M. tion. Further investigation of mother′s family has shown that t (11; 21) Stefanova1; was not present at her parents. 1Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2Rigshospitalet, University of Copenha- The cytogenetic and clinical finding of index case and her family will gen, Denmark. be presented. Unbalanced subtelomere chromosome rearrangements are a signifi- cant cause of both isolated and familial mental retardation/multiple P0420. DOWN SYNDROME IN A PATIENT WITH PARTIAL congenital anomalies syndromes with approximately 5 to 10% of over TRISOMY 21 RESULTING FROM A RARE MATERNAL SHIFT 3000 affected individuals tested worldwide. Here we report three un- V. Malan1, M. Rio2, M. Pic1, S. Chevallier1, M. Vekemans1, O. Raoul1; related cases with cryptic unbalanced translocations, t(1;11)(pter,qter), 1Service de Cytogenetique, CH Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Ser- t(4:11)(pter;qter) and t(8;20)(pter;pter). Disballances were found by vice de Génétique Médicale, CH Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. MLPA analyses. A combination of partial monosomy 1pter/trisomy Down syndrome results generally from the presence of an extra copy 11qter was found in a one-month-old girl. She had a low birth weight, of chromosome 21. Unbalanced translocations or abnormal recom- microcephaly, telecanthus, long eye lashes, blue sclera, broad na- binant chromosomes resulting from a pericentric inversion have also sal bridge, fleshy nose, smooth philtrum, down-turned corners of the been observed. Here, we report on a child with a Down syndrome mouth, thin lips, high palate, posteriorly rotated dysplastic ears, short phenotype carrying a partial trisomy 21q22 resulting from “aneusomie neck, wide spaced nipples, abnormal dermatoglyphic patterns, long de recombinaison” in a maternal shift. During pregnancy, the mother overlapping toes, generalized hirsutism, caudal appendage and patent underwent amniocentesis because of pyelectasy detected by ultra- ductus arteriosus. The second case, a two-month-old girl, presented sound examination. The fetal karyotype was considered as normal, with partial trisomy 4pter/monosomy 11qter. She had pyloric steno- 46,XY. At 5 years of age, due to a developmental delay, chromosomes sis, thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly and following dysmorphic studies were performed. The karyotype revealed an unusual short features: face/body asymmetry, pronounced hypertelorism, strabis- arm of one chromosome 21 suggesting the presence of extra genetic mus, wide nasal bridge, anteverted nostrils, high palate, midline cleft material. Because of the Down syndrome phenotype, FISH studies tongue, low set-up ears, clinodactyly. This clinical presentation over- were performed using probes specific for the DSCR (Down Syndrome laps previously described Paris-Trousseau type thrombocytopenia Critical Region). A third signal was observed on one chromosome 21p. (#188025) due to partial monosomy 11q. The third case, a five-year-old Karyotypes of the parents as well as FISH studies were performed. girl, revealed partial monosomy 8pter/trisomy 20pter. She had mental The mother was found to be a carrier of a DSCR insertion onto the retardation, obesity, hydrocephaly and following dysmorphic features: short arm of one chromosome 21. Shift or intrachromosomal insertion arched eyebrows, synophrys, tapering fingers, patchy skin depigmen- results from a three-break event leading to transposition of a chromo- tation. Genealogical follow-up revealed in two of the cases additional Cytogenetics 12 affected family members. The study included genotype-phenotype cor- cytogenetic analysis with the Whole Chromosome Painting probe of relations and thus, contributed to clinical and molecular characteriza- chromosome X revealed a de novo partial duplication of the short arm tion of subtelomere aberrations. We showed the usefulness of recently of an X chromosome. developed technology for accurate diagnosis of submicroscopic chro- In order to further characterize the duplicated segment, we used a mosome abnormalities and their application in genetic counselling. series of BAC probes extending from band Xp11.22 to Xp22.1. BACs from Xp11.23 to Xp11.4 were duplicated. The karyotype was P0423. The 4P-syndrome. A Case description and literature finally 46,X,dup(X)(p11p11).ish dup(X)(p11.23p11.4)(WCPX+,RP11- review 416I6++,RP11-386N14++,RP11-466C12++). X inactivation status was F. Mortezapour1, F. Mahjoubi2, S. Soleimani1, M. Rahnama1, F. Razazian1, M. studied using HpaII digestion of the AR and FMR1 genes. Unexpect- Zamanian1, F. Manouchehri1, F. Nasiri1; edly, the two X chromosomes were found to be randomly inactivated, 1IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2IBTO & NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic in the proband. Indeed, usually, in women with structurally abnormal Republic of Iran. X chromosome, the abnormal X chromosome is preferentially inacti- Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a rare developmental disorder vated and those patients share an apparent normal phenotype. So, we associated with deletion of short arm of chromosome 4. Well-known speculate that in the present case, the phenotype of the patient could genetic condition of WHS are typical facial anomalies, midline defects, be explained by a functional disomy of the genes present in the dupli- skeletal anomalies, prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, hypoto- cated region. We’ll discuss the possible implication of these genes on nia, mental retardation, and seizures. the observed phenotype. Here we report a new case of WHS who referred to our clinic for cy- togenetic investigation. The patient was a 9 month old baby boy with P0426. Familial pericentric Y chromosome inversion in Russian developmental delay, hypotonia, respiratory and heart problem, promi- patient with trisomy 21 nent eyes and forehead and delayed bone age. GTG banded karyo- T. G. Tsvetkova, V. B. Chernykh, L. F. Kurilo, E. V. Il’ina, E. V. Zaklyazmins- type reveald a deletion on segment of 4p (p15.31 pter). Due to a broad kaya, A. V. Polyakov; spectrum of possible morphologic abnormalities followed by mental Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci- retardation, prenatal diagnosis is very important. Postnatal recognition ences, Moscow, Russian Federation. of the syndrome requires genetic counseling of parents and supportive We reported a patient with trisomy 21 and pericentric Y inversion. The multidisciplinary treatment. proband, a Russian male newborn with a typical Down syndrome phe- notype, was born to a 21-y.o. G1P1 mother and an unrelated 23-y.o. P0424. Olfactory receptors gene clusters on 4p are not father. No genital abnormalities were mentioned in this patient. involved in the origin of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome-associated We have examined the proband and his father, mother and grand- chromosome rearrangements. father. Chromosome analysis had been carried out on peripheral G. Marangi, M. Murdolo, R. Lecce, D. Orteschi, M. E. Grimaldi, G. Neri, M. lymphocytes by standard techniques with GTG- and CBG- staining. Zollino; Genomic DNA had been extracted from peripherical leukocytes us- Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy. ing by standard protocol. Parents’ origin of aneuploidy had been de- Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a multiple congenital anoma- termined by analysis for four following polimorphic markers: D21S11, lies/mental retardation (MCA/MR) syndrome caused by partial 4p D21S1888, D21S1890, and D21S1895. Y microdeletion analysis had monosomy. By analysing a total of 72 families, we found that 65 of been performed using PCR amplifications for SRY, AMG/AMGL, ZFY/ 72 rearrangements (90 %) occurred de novo. Of these, 49 were fur- ZFX loci and 21 Y-specific STSs. ther analysed by all telomeres (46) or by other locus-specific FISH The proband’s karyotype was 47,X,inv(Y)(p11.2q11.23),+21. Patient’s (3). An isolated 4p deletion was detected in 36 (74 %), an unbalanced father and patient’s grandfather posses the same inverted Y chromo- translocation in 9 (18 %), a dup/del 4p in 3 (6 %), and a der(4)(4qter→ somes, mother had normal female karyotype. The extra chromosome q32::4p15.3→qter) in one patient (2 %). With the purpose to investi- was maternal origin is to determined by molecular analysis. PCR am- gate if hotspots for rearrangements exist, we performed FISH analy- plifications have shown an absence of sY1192 marker in proband and sis with a total of 80 molecular probes, properly selected in individual his father and grandfather. It is typically for b2/b3 deletions, partial de- patients, spanning the 4p15pter chromosome region. In particular, letions within AZFc region. probes RP11-423D16 and RP11-751L19, delimiting the proximal OR Remarkable, that deleted sY1192 locus falls in inverted repeat IR1 lo- on 4p, and probes 228a7 and RP11-324I10, delimiting the distal OR, calization near or within Yq breakpoint of pericentric Y chromosome were tested. inversion. We suppose that revealed partial AZFc deletion may be due Looking at unbalanced translocations (n=16), both familial (n= 7) and to pericentric inversion in ancestor Y chromosome. The transmission de novo (n= 9), different pattern chromosomes were diagnosed, all au- of this rearranged Y chromosome through three generations demon- tosomal. No hotspots were observed on 4p, with the exception of the strated, that at least some partial deletions (b2/b3 deletions) even in t(4p;8p) translocations, that recurred within the proximal or the distal association with inv(Y) polymorphism not impair the male fertility. OR in 6 of 7 cases. Only one different de novo translocation, t(4p;7p), did occur within the distal OR. Of the remaining 56 rearrangements, P0427. Unbalanced translocation (Y;3) leading to 3p deletion in a consisting more often of isolated terminal deletions, only three were dyslexic boy and his normal mother OR-mediated. A strong relationship was observed between parental C. Schluth1,2, M. Till1, V. Des Portes3, P. Gosset4, V. Malan5, P. Edery1,2, D. origin and type of the de novo rearrangement. We conclude that ORs Sanlaville1,2; are not usually involved in the WHS-associated rearrangements, with 1Service de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle - Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, the exception of t(4p;8p) translocations. France, 2Faculté de Médecine Lyon Nord - Université Claude Bernard, Lyon, France, 3Service de Neuropédiatrie - Hôpital Debrousse, Lyon, France, 4La- P0425. Molecular cytogenetic characterisation of an Xp boratoire de Biologie de la Reproduction - CHU Strasbourg - SIHCUS-CMCO, duplication in a phenotypically abnormal girl with random X Schiltigheim, France, 5Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Histologie et Embryologie inactivation - Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. C. Massol1, S. Monnot1, F. Giuliano1, C. Fossoud2, M. Cossée3, J. C. Lambert1, A 10-year-old boy was assessed for learning disability, language delay, H. Karmous-Benailly1; dyslexia and hyperactivity. He was born at 32 weeks’gestation and 1Department of Medical Genetics, Nice, France, 2Department of Pediatrics, required resuscitation. He walked at 19 months, suffered from frequent Nice, France, 3Genetic Laboratory, Strasbourg, France. otitis media and was surgically treated for hypospadias. Standard Partial duplications of the short arm of the X chromosome are rela- karyotype displayed an abnormal chromosome 3 : add(3)(p25). The tively rare and have been described in males and females. We report same abnormality was identified on the karyotype of his phenotypically the case of a 4 years and 10 months old girl presenting developmen- normal mother. tal delay, severe language retardation and dysmorphic features with FISH analyses showed that the additional material on chromosome macrocephaly (+1,8 SD), prominent forehead, wide palpebral fissures 3p consisted of Y heterochromatin and Yq telomere. 3p subtelomer- and anteverted nares. No pigmentary dysplasia of the skin was pres- ic probe (Cytocell, 230kb from telomere) was deleted whereas the ent. The external genitalia were normal. The karyotype completed by CRELD1 locus at 10 Mb from telomere was retained. So, both mother Cytogenetics 12 and his son carried the same derivative der(3)t(Y;3)(q12;p25.3) lead- To our knowledge we have reported the first case of ZFX mutation. ing to a 3pter deletion of less than 10 Mb. This gene encodes zinc finger protein lies within the critical region for Familial cases of Y translocation usually concern Y heterochromatin ovarian failure and escapes X inactivation. Although we have found on acrocentric short arm. Involvement of a non-acrocentric partner has that in reported patient the XY cells were prevalent in blood lympho- only been reported once to date. cytes, gonadal mosaicism may be essentially different. Furthermore, it 3p deletion syndrome consists of growth retardation, microcephaly, is not excluded that ZFX gene loss may dismiss the SRY gene effect facial dysmorphism (ptosis, broad nasal tip, micrognathia), mental on the gonad differentiation. retardation and occasional cardiac malformation, deafness and poly- dactyly. Size of deletion and phenotype are variable. Only two familial P0428a. Novel matUPD15 identification by cytogenetic testing cases have been reported. In the present observation, 3p telomeric V. Adir, H. Bar-El, M. Zif, A. Shalaata, Z. U. Borochowitz; region is deleted in both mother and her child while only the child ex- The Simon Winter Institute for Human Genetics, Bnai-Zion Medical Center, press clinical features that are not typical for 3p deletion syndrome. Technion-Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel. Therefore, it can be questioned whether this deletion really accounts Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a multisystemic genetic disorder for the patient’s phenotype. Familial study and precise characterization characterized by infantile hypotonia, feeding difficulties, distinct dys- of the deletion’s size are in progress to shed light on this issue. morphic features, hypogonadism, psychomotor retardation and morbid obesity, with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 15,000 individuals. PWS P0428. ZFX gene deletion in mosaic 45,X/46,XY female is caused by the loss of function of paternal expressed genes within V. B. Chernykh, L. F. Kurilo, T. G. Tsvetkova, E. V. Il’ina, A. V. Polyakov; chromosome 15q11-q13, of which an interstitial deletion is observed Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci- in approximately 75% of the patients while a matUPD15 is noted in ences, Moscow, Russian Federation. about 20%. The remaining 5% are due to a mutation or a translocation X/XY mosaicism is associated with a wide spectrum of clinical phe- involving the 15q11-13 region. notypes varied from females with Ullrich-Turner syndrome (UTS), un- Here we report on a newborn male with low-birth weight, severe hypo- dervirilized males with mixed gonadal dysgenesis to normal virilized tonia and poor sucking. Decreased fetal movements were noted dur- infertile males with azoospermia. At this the phenotype effects mainly ing the 3rd trimester of pregnancy. depend on a presence of intact SRY gene and correlate with gonadal Chromosome analysis revealed normal male karyotype, with 2 iden- X/XY mosaicism. tical marked chromosome 15P+S++. Parents’ karyotypes were 46XX We have examined patient with UTS. The proband was nine-year fe- 15P+S++ and 46XY, suggestive of a matUPD mechanism, with partial male referred to cytogenetic examination because of virilization. Be- isodisomy. The newborn’s FISH analysis (Q-Biogene probe), SNRPN side short stature and clitoral hypertrophy, marked skin dryness was region/ PML control, was normal. Molecular testing of polymorphic mentioned in this patient. markers along chromosome 15 revealed a matUPD15, with heter- Chromosome analysis was performed using standard cytogenetic oUPD15 from band q11.2 (D15S128) to band q21.1 (D15S659) and techniques with GTG- and CBG- staining. Molecular analysis was car- isoUPD at band q26.1 (D15S652). The cytogenetic results suggest ried out on DNA extracted from peripheral leukocytes. PCR amplifica- isoUPD of the 15p arm, formed at the 2nd meiosis nondisjunction, and tions for SRY, AMG/AMGL, ZFY/ZFX loci and 21 Y-specific STSs have the molecular testing shows a double crossing over event in the 15q been performed. arm. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of detection Cytogenetic examination has found a presence of X/XY mosaicism. of UPD15 using standard cytogenetic testing. We suspect that due to In 4 of 50 analyzed metaphases chromosome analysis has demon- these unique findings, further clinical follow-up of this child may yield strated a 45,X karyotype. PCR reactions have revealed a presence of a better understanding of the genotype-phenotype correlation among SRY, AMG, AMGL, ZFY loci, and an absence of ZFX locus. Apparently PWS cases. patient had an Xp21 microdeletion included the ZFX gene. No Y chro- mosome microdeletions were found.Prenatal diagnosis 10 Po03. Prenatal diagnosis tion, Béclère, Clamart, France. Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney disease (ARPKD) is one P0429. Reporting Three Cases Of PND For Alpha thalassemia In of the most common hereditary renal cystic disease, and is caused Iran. by mutations in the PKHD1 gene. The diagnosis is often made late V. Lotfi1,2, M. Sajedifar1,2, P. Fouladi1,2, A. Abdolhosseini1, F. Shirazi1, Z. Sha- in pregnancy and sometimes at birth. Owing to the poor prognosis, hab1, S. Zeinali1,3; there is a strong demand for prenatal diagnosis. Preimplantation ge- 1Medical Genetics Lab of Dr Zeinali, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Young netic diagnosis (PGD) represents an alternative because it is done on Researchers Club of research and science branch of Islamic Azad University, cells taken from in vitro fertilized embryos at the third-day stage. Only Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Human Genetics Unit, Dept of Biotech ,Pas- healthy embryos are transferred, avoiding the physical and psychic teur Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. traumatism of the termination of pregnancy in the case of an affected Each normal person has 4α genes which are shown as αα /αα. Usually fetus detected later by prenatal diagnosis. We developed a single-cell α is more expressed than α therefore deletion of α or mutation on α diagnostic approach based on haplotype analysis in order to propose 2 1 2 2 has more severe effect. PGD to most couples, whatever the mutations may be. Being carrier alpha thalasemias are usually caused by deletion of one Six linked markers within (D6S1714 and D6S243), or in close proxim- or two α-globins genes. ity to (D6S272,D6S436, KIAA0057, D6S1662), the PKHD1 gene are Alpha thal genotyped are usally shown like -α/αα (αthal 2); -α /-α or tested in multiplex nested-PCR, using QIAGEN multiplex PCR kit, al- --/αα (α thal 1 or classical type). --/αα type is seen most in South East lowing identification of embryos carrying the high-risk haplotypes. Asia. H-disease is caused by PCR analysis was first carried out on 50 single-lymphocytes. Amplifi- --/-α form either by deletions or point mutations (e.g. --/αT α ). cation rate was excellent (100%), with an allele drop-out (ADO) rate Complete absence of 4α genes causes hydrops fetal is which requiring ranging from 0 to 8%. Using this test, 4 PGD cycles were performed prenatal diagnose. We have performed three cases of PND for α-thal resulting in 18 biopsied embryos. Transferable embryos were obtained so far. In these cases the fetuses were diagnosed carriers (--/αα). In for three cycles, resulting in a pregnancy, and the birth of a healthy boy. one case both parents were carrier of Med deletion (--med /αα). The The co-amplification of several loci increases the assay accuracy by Hematological data of parents were: allowing the detection of ADO, recombination and contamination. This Father: MCV=62/8 MCH=20/2 Hb=14/1 A= Normal simple diagnostic procedure can be applied to most patients at risk to 2 Mother:MCV=67/9 MCH=20/6 Hb=10/3 A=Normal transmit ARPKD. 2 At the present time we think only need to perform PND for hydrops fealties. P0432. Non Invasive Prenatal Diagnosis (NIPD): the suitability Yet we need more strong evidence to do PND since most cases of of locked nucleic acid (LNA)-modified allele-specific primers for Hdisease seen in adults by us were mild enough to exclude PND for detection of paternally inherited beta globin gene alleles similar cases. G. Dimisianos, J. Traeger-Synodinos, C. Vrettou, E. Kanavakis, A. Mavrou; Key words: Alpha thalassemia, Prenatal Diagnosis, H Disease University of Athens, Athens, Greece. Prenatal diagnosis (PND) with CVS sampling and amniocentesis in- P0430. Whole-genome expression analysis of amniocytes volves a small risk of pregnancy complications. This may be avoided by G. R. Nagy1, B. Győrffy2, O. Galamb3, B. Nagy1, L. Lázár1, Z. Bán1, B. Molnár3, NIPD, which for monogenic diseases is potentially based on detection Z. Papp1; of distinct paternally-inherited alleles of cell-free fetal DNA in the ma- 1Semmelweis University, I. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Bu- ternal circulation. However, methods for NIPD must address the prob- dapest, Hungary, 2Semmelweis University, Szentágothai János Knowledge lem that fetal alleles exist within an excess of maternal alleles (~5% Center, Budapest, Hungary, 3Semmelweis University, II. Department of Internal versus ~95%) with low total-DNA concentration (~10-100pg/μl). This Medicine, Cell Analysis Laboratory, Clinical Research Unit of the Hungarian study investigates specificity and sensitivity of allele-specific PCR us- Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary. ing LNA-modifed oligonucleotides for the most common Mediterranean Aims: The objective of our study was to investigate the ability of global beta-thalassaemia mutation (IVS-I-110G->A, HBB c.93+21G>A) when gene expression array analysis from routinely collected amount of am- present in minority quantities relative to wild-type alleles (20%:80%). niotic fluid. We also wanted to search for the differential gene expres- Design of PCR primers included an allele-specific primer (IVS1-110 sion profile of a polygenic disorder, the neural tube defect, which is the G>A), LNA-modified at the 3’ nucleotide (mutant base). Inclusion of a second most common birth defect in the world. pBR322 RsaI-fragment and pBR322-specific primers monitored PCR Material and methodology: We analyzed 6-17 mL of amniotic fluid. conditions whilst overcoming the problem of co-amplifying genomic re- Samples were taken from seven pregnant women carrying fetuses with gions present in excess from the maternal genome. Reverse primers neural tube defect, diagnosed during ultrasound examination. Control were labelled (Cy5.5), facilitating analysis on an automatic sequencer. samples were obtained from pregnant women who underwent rou- PCR reactions analysed 200 diluted genomic-DNA mixtures with 80% tine genetic amniocentesis because of advanced maternal age (>35 normal and 20% mutant alleles (M/N), and 100 mutation-free (N/N) years). Fetal mRNA from amniocytes was successfully isolated, ampli- DNA samples (8-80pg DNA /reactions). 32 M/N and 32 N/N DNA sam- fied, labeled, and hybridized to whole-genome transcript arrays. Since ples were also analysed with non-LNA allele-specific primers under the most significant epidemiological finding with respect to neural tube identical conditions. LNA-modified primers gave 2% false positives defects is the protective effect of maternal periconceptional folic acid and no false negatives; non-modified primers gave false positive and supplementation, we also investigated specific folate-related genes. negative rates >40%. The pBR322-specific band confirmed correct Results: The detected differential gene expression profiles between PCR conditions in all cases. These results indicate that LNA-modified cases and controls highlighted genes, like SLA, LST1 and BENE allele-specific primers increase specificity and sensitivity. genes, these might be important in the development of neural tube defects. None of the specific folate-related genes were in the top 100 P0433. Prenatal diagnosis of Carpenter Syndrome associated transcripts. D. F. Albu, A. C. Crenguta, E. Severin; Conclusions: This study demonstrates the ability of global gene ex- “Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. pression array analysis from as small as 6 ml amniotic fluid, allowing Background: Carpenter syndrome (CS) is a rare genetic disorder also the examination from routinely collected amniotic fluid samples so in- called acrocephalopolysyndactily. The main features of Carpenter syn- dividual fetuses can be studied. The analysis of fetal gene expression drome are craniosynostosis, congenital heart disease, obesity, extra differences might get us closer to decipher the complex genetic back- fingers and/or toes (polydactyly), genital abnormalities, and short stat- ground of polygenic disorders. ure. Carpenter syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder, for which the gene has not yet been identified. Objectives: To identify and char- P0431. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for autosomal acterize both craniofacial and limbs malformations associated with CS. recessive polycystic kidney disease Patients and Methods: A 28-year-old pregnant Caucasian female was N. Gigarel1, N. Frydman2, P. Burlet1, E. Feyereisen2, V. Kerbrat2, R. Frydman2, referred at 21 weeks’ gestation for a routine prenatal ultrasound. Fetal J. Bonnefont1, A. Munnich1, J. Steffann1; monitoring was made by ultrasound scans for fetal growth, congenital 1Département de génétique, Necker, Paris, France, 2Biologie de la reproduc- malformations, and amniotic fluid volume. We also collected informa-Prenatal diagnosis 11 tion about family medical history. Amniotic fluid samples were taken to longer STR system. Work manifested that DS samples had signifi- perform prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis. Results: Ultrasound examina- cantly higher amount of cff DNA. Our findings could contribute to the tion revealed a single fetus with an abnormal fetal craniofacial and improvement of non-invasive prenatal diagnostics. limbs development: and oligohydramnios. Craniofacial abnormalities as a sonographic marker suggested the possibility of a chromosomal P0436. Cell-free fetal DNA quantification in maternal plasma at anomaly. More associated fetal anomalies were detected. Karyotype 16° and 17° week of gestation: the experience of I.R.C.C.S. Burlo indicated a normal cytogenetic female: 46, xx. There was no family Garofolo of Trieste history of congenital anomalies. The couple chose to terminate the E. Bevilacqua, V. Petix, M. Monticolo, D. Gambel Benussi, V. Pecile; pregnancy. The family accepted autopsy. Autopsy findings confirmed S.C. Genetica Medica, I.R.C.C.S. Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy. the ultrasound diagnosis. Conclusions: The case was sporadic. The During pregnancy, cell-free fetal DNA is present in maternal blood. Its complex pattern of fetal anomalies identified and described suggested quantity increases throughout gestation and with increasing maternal the possibility of CS. As the gene defect for Carpenter syndrome is age. It represents an alternative source of fetal genetic material for unknown, the diagnosis of this condition remains a clinical one. The non-invasive prenatal diagnosis. discovery of single or multiple fetal malformations requires not only It has been demonstrated that cell-free fetal DNA is significantly more complete echo graphic assessment, but also detailed post-abortum present in women carrying fetuses with trisomy 21 and 13, bu not in examination to allow optimal use of diagnostic aid programmes. trisomy 18. Aim of this study was to quantify cell-free fetal DNA levels in plasma of P0434. Our first steps in non-invasive detection of fetal Rh(D) pregnant women undergoing amniocentesis in the 2005-2006 period, using real-time PCR method in order to define its range and distribution at 16° and 17° week of ges- L. Lazar, B. Nagy, Z. Bán, R. Nagy, Z. Szigeti, Z. Papp; tation, and to correlate its concentration to fetal conditions. Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. Patients were recruited with informed consent and samples were col- Introduction: In the last ten years the detection of fetal origin cells and lected before amniocentesis. cell free fetal DNA in maternal circulation opened new horizonts in non Fetal DNA quantification in maternal plasma was performed by real- ivasive prenatal diagnosis. The Rh(D) incompatibility is the most fre- time PCR on the SRY gene in male-bearing pregnancies. Fetal gender quent blood group incompatibilities in the clinical practice, which can was ascertained by amniocentesis. cause fetal anemia, hydrops and even fetal death. Aims: The aim of At all, we collected 260 samples, 125 of these carrying male fetuses. this study was to detect the fetal DNA in maternal circulation, to de- From cytogenetic analysis, all male fetuses were 46,XY, but one of termine the Rh(D) status of the fetus. Methods: Blood samples and these displayed a second level mosaicism; regarding fetal conditions, amnionic fluid samples were collected from 30 pregnant women, with there were four cases with cardiac malformation, one case with renal Rh negative status, between 11-22 week of gestation presented for malformation and diaphragmatic hernia, one case with corpus callo- genetic amniocentesis at the 1st. Department of Obstetrics and Gy- sum agenesis, and one case with IUGR. necology, Semmelweis University. After DNA isolation real-time PCR Preliminar data of fetal DNA analysis showed that the range of cell- was performed in order to detect the exon 7 of the RhD gene located free fetal DNA concentration in maternal plasma at 16 and 17 week of on the first chromosome (1p36.11.). Results: In 24 cases the PCR re- gestation was in line with literature. In cases of fetuses with malforma- action gave same result in case of the DNA isolated from plasma and tions, range of fetal DNA concentration in maternal plasma was similar amniotic fluid, but in six cases the there was no PCR product of plasma to that of normal fetuses. samples and the product was detectable in amniotic fluid samples. The exon 7 was detectable in 25 cases, and there was no product in 5 P0437. Mechanisms of transport of the extracellular nucleic cases. Conclusions: The real-time PCR method seems to be an easy acids : study of choriocarcinoma cell line and reliable method to determine the fetal Rh blood group. The sensi- N. Bonello, J. Gabert, A. Levy-Mozziconacci; tivity and specificity of the method in this study is in concordance with Laboratoire de Biologie Moleculaire, CHU Nord, Marseille, France. international data. The use of more than one probe could increase the Extracellular DNA and RNA are present in normal and diseased hu- sensitivity of the method. man plasma. They allow a novel approach to non-invasive diagnosis in the cancer- P0435. Refined fluorescent STR quantification in cell free fetal ology and antenatal fields but very little is known about their physio- DNA during pregnancy in physiological and Down syndrome pathological mechanisms. fetuses. Our study was carried out on an in vitro human epithelial choriocar- R. Vodicka1, R. Vrtel1, L. Dusek2, M. Prochazka1, E. Schneiderova1, I. Dhai- cinoma cell line : JEG-3. The cell line was first characterised, then falah1, A. Santava1, E. Krejcirikova1, J. Santavy1; a protocol was established for the separation of microparticles and 1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub- exosomes in the supernatant fluid of a common culture. The protocol lic, 2CBA Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. was validated using two techniques; electronic microscopy and flow Real-time PCR is the most common approach to quantify cell free fetal cytometry. (cff) DNA in maternal plasma. Analysis by the short tandem repeats The extracellular nucleic acids associated with the vesicles were then (STR) has advantage to better recognize of different genotypes. But quantified. We were also interested in the localisation of the extracel- the quantity examination by Quantitative Fluorescent (QF) PCR of lular nucleic acids associated with the vesicles. (STR) is limited to the only rough approximation. Study of culture supernatant showed the presence of extracellular DNA This project, supported by IGA MZ CR NR7817-3, focused on more and RNA, quantifiable using real time quantitative PCR specific to the precise calculation of relative cff DNA amount tested by the STRs loci genes and transcripts analysed (β-globin, SRY for DNA and GAPDH, refined quantification directed to 21st chromosome. HLA-G for RNA). The cff DNA was analysed on 475 samples from pregnant women with We showed the presence of DNA and RNA associated with two types physiological fetuses in different stage of pregnancy (from 4gw- to of vesicles . The analysis of specific and ubiquitous genes allowed us 37gw) separately in three STRs systems (D21S1435, D21S1446 and to demonstrate the different distribution of the genes and transcripts pD) and also by gonosomal sequences (AMELX/Y). Thirteen samples associated with the vesicles. Vesicular fractions were analysed follow- with Down syndrome (DS) fetuses cff DNA were compared. ing treatment with DNase and after permeabilisation. The percentage We optimized and assessed the Refined (R)QF PCR for STRs in par- of the internal and external fraction for both genes associated with ticular locus. We modified calculations with respect to preferably am- vesicules supported our hypothesis that the two genes have different plificated short DNA molecules and to stutters. The cff DNA detection modes of transport. rate was 73.8% in minimally one of STRs if successful PCR ampli- This work will be performed in order to evaluate the role of these ex- fication (88.4 %) is considered. The efficiency was decreasing from tracellular nucleic acids in the intercellular communication through dif- shorter to longer PCR fragments. ferent vesicles. . All three STR and gonosomal systems proved increasing of cff DNA during pregnancy. The stutter variability rate tended from shorter to Prenatal diagnosis 12 P0438. Is fetal DNA detectable in maternal urine? sound markers, abnormal serum-screening test, chromosome recip- S. Majer, M. Bauer, I. Oreskovic, A. Strele, E. Giegerl, M. Eder, U. Lang, B. rocal translocation in parents and sex-chromosome related diseases. Pertl; Analyses on 17 samples of uncultured amniocytes revealed two path- Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. ological karyotypes (11,8 %). FISH analysis on 32 cultured samples Objectives: The aim of this study was the detection, quantification, and was used as adjunct technique after classical cytogenetical analysis. correlation of cell-free fetal (cff) DNA in maternal urine and plasma in Indications for 24 samples were suspected chromosomal structural de normal and complicated pregnancies during the third trimester. novo and numerical aberrations, 5 were investigated for population Methods: 151 urine and plasma samples obtained from 96 women variants of acrocentric chromosomes and 3 for parents carriers of re- pregnant with male and 55 pregnant with female fetuses were col- ciprocal translocation. lected and analyzed for cff-DNA using fluorescent PCR and quantita- From total number of 32 samples, 14 karyotypes were pathological tive real-time PCR. The concentrations of cff and total DNA in maternal (43,8 %) and 18 karyotypes were normal (56,2 %). plasma were correlated with maternal and obstetric parameters using Following analyses on cultured amniocytes, 4 medically indicated appropriate correlation analyses. abortions were recommended as well as 1 medically indicated abor- Results: Y-chromosome specific sequences were detected in 31/96 tion after uncultured amniocytes analysis. (32.3%) urine samples collected from women pregnant with male fe- FISH is a fast, powerful molecular cytogenetic technique used as an tuses using the DYS14-assay and in 6/96 (6.3%) urine samples using supplement to conventional chromosomal analysis. the SRY-assay for real-time PCR analysis. DNA was extracted from 1 ml maternal urine using the QIAamp®MinElute Virus Spin Kit (QIA- P0441. Prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities in GEN). No cff-DNA was detected in all 55 urine samples obtained from Lithuania women pregnant with female fetuses. All 96 plasma samples obtained N. Krasovskaja1, E. Benusiene1,2, E. Butkeviciene1, V. Kucinskas1,2; from women pregnant with male fetuses were tested positive for cff- 1Center for Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and DNA using real-time PCR. Cff-DNA exhibited a correlation with ges- Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. tational age (R=0.244; P=0.018) and an inverse correlation with the Objective. To ascertain the effectiveness of non-invasive prenatal test- latency between blood collection and birth (R=-0.218; P=0.036). Total ing of chromosomal abnormalities. DNA showed a correlation with placental weight (R=0.182; P=0.034) Methods. The risk for chromosomal defect was calculated by taking and pregnancies associated complications (R=0.280; P<0.001). in account maternal age and gestation, first and/or second trimester Conclusion: Our data confirm that cff-DNA is cleared by the kidneys serum biochemistry and first and/or second trimester ultrasound. The in detectable amounts. Total DNA was found to be elevated in compli- vast majority of women were tested in the second trimester. Cut-off cated pregnancies during the third trimester. for invasive testing was risk 1 in 250. For diagnosis karyotype analy- sis from cultured amniocytes and quantitative fluorescent polymerase P0439. The association between choroid plexus cysts and chain reaction was performed. cytogenetic abnormalities Results. 827 amniocenteses were performed during the period of 4,5 C. Gunduz1, C. Biray Avci1, A. Vahabi2, H. Onay2, O. Cogulu2, D. Ercal3, F. years . Abnormal karyotypes were ascertained in 5.56% of cases. The Ozkinay4, C. Ozkinay2; structure of abnormalities was: trisomy 21-47.8%, trisomy 18-26%, 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, mosaic karyotypes-8.7%, Robertsonian translocations-6.5%, recipro- Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genet- cal translocations-2.17%. In the group of women after non-invasive ics, Izmir, Turkey, 3Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of testing was born 5 babies with trisomy 21. The fetal loss after invasive Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of procedures was 0.96%. Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey. Conclusions. The effectiveness of non-invasive prenatal diagnostics of The choroid plexus is the area on the ventricles of the brain where trisomy 21 was 81.5%. The vast majority of non-invasive and invasive cerebrospinal fluid is produced by modified ependymal cells. When a tests should be performed in the first versus the second trimester of cystic form occurs inside the choroid plexus it is called a choroid plexus pregnancy. cyst (CPC). Cysts can be found in unilateral or bilateral form with dif- ferent sizes. The choroid plexus cyst is a common variant and can be P0442. Prenatal molecular diagnosis of Cockayne Syndrome detected in utero incidentally by ultrasonographic examination during C. Conte, M. D’Apice, F. Sangiuolo, A. Botta, G. Novelli; the second trimester. However it may be associated with an abnormal Dpt Biopathology, Rome, Italy. karyotype in approximately 3 % of fetuses. We aimed to evaluate the Cockayne Syndrome (OMIM 216400) is a rare and multi-systemic re- files of prenatally detected choroid plexus cysts between 2000-2006 cessive disease characterized by postnatal growth failure and progres- years retrospectively. Among all referrals, CPC was found in 95 fetus- sive multiorgan dysfunction. Growth and developmental abnormalities es of which, 40 of them had bilateral and 55 had unilateral localization. become fully manifest in the second year of life. Progressive impair- All fetuses were in the second trimester and the mean gestation week ment of clinical features leads to severe disability, and death occurs was 18.83±1.77 (range 17-25 weeks). The mean maternal age was within the first or second decade of life. CSA is caused by mutations in 27.90±3.82; 5 of them had an advanced maternal age (>35-year-old) the 12 exons of ERCC8 gene, encoding a protein involved in the group and 4 of them had an increased maternal serum screening test result. of excision-repair cross-complementing process. Upnow 6 mutations Of 95 cases, 86 had isolated CPC. Nine of them had secondary ultra- has been characterised in the CSA gene. In our laboratory we exam- sonographic abnormality such as intracardiac ecogenic focus, cardiac ined a family with an affected son, died at the age of twelve, presenting hypertrophy, clinodactyly, renal pelvis dilatation, hydronephrosis, hy- typical clinical features. At the age of seven he weighed 9.360 gr and perecogenic kidney, ventriculomegaly and overlapping fingers. While he was 48 cm high. The proband resulted compound heterozygote cytogenetic investigation revealed karyotypic abnormality in 8 fetuses for two new mutations: a deletion del1436-586 (segregating from the (8.42%), 88 were normal (41 fetuses were 46,XX and 47 were 46,XY). mother) detectable by RNA analysis and a missense mutation C336G Among the abnormal karyotypes, 3 fetuses (3.16%) presented Triso- located in exon 4 (from the father). Southern analysis was performed my 18. The other abnormal karyotypes were 46,XY[144]/47,XY+21[6], to characterised the extension of the deletion. Successively the mother 46,XY,inv(9)(p11;q13) (2 fetuses) and 46,XY,15p+. undergoes prenatal diagnosis by transabdominal chorionic villus sam- pling (CVS) at week XII of pregnancy. Direct analysis on DNA and RNA P0440. Fluorescence in situ Hybridization in prenatal diagnosis was performed. A linkage analysis was also developed to study the H. Ljubic, R. Lasan, L. Letica, M. Burek, D. Muzinic, D. Begovic; segregation of the haplotypes, using markers located within an interval Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University of 2.5cM comprising ERCC8 gene. This study allowed us to identify a Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia. foetus with a wild genotype confirmed at the birth by analysis on bio- Samples of amniotic fluid from 49 patients were analyzed using Fluo- logical material isolated from placenta. This study documents the first rescence in situ Hybridization (FISH) technique, applied on cultured molecular prenatal diagnosis of Cockayne syndrome. and uncultured amniotic cells. Indications for FISH analysis on un- cultured amniotic cells were: late weeks of gestation, abnormal ultra-Prenatal diagnosis 1 P0443. The risk of cystic fibrosis with prenatally detected Pathology in amniocenteses were confirmed with almost 100 % ac- hyperechogenic bowel in Belarus population curacy with chordocenteses. Considering other indications for chor- N. Mosse, L. Savenko, E. Shepelevich, K. Mosse; docentesis, most pathologic karyotypes were confirmed at ultrasound Scientific-Practical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. markers indication (45/60; 75%). Hyperechogenic fetal bowel is prenatally detected by ultrasound dur- ing the second trimester of pregnancy in 0.1-1.8% of fetuses. It has P0446. Towards noninvasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of been described to be associated with severe diseases, notably cys- trisomy 21 Down syndrome tic fibrosis (CF). The incidence of CF in Belarus is 1:8000 newborns, R. W. Old, F. Crea, W. M. Puszyk, M. A. Hulten; much less than in West Europe. The aim of our study was to deter- University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom. mine the risk of CF in a prospective study of 70 fetuses with hyper- echogenic fetal bowel detected during the 2005-2006 years period The development of non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of trisomy in our Center. Fetal cells and parental DNA were screened for CFTR 21 Down Syndrome based on a maternal blood sample rather than the mutations. Two steps screening protocol was used. In the first step invasive procedures chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis, is a the most frequent mutations in Belarus CF patients - dF508 (61.6%); long-term goal in reproductive care. Copy number counting of cell-free CFTRdele2,3(21kb) (6.8%) and 2184delA (4.1%), were analyzed in fetal DNA (cffDNA) sequences in maternal plasma presents a greater one multiplex PCR reaction. When one mutation had been detected, a challenge than NIPD based upon detecting paternal sequences in direct sequencing strategy was applied. We found 6 affected fetuses, cffDNA, already clinically feasible for X-linked disorders and RhD ge- which gave us an 8.6% risk of CF when a digestive tract anomaly notyping. One approach for identification of fetal DNA exploits differ- is observed at routine ultrasound examination. Mutations, associated ences in DNA methylation between maternal and cffDNA (the majority with pancreatic insufficient CF, were the most frequent. In 6 CF cases of which originates from placental syncytiotrophoblasts). 5 dF508 and 3 CFTRdele2,3(21kb) mutations were identified. The high We describe the first identification and characterisation of a panel of incidence of CFTRdele2,3(21kb) can be explained by the more severe chromosome 21-specific sequences (and reference sequences on gastrointestinal expression of the disease in compound deletion car- other autosomes) that are differentially methylated between peripheral riers. Our results confirm that fetal bowel anomalies indicate a risk of blood and placental tissue, DNA sequences which thus constitute can- severe cystic fibrosis and justify careful CFTR gene analysis. didate biomarkers for NIPD of trisomy 21 Down Syndrome. To select DNA sequences to be screened for differential methylation P0444. Newborn screening for cystic fibrosis in the Czech between these tissues, we adopted three strategies (1) searching pub- Republic: observation of lower incidence of the disease lic databases for highly differentially expressed genes, (2) choosing M. Balascakova1, A. Holubova1, V. Skalicka2, V. Vavrova2, D. Zemkova2, P. ‘random’ promoter regions, and (3) choosing ‘random’ non-promoter Kracmar3, T. Piskackova1, F. Votava3, M. Macek Jr.1; regions. We screened these regions by methylation-specific restric- 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - Faculty tion enzymatic and bisulfite-conversion assays, and hence identified Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics, Charles a number of differentially methylated sequences located at 21q22.3 University - Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department (AIRE, CLDN14, and ERG genes), at 1q32.1 (CD48 gene and FAIM3 of Pediatrics, Charles University - Faculty Hospital Kral. Vinohrady, Prague, gene), at 2p14 (ARHGAP25 gene) and at 12.24 (SELPLG gene). Clini- Czech Republic. cal evaluation of the sensitivity and specificity for NIPD of trsiomy 21 An early diagnosis of cystic fibrois (CF) is considered as a favourable Down syndrome is underway. prognostic factor. Unless meconium ileus is present at birth, CF is could This work has been supported by the EC NoE SAFE no LSHB-CT- be often misdiagnosed. Increase of the age at diagnosis (ADG) in our 2004-503243. country due to devolution of health care (prior to 1998 /median 0.58 years/; 1999-2005 /1.2 years/; p = 0.036) led us to initiate a pilot CF P0447. Detection of median values of PAPP-A protein and free newborn screening project (NBS; two tier IRT/DNA; II/2005-XI/2006) beta hCG in serum samples of pregnant women in north-west of covering ~62% of all newborns. Concentration of IRT was measured in Iran. 76,438 Guthrie cards and its level above the arbitrary cut off (75ng/ml) S. Mohaddes; was found in 799 cases (1.05%). Positive cases were examined using Medical Genetics Unit, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic a population specific CFTR mutation panel (~ 84% detection rate). In Republic of Iran. total, 12 CF patients were identified and the median ADG was 37 days Pregnancy-associated plasma protein A and the beta subunit of hu- (range 26-54). Interestingly, we also diagnosed previously unrecog- man chorionic gonadotrophin are well established markers used in nised CF in 3 older sibs. 53 ,,IRT positive“ newborns, that had only combination with nuchal translucency to screen the pregnancies for 1 CFTR allele, were subjected to follow-up sweat testing. Thus far, Down syndrome and trisomy 18 in first trimester. However their me- 45 cases were negative (ie. unaffected heterozygotes), while in one dian values are different according to the ethnic origin. In the pres- instance a borderline result indicated long-term monitoring. When us- ent study the median values of free beta hCG and PAPP-A protein ing NBS data alone the incidence of CF was 1: 6,369, compared to the were obtained in the population of pregnant women of North-West of previously epidemiologically established value of 1:2,700. However, Iran, using serum samples prepared from 846 pregnancies at 11th-13th when respective prenatal diagnosis (PND) data from within study pe- weeks of gestation. The results were also compared to those of similar riod were taken into account incidence increased to 1:3,900. Overall, findings on other ethnic origins. A significant difference was observed our study proved that NBS is an efficacious tool for uniform diagnosis between the median values calculated in the present study and those of CF and that its incidence could be lower due to systematic PND dur- reported for Asian and Caucasian ethinics. Our results indicate that ing the last decade. Supported by VZFNM00064203 employing the median values, present in available risk calculation soft wares for screening purposes, will result in underestimation of Down P0445. Results of cytogenetical analysis of 1194 chordocenteses syndrome and trisomy 18. M. Burek, L. Letica, R. Lasan, H. Ljubic, D. Muzinic, D. Begovic; Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University P0448. Evaluation of indications of prenatally diagnosed Down Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia. syndrome cases between 2000-2006 years 1194 chordocenteses were analyzed cytogenetically in a period of 22 F. Ozkinay1, S. Numanoglu2, A. Aykut1, S. Unlubay1, C. Gunduz2, O. Cogulu1, years, using cytogenetical GTG-banding method. Indications for chor- A. Vahabi3, D. Ercal4, C. Ozkinay3; docenteses were late weeks of pregnancy (ultrasound markers, par- 1Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Genetics and Teratology, Ege Uni- ents carrieres of reciprocal translocation, age, …) and amniocenteses versity, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, confirming. Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medi- From total number of 1194 chordocenteses, 88 (7,37 %) were karyo- cine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 4Dokuz Eylul University, typically determined as pathologic: 63 (71,5 %) numerical aberrations Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey. and 25 (28,4 %) structural aberrations. The most frequent numerical Down syndrome (DS) is the most commonly recognized genetic cause aberrations were trisomie of chromosome 21 (21/63; 33.3 %) and tri- of mental retardation. The risk of trisomy 21 is mostly related to ad- somie of chromosome 18 (20/63; 31.7 %). vanced maternal age. Our study aimed to determine the correlation Prenatal diagnosis 1 between prenatally diagnosed trisomy 21 incidences with the indica- (24,5%) cases, according first trimester test - for 26, second - 63, two tions throughout 7 years. this - 12 women. The amniocentesis was offered in case when risk The indications of the women who underwent cytogenetic prenatal was higher 1:100 for women younger 40 years old and 1: 50 older 40 analysis including amniocentesis (9737), chorionic villus sampling (95) years old. This procedure was done for 15 women and 3 trisomies of and fetal blood sampling (229) were evaluated. The mean maternal chromosome 21(3,3% of all women with increased risk) were found age was 34.70±6.02 years and the mean gestation week was 17±3.85. using FISH method in combination with full cariotype of fetus. In other Advanced maternal age was the most common indication (48.6%) in 74 cases of increased risk the further ultrasound examination was of- all prenatally diagnosed DS cases which is followed by abnormal ul- fered. trasound findings (18.6%) and increased maternal serum screening CONCLUSION: The greet importance is to evaluate the health sta- in triple test results (18.6%). Trisomy 21 was detected in a total of 70 tus of newborns after birth and all outcomes of pregnancy in cases of cases. Chromosome analysis revealed 33 cases with 47,XY,+21; 32 increased risk according biochemical examination. These dates will cases with 47,XX,+21; 2 cases with 47,XX,+21,inv(9)(p11;q13), one show in full text of this work. with mosaic DS 47,XY,+21/48,XY,+3,+21, one with 46,XY,t(13;15)(q12 ;p11),+21 and one 46,XX,t(14;21).The distribution of the number of DS P0451. Prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 mosaicism with true cases according to the advancing years were: 3/515 (0.003%) in 2000, chimerism 5/717 (0,697%) in 2001, 7/836 (0.837%) in 2002, 8/1285 (0.622%) in C. Gug, G. Budau; 2003, 21/1474 (1.424%) in 2004, 13/1316 (0.987%) in 2005, 13/1315 University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. (0.988%) in 2006. The 32 year old female (gesta 1, para 0) had amniocentesis at 21 The mothers less than 35 years old who had a fetus with DS covered weeks gestation due to: increased nuchal translucency at ultrasound 47.8% of the cases, nevertheless, when the age lowered to 30 years, scan (6 mm at 13 weeks of pregnancy), abnormal alpha-feto-protein the ratio became 80.6%. The risk of having a child with DS increased in maternal serum (0,44 MoM) and chromosomal abnormality in fam- in a gradual, linear fashion until 30 years old and showed a significant ily history (an uncle with Down Syndrome). Chromosome analysis of increase thereafter. amniotic fluid cultures showed a mosaic karyotype: 47,XX+21/46,XY. The couple was counseled for prenatal diagnosis of the mosaicism: we P0449. Down’s syndrome screening in Saint-Petersburg. Ten explained the possibility that the anomalous cell line could involve fetal years experience (1997-2006). tissues. To exclude the possibility of contamination with maternal cells T. K. Kascheeva1, Y. A. Nikolaeva1, N. V. Vokhmyanina2, T. V. Kuznetzova1, O. (having suspected that a mosaicism with a very low line with no phe- P. Romanenko2, V. S. Baranov1; notypical modifications existed), we performed maternal karyotype, 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian which turned out to be normal. After such investigations, the couple Federation, 2City Medical Genetic Center, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa- elected to terminate the pregnancy. Cord blood cultures showed two tion. cell-lines: a normal cell-line of 46,XY and a 47,XX+21 cell line. We Trisomy 21 or Down’s syndrome is one of the most common genetic propose that this case represents an example of true chimerism. The abnormalities with its risk progressively increase with maternal age. most plausible mechanism underlyind this phenomenon is that two In many countries biochemical screening programs have been imple- embryos (1 normal, male, and one trisomic, female) have performed a mented, and the risk of Down’s syndrome is calculated for each preg- fusion in early pregnancy. nancy. Total biochemical screening for Down’s syndrome in Saint-Pe- tersburg has been carried out in the second trimester of pregnancy P0452. Introducing first trimester screening for chromosomal since 1997. Assessment of risk relies maternal age and serum mark- abnormalities in Estonia ers (AFP and HCG) concentrations. Also all pregnant women were K. Muru1,2, T. Reimand1, M. Sitska1; subjected to ultrasound examinations on the 10-14 & 20-22 weeks of 1Medical Genetics Center, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of gestation and also for cytogenetic screening for chromosomal abnor- General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. malities. Basic results of screening programs for Down’s syndrome Prenatal diagnosis of genetic disorders in Estonia has been offered since 1997 up to 2006 and some urgent problems in this area are out- since 1990. Second trimester maternal serum screening was started in lined. Since 1997 36,9% DS fetuses (198/536) could be attributed to 1998. In 2001 first trimester ultrasound screening (NT) was introduced the women of 35 ages and more. Most of these cases - 61 % (102/166) in some centers. Since February 2005 the combined first trimester were detected prenatally. Efficiency of DS detection in this group in- screening (serum screening+NT) is offered in Tartu University Clinics. creased from 28.9% in 1997-98 up to 68% in 2004-06. About 18,7% of Our study included 1275 women at the first trimester of pregnancy. elder women rejected invasive PD for different reasons. Detection rate In 10+1 - 13+6 week of pregnancy PAPP-A and free ß-HCG were mea- in 2-d trimester was 74,6% (cut off 1/360, FPR 6,8%). Since 2004 com- sured. Eighty-five percent of women underwent the combined 1st tri- bined biochemical & US screening in the first trimester was initiated. mester screening (NT + PAPP-A and free ß-HCG). For individual risk Detection rate was 93.8% (30/32) (cut off 1/250, FPR 12.8%, average calculation we used Prisca 4.0 software (distributed by Siemens Medi- age 32.4+/-4.7). Pilot study of UE3 and inhibin A concentrations were cal Solutions Diagnostics). All women had also 2nd trimester routine performed for establishing of medians. Introducing of quadrotest will ultrasound screening in 19-20 week of pregnancy. be useful for reducing of false positive results for the patients tested in First 500 women underwent also routine 2nd trimester serum screen- the 2-d trimester. ing. From the beginning of 2006 stepwise sequential screening was developed for 1st and 2nd trimester screening. Screening positive (risk P0450. Further results evaluation for the women with increased for trisomy 21 of ≥1: 270 at term) were 10,2% of tests based only risk for congenital anomalies of fetus after biochemical prenatal on biochemical markers and 4,6% of combined screening tests. Eight diagnostic (PRISCA) women fulfilled criteria (risk for DS >1:50 and NT >2,5 mm or NT >3,0 R. Sereikiene, D. Serapinas, V. Asmoniene; mm) for early invasive diagnostics test (CVS). Chromosomal analysis Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania. (via CVS or AC) revealed 4 Down syndrome, 1 Edwards syndrome and PURPOSE: to evaluate real outcomes of pregnancy of women with 1 triploidy (69,XXX). During study period were found 2 “false negative” increased risk of fetal chromosomal abnormalities after I or II trimester Down syndrome cases. The essential criteria for using 1st trimester biochemical examination more than age risk. screening wider in Estonia is the feasibility to measure NT during 12- METHODS AND RESULTS: Analyzing of medical documentation, con- 13. week of pregnancy, which is now possible only in few centers. tacts with women after birthing. The 371 women were examined by the PRISCA program during 2005.10.01-2006.10.01 year period. The risk P0453. Assessment of the Fragile X PCR assay in routine factors were older age, not favorable anamnesis of pregnancy (con- diagnostic practice genital anomalies, miscarriages, sterilities and others), not favorable Z. Musova, S. Bendova, K. Pavlikova, P. Hedvicakova, A. Krepelova; anamnesis of family or relatives. First trimester “double” test (PAPP-A Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - Faculty Hos- + β-hCG) was done for 103 women, second trimester “triple” test was pital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. done for 268 and all two tests - for 24 women. Here we present our initial assessment of the Fragile X PCR kit (Ab- The increase risk for Downy and Edwards syndromes was got in 91 bott) in diagnostic practice. Sample genotype was determined using an Prenatal diagnosis 1 in house PCR protocol (BI 2720) and Southern blot analysis, while the association between echogenic foci and chromosomal abnormalities, assay was utilised in subsequent prenatal- and postnatal diagnoses. In particularly trisomy 21, has been reported in the literature. Our study 14 male-, 7 premutations and 7 full mutations and 18 female samples, aims to compare the association between echogenic foci and chro- 10 premutations and 8 full mutations, were detected. All expansions mosomal abnormalities. Retrospective evaluation of clinical files of 27 were independently confirmed and detection of PCR products within cases whose referral reason was ICEF in their routine ultrasonograph- the premutation range was robust. However, 6 out of 15 full mutation ic screenings during the last four years was evaluated. The mean ma- samples were not visible on the agarose gel and two of them were ternal age and the gestational age were 27.87±4.22 and 18.17±3.07, even not conclusive on ABI 3100. In order to assess reliability of the respectively. ICEF was the only ultrasonographic finding in 26 cases, TR/X ratio we have analyzed the homozygous or heterozygous status while it was associated with other anomalies in one case. Chromo- in a set of 23 females with known genotypes. Discrepancy was found somal abnormality was found in only one case and had a karyotype in 6 out of 23 cases (26 %), which is in general agreement with previ- of 46,XX,del(13)(q22),inv(9)(p11;q13). Fetal anomaly screening by ul- ous reports. Subsequently, these results were taken into account in 3 trasonographic examination revealed nuchal translucency, nasal bone different prenatal diagnostic cases. In two instances the results were hypoplasia, hyperecogenic bowel, absence of the middle phalanx of 5th negative, while in one case the expansion was exactly at the premuta- digit. Among the other karyotypes, 14 were 46,XX and 12 were 46,XY. tion / full mutation threshold (199 cgg+/-3cgg). There is a necessity There was no association between isolated ICEF and chromosomal to examine its methylation status in order to distinguish affected from abnormalities. the healthy carrier. In summary, this assay is promising product which allows rapid, albeit incomplete Fra X diagnostics. However, in house P0456. Characterization of the mitochondrial respiratory chain diagnostic validation is necessary for its optimalisation and manufac- during human foetal development turer instructions should be strictly adhered to in order to assure con- L. Minai1, D. Chretien1, A. Munnich1, F. Encha-Razavi2, J. Martinovic-Bourriel2, sistent results. Supported by VZFNM 00064203. H. Etchevers1, C. Esculpavit2, T. Attie-Bitach1, A. Rötig1; 1INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, France, 2Service P0454. Rapid diagnosis of hydatidiform moles by QF-PCR d’embryologie/Foetal pathologie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, D. Diego-Alvarez1, R. C. Narvaiza1, A. Avila-Fernandez1, C. Ramos1, R. France. Cardero-Merlo1, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1, J. Diaz-Recasens2, J. Aneiros3, I. Lorda- Mitochondrial disorders can have an early antenatal expression or un- Sanchez1; dergo a symptom-free period. The aim of the present study is tracing 1Genetics Service Fundación Jiménez Díaz-Capio-CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, the time point during pregnancy at which the foetal respiratory chain 2Obstetrics and Gynaecology Service Fundación Jiménez Díaz-Capio, Madrid, (RC) is being assembled and functions fully. The study was carried out Spain, 3Anatomopathologic Service Fundación Jiménez Díaz-Capio, Madrid, on human foetuses aged from 9 to17 weeks of gestation, that were Spain. aborted because of genetic diseases that do not affect mitochondrial One possible cause of first trimester miscarriage is hydatidiform molar function. For each foetus, various tissues (brain, heart, liver, kidney pregnancy, which is associated with a significantly increased risk of and muscle) were examined. The research has focused on 3 main subsequent development of persistent gestational trophoblastic dis- angles of the foetal respiratory chain. ease (GTD). Differentiating between partial (triploid, usually paternally Firstly, the assembly state of the foetal RC complexes was observed derived) and complete (diploid, whether mono or dispermic, androge- using Blue Native gels. Then, the protein profile of the RC complexes netic in origin) mole is important because of their different prognosis was examined using a cocktail of antibodies that allows tracing one and appropriate treatment therefore. However, the widespread use of subunit of each complex on SDS-PAGE. Finally, the enzymatic activity ultrasound in the clinical managment of pregnancies has resulted in of the different RC complexes was measured. earlier detection and evacuation of moles, which makes the histopath- The results show that as from 9 weeks of gestation all five complexes ologic clinical diagnosis that is based on subtle morphologic criteria of the foetal RC are fully assembled (as compared with post-natal com- more difficult to achieve. Nevertheless, other approaches seem to be plexes) in all five tissues examined. Their protein composition for the reliable diagnostic methods. Hence, karyotyping or FISH may result subunits that were tested is similar; the ratio between them is constant useful in order to determine ploidy in hydatidiform moles as previously and resembles that of the post-natal one. Finally, the enzymatic activ- described. Moreover, genetic origin and classification of moles can be ity of these complexes is 2.5 times lower than that found for post-natal assesed by PCR-based methods. samples; however, the relative activity of each complex has the same Here, we present the molecular genetic diagnosis of complete and pattern as observed in post-natal tissues. partial hydatidiform moles studied by multiplex QF-PCR with different Altogether, these results suggest that the respiratory chain is fully func- specific chromosome polymorphic STR markers. From late 2005 on, tional at early stages of human foetal development. all the first trimester curettage samples were provided by the gynae- cological service of the hospital (whether suspicion of mole existed P0457. Rapid detection of chromosomal aneuploidies by MLPA or not) in order to asess its chromosomal constitution and then were in prenatal diagnosis derived for anatomopathological studies. Correlation between genetic B. L. Carvalho1, R. P. Leite1, E. Ribeiro1, F. Carvalho2; and histopathologic results was found in all of the cases except for one 1Dept. Genetics, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Real-Peso da Régua, E.P.E, Vila complete mole, whose anatomopathologic diagnosis failed. Real, Portugal, 2Dept. Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto., Porto, Then, we propose the genetic molecular study as a rapid (24-48h), Portugal. low-cost, less time-consuming, sensitive and reliable complementary Chromosomes aneuploidies of 13, 18, 21, X and Y account for the ma- diagnostic method of hydatidiform moles. jority of abnormal fetal karyotypes in prenatal diagnosis. Conventional cytogenetic requires in vitro cell culture to obtain a karyotype with re- P0455. Intracardiac echogenic focus and cytogenetic sults available only after 10 to 15 days. Multiplex Ligation-dependent abnormalities Probe Amplification (MLPA) is a novel method for detection of aneu- H. Akin1, C. Biray Avci2, B. Durmaz3, C. Gunduz2, O. Cogulu3, D. Ercal4, F. ploidies of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y by relative quantification Ozkinay3, C. Ozkinay1; of about 40 different DNA sequences in a single PCR reaction. On the 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, basis of a retrospective clinical study, 204 uncultured amniotic fluid Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, samples from women between 17 and 45 year’s old and gestacional Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, age between 12 to 31 weeks were analysed. The most frequent indica- Izmir, Turkey, 4Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pedi- tions for fetal sampling were advanced maternal age, followed by posi- atrics, Izmir, Turkey. tive biochemical screening for Down’s syndrome and ultrasound ab- Intracardiac echogenic focus (ICEF) is defined as a discrete structure normalities. The MLPA probe mix contain 8 probes for chromosomes within the cavity of the heart that probably represents microcalcifica- 13, 18, 21 and X chromosomes and 4 probes for Y chromosome. Prod- tions of the papillary muscles. ICEFs are usually observed during the ucts were analysed by capillary electrophoresis and quantitative data routine fetal ultrasound examinations. It is commonly seen as a single were extracted from ABI Prism GeneScan Analysis Software. focus in the left ventricule and the incidence of ICEF is given as 3-8 No aneuploidies for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y were detect- %. In most of the cases it is found as a normal variant however the ed in 197/204 cases. Three cases showed trisomy 18 and 4 cases Prenatal diagnosis 1 showed trisomy 21. All the results were confirmed by conventional cy- ferent between DS mothers and control and NTD mothers. Statistical togenetic. No aneuploidies for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y were differences were registered also between DS mothers and NTD moth- missed by MLPA. The efficiency of the method was not influenced by ers, regarding AA genotype. The measured mean total homocysteine the gestational age. level in the group of 49 pregnant control females was 3,14 umol/L, in MLPA is valid, simple, sensitive and cheap method of prenatal diagno- comparison with the group of 11 women with NTD pregnancy (mean sis of common aneuploidies within 24 hours, until the complete analy- 10,2 umol/L). The data presented in this study failed to support the sis of conventional karyotype. relation between MTHFR 677C>T and 1298A>C polymorphisms and risk of having a child with NTD and DS. Raised plasma homocysteine P0458. A monosomy 8 cell line detected by FISH in a fetus with levels could be explained by folic acid deficiency, mutations in MTHFR multiple abnormalities and mosaic trisomy 8 in chorionic villi genes or both. D. Turchetti1, E. Pompilii1, E. Magrini2, A. Pession2, M. C. Pittalis3, D. Santini4, P. Bonasoni4, M. Segata3, G. Pilu3, G. Romeo1, M. Seri1; P0460. Identification and characterization of DNA methylation 1Unit of Medical Genetics, University of Bologna-Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, sensitive markers for non invasive diagnosis of X linked Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Oncology-Section of Pathology, University of aneuploidies. Bologna-Ospedale Bellaria, Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Obstetrics and F. Della Ragione, L. Speranza, M. D’Esposito; Gynecology, University of Bologna-Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Naples, Italy. Italy, 4Unit of Pathology, University of Bologna-Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, We are interested to the development of NIPD methodogies of X Bologna, Italy. linked aneuploidies based on DNA methylation. We identified three Trisomy 8 mosaicism is associated with a variable phenotype, with new markers by “in silico” strategies. Among these markers, two are neurodevelopmental delay, dysmorphic facial features, skeletal, renal genes escaping X inactivation, and predicted to be expressed only in and cardiovascular abnormalities being common features. Neverthe- placenta; a third gene is X inactivated and expressed only in placenta less, individuals with minor abnormalities and normal intelligence have as well. We next analyzed their expression by RT-PCR in placenta and been described. blood: on this basis, the first, escaping gene was eliminated, given its Increased nuchal translucency thickness was detected at 13 weeks expression in both tissues. The remaining analysis has been focused in the male fetus of a 27-year-old woman. At CVS, direct preparation on the remaining two genes. showed a normal karyotype (46,XY), while in cultured cells mosaic tri- We confirmed their inactivation status, by somatic hybrids analysis: somy 8 (47,XY,+8[11]/46,XY[53]) was found. At 15+6 weeks, ultrasound as predicted one gene is escaping, the other is subject to X inactiva- scan revealed bilateral cleft lip and palate with flat face and absence tion. By bisulfite analsysis we demonstrated that the escaping gene is of the nose; no other abnormalities were evidenced. Pregnancy was differentially methylated between blood and placenta, whereas the X terminated at 16+6 weeks. inactivated gene, being not regulated by differential DNA methylation Mosaic trisomy 8 was confirmed by standard karyotyping in placenta has been rejected. (47,XY,+8[13]/46,XY[87]) and amnion (47,XY,+8[16]/46,XY[68]), but Additional efforts will be necessary to complete the characterization of not in umbilical cord (46,XY[100]). Pathological examination of the fe- the marker we identified, and we will continue the search for additional tus confirmed cleft lip and palate with maxillary hypoplasia and showed markers. We plan to develop an MSP assay to check the differential gastrointestinal abnormalities, dysplastic kidneys and focal portal fi- methylation of these regulatory regions in blood and in placenta: later brosis in the liver. To confirm the presence of the trisomic cell line in on, a Real Time PCR assay to determine the number of X and Y chro- fetal tissues, FISH was performed in liver and kidney samples using mosomes of a certain sample. Our final goal is to adopt this strategy on a chromosome-8 specific probe. In liver, two fluorescent signals were plasma of donors for non invasive diagnosis of X linked aneuploidies. detected in 64% of nuclei, three signals in 13%, one signal in 23%; in This research is sponsored by CEE: SAFE: Special Non-Invasive Ad- kidney, 57% of nuclei showed two signals, 43% one signal. In control vances in Foetal and Neonatal Evaluation Network, contract LSHB- tissues, the presence of one signal was found in 3-10% of nuclei, sug- CT-2004-503243. gesting that our finding reflected true mosaic monosomy 8. In the case here described, multiple fetal anomalies were associated P0461. Foetal sex assessment in maternal plasma in the first with a complex chromosomal mosaicism (trisomy/monosomy 8) with trimester of gestation: large scale validation of the technique for only trisomy 8 mosaicism detected at CVS. clinical purposes. A. Bustamante-Aragones1, M. Rodriguez de Alba1, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1, J. P0459. Maternal MTHFR genotype, blood homocysteine levels Plaza2, R. Cardero-Merlo1, F. Infantes1, C. Gonzalez-Gonzalez1, M. L. Perez2, and incidence of NTDs and Down syndrome C. Ayuso1, C. Ramos1; S. Andonova1,2, V. Dimitrova3, R. Vazharova4, R. Tincheva5, A. Tzoncheva6, I. 1Department of Genetics. Fundacion Jimenez Diaz-Capio-CIBER-ER(ISCIII), Kremensky1,2; Madrid, Spain, 2Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology. Fundacion Jimenez 1Molecular Medicine Center, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2National Diaz-Capio, Madrid, Spain. Genetics Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, The knowledge of the foetal gender is an indispensable data for those Bulgaria, 3High-Risk Pregnancy Department, University Hospital of Obstetrics couples at risk of an X-linked disorder. The possibility to determine the and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Sofia foetal sex from a maternal plasma sample collected in the early first tri- Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Section of Clinical Genetics, Department mester of gestation would avoid invasive prenatal procedures in some of Pediatrics, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Department of Clinical cases. For this reason, we have analyzed a large number of maternal Laboratory and Clinical Immunology, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. plasma samples collected in the first trimester of gestation in order to Neural Tube defects (NTDs) and Down syndrome (DS) are common know the earliest accurate gestational age to perform the study. The reason for malformations among newborns. Despite of the high fre- next step will be the application of this technique for clinical purposes. quencies, the etiology is still unclear. Some anomalies in the homocys- Up to date, 185 voluntary pregnant women from the 5th to 12th week of teine metabolism and elevated blood homocysteine levels in mothers gestation have participated in this study, having collected a total of 278 in combination with folate deficiency could be associated with NTD samples. Three replicas of each sample were analyzed by RealTime- and DS appearance. The C677T and A1298C polymorphisms in Meth- PCR and the foetal gender assessment was established based on the ylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene were described as an presence/absence of the SRY gene. Three ways to validate results are NTD risk factor and could cause elevated homocysteine concentra- being used: 1) By the analysis of a second blood sample within the first tions. The frequency of C677T and A1298C substitutions were detect- trimester. 2) By comparing with the prenatal tests results (CVS, am- ed after restriction of the PCR products with HinfI and MboII, respec- niocentesis or 20th week ecography). 3)By comparing both a second tively. We have investigated 54 DNA samples from NTD mothers, 35 - sample + prenatal tests. from DS mothers and 60 - from control mothers. Plasma homocysteine At the present moment, results from 138 out of 185 pregnant women levels were measured by chemiluminescence immuno assay. There have been confirmed obtaining a 100% of accuracy and specificity in was no statistical difference in allele frequencies according C677T. samples collected from the 6th to the 12th week of gestation. Although The observed frequencies of 1298C allele were 37.0%, 26.9% and the study has not finished yet, these results indicate the possible imme- 28.8% respectively. The frequency of AC genotype was statistically dif- diate application of the technique for clinical diagnosis in our hospital.Prenatal diagnosis 1 P0462. Increased Nuchal Translucency as a Prenatal Marker in Charles University - Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 33rd De- Wolf-Hirshhorn Syndrome. partment of Internal Medicine, Charles University - Faculty Hospital Kral. Vino- A. Singer1, S. Josefsberg2, C. Vinkler3; hrady, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 1Genetic Institute, Ashkelon, Israel, 2Institute of Clinical Genetics, Kaplan Medi- Charles University - Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. cal center Rehovot, Israel, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Wolfson Medical Here we report verification of screening efficacy, complemented by Center Holon, Israel. aneuploidy risk evaluation, based on the degree of PAPP-A/proMBP Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome is characterized by multiple congenital and β-hCG deviations, including assessment of PAPP-A/proMBP anomalies. complex as a biomarker of acute coronary disease (ACD). Analytes The syndrome is caused by partial aneupleoidy of the short arm of were examined in 2702 sera by Kryptor system/assays (Brahms), with chromosome 4. trisomy 21/18 ascertainment by Lifecycle/Elipse software (Perkin-El- Patients are characterized by microcephaly, hypotonia, mental retar- mer). Aneuploidy risk was evaluated according to analyte MoMs and dation, cardiac anomalies, club feet and characteristic dysmorphic fa- NT deviations in 4 categories: I.: 0.6-1.9, II.: 0.5-0.59 and 1.91-2.0, cial features with cleft lip and palate, micrognathia, hypertelorism and III.: 1 analyte <0.5 or >2.0, IV.: both analytes <0.5 or >2.0. PAPP-A/ midline defects. proMBP Kryptor kit was used for sera examination in 51 controls, 110 Routine ultrasound imaging during second and third trimester preg- stable coronary disease and 258 unstable angina pectoris (UAP) and nancy detects IUGR as well as most of the anomalies associated with STEMI and NSTEMI myocardial infarction cases. No autosomal or het- Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome. However, increased nuchal translucency erochromosomal aneuploidies were found in cat. I. Frequency of auto- (NT) has not been frequently described previously in this syndrome. somal aneuploidies gradually increased from II. to IV. with the highest We present two young women who were referred to the genetic unit prevalence in cat. IV. Heterochromosomal aneuploidies were higher in between 12 and 13 weeks gestation due to increased NT. Chromo- cat. II. versus III./IV. These were detectable by analyte deviations only, somal analysis in both cases, whereas autosomal aneuploidies by increased NT, analyte deviation revealed deletion of the short arm of chromosome 4. In the first case and software risk determination. Thus far, no case of fetal aneuploidy hydrops developed and the women decided to terminate the pregnan- was missed by this strategy. Data from screening questionnaires en- cy. In the second case early ultrasound screening at 15 weeks gesta- abled indication of counselling in 25% woman in cat. I. for improve- tion, demonstrated multiple anomalies ment prenatal care because of other genetic, obstetric or exogenic and later there was fetal demise. risk factors. PAPP-A/proMBP examination proved, that serum levels Increased nuchal translucency as a presenting symptom, has been were significantly increased only in UAP and myocardial infarctions previously described in relation with common chromosomal aneu- (p<0.004 and p<0.0005, respectively). In ACD patients within <7 hours ploidies. Only rarely is it associated with other types of chromosome after the onset of chest pain increased PAPP-A/proMBP levels were an abnormalities. Our cases provide further evidence of a possible rela- earlier marker than cTnI positivity. Supported by VZFNM00064203. tionship between increased nuchal translucency and a chromosomal deletion syndrome. P0465. Experiences from FISH and PCR based preimplantation genetic diagnoses performed for 29 families P0463. Two prenatal cases of Pallister-Killian syndrome N. Sirkkanen1, K. Piippo1, T. Salonen1, C. Hyden-Granskog2, H. von Koskull1, V. Krutilkova1, E. Hlavova1, M. Trkova1, M. Louckova1, J. Sehnalova1, N. Jen- T. Alitalo1,3; cikova1, Z. Zemanova2, K. Michalova2; 1Helsinki University Central Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Praque 7, Czech Republic, 2Center of Oncocyto- Finland, 2Helsinki University Central Hospital, Department of Obstetrics and genetics UKBLD, General Faculty Hospital, Praque 2, Czech Republic. Gynecology, IVF laboratory, Helsinki, Finland, 3Helsinki University Central Hos- Pallister-Killian syndrome (PKS) is a rare sporadic syndrome. PKS is pital, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki, Finland. caused by a tissue-specific mosaicism distribution of supernumery iso- We have employed both fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) and chromosome 12p. PCR / fragment analysis techniques, to screen blastomeres for chro- Clinical findings in PKS include congenital defects (diafragmatic her- mosomal aneuploidies or genetic mutations before transfer of embry- nia, micromelia, hydramnios), mental retardation, seisures, streaks os. Presently, we have performed 29 FISH- PGDs for 15 translocation hypo or hyperpigmantation, facial dysmorphism. families and three families with an X-linked disorder. In four cases, a We report two prenatal cases which illustrate the great variability of second FISH round was done to screen for the most common triso- the tissue-specific mosaicism distribution. Both mothers were over 35 mies. A total of 240 blastomeres from 215 embryos were analysed. years old. Normal results were obtained for 71 embryos (33%). The success rate Case 1: Sonographic investigation showed nuchal translucency (NT) of the analysis was 71% (50/70) for reciprocal translocations, 90% 2,6mm, ventricular dilatation, flat faces, micromelia. The section de- (94/105) for Robertsonian translocations, and 88% (35/40) for sexing. scribed diafragmatic hernia, low-set ears, hydrocephalus too. Tetra- Four pregnancies have been carried to term and five healthy babies somy 12p was found in 67% amniotic fluid cells and in 6% fetal blood have been born. One pregnancy is still pending. cells. We have performed PCR-based PGD analysis for seven Dystrophia Case 2: The socond trimestral screening test was positive, sonograph- myotonica (DM)) and three Fragile X syndrome (FRAXA) families. The ic examination showed diafragmatic hernia. Tetrasomy 12p was found CTG repeat region of the DMPK gene was successfully amplified in in 13% amniotic fluid cells, in 48% fetal blood cells and in 45% skin 70% (73/104) of the blastomeres. A total of 14 PGDs have been per- fibroblasts. formed and two babies with normal DMPK alleles have been born. The cytogenetic investigation performed the diagnosis of PKS in both The CGG repeat region of the FRAXA locus has successfully been our cases by amniocentesis. M-FISH and mBAND analysis confirmed amplified in 17 out of 33 (52%) blastomeres. The method still relies on identification of isochromosome 12p, resp. i(12)(p10). identifying the normal maternal allele in the blastomere. We have per- We discuss the difficulties of prenatal diagnosis due the variability of formed FRAXA PGD five times and one normal child has been born. the tissue-specific distribution mosaicism and due the variability of the The ongoing studies include the application of whole genome ampli- fetal phenotype. fication, followed by routine mutation screening, for PGD. So far, we The false negative results of PKS were reported on amniocentesis, on have used this method for one family with CNF. CVS but most often on fetal blood sample. P0466. Preimplantation Genetic Haplotyping (PGH) for P0464. Verification of an improved strategy for combined first monogenic disease. trimester screening and of commercial PAPP-A/proMBP complex C. Ogilvie, J. Trussler, C. Black, A. Lashwood, P. Braude, P. Renwick; examination for early detection of acute coronary disease Guy’s & St Thomas’ Centre for PGD, London, United Kingdom. M. Macek Sr.1, P. Hajek2, P. Ostadal3, A. Lashkevich1, D. Chudoba1, H. Klucko- Amplification by Multiple Displacement Amplification (MDA) of DNA va1, M. Simandlova1, R. Vlk4, I. Spalova4, M. Turnovec1, J. Diblík1, M. Havlov- from a single cell provides sufficient material for genotyping at mul- icova1, M. Macek Jr.1; tiple loci. This has led to the development of Preimplantation Genetic 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - Faculty Haplotyping (PGH), a generic approach to embryo testing that can be Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Internal Medicine, applied to any mapped inherited disease, regardless of the mutation; Prenatal diagnosis 1 misdiagnosis is reduced to the risk of a double recombination event. ferred in 24 procedures. Out of the 44 transferred embryos, two (4.5%) Fourteen couples undertook 16 PGH cycles (10 cycles-cystic fibrosis had one, 33 (75%) had two, seven (16%) had three and one (2%) had (CF), 5-Duchenne and 1-Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD)), four cells biopsied. From prenatal or postnatal analysis six out of 13 of with a total of 79 embryos reaching biopsy, from which results were the embryos that implanted could be identified. In four embryos 2 cells obtained in 71 embryos (89.9%). For CF, 5 couples were F508del het- had been removed and in the remaining embryos it was three. This erozygotes, 1 couple were heterozygous for F508del and an unknown indicates that biopsing more than one cell improves diagnosis and can mutation (a previous child had CF), and two couples comprised an lead to implantation. affected partner (F508del/R345H and homozygous F508del) and a F508del carrier, thus having a prior risk of 50% of an affected child. P0469. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis of myotonic Results for diagnosed embryos were: 4 normal, 13 carrier, 6 normal/ dystrophy type 1 carrier, 12 affected, 3 affected/carrier and 4 ?aneuploid. Amplification G. Kakourou1, S. Dhanjal1, T. Mamas1, S. Gotts2, P. Serhal2, D. M. Ranieri2, J. of markers on one side of the gene only meant that for 6 embryos there D. A. Delhanty1, J. C. Harper1, S. B. SenGupta1; was a residual risk (1-4%) of recombination between the gene and 1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University College Lon- the marker amplified. For DMD/BMD, 7 embryos were normal female, don Hospital, London, United Kingdom. 2 normal/carrier female, 4 carrier female, 5 normal male, 3 affected Introduction: Myotonic dystrophy (DM1) is an autosomal dominant male, 2 ?aneuploid. Overall pregnancy rate was 53.8% per embryo genetic disorder characterised by muscle weakness, myotonia, multi- transfer. systemic lesions and hypogonadism, with an estimated prevalence of Further PGH marker panels for Fragile X syndrome, myotonic dys- 1/8000 worldwide. The disease shows anticipation due to an expan- trophy, Huntington disease, spinal muscular atrophy, Alport syndrome sion of a CTG repeat in the 3’ untranslated region of the DMPK gene. and variants of globin (sickle disease and β-thalassaemia) have been Our centre is the only diagnostic centre routinely offering PGD for DM1 developed for clinical use. in the UK. Methods: Embryos derived from IVF were biopsied on day 3 of devel- P0467. The single cell as a tool for genetic testing: credibility opment to allow collection and analysis of single blastomeres. Three and precision different optimized fluorescent PCR protocols were applied in 22 clini- L. Peleg, B. Goldman, B. Feldman, K. Dotan; cal PGD cycles. Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Results: Four out of the 22 cases were cancelled before oocyte re- Gan, Israel. trieval due to either poor response to the IVF treatment or hyperstimu- Specimen for prenatal testing: chorionic villus sampling or amniocen- lation. In another couple only two embryos were available for biopsy tesis are obtained during pregnancy thus the diagnosis of an affected and PGD was cancelled. From the remaining 17 cycles, 217 oocytes embryo usually leads to pregnancy termination. Pre-implantation ge- were collected, 198 of them were inseminated of which 126 fertilized netic diagnosis (PGD) is a procedure which involves the biopsy and and 122 embryos were of sufficient quality for biopsy on day 3. A diag- testing of one cell following in-vitro fertilization and the implantation of nosis was achieved for 82 embryos (26 normal, 56 affected). Twenty- unaffected embryos. The process minimizes pregnancy terminations two normal embryos were transferred in 12 cycles. Five pregnancies in case of at risk couples. were established that have led to the birth of six healthy infants. The The minute initial amount of DNA (single genome) generates technical pregnancy rate per embryo transfer was 41.7 %. difficulties such as amplification failure and allele dropout (ADO). Our Conclusion: PGD for DM1 is a practical and effective option for cou- objective was to measure and quantify those aspects of the single cells ples who wish to avoid termination of an affected pregnancy following analysis. The study was carried out in single peripheral lymphocytes prenatal diagnosis. and embryonic culture cells. A set of nested PCR protocols was de- signed for five mutations of three genes: HEXA (Tay Sachs Disease): P0470. Activities of the ESHRE PGD Consortium (1997-2007) 1278+TATC, IVS12+1G>C and 805G>A. IKBKAP (Familial Dysauto- A. R. Thornhill1, K. Sermon2, J. C. Harper3; nomia): IVS20+6T and in the ASPA gene (Canavan Disease): 854A>C. 1The London Bridge Fertility, Gynaecology and Genetics Centre, London, Unit- In a total of 650 cells derived from heterozygotes to those mutations ed Kingdom, 2Research Centre Reproduction and Genetics, Vrije Universiteit there was no significant difference in PCR efficiency between cell Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium, 3UCL Centre for PGD, Department of Ob- types although more failures were obtained in larger PCR products. stetrics and Gynaecology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. ADO rate however was significantly lower in embryonic single cells The European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology Pre- compared to lymphocytes (average of 4.5 fold). We hypothesize that implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) Consortium formed in 1997 to dividing cells demonstrate lower ADO rate due to their less compact collect technical and outcome data, provide referral networks, survey nucleus structure. To test the hypothesis, lymphocytes were induced and promote best practice. Data including fresh and frozen-thawed to divide by PHA and single cells were tested for ADO rate. The results cycle details, pregnancies and babies were collected using a bespoke showed a 1.8 fold lower ADO rate in the dividing compared to the non FileMaker Pro 5 database. Membership has increased steadily with a dividing cells. concomitant increase in number of centres reporting (16-50) and total number of cycles reported (392-2984) between reports 1 and 6. Cycle P0468. Does the number of cells biopsied affect the implantation numbers for constitutional chromosome abnormalities and monogenic of embryos in preimplantation genetic diagnosis? disorders have increased but a disproportionately large increase in S. Dhanjal1, G. Kakourou1, T. Mamas1, A. Doshi2, S. Gotts2, S. Laver2, J. C. preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) cycles reflects the increasing Harper1, S. B. SenGupta1; tendency for IVF laboratories to select the ‘best’ embryo for transfer 1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University College Lon- by eliminating chromosomally abnormal embryos. Methodologies for don Hospital, London, United Kingdom. technical aspects of the PGD process (including embryo biopsy and Preimplantation Genetic diagnosis (PGD) offers couples with a known single cell diagnostics) are becoming more sophisticated, accurate monogenic disorder a means of screening embryos for their inherited and reliable ensuring extremely low misdiagnosis rates. PGD and IVF mutation with a view to transfer an unaffected embryo to establish a with sperm injection (ICSI)are comparable with respect to pregnancy pregnancy. Analysis of single blastomeres biopsied from the embryo is complications and congenital malformation. The main complication, as fundamental to the technique. Contamination and allele dropout, the with routine IVF, remains the risk of multiple pregnancy with concomi- major problems of single cell PCR can be overcome and the efficiency tant higher morbidity and mortality. Aside from data collection, the Con- and accuracy of the diagnosis can be improved by analysis of more sortium has published best practice guidelines for PGD and PGS and than one cell from each embryo . recently, a joint report with the European Society for Human Genetics Between September 2003 and December 2006, 33 cycles of PGD broadly examining the interface between genetics and assisted repro- were carried out for 6 disorders in 25 couples. Two cells were taken ductive technology. To further improve preimplantation testing, stud- from every embryo that had 6 or more cells. If the biopsied cell had ies are ongoing to investigate appropriate external quality assessment lysed before tubing or a nucleus was not seen, additional cells were (multicentric evaluation of captured FISH images from single embry- taken. A total of 496 cells were biopsied from 243 embryos. A diagnosis onic nuclei) and follow-up of children born following PGD. was made in 163 (67%) embryos resulting in 44 embryos being trans-Prenatal diagnosis 1 P0471. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis for a Y-autosome P0473. Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for Genetic translocation t(Y;8)(p11;q11). and Metabolic Disorders in Saudi Arabia P. Gosset1, M. Schillinger1, C. Schluth1, Y. Menezo2, B. De Fréminville3, S. A. I. Al-Aqeel1, S. Coskun2; Viville1; 1Riyadh Military Hospital/ King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, 1Laboratoire de Biologie de la Reproduction, CHU Strasbourg, SIHCUS-CMCO, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Schiltigheim, France, 2Assistance Médicale à la Procréation, Laboratoire Marcel Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Mérieux, Lyon, France, 3Service de Génétique Clinique, Chromosomique et Saudi Arabian culture is highly consanguineous, with cousin marriages Moléculaire, CHU Nord, Saint Etienne, France. accounting for 60-70%. Given the difficulties in management of ge- Reciprocal Y-autosome translocations are rarely observed, because netic disorders, preventive measures for the suffering families by doing implication of the Y chromosome in a translocation produces, most of pre-implantation genetic diagnosis is undertaken. Over 30 cases are the time, a meiosis blockage, which results in azoospermia. successfully prevented by PGD. The first of these disorders is San- However, when some spermatozoa are observed, assisted reproduc- jad-Sakati Syndrome (SSS) OMIM# 24140, which is characterized tive techniques (ART), particularly intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection by hypoparathyroidism, growth and mental retardation with a unique (ICSI), can be proposed. 12bp deletion. The second is Niemann Pick Disease type B (NPD-B) Because of the translocation, some of the spermatozoa may carry an OMIM# 257200,) (acid sphingomylinase (ASM) deficiency) with more abnormal chromosomal complement, involving a risk to obtain em- than 70 mutations reported in (SMPD1) gene, which presents with se- bryos with unbalanced karyotype. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis vere phenotype in Saudi Arabia. Four unique mutations are found in (PGD) can prevent this by selecting balanced embryos before transfer our Saudi families. A family with (W533R) mutation in the (SPMDI) to the mother’s uterus. gene suffering from a severe phenotype underwent PGD. The third We present here a patient, carrying a t(Y;8)(p11;q11) translocation, disorder is Morquio’s disease (MPSIV) OMIM # 253000, with severe who was referred to us for a PGD. classic phenotype with N-acetyl galactosamine-6-sulftase deficiency Because of the lack of data about segregation in Y-autosome transloca- (MPSIV-A). More than 20 different mutations in (GALNS) gene re- tions, analysis of patient’s spermatozoa was performed by Fluorescent ported in (MPSIV-A). A family with three affected siblings with severe in situ Hybridisation (FISH) to estimate the risk of missegregation. classic (MPIV-A) with detected W195C mutation in the (GALNS) gene Simultaneously, to prepare for PGD, the FISH diagnosis method on underwent PGD. In all these families PGD was undertaken using fluo- single cell was improved by using a set of 4 probes: X centromere rescent PCR(F-PCR) and/or nested PCR with sequencing on a single and Y heterochromatin labelled with Tetramethyl-Rhodamine, 8qtel la- cell, or Multiple Displacement Modification (MDA) to amplify the whole belled with dGreen, 8 centromere labelled with Spectrum Aqua. genome from a single cell. A singleton pregnancy ensure after transfer Over 500 spermatozoa scored, 41.6% were found to be balanced. A of one heterozygous and one/or normal embryo and prenatal diagno- PGD cycle was started, but diagnosis was not performed because of sis by CVS confirmed a normal pregnancy. This is the first report of embryos development arrest at day 2. successful PGD in different genetic disorders in Saudi Arabia, and the Prior to any PGD attempt in such difficult cases, study of the chromo- Muslim world. somal segregation establishes the proportion of balanced gametes, allowing to estimate chances of a successful ART. If too low, patients P0474. QF-PCR: reliable and accurate for the rapid detection of must be offered alternative options such as sperm donation. the most common fetal chromosomal abnormalities in the first trimester P0472. A one year experience on PGD at Ege University in Izmir/ G. Christopoulou, A. Hatzaki, S. Christopoulou, A. Hatzipouliou, J. Donoghue, Turkey M. Karkaletsi, V. Velissariou; E. Karaca1, C. Gunduz2, G. Altin3, T. Cankaya1, B. Durmaz1, E. Tavmergen3, E. Mitera Maternity & Surgical Center, Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology lab, Tavmergen Goker3, H. Akin1, O. Cogulu1, F. Ozkinay1; Athens, Greece. 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetic, Izmir, Tur- Quantitative Fluorescent Polymerase Chain Reaction (QF-PCR) is a key, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, well established method for the rapid prenatal diagnosis of the most Turkey, 3Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Family Planning and common chromosomal aneuploidies found in amniotic fluid samples. Infertility Research and Treatment Center, Izmir, Turkey. In recent years it has also been applied to chorionic villi samples (CVS) We would like to present our preliminary report of 1 year experience. in the first trimester. Couples applied to the Family Planning and Infertility Research and Since June 2005 to date 1272 CVS samples were tested with QF-PCR Treatment Center for assisted reproductive technologies (ART) were in our lab for the diagnosis of aneuploidies involving chromosomes 13, referred to Medical Genetics Department for PGD and aneuploidy 18, 21 and X, Y. A total of 38/1272 (3%) fetal aneuploidies were de- screening due to advanced maternal age, recurrent miscarriage, re- tected and confirmed after chromosomal analysis of long-term cultures current ART failure and balanced translocation carriers between the (LTC). Twenty four cases with trisomy 21 (1 mosaic case), 10 cases period of January 2006 and January 2007. with trisomy 18, 1 case with trisomy 13, 1 case with Klinefelter, 1 case One or two blastomeres were aspirated on day 3 and analyzed us- with triploidy and 1 case of a mosaic sex chromosome abnormality ing the fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) technique. Probes for were detected. Maternal contamination was detected in 5/1272 (0,4%) chromosomes 13,16,18,21 and 22 were used for aneuploidy screening samples and therefore no QF-PCR results were obtained. No false- and individual specific probes were chosen for chromosomal translo- positive or false-negative results were reported for the chromosomes cations. Unaffected embryos were transferred on day 4 or 5. tested. LTC analysis revealed an abnormal result for chromosomes There were 20 cycles for aneuploid screening (group 1) and 2 cycles not tested for by QF-PCR in 11/1272 (0,8%) cases. In another 5 (0,4%) for chromosomal translocation (group 2). In group 1, 118 embryos cases there was a discrepancy between QF-PCR and LTC analysis were biopsied successfully with a diagnosis rate of 84% and 39 unaf- due to in situ placenta abnormalities missed by sampling. fected embryos were transferred in 20 cycles, achieving 10 singleton Based on our experience of two years, we consider QF-PCR to be a pregnancies (implantation rate: 50%). In group 2, 8 embryos were bi- reliable, accurate, easy and relatively inexpensive method for rapid opsied with a diagnosis rate of 84% in 2 cycles and 1 balanced embryo prenatal diagnosis in first trimester CVS. transferred achieving pregnancy. Unfortunately we could not find any balanced embryo in the other cycle of our translocation group and can- P0475. Application of genetic methods in Prenatal Diagnosis: celled the transfer. All antenatal amniocentesis confirmed the diagno- Experience in Iran sis. Post-natal physical examination showed no evidence of major ab- F. Mahjoubi1, M. Akbary2; normalities. PGD is an alternative method for having healthy children 1NRCGEB, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Akbary Laboratory of Medical Ge- in selected couples with chromosomal abnormalities. In addition, PGD netics, Taleganee Ave., Tehran, Iran& Clinical Genetic Dept. Tarbiat Modaress may increase the implantation rate in infertile couples and balanced University, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. translocation carreers seeking ART assistance. Prenatal diagnosis has revolutionized prenatal care from the perspec- tive of both the patient and the physician. For the patient, prenatal di- agnosis provides genetic, anatomic, and physiologic information about the fetus or fetuses. The information can help individual to make deci-Prenatal diagnosis 10 sions regarding the pregnancy. For the physician, prenatal diagnosis We describe a fetus in which a minute supernumerary marker chromo- provides vital information that can be utilized for better patient’s man- some (SMC) was detected in addition to a larger pseudodicentric chro- agement. Prenatal knowledge about genetic abnormalities enables mosome. The case was a 12-week fetus with mosaicism for a normal the physician to tailor or manage the timing and mode of delivery for and two abnormal cell lines: one had a dic (12;15)(q11.2;q11.2) chro- optimal maternal and fetal outcomes. mosome, and the other had a minute SMC. Although the heart beat Great efforts have been put forth to devise more efficient genetic pro- could be detected at the beginning of the pregnancy, the heart failed to tocols. Because of its ability to provide results early in pregnancy, first- fully develop and therefore therapeutic abortion was done at 16 weeks trimester screening is becoming increasingly more important. First-tri- of gestation. Deletion of centromeric material was proposed as one mester screening provides the opportunity for early risk assessment mechanism of centromere inactivation in dicentric chromosomes. This and early diagnosis of fetal aneuploidy via chorionic villus sampling SMC may be the result of a deletion event leading to inactivation of one (CVS). Early diagnosis allows for pregnancy termination earlier in ges- centromere of a dicentric chromosome to generate a pseudodicentric tation, if the patient so desires, chromosome. Therefore, this case suggests possible mechanisms for While the advances in first-trimester genetic test are exciting, there will the origin of this SMC always be a role for second-trimester genetic test. Many patients may not present in time for first-trimester test. Likewise, many patients may P0478. Prenatal diagnosis of aneuploidies of chromosomes 13, not have access to providers skilled at CVS. In addition, a portion of 18, 21, X and Y by QF-PCR in the Republic of Macedonia patients may prefer amniocentesis to CVS. D. Plaseska-Karanfilska, S. Talaganova, S. Trivodalieva, G. D. Efremov; In this talk, available genetic techniques for prenatal diagnosis in Iran Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic will be discussed. In addition, from the prenatal diagnosis experiences Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of in Iran, several other concerns noticed by genetecian such as fairness Macedonia. of access to genetic services, indications for prenatal diagnosis, confi- The great majority of chromosomal abnormalities are due to aneuploi- dentiality problems etc will be mentioned. dies of chromosomes 21, 18, 13, X and Y. The quantitative fluorescent (QF) PCR of selected small tandem repeat (STR) markers enables P0476. Needs assessment regarding decision about Down’s rapid and accurate prenatal diagnosis of these aneuploidies. Here, we syndrome prenatal testing: A systematic review of women, their present our results of the use of QF-PCR for prenatal detection of com- relatives and health professionals’ perceptions. mon chromosomal aneuploidies in 930 pregnancies at risk. The prena- F. Légaré1, S. St-Jacques2, S. Grenier2, M. Charland1, J. Forest1, F. Rousseau1; tal diagnosis was performed on genomic DNA isolated from fetal cells 1CHUQ Research Center, CanGeneTest consortium, Québec, PQ, Canada, collected by amniocentesis and chorionic villus samples. All samples 2CHUQ Research Center, Québec, PQ, Canada. were analyzed by three multiplex PCR assays, amplifying a total of Background: Population-based prenatal testing for Down’s syndrome thirteen STR markers on chromosomes 21 (D21S1435, D21S1446, is being considered in the Province of Quebec. In order to elaborate D21S1411 and D21S1414), 18 (D18S535, D18S1367, D18S978 and effective decision support interventions, a systematic review was D18S386), 13 (D13S631, D13S258 and D13S1817) and X (DXS6803 performed to identify the needs of women, their relatives and health and XHPRT). When these markers were uninformative, additional professionals regarding decisions about prenatal testing for Down’s markers were used. Using this approach, we have detected 17 fetuses syndrome. with trisomy 21, 11 with trisomy 18, one with partial trisomy 18, four Methods: PubMed, EMBASE, CINHAL and PsycINFO were searched with trisomy 13, three fetuses with Turner syndrome (45,XO) and one for original studies in English or French. Studies were identified inde- with Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY). A polymorphic duplication was de- pendently by two reviewers and discrepancies were resolved by a third tected in two fetuses with STR marker D13S631; in both fetuses it was one. Studies were included if they reported original data on difficulties inherited from one of the parents. The parental origin of the aneuploidy and/or facilitators in making decisions about Down’s syndrome prena- was determined in 11 cases with trisomy 21, seven with trisomy 18, tal testing, enrolled women, their relatives and/or health professionals three with trisomy 13 and three with Turner syndrome. The origin was and were conducted in real clinical situation. Content analysis is being maternal in all complete trisomies and paternal in the partial trisomy currently performed by two reviewers using a taxonomy adapted from 18 and the Turner syndrome cases. Triple X syndrome (47,XXX) was the Ottawa Decision Support Framework and quality of studies, as- detected in a woman with a fetus with trisomy 18. sessed using Qualsyst validated tools. Results: From 2390 potential titles, 64 publications covering 51 unique P0479. QF-PCR on Amniotic Fluid and Corionic Villi. Diagnostic studies were included. The majority of studies were from UK (27%) troublesome results. followed by Canada and USA (12% each). Most targeted screening for C. Curcio1, V. Tieran1, F. Lalatta2, S. Guerneri1, P. De Leonardis1, M. Travi1, A. Down’s syndrome (41%). Most used qualitative methods exclusively Kustermann3, D. A. Coviello1; (45%). Three studies were grounded in theory. Validated measure- 1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore ment tools were used in ten studies. Overall, the vast majority of stud- Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Servizio di Genetica Me- ies targeted women (90%) followed by health professionals (12%) and dica, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina partners (10%). Elena, Milan, Italy, 3Cenro di Diagnosi Prenatale, Seconda Clinica Ostetrico Conclusions: We observed an important gap in knowledge about the Ginecologica, Università di Milano, IRCCS Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore perceptions of health professionals and relatives. In order to elaborate Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy. effective decision support interventions for prenatal testing for Down’s Autosomal trisomies, which account for about 80% of significant ab- syndrome, future studies will need to address these gaps. normalities, can be detected within 24-48 hours by quantitative flu- orescence (QF)-PCR. In the last four years we have used QF-PCR P0477. A supernumerary marker chromosome with a related to assess relative allele dosage at polymorphic loci of chromosomes pseudodicentric chromosome detected in a fetus during 13, 18, 21 and sex chromosome in more then 3.000 samples (80% prenatal diagnosis amniotic fluid and 20% Chorionic Villus Samples-CVS). Samples of S. Karymee1, F. Mahjoubi2, M. Khalegian1, S. Tootian1, M. Akbari3; women with abnormal ultrasound referrals or from families with known 11Medical Genetic Laboratory of Akbari, Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran, tehran, chromosome rearrangements require full karyotype analysis, but if ab- Islamic Republic of Iran, 21Medical Genetic Laboratory of Akbari, Taleganee St , normalities are identified earlier this will aid the clinical management Tehran, Iran &NIGEB, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 31Medical Genetic Labo- of pregnancy and will help to minimize the period of parental anxiety ratory of Akbari, Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran& 3Clinical genetic Dept. Tarbiat while awaiting for the diagnostic test result. Modaress University, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Mosaicism in CVS is well documented in the literature and it is detect- Dicentric autosomes are considered as unstable constitutional chro- ed in 1-2% of the CVS. Discrepancy between chromosome analysis mosomes in humans. The presence of centromeres on the same chro- of direct short-term cultures (cytotrophoblast cells) versus long-term mosome leads to a high risk of attachment of the same chromatid to cultures (mesenchymal cells) is very well known. the mitotic spindle from opposite poles and to the formation of ana- We describe here cases in which a discrepancy between QF-PCR phase bridge during cell division. Therefore, breakage of the dicentric and standard karyotype was observed in CVS analysis. In two cases can occur. QF-PCR showed the polymorphic markers of two X chromosomes (in Prenatal diagnosis 11 agreement with while direct short-term cultures karyotype), while the P0482. DNA analysis with QF-PCR technique for confirmation of long-term cultures showed a 45,X karyopype. Moreover one case was suspected fetal triploidy partially informative because QF-PCR showed only one informative R. Raynova1, S. Andonova1,2, V. Dimitrova3, V. Georgieva1, I. Kremensky1,2; polymorphic marker for trisomy 18. The karyotype of the long-term cul- 1National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, tures showed a trisomy 18. Our results confirm that QF-PCR technique Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular Medicine Center, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, is a rapid testing able to diagnose chromosome aneuploidy accurately Bulgaria, 3High-Risk Pregnancy Department, University Hospital of Obstetrics in prenatal diagnosis on amniotic fluid but on chorionic villi more con- and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria. troversial results can be obtained. We report three cases of fetal triploidy diagnosed by QF-PCR analy- sis. The patients were referred to our Lab due to abnormal ultrasound P0480. Detection of fetal aneuploidies by quantitative scan of both the placenta and fetus at 14 wg, 22 wg and 20 wg re- fluorescent polymerase reaction spectively. QF-PCR technique was performed on DNA samples, ex- Z. Ban, B. Nagy, L. Lazar, G. Nagy, Z. Papp; tracted with commercial kit from amniocytes (case 3) and from fetal Semmelweis University, I. Dept. of Ob/Gyn., Budapest, Hungary. and placental tissue after termaniation of pregnancy (cases 1 and 2). Introduction: Multiplex quantitative fluorescent polymerase chain reac- Fourteen polymorphic STR markers (4 located on chromosome 21, 4 tion (QF-PCR) analysis of amniotic fluid samples has been shown to - on chromosome 18, 3 - on chromosome 13 and 3 on chromosomes be a useful tool in the detection of fetal aneuploidies, but has its limita- X and Y) were amplified with Cy5-labeled primers. The observed elec- tions as it can not detect some fetal chromosome disorders of clinical trophoretic profiles for all investigated STR markers showed diallelic or importance. triallelic genotype concordant with trisomic pattern. No false negative Objective: To test the reliability of QF-PCR for the prenatal diagnosis results were observed. For case 3 DNA samples from parents were of the common aneuploidies, to obtain data on the allele distribution of available and paternal origin of the additional chromosomal set was 7 different short tandem repeats in Hungarian population and to ana- proved. The triploidy was confirmed by cytogenetic analysis performed lyze the indications in which QF-PCR can be applied safely in prenatal after the termination of the pregnancy only in case 3. Our experience diagnosis. showed that QF-PCR analysis is a reliable technique for rapid prenatal Materials and methods: At 4985 patients (25 twin pregnancies) under- diagnosis of triploidy when particular ultrasound anomalies are present going amniocentesis we compared the results of QF-PCR with those and karyotyping is not available. A high-standard ultrasound examina- of the conventional cytogenetic study. We have analyzed allele distri- tion was essential for the diagnosis of reported cases. bution of the applied STR markers. We compared the occurrence of chromosome disorders which can not be detected by amnio-PCR in P0483. Evaluation of a non invasive prenatal RHD genotyping cases with different indications of amniocentesis. screening strategy Results: 98.3% of amnio-PCR results were informative without false- M. Tsochandaridis1, R. Desbriere2, N. Lesavre3, C. D’Ercole2, J. Gabert1, A. negative and false-positive results. 9 samples (0.16%) were incon- Levy-Mozziconacci1,2; clusive because of borderline peak ratios of diallelic results. 126 1Laboratoire de Biologie Moleculaire, CHU Nord, Marseille, France, 2Service de chromosomal abnormalities of 152 were detectable by amnio-PCR. Gynecologie-Obstetrique, CHU Nord, Marseille, France, 3Centre d’Investigation Amnio-PCR detected all chromosomal disorders in case of maternal Clinique, CHU Nord, Marseille, France. age as indication for amniocentesis. In case of structural abnormalities It has been amply documented that fetal genotyping is feasible, allow- detected by ultrasound, the chromosome disorder was not detectable ing NIPD for the identification of RhD positive fetuses in RhD negative by amnio-PCR in 23 cases. women. This approach now means that only those RhD negative wom- Conclusion: All chromosome disorders of clinical significance were en who are known to carry an RhD positive child will require treatment detected in case of advanced maternal age. The highest number of with anti-D IgG to prevent haemolytic disease of the newborn. We chromosome disorders that are not detectable by QF-PCR was in case described our experience with plasma obtained from 250 RhD nega- of structural abnormalities detected by ultrasound. tive pregnant women between 10 and 28 weeks of gestation. 200 ul of maternal plasma is automated extracted by biorobot EZ1 (Qiagen, P0481. Preparation of CVS for QF-PCR aneuploidy diagnosis and forencic card). The DNA eluate is tested in triplicate in RHD exon 7 and correlation with karyotype analysis of cultured cells 10 real-time quantitative PCR. To reduce false negative due to low ex- K. Mann, A. Hills, C. Donaghue, C. Mackie Ogilvie; tracellular nucleic acids concentration in plasma in some extractions, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. we tested β-globin gene systematically. Plasmidic ranges for differ- Aneuploidy mosaicism has been reported to occur in up to 1% of cho- ent genes were also used. A strategy based on β-globin quantification rionic villus samples (CVS), usually due to differences between the (cut-off at 1000 copies/ml) were established to perform this analysis in cytotrophoblast and mesenchyme cell lineages. Karyotype analysis of routine. All RHD NIPD were compared with RH genotyping cord blood. cultured metaphases from the mesenchyme gives an accurate prena- No false negative were obtained and two false positive cases were due tal diagnosis in the majority of cases. QF-PCR analysis of two sepa- to the presence of RHD variants. In these two cases, using plasmidic rate villus tips taken from different regions of the CVS has proven to range permitted easily to confirm this diagnosis. In conclusion, auto- be an accurate predictor of fetal status regarding chromosomes 13, 18 mation and quality control of extraction step are essential to introduced and 21. Prior to June 2005 more than 3000 CVS were processed in this screening into restricted the antenatal anti-D immunoprophylaxys our centre with no completely discrepant QF-PCR/karyotype results. to women carrying RhD-positive fetuses. However, in the following 6 months three such results were identi- fied, all due to sample mosaicism and QF-PCR analysis of isolated P0484. Prenatal findings in a severe type of achondroplasia cell populations. We therefore now test a small aliquot of dissociated associated with mental retardation and acanthosis nigricans cells prepared from 10-15 mg of CVS for cell culture. A case study (SADDAN). has shown the mesenchyme to contribute between 40-50% of the J. A. Kortmann1, A. van Essen1, K. M. Sollie2, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders3, P. J. DNA in these samples. Since this change in CVS preparation protocol, Herbergs3, S. G. Robben4, M. M. Y. Lammens5, B. Timmer6, J. J. P. Gille7, M. 1738 CVS have been tested by QF-PCR for autosomal trisomy, and 4 Vreeburg3, M. van Steensel8, I. Stolte-Dijkstra1, D. Marcus-Soekarman3,9; cases of mosaicism detected; 60% trisomy 13, 78% trisomy 18, 30% 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center, Groningen, The trisomy 21 and 35% trisomy 21. The first three cases showed non- Netherlands, 2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Medi- mosaic abnormal karyotypes with only the final case showing mosa- cal Center, Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, icism (46,XY,der(21;21)(q10;q10),+21[23]/46,XY[13]). In all cases the Academic Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4Department of Radiology, mesenchyme cell lines were detected by QF-PCR and there were no Academic Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 5Department of Pathology, completely discrepant results. In summary, the QF-PCR analysis of University Medical Center St Radboud, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 6Depart- dissociated cells from whole CVS has resulted in better representation ment of Pathology, University Medical Center, Groningen, The Netherlands, of the CVS and greater concordance with the karyotype result. 7Department of Clinical and Human Genetics, Free University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 8Department of Dermatology, Academic Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 9GROW/University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Prenatal diagnosis 12 Netherlands. ining the correlation between sonography and pathologic findings may The detection of a skeletal dysplasia during pregnancy creates an intri- indicate potential markers for sonographic screening of trisomy 18. cate situation depending on the type of the skeletal dysplasia and the stage of the pregnancy. Establishing a diagnosis as exact as possible P0487. Characteristics of pregnancies with cytogenetic is important for support and management of the existing pregnancy diagnosis of trisomy 21. and may have consequences for future pregnancies. Due to the time K. Keymolen, E. Sleurs, I. Liebaers, C. Staessen; factor, a diagnosis is not always found during the on-going pregnancy. University hospital, Brussels, Belgium. Additional information, such as follow-up after birth, skeletal X-rays, Aim of the study: In this study we characterize the pregnancies with obduction and chromosomal and DNA-investigations is essential in cytogenetic diagnosis of trisomy 21. such a situation. We present one postnatal and two prenatal cases Materials and methods: We retrospectively looked at pregnancies in of a rare skeletal dysplasia, where DNA-investigation confirmed the which trisomy 21 was found in chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or am- subtype of the skeletal dysplasia and generated important informa- niocentesis (AC) between 01.01.2002 and 31.12.2006. Data on mater- tion about prognosis. In one prenatal case, MRI-examination of the nal and paternal age ,reason for referral, fetal sex, fetal and parental pregnancy gave valuable additional information for the differential di- karyotype were recorded. agnosis. Results: In this 5 year period, 73 prenatal cytogenetic diagnoses of trisomy 21 were made in our centre. It concerned 44 chorionic villus P0485. β-Thalassemia Carrier Screening and Prenatal Diagnosis biopsies and 29 amniocenteses. In all but one case, there was free among Iranian Population trisomy. Mosaic trisomy was present in 3 cases. Forty-one trisomic M. Sajedifar1,2, V. Lotfi1,2, P. Fouladi1,2, A. Joudaki1, F. Hashemi1, S. Zeinali1,3; fetuses were male and 32 female. The main reason why cytogenetic 1Medical Genetics Lab of Dr Zeinali, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Young diagnosis was performed, was maternal age (31/73), fetal anomalies Researchers Club of research and science branch of Islamic Azad University, on ultrasound (18/73) and second trimester serum screening (7/73). In Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Human Genetics Unit, Dept of Biotech ,Pas- 13 pregnancies there were 2 different reasons for referral. teur Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. The mean maternal age was 36 years, the mean paternal age 37.1 Thalassemia is one of the most common monogenic disease world- years. wide and also in Iran. More than 200 different mutations have been For 53 parents, a karyotype was performed, being normal for 52 and reported to date, and each ethnic population has it‘s own cluster of showing a translocation for 1. common mutations. This is well illustrated by the experience of the Discussion: Trisomy 21 is the most common chromosomal anomaly National Thalassemia Screening Program in Iran. Molecular analysis encountered in CVS or AC. Despite the small sample of this study, the of β-globin mutations has been performed by PCR-based protocols experience in our centre confirms the common knowledge that it oc- (ARMS, RFLP, DNA Sequencing) mostly for prenatal diagnostic in our curs more frequently in older parents and that in more than half of the center.DNA samples are usually tested for mutations like IVS-II-I, IVS- cases there is an anomaly on ultrasound and/or biochemistry. For the I-5, IVS-I-110,codon 5, codon 17,codon 41/42(-TTCT) and many com- majority of the pregnancies for which follow-up was available, termina- mon mutations and deletions. tion of pregnancy was performed In a population of 1954 prenatal diagnosis (PNDs) performed since mid 2000 and we have found 24% normal, 50.7% β-Thalassemia car- P0488. Prenatal diagnosis of a marker chromosome derived riers and 22.9% affected (β-Thalassemia major). from chromosome 3 in a fetus with growth retardation and Prenatal diagnosis has been an ongoing program in Iran since 1996 microcephaly- a case report by a religious decree. Our center is part of the PND Network in Iran M. I. Srebniak, P. dos Santos, P. Noomen, D. Halley, R. van de Graaf, L. Gov- and the above PNDs have been performed as a part of the program to aerts, R. Galjaard, D. Van Opstal; curtail β-thalassemia. Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Keyword: Thalassemia , Prenatal Diagnosis , ARMS , DNA Sequenc- We present a rare prenatal case of an “incomplete” trisomy 3 rescue ing which resulted in an extra chromosome 3-derived marker chromo- some in the foetus. P0486. Quality control of prenatal sonography in detecting The patient was referred for prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis in chori- trisomy 18. The value of perinatal autopsy onic villi because of advanced maternal age and a growth discrepancy Z. Szigeti, Z. Csapo, J. Joo, B. Pete, Z. Papp, C. Papp; between both foetuses in her twin pregnancy, with foetus II being too First Dept. of Ob/Gyn, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. small for the gestational age. Introduction: Trisomy 18 (Edwards-syndrome) is the second most Whereas foetus I had a normal male karyotype, STC-villi of foetus II common autosomal trisomy. The second-trimester ultrsonographic showed 100% trisomy 3 and in LTC-villi an extra marker chromosome, examination followed by fetal karyotyping is the most relevant way of derived from chromosome 3, was found in all analysed cells. In order diagnosing this aneuploidy. However, sonographic findings have been to exclude confined placental mosaicism follow-up investigations in demonstrated to have significant rates of fals-positive and fals-nega- amniotic fluid cells were performed which showed the marker chromo- tive diagnosis. Detailed pathologic examination of aborted fetuses has some to be present in 100% of the cells. Parental karyotypes were important role in the quality control of ultrasonographic diagnosis. This normal. study was designed to compare the prenatal ultrasound findings and FISH- and DNA-studies that were performed in order to characterize postmortem pathologic findings of fetuses with trisomy 18. the marker chromosome and to elucidate the mechanism of forma- Materials and Methods: 70 fetuses with trisomy 18 were diagnosed tion, respectively, as well as the clinical data of the foetus will be pre- between 1990 and 2004. Sonographic and autopsy findings were com- sented. pared by organ system and their correlation was assigned to 1 of 3 categories. P0489. The incidence of prenatally diagnosed Turner syndrome Results: There were 164 separate major structural abnormalities found and their referral indications on autopsy. Of them, sonography detected 72 (43.9%). Among ma- M. Akgul1, E. Ataman1, B. Durmaz2, A. Alpman2, E. Karaca2, O. Cogulu2, H. jor defects the agreement was more than 75% of all abnormalities Akin1, C. Gunduz3, C. Ozkinay1, F. Ozkinay2; of these systems: central nervous system (80%), abdominal abnor- 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, malities (87.5%) and cystic hygroma (100%). Whereas, the sensitiv- Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, ity of sonography was lower in these organ systems: cardiac system Turkey, 3Ege University, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of (66.6%), facial abnormalities (26.3%), urinary system (27.3%) and ex- Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey. tremities (8.7%). The rate of additional findings at autopsy was 56.1% Turner syndrome occurring in 1/2000-5000 female live births is one of and involved mainly 2 organ systems: face (including ear) and extremi- the most common chromosomal disorder. It is also a common reason ties (including hands and feet). Some ultrasound findings (n=15) were in spontaneous miscarriages with an incidence of 10%. As 99% of em- not confirmed at autopsy in our series. bryos with 45,X karyotype result in spontaneous abortion, only 1% of Conclusions: This study confirms that perinatal autopsy provides ad- Turner syndrome fetuses survive till birth. Increased nuchal translucen- ditional information in many fetuses with trisomy 18. In addition, exam- cy, cystic hygroma, and renal and cardiac defects are typical findings Prenatal diagnosis 1 of Turner Syndrome which can be determined by ultrasonographic ex- of cystic hygroma cases are associated with Turner Syndrome. Among amination. In this study 3595 amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling all prenatally detected cystic higroma cases (15) detected by ultraso- and fetal blood sampling materials obtained during 1999-2006 were nography during 8 years, 8 cases (53.33%) were found to have 45,X evaluated. Turner Syndrome was found in 16 cases (0.45%). The indi- karyotype. The present study indicates the importance of cystic hy- cations for prenatal diagnosis for those cases were cystic higroma in 8 groma in the prenatal diagnosis of Turner Syndrome. cases (50.00%), missed abortion in 5 cases (31.25%) and advanced maternal age in 3 cases (18.75%). It has been reported that 40-60% Cancer genetics 1 Po04. Cancer genetics ter, Montebello and the Faculty of Medicine University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 4Kreatech Biotechnology B.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands. P0490. QMPSF : A novel method for detection of 1p19q deletions Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) has in gliomas become a powerful technique for studying DNA sequence copy num- S. Monnot1, D. Fontaine2, F. Vandenbos3, P. Paquis2, J. Michiels3, J. Lambert1, ber changes in breast tumors. The ultimate goal of these efforts is V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,4; the identification of genomic markers that correlate with prognosis and 1Department of Medical Genetics, Nice, France, 2Department of Neurosurgery, prediction of clinical outcome. For many of these retrospective studies, Nice, France, 3Department of Anatomopathology, Nice, France, 4UMR CNRS formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues are the only samples 6543, Medicine School, Nice, France. available. DNA extracted from FFPE tissue can present challenges as Gliomas are the most common primary cerebral malignancies. De- it is often degraded and damaged. In this study, we extracted DNA letions of 1p and 19q chromosomes have shown to be predictors of from 24 FFPE breast tumor samples (mostly ductal invasive cancers): chemotherapeutic response and better survival in oligodendrogliomas. ten 1 year, eight 5 year, and six 10 year old. Traditional enzymatic Different techniques are available for the detection of these alterations labeling of degraded DNA samples can decrease the DNA fragment including LOH, FISH and CGH. Despite good concordance exists in length still further and moreover can result in the introduction of enzy- terms of sensitivity and specificity between these methods, all have matic biases. Therefore, we chose a non-enzymatic labeling method specific limitations. The aim of our study was to describe a reliable - the Universal Linkage System (ULS™, Kreatech Biotechnology). novel technique for the detection of 1p/19q deletions in gliomas. For Analysis of these samples on Agilent Human CGH arrays showed that each chromosome arm (1p and 19q), we devised a multiplex PCR as- the average probe-to-probe log ratio noise (DLRSD) was 0.33 for the say of fluorescent fragments corresponding to exons, which belong to 1 and 5 year old FFPE samples, indicating that high quality, reliable genes located in the minimal deleted region. A control gene, located biological data were obtained. While the 10 year old FFPE samples on chromosome 1q or 19p, is simultaneously amplified in each assay. showed higher average DLRSD values (0.53), the 60 mer probes PCR products are analysed on an automated sequencer and electro- still enabled detection of aberrations with a high level of confidence. pherograms generated from control and tumor samples are superim- Previously known aberrations associated with breast cancer, such as posed. We have searched for 1p/19q deletions by LOH and QMPSF HER-2 (human epithelial receptor 2), PIK3CA (phosphatidylinositol 3- (Quantitative Multiplex PCR of Short Fluorescent fragments) in a se- kinase) and CCND1 (cyclin D1) were detected in several samples. We ries of 50 patients with a glioma. We found that QMPSF, which does conclude that the method described here is well suited for analysis of not require constitutional DNA, is a simple, rapid and reliable method archival pathology specimens for biomarker discovery. to detect 1p/19q deletions. There was a good concordance with LOH data in (88% for 1p deletion and in 83% for 19q deletion). Furthermore, P0493. Cytogenetic findings in a group of patients with acute we show that QMPSF has a higher sensitivity than LOH and allows the lymphoblastic leukemia detection of 1p/19q duplications. H. G. Karabulut, B. Saglam, T. Tuncalı, N. Y. Kutlay, H. I. Ruhi, K. Yararbas, I. In conclusion, QMPSF can be routinely used in diagnosis laboratories Akalın, F. Sadeghi, A. Vicdan, A. Tükün; for the detection of 1p/19q rearrangements in glial tumors. Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey. . Cytogenetic analysis in bone marrow samples of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients have both pathophysiologic and prognostic P0491. Amplification of ABL1 gene without BCR/ABL1 fusion in significance. In this retrospective study, we present the results of cy- two children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia togenetic analysis of 348 ALL patients (243 children and 105 adults). S. Berker Karauzum1, Z. Cetin1, S. Yakut1, G. Tezcan2, T. Tulumen3, V. Hazar2, Cytogenetic abnormalities were found to be more frequent in adults T. Sipahi3, G. Luleci1; than in children, 23,8 % and 13,6 %, respectively. Structural abnor- 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz malities were more frequent than numerical abnormalities in childhood University, ANTALYA, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatric Haematology and On- ALL (61.5 % vs 38.5 %) while numerical abnormalities were observed cology, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz University, ANTALYA, Turkey, 3Department more frequently than structural abnormalities in adults (56 % vs 44 %). of Pediatric Haematology, Faculty of Medicine, Süleyman Demirel University, Overall, the most frequent cytogenetic abnormality in both childhood Isparta, Turkey. and adult ALL patients was t(9;22)(q34;q11) with a frequency of 12,3 The ABL1 proto-oncogene, located on chromosome band 9q34 is the % and 8,2 %, respectively. Monosomy 22 and trisomy 21 was the most known translocation partner of the BCR gene on chromosome band frequent second and third cytogenetic abnormality in childhood ALL, 22q11, giving rise to t(9;22)(q34;q11). This is the most common chro- followed by -7 and +8 at fourth place. On the other hand, - 21 was the mosomal abnormality in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) and adult most frequent second cytogenetic abnormality in adults, followed by Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) patients. Otherwise, frequency -13, -15 and -20 at third place each with equal frequencies. of this translocation is only 3-5 % in childhood ALL patients. Amplifica- tion of ABL1 gene is a rare event, that only 7 cases reported in the P0494. Cytogenetics in AML: results of 589 patients literature. N. Yurur-Kutlay, T. Tuncali, H. G. Karabulut, F. Sadeghi, B. Saglam, I. Akalın, In this study, conventional cytogenetics (CC) and Flourescence In Situ K. Yararbas, H. Ilgın Ruhi, A. Vicdan, A. Tukun; Hybridization (FISH) studies were performed on two ALL patients. In Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An- the first case, which is a seven-year-old girl, amplification of ABL1 kara, Turkey. gene, without BCR/ABL1 fusion, was observed in 27% interphase nu- The role of cytogenetics in diagnosis and follow-up studies of acute clei in FISH analysis while metaphases were not found in CC. In the myeloid leukemia (AML) is now widely recognized. However in con- second case which is a ten year old boy, translocation of t(9;15) was trast to chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), the cytogenetics of AML detected in CC and interphase cytogenetic analysis by FISH showed is much more complex. More than 200 different structural and numeri- the presence of the 10% ABL1 gene amplification without t(9;22) trans- cal changes have been found to be recurrent chromosome aberration location. in AML. Our results indicate that, amplification of ABL1 gene without BCR/ In this report, cytogenetic findings of 589 AML patients are pre- ABL1 fusion can be shown by FISH methods. This amplification might sented. Novel translocations, deletions and numerical abnormalities play role in leukomogenesis of pediatric ALL and may be used for dis- were found besides of previously defined AML aberrations such as ease monitoring t(15;17), t(16;16), t(8;21), del11q, monosomy 7, and trisomy 8. Two complex, thirteen simple translocations, one inversion and three un- P0492. Oligo array CGH on 1, 5 and 10 year old FFPE breast balance changes t(2;19;10)(q21;q13;p11), t(15;17;21)(q24;q23;q21) cancer samples and t(1;11)(q32.1;q13.9), t(2;5)(q24.2;p13.3) t(2;21)(q11.2;q11.2) A. De Witte1, I. Bukholm2, V. Kristensen3, A. Borresen-Dale3, E. Klok4, J. Col- t(3;5)(q21;q33), t(3;18)(p13;q23) t(3;18)(q21;q23) t(5;22)(p13:p11) lins1; t(8;19) (q22;q13) t(9;17)(p11;p13), t(16;17)(p13;q21), t(7;17)(q11;p13) 1Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2Department of Surgery, t(8;18)(p23;q21.1), t(12;18)(p11;q11) inv (13)(p12q32) del(2)(q34), Akershus University Hospital, Nordbyhagen, Norway, 3Department of Genetics, del(2)(q37) dup(2)(q35;qter) respectively, were not reported before Institute for Cancer Research, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Cen- as AML related translocations. Some of these breakpoints were previ-Cancer genetics 1 ously defined for different rearrangements in AML patients, and other P0497. Analysis of APC tumor suppressor gene promoter ones have been reported to be loci of some genes which take place in methylation status in adenocacinoma of stomach and in serum hematopoiesis. Possible effects of these new cytogenetic findings on M. Alivand1,2, F. Ratgar jazii3, M. Zare3,4; prognosis of AML will be discussed. 1National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Khatam University, Tehran-ferdous blv., Islamic Re- P0495. Case report of a rare AF9-MLL fusion gene in pediatric public of Iran, 3National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4khatam university, Tehran-ferdous blv., A. Divane1, M. Baka2, M. Varvoutsi2, A. Pourtsidis2, D. Bouhoutsou2, D. Doga- Islamic Republic of Iran. nis2, K. Koronioti1, S. Velaeti1, H. Kosmidis2; Adenocarcinoma of stomach has a high mortality rate . Its incidence 1Department of Cytogenetics, Locus Medicus, Diagnostic Centre, Athens, rate in Ira is high. Often, the cancer is diagnosed when its is already Greece, 2Department of Oncology, Aglaia Kyriakou Childrens Hospital, Athens, advanced and has spread to other tissues, which makes treatment dif- Greece. ficult. In order to early diagnose the disease attention is focused to the It is known that structural abnormalities involving the mixed -lineage promoter methylation status of tumor suppressor genes. By applying leukemia (MLL) gene on 11q23 have been associated with hemato- Methylation Specific PCR(MSP) we studied the methylation status of logic malignancies. the Adenomatous polyposis coli(APC) tumor suppressor gene in this In acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) the MLL gene fuses to more type of cancer . MSP analysis of APC was done due to the fact that pro- than 30 different partner genes. To the best of our knowledge only moter methylation is an important way of APC inactivation. Our study few cases of AML-M7 have been associated with MLL rearrangement. indicates methylation of APC promoter in %66.6 of tissue samples. We We herein report a rare case of pediatric AML-M7 with translocation further extended our study on to serum of such patients and our results t(9;11)(p22;q23) leading to the AF9/MLL fusion gene. indicate that MSP could be applicable to the serum which clinically is An 18-month old girl presented with anaemia and thrombocytopenia. important for diagnosis and evaluation of treatment strategy. In repeated bone marrow (BM) examinations, patient exhibited cy- topenia and 15-25% infiltration with blast cells. Immunophenotyping P0498. The coumarins and furanocoumarins induced apoptosis revealed blast positivity for CD41, CD42b and CD61 and the leuke- and inhibit proliferation in human leukemic cells mia was therefore classified as M7 according to FAB classification. A. Bogucka-Kocka, D. H. Smolarz, J. Kocki; Cytogenetic analysis of BM showed normal karyotype. FISH analysis Medical University, Lublin, Poland. was performed using the LSI MLL dual color break apart rearrange- Coumarins and furanocoumarins are plant compounds exhibiting an- ment probe (Vysis) at 11q23. 27,5% of analysed nuclei contained a ticancer activities. A series of 15 coumarins and furocoumarins have MLL rearrangement. Patient was treated as per the BFM98 protocol for been evaluated for anticancer activity in vitro on 6 human leukemic cell AML . Analysis at a later time and when patient achieved clinical and lines: HL-60, J45.01, Eol-1, 1301, U261, and ML1. hematological remission, showed 4,2% positive nuclei while investiga- The cell cultures were stimulated with coumarin derivatives in various tion of metaphases spreads revealed that the translocation involved concentrations. As a negative control the cells were incubated without the short arm of chromosome 9 (9p22) and the chromosome 11 at compounds. The cell growth was measured by using tetrazolium bro- band q23. Chromosome 9 was hybridized, simultaneously with probe mide (MTT) assay. Coumarins and furanocoumarins induced apopto- for ABL gene (9q34), as a marker. sis in cells as indicated by dose- and time-dependent (1) cytochrome c The patient continued chemotherapy according to protocol and she is release, (2) caspase activation, (3) DNA fragmentation, and (4) reduc- candidate for allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. tion of expression of anti-apoptotic genes: BCL-2, MCL-1 and BCL-xL. Genes expression activity were detected by using real-time quantita- P0496. Mutation analysis of the APC and MYH genes in Spanish tive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. After leukemic patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis cells were treated with coumarins and furanocoumarins, the expres- C. Ruiz-Ponte, N. Gomez-Fernandez, C. Fernandez-Rozadilla, A. Vega, A. sion of BCL-2, MCL-1 and BCL-xL mRNAs decreased. Carracedo; Our studies show the influence of coumarins: xanthotoxin, o,o-dim- Grupo de Medicina Xenómica USC, FPGMX-SERGAS, Santiago de Compos- etyl-fraxetin, heraclenine and phelopterine on apoptosis process in hu- tela, Spain. man lymphocytes in vitro. The compounds showed very good activity Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant in- against different leukemic cell lines. Supported by grant of Polish State herited syndrome caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous Committee of Scientific Research No 2 PO5F 04928. polyposis coli (APC) gene. However, germline mutations in APC can- not be identified in about 20-30% of patients with classical FAP and up P0499. Alterations in ATP2A2 gene in correlation with colon and to 90% of those with attenuated phenotype (AFAP). Recently, germline lung cancer mutations in the base-excision-repair gene, MYH, have been associ- M. Ravnik-Glavač1, B. Korošec1, D. Glavač2; ated with some APC negative FAP and AFAP patients. 1Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia, Thirty-four unrelated patients with a clinical diagnosis of multiple pol- 2Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lju- yposis (15-100 colorectal adenomas) or classical FAP (>100 colorectal bljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. adenomas) were analysed for germline APC mutations. Patients with- Sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium transport ATPases (SERCA- out APC detected mutations were investigated for MYH mutations. type calcium pumps), proteins that accumulate calcium in the ER, play Eighteen families (54%) carried point mutations or large rearrange- an important role in numerous signaling pathways controlling tumor ments in the APC gene. p.R805X and p.R216X mutations were found growth, differentiation and cell death. Reports that SERCA2 haploin- twice in unrelated patients. Phenotypic heterogeneity was observed for sufficient mice often developed cancer prompted us to study the in- the R805X, associated with either AFAP or FAP, suggesting that modi- volvement of the ATP2A2 gene in human cancer development. We fier genes or environment could modulate FAP phenotype. Two new found 13 novel different alterations of the ATP2A2 gene in 27 of 416 al- unclassified variants p.I1055M and p.R1171C were also identified. leles of patients with two different types of cancer. Changes in ATP2A2 Three biallelic (20%) and two monoallelic (14%) MYH germline mu- were statistically significantly more common in patients with colon (p tation carriers were identified in 4 AFAP and 1 FAP families APC < 0.0001, OR = 25.3) as well as lung (p = 0.046; OR = 8.05) cancer. negative. The two most frequent germline mutations (p.Y165C and We found two missense mutations, two intronic deletions, an intronic p.G382D) were observed as well as new genetic variants for which insertion and 8 single nucleotide alterations, of which two were in the control populations studies were performed. coding region, three in the intronic and three in the promoter region. In this study 20% of the APC negative patients were found to be bi- We were able to detect lost or reduced expression of ATP2A2 in all pa- allelic MYH germline mutation carriers. Therefore, MYH analysis is tients with alterations in the promoter region, as well as in patients with recommended for all APC negative families even if a recessive inheri- a combination of gene alterations. Our results suggest that germline tance is not confirmed. However, mutations in MYH can not explain all alterations of ATP2A2 may predispose to lung and colon cancer and cases of FAP. that an impaired ATP2A2 gene might be involved, directly or indirectly, as an early event in carcinogenesis.Cancer genetics 1 P0500. Automated FISH analysis predicts good outcome in interpretation. An automated system for FISH analysis has the poten- CML patients with Imatinib-induced remission and detects tial to reduce interpretation errors and decrease turn around times for very low level leukaemic cell population with double BCR-ABL patient results. We report here the use of a fully-automated, robotic rearrangement. fluorescence microscopy platform in the identification and analysis of G. Calabrese1,2, D. Fantasia3, P. Guanciali-Franchi1, R. DiGianfilippo3, E. Mori- cells, in urine sediment, for the diagnosis of bladder cancer or tumor zio3, M. Alfonsi1, R. DiLorenzo4, L. Stuppia1,2, G. Palka1,3; recurrence. 1Genetica Medica, Chieti Scalo, Italy, 2G. D’Annunzio Foundation, Chieti Scalo, 100 patients suspected of having bladder cancer or bladder cancer re- Italy, 3Genetica Medica, Pescara Hospital, Pescara, Italy, 4Hematology Dept, currence were analyzed in a blinded study. A single slide was prepared Pescara Hospital, Pescara, Italy. from each patient’s urine then analyzed manually on a fluorescence Seventy-six patients with CML, 69 in chronic phase, 1 in accelerate microscope. The slide was then loaded on the automated microscopy phase, and 6 in blastic crisis, were treated with imatinib mesylate (IM). platform for FISH analysis. 50 of the slides were run on a second plat- The patients were studied for a 18-66 months follow up period using form for intra-instrument comparisons. cytogenetics and FISH analysis with a dual-fusion BCR-ABL probe, 97% of the samples showed complete concordance between the re- and an automated FISH imaging system for rare cell events (BioView- sults obtained by manual and automated analysis. 19 samples were Duet). Before IM treatment 50 patients showed Ph chromosome in all positive by both methods, 76 negative and 2 inconclusive. 2 samples examined cells while in the remaining 26 patients a normal clone was were negative by manual analysis and inconclusive by automated and also found. Complete or partial cytogenetic remission rate [CCR or 1 sample was negative by automated analysis and inconclusive by PCR: t(9;22) absent or <35% of cells, respectively] overlapped com- manual. For the 50 slides run sequentially on two instruments, 49 gave plete or partial FISH remission rate (CFR or PFR: BCR-ABL absent the same result from both analyses. One slide was read as normal on or <35% of cells, respectively) in 74% of patients during the follow the first instrument and inconclusive when run a second time, probably up period. However, CFR achievement within 12 months of treatment due to deterioration of the FISH signals. resulted in a disease-free second year of treatment in 97% of patients These data suggest that an automated FISH analysis system is ca- as previously reported using QF-PCR. Forty-three percent of CCR pable of providing accurate detection and enumeration of FISH signals samples actually showed >0.5% leukaemic cells by FISH. Two cases in voided urine samples and has the potential to increase efficiency in showed 0.08% cells with double BCR-ABL (i.e. double Ph), unde- the detection of bladder cancer and tumor recurrence. tectable by QF-PCR, which disappeared after increasing IM dosage. Moreover, FISH unravelled leukaemic cells in 21% of samples unsuit- P0503. Polymorphism of DNA repair genes XRCC1 and risk of able for cytogenetic investigation from 9 patients who subsequently brain tumors developed haematological relapse. In 11 patients with partial deletion S. L. Cengiz1,2, H. Acar1,3, Z. Inan1,3; on der(9)(q34) at treatment start, no CCR/CFR was achieved. Clinical 1Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey, 2Selcuk University , Meram Medicine Faculty, and haematological relapse occurred in 5 cases, while in the remain- Neurosurgery Department, Konya, Turkey, 3Selcuk University , Meram Medicine ing 6 a PCR/PFR was observed only after 30 months of treatment sup- Faculty, Genetics Department, Konya, Turkey. porting a negative role of der(9) deletion on IM effect in CML patients. Background and Objective: DNA repair genes play a major role in main- taining genomic stability through different repair pathways. The current P0501. Serial quantitation of bcr-abl transcripts predict study was designed to evaluate the relation between polymorphism of resistence to imatinib in chronic myeloid leukemia DNA repair gene XRCC1 and brain tumours. Their frequencies were S. Menif, K. Dellagi; also compared with patient‘s age, gender, smoking, alcohol status, Laboratoire Hematologie, Tunis, Tunisia. family history, and tumor histopathology in a Turkish population. Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) is attributed to a specific translo- Methods: We conducted a case-population base study including 135 cation between chromosomes 9 and 22. the resulting bcr-abl fusion cases of brain tumors and 87 population base age- and sex-matched gene codes for a fusion protein with tyrosine kinase activity leading to healthy controls to examine the role of polymorphism of XRCC1 Arg- uncontrolled cell growth. 399Gln gene, in the context of brain tumor risk for the Turkish popula- Imatinib, a bcr-abl inhibitor, induces apoptosis in CML cells by stabiliz- tion. Tumors were subdivided into 4 main groups that constitute 85% ing the non ATP-binding form of bcr-abl ,and in turn phosphorylation of brain tumors, according to tumor histopathological examination.. of its sustrates . Group I; patients with glial tumors (n=71), Group II; patients with me- Despite the excellent clinical results with imatinib in CML, some pa- ningiomas (n=35), Group III; patients with pituitary adenomas (n=21) tients develop resistence .Several mechanisms of resistance have and Group IV; patients with metastases to the brain (n=8). been described ,the most important in clinical samples appears to be Results: There was no significant difference in the distributions of the development of mutations in the kinase domain of bcr-abl. routine XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphisms among the gliomas, meningiomas screening of patient’s samples for bcr-abl kinase mutations is labori- and the controls. However XRCC1 Arg399Gln, polymorphism were ous and expensive, serial quantitation of bcr-abl transcripts is a useful significantly different in pituitary adenomas and metastases to brain. tool to diagnose theses patients . As metastases to brain were compared with primary brain tumors the Here we report 15 patients diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukae- difference was also significant. mia and treated with imatinib 400mg daily . serial quantitation of bcr- Conclusion: These results suggest that the XRCC1 Arg399Gln poly- abl transcripts in peripheral blood for a median followup of 36 months morphism may be a marker for the susceptibility to pituitary adenomas showed an emerging clone. indeed bcr-abl/abl ratios increased during and metastases to brain. the period of observation which is synonymous of resistence to treat- Key Words: brain tumors, DNA repair gene, genetics, polymorphism, ment. XRCC1 RQ-PCR studies can identify degrees of molecular response that pre- dict long term stability in chronic myeloid leukaemia. and thus can be P0504. The role of XPD gene polymorphism in brain tumors used as a screening strategy for mutation analysis. S. L. Cengiz1,2, Z. Inan1,3, T. Cora1,4, H. Acar1,5, S. Yavuz1,6, A. Baysefer1,6; 1Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey, 2Selcuk University, Meram Medicine P0502. Robotic Microscopy for Fully-Automated FISH Testing: Faculty,Neurosurgery Department, Konya, Turkey, 3Selcuk University,Meram Application in Bladder Cancer Identification and Recurrence Medicine faculty,Genetics Department, Konya, Turkey, 4selcuk University, Monitoring Meram medicine Faculty,Genetics Department, Konya, Turkey, 5Selcuk M. W. Kilpatrick1, F. Tafas1, R. Gasparini2, Y. Kim1, Y. Zhu1, P. Tsipouras1; University,Meram Medicine Faculty,Genetics Department, Konya, Turkey, 1Ikonisys Inc, New Haven, CT, United States, 2Neogenomics Inc, Ft Myers, FL, 6Selcuk University,Meram Medicine Faculty,Neurosurgery Department, Konya, United States. Turkey. FISH analysis for the identification of bladder cancer has been well Background and Objective: Deficits in DNA repair pathways may lead documented. Quantitation of chromosomes 3, 7 and 17 and deletion to tumorigenesis and pathogen defence. The current study was de- of 9p21, has been found to complement urine cytology raising the signed to evaluate the relation between polymorphism of DNA repair sensitivity of testing to >97% (specificity of >94%). However, FISH is gene xeroderma pigmentosum group D (XPD) and brain tumors. We labor intensive requiring a high skill level and somewhat subjective aimed to investigate it’s role as susceptibility marker for brain tumors. Cancer genetics 1 Their frequencies were also compared with patient‘s age, gender, All carriers of c.5272-1 G>A and c.5374delTATG mutations shared smoking, alcohol status, family history, and tumor histopathology in a the same haplotype at the four markers of BRCA1 and BRCA2, re- Turkish population. spectively, and thus supporting the possibility of a common ancestry. Methods: We conducted a case-population base study including 136 Results in c.3036delACAA families provide evidence of at least two cases of brain tumors and 86 population base age- and sex-matched distinct lines of transmission in Spanish population. This facilitates the healthy controls to examine the role of polymorphisms of XPD gene, in setting up of a less expensive and less time-consuming strategy to test the context of brain tumor risk for the Turkish population. Tumors were the BRCA genes in high-risk Spanish BC patients. subdivided into 4 main groups that constitute 85% of brain tumors, according to tumor histopathological examination. Group I; patients P0507. The complete deletion of BRCA1 gene identified in the with glial tumors (n=72), Group II; patients with meningiomas (n=35), Slovak family by combination of sequencing, MLPA and array- Group III; patients with pituitary adenomas (n=20) and Group IV; pa- CGH techniques. tients with metastases to the brain (n=9). M. Konecny1, K. Zavodna2, V. Vranova3, M. Vizvaryova1, Z. Bartosova2, P. Results: There were no significant difference among groups as com- Kuglik3, E. Weismanova1, I. Mlkva4, J. Kausitz1; pared with each other (groups I-IV) and also compared with control 1St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Cancer Research Institute healthy individuals in regards to XPD gene polymorphisms. of Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Faculty of Science, Ma- Conclusion: Lys751Gln polymorphisms of the XPD gene have not a saryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Faculty Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia. functional consequence in brain cancer risk and do not have prognos- Pathogenic germline substitutions and short deletions/insertions in tic significance in patients with brain tumors either. BRCA1/2 account for the majority of hereditary breast/ovarian cancer Key Words: brain tumors, DNA repair gene, genetics, polymorphism, cases, however, the large genomic rearrangements (LGR) also repre- xeroderma pigmentosum group D, XPD sent a substantial proportion of disease-causing changes. In this pilot study we demonstrate the specific case of Slovak family with breast/ P0505. BRCA1 and BRCA2 sequence variability in normal ovarian cancer, where sequencing analysis (SA) of BRCA1 revealed population in Croatia the discrepancy of SNPs haplotypes and primarily indicated the pres- V. Musani1, M. Levacic Cvok1, M. Cretnik1, P. Ozretic1, A. Godan2, M. Markovic3, ence of LGR. S. Levanat1; Initially, the analysis of all exons of BRCA1 was based on the combi- 1Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, nation of SSCP and SA. Subsequently, MLPA analysis (P002B; P087 2School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, General Practice Kalinovica, Zagreb, kits) was performed. Finally, results were proved with array-compara- Croatia, 3Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, Za- tive genomic hybridization (array-CGH). greb, Croatia. SSCP and SA demonstrated presence of 11 SNPs in BRCA1, which Hereditary breast cancer is characterized by an inherited susceptibility indicated hemizygous status, and possible occurrence of LGR. The to breast cancer. The main candidates are BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, MLPA results showed reduction of peaks levels for each BRCA1 exon. which are acting as tumor suppressors, and are only genes known to Array-CGH displayed a single deletion signal for BRCA1 among set of be mutated in familial history of breast cancer. In familial cases an in- 287 gene probes. Totally, 8 members of the family were analysed, in 3 dividual already carries a mutation in one of the alleles. Tumorigenesis of them LGR was confirmed. is a result of inactivation of the second allele. We have discovered rare germline LGR affecting complete BRCA1, We are analyzing distribution of polymorphic variants of BRCA1 and according to our knowledge this is the second time it was described. BRCA2 genes in normal population to establish the reference values Although, the breakpoints of LGR were not identified yet, concerning in healthy population, since no such screening has been undertaken in family history it is evident, that clinical effect is comparable with small Croatia. We assume that by evaluating polymorphic forms of BRCA1 deletions/insertions and substitutions and leads to the loss-off gene and BRCA2 predisposition to breast and ovarian cancer can be esti- function. mated. In conclusion, it is important to note that DNA analysis of BRCA1/2 Among a wide range of conventional mutation scanning methods genes should be performed in all affected members of breast/ovarian based on conformational polymorphisms, we decided to use proce- cancer families concurrently, since the discrepancy in the SNPs haplo- dures based on high resolution melting approach and heteroduplex types may indicate the presence of LGR. formation that give different melting profile and fluorescence, accord- ing to polymorphic or mutational variant. P0508. Mutation screening of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in breast and This analysis is contributing to a program of an early detection and pre- breast/ovarian cancer families from the Slovakia. vention of breast cancer in Croatia with intention of forming a database M. Vizvaryova1, M. Konecny1, E. Weismanova1, D. Ilencikova2, I. Mlkva3, J. of a high penetrance susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. Kausitz1; 1St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2National Oncological Insti- P0506. Haplotype Analysis of Recurrent BRCA1 and BRCA2 tute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Faculty Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia. Mutations In Spain. Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes have been shown M. Infante, M. Duran, L. Perez-Cabornero, D. J. Sanz, E. Sanchez-Tapia, A. to account for the majority of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers. Osorio, G. Llort, O. Diez, M. de la Hoya, E. Esteban-Cardeñosa, A. Vega, E. We have screened high-risk breast and breast/ovarian cancer families Lastra, C. Miner, E. Velasco; from Slovakia using combination of the SSCP and direct sequencing IBGM, Valladolid, Spain. techniques. Mutational analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes has been hampered Mutational analysis of all exons and flanking intronic splice sites of by the large size of the two genes, and the frequent occurrence of BRCA1 gene was performed in 156 suspected families and subse- unique mutations. Founder mutations for BRCA1 and BRCA2 have quently in 47 BRCA1 negative families, the analysis of complete cod- been identified in several populations, and haplotype analysis has pro- ing region of BRCA2 was performed. vided evidence of a common ancestor. Several mutations (c.5272-1G>A Fourteen different types of BRCA1 pathologic mutations were identi- from BRCA1, and c.3036delACAA, c.5344delAATA, c.5374delTATG fied in 31 breast/ovarian families. The most frequently found mutations and c.9538delAA from BRCA2) have been identified multiple times in were c.5266dupC (8 families), c.181T>G (5 families), c.68_69delAG our population, suggesting that could be founder in Spain. (3 families) and c.843_846del4 (3 families), marked in the approved Haplotype analysis using polymorphic markers spanning BRCA1 and systematic nomenclature numbering. The novel BRCA1 mutation BRCA2 loci was performed on index cases and on additional fam- c.1166delG, which forms a stop codon in amino acid 393 giving rise ily members. Sixty-two BRCA1/2 positive families were genotyped. to a truncation protein, was identified. This frame-shift mutation was D17S855, D17S1185, D17S1323 and D17S1326 polymorphic micro- identified in 2 patients suffered from breast cancer at the ages of 27 satellites linked to the BRCA1 gene were analysed in seven c5272-1 and 32 years, and in 2 subclinical probands. G>A families. D13S171, D13S260, D13S1695 and D13S1698 STRs Mutational analysis of BRCA2 gene showed presence of 3 distinct were typed in four different BRCA2 mutations c3036delACAA (36 pathogenic mutations. The mutations c.3G>A, c.5946delT, c.9403delC families), c5374delTATG (11 families), c5344delAATA (4 families), and were found in 3 families with strong family history for occurrence of c9538delAA (4 families). breast cancer, all of them are already presented in BIC database.Cancer genetics 1 In summary within 156 Slovak breast/ovarian families, we identified P0511. Search for a rapid pre-screening technique to identify 34 families (21,8%) with pathologic germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mu- heterozygous BRCA mutation carriers using gene expression tations. A novel BRCA1 mutation c.1166delG was not previously de- profiling in peripheral blood lymphoytes scribed in BIC database and published until year 2006 and we suspect M. Vuillaume1, N. Uhrhammer1, V. Vidal2, V. Sylvain Vidal2, V. Chabaud2, M. it is of Slovak origin. Agier3, Y. Bignon1; 1Laboratoire Diagnostic Génétique et Moléculaire, Clermont ferrand, France, P0509. Germline BRCA2 large rearrangements are not a 2Société Diagnogène division d’Imaxio, Biopôle Clermont Limagne, France, common cause of breast/ovarian cancer predisposition 3INRA, Theix, France. S. Pagès-Berhouet1, S. Reynaud1, V. Caux-Moncoutier1, D. Michaux1, A. Lau- Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women in the western gé1, A. De Pauw1, M. Gauthier-Villars1, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,2, C. Houdayer1,3; world. Approximately 5-10 % of breast cancers are due to strong ge- 1Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2INSERM U509, Paris, France, 3UMR INSERM netic susceptibility. Mutations in two major genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, 745, Paris, France. account for at most 30 % of the families with hereditary breast can- Screening for large deletions and duplications of the BRCA1 gene is cer. Unfortunately, in most families there is little to indicate which gene now recognized as an important part of routine molecular diagnosis in should be targeted first for mutation screening, which is labor intensive, familial breast/ovarian cancer. The picture is less clear as to the value time consuming and often prohibitively expensive in poor and develop- of screening BRCA2 for such alterations. The available studies seem- ing countries. We are investigating gene expression profiling to distin- ingly show that this is a worthwhile screening however they are based guish between BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers and non BRCA on patients selected for high probability of breast/ovarian cancer pre- carriers. Heterozygous mutations in either BRCA1 or BRCA2 could disposition. No data are available for patients routinely ascertained in dysregulate the DNA damage response and alert the immune system genetic units. by inducing or inhibiting transcriptional activity of genes involved in the Therefore we embarked upon BRCA2 large rearrangement screen- downstream signaling cascade. RNA from samples of blood periph- ing on a large sample of 488 patients consecutively ascertained in eral lymphocytes from BRCA1 mutation carriers and non-carriers from our breast cancer family clinic for whom breast/ovarian cancer ge- BRCA1 families were hybridized on an Agilent pangenomic microarray netic-predisposition was 1%-96% (mean 53%) according to the Claus of 44000 complementary cDNAs. Among 576 genes over- or under- model. Obviously all these patients were tested negative for BRCA1 expressed at least 1.5-fold between the two groups, Student’s t-test point mutations and large deletions and for BRCA2 point mutations. with a Benjamini and Hochberg multiple testing correction (p<0.05) re- BRCA2 large rearrangement screening was performed using a previ- vealed 79 differentially expressed genes. Several of these genes are ously published QMPSF assay and included control samples bearing a involved in transcription regulation or the BRCA1 signaling network BRCA2 deletion and a trisomy 13 purchased from Corriel. All controls and one is a stimulatory receptor of the innate immune system previ- were successfully identified and no BRCA2 rearrangement was found ously shown to be induced by DNA damage responses. We are now in these 488 patients. testing a larger sample set, as well as targeted experiments by RT- These results strongly suggest that BRCA2 large rearrangements are PCR to validate this preliminary data before studying gene expression not a common cause of breast/ovarian cancer predisposition. Oncoge- profiles of BRCA2 mutation carriers. netic teams should now discuss if this screening should be proposed on a routine basis or only to highly selected patients. It could also be P0512. Germ line E-Cadherin mutation in familial lobular breast used as a second-line screening however this option could greatly de- cancer layed the results availability to the detriment of the genetic follow-up. N. E. Larsson1, S. Masciari2, J. Senz3, D. Huntsman3, J. E. Garber2; 1Lund University/Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, P0510. Breast cancer susceptibility association with a regulatory Lund/Boston, Sweden, 2Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, SNP in 3’utr region of E2F1 gene Boston, MA, United States, 3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, E. Barroso1, E. Wentzel2, R. L. Milne1, J. Arias3, P. Zamora4, J. T. Mendell2, J. University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Benítez1, G. Ribas1; Background: The cell surface glycoprotein, E-Cadherin (CDH1) is a 1CNIO, Madrid, Spain, 2The McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, key regulator of adhesive properties in epithelial cells. Germline mu- Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Monte Naranco Hospital, Oviedo, Spain, 4La tations in CDH1 are well-established as the defects underlying the Paz Hospital, Madrid, Spain. cancer syndrome of Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC): an SNPs located in regulatory regions (rSNPs) have been proposed as increased risk of lobular breast cancer (LBC) has been described in potential causal SNPs in complex traits and diseases because of their HDGC kindreds. We sought to investigate the frequency of germline role in modulating gene expression. CDH1 mutations in LBC patients with early onset disease or family his- In the current work, we present the research on a rSNP located in 3’utr tories of breast cancer without diffuse gastric cancer. Methods: Germ- of E2F1, rs3213180, within a case-control association study, using up line DNA was analyzed in 23 women with invasive lobular or mixed to 854 sporadic breast cancer patient and 553 control samples. A rela- ductal and lobular breast cancers who had at least one close relative tive risk of 2.3 (95%C.I.=0.48-11.10), was estimated for rs3213180, not with breast cancer or had themselves been diagnosed before age 45, statistically significant, possibly due to the low Spanish MAF=0.05. It had tested negative for a germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, and has been described that the expression of the E2F1 gene is modulated reported no personal or family history of diffuse gastric cancer. The full by c-Myc, which activates E2F1 transcription, but also blocks its trans- coding sequence of CDH1 including splice junctions was PCR ampli- lation through the activation of transcription of some miRNAs. These fied and screened for mutations using DHPLC. Results: A novel germ- miRNAs recognize two binding sites at the 3’utr region of the E2F1 line CDH1 truncating mutation in the extracellular portion of the protein mRNA and delay the translation to protein, and rs3213180 is located (517insA) was identified in one subject who had lobular breast cancer at the 3’utr region, upstream of binding site 2.Luciferase expression at age 42 and a first degree relative with invasive lobular breast can- assays using constructs with E2F1 3’utr have revealed a mild incre- cer. Conclusions: Germline CDH1 mutations can be associated with ment in expression in the presence of the minor allele (p-value<0.001) invasive lobular breast cancer in the absence of diffuse gastric cancer. and a difference of expression with minor allele was again observed The finding may have implications for management of individuals at using constructs with binding site 2 mutated (p-value=0.02). Experi- risk for this breast cancer subtype, and compels clarification of the ments with binding site 1 mutated are in progress and they will help cancer risks in the syndrome. to determine whether rs3213180 affects miRNAs binding as previous experiments are pointing out. Additionally, E2F1 protein expression by P0513. Screening of CDKN2A and CDK mutations in using western analysis on lymphocytes and immunochemistry staining heterogeneous-phenotype breast cancer families presenting on normal breast tissues from patients with different genotypes will be melanoma and/or pancreatic cancer. further discussed. P. M. Machado1, J. Eugénio1, S. Santos1, C. Moura2, F. Vaz3; 1Molecular Biology Department-Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, Por- tugal, 2Breast Cancer Risk Evaluation Clinic-Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Molecular Biology Department/Breast Cancer Risk Evalua-Cancer genetics 1 tion Clinic-Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, Portugal. cent. This was similar to other reported cases .Statistical significant Breast cancer is hereditary in 10% of the cases, the majority related associations (<0.05) were demonstrated between hyperdiploidy 1 and to mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes but only 20-25% of families trisomy 8 and patients’ age below 50 years . Trisomy 1 and hyperdip- screened are found positive, suggesting that other breast cancer sus- loidy 1 showed significant correlation with poor survival. Larger tumor ceptibility genes exist. Inherited mutations in the CDKN2A tumour sup- size and raised aneusomy 8 were significantly related. Patients with pressor gene, which encodes the p16INK4a/p14ARF proteins, and in the increased number of lymph node metastasis, involvement of lymph cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) gene, confer susceptibility to cuta- node metastasis and increased stage of the disease showed a poorer neous malignant melanoma. The INK4a/ARF locus on chromosome prognosis. 9q21, encodes for 2 unrelated and independently acting negative cell In conclusion, chromosomes 1 and 8 aneusomy alongside other clini- cycle regulators, p16INK4a and p14ARF, arising from alternative first ex- cal and pathological parameters may be considered as useful prog- ons (1α or 1β respectively) and common exons 2 and 3. Besides mela- nostic markers in invasive ductal carcinoma of breast. noma, a high frequency of other tumours (pancreatic, nervous system, head and neck and breast) has been reported in p16INK4a/p14ARF muta- P0516. Is telomere length in peripheral blood lymphocytes tion positive melanoma families. The objective of this study is to anal- correlated with cancer susceptibility or radiosensitivity? yse the presence of germline mutations in the CDKN2A and in CDK4 S. V. Hodgson1, J. G. Barwell2, L. Pangon3, I. Kesterton4, A. Georgiou3, R. genes, in 21 families with breast, melanoma and/or pancreatic cancer. Gilchrist3, B. Kato5, J. Ball3, J. Berg6, Z. Docherty4, A. Aviv7, J. Gardner7, R. Two families were negative for full BRCA1/2 genetic screening. In the Camplejohn5,3, T. D. Spector5,3; remaining 19 families, BRCA1/2 and CDKN2A/CDK4 screening are 1St George’s, London, United Kingdom, 2St George’s, University of London, being done simultaneously, since BRCA mutation probability was un- United Kingdom, 3King’s College, London, United Kingdom, 4Guy’s Hospital, der 25%. The entire CDKN2A coding region and exon 2 of the CDK4 London, United Kingdom, 5St Thomas’ Hospital, London, United Kingdom, gene are being screened by direct sequencing. Results of our screen- 6Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, United Kingdom, 7New Jersey Medical School, ing will be presented and will help determine if CDKN2A and CDK4 Newark, NJ, United States. screening is worth being done in heterogeneous-phenotype breast Mean terminal restriction fragment lengths (TRF) in white blood cells cancer families presenting melanoma and/or pancreatic cancer. have previously been found to be associated with breast cancer in case-control studies. In order to assess whether this marker could P0514. Screening of BRCA 1 gene in breast and ovarian cancer be used as a test for breast cancer susceptbibility, TRF length was patients diagnosed at age under 40 measured in 72 individuals after treatment for breast cancer, 125 N. Lojo-Kadric1, L. Kapur1, J. Ramic1, S. Beslija2, N. Obralic2, N. Bilalovic3, S. newly diagnosed breast cancer cases and 1804 unaffected controls Vranic3, N. Pojskic1, K. Bajrovic1; between the age of 45 years and 77 years from the Twin Research 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Unit at St Thomas Hospital. Mean TRF was also tested for correlation Herzegovina, 2Institute of Oncology, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, with chromosome radiosensitivity and apoptotic response in the vari- 3Institute of Pathology, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. ous groups. Since the identification of BRCA1 gene in 1994, there were numerous After adjusting for age and sex, there was no significant difference in studies on prevalence and genetic background of breast and ovarian TRF lengths between the breast cancer treated and unaffected controls cancer. Introducing of new method for screening of large genomic re- (6.859 kb versus 6.858, p=0.988) or between newly diagnosed breast arrangements of BRCA 1 gene gave a new perspective to diagnosis, cancer patients and unaffected controls (6.65 kb for cases versus 6.60 prognosis, therapeutical approaches and prevention of breast cancer. for controls P = 0.529). The only significant finding was a positive cor- Tumor bioptic specimens from patients fulfilling a criteria of high to me- relation between age-adjusted apoptotic response and mean TRF in dium risk group for breast and ovarian cancer have been consecutively newly diagnosed breast cancer patients (p=0.008). collected at Sarajevo Clinical Center during the period of two years. This suggests that TRF lengths in white blood cells, is not a marker of DNA was isolated from tumor tissue samples using standard salting breast cancer susceptibility and does not vary significantly between af- out procedure. After DNA isolation we introduced MLPA - Multiplex li- fected women who have or have not been treated for their cancer. gation-dependent probe amplification. 34 probe hybridization , ligation and PCR reaction was performed on Eppendorf Mastercycler gradi- P0517. Genetic risk factors in non-BRCA breast/ovarian cancer ent, and genotyping was performed on ABI PRISM 310 sequencer. families. Data analysis is performed using GeneMapper v. 3.2 and Coffalyzer N. Uhrhammer, Y. Yang, J. Geneste, L. Delort, M. Vuillaume, Y. Bignon; software. Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France. Results are displayed as RFU and peak area values and graphically Mutations in the BRCA genes account for less than 30 % of families at as output of Coffalyzer. risk of hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer. It is therefore impera- tive to identify the other genetic factors contributing to familial breast P0515. Prognostic value of chromosomes 1 and  aneusomy cancer, to better ascertain risk to individuals in these families and in invasive ductal breast carcinoma among Iranian women: An decide on appropriate preventive and/or early detection measures. interphase FISH analysis Deleterious mutations or polymorphisms of many genes have been F. Behjati1,2, M. Atri3, H. Najmabadi1, P. Mehdipour2; described as associated with breast cancer risk. 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation We analysed two genes for deleterious mutations, and snps or mic- Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, rosatellites in seven cancer-associated genes in 600 cases from non- Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3De- BRCA1/2 breast/ovarian cancer families and in 400 women with no partment of Surgery, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic personal or familial breast/ovarian cancer history. Republic of Iran. Deleterious mutations and missense variants of Chk2 were signifi- Breast cancer is amongst the leading causes of death in women world- cantly more frequent in cases than controls. No mutations in XRCC2 wide and the most common cancer amongst Iranian women. were observed, although the variant allele His188 was significantly The aim of this retrospective study was to investigate the role of chro- associated with cases. Polymorphisms affecting expression of IGF- mosomes 1 and 8 copy number assessed by Interphase Fluorescence 1 and EGFR were significantly different between cases and controls. In Situ Hybridization (FISH), as the genetic prognostic parameters in Polymorphisms in other genes were not associated with cancer. Mul- 70 Iranian women, aged 35 to 64 years(mean age of 48.1±7.7), with tivariate analysis suggested that Chk2 mutation, the His188 variant primary sporadic invasive ductal breast carcinoma. of XRCC2, and the risk-associated alleles at EGFR and IGF-1 were FISH, using centromeric probes for chromosomes 1 and 8 was applied independent risk factors. There was no apparent effect on age at diag- to interphase cell suspensions all prepared from the carnoy fixed tu- nosis or type of cancer (breast vs ovarian or other) among carriers of mor cells and selected paraffin embedded tumor sections. risk alleles. Segregation analysis of Chk2 mutations and of the XRCC2 More than 10000 cells for chromosomes 1 and 8 were assessed. An- His188 variant are underway, as is the multiparametric analysis of ad- eusomies for chromosomes 1 and 8 were present in all the studied ditional genes. These results are an encouraging first step in uncover- patients to different levels. The total abnormality rate for chromosome ing the diverse genetic factors contributing to breast cancer risk in a 1 was 47 percent , whereas for chromosome 8, this rate was 33 per- polygenic model.Cancer genetics 10 P0518. A map of nuclear matrix attachment regions within tal mutagenic and cytotoxic compounds or carcinogens. Our objec- the breast cancer loss-of-heterozygosity region on human tive was to investigate the association, if any, between XRCC1 (X-ray chromosome 16q22.1 repair cross-complementing 1) for Arg399Gln and XPD (ERCC2) for S. Shaposhnikov1, S. Akopov2, I. Chernov2, L. Nikolaev2, E. Frengen3, A. Col- Lys751Gln polymorphic genotypes and LSCC, smoking and alcohol lins3, V. Zverev1; habits, tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classification, and patient age. 1Institute of Viral Preparations, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Shemyakin and There was no significant difference in the genotype distribution of XPD Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russian Federation, between LSCC patients and their smoking and alcohol habits, tumor- 3University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. node-metastasis (TNM) classification, and patient age and controls for To explore the DNA domain organization of the breast cancer loss-of- each polymorphism (p>0.05). There was a significant difference be- heterozygosity region on human chromosome 16q22.1, we have iden- tween the genotype distributions of XRCC1 in patients and in control tified a significant portion of the scaffold/matrix attachment regions (S/ groups (P<0.05). Our result concluded that polymorphism in XRCC1 MARs) within this region. Forty independent putative S/MAR elements codon 399 was associated with risk of LCSS in a sample of the pa- were assigned within the 16q22.1 locus. More than 90% of these S/ tients while polymorphism in XPD codon 751 was not. MARs are AT rich, with GC contents as low as 27% in 2 cases. Thirty- nine (98%) of the S/MARs are located within genes and 36 (90%) in P0521. Isolation and characterization of the putative bladder gene introns, of which 15 are in first introns of different genes. The cancer stem cell clear tendency of S/MARs from this region to be located within the A. Bentivegna1, E. Sala2, G. Bovo2, F. Crosti2, N. Villa2, S. Redaelli1, S. Lisso- introns suggests their regulatory role. The genomic interval mapped ni1, M. Casu2, P. Viganò2, G. Strada2, L. Dalprà1,2; has been identified as a possible region harboring tumor suppressor 1Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Monza, MI, Italy, 2S. Gerardo Hospi- genes in both invasive ductal and invasive lobular breast carcinomas. tal, Monza, MI, Italy. The E-cadherin gene, which is located within this region, has been There is increasing evidence that the growth, spread and drug resis- shown to be mutated in lobular breast carcinomas, resulting in loss of tance of cancers is driven by a subpopulation of cancer stem like cells E-cadherin expression. However, in most cases of ductal carcinoma, (CSCs) the only cells able to long-term self-renewal and generation E-cadherin is normally expressed, suggesting that other genes within of the phenotypically diverse tumour cell population. Current failure chromosome 16q22.1 may be involved in the development of this tu- of cancer therapies may be due to their lesser effect on potentially mor subtype. The construction of comprehensive S/MAR maps of the quiescent CSCs which remain viable and retain their full capacity to region using a panel of breast cancer cell lines may provide informa- restore the tumour. However, the development of new CSC-targeted tion on relevance for the etiology of breast carcinomas. Changes of strategies is currently hindered by the lack of reliable markers for the positions of regulatory elements such as S/MAR within the region may identification of CSCs and the poor understanding of their behaviour allow an understanding of how the genes in the region are regulated and fate determinants. We report the isolation and characterization of and how the structural architecture is related to the functional organi- a putative bladder CSC population from human bladder tumors. Speci- zation of the DNA. mens were mechanically dissociated and digested by collagenase and plated at clonal density in serum-free medium containing mitogenic P0519. Expression of two testis-specific genes, TSGA10 and growth factors (basic fibroblast growth factor and epidermal growth SYCP3, in skin cancer factor). Karyotypic and interphasic FISH analysis were performed on M. B. Mobasheri1, M. Aarabi2, I. Jahanzad3, M. H. Modarressi1,2; fresh tumors and on tumor-derived cells after different times of culture. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Teh- Preliminary results suggested a marked heterogeneity among differ- ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Reproductive Biotechnology Research Center, ent tumors and a cell selection after isolation and culture. After 2 days Avesina Research Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of in vitro few proliferating clusters were observed that forms detached Pathology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of spheres. Experimental procedures are in progress to test the capacity Iran. of long term proliferation and differentiation. This is the first report at Cancer-testis genes are a group of genes expressed in testicular ger- our knowledge on putative CSCs from human bladder tumors. minal cells and a range of human cancers. Testis specific gene A10 (TSGA10) is expressed in testis and actively dividing and fetal differ- P0522. DNA copy number changes in gastric adenocarcinoma entiating tissues. SYCP3 gene is supposed to be a testis specific gene patients from Turkey and constitutes the core of the lateral elements of synaptonemal com- G. Gümüş-Akay1, A. E. ÜNAL2, A. H. ELHAN3, A. Sunguoğlu1, A. Tukun4; plex. It has role in regulating DNA binding to the chromatid axis, sister 1Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Ankara, chromatid cohesion, synapsis, and recombination. Methods: In this Turkey, 2Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Surgical Oncol- study expression of TSGA10 and SYCP3 were investigated in 26 skin ogy, Ankara, Turkey, 3Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of cancer using RT-PCR. Diagnosis of cancer was based on histopatho- Biostatistics, Ankara, Turkey, 4Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Depart- logical reports. Results: TSGA10 expression was observed in 66.4% ment of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. of total of skin tumors including melanomas with 85.7%, Basal cell car- Gastric cancer is one of the most common causes of cancer-related cinomas (BCC) with 75% and Squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) with deaths in Turkey, but genetic changes underlying the development and 40% positive expression of TSGA10, but, SYCP3 transcripts were not progression of this cancer is poorly understood. In this study, DNA found in skin tumors. Conclusion: These results may get further insight copy number changes were analyzed by comparative genomic hy- into the potential role as cancer marker and as cancer testis gene im- bridization (CGH) in 43 gastric adenocarcinoma patients from Turkey plicated in tumorogenesis of skin tumors in the case of TSGA10 and correlated with tumor invasion, lymph node involvement and his- tological stage. Chromosomal imbalances were observed in 36 (84 P0520. Evaluation of the relationship between XRCC1 and XPD %) tumor samples. Frequent gains were found on 1q, 7p, 7q, 8p, 8q, Polymorphisms and laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) 11q, 13q, 16p, 20p, 20q and losses were found on 2q, 4q, 5q, 6q, 14q, H. Acar1, Z. İnan1, K. Öztürk2; 15q, 18q and Xq. High level gains were detected on 1q, 7q, 8p, 8q, 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Konya, 9p,13q and 16p. When all of the detected chromosomal imbalances Turkey, 2Dept. of Otolaryngology, Meram Medical Faculty, Selcuk Unıversıty, were analyzed for the correlation with the histopathological factors, no Konya, Turkey. statistically significant difference in the pattern of chromosomal imbal- Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common (90-95%) of all head ances were observed in tumor invasion. However, gain of 13q with a and neck cancers (SCCHN), and laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma minimally overlapping region 13q21-q31 was found to be significantly (LSCC) is one of the most common tumors of the upper aerodigestive higher in tumors with increased lymph node metastasis (p<0.05). In tract. The incidence varies according to geographical area and most addition, gains of 6p, 9p and 10q were found to be correlated with probably depends on specific environmental risk factors. Many studies stage I tumors (p<0.05). Minimally overlapping regions were defined reported that polymorphisms in DNA repair genes reduce their capac- as 6p21.1 and 9p21-p13 for gains of 6p and 9p respectively. 10q21- ity to repair DNA damage and thereby lead to a greater susceptibility q23 and 10q25-qter, each of which was observed in two cases, were to cancer. DNA repair enzymes continuously monitor DNA to correct determined as minimally overlapping regions for gain of 10q. This data damaged nucleotide residues generated by exposure to environmen- indicates that chromosomal imbalances play an important role in gas-Cancer genetics 11 tric carcinogenesis and chromosomal regions identified in this study chemopreventive drug in cholangiocarcinoma. provide candidate regions for progression of gastric adenocarcinoma. P0525. High-Resolution Genomic Profiling of Chronic P0523. Mutations in CHEK2 gene in the Czech Breast Cancer Lymphocytic Leukaemia by Array CGH Families S. Y. Moon1, J. L. McKenzie1, U. R. Jewell1, P. S. Ganly2,1, C. M. Morris1,2; M. Lukesova, E. Machackova, P. Vasickova, M. Navratilova, H. Pavlu, J. Kuk- 1Christchurch School of Medicine, Christchurch, New Zealand, 2Canterbury lova, V. Kosinova, L. Foretova; Health Laboratories, Christchurch, New Zealand. Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, Brno, Czech Re- Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is the most common form of leu- public. kaemia in adults in the western world. Research into the genetic basis Cell cycle regulator CHEK2 is an important breast cancer susceptibility of CLL has successfully improved survival rate, but further advances gene. It seems that the contribution and spectrum of CHEK2 mutations are hampered by resolution limits of conventional genetic screening varies from country to country. techniques such as cytogenetics, FISH, and metaphase CGH. We Our aim was to detect CHEK2 1100delC mutation and genomic rear- have applied high-resolution microarray CGH to analyse DNA copy rangements in CHEK2 gene among patients with breast cancer from number imbalances in a cohort of 50 CLL patient samples and identi- high-risk families with negative testing results of BRCA1 and BRCA2 fied genetic imbalances that have not previously been recognised, but genes. correlate with disease progression and treatment outcome. Sample Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) has been ap- DNA was extracted from CLL cell populations with an average purity plied for examination of CHEK2 rearrangements and CHEK2 1100delC of 84%, and co-hybridised with normal reference DNA onto UCSF 1.4 mutation. DNA from 180 breast cancer patients with no previously Mb BAC arrays. Reference DNA was taken from the same individual found BRCA1/2 mutation was investigated. In addition 273 BRCA1/2 for all array hybridisations, and we identified sites of normal copy num- negative breast cancer patients were investigate for the presence of ber variations (CNVs) in this reference in a separate study by array CHEK2 exon 9-10 deletion using PCR reaction with specific primers. hybridisation against 20 non-CLL samples. In addition, approximately This deletion was originally reported in families of Czechoslovakian 10% of CLL samples were also hybridised against DNA extracted from ancestry. the same patients’ non-leukaemic neutrophils. Known recurrent copy The 1100delC germline mutation was identified in one from 180 fami- number changes, such as deletions of 13q14, 11q22-23, 17p13, and lies tested (0,56 %) and the deletion of exon 9-10 was identified in 4 trisomy 12, were detected in 27 (54%), 9 (18%), 8 (16%), and 7 (14%) from 453 families tested (0,88 %). Both mutations lead to premature samples, respectively. Novel sites of recurrent copy number changes stop codon. The average age at the diagnosis of breast cancer in mu- that are not recognised as sites of normal CNV and have not been tation carriers was 41,2 years and three of them reported a positive previously correlated with CLL have also been identified. These sites family history of breast cancer. have high potential to assist future improved clinical stratification and It is suggested that there is a two-fold increased risk of breast cancer in better adjusted treatment regimes. 1100C mutation carriers compared to noncarriers. However, the clinical impact of other CHEK2 gene mutations needs further investigations. P0526. Detection of ABL tyrosine kinase domain mutations in In the poster we present pedigrees of five breast cancer families that Turkish chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients treated with carry deleterious mutation in CHEK2 gene. imatinib mesylate Contract grant sponsor: Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: MZO D. Akcora1, G. Akay1, A. Rüstemov1, O. Aydos1, B. Altınok2, A. Sunguroglu1, O. 00209805. Ilhan3, M. Ozcan3, M. Beksac3, G. Gurman3; 1Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, An- P0524. Cytotoxic and cytogenetic analysis in a human kara, Turkey, 2Ankara University, Institute of Biotechnology, Ankara, Turkey, cholangiocarcinoma cell line after resveratrol treatment 3Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematology, Ankara, L. Roncoroni1,2, L. Elli2, M. T. Bardella2, E. Dogliotti1,2, C. Terrani2, M. G. Gri- Turkey. moldi3, E. Dolfini1, L. Doneda1; Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a malignant hematopoietic stem 1Department of Biology and Genetic for Health Sciences, University of Milan, cell disorder that is characterized by the Philadelphia (Ph) chromo- Milan, Italy, 2Center for Prevention and Diagnosis of Celiac Disease, IRCCS some which results in fusion of BCR and ABL genes. BCR-ABL fusion Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, University of Milan, gene encodes cytoplasmic BCR-ABL oncoprotein with a constitutive Milan, Italy, 3Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dental Sciences, Pathology tyrosine kinase activity that enhances the proliferation of affected cell Unit, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. clone. Selective inhibitor of BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase namely imatinib Cholangiocarcinoma represents 3% of all gastrointestinal cancers, its mesylate (Gleevec, STI571) is used as an effective therapeutic agent. incidence is increasing and therapies are dissatisfied. In vitro stud- imatinib induces the BCR-ABL protein into the inactive conformation ies demonstrated that resveratrol (RES), a poly-phenol agent, inhibits by binding to amino acids in the ABL kinase domain and blocks the proliferation of cancer cells in two-dimensional cell cultures, through binding of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). This prevents the transfer an increase of apoptosis and cell destruction. New insights into tumor of phosphate from ATP and blocks the downstream signal pathways, biology are produced by another in vitro model, the multicellular tumor leading to growth arrest or apoptosis. Targeted therapy with imatinib spheroids (MCTS). We evaluated the activity of RES on a human chol- has led to revolution in the treatment of CML. However, some patients angiocarcinoma cell line (SK-CHA-1) growing in two-dimensional and develope resistance to imatinib. Point mutations in the ABL kinase do- MCTS culture. main is the major mechanism of resistance in patients treated with SK-CHA-1 cell line with pseudo-triploid karyotype (modal chromo- imatinib and these missense mutations cause different degrees of somes number 71) and 12 different markers chromosomes have been resistance. In this study we’ve investigated the frequencies of T315I exposed to different doses of RES (8, 16, 32, 64 microM) in both mod- found in imatinib binding region, E255K found in P-loop region and els. We investigated: 1) cell viability; 2) cell morphology; 3) plasmatic M351T found in catalytic region mutations by ASO-PCR in 30 CML membrane damage through lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and alka- patients treated with an inadequate response to imatinib. In our study, line phosphatase (ALP) medium release; 4) apoptosis through trans- T315I mutation is seen in %43 of patients, E255K mutation is seen in glutaminase type 2 (TG2) activity 5) karyotype. %10 of patients and M351T mutation is seen in %26.6 of CML patients. RES significantly reduced viability in both cell culture systems (from The relation between the mutations and the clinical outcome is impor- 89% to 16% vs 100% controls) and induced partial disaggregation of tant for predicting the treatment. MCTS in a dose and time dependent fashion. In the culture media we found increased LDH levels (decupled vs controls) and ALP activity P0527. Karyotype monitoring during imatinib treatment in (quadruplicated vs controls), suggesting a plasma membrane injury; chronic myeloid leukemia high levels of TG2 activity in treated cells suggested high pro-apoptotic A. A. Arghir1, G. M. Cardos1, R. Colesniuc1, M. Bari2, A. G. Lungeanu1; stimuli (from 108% to 462% vs controls in both cell culture systems). 1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2Filantropia Clinical No chromosomal changes have been observed. Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. In conclusion, the cytotoxic effect of RES on SK-CHA-1 cells supports The non-transplantational therapy in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) further studies on the possible use of resveratrol as chemotherapic/ has been dramatically changed by the introduction of imatinib mesyl-Cancer genetics 12 ate. Glivec became the therapy of choice in chronic phase CML. chromosome in conventional analysis and/or BCR-ABL fusions were We present some preliminary results of cytogenetic evaluation within a determined as 4%, 2.8%, and 1.9% in CMPD?, ET, and PV subgroups study aiming the long term Glivec therapy monitoring. and excluded. In a total of 337 analysis the frequency of structural- Chromosomal studies were performed on GTG-banded slides ob- numerical abnormalities were determined (CMPD:30.9%-20.3 n=123; tained from bone marrow, after short term culture and standard prepa- ET:13.8%-6.4% n=94; PV: 5.6%-9.3% n=54; CMML: 19.4%-45% n=40; ration. FISH studies were done with BCR/ABL probes (Vysis), BAC IMF: 10.0%-15.0% n=20; HES: 16.7%-16.7% n=6). Structural and nu- FISH probe (8p23.1) and WCP probes (Vysis, Cytocell). merical gathered the leading chromosomal aberations were 17, 22, 11 Cytogenetic evaluations were performed at 6, 12, 18 and 24 months. for CMPD, 7, 17, 8 for ET, and 21, 8, 7 for PV. After more than 2 years of treatment most of the patients were as- sessed at 12 months intervals. P0530. Genetic aberrations appeared during the disease course Sixty six out of 77 patients (86%) had advanced disease or a history of may be associated with clinical progression in CLL patients long term interferon-alpha and conventional chemotherapy in chronic E. Arranz1, O. González1, S. Ramiro1, M. Renedo1, C. Blas1, A. Pastor1, C. phase CML. Eleven patients (14%) received imatinib as first thera- Fernandez-R.1, A. Alonso2, E. Martí2, M. Pérez2, J. Fernández-Rañada2; peutic choice in early chronic phase. Among these patients, 2 had ad- 1Gemolab, Madrid, Spain, 2Ruber Hospital, Madrid, Spain. ditional pre-treatment chromosomal changes [7q additional material Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common type of of unknown origin and translocation t(8;14), respectively], and 2 had leukaemia in adults. Clonal aberrations are found in about 50% of variant t(9;22): t(3;9;22) and t(1;9;22). None of the patients receiving cases by chromosome analysis and in about 80% of CLL cases by front line Glivec therapy showed karyotype evolution so far. Instead, 5q fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Progression of disease is ob- deletion was seen in Ph negative cells of one patient, after 24 months served in some cases, but genetic factors involved are not completely of therapy. known. The evaluation of cellular genome, prior to Glivec therapy, helps the The aim of this study was to analyze the impact of genetic alterations prediction of response. Monitoring both Ph positive and Ph negative that appear during disease evolution in clinical progression in CLL pa- clones for chromosomal changes allows a better management of CML tients. Clinical parameters evaluated were: progression in stage, me- patients. dian survival time and need for treatment. Acknowledgements: The authors gratefully acknowledge to CNCSIS FISH using LSI D13S319/13q34/CEP 12 and LSI p53/ LSI ATM multi- National Program Board (Project No. 19/2006). color probe sets (Vysis) was performed on bone marrow or peripheral blood samples from 21 CLL patients at various time points during the P0528. Cytogenetic evolution patterns in CML post-SCT disease course [median follow up: 5 years (2-14)]. K. Karrman1, B. Sallerfors2, S. Lenhoff3, T. Fioretos1, B. Johansson1; Genetic aberrations occurred during disease development were ob- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Sweden, 2Depart- served in 5/21(24%) patients. Genetic alterations detected included: ment of Medicine, Halmstad Hospital, Sweden, 3Department of Hematology, del (13q14) monoallelic (n=1), del (13q14) biallelic (n=1), del (13q14) Lund University Hospital, Sweden. monoallelic and biallelic (n=1), del (11q 22.3) (ATM gene) (n=2). The cytogenetic evolution patterns in CMLs after allogeneic SCT are dif- The median overall survival (OS) and need for treatment were not ferent from the ones observed in non-transplanted patients, a phenom- significantly different between patients with and without appearance enon suggested to be caused by the conditioning regime. We reviewed of genetic aberrations during the disease course. The only difference 131 CMLs displaying karyotypic evolution after SCT (122 allogeneic, 9 between the 2 groups was a greater progression in stage in the for- autologous), treated at Lund University Hospital or reported in the lit- mer group (80% vs. 44%). It is remarkable that progression occurred erature. Major route abnormalities (i.e., +8, +Ph, i(17q), +19, +21, +17 despite the appearance of non high-risk genetic abnormalities (13q14 and -7) were seen in 14%, balanced aberrations in 61%, hyperdiploidy deletion).Although more cases are needed to confirm these results, in 19%, pseudodiploidy in 79%, divergent clones in 14%, and Ph-neg- our data suggest that genetic aberrations appeared during evolution of ative clones in 21%. The breakpoints involved in secondary structural disease may be associated with clinical progression in CLL patients. rearrangements clustered at 1q21, 1q32, 7q22, 9q34, 11q13, 11q23, 12q24, 13q14, 17q10, and 22q11. Cytogenetic abnormalities common P0531. Genome copy number variations unique to CML in AML after genotoxic exposure, i.e., der(1;7)(q10;p10), del(3p), -5, A. Chanalaris1, D. Brazma1, C. Grace1, J. Melo2, J. F. Apperley2, T. L. Hollyo- del(5q), -7, -17, der(17p), -18, and -21, were only rarely seen post- ake3, E. Nacheva1; SCT. Comparing the cytogenetic features in relation to type of SCT 1Royal Free & UC Medical School, London, United Kingdom, 2Imperial College revealed that balanced aberrations were significantly more common and Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Glasgow Royal Infir- after allogeneic than after autologous SCT (64% and 22%, respec- mary, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. tively, P = 0.03). In addition, there was a trend as regards hyperdiploidy Copy number variations (CNVs) are now a recognised feature of the being more common after autologous (P = 0.07) and pseudodiploidy human genome with unknown phenotypic consequences. Chronic my- being more frequent after allogeneic SCT (P = 0.09). eloid leukaemia (CML) is a haematopoietic stem cell disorder defined by expression of the BCR-ABL fusion gene, a constitutively activated P0529. Classification of chromosomal aberrations in a group of tyrosine kinase. We studied 49 CML samples at various stages of the patients with chronic myeloproliferative disorders disease by arrayCGH using a 1 Mbase BAC chip (SGI2600, Perkin T. Tuncali, H. G. Karabulut, H. I. Ruhi, N. Y. Kutlay, F. Sadeghi, A. Ibrahim, B. Elmer). The aCGH profiles revealed a large number of single BAC Saglam, A. Vicdan, K. Yararbas, A. Tukun; imbalances where fluorescence ratios exceeded a ± 3 SD threshold. Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. We limited our analysis to imbalances found in at least three samples. Chronic myeloproliferative disorders (CMPD) are thought to be clonal A total of 194 BACs met this criterion and were compared with the disorders arising in a multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cell. The di- CNVs recently published (Redon1 at al., Nature Genetics, 2006 and agnosis of an CMPD other than chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) Database of Genomic Variations at http://projects.tcag.ca/variation). can be problematic due to a lack of clinically applicable clonal mark- Many of the loci identified corresponded to the published data. Howev- ers. It’s suggested that in patients with classical CMPD phenotype, the er, among the 99 loci unique to our study, the two most frequent were hematopoietic stem cells appear to be polyclonal, suggesting that the BAC clones RP11-452O22 (35%) and RP11-89C6 (26%). Confirmed chronic CMPD other than CML may actually be a genetically heteroge- by Q-PCR, these imbalances are not reported elsewhere. CML occurs neous group of disorders. Here, we present the results of a retrospec- in about 1 per 100,000 of the general population, so it is unlikely that tive data mining study for CMPD patients refered to our department for any constitutional CNVs offering a predisposition to CML would occur cytogenetic analysis to seek the clonality. We followed the the most in the 270 individuals studied by Redon et al. Our results suggest that established criteria for CMPD released by the WHO and Polycthemia these newly identified unique CNVs, either constitutional or disease Study Group for inclusions. The data was obtained from results of the associated, are specific to CML and offer new insights into the biology bone marrow and peripheral blood samples of 274 patients diagnosed of this malignancy. or suspected as CMPD between May 1998 and January 2007 ana- lyzed with conventional /FISH cytogenetic methods. The cohorts were formed as CMPD?, ET, PV, CMML, IMF, and HES. The existence of Ph Cancer genetics 1 P0532. Secondary chromosomal abnormalities within developing cancerous cells in tissue. Philadelphia positive Chronic Myeloid Leukemia In order to evaluate the highest risk patients, p53 nuclear accumulation B. Saglam, K. Yararbas, I. Akalın, H. Ilgın Ruhi, T. Tuncali, H. G. Karabulut, N. evaluated by monoclonal antibody DO7 and Envision + Dual link+DAB Yurur Kutlay, A. Vicdan, F. Sadeghi, A. Tukun; (kit) in ordinary paraffin-embedded tissue sections. The method used Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An- to assess p53 status were immunohistochemistry (IHC), indicating ac- kara, Turkey. cumulation of p53 in tumoral and normal tissue in colorectal cancer Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a stem cell disorder character- patients. P53 protein accumulation was seen in tumor tissues and nor- ized by Philadelphia chromosome (Ph), showing a progression into mal cells adjacent to tumor cells. Our finding suggested that detection an agressive blast phase from a chronic phase. This progression is of p53 protein accumulation may play an important role in developing frequently preceeded by secondary chromosomal abnormalities which colon cancerous cells among cancer patients. It is suggested that de- are considered as the cytogenetic signs of progression. In this respect tection of the p53 gene mutation can be investigate among colon can- a retrospective analysis of 162 cases of CML with Ph was performed cerous cells and normal tissue adjacent to tumor cells in the future. in our department. In 43 of the cases, presence of extra chromosomal abnormalities was observed. The most frequent abnormalities were +8 P0535. No association between the CHEK2 I157T allelic variant (7 cases); -20, -21, -Y (4 cases each); -5, -7, -12, -13, del(17)(q25)(3 and colorectal cancer in Bulgaria cases each); and -18, -19, i(17)(q10), del(17)(p13)(2 cases each). 28 T. K. Kadiyska1, D. V. Konstantinova1, V. B. Sokolova1, M. B. Mirchev2, R. P. different rearrangements such as t(2;8)(p21;q24), inv(4)(p14;q12), Kaneva1, I. M. Kremensky1, V. I. Mitev3; t(3;4)(q13;q31) not previously associated with Ph+ CML were ob- 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital “St. served. The cumulative data on cytogenetic studies of Ph+ CML will Marina”, Varna, Bulgaria, 3Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical contribute not only to the prediction of the prognosis but also to the University, Sofia, Bulgaria. enhancement of monitoring responses to the treatment. In the development of colorectal cancer (CRC), genetic and environ- mental factors are involved, but the exact mechanism of carcinogen- P0533. A unique complex translocations (9;22;6) in a patient with esis still remains unclear. The CHEK2 gene encodes a protein kinase chronic myelogenous leukemia that participates in the DNA damage response in many cell types. M. Khaleghian, C. Azimi; Three founder alleles have been described in this gene and all of them Cancer Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Re- were associated with different cancer types. public of Iran. The missense variant c.470 T>C, p. I157T has been associated with Complex chromosome translocations involve changes between three an increased risk of breast, colon, kidney, prostate, and thyroid cancer. or more chromosomes and are found very rarely in the general popu- This variant was also seen in healthy population controls. lation. Aim: To determine the frequency of the I157T alleles in Bulgarian pa- Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is characterized in about 90- tients with CRC and healthy controls. 95% of cases by a karyotypic marker, the Philadelphia chromosome, Methods: The analysis was performed in a total of 299 patients and originating from a reciprocal translocation of chromosomes 9 and 22, 273 healthy individuals. Samples were analyzed by PCR- RFLP. All t(9;22)(q34;q11), and genetically resulting in the fusion of BCR/ABL mutations were further confirmed by direct sequencing. gene. About 5-10% of Philadelphia positive patients with CML show Results: The I157T variant was found in 8 patients (2,7%) and 8 con- various complex translocations involving the third chromosome in ad- trols (2,9%). There was no association between the mutation and dition to chromosomes 9 and 22. CRC. The patient group was then divided according to family history In this study we report a 20-year-old male patient with a diagnosis of and each of them was compared to controls and in between, but again CML with unusual and complex translocations involving chromosomes no significant differences were found in their frequencies. Different 9, 22 and 6. extra-colonic tumors were described in the pedigrees of three family Cytogenetic analysis was done on a 24-hour culture of bone marrow cases. Conclusions: Our results from this case - control study do not specimen. The cells were cultured by conventional methods and pro- confirm the role of the I157T mutation in the development of CRC in cessed by standard techniques, using GTG-banding. The FISH were the Bulgarian population. Larger studies are required to investigate performed according to the manufacturers’ directions, using whole the tendency for higher frequency of different cancer types in mutation chromosome painting probes. carriers. The karyotype of our case was: t(9;22;6)(q34;q11;p21). Apparently, the first translocation occurred between chromosomes 9q P0536. Pattern of distribution of SNPs in DNA repair genes in and 22q resulting to the formation of Philadelphia chromosome. Then colorectal cancer patients - a preliminary report. the distal segment of the chromosome 6p has been translocated to the J. Gil1, P. Karpinski1, P. Leszczynski1, I. Laczmanska1, D. Ramsey2; end of the derivative chromosome 9. 1Department of Genetics, Wroclaw, Poland, 2School of Mathematics and Statis- According to literature review and to the best of our knowledge, our tics, Limerick, Ireland. case is a unique tranlocations which has not been reported. Epidemiological data shows that colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most frequent cancer. One to two percent of all CRCs are caused by P0534. Correlation between p53 protein accumulation and the mutation in APC which leads to familial adenomatuos polyposis while development of colon cancer from Iran about 5-10% of all CCR is caused by mutations in mismatch repair N. Taghavi1, F. Biramijamal1, G. Iravanloo2, K. Shamimi3, P. Azimi4, M. Soltani1, genes leading to hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) E. Nazari1; syndrome. Although the participation of the mentioned above muta- 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, tions in CRC development is obvious, in more than 85% of cases the Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cancer Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, genetic background remains unknown. 3University of Medical Sciences-Dept. Surgery, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, The involvement of “minor impact genes” such as XME and DNA-repair 4University of Medical Sciences-Dept. Pathology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of genes in aetiology of sporadic cancer is postulated by other authors Iran. therefore in our research we focused on analysis of polymorphisms Colorectal cancer is the third cause of the cancer-related death in the in DNA-repair genes in CRC. On the basis of the recently published world and the fourth most common cancer in Iran. The peak age is be- studies we hypothesise that it is not a single genetic alteration but a tween 60-80 years old, while about 20% of cases occur under the age network of polymorphisms that plays a key role in the individual sus- of 50. It is estimated that the annual incidence rate of colorectal cancer ceptibility to cancer. In order to verify this hypothesis we have chosen is about 150,000 and the death toll is 50,000 around the world. One 11 genes involved in three different ways of DNA repair: base excision of the basic mutation involved in these tumors include inactivation or repair (BER- OGG1, XRCC1), nucleotide excision repair (NER- XPA, alteration of p53 gene. Changes in this tumor suppressor gene are the XPC, XPD, XPG, XPF, ERCC1) and homologous recombination repair basic event in many cancers. One of the methods to identify changes (HR-RAD51, XRCC3, NBS1). The study group consists of 133 patients in this gene includes Immunohistochemistry (IHC). We studied the ex- with CRC; 20 of them diagnosed with HNPCC or suspected of HNPCC pression of p53 protein in cancerous and normal tissues from colon and the rest with sporadic cancer. cancer patients for predicting the natural path of the disease and also We compare the frequency of polymorphisms between patients’ and Cancer genetics 1 control groups and we define an individual profile for every investi- gene is reported to be associated with increased risk of breast cancer. gated person in order to establish the pattern of polymorphisms char- This study evaluates the influence of genetic polymorphism of CYP17 acteristic for CRC patients. on breast cancer susceptibility. A polymerase chain reaction-restric- tion fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method was used to P0537. Molecular analysis of some genetic polymorphisms detect the polymorphism, and the genotypes identified were assigned associated with colorectal cancer in Romanian patients as homozygous wild type (A1A1), heterozygous variant (A1A2), and M. L. Toma1, L. Belusica2, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, M. Stavarachi1, I. Dumi- homozygous variant (A2A2). trescu2, A. M. Craciun2, D. Usurelu1, I. Radu1, L. Gavrila1; Probably a statistically significant increased risk in carriers of homozy- 1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Clinical Hospital Dr. gous A2 allele was found in woman (P < 0.001) in comparison with A1. Cantacuzino, Bucharest, Romania. However, no significant association between the genotype and breast Mutations in APC gene have not previously been characterized among cancer risk was observed among women with strong family history Romanian patients with CRC. We analyzed blood and tumor samples yet. collected from 32 patients (22 men and 10 women) and 32 relatives We genotyped 200 cases of primary breast cancer and population without CRC. We tested the presence of mutations in exons 6, 7, 12, controls, all age of Iranian women, for the CYP17 polymorphism stud- 13, 14 and in regions B, L and W of exon 15 by PCR multiplex and 5 ied. Small overall association was found between CYP17 and breast bp deletions at position 1061 by SSCP methods. We observed mul- cancer risk, for the A2/A2 carriers compared to the A1/A1 carriers until tiple deletions (e.g. in exon 6, 12, and in 15B, 15L and 15W regions) today. in a DNA extracted form the tumoral sample, but not in blood cell. We speculated that these mutations are an example of genomic instability P0540. The Methylation Analysis of DAP Kinase (DAPK1) Gene in described in malignancies. In one patient, we detected a deletion of Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Patients exon 13 in DNA extracted from blood and tumoral tissues. For the pa- S. Celik1, T. Ozkan1, N. Varol2, O. Aydos2, D. Akcora2, A. Karadag2, G. Gur- tients analyzed until now we didn’t find any mutation at codon 1061. man3, A. Sunguroglu2; Association between the VDR gene polymorphisms and cancer de- 1Ankara University, Biotechnology Institue, ANKARA, Turkey, 2Ankara Univer- velopment has been suggested by several studies. This study investi- sity, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Sihhiye-ANKARA, gate genotype frequencies and association of the VDR Taq I and Apa Turkey, 3Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Haematology, polymorphisms with colorectal cancers in Romanian patients (n=32) in ANKARA, Turkey. correlation with normal population (n=40). Prevalence of VDR Apa al- Cancer occurs as a result of various genetic and epigenetic mecha- leles and genotype frequencies in patients with colorectal cancer was nisms which cause loss/gain of functions of tumour suppressor genes, similar to that in the normal population ; in the same time, for VDR Taq oncogenes, DNA repair and apoptosis genes. DAP kinase gene, which I prevalence was different to that in normal population (p 0,0083 , 95% is an proapoptotic gene, induces the cell to apoptosis response to sev- CI , 1.2992<RR<5.2609). We need to increase the size of the lots in eral internal and external apoptotic stimulants. Changes occurring in order to confirm our data. DAP kinase gene cause uncontrolled proliferation instead of going to apoptosis of the cell and cause development. Therefore DAP Kinase P0538. Analysis of the microsatellite (tttta) polymorphism of the gene is described as a tumor suppressor gene. DNA methylation, one n CYP11A1 gene in patients with prostate cancer of epigenetic mechanisms that have as much importance as genetic T. Celhar1, K. Gersak2, Z. Ovcak3, B. Sedmak4, I. Mlinaric-Rascan1; mechanisms in cancer formation can prevent gene expression by si- 1Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Division of Medical lencing. Silencing of DAP kinase through this methylation mechanism Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Medical can be observed in many solid tumour and hematopoietic malignan- Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Institute of Pathology, Medical Faculty, University cies. In this study methylation of DNAs of 35 patients with chronic my- of Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4Department of Urology, University Medical Centre, Lju- eloid leukaemia and DNAs of 25 healthy patients were analysed by bljana, Slovenia. Methylation Spesific PCR (MSP). As a result, it has been determined The CYP11A1 gene encodes a cytochrome P450 enzyme, which that 4 of 12 CML patients with drug resistance have hypermethylation catalyses the first step in the synthesis of sex hormones. There is a and statistically the significant difference is established. However all of microsatellite (tttta) polymorphism in the promoter of CYP11A1 and the CML patients with no drug resistance and all of the control sample n the absence of the (tttta) CYP11A1 allele has been associated with groups DNAs don’t have methylation. In this study although no correla- 4 clinically advanced prostate cancer. The aims of the present case-con- tion is found between hypermethylation of DAPK1 which is defined as trol study were (i) to examine the association of the number of tttta a tumour suppressor gene and formation of CML, significant relation repeats with prostate cancer risk and aggressiveness and (ii) to test between hypermethylation of DAPK1and progress of CML and drug microsatellite instability. A total of 206 Slovenian males were enrolled resistance is determined. in the study: 96 controls and 110 prostate cancer (CaP) patients with prostate gland confined (pT2) or extracapsular extended (pT3) can- P0541. Mutation Analysis of the DBC2 Gene in Sporadic and cer. Prostate tissue samples were collected in pairs of histologicaly Familial Breast Cancer normal and tumor tissue. Polymerase chain reaction followed by poly- M. Ohadi, R. Habibi; acrilamide gel electrophoresis revealed five CYP11A1 (tttta) alleles, Royan Institute, Tehran, NJ, United States. n corresponding to 4, 6, 8, 9 and 10 repeat units. The frequency distri- The expression of the recently identified tumor suppressor gene, DBC2 bution in the control group was similar to previously reported data for (Deleted in Breast Cancer 2), is frequently extinguished in breast can- Caucasians. On the basis of the presence or absence of the (tttta) cer cells or tissues. In the current study we have analyzed 100 spo- 4 allele, no statistically significant differences in genotype distributions radic breast cancer cases by PCR-SSCP, and DHPLC, followed by were observed between the control and CaP group and no associa- direct sequencing. An additional 17 breast cancer families, who were tion was found with tumor aggressiveness. Furthermore, no microsat- negative for the BRCA1/2 mutations, were analyzed by direct sequenc- ellite instability was observed in matched normal and tumor tissues, ing. Mutation analysis of the essential promoter region, all exons and except for three samples that need further investigation. In conclusion, exon/intron boundaries of the DBC2 gene was performed. Three novel the (tttta) CYP11A1 polymorphism may not be a useful biomarker for mutations were observed in the promoter and 5’-untranslated region n prostate cancer risk aggressiveness prediction. (UTR) of the gene; a G>A transition in the promoter at nt -238 from the transcription start site, and two tumor-specific mutations at nt -121C>T P0539. Polymorphism in cytochrome P450c17 (CYP17) is and nt +48G>A. No deleterious mutations were detected in the coding associated with increased risk of breast cancer sequence of the gene in familial and sporadic breast cancer cases. M. Hosseini1, M. Houshmand2, A. Ebrahimi2; The sequence variations found within the promoter and 5’-UTR region 1Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for of the gene warrant expression analysis and screening more tumor Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. samples at this region. The polymorphism in cytochrome P450c17 (CYP17), a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of estrogen, has been associated with breast can- cer risk, but previous studies have been relatively small yet. CYP17 Cancer genetics 1 P0542. Differential methylation of HLAIII locus (6q21) in normal histologically confirmed stage I/II endometrial cancer. and cancer cervical tissues DNA was extracted form fresh tumor tissue and from whole blood. For D. V. Gra1, T. L. Azhikina2, N. P. Kiseleva1; MSI status determination we used a panel of six polymorphic markers 1Institute of Carcinogenesis, N.N. Blokhin Cancer Research Center of Rus. - BAT26, D2S123, D5S346, D18S35, FGA, and TP53. MSI(+) were Acad. Med. Sci., Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov defined cases where two or more markers showed instability. CTNNB1 Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, exon 3 was direcly sequenced. Russian Federation. We detected MSI in 10 tumors (28.6%). Two of them (20%) harbored Epigenetic alterations, such as abnormal DNA-methylation patterns, CTNNB1 mutations - a transversion at Ser 37 and a previously unde- are associated with many human tumor types. New techniques have scribed deletion of 48 bp corresponding to loss of codons 31 to 47. been developed to perform genome-wide screening for alterations in MSI(-) tumors had no mutations. DNA-methylation patterns to identify new tumor-suppressor genes and As a downstream transcriptional activator in the Wnt pathway, ß- to find patterns that can be used in diagnosis and prognosis. catenin is regulated by phosphorylation on Ser/Thr sites encoded by Non-methylated Genomic Sites Coincidence Cloning (NGSCC) al- exon 3 of the gene. Mutations at these residues often lead to nuclear lows to analyze tissue-specific distribution of the unmethylated CpG accumulation of the protein and activation of target genes c-Myc and sites within the megabase(s)-long genomic DNA fragments (NGSCC; cyclin D1. Azhikina et al., Mol Gen Genomics, 271: 22-32). We applied this tech- We identified mutations that alter or abolish Ser/Thr residues impli- nique to the HLA III locus (6q21), containing D6S273, the known as cated in the down-regulation of ß-catenin. In our patient group their a marker of early genetic alterations in cervical neoplasias. Hetero- frequency is 5,7% and they are associated with MSI positive cases zygocity loss in this specific locus correlates with tumor progression (p=0.021). and suggests that there are potential tumor-suppressor genes in this region of the chromosome 6 (Mazurenko et al., Mol Biol (Mosk), 40: P0545. Identification of DNA methylation markers for detection 436-447). and classification of colon cancer by epigenetic profiling With the use of NGSCC we constructed high density maps of unmeth- E. H. J. van Roon, M. van Puijenbroek, H. Morreau, J. M. Boer; ylated CpGs for both cancer and normal cervical tissues. We found LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands. the methylation patterns of CpG’s in promoter region of BAT2, BAT3 Promoter methylation is thought to be an initial event in tumorigen- and MICB differ in normal and cancer tissues. These results were con- esis. Especially right- sided colon cancer is associated with epigenetic firmed by bisulfite sequencing of the CpG islands of these genes. modification of gene expression. The mismatch repair gene MLH1 is Thus, the applied approach revealed characteristic tissue-specific fea- a prime target for epigenetic downregulation with a frequency of 40% tures of large-scale distribution of unmethylated CpGs. The changes in all right-sided colon carcinomas. Our aim in this study is to identify observed in this distribution might provide useful epigenetic markers of additional epigenetic markers to generate a panel that will allow the cancerous transformation. epigenetic detection and classification of colorectal cancer (CRC) and its precursor forms. P0543. Studying of adenovirus E1A gene silencing effects on We carried out a genome-wide methylation study on clinically well- HEK 293 cancerous cells using RNAi technique described colorectal adenocarcinomas, adenomas and paired normal H. Vosgha, M. Behmanesh, M. Sadeghizadeh; epithelium. DNA from macrodissected fresh-frozen tissue was digest- Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ed by the restriction enzyme MseI, linker-ligated and subsequently di- RNA interference (RNAi) is a natural gene regulatory mechanism gested by two methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes. The remain- widely used for studying gene function in a variety of species. Small ing fragments were amplified, labeled and hybridized to our 9K clone interference RNA (siRNA) technology has been reported to produce library CpG island microarrays. Recently, we extended the screen to post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) in mammalian cells. Stud- high-density CpG island tiling oligonucleotide microarrays. ies have been shown that siRNA expression mediated by vectors We identified several loci aberrantly methylated with a high frequency causes efficient and stable down regulation of gene expression, result- in carcinomas using our 9K array. Thusfar three loci were verified using ing in functional inactivation of the targeted genes. So in this study, we direct- and clonal bisulfite sequencing and are currently being studied designed a human U6 promoter-driven mammalian expression vector in more detail. Interestingly, one locus was shown to be hypermethyl- to produce small hairpin RNA (shRNA) for E1A gene transcripts. To ated in carcinomas as well as adenomas. Possible clinical applications transfect HEK 293 cells by our designed plasmid, dendrosome, a new of these markers include early detection of cancer with applications designed chemical compound was used. Using this technique, we got such as in feces screening, and cancer prognosis. a system for stable expression of shRNA to reduce Ad5 E1A gene tran- scripts in these cells. In this report we will present the result of E1A si- P0546. FISH studies using bac clones of the EVI1 locus lencing effects on cell cycle genes such as Rb1 by gene expression. in 9 patients with hematological malignancies carrying 3q rearrangements. P0544. Mutational analysis of the beta-catenin gene in MSI(+) D. Costa1, I. Madrigal2, A. Carrió1, C. Gómez1, M. Rozman3, J. Esteve3, B. and MSI(-) endometrial tumors from bulgarian patients Nomdedeu3, E. Campo1; D. V. Konstantinova1,2, T. K. Kadiyska1, R. P. Kaneva1, S. I. Ivanov3, R. G. 1Hematopathology Unit. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2IDIBAPS, Biochem- Dimitrov4, T. V. Dyankova3, E. Tiufektchieva5, K. P. Meinhardt6, N. I. Doganov7, istry and Molecular Genetics Department, Hospital Clínic. Barcelona, Spain, V. I. Mitev2, I. M. Kremensky1; 3Hematology Service. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gyne- Chromosomal rearrangements involving 3q26 are a recurrent aberra- cology “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Chemistry and Biochem- tion in malignant myeloid disorders. Several of these rearrangements istry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Oncogynecology, National involve the EVI1 oncogene or its surrounding sequences and are asso- Centre of Oncology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4II Clinic of Operative Gynecology, Univer- ciated with a poor prognosis. In order to know whether the EVI1 locus sity Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5I was rearranged in 9 patients with hematological malignancies carrying Clinic of Operative Gynecology, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecol- 3q abnormalities, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) studies using ogy “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Department of Pathology, University BAC (bacterial artificial chromosome) clones were carried on. A dual Hospital “Aleksandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 7University Hospital of Obstetrics color probe was constructed with 9 BACs; centromeric clones covering and Gynecology “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria. 1Mb and including EVI1 gene were labeled with a red fluorescent dye Activating somatic mutations in exon 3 of the ß-catenin gene (CTN- and telomeric clones covering 1 Mb were labeled with a green fluores- NB1) have been identified in 11 - 25% of endometrial cancer patients. cent dye. From the 9 patients, two patients showed normal copies of Attempts to systematize their distribution among microsatellite unsta- the EVI1 locus, four patients showed one EVI1 locus rearranged and in ble MSI(+) and stable MSI(-) tumors have produced conflicting results. all of them the breakpoint on 3q26 was telomeric to EVI1 gene, one pa- Tumor MSI has been reported at frequences from 17 to 45% for en- tient showed one copy of the EVI1 locus translocated to another chro- dometrial cancer. mosome, one patient showed one copy of the EVI1 locus rearranged In order to evaluate the frequency of exon 3 CTNNB1 mutations and and the other copy translocated and one patient showed one extra their possible association with MSI status, we studied 35 patients with copy of the EVI1 locus. FISH studies using the EVI1 clones allowed Cancer genetics 1 the detection in 4 cases of different 3q abnormalities not previously P0549. APC and MYH mutations in Czech and Slovak FAP found by conventional cytogenetics. FISH analysis with BAC clones families was found to be a useful tool to identify the chromosome breakpoints M. Šulová1, J. Štekrová1, K. Zídková1, Z. Kleibl2, V. Kebrdlová1, K. Veselá1, M. affecting EVI1 locus in patients with 3q26 rearrangements. Kohoutová1; 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine and P0547. Clinical and genetic characterization of Austrian FAP General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biochemistry patients - A first report and Experimental Oncology of the First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech B. Wolf1, S. Gruber1, E. Roth1, J. Karner-Hanusch2; Republic. 1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Research Laboratories, Germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis gene (APC) result Vienna, Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Vienna, in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) as well as an attenuated form Austria. of this syndrome. FAP is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder Background: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an inherited predisposing to colorectal cancer. colorectal cancer syndrome characterized by the early onset of nu- We analyzed the APC gene for germline mutations in 59 Czech and merous polyps and associated with germ-line mutations in the adeno- 15 Slovak FAP patients. In addition, 50 APC-mutation-negative Czech matous polyposis coli (APC) gene. probands and 3 probands of Slovak origin were screened for large Material and Methods: We analyzed a series of 128 unrelated Austrian deletions of the APC gene. Mutation screening was performed using families clinically diagnosed with FAP for mutations in the APC gene. denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and/or protein truncation test. Protein-truncation test and heteroduplex analysis were used as pre- DNA fragments showing an aberrant electrophoretic banding pattern screening tests previous to DNA sequence analysis. Linkage analysis were sequenced. Screening for large deletions was performed by mul- was performed with 4 polymorphic microsatellite markers. tiplex ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Results and Conclusion: Medical examination revealed 69 (67.6%) We identified 46 germline mutations among the 74 unrelated probands patients with classical FAP symptoms and 33 (32.4%) patients with an including large deletions. We reported 20 novel germline APC muta- attenuated or atypical phenotype. In 55.6% of the families a genetic tions and 3 large deletions encompassing the whole-gene deletions defect was identified with at least one of the methods applied. The and/or exon 14 deletion. detection of a genetic defect in the APC gene was highly significantly Some of the APC negative FAP/AFAP cases have recently been found associated with a classical phenotype, the detection of innumerable to be attributable to MYH associated polyposis (MAP), an autosomal polyps, lesions of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) and des- recessive syndrome caused by mutation in the MYH gene. moids. DNA sequence analysis identified 61 pathogenic APC muta- We screened for germline MYH mutations in 120 APC-mutation-nega- tions. Six mutations were detected in more than one family. Twenty- tive probands with classical and attenuated FAP. As a prescreening nine mutations are novel. Only a polymorphic fragment pattern could to detect DNA sequence changes, denaturing high performance liq- be associated with the inheritance of the disease in two families. This uid chromatography (dHPLC) was performed using the WAVE system study is the first comprehensive report of APC gene mutations in Aus- (Transgenomic). Samples showing unique profiles were sequenced in trian FAP patients. both directions on ABI Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosys- tems). P0548. Association of biallelic BRCA2 mutations in a child with Altogether 10 previously reported changes and 8 novel genetic altera- rhabdomyosarcoma tions in MYH gene, mostly in intronic sequences were identified. V. Nicolas1, A. Defachelles2, B. Catteau3, J. Peyrat4, S. Lejeune-Dumoulin1, S. Supported by the VZ MSM0021620808 of the Czech Republic. Manouvrier-Hanu1, M. Holder-Espinasse1; 1Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Ser- P0550. Florescent in situ hybridization (FISH) for the detection vice d’Oncologie Pédiatrique, Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France, 3Service de of Ph- positive clone in CML: Comparison with metaphases Dermatologie, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 4Biologie Moléculaire, banding analysis Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France. A. Movafagh, I. F. Isfahani; Growth retardation, microcephaly and solid tumour in childhood can Shahid Beheshti Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. be linked to Fanconi anaemia. Fanconi anaemia is an autosomal re- Introduction: Chronic Meyloid Leukemia(CML) is characterized by cessive heterogeneous condition, consisting in 11 complementation the formation of BCR/ABL fusion gene, usually as a result of the groups and involving at least twelve genes. Recently, biallelic muta- Philadelphia(Ph) translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22.CML tions in BRCA2 have been discovered in patients classified as Fanconi is characterized by the Philadelphia in more than 90% of cases. Mate- anaemia complementation group FA-D1. rial and method : In this study, we present our results of cytogenetic We report on a further case presenting with rhabdomyosarcoma, in- analysis with GTG banding and Fluorescent in situ hybridization(FISH) trauterine and postnatal growth retardation and microcephaly. This is using dual color dual fusion probe CML patients registered at Taleghani the first child of non consanguineous parents. At the age of one year, hospital from March 2004 to March 2006 ,IRAN. cutaneous lesions were observed (naevi, haemangioma and cutis Results: GTG banding metaphases was Carried out in 30 Patients marmorata). The motor milestones were achieved normally. Karyotype Blood /Bone marrow. Ph translocation showed in 26(87%). About was 46XX, but breakage studies were not performed. 23(76.6%) of Ph- positive patients displayed the typical D-FISH signal At 1.5 year of age, an embryonic paravertebral rhabdomyosarcoma pattern, 17 included metaphase FISH and the rest has only interphase with vertebral extension and pulmonary metastasis was detected. The FISH results. association of this solid tumour and the growth retardation was sug- Conclusion: Fluorescence in situ hybridization has become a widely gestive of Fanconi anaemia type FA-D1, despite no other typical fea- used method for studying Ph translocation . tures of this condition were observed. Sequencing of BRCA2 revealed two deletions: one in exon 8 (886del- P0551. The role of CDH1 gene variants in inherited GT) and the other in exon 22 (9132delC). These two mutations are predisposition to gastric cancer deleterious and have been previously reported in either Fanconi anae- A. S. Tsukanov1, N. I. Pospekhova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, M. P. Nikulin2, R. F. mia or breast cancer. Garkavtseva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; Heterozygous BRCA2 mutation carriers are at risk of breast and other 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer cancers. In the family pedigree, there were cases of breast cancer in Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. the father’s family and cases of prostate and pancreatic cancer in the The CDH1 gene is a main suppressor of inherited gastric cancer. Nev- mother’s family. BRCA2 molecular analysis is pending in the parents. ertheless only a small faction of familial gastric cancer cases is due We discuss the clinical phenotype of this rare form of Fanconi anae- to CDH1 mutations. The genetic reason for the other inherited gastric mia, and the complexity of the management in these cases. cancer cases is unknown at present time. One possibility is that CDH1 variants confer gastric cancer risk. In particulary it is known that CDH1 -160C/A promoter polymorphism is connected with functional activity of CDH1. We investigated significance of CDH1 -160C/A and 2076C/T SNPs for Cancer genetics 1 gastric cancer risk among probands with familial gastric cancer with- and non-lymphoblastic leukemia in 12 cases (44,5%). out CDH1 mutations by case-control study. An association of 2076T Conclusions. The proportion of genetic disorders associated neoplasia variant with gastric cancer was found (P=0,007). The risk value for is significantly higher than in normal population. Therefore the identi- -160C/A was not significant. However a significant excess of geno- fication of risk factors in a family should be the first step for individual- types including both -160A and 2076T among probands in comparison ized counseling and monitoring, able to assure the detection in early with control sample was revealed (OR=3,33; P=0,009). The risk was stage of the disease. the highest if the variants -160A and 2076T composed a haplotype (OR=13,6; P=0,003). P0554. The Italian External Quality Control Programme for The data suggest a role of CDH1 -160C/A and 2076C/T SNPs in a pre- Adenomatous Polyposis of the Colon (APC gene): five years disposition to gastric cancer, especially when both the variants -160A experience and 2076T occur on the same chromosome. F. Censi, V. Falbo, G. Floridia, M. Salvatore, F. Tosto, D. Taruscio; Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. P0552. Differences in gene expression between transitional Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a rare autosomal dominant cell carcinoma of the human bladder with short and prolonged inherited disease (incidence 1/8000)1. More than 90% of families af- recurrence-free period using oligonucleotide microarrays fected by FAP have a mutation in the tumor suppressor gene APC J. Mares1, M. Szakacsova2, F. Zelezny3, J. Klema3, V. Soukup2, J. Duskova4, M. gene (5q21) (OMIM 175100). Mutations in this gene are characterized Babjuk2; by 100% penetrance, although there is a variation in phenotypic ex- 1Inst. of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles Univer- pression of the disease1. sity, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Urological Clinic, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles According to a 2004 survey of the Italian Human Genetic Society, University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Dept. of Cybernetics, Faculty of Electrical about 264 APC gene molecular genetic tests were performed by Ital- Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, ian laboratories2. 4Inst. of Pathological Anatomy, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, The Italian External Quality Control Programme (IEQC), financially Czech Republic. supported by the Ministry of Health and coordinated by the Italian Na- The prediction of tumour recurrence in patients with superficial bladder tional Institute of Health - Istituto Superiore di Sanità, started in 2000 in tumours is inaccurate. For the improvement of recurrence prognosis in order to improve the quality of molecular genetic tests in Italy3. In the patients with superficial bladder cancer we investigated gene expres- frame of the IEQC, about 50% of public laboratories performing APC sion and identified differences between superficial bladder tumours gene tests have been monitored2. without recurrence during period of two years (5 patients) and with The number of responding public laboratories versus enrolled labo- early recurrence (7 patients), which might explain differences in the ratories during the five years was 6/8, 7/8, 7/7, 7/7, 5/7 from 2001 to biology and clinical outcomes of these groups of TCC. High-density 2006 respectively; on average of 93,3% of 192 samples were correctly oligonucleotide microarrays (29,019 genes) were used to analyze the genotyped. transcript profiles of 12 superficial bladder tumours: 11 pTa and 1 pT1, Currently methods used by laboratories to detect mutation were direct grading 2 G1 and 10 G2. Statistical analyses were applied to inves- sequencing, SSCP, PTT and DHPLC. tigate the ability of the genes to identify patients without recurrence Written reports were not homogeneus among laboratories, although a during period of two years and with early recurrence. Initial screen- new form of written report was proposed to laboratories in 2004. ing using the GeneSpring and Bioconductor software tools revealed a Funded by: “Progetto nazionale per la standardizzazione e l’assicura- putative set of about 120 genes associating with the recurrence class. zione di qualità dei test genetici”, Ministry of Health (Rome). Significant differences were observed by HOXA10, GPNMB, TCN1, 1. Fearnhead NS. et al. Hum Mol Genet, 10:721, 2001 H19, FABP3 and PLOD2 genes. Besides, we integrated the micro- 2. Dallapiccola et al., Analysis, 2006 array dataset with additional background knowledge, in order to al- 3. Taruscio D. et al. CCLM, 42(8):915-21 2004 gorithmically mine for differential-expression patterns in terms of the Gene Ontology functions and processes as well as known regulatory P0555. Cytogenetic and Moleculer cytogenetic Analyses (I-FISH, pathway memberships. Our results indicate that it may be possible to M-FISH) of Glial Tumors identify patients with a high risk of disease recurrence at an early stage S. Artan1, Z. Karakas1, B. Durak1, R. Durmaz2, A. Arslantas2, K. M. Canturk1, M. using a molecular profile present already in the superficial tumours. Ozdemir1; Research is supported by MSM 0021620808 and IGA NR 8934-3. 1Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genet- ics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Depart- P0553. Genetic disorders related neoplasia in childhood ment of Neurosurgery, Eskisehir, Turkey. M. Bataneant, S. Arghirescu, C. Petrescu, E. Boeriu, M. Puiu, I. Ferencs, M. Glial tumors are the most common tumors of the central nervous sys- Serban; tem, affecting individuals of all ages but the underlying genetic chang- IIIrd Pediatric Clinic, Timisoara, Romania. es that give rise to these tumors are still poorly understood. Combi- Background. Despite the fact that neoplasia is not a deterministic ge- nation of conventional cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic (FISH, netic disease, the majority of childhood malignancies result from errors M-FISH) analyses identifies consistent chromosomal rearrangements that take place during early stages of cell differentiation, tissue matura- and copy number changes of related genes in this group of tumors tion and organ development. METHODS: Chromosome preperation was carried out on primary cul- Objectives. We aimed at evaluating the frequency of association be- tures of the 23 primary glial tumor samples using standard cytogenetic tween neoplasia and some genetic disorders, recognized for their in- techniques. Karyotyping, interphase fluoresence in situ hybridization creased susceptibility role and predisposition for neoplasia in order to (I-FISH) by using LSI p53(17p13.1), LSI p16(9p21)/CEP9, LSI 1p36/ provide a basis for risk assessment and counseling of families prone 1q25, LSI19q13/19p13, LSI EGFR/CEP 7, LSIPTEN ( 10q23)/CEP 10, to develop neoplasia. and LSITOP2A /HER2 /CEP17 gene specific probes and Multiplex- Patients and methods. The study has been undertaken on all patients FISH (M-FISH) were applied for chromosome rearrangements and with neoplasia admitted in the IIIrd Pediatric Clinic, Timisoara between specific gene deletions/ amplifications. RESULTS: Karyotype analysis 1981-january 2007. could be performed in 16/23 cases (70.0%), and complex chromo- Results. We analyzed 750 patients aged 1 month - 20 years. 730 pa- somal anomalies were seen in all tumors. The most frequently seen tients (97,33%) had cancer and 20 patients (2,67%) had benign tu- aberrations were monosomies of chromosomes 1p, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13, mors. We diagnosed 27 patients (3,6%) with neoplasia and concomi- 14, 16, 17, 19 and Y, trisomies of chromosomes 5p,7,12 and 15. Dou- tent genetic disorder: Down (5), Peutz-Jegers (1), von Hippel-Lindau ble minutes were significant. The most frequently seen amplifications (1), Beckwith-Wiedemann (2), Rubinstein-Taybi (1), Nijmegen break- were TOP2A, HER2 and EGFR genes (43% each), followed by 19q13 age syndrome (2), Kostmann agranulocytosis (1), Fanconi anemia (1), region amplification (30%). Chromosomes 9p21 (35%),17p31 (26%), Ataxia-telangiectasia (1), Bourneville disease (3), Neurofibromatosis 1p36 (17%) and PTEN gene deletions were diagnosed. Chromosomal type I (2), Proteus syndrome (1), Poland syndrome (1), minor anoma- rearrengements such as t(9;Y), .t(7;10), t(21;17), t(15;9) were revealed lies (5 cases). Types of neoplasia developed by the patients with ge- by M-FISH analysis. CONCLUSION: Not only cytogenetic analysis, netic disorders were dominated by solid tumors in 15 cases (55,5%) but also improved molecular cytogenetic techniques can increase our Cancer genetics 1 abilities to progress toward effective strategies of molecular diagnosis Conclusion: In the screening and counselling program for women at and classification of glial tumors. high risk in gynaecological cancers the role of prophylactic surgery should be considered. P0556. Study of genetic profile and intratumoral patterns of clonal evolution in gliomas P0558. Real time quantification of human telomerase reverse A. L. Vital1,2, M. D. Tabernero2, I. Crespo1,2, O. Rebelo3, H. Tão4, F. Gomes4, M. transcriptase mRNA in liver tissues from patients with C. Lopes1,5, A. Orfao2; hepatocellular cancer and chronic viral hepatitis 1Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Portugal, M. Satra1, N. Gatselis1, D. Iliopoulos2, D. Zacharoulis1, G. N. Dalekos1, A. 2Research Unit of University Hospital and Center for Cancer Research, Uni- Tsezou1; versity of Salamanca, Spain, 3Neuropathology Laboratory, Neurology Service, 1University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2The Ohio State University, Columbus, University Hospital of Coimbra, Portugal, 4Neurosurgery Service, University OH, United States. Hospital of Coimbra, Portugal, 5Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Coimbra, Telomerase activity (TA) and human telomerase reverse transcriptase Portugal. (hTERT) mRNA expression was determined, in liver tissues from pa- Diffuse infiltrating gliomas are the most common tumors of the central tients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC; n=13), chronic viral hepa- nervous system, being their clinical diagnosis based almost exclusive- titis (CVH) B (n=19),C (n=13) and in 17 patients without liver disease ly on tissue histology, which relies mainly upon the World Health Or- in whom liver biopsy was performed during cholecystectomy (control ganization (WHO) classification scheme. However, a variable clinical group). TA was evaluated using TRAP assay and hTERT mRNA ex- behavior is observed even in the same histological category and diag- pression was assessed using the LightCycler technology. TA was de- nostic variability can occur due to the heterogeneous nature of these tected in all HCC tissues compared to 15.6% of CVH (p<0.001) and tumors. So, the association between histologic and molecular classifi- none of controls (p<0.001). TA levels and hTERT mRNA were higher in cation will be helpful to give prognostic and predictive information. HCC compared to CVH (p<0.001) and normal livers (p<0.001). hTERT The main objective of our study is to identify molecular genetic altera- mRNA expression was correlated with TA (p<0.05). CVH patients that tions that may account for the heterogeneity of gliomas, which will per- tested negative for TA and hTERT mRNA had significantly lower dis- mit to establish the genetic profile and patterns of clonal evolution in ease duration (58±85 months) compared with those tested positive individual patients. To correlate the chromosomal instability with the (144±50 months; p<0.05). Detection of TA and quantification of hTERT gene expression profiles of these tumors, the tumor samples are firstly mRNA expression in liver tissues could be useful and additional mark- studied by interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (iFISH) analy- ers for HCC diagnosis and may serve as prognostic markers for HCC sis and then submitted to c-DNA microarrays. development in CVH patients. However, we were not able to draw A total of 40 glioma patients were already analyzed. In all cases, iF- general conclusions at this moment, as the number of CVH patients ISH studies were performed on fresh tumor samples for the detection positive for hTERT mRNA was relatively small. Real-time quantifica- of numerical/structural abnormalities for 10 loci in 8 different chromo- tion of hTERT mRNA expression as a diagnostic/prognostic marker in somes (1p36, 7q11, 7p11, 9q34, 9p21, 10q23, 13q14, 17p13, 19q13, patients with chronic hepatitis B and C and its relationship with hepa- 22q11). Among these 40 tumor samples, the mRNA from 20 samples tocarcinogenesis needs further evaluation. was already extracted and submitted to c-DNA microarray studies, which are being performed. P0559. E-box methylation in hTERT promoter interferes with Identification of homogeneous prognostic subgroups and definition of c-myc binding and predicts survival in early stage cirrhotic HCC clonal evolution patterns may be valuable for diagnosing and for pre- patients. dicting prognosis and response to treatment in patients with glioma. M. Satra1, D. Iliopoulos2, G. N. Dalekos1, A. Tsezou1; (Supported by a FCG project and FCT PhD fellowship, Portugal) 1University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States. P0557. Surveillance of women at high risk of gynecological Early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is essential for the cancers: Ten years results from one surveillance center successful treatment of patients, however the molecular pathogenesis M. Pöyhönen1,2, T. Löppönen3, R. Winqvist4, J. Ignatius4, U. Puistola5; of the disease has not been elucidated. Human telomerase reverse 1Department of Medical Genetics University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, transcriptase (hTERT) has been found up-regulated in HCCs, while it 2Cancer Society of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Child Neurology is not expressed in normal liver tissues. So far no mechanism describ- Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland, 4Department of Clinical Genetics ing the regulation of hTERT in liver tissues has been reported. In the University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 5Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology present study we determined hTERT promoter methylation status in University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. liver tissues and cell lines, correlated it with hTERT and c-myc expres- Backround: Women at high risk of ovarian or endometrial cancers are sion levels and estimated its clinical significance in early stage cirh- recommended to be under programmed surveillance once a year. The hosis HCC patients. Fifty-four patients were enrolled in this study: 27 efficacy of the screening has not been proven. The role of screening with HCC, 13 with chronic viral hepatitis and 14 without liver disorders. instead of prophylactic surgery has been questionable. hTERT methylation status was detected by MethyLight analysis and Population and Screening: A cohort of 730 000 inhabitants in Northern sequencing, while hTERT and c-myc expression levels were assesed Finland was included in the study. 453 families contacted the Depart- by real-time PCR. hTERT expression levels were strongly correlated ment of Clinical Genetics. 137 women were classified as high risk for with DNA methylation levels in all patients (r=0.912, p<0.001) and c- gynaecological, breast or colorectal cancer and were taken for sur- myc expression levels in HCC patients (r=0.851, p<0.001). Specifi- veillance program. The women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation were cally, hTERT promoter was found methylated in all CpG sites where c- screened semiannually and other risk-groups annually with TVUS and myc is binding in the first E-box. Moreover, hTERT methylation status CA125 measurements. Mammography and Ultrasound or MRI was showed an independent prognostic significance for overall survival in performed once a year. HCC patients (p<0.0001). We propose that hTERT methylation sta- Results: Main indications for surveillance were: Family history of breast tus correlates with its expression in liver tissues and HCC cell lines and ovarian cancer: 39%; Breast cancer at young age: 19%; HNPCC and that E-box methylation in hTERT promoter inhibits c-myc binding mutation: 20%; and BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation: 14%. and subsequently hTERT upregulation. Additionally, hTERT methyla- Prophylactic surgery was performed on 16 women (12%): Eight tion levels correlate with overall survival of HCC patients suggesting LH+BSO, six BSO and two mastectomies. 19 cancers and two pre- that methylation status could be used as a prognostic marker of HCC malignant lesions were found: Seven breast cancer, two endometrial progression. cancers, one ovarian cancer, one endocervical cancer, five colorectal cancers and three miscellaneous cancers (sarcoma, leukaemia, skin P0560. Adaptation of hereditary breast/ovarian cancer genetic cancer). 70% of the cancers were diagnosed during the first two years counselling and testing service in Lithuania surveillance period. 60% of the breast cancers and 80% of the colorec- R. Janavičius1,2, J. Kasnauskienė1,2, V. Ostapenko3, V. Kučinskas1,2; tal cancers were diagnosed in their advanced stage. Gynecological 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for cancers were diagnosed in their early stage. Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Vilnius, Lithu-Cancer genetics 1 ania, 3The Institute of Oncology Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. launched a multicentric prospective study to test the practice of the The germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes account for SDH genetic testing in every patient affected by head and neck or tho- the majority of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers. We present our racic-abdominal or pelvic paragangliomas (PGL) in France. approach for the adaptation of hereditary breast/ovarian cancer ge- Patients and Methods: 321 affected patients were genotyped in 3 years. netic counselling and testing service in Lithuania. In the year 2006 we 86 had a positive family history. SDH genetic testing was performed developed strict referral criteria for high/moderate-risk patients. by SDHD, SDHB and SDHC direct sequencing and by the search for During appointment detailed three-generation genealogy is collected; large genomic rearrangements by quantitative multiplex PCR of short pathological records are verified; genetic and risk information is com- fluorescent fragments (QMPSF). municated; availability of genetic testing and its limitations are dis- Results: We identified a SDH germline mutation in 188 patients cussed; informed consent is obtained; management and supportive (58.6%). 104 patients had a mutation on SDHD, 74 on SDHB, and options are provided. 10 on SDHC. 79 different mutations were found among whom 4 large BRCA1 testing is initiated with direct sequencing for three common deletions comprising one to several exons (~5%). Age at the diagnosis mutations (c.4153delA, c.5382insC, c.300T/G), recently reported of the first PGL was 36.2 years-old for the mutation-carriers compared in Baltic and Slavic populations. 11 female patients diagnosed with to 48.9 for the non-mutation carriers. A head and neck PGL was diag- breast cancer (<=35 year) and one with family history of ovarian can- nosed in 98.1% of the SDHD subjects and in all the SDHC subjects, cer have had referred so far. 5382insC mutation was prevalent in three but only in 40.5% of the SDHB subjects. A thoracic-abdominal location and c.4153delA mutation in one cases (33% overall). was present in 64.9% of the SDHB and in 17.3% of the SDHD sub- We propose absolute indications for common mutations testing: a) jects. A malignant PGL was diagnosed in 43.2% of the SDHB subjects breast cancer diagnosed before the age of 35 and ER negative or first and only in 3.8% of the SDHD subjects. degree relative/second through male; b) medullary breast carcinoma Conclusion: The PGL.NET study data suggest a clinical-focused strat- and c) invasive, nonmucinous epithelial ovarian tumor regardless the egy for the paraganglioma genetic testing. The benefits of such genetic age. testing in pre-symptomatic subjects is currently under evaluation. After the exclusion of common mutations, DGGE prescreening for the genes prioritized according Manchester scoring system with variants P0563. SNP screening for HMGA1 mutations in 55 Dachshunds confirmation by direct sequencing, as well as MLPA gene dosage anal- H. Murua Escobar1,2, C. Beuing2, S. Willenbrock1,2, J. T. Soller1,2, S. Winkler1, I. ysis, are performed. We found several polymorphic variants in BRCA1 Nolte2, J. Bullerdiek1; gene: c.3232A/G, 3667A/G, 4427T/C, 4956A/G. No BRCA1 or BRCA2 1Centre for Human Genetics, Bremen, Germany, 2Small Animal Clinic, Univer- genes rearrangements were detected. sity of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany. HMGA non-histone proteins participate in a wide variety of cellular P0561. MSH2 deletions and anticipation effects in HNPCC processes including regulation of inducible gene transcription, integra- A. Stella1, P. Lastella1, C. Bozzao1, N. Resta1, D. Barana2, C. Oliani2, M. G. tion of retroviruses into chromosomes, and the induction of neoplas- Tibiletti3, A. Viel4, C. Natale5, A. Piepoli6, G. Marra7, G. Guanti1; tic transformation and promotion of metastatic progression of cancer 1Sezione di Genetica Medica Dipartimento di Biomedicina dell’Età evolutiva, cells. Università di Bari, Italy, 2UOA di Oncologia ULSS 5 Ovest Vicentino, Vicenza, For various malignant tumours over-expression of HMGA was shown Italy, 3U.O. Anatomia Patologica Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy, 4Oncologia to be characteristic suggesting a relation between high titer of the pro- Sperimentale 1, Centro Riferimento Oncologico, IRCCS, Aviano (PN), Italy, 5UO tein and the neoplastic phenotype. Due to the similarities of human and Chirurgia Generale Ospedaliera OORR, Foggia, Italy, 6Lab. Research Dept. of canine cancer the dog has joined the common rodent animal model for Gastroenterology IRCCS “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza”, San Giovanni Ro- therapeutic and preclinical studies. For use as a model system, in pre- tondo (FG), Italy, 7Institute of Molecular Cancer Research University of Zurich, vious studies we characterised the canine HMGA1 gene completely Zurich, Italy. and screened the protein coding sequences of twelve canine breeds Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is caused by for SNPs. In a Dachshund sample the screening revealed a transition mutations in mismatch repair genes. Using multiplex ligation-depen- from A to G in exon 7 leading to an amino acid exchange from threonin dent probe amplification, we identified three MSH2 deletions in Ital- to alanin causing a mutated HMGA1 protein. ian patients with HNPCC (proband A exons 1-3, proband M exon 8, Herein we report the screening of 55 Dachshunds for the specific mu- and proband C exons 1-6). Deletion breakpoints sequencing allowed tation affecting the cancer related HMGA1 gene to elucidate if the ob- us to develop rapid PCR-based mutation screening, which confirmed served exchange is frequently existent in the Dachshund population. the presence of the deletions in several affected and asymptomatic Genomic DNA was isolated from 55 collected Dachshunds samples individuals. While the exon 8 and exon 1-3 deletions are novel, the using the QiaAmp kit. A specific genomic PCR reaction was estab- MSH2 1-6 is identical to the one recently documented in two branches lished allowing the amplification of the complete exon 7 and flanking of another unrelated Italian family (family V+Va). Haplotype analysis regions of intron 6 and 7, respectively. Direct sequencing of the puri- showed that the kindreds C and V+Va (both from northeastern Italy, fied PCR products revealed that the observed mutation is absent in both displaying clinical features of the Muir-Torre syndrome) shared the studied cases. Combining both studies indicates that the observed a common haplotype, indicating that the MSH2 1-6 deletion is a novel HMGA1 mutation is rare in Dachshunds. founder mutation. Families A,C, M, and V+Va all showed progressively earlier cancer-onset ages in successive generations. Analysis of 23 P0564. Missense mutations in the MMR genes MLH1 and MSH2 affected parent-child pairs in the four kindreds showed median antici- and their clinical significance. pation of 12 years in offsprings’ onset of cancer (p < 0.0001). No birth C. Graziano1, R. Tricarico1, B. Toschi1, L. Papi1, E. Lucci Cordisco2, C. Di Gre- cohort effect was found. We have started to analyze by means of a gorio3, M. Genuardi1; cloning-sequencing approach the instability levels in PBLs and normal 1Department of Clinical Physiopathology, Medical Genetics Unit, University of tissues from several both symptomatic and asymptomatic mutation Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Catholic University A. Gemelli School of Medicine, carriers belonging to one of these families. Preliminary results sug- Rome, Italy, 3Division of Pathology, Hospital of Carpi, Modena, Italy. gest that the age at cancer diagnosis correlates with the accumulation Mutations in the mismatch-repair genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and of instability in HNPCC target organs. These data represent the first PMS2 are responsible for Lynch syndrome (HNPCC), the most com- significant evidence of anticipation effects in HNPCC families carrying mon form of autosomal dominant genetic predisposition to colorectal MSH2 deletions. cancer. Germline mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 account for approxi- mately 90% of detected mutations in families with HNPCC. We ana- P0562. Genetic testing in paragangliomas, the PGL.NET study lyzed a cohort of patients selected on the basis of Bethesda criteria N. Burnichon1,2, A. Venisse2, P. Saugier-Veber3,4, L. Strompf2, X. Jeunemaitre1,2, for microsatellite instability (MSI) and/or immunohistochemistry (IHC) A. Gimenez-Roqueplo1,2; for detection of the proteins encoded by MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6. 1INSERM U772, Paris, France, 2Hopital Europeen Georges Pompidou, Paris, We identified 9 mutations in MLH1 and 16 mutations in MSH2 through France, 3CHU Rouen, Rouen, France, 4INSERM U614, Rouen, France. sequencing analysis of the whole coding sequence and multiplex liga- Purpose: Germline mutations on SDHD, SDHB or SDHC genes tion-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) method. Seven were mis- cause Hereditary Paraganglioma. In 2003, the PGL.NET network has sense mutations (4 in MSH2 and 3 in MLH1), that represent a chal-Cancer genetics 10 lenge for the clinician and for the genetic counselor, who often can not affirmed. Supported by grant of Polish State Committee of Scientific use them for the management of Lynch syndrome families. Several pa- Research No 2 PO5B 064 30. rameters can be evaluated to gain insight into the significance of such unclassified variants (UVs): familial segregation analysis, absence of P0567. I171V mutation in the NBS1 gene is associated with the variants in control samples, presence of other pathogenic muta- predisposition to cancer. tions, amino acid conservation, and functional and mRNA analyses. J. Nowak1, D. Januszkiewicz1,2, M. Mosor1, I. Ziółkowska1, K. Rożnowski3, M. None of these variables can be used alone to predict the significance Wierzbicka3; of UVs in a single case, but combined evaluation can be clinically use- 1Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, ful. We report our experience on the interpretation of these UVs and 2University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3University of Medical Sci- the clinical management of patients and their families. ences, Poznań, Poland. Homozygous mutation 657del5 within the NBS1 gene is responsible P0565. Functional screening of MLH1 and MSH2 unclassified for the majority of Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) cases. NBS variants in a large cohort of French HNPCC families reveals an patients are characterized by increased susceptibility to malignancies important fraction of splicing mutations mainly of lymphoid origin. Recently it has been postulated that hetero- I. Tournier1, M. Vezain1, A. Martins1, F. Charbonnier1, S. Baert-Desurmont1, J. zygous carries of 657del5 NBS1 mutation are at higher risk for cancer Soret2, J. Tazi2, S. Olschwang3, Q. Wang4, M. Buisine5, T. Frebourg1, M. Tosi1; development. The aim of the study was to analyse the frequency of 1Inserm U614 and Rouen University Hospital, Institute for Biomedical Re- I171V mutation in NBS1 gene in 135 children with acute lymhoblas- search, Rouen, France, 2IGMM, CNRS UMR 5535, Montpellier, France, 3Inserm tic leukemia, 258 women with breast cancer, 176 patients with larynx UMR 599, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, 4Molecular Oncology cancer, 103 with second primary tumours and 385 healthy individuals. Unit, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France, 5Laboratory of Biochemistry and Mo- I171V mutation was present in 22 cancer patients compared with only lecular Biology, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France. one in healthy individuals. This constitutes 3.27% in studied patients Numerous unclassified variants (UVs) are detected in the mismatch with malignancies and 0.26% in the control group (P=0.0006; relative repair genes MLH1 and MSH2 involved in hereditary nonpolyposis risk, 0.657; odds ratio, 0.077; 95% confidence interval, 0.01-0.57). colorectal cancer (HNPCC) and cannot be used for genetic counsel- Since DNA was isolated from non malignant cells, all mutations found ling. We have undertaken their systematic screening by developing a in cancer patients appeared to be of germinal origin. It can be con- functional splicing assay using patient DNA. The genomic region of cluded that NBS1 allele I171V may be a general cancer susceptibility interest, either mutant or wild-type, was PCR-amplified and inserted gene. into the intron of an expression vector. After transfection into HeLa cells and total RNA extraction, the effects of mutations on splicing were P0568. Intracranial germ cell tumors: association with Klinefelter evaluated by RT-PCR and systematic sequencing. We have examined Syndrome and analysis of X/Y chromosome aneuploidies in the 85 different UVs detected in 84 French HNPCC families (54 missense, tumors 10 silent, 3 deletions of a single codon and 18 intronic variants) and S. Kofman-Alfaro1,2, K. Nieto1,2, D. Aguirre1, I. Palma1, R. Peña3, G. Queipo1,2; found that 26% affect splicing. Five variants are at positions distinct 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Facultad de Medicina Uni- from splice sites, suggesting the presence of regulatory elements such versidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico, 3Hospital Infantil as exonic or intronic splicing enhancers (ESE, ISE). We cloned the de México Federico Gómez, Mexico City, Mexico. short regions (~30 bp) containing the putative exonic regulatory ele- Extragonadal germ cell tumors (EGCT) arise in specific midline re- ments into the strictly ESE-dependent central exon of a modified β- gions mainly in the anterior mediastinum, intracranial germ cell tumors globin expression vector and demonstrated by cell transfection assays (IGCT) occur mainly in male children and adolescents. X chromosome and RT-PCR that these sequences indeed contain splicing enhancers. polyploidy and X hypometilation have been suggested as a mechanism This led us to examine in this ESE-dependent splicing assay other for malignant transformation independently of the histological type. On MLH1 and MSH2 exonic mutations detected in HNPCC patients and the other hand, several reports associated EGCT with Klinefelter syn- previously described as affecting splicing and found that the regions drome (KS). Recent reports indicate that KS patients have a relative affected by these mutations do contain ESE elements. In absence risk (66.7) for development of malignant mediastinal germ-cell tumors of reliable bioinformatics predictions, the sequential use of these two and around 8% of male patients with primary mediastinal tumors have functional assays represents a valuable tool for the interpretation of KS, corresponding to 50 times of the expected frequency. Trying to UVs found in these and other genes. record the frequency of KS and to confirm the presence of X chromo- some polyploidy in XY IGCT, 13 paraffin embedded tumoral and nor- P0566. The significance of BCL-2 and IAP families genes mal tissue specimens in XY cases with IGCT were studied using FISH. expression in diagnostics of human acute leukemias We confirm KS in two cases (8%) demonstrating that this constitutive J. Kocki, M. Cioch, A. Dmoszyńska; aneuploidy could be related to carcinogenesis. A low percentage (1%) Medical University, Lublin, Poland. of X and Y chromosome polyploidy was observed in all cases. In the The aims of work: (1) The expression levels designation of the genes XY patients the aneuploidy could be involved in the tumorogenesis, regulating the apoptosis process IAP and BCL-2 families genes in the however, malignant transformation arise through the accumulation of normal bone marrow cells and the human acute leukaemias cells. (2) multiple and different genetic abnormalities. The evaluation of the reciprocal correlations of IAP and BCL-2 families genes expression, typical for individual types of leukaemias. (3) The P0569. Inactivation of the laminin gamma 3 chain (LAMC) gene analysis of the potential dependence between the genetic investiga- in various cancers tions results and the clinical and laboratory parameters.Conclusions: E. B. Kuznetsova1,2, D. S. Mikhaylenko1,2, E. A. Pudova3, S. S. Larin4, M. V. (1) The gene expression levels of the IAP and BCL-2 families in normal Nemtsova1,2, D. V. Zaletayev1,2, V. V. Strelnikov1,2; bone marrow cells and the human acute leukaemias cells differed in 1Institute of Molecular Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Cen- the individual types of acute leukaemias and had prognostic signifi- tre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Russian State Medical cance. (2) In ALL the MCL-1 gene showed the highest expression. (3) University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Institute of Gene Biology, Moscow, In M0/1 AML the BCL-xL gene showed the highest expression. No de- Russian Federation. pendence between gene expression levels and the survival, however We have identified LAMC3 gene promoter CpG island among those the correlations between the BAX or BCL-w genes expression with abnormally methylated in breast cancer by methylation sensitive ar- CD34 antigen expression were affirmed; (4) In M2 AML the MCL-1 bitrarily primed PCR. Gene expression analysis by real-time RT-PCR gene showed the highest expression. The dependence of the SUR- has revealed extremely frequent (94%) decrease/loss of LAMC3 ex- VIVIN gene expression higher level on the bad prognosis for a patient pression in breast cancer samples. Loss of expression was also de- was affirmed. (5) In M3 AML the MCL-1 gene showed the highest ex- tected in the MCF7 breast cancer cell line. We have performed the pression. The dependence of the SURWIWIN, NAIP or MCL-1 genes fine mapping of the CpG island and designed a PCR assay for LAMC3 expression higher levels on the poor prognosis for a patient were methylation detection. Its promoter region appeared to be unmethyl- affirmed. (6) In M4 AML the NAIP gene showed the highest expres- ated in control samples and methylated in several breast cancer sam- sion. (7) In M5 AML the expression top-level for the MCL-1 gene was ples, but the frequency of this abnormal methylation was surprisingly Cancer genetics 11 low: 8% (8/98 samples). Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) study with the We detected three patents with t(1;19) E2A/PBX among 26 ALL sam- intragenic microsatellite marker D9S313 revealed LAMC3 locus de- ples. This translocation defines an unfavorable prognosis. Patients letions in 8/48 (17%) breast cancer samples. Methylation and LOH with t(1;19) received high-risk treatment protocol, that permit to reach studies were also performed for bladder and clear cell renal cancers, molecular remission and decrease risk of relapses. demonstrating higher frequencies of LAMC3 molecular alterations. Among ALL patients - three were with t(12;21) TEL/AML1. This trans- The study was supported in part by Applied Biosystems, USA. location defines a favorable prognosis. Patients with t(12;21) received standard-risk treatment protocol, that permit to reach molecular remis- Molecular pathology of the LAMC3 gene in breast, renal and bladder cancers sion and decreases the risk of complications. Among ALL patients - one had a t(9;22) BCR/ABL p210. This translo- LOH cation defines a very unfavorable prognosis. This child has received Methylation Expression high-risk treatment protocol in combination with STI571 (Glivec) 400 Total number of Number (%)of Number (%) of samples tested hetero-zygotes samples with LOH mg daily. Among 6 AML patents, one was with AML-M3, translocation t(15;17), Breast cancer 58 48 (83%) 8 (17%) 8/98 (8%) 29/31 (94%) PML/RARA confirmed the diagnose. This patient has received AML- Clear cell renal APL protocol in combination with ATRA (Tretionin). cancer 75 49 (65%) 10 (20%) 8/34 (24%) n/a We detected t(9;22) BCR/ABL p210 translocation in two samples in patients with chronic phase of CML. These patients have received Bladder cancer 77 45 (58%) 12 (27%) 13/45 (29%) n/a treatment with Glivec 400 mg daily. After 6 and 12 months of treatment molecular remission was achieved, t(9;22) was not detected. P0570. Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Insertion/Deletion Thus, molecular-genetic analyses plays an important role in diagnos- (I/D) Gene Polymorphisms in Leukemic Hematopoiesis tics, choice of treatment and prediction of relapse in hematological I. Akalin1, E. Koca2, H. G. Karabulut1, D. Cetiner2, I. C. Haznedaroglu2, M. malignancies. Hayran3, I. K. Onal4, O. I. Ozcebe2, A. Tukun1; 1Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, P0572. Cytogenetics, immunophenotype and biomolecular Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University Medical School, Department of Internal parameters-particularities in acute lymphoblastic leukemia Medicine, Hematology Division, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University Medical M. Puiu, S. Arghirescu, M. Bataneant, R. Firescu, L. Stana, M. Baica, M. Mi- School, Department of Preventive Oncology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Hacettepe Uni- hailov, M. Serban; versity Medical School, Department of Internal Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. IIIrd Pediatric Clinic, Timisoara, Romania. Renin angiotensin system (RAS) represents an autocrin/paracrin sys- Background. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) refers to a group of tem affecting normal and neoplastic hematopoiesis. In this study, we heterogeneous diseases with different clinical expression and progno- investigated angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) insertion/deletion sis. Therefore, patients require precise and complete initial evaluation (I/D) gene polymorphisms, which may affect the behavior of the local of risk factors including cytogenetics, immunophenotype and biomo- RAS in hematological neoplastic disorders. lecular assessment in order to plan an individualised, optimal treat- Our results indicated alterations in the polymorphisms of major RAS ment regimen. component, ACE in leukemic hematopoiesis. ACE ID/II genotype fre- Objectives. We aimed at evaluating the biological profile of leukemic quency is increased in leukemic patients compared to the controls. cells and its particularities in ALL. Disease risk in patients with insertion (ID or II) is increased (chi- Patients and methods. We analyzed cytogenetics, cell surface markers squared, p=0.008, OR: 3.2[1.3-7.9]). ID/II genotype was found in 80.4 and biomolecular parameters in connection with clinical parameters % of the patients while it was 55.9 % in the control group. Hence, our (sex, age, risk factors, ethnic group, central nervous system leukemia, study firstly provided evidence that the ACE ID/II gene polymorphism mediastinal mass) in 156 ALL patients aged 0-18 years, treated in our may be linked to the development of leukemia as a clue of activated Clinic between 1990-2002. local RAS in leukemogenesis. Results. Compared to data from literature, in our study group we Leukemias * ACE Gene Polymorphism Crosstabulation noticed no differences between sex distribution (56% vs. 57% being ACE-Polymorphisms males), a lower proportion of patients belonging to 2-6 years age group (53.8% vs. 77%) and a double proportion of patients older than 6 years DD ID/II TOTAL (41.6% vs. 20%). Frequency of medium and high risk forms was higher Leukemia ALL Count 1 7 8 in study group (75.6% and 10.2% vs. 59.46% and 10.65%) and also % within ALL 12,5% 87,5% 100,0% the incidence of L3-ALL (3.3%). Biomolecular assessment revealed a comparable proportion of patients with t(9,22)-BCR-ABL mutation % within ACE-pol 25,0% 22,6% 22,9% (1.28%) and a higher proportion of t(14,11) MLL-AF4 (2.56%). Leu- AML Count 1 9 10 kemic cells expressed lymphoid CD10 marker in 35.07% vs. 63.01%. There were no differences between central nervous system involve- % within AML 10,0% 90,0% 100,0% ment in newly diagnosed ALL (3.8% vs. 4%). These data can explain % within ACE-pol 25,0% 29,0% 28,6% the worse prognosis of our patients. Conclusions. Our results provide practical information that should be CML Count 2 15 17 taken into account for planning individualized treatment. % within CML 11,8% 88,2% 100,0% P0573. Molecular basis of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS): an % within ACE-pol 50,0% 48,4% 48,6% update from the French LFS cohort Total Count 4 31 35 G. Bougeard1, S. Baert-Desurmont1, C. Martin1, S. Vasseur1, L. Brugières2, B. % within leukemias 11,4% 88,6% 100,0% Bressac - de Paillerets3, A. Chompret4, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet5, C. Bonaïti-Pellé6, T. Frebourg1; P0571. Molecular-genetic analyses of children with 1Inserm U614 and Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Institute hematological malignances in Bashkortostan Republic, Russia for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 2Department of Pediatric Oncology, E. Yakupova, T. Krasavtceva, R. Stepanova, R. Bayramgulov, V. Mahonin; Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 3Department of Genetics, Institut Children republic hospital, Ufa, Russian Federation. Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 4Department of Medicine, Institut Gustave Hematological malignances are the most common cancer in childhood. Roussy, Villejuif, France, 5Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris, France, Chromosome rearrangements determine the prognosis of diseases 6Inserm U535, Villejuif, France. and play an important role in the choice of treatment protocols, allow- The Li-Fraumeni syndrome represents one of the most devastating ing the control of minimal residual disease during and after treatment. genetic predispositions to cancers and is characterized by a wide During the 2005-2006 years, 34 bone marrow samples of patients with spectrum of early-onset malignancies (sarcoma, brain tumour, adre- leukemia tested to the presence of chromosomal aberrations by the nocortical tumour, breast cancer, leukemia, lymphoma, gastric car- method of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. cinoma, gonadal germ cell tumour, colorectal and lung cancer). We Cancer genetics 12 have performed the extensive analysis of TP53, based on complete colon carcinoma cell line predisposed these cells to acquire structural sequencing of the 11 exons and on QMPSF, in 370 families sugges- chromosomal rearrangements including multiple reciprocal transloca- tive of LFS, fulfilling the French LFS network criteria (J. Med. Genet. tions after irradiation, reminiscent of those seen in HCA7. We also 2001). We detected in 73 families (20%) a germline alteration of TP53 found that over-expression of MBD4tru in DLD1 alters the colony surviv- corresponding, in most of the cases (96%), to point mutations or small al after exposure to cisplatin, etoposide and gamma rays. These data deletions or insertions, widely distributed between exons 3-11 and in suggest a wide role for MBD4 in DNA damage response and maintain- 4% of the cases to complete or partial genomic deletions (4%). These ing chromosomal stability. results constitute a definitive argument demonstrating that LFS results from a haploinsufficiency at the TP53 locus. If most of the families P0576. Identification and characterization of microRNAs on presented the classical LFS wide tumour spectrum, the presentation of common genomic instability regions in breast cancer cells some kindreds was remarkable, mimicking BRCA families. The earlier S. D. Selcuklu1, C. Yakicier2, A. E. Erson1; development of tumours in TP53 wt/mt mice compared to wt/- mice 1Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Bilkent University, Ankara, (Cell 2004) led us to compare the age of tumour onset between pa- Turkey. tients harbouring missense mutations (57 patients) and those carrying Various loss or amplification regions are known in breast tumors. An other alterations (35 patients). As predicted by the murine models, we intensive search for potent tumor suppressors or oncogenes located in indeed observed a significant difference between both groups (19.4 these regions continues. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are ~18-24 nt that reg- y vs. 29.8 y). These results confirm that missense mutations not only ulate protein expression by binding to complementary sequences in inactivate the transcriptional activity of the wild-type protein but have the 3’ UTR regions of mRNAs. We hypothesized that miRNAs located also an additional oncogenic effect. on genomic instability regions in breast cancer cells may contribute to breast tumorigenesis. First, by using bioinformatics, we mapped miR- P0574. Telomere length in peripheral blood cells of germline NAs and candidate miRNAs to reported genomic instability regions. TP53 mutation carriers is shorter than that of normal individuals We found more than 38 known miRNAs and 35 candidate miRNAs in of corresponding age. these regions. To further confirm loss or amplification of miRNA genes M. Trkova, K. Prochazkova, V. Krutilkova, D. Sumerauer, Z. Sedlacek; in these regions, we performed semi-quantitative PCR in 20 breast Charles University Second Medical School and University Hospital Motol, cancer cell lines, 2 immortalized mammary lines and 2 normal con- Prague, Czech Republic. trols. Our results showed 85% of selected miRNAs (29 of 34 known A decrease in the age at cancer onset and increase in cancer incidence miRNAs) were either lost or amplified in at least 2 different lines and in successive generations in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) families 61% (21 of 34 known miRNAs) in at least 3 lines. Interestingly, most with germline TP53 mutation have been previously described. In this of these alterations were found to be amplifications even in regions study we analysed a possible relationship between telomere length reported to harbor losses in breast tumors. and cancer onset in TP53 mutation carriers. Telomere length was Further studies are underway to verifiy deregulation of these miRNAs. measured using real-time quantitative PCR in 20 carriers of germline Functional analysis will also clarify potential targets of these miRNAs. TP53 mutations and in 83 unrelated healthy individuals and the rela- Our results will help us better understand the biological roles of miR- tive telomere/single copy gene (T/S value) was calculated. According NAs during breast tumorigenesis and will potentially lead to new diag- to the age at blood sampling, patients and controls were divided into nostic, prognostic and therapeutical findings in breast cancer. two age groups: children and adults. The telomere length was corre- lated to TP53 mutation status, and the telomere shortening in patients P0577. Missense mutations in genes predisposing to colorectal to the age at cancer onset. t-test and linear regression were used to cancer : Muddying the diagnostic and prognostic waters analyse the data. Compared to healthy controls, telomere length was C. D. Delozier1, J. Mann2, B. Box-Noreiga3, S. Rouillard4, F. Eggerding5; significantly shorter both in the child (P=0.001) and adult (P=0.034) 1Genetic Medicine Central California & Kaiser Permanente, Fresno, CA, United germline T53 mutation carriers. Although statistically significant corre- States, 2Genetics Department, Kaiser Permanente, Fresno, CA, United States, lation between telomere shortening and the age at cancer onset could 3Oncology Department, Kaiser Permanente, Fresno, CA, United States, 4Gas- not be observed, there was a trend of shorter telomeres in mutation troenterology Department, Kaiser Permanente, Fresno, CA, United States, carriers affected in childhood compared to those affected later in life. 5Huntington Medical Research Institutes, Pasadena, CA, United States. Cancer therapy as well as sex differences were unlikely to affect the Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) and Hereditary Non-Polyposis results. Statistically significant telomere shortening was observed in Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC, Lynch syndrome) are classical colorectal mutation carriers, providing a possible link between TP53 mutation, cancer predisposition syndromes. FAP is generally due to mutations telomere length, predisposition to early-onset cancer and anticipation in APC, whereas HNPCC is caused by mutations in mismatch repair in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Supported by grants MSM0021620813 and (MMR) genes, primarily MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2. Although MZO00064203. most mutations are nonsense or small deletions/insertions, thus pre- dicted to result in protein truncation, missense mutations have also P0575. Truncation of MBD4 predisposes to chromosomal been well-documented. Depending on patient selection criteria, the translocations and alters the response to therapeutic agents proportion of missense mutations is approximately 30-32% for MLH1, W. M. Abdel-Rahman1, S. Knuutila1, P. Peltomäki1, D. J. Harrison2, S. A. 15-18% for MSH2, 5-12% for (classical) APC. Bader2; We present two families which demonstrate the diagnostic and prog- 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, nostic dilemmas associated with missense mutations in genes for FAP United Kingdom. and HNPCC, which have led us to formulate somewhat different sug- We previously identified a novel genomic instability phenotype of gestions for laboratory evaluation and clinical management. Patient 1 multiple reciprocal chromosomal translocations in a MLH1-defective, developed colon adenocarcinoma at 24 and multicentric thyroid carci- microsatellite unstable (MSI) colon cancer cell line (HCA7) and, fur- noma at 30. Sequencing showed a missense alteration in MLH1: G22A ther, showed that it was unlikely to be directly caused by the mismatch (65G->C), also present in her healthy 54-year-old-mother. Rather sur- repair (MMR) defect in this cell line. To gain insight into the molecular prisingly, both tumors were Microsatellite Stable (MSS) and conserved basis to this novel translocation phenotype, we examined coding and expression of the MLH1 protein. This constellation has been described splice-site nucleotide repeat tracts in DNA repair genes for mutations previously in Lynch syndrome families, pleading the question of wheth- by direct sequencing together with RT-PCR expression analysis of the er missense mutations are truly pathogenic and whether the mecha- associated transcript. The material was a selected panel of 8 MSI cell nism of malignant transformation is other than impaired DNA repair. lines including HCA7. A strong candidate identified through this ap- Patient 2, who presented at age 67 with rectal bleeding, had approxi- proach was MBD4 as it showed a homozygous truncating mutation mately two dozen polyps on colonoscopy. Histologically, several were associated with substantial loss of the transcript in HCA7 not seen tubulo-villous adenomas, suggesting attenuated FAP. Sequencing in the other lines. In previous published studies, heterozygous MBD4 identified a missense alteration in APC: L1129S(3386->C). Family his- mutations were observed in up to 89% of sporadic MSI microdissected tory was positive for polyps. Discussion has centered on management, colon tumor foci. Using MFISH, we here show that over-expression of which generally includes colectomy in FAP. the truncated MBD4 (MBD4tru) in DLD1, a MSH6 defective, MSI human Cancer genetics 1 P0578. Somatic mitochondrial DNA mutations in gastric P0580. Neurofibromatosis, lymphoma and cavernoma in a child intraepithelial neoplasia: a histopathologic and biomolecular with homozygous genomic deletion in the MSH2 gene study. C. Colas1, F. Coulet1, S. Haouy2, I. Husson3, T. André4, M. Vidaud5, F. Soubrier1, L. Rigoli1, C. Di Bella1, F. Verginelli2, M. Falchetti3, A. Bersiga4, A. Rocco5, G. A. Verloes6; Nardone5, R. Mariani-Costantini2, R. Caruso6; 1APHP - Département de Génétique - GH Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 1Department of Pediatrics, Medical School, University of Messina, Messina, 2APHP - Service d’hématologie - Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 3APHP Italy, 2Department of Oncology and Neurosciences, University G. d’Annunzio, - Service de Neurologie - Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 4APHP - Service and Center of Excellence on Aging (Ce.S.I.), G. d’Annunzio Foundation, Chieti, d’Oncologie Médicale- Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France, 5APHP - Service de bio- Italy, 3‡Departments of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University La chimie - Hôpital Beaujon, Clichy, France, 6APHP - Département de Génétique Sapienza, Roma, Italy, 4Pathology Division, Istituti Ospedalieri, Cremona, Italy, - Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. 5Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Gastroenterology Unit, Heterozygous mutations in one of the DNA mismatch repair genes University Federico II, Naples, Italy, 6Department of Human Pathology; Univer- (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2) cause hereditary non polyposis colorec- sity Hospital, Messina, Italy. tal cancer (HNPCC). Homozygous or compound heterozygous mu- We analysed molecular changes in the displacement loop (D-loop) re- tations in those genes have been reported in about 20 families and gion of mitochondrial DNA in 24 gastric intraepithelial neoplasias (GINs) cause patchy pigmented skin anomalies reminiscent of neurofibroma- from a high gastric cancer risk area in Northern Italy. Helicobacter py- tosis I (NF1) and childhood malignancies (both haematological and lori (H. Pylori) infection was assessed by histological examination. The HNPCC-related). mtDNA D-loop was amplified and sequenced from matched paraffin- We report a 3 years old boy, born to first cousin parents, referred for embedded gastric mucosa and GIN samples. The GINs were divided NF1 who presented with café-au-lait spots and Lish nodules of the into two groups. Group A, with H. pylori-positive gastritis, contained irides. No mutation was found in the NF1 gene. He subsequently de- 7 patients, and Group B without H pylori gastritis, contained 17 pa- veloped an intracerebral cavernoma treated by surgery, and a lym- tients. Group A had a larger proportion of high-grade lesions than B (p= phoblastic lymphoma. A metastatic colon cancer was diagnosed in his 0.004). Group B had a larger proportion of cases with mtDNA D-loop father at age 29 but no other familial history was consistent with he- mutations than A (p=0.004). We found that 15 (62%) of the 24 patients reditary non polyposis colorectal cancer. We identified a homozygous with GINs harbored tumor-associated somatic mutations as following: deletion of exon 8 of the MSH2 gene in this child. Both parents were a G>A transition at nucleotide position (np) 16004; an A>C transver- heterozygous for this deletion. This is the first report of a homozygous sion at np 16013; a T>G transversion at np 16045; a C>T transition at genomic rearrangement in the MSH2 gene. All clinical features of this np 16380; a C>T transition at np16495 (2 cases); an A>G transition child, but the cavernoma and Lish nodules, are consistent with those at np 16510; an A>G transition at np 16515; a T>G transversion at np previously described. No vascular malformations have been described 10; a 1-base-pair insertion at np 12 (12.1 insA); an A>G transition at so far in this syndrome so it is unclear if this association is coincidental np 13; a C>G transversion at np 552; a C>G transversion at np 572; or not. a T>G transversion at np 579; a previously described C>T transition at np 559. These results provide further evidence for the morphologic P0581. Mutation screening of the MUTYH gene by high and mtDNA biomolecular heterogeneity of GINs, and suggest the ex- resolution melting analysis istence of two distinct pathways to gastric cancer - corpus-dominant H R. Tricarico1, B. Ciambotti1, R. Sestini1, C. Orlando2, M. Genuardi1; pylori gastritis and the atrophy-metaplasia pathway. 1Department of Clinical Physiopathology, Medical Genetics Unit, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Department of Clinical Physiopathology, Clinical P0579. The role of Multidrug Resistance-associated Protein 1 Biochemistry Unit, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (MRP1) expression and its polymorphisms in Iranian pediatric High-resolution melting analysis (HRMA) is a mutation detection meth- acute leukemia patients : impact on treatment outcome od based on the principle that the melting curves of DNA fragments S. Akbari1, F. Mahjoubi2, B. Shamsi3, S. Nazari4, E. Elahi2; vary depending on base composition. Heterozygous samples can be 1NIGEB & Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NIGEB, Tehran, detected with high sensitivity, whereas homozygosity for a nucleotide Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Animal Science Dept. Tehran University, Tehran, change may not lead to significant curve shape or melting tempera- Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Hematology and Oncology Dept. Mofid Hospital, Teh- ture changes compared to homozygous wild-type samples. We have ran, Islamic Republic of Iran. evaluated whether HRMA could be used for the identification of ho- Occurrence of cross-resistance to structurally and functionally un- mozygous mutations in the MUTYH gene, implicated in the autosomal related drugs, called Multidrug Resistance (MDR), is a main cause recessive form of intestinal polyposis (MUTYH-associated polyposis; of failure in the chemotherapeutic treatment of malignant disorders. MAP). HRMA was first tested on a set of 30 samples of known geno- Several mechanisms of MDR have been identified; one of these is type at exons 7 and 13, where the mutations 495a>g (Y165C) and the overexpression of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent mem- 1145g>a (G382D) are located. These account for about 70% of MU- brane proteins that function as drug-efflux pumps. The multidrug re- TYH mutations among Caucasians. In order to generate a condition of sistance protein MRP1 is a member of the superfamily of ATP-binding artificial heterozygosity, test samples were mixed with a homozygous cassette (ABC) transporters. MRP1, a 190-Kd protein, is encoded by wild-type reference control sample and amplified by PCR. Samples the MRP1 gene located on chromosome 16p13 and has been shown heterozygous or homozygous for the two common mutations, as well to transport a broad range of organic substrates, such as glutathione as for other exon 7 and 13 sequence variants, could be identified by (GSH) conjugates and other anionic conjugates. HRMA. The experiments were then repeated without mixing the test Our aim was to investigate the possible association between MRP1 samples with the reference control DNA. We found that homozygous gene expression level and its polymorphisms and clinical outcomes in mutant samples could be consistently distinguished from homozygous Iranian pediatric patients. In a retrospective study, we analyzed sam- wild type samples also under these conditions. We applied HRMA as ples obtained from 42 ALL similarly treated pediatric patients to assess mutation screening test in a series of samples of unknown genotype. whether the overexpression and/or function of this protein and also The results obtained were confirmed by sequencing, indicating that correlation between SNPs and Overexpression correlate to treatment HRMA is a sensitive and reliable method for the identification of muta- failure and therefore affects clinical outcome. In this regard total RNA tions in the hotspot exons of the MUTYH gene. and DNA was isolated from peripheral blood of ALL acute leukemia patients and ten healthy individuals. MRP1 gene overexpression was P0582. Cytogenetic evaluation of 506 myelodysplastic syndrome detected in 12 patients using Real-Time RT-PCR and compared to the patients type of response to chemotherapy. H. Ilgin-Ruhi, T. Tuncali, N. Yurur-Kutlay, H. G. Karabulut, K. Yararbas, I. Aka- We also have investigated the associationn between MRP1 mRNA lin, B. Saglam, F. Sadeghi, A. Vicdan, A. Tukun; level and other clinical characteristics including cytogenetic subgroups Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. and FAB subtypes. We also studied the effects of 4 SNPs (in exon 16 Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are clonal hematologic malignan- and 20) of MRP1 gene on its overexpression using PCR-SSCP meth- cies with associated genetic abnormalities. The heterogeneous genetic ods followed by sequencing. changes have a role in MDS pathogenesis. Hence, cytogenetic testing is important in the diagnosis and prognosis of these disorders. Cha-Cancer genetics 1 racteristic chromosomal abnormalities in MDS are del(5q), -5, del(7q), mor by RT-PCR assay of RNA extracted from fresh tumor samples. -7, +8, del(11q), del(12p), del(13q), del(17p), del(20q), +21. The abera- This data suggests that this factor is involved in other kinds of cancer. tions in chromosome 5 and 7 are the most frequent cytogenetic findin- Take together, the expression of NANOG in these tumors, and the ef- gs. In the present study, we defined cytogenetic changes with respect fects of their disruption in animal models suggest that this gene could to their predictive value. We retrospectively analyzed cytogenetic cha- be a new therapeutic target for cancer. racterization of 506 consecutive patients with suspected or confined MDS referred to our department from different centers. There were P0585. Molecular variants of the NBS1 gene in glial and 254 male and 252 female patients with an age-range of 0 to 87 (me- embryonal brain tumors in children dian 54). For each case, bone marrow or peripheral blood cells were K. H. Chrzanowska, E. Ciara, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, E. Popowska, cultured in vitro for 24h at 370C. Chromosome spreads were obtained W. Grajkowska, S. Barszcz, B. Dembowska-Bagińska, E. Kowalewska, A. following standard techniques. In 140/506 (28 %) patients the quality Czajńska, M. Krajewska-Walasek, D. Perek, M. Roszkowski; of the slides were insufficient for evaluation. The number of abnor- The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. mal and normal karyotypes were 256 (62 %) and 140, respectively. Of Mutations in the NBS1 gene, which is involved in double-strand DNA 226 patients, 161 (71 %) showed a single anomaly (-7, +8, etc.) The repair, are associated with an autosomal recessive disorder, Nijmegen most common abnormality was pertaining to chromosome 7. Complex breakage syndrome. Several studies strongly suggest that NBS1 het- karyotypes (≥ 5) were found in 13 patients (6 %). Hypodiploidy de- erozygosity may be associated with elevated risk of some cancers. tected in 86 (38 %) of the patients. The aim of the study was to identify molecular variants of the NBS1 Our results corroborate that cytogenetic findings are in a heteroge- gene in a total of 109 children with glial (juvenile pilocytic astrocyto- neous state and conventional cytogenetic analysis are important in the mas, astrocytomas anaplasticum, glioblastomas) and embryonal brain diagnosis and prognosis of MDS cases. tumors (medulloblastomas, atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors, supra- tentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumors). Blood and tumor DNA P0583. Analysis of JAK2(V617F) Mutation in Turkish Patients samples from all patients were screened for the presence of the two with Myeloproliferative Disorders most common mutations, c.657del5 (p.K219fsX234) and c.643C>T O. Cilingir1, B. Durak1, M. H. Muslumanoglu1, G. Bademci1, M. O. Akay2, E. (p.R215W), in exon 6 of the NBS1 gene. In addition, in glial tumor Atli1, E. Tepeli1, Z. Gulbas2, S. Artan1; tissue exon 5, and in embryonal tumor tissue exons 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 13, 1Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genet- 14, were investigated. Molecular studies consisted of PCR-SSCP and ics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Depart- sequencing analyses. ment of Hematology, Eskisehir, Turkey. Of 53 patients with glial tumors, two heterozygous cases with mutations Polycythemia rubra vera (PCRV), essential thrombocythemia (ET) and in exon 6 of the NBS1 gene, c.657del5 (p.K219fsX234) and c.643C>T agnogenic myeloid metaplasia (AMM) are clonal myeloproliferative (p.R215W), were identified. In the group of 56 patients with embryonal disorders arising from a multipotent progenitor. The recent identifica- brain tumors, two heterozygotes for mutation c.511A>G (p.I171V) in tion of a V617F mutation in the JAK2 tyrosine kinase gene in a high exon 5, and three heterozygotes for a common mutation, c.657del5 proportion of patients suffering from MPDs may provide confirmation (p.K219fsX234), in exon 6 of the NBS1 gene were found. Moreover, of a diagnosis. Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase five frequent polymorphisms: c.553A>G (p.E185Q), c.2016A>G that transduces signals, especially those triggered by hematopoietic (p.P672P), c.1197C>T (p.D339D), IVS12-7A>G, IVS10+45delA, were growth factors such as erythropoietin, in normal and neoplastic cells. revealed. The frequency of sequence variants of the NBS1 gene in Here we analyzed JAK2(V617F) mutation in 41 Turkish patients with children with glial and embryonal brain tumors differs from that ob- myeloproliferative disorders. METHODS: DNAs from bone marrow served in the general population. samples of the patients were extracted and then PCR reactions by This study was supported by grant PBZ-KBN-090/P05/04-17. using F:5’-TGC TGA AAG TAG GAG AAA GTG CAT- 3` and R:5’- TCC TAC AGT GTT TTC AGT TTC AA-3’ primers and sequencing analysis P0586. Evidence for amplification of the mutant NBS1 allele in were performed. RESULTS: A single point mutation (Val617Phe) was tumour samples from NBS-heterozygotes identified in JAK2 in 19 (73.0 %) of 26 patients with PCRV, six (50%) of M. Stumm1, A. Pelz2, K. Sperling3, M. Maurer3, R. Schneider-Stock4, J. Steffen5, 12 with ET, and two (66.0 %) of three with AMM. Total V617F mutation R. Varon3; prevelance was 66.0% (27/41). CONCLUSION: JAK2V617F mutations 1Zentrum für Pränataldiagnostik, Berlin, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, are present in almost all patients with PCRV, and in approximately half Universitätsklinikum Magdeburg, Germany, 3Institut für Humangenetik, Charité of those with ET and AMM. This molecular abnormality takes an in- Berlin, Germany, 4Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsklinikum Magdeburg, creased importance in the knowledge of the physiopathology of MPDs, Germany, 5MSC Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, particularly in PCRV and also in prognosis of the patients. However, Poland. further studies are necessary to answer many questions regarding the Mutations of the NBS1 gene cause an increased tumour risk in NBS- role of a single allele in three clinically distinct disorders, the mecha- homozygotes as well as in NBS-heterozygotes. However, in the lat- nism of activation of JAK2V617F, and the pathogenesis of JAK2-nega- ter case the underlying mechanisms are completely unknown. To tive myeloproliferative disorders. approach this problem, ten tumour samples of 9 different NBS-het- erozygotes from Poland were analyzed by FISH and RT-PCR. The P0584. NANOG expression in Ewing’s sarcoma and tumour samples were derived from carriers of the 657del5 mutation or desmoplastic small round cell tumor the R215W variant. Interphase FISH was performed on isolated nuclei Á. F. L. Rios, L. G. Tone, C. A. Scridelli, R. P. Queiroz, E. S. Ramos; from paraffin embedded tumour samples by means of a Cy3-labeled University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil. BAC-probe containing the whole NBS1 gene region. A BAC-probe The initiation and development of cancer include several molecular flanking the NBS1-region and/or a chromosome 8 centromeric probe events like accumulation of genetics and epigenetic alterations. Since were hybridised as controls. Four tumour samples showed a deletion the 19th century, several researchers have noted the homologies be- of the NBS1 gene due to a monosomy 8. In contrast, three tumours tween cancer and embryonic cells. The hypothesis that cancer arise demonstrated an amplification of the NBS1 gene due to trisomy or from adult stem cells can be supported by the studies showing gene even pentasomy of chromosome 8. Additionally, two samples showed expression profile similar to normal stem cells. The transcription fac- both, deletions as well as amplifications of the NBS1 gene in different tor NANOG maps on the chromosome 12 in humans, it is uniquely cells of one tumour. RT-PCR analyses on 4 tumour samples demon- expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells and in germ cell tumors, and strated a loss of the NBS1 wild type allele and a gain of the NBS1 it is important for self-renewal. Knockout of this gene provokes the mutant allele. In this context it is important to note that the 657del5 differentiation of epiblast cells into parietal endoderm cells, in mouse. mutation is hypomorphic because a 70kDa amino-terminal truncated The expression of Nanog in the NIH3T3 transformed these cells, sug- fragment is produced by alternative initiation of translation at a start gesting an oncogenic potential of this transcription factor. Some re- codon upstream of the deletion through which it is brought into frame. ports have demonstrated the expression of NANOG in seminoma and We speculate that overexpression of this fragment might exert a domi- breast carcinoma. We identified the expression of NANOG transcripts nant negative effect. This and/or loss of the NBS1 wild-type allele are in samples of Ewing’s sarcoma and desmoplastic small round cell tu- possible mechanisms for tumorigenesis in NBS-heterozygotes.Cancer genetics 1 P0587. Differential expressed genes in favourable versus several contiguous genes have an earlier onset and a higher number unfavourable neuroblastoma tumors of dermal neurofibromas as classical NF1 patients. To explain this F. E. Abel, A. Wilzen, T. Martinsson; variability the existence of NF1 modifying genes in this region has Biomedicine, Goteborg, Sweden. been proposed. Our expression studies in dermal neurofibromas re- Neuroblastoma (NB), a childhood tumor originating from neural crest vealed four putative NF1 modifying genes: CENTA2, UTP6, C17orf79 cells in the sympathetic nervous system, has a complex biological het- and RAB11FIP4. We investigated the expression level and SNP vari- erogeneity depending on clinical stage and age at diagnosis. In order ability of these genes in more detail. First results will be presented. to screen for genes involved in tumour development, a global micro array expression analysis was performed on six NB tumours (three P0590. Disruptive mitochondrial DNA mutations in complex I favourable and three unfavourable). Data indicated that the expres- subunits are markers of oncocytic phenotype in thyroid tumors sion levels of several important players in the noradrenalin biosyn- G. Gasparre1, A. Porcelli2, E. Bonora1, L. Pennisi1, M. Toller3, L. Iommarini4, A. thesis pathway were significantly lower in unfavourable NB tumours Ghelli2, C. M. Betts5, V. Carelli4, M. Rugolo2, G. Tallini6, G. Romeo1; compared to favourable. The 95 most significant genes with a fold 1Unità di Genetica Medica, Policlinico Universitario S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bolo- change above 2.0 between groups were picked out for verification gna, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Biologia Evoluzionistica Sperimentale, University of with real-time PCR (with TaqMan Low Density Array cards, Applied Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Patologia e Medicina Sperimentale Biosystems) on tumours included in the micro array study. Thirteen e Clinica (DPMSC) and Centro Interdipartimentale di Medicina Rigenerativa additional tumours were also analyzed by real-time PCR in order (CIME), University of Udine, Udine, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Scienze Neurolo- to explore if the expression pattern is applicable to a larger group. giche, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Patologia Spe- The preliminary results show that transcripts encoded by solute car- rimentale, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 6Dipartimento di Anatomia rier family 6 (SLC6A2), transcription factor AP-2 beta (TFAP2B), and Patologica, Ospedale Bellaria, Bologna, Italy. chromosome 5 open reading frame 13 (C5ORF13) all show a distinct Oncocytic tumors are lesions composed of cells characterized by mi- down-regulated pattern in unfavourable tumours versus favourable. tochondrial hyperplasia particularly common in the thyroid gland. Be- The protein encoded by SLC6A2 is an important mediator in the nor- cause of their distinctive features they represent a good model to study adrenalin biosynthesis pathway. Both TFAP2B and C5ORF13 (also the role of mitochondria in tumorigenesis. We recently demonstrated known as P311) are known to induce the expression levels of cell- the association between two pathogenic mitochondrial mutations and cycle regulator P21. Also, TFAP2B has been shown to regulate ex- a defective biochemical phenotype in a cell line model of oncocytoma. pression of genes required for development of tissues of ectodermal To understand whether specific mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) muta- origin, such as neural crest. These findings insist us to further explore tions are associated with the oncocytic phenotype we sequenced these genes and their involvement in neuroblastoma development the entire mtDNA in 45 oncocytic thyroid tumors (HCTs), 5 oncocytic and progression. breast tumors and 52 control cases (21 non-oncocytic thyroid tumors, 15 breast carcinomas and 16 gliomas) utilizing a recently developed P0588. Screening 80 unrelated neurofibromatosis type 1 technology (Applera). Thirteen oncocytic lesions (26%) presented dis- patients for deletions of the NF1 gene. ruptive mutations (nonsense or frameshift), whereas only 2 samples O. Drozd1,2, O. Babenko1,2, M. Nemtsova1,2, D. Zaletayev1,2; presented such mutations in the non-oncocytic control group (3.8%). 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. In one case with multiple thyroid nodules analyzed separately a dis- Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. ruptive mutation was found in the only nodule with oncocytic features. Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant In one of the 5 oncocytic breast tumors a disruptive mutation was disorder affecting 1/3,500 individuals. The major diagnostic features identified. All disruptive mutations were found in complex I subunit include café-au-lait spots, neurofibromas, axillary/inguinal freckling, genes and the association between these mutations and the onco- and Lisch nodules. Various constitutional mutations of the NF1 gene cytic phenotype was statistically significant (p=0.001). To study the have been found in NF1 patients. However, no clear genotype-pheno- pathogenicity of these mitochondrial mutations, primary cultures from type correlation has been established so far, except for patients with oncocytic tumors and corresponding normal tissues were established. deletions of the entire NF1 gene who have a more severe phenotype, Molecular and biochemical analysis and electron microscopy showed including facial abnormalities, mental retardation, developmental de- that primary cultures derived from tumors bearing disruptive muta- lay, early development of numerous cutaneous neurofibromas, and tions failed to maintain the mutations and the oncocytic phenotype. plexiform neurofibromas. We have developed the panel of intragenic We conclude that disruptive mutations in complex I subunits are mark- microsatellite markers (D17S1307, D17S1849, TAGA/TAGGint27a, ers of thyroid oncocytic tumors. ACint27b and GTint38) for detection of NF1 region gross deletions and indirect NF1 DNA-diagnostics. Moreover, we used 3 polymor- P0591. P53, H-ras, c-myc, c-erbB2 and bcl2 analysis in oral phisms (702A>G, 1528-29delT and 5546-19T>A) for the definition of squamous cell carcinomas NF1 locus heterozygosity. A total of 80 unrelated patients who met the J. Milasin1, B. Popovic1, B. Jekic2, G. Tredici3, I. Novakovic2, V. Lekovic1; diagnostic criteria for NF1 were included in our study. In five patients 1School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia, 2School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, all markers were homozygous and one patient had a deletion (TAGA/ 3Department of Neurosciences, University Milano, Milano-Bicocca, Italy. TAGGint27a, GTint38). Parents DNA was accessible only for three of A comprehensive study of molecular changes during oral carcinogen- five potential carriers of deletions. Among the latter, two of three had esis has been performed on 60 specimens of squamous cell carci- no severe phenotype characteristic for loss of the entire NF1 gene. noma (OSCCs). P53 and H-ras have been subjected to mutational Based on the heterozygosity of each marker, the probability of random analysis by SSCP followed by sequencing. C-myc and c-erbB2 have homozygosity of eight markers in one individual could be calculated been tested for amplification using differential PCR and bcl2 gene ex- as 0.00027. It is possible to explain such contradiction by the pres- pression has been determined by immunohistochemistry. ence of a small number of allelic variants of marker D17S1307 and Mutations in one or more exons of the p53 gene have been found in prevalence of one allelic variant (52 %) of marker D17S1849. 60 % of cases. H-ras codons 12/13 mutations have been detected in 22% of cases, while c-myc and c-erbB2 amplification has been re- P0589. Expression analysis and investigation of single corded in 35% and 32% of specimens, respectively. Bcl2 expression nucleotide polymorphisms in putative NF1 modifying genes has been registered in 68% of OSCCs. M. Wuepping, B. Bartelt-Kirbach, D. Kaufmann; We confirmed a positive association between the presence of p53 Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany. mutations and bcl2 expression, as well as a significant correlation Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common autosomal between c-erbB2 amplification and bcl2 expression. No statistically dominantly inherited tumor diseases. Several symptoms of NF1 as the significant correlation was found between molecular and histopatho- dermal neurofibromas show a high interfamilial variability in classical logical changes (p53 mutations showed a borderline correlation with NF1. In the familial spinal neurofibromatosis, a very rare variant of histological grades). NF1, the number and onset of neurofibromas is obviously decreased. On the other hand, patients with microdeletions spanning the NF1 and Cancer genetics 1 P0592. Different profiles of BRCA1 and BRCA2 SNPs association Austria, 4Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Vienna, Austria. with breast/ovarian cancer risk among sporadic cases and p53 immunohistochemistry (IHC) has been performed in thousands of BRCA1 mutation carriers malignant tumors but its clinical impact is still unclear. T. Y. Smirnova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, R. F. We have already demonstrated that the p53 genotype assessed by Garkavtseva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; sequencing is predictive for response to preoperative cancer therapy. 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer Aim of the present study was to evaluate whether p53 IHC is of any Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. use for predicting response to p53 dependant treatments. The BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are the main suppressors of inherited Using one of the most frequently applied antibodies for IHC, pAb1801, breast and ovarian cancer. The molecular basis for cancer localization we calculated different cutoff points for scoring positivity, ranging from in either the breast or in the ovary is unclear. We speculate that cancer >0% to >80%, for their correlation with the response to preoperative localization may be modified by different variants of BRCA1/2 genes. cancer therapy. We studied 4 samples of patients for SNPs in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 In 106 patients (22 lung cancer, 49 rectal cancer and 35 breast cancer genes. Patients with sporadic breast and ovarian cancer, patients with patients) a mutant p53 genotype has been shown to be significantly the same types of cancer with BRCA1 mutations and a control sample. associated with treatment failure. A positive IHC calculated with a 10% The BRCA1 E1038G and BRCA2 N372H, H1256P coding variants, cutoff did not show any correlation with treatment response in lung and and a SNP located in the 5’-untranslated region were investigated. in rectal cancer patients, respectively. Only in breast cancer patients, In a sample of sporadic breast cancer patients, an association of the treatment failure was related to the presence of a positive IHC staining, 1038EG variant with cancer risk was found (OR=2,11; P=0,016). There but specificity - the probability of recognizing responders - was lower was no difference in four SNPs frequencies between BRCA1 mutation than calculated by sequencing. carriers with breast cancer and control sample. This may means that no Raising the cutoff improved specificity, but we could reach 100% in modifications are required for breast cancer localization under BRCA1 breast cancer only. Furthermore, correlation of p53 IHC and treatment mutations. In sporadic ovarian cancer 203AA homozygous variant was response was found in breast cancer patients only. associated with cancer risk (OR=6,59; P=0,0016). An association of We conclude that the specificity of p53 IHC to detect responders to 1038GG (OR=0,12; P=0,019) and 203GA (OR=0,29; P=0,0033) were cancer therapy may be improved by changing the cutoff. However the revealed for cases of ovarian cancer with BRCA1 mutations. later decreases the sensitivity of recognizing nonresponders. There- In conclusion, the data suggest a possibility distinguish four groups of fore, in contrast to p53 sequencing, p53 IHC does not qualify for clini- patients with breast or ovarian cancer by profiles of BRCA1/2 SNPs cal application. association with cancer risk. The risk of sporadic breast and ovar- ian cancer is associated with different SNPs. The BRCA1 mutations P0595. Correlation between genetic polymorphisms of GST-P1, caused breast cancer independent of the SNPs studied. We conclude p53, COX-2 and overexpression of p53 in esophageal squamous that BRCA1/2 polymorphic variants may act as modifiers of the magni- cell carcinoma from Iran tude of ovarian cancer risk of BRCA1 mutations. F. Biramijamal1, M. Soltani1, N. Saligheh Araghi1, G. Iravanloo2; 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, P0593. Coexistence of copy number changes of different genes Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cancer Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. (erbB-1, erbB-2, CMYC, CCND1 and ZNF217) in ovarian tumors The incidence of esophageal cancer (EC) is depended on the geo- I. Dimova1, A. Josifova1, S. Raicheva2,3, R. Dimitrov2,4, N. Doganov2,4, D. Ton- graphic differences. It is due to specific environmental factors and cheva1; chemicals. Northern Iran is the highest risk area for this type of cancer, 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital “Maichin dom”, but the specific environmental factors are very important as determi- Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Laboratory of Gynecopathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Second Gy- nants of esophageal cancer risk in Iran is not clearly defined. It is dem- necological Clinic, Sofia, Bulgaria. onstrated that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in various genes The aim of this study was to establish the frequency of combinatorial revealed a correlation between the presence of specific allelic variants and separate copy number changes of erbB-1, erbB-2, c-myc, CCND1 and cancer susceptibility in diverse malignancies. Furthermore, stud- and ZNF217 in ovarian tumors from different phenotype; icroarray of ies of polymorphisms in cancer susceptibility genes included GST-P1, 507 ovarian tumors was analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization. p53 and COX-2 in various types of cancer were shown. Therefore, in A total of 47 tumors were successfully analyzed for all 5 loci, among this investigation, we assesed the role of genetic polymorphisms of them 38 were malignant, 7 were tumors with low malignant potency GST-P1, p53, COX-2 in risk of developing esophageal squamous cell (LMP) and 2 were benign. Normal gene copy numbers of all loci carcinoma from Iran. were established in 12 malignant tumors (31.6%), in 2 of LMP tumors The p53 Pro72Arg, GST-P1 Ile105Val and COX-2 -765G>C genotypes (28.6%) and in both adenomas. At least one aberration was found in were determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment 26 malignant tumors (68.4%) and in 5 LMP tumors (71.4%). Single length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) and direct DNA sequencing analy- abnormalities were detected in 14 malignant tumors (36.8%) and in all sis in healthy controls and patients. Also, Immunohistochemistry was aberrant LMP tumors, while double or higher abnormalities were found performed to determine p53 expression. Among the EC patients sub- only in malignant tumors (31.6%). The most frequent genetic change jects, the frequency of G allele for p53 gene, A allele for GST-P1 gene both in malignant and LMP tumors was copy number increases of c- and C allele for COX-2 gene were high. Accumulation of p53 protein myc. Coexistence of two or more abnormalities was more frequent in tumor cells was not correlated with investigated genetic polymor- in serous (64.3%) than in non-serous (40%) tumors (p<0.19). Copy phisms. number changes of c-myc and CCND1 were predominantly found sep- This preliminary study support a hypothesis that GST-P1, p53 and arately, while copy number increases of erbB-1, erbB-2 and ZNF217 COX-2 variants are involved in development of esophageal cancer were usually combined with another aberration. We concluded that, from Iran. However nothing is known so far about the status of GST- in particular, c-myc gain is early event in ovarian carcinogenesis, P1, p53 and COX-2 genetic polymorphisms and its association with whereas gains of erbB-1, erbB-2 and ZNF217 are late events. Serous overexpression of p53 in EC from Iran. cancers are genetically more instable than non-serous cancers. About 70% of ovarian cancers have unbalanced alterations in some of the P0596. Is 16bp intron 3 polymorphism for p53 gene associated analyzed loci. with esophageal cancer in Iran? E. Nazari1, F. Biramijamal1, M. Soltani1, G. Iravanloo2, M. Karim2; P0594. The right cutoff point: is it possible to improve the 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, predictive value of p53 immunohistochemistry? Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cancer Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. S. Kappel1, C. Ludwig1, B. Wolf1, F. Wrba2, M. Ploner3, M. Mittlböck3, E. Roth1, The p53 protein is considered a key combination in countering stress D. Kandioler4; messages such as DNA damage. This protein is a transcription factor 1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery/ Surgical Research, Vi- and it can induce cell growth arrest or apoptosis to protect genome and enna, Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Pathology, Vienna, cell against genotoxic damage. Also, the p53 gene is involved in the Austria, 3Medical University of Vienna, Department of Biostatistics, Vienna, etiology of malignant disease. It is recorded that most cancers carry p53 gene mutations. The frequency of esophageal squamous cell car-Cancer genetics 1 cinoma (ESCC), which it is predominant cancer in esophagus, is very prevalent on TAp73α and TAp73β activatory actions. This evidence high in northern Iran. The incidence pattern of esophageal cancer is supposes that in thyroid cancers, in which there are a high ΔNp73α different among Iranian population and up to 171/100,000. So, iden- expression respect to the normal thyroid tissue, ΔNp73α could reduce tification of p53 gene mutations and polymorphisms is very important PTEN expression even in presence of the others activating isoforms. to find the major causes of this type of cancer in Iran. Several studies were described the polymorphism in intron 3 of the p53 gene (16bp P0599. Searching for polymorphisms in paclitaxel elimination intron 3 insertions) and susceptibility to several types of cancer and pathway influencing drug efficacy and toxicity diseases. This type of polymorphism can change the expression of S. Leskelä1, C. Jara2, J. García-Donás2, R. Villafañe2, J. Sánchez-Torres2, p53 gene. C. Montero-Conde1, I. Landa1, E. López-Jiménez1, R. Letón1, A. Cascón1, M. In this investigation, we assessed allele frequency of p53 polymor- Robledo1, C. Rodríguez-Antona1; phism in intron 3 among Iranian ESCC patients and healthy controls. 1Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain, 2Unidad de On- The p53 genotypes were determined by direct DNA sequencing analy- cología Médica, Fundación Hospital Alcorcón, Madrid, Spain. sis in healthy controls and patients. Among the ESCC patients sub- Paclitaxel is an anti-cancer drug widely used in the treatment of a jects, the 16bp intron 3 polymorphism for p53 gene were significantly variety of solid tumors, including breast, ovarian and lung. There is higher than healthy controls. Our finding suggested that p53 genotype a large interindividual variation in the efficacy and adverse effects of may play an important role in developing esophageal tumor among this drug, mainly hematologic toxicity and neurotoxicity. It has been ESCC patients. It is suggested that protein expression of the p53 gene proposed that polymorphisms in genes encoding drug-metabolizing can be investigate among Iranian ESCC patients in the future. enzymes and drug transporters might contribute to the differences in paclitaxel outcome. Thus, the aim of this work is to identify SNPs P0597. Epigenetic regulation of shc1 protein expression, and involved in paclitaxel elimination that could influence its efficacy and genetic variation within the SHC1 gene in breast carcinomas. toxicity. Paclitaxel elimination is mediated by hepatic metabolism and K. Duda, L. Hansen; biliar excretion: the uptake of paclitaxel into the hepatocytes is me- University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark. diated by the organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP)1B3, in The SHC1 gene encodes three isoforms: p66shc, p52shc and p46shc. the liver cytochrome P450 2C8 (CYP2C8) and CYP3A4/5 hydroxylate Both p52/46shc activate the mitogen activated protein kinase pathway paclitaxel and the P-glycoprotein mediates biliar excretion. Thus, we (MAPK), in contrary to p66shc which downregulates MAPK. Moreover selected variants in these genes and genotyped them in more than p66shc plays an important role in apoptosis and response to oxidative 80 oncology patients treated with paclitaxel: four CYP2C8 SNPs from stress by transferring signal from p53. Despite that p66shc and p52/ which two are in the coding region; one CYP3A5 SNP causing alterna- 46shc are involved in different cell functions, they all play an important tive splicing; one CYP3A4 promoter SNP influencing transcription; two role in tumorigenesis. coding OATP1B3 SNPs and three MDR1 SNPs previously associated Western blot analysis of cytosol fractions from breast tumours revealed with altered activity. Neurotoxicity was evaluated in the patients and that p66shc protein expression is decreased for most of the samples. the influence of clinical variables, such as total paclitaxel dose, time Sequencing of bisulphite treated DNA from the same patients showed to neurotoxicity and time to recovery were taken into account in the that the level of methylation inside the p66shc promoter region cor- study. Then, the genotypes were compared to the clinical data of the relates with protein expression. Additionally, samples which did not fit patients, in order to assess their effect. In conclusion, the identification properly to this thesis underwent mutation analysis. Exon 1 and the of genetic variants involved in paclitaxel elimination could be useful to promoter region of SHC1 were sequenced in 20 breast tumours, but predict drug effects. no common mutation was found. There was discovered mutation with- in the Sp1 binding site for one of the samples, but a single nucleotide P0600. Molecular genetic analysis of pheochromocytomas and change did not affect expression of p66shc. Moreover, SNP analysis paraganglioma in Czech patients was performed, comprising four known and two new polymorphisms Z. Musil1, A. Krepelova1, J. Widimsky2, T. Zelinka2, M. Kohoutova1; within the common part for all 3 SHC1 isoforms. 200 DNA breast can- 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine, cer samples and 252 DNA samples from healthy individuals serving as Prague, Czech Republic, 2Third Medical Department - Clinical Department of controls were analyzed. Two independent haplotypes were identified Endocrinology and Metabolism of the First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech based on the SNP genotypes. Despite the presence of two rare poly- Republic. morphisms, one of the discovered haplotypes may have a protective The pheochromocytoma is tumor arising in adrenal or extra-adrenal effect against breast cancer. The genotype was twice as frequent in sites and occurs as a sporadic form or, less frequently, in familial set- the control population as in the tumour samples. ting as a part of inherited syndromes. Paraganglioma of the head and neck occurs mostly sporadically and also in syndromic or nonsyndrom- P0598. p73 regulates PTEN genic expression ic familial settings. To date four susceptibility genes for pheochromocy- C. Puppin1, F. Frasca2, V. Vella2, L. Messina2, R. Vigneri2, G. Damante1; toma have been reported that included RET proto-oncogene, VHL tu- 1Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, Udine, mor suppressor gene and recently identified genes SDHB and SDHD Italy, 2Endocrinologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e di Medicina Speciali- for succinate dehydrogenase subunit B and D respectively. Mutations stica, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy. in these genes can predispose one to pheochromocytoma and para- p73 belongs to a family of p53-related nuclear transcription factors that ganglioma. includes p53, p73 and p63. Differentially from p53, p73 is expressed All established genes were analyzed to investigate possible genetic as two NH2-terminally distinct isoforms, due to a second downstream cause of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma in the population of promoter: transcriptionally active (TAp73) and transcriptionally inactive Czech patients. Among 100 patients we have found several previously (ΔNp73) forms. The ΔNp73 isoforms can act as dominant negative described mutations or polymorphisms. Besides that one novel muta- inhibitors of the TA isoforms and p53, so TA and ΔN show pro- and anti- tion was found in the SDHB gene in a child patient. We conclude that a apoptotic properties, respectively. Moreover additional complessity is large part of diseases could be be due to mutations in an unidentified generated at the COOH terminus because p73 undergoes multiple gene(s). COOH-terminal splicing (α being full-length isoforms). PTEN is a dual- Supported by the grant project MŠMT &#268;R MSM0021620808 specificity phosphatase and has a tumor suppressor function. This study investigates the regulation of PTEN expression by p73 in thyroid P0601. Methylation-associated PHOX2B gene silencing in human cells because in thyroid carcinomas both decrease of PTEN expres- neuroblastoma sion and increase of p73 expression have been previously shown. Sta- L. de Pontual1, D. Trochet1, F. Bourdeaut2, S. Thomas1, H. Etchevers1, A. ble thyroid cell line was generated expressing inducible p73 isoforms, Chrompret3, D. Valteau3, L. Brugière3, A. Munnich1, O. Delattre2, S. Lyonnet1, I. these cells showed incremented PTEN protein upon over expression Janouex-Lerosey2, J. Amiel1; of TAp73α and β; instead cell line expressing ΔNp73α showed decre- 1Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 2Institut Curie, Paris, France, 3Insti- mented PTEN protein. Cell transfection studies indicated that TAp73α tut Gustave Roussy, Paris, France. and TAp73β can activate PTEN promoter, instead ΔNp73α inhibits it, Neuroblastoma (NB), an embryonic tumour originating from neural in a p53 independent way. Moreover the ΔNp73α inhibitory action is crest cells, is one of the most common solid tumours in childhood. Cancer genetics 1 Although NB is characterized by numerous recurrent, large-scale P0604. POET (Prevention of Endometrial Tumours), a chromosome rearrangements, the genes targeted by these imbal- randomised control trial of the effect of the Mirena Intrauterine ances have remained elusive. We recently identified the paired-like System (IUS) with surveillance, versus surveillance alone, on homeobox 2B (PHOX2B, MIM 603851) gene as disease-causing in the development of atypical endometrial hyperplasia (AEH) and dysautonomic disorders including Congenital Central Hypoventilation carcinoma (EC) in women with Lynch Syndrome aged 35-65y. Syndrome (CCHS), Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) and NB in various S. V. Hodgson1, V. Murday2, P. Sasieni3, E. Sheridan4, T. Bourne5, E. Okaru6; combinations. Most patients with NB due to a germline heterozygous 1St George’s, Tooting, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Medical Genet- PHOX2B gene mutation are familial and/or syndromic. PHOX2B, at ics, Yorkhill NHS Trust, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Wolfson Institute, Queen chromosome 4p12, does not lie in a commonly rearranged locus in Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 4Yorkshire Regional Clini- NB. To evaluate the role of PHOX2B in sporadic, isolated NB, we cal Genetics Service,St James’ University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, analysed 13 NB cell lines and 46 tumors for mutations of coding and 5Dept. Gynaecology, St.George’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6Dept. promoter sequences, loss of heterozygosity (LOH), or aberrant hyper- Gynaecology, Barts and the London NHS Trust, St.Bartholomew’s Hospital,, methylation of PHOX2B (13 cell lines and 18 tumors). We identified no London, United Kingdom. mutation but LOH in about 10% of the cases and aberrant CpG island Women with Lynch syndrome have an increased risk of developing en- methylation of the 500 bp PHOX2B promoter region in 4/31 (12.9%). dometrial cancer (up to 65% lifetime risk, 20% before 50y). The Mirena Altogether, both germinal and somatic anomalies at the PHOX2B lo- progestogen-releasing intra-uterine system greatly reduces the thick- cus are found in NB. ness of the endometrium. This study proposes to evaluate whether treatment with the Mirena for 4y reduces the rate of detection of AEH P0602. Breast cancer and the promyelocytic leukemia gene and EC in women with Lynch Syndrome on surveillance by annual I. Jeziskova1, P. Plevova1,2, S. Walczyskova1, A. Krepelova3, K. Pavlikova3, V. transvaginal ultrasound (TVS) and EB. Secondary study outcomes in- Kotala4, E. Silhanova1; clude determination of the sensitivity and specificity of surveillance, the 1University Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 2Palacky University, Olomouc, age-related incidence of AEH and EC in women with Lynch syndrome, Czech Republic, 32nd Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Re- the premalignant pathway to carcinoma, the psychological effects of public, 4Weizmann Institute, Rehovot, Israel. this management protocol and any adverse effects of surveillance and Introduction: The PML (promyelocytic leukemia) protein is a tumor sup- use of the Mirena IUS. We piloted the Mirena IUS for 6 months in 15 pressor gene that encodes a multifunctional protein with critical tumor women, average age 42y (24-56y). 9 experienced mild, 4 moderate suppressive functions such as induction of apoptosis, growth arrest and 2 severe pain on insertion. One IUS was removed for excess uter- and cellular senescence. Its expression is downregulated in about one ine bleeding; 7 women had spotting and 7 no endometrial bleeding. third of tumors, including breast cancer. With respect to these facts we EB was successful before and after the trial period; all post-Mirena tested the hypothesis that germline mutations of the PML gene might biopsies showed decidualisation of the endometrium. 5 women chose predispose to breast cancer. to continue for longer with the Mirena. Patients and methods: Thirty five patients fulfilling the criteria for This study is funded by CR-UK for 5y. in the UK, where we have initi- BRCA1/BRCA2 gene mutation analysis in whom no germline BRCA1/ ated it as a multi-centre National study. We welcome expressions of BRCA2 gene mutation was found were included into the study. Ge- interest to initiate wider international collaboration. nomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood. Nine exons of the PML gene were screened for mutations using heteroduplex analysis. Sam- P0605. Detection of PML-RARA rearrangement by RT-PCR in an ples with fragments of abnormal mobility were sequenced using ABI acute promyelocytic leukemia without evidence by FISH. prism 3100 genetic analyser. S. Ramiro1, O. González1, C. Blas1, M. Renedo1, C. Castellanos1, L. de la Results: No germline mutation was found in the PML gene in any of Vega1, M. Calderón1, C. Martinez-Chamorro2, P. Font2, C. Alaez2, A. Alegre1, A. the patients. Escudero2, E. Arranz1; Conclusion: Our results suggest that predisposition to breast cancer is 1Gemolab, Madrid, Spain, 2Ruber Hospital, Madrid, Spain. probably not associated with germline mutations of the PML gene. Ac- Acute promielocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a reciprocal knowledgements: The project was supported by IGA MZ CR NR/9092- translocation, t(15;17), resulting in fusion of the genes promyelocytic 3/2006. leukemia (PML) and retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA). This translo- cation is detected in about 70-90% of patients by conventional cytoge- P0603. Array CGH of dic(7;9)(p11-13;p11-13) in B-cell precursor netic methods. There are also masked or cryptic t(15;17) that may be acute lymphoblastic leukemia reveals clustered breakpoints at generated by submicroscopic insertions of PML or RARA or more com- 7p11.2-12.1 and 9p13.2 plex rearrangements. Those masked PML-RARA fusions can be iden- C. Lundin1, M. Heidenblad1, B. Strömbeck1, Å. Borg2, R. Hovland3, S. Heim4, B. tified by molecular analyses such reverse transcriptase-polimerase Johansson1; chain reaction (PCR) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Oncology, Lund, Sweden, We have studied the case of a 55-years-old woman that shows clini- 3Dept of Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Bergen, Norway, 4Dept of cal, morphological and inmunophenotypic features of APL. The PML- Medical Genetics, Oslo, Norway. RARA was not evident on FISH test, while RT-PCR revealed the pres- The dic(7;9)(p11-13;p11-13) is a recurrent chromosomal abnormality ence of PML-RARA transcript (bcr-3). The probe used was PML-RARA in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), mainly of B-lineage. Although dual color dual fusion (Vysis). It was not possible to perform the chro- more than 20 dic(7;9)-positive ALLs have been reported to date, the mosomal analyses because of the coagulation of the sample of bone molecular genetic consequences of this aberration are unknown. marrow. The patient was treated with a standard protocol for APL that We performed high-resolution (32K) genome-wide array-based com- includes All Trans Retinoic Acid (ATRA) and chemotherapy. parative genomic hybridization (array CGH) and locus-specific fluo- The FISH probes used in this case are a good molecular testing to rescence in situ hybridization analyses on three cases with dic(7;9) detect cryptic, variants or complex PML-RARA rearrangements, but in order to characterize the breakpoints on 7p and 9p. The analyses depending on the size of the insertion of PML-RARA, the target could showed a clustering of breakpoints at 9p13.1-13.2 in all three cases be so small that it would not hybridize with the probe or even hybrid- and at 7p11.2 in two; the array CGH revealed two different breakpoints ization itself might not generate a fluorescent signal large enough to - 7p12.1 and 7p14.1 - in the remaining case. Based on the present be visualized by FISH. Thus, a combination of molecular testing FISH results this abnormality should hence be designated dic(7;9)(p11.2- and PCR could avoid false negative results in presence of masked 12.1;p13.1-13.2). Unfortunately, lack of material precluded further mo- PML-RARA fusions. lecular genetic studies, and it thus remains to be elucidated whether the pathogenetically important outcome of the dic(7;9) is formation of a P0606. Overexpression of CD2 and c-myc in prostate cancer chimeric gene or loss of 7p and 9p material. tissue samples obtained by needle biopsy. A. Szendrői, B. Nagy, Z. Papp, I. Romics; Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. Objective: Altered CD24 and c-myc expression was reported in dif- ferent cancers. We decided to establish a quantitative real-time PCR Cancer genetics 1 method to measure the expression of these genes in prostate cancer AI and clinicopathologic parameters in adjacent stroma was observed. tissues and compare it to a non-cancerous samples. The epithelium LOH/AI frequencies at all loci were increased from Subjects and methods: Prostate tissue samples were collected using stage I to IV, in contrast, stromal LOH/AI frequencies were diminished needle biopsy from 21 prostate cancer (PCA) and 10 benign pros- respectively. tate hyperplasic (BPH) patients. RNA was isolated; cDNA synthetized; LOH/AI frequencies CD24 and c-myc expressions were determined by quantitative real- Marker Tumour stroma PIN stroma time PCR method. The expression of phospholipase 2A gene was measured for normalization of the gene expression results. Serum D8S1731 15/31 (48%) 16/28 (57%) 1\13 (7.7%) 1\9 prostate specific antigen (SPA) levels were determined by micropar- D16S534 15/30 (50%) 16/29 (55%) 3\9 (33%) 1\6 ticle enzyme immunoassay (MEIA) method. D16S422 14/25 (56%) 9/18 (50%) 1\8 (13%) 1\6 Results: PSA levels were significantly different between the PCA and RB1.20 11/30 (37%) 15/26 (58%) 2\9 (22%) 2\7 BPH groups, 252.37±308.33 ng/ml vs. 3.5±2.14 ng/ml (p=0.001). CD24 expression was 33.65±47.39 ng/μl in prostate tumorous and 4.00±4.25 The finding of frequent genetic and epigenetic alterations in tumor-associated stroma ng/μl in the BPH group (p=0,014), while the c-myc expression was suggests a more important role for stromal fibroblasts in prostate cancerogenesis than 88.85±114.95 ng/μl in the prostate tumorous and 17.08±21.75 ng/μl in was previously appreciated. the BPH group (p=0.028). Conclusion: Overexpression of CD24 and c-myc was observed in pros- P0609. Aberrant expression of TGIFLX/Y gene in prostate cancer tate cancer samples using quantitative real-time PCR method. CD24 Z. Ousati-Ashtiani, R. Ghassemi, M. Modarresi, M. Heidari; expression could be an independent marker on tumour invasion and Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. metastasis, with c-myc which plays also role in cell cycle regulation Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy and the second lead- and metastasis development. ing cause of cancer in men. Genetic studies have revealed this disorder to be heterogenous in nature. The molecular biology of prostate can- P0607. Significance of VDR, MTHFR and Insulin Gene cer and its progression is characterized by aberrant activity of several Polymorphisms in Prostate Cancer in Turkish Population regulatory pathways at the cellular level, and the surrounding tissue M. H. Muslumanoglu1, M. Turgut2, S. Demir1, T. Basmaci1, E. Tepeli1, E. Atli1, of the prostate.. Alterations at the DNA, RNA and/or protein expres- D. Uzun1, M. Ozdemir1; sion levels of molecules involved in these pathways are all potential 1Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genet- candidate markers of prognosis and therapeutic response. It is known ics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Depart- that homeobox genes encode transcription factors which regulate mul- ment of Urology, Eskisehir, Turkey. tiple developmental processes. These homeodomain proteins play Prostate cancer is an increasingly common disease for which there are an important role in determining cell fate. TGIFLX/Y is a homeobox few well-established risk factors. Family history data suggest a genetic gene, contains two genes; TGIFLX (X-linked) and TGIFLY (Y-linked). component; however, the majority of prostate cancer cases cannot be The biological function of these genes is unknown. In order to deter- explained by a single-gene model. AIM: We examined genetic poly- mine the potential function and involvement in normal and abnormal morphisms in Vitamin D receptor (VDR), methylenetetrahydrofolate development, the expression pattern of TGIFLX/Y in prostate cancer reductase (MTHFR) and insulin genes in a case-control study of pros- tumors was investigated. In this study a RT-PCR assay for detection tate cancer in Turkish population. METHODS: VDR gene BsmI and of TGIFLX/Y mRNA was carried out. Two different types of clinical FokI, insulin gene PstI and MTHFR gene A1298C and C677T poly- samples including 100 prostate tumors and 95 benign prostate hyper- morphisms were analyzed using DNAs from peripheral blood samples plasia (BPH) were studied. RT-PCR analysis reveals different patterns of 100 prostate cancer patients and 200 controls with benign pros- of TGIFLX/Y gene expressions among prostate cancers. In some tu- tate hyperplasia. RESULTS: No significant difference was seen in all mor samples the expression of both genes was detected. However, genes, but the significance for A1298C polymorphism is in the edge of in some cases either no expression or just one gene was detectable. range. CONCLUSION: None demonstrated any significant variation in In contrast, no expression of TGIFLX/Y mRNA in BPH samples was distribution within these genes and therefore we concluded that VDR, observed. Our results suggest possible TGIFLX/Y involvement in pros- MTHFR and insulin genes polymorphisms might not be major risk fac- tate cancer development . tor for prostate cancer in Turkish population. P0610. Cowden syndrome in Norway P0608. Molecular genetic alterations in tumor epithelium and C. F. Rustad1, M. Bjørnslett2, K. R. Heimdal1, L. Mæhle1, J. Apold3, P. Møller1; tumor-associated stromal cells of prostate cancer. 1Section for Inherited Cancer, Dep. of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet-Ra- T. V. Kekeeva1, O. P. Popova1, Y. Y. Andreeva2, L. E. Zavalishina2, D. V. Za- diumhospitalet Medical Cent, Oslo, Norway, 2Section for Molecular Genetics, letaev1,3, M. V. Nemtsova1,3; Dep. of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Cent, Oslo, 1Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow Herzen Norway, 3Centre for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Clini- Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Medical Genetic cal Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. We report the results of diagnostic and predictive testing in all families possibly having Cowden syndrome or families with breast and thyroid We investigated epigenetic changes and allelic imbalance (LOH/AI) cancer registered at the Norwegian cancer family clinics. in prostate cancer epithelia, tumor-associated stroma and prostate Cowden syndrome (multiple hamartoma syndrome, MIM 158350) is intraepitelial neoplasia (PIN) in prostatectomy specimens. Adenocarci- characterized by multiple hamartomas in the skin, mucous membranes, noma epithelia, foci of PIN and benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and breast, thyroid and endometrium. Patients with Cowden syndrome stroma adjacent to tumor tissues were isolated from 34 whole-mount have increased risk of breast cancer, thyroid cancer and endometrial prostatectomy specimens of patients with pT1-T4 stage prostate can- cancer. In 1997 germline mutations in PTEN were demonstrated to cer by using laser capture microdissection. cause Cowden syndrome. By analyzing the computerized medical files The methylation status of p16, HIC1, N33 and GSTP1 genes were in our department we identified families with a diagnosis of Cowden evaluated using methylation-sensitive PCR. We found high levels of syndrome, all families suspected to have Cowden syndrome, and all gene methylation in the tumor epithelium (78, 89, 33, 70%) and high- families with a combination of breast and thyroid cancers. The other grade PIN (57, 71, 33, 71%) and some methylation in BPH (25, 25, Norwegian genetic centres contributed their families with Cowden stig- 13, 0%) located adjacent to tumors. All investigated genes were meth- mata. ylated with very similar frequencies in adjacent stroma. There is no PTEN mutations were found in all six families meeting the clinical crite- methylation in BPH and stroma from patients with hyperplasia. ria for Cowden syndrome, in none of the two families assumed to have Microsatellite allelotyping was performed using 5 polymorphic mark- Cowden syndrome but not fulfilling the criteria, and in none of the eight ers for regions 8p22, 16q23 and 13q14. The frequencies of LOH/AI families with a combination of breast and thyroid cancers. Mutations in were higher in the corresponding stroma (Table). LOH/AI in tumour PTEN were identified in all affected members of the families fulfilling epitelium at 16q23 and 13q14 were significantly associated with stage, the Cowden syndrome criteria. 56 persons were tested, 19 were identi- Gleason score, metastasis, but no positive correlation between LOH/ fied as mutation carriers.Cancer genetics 10 Penetrance of PTEN mutations was high and expressions were P0613. Chracterization of chromosomal alterations in paraffin- Cowden syndrome stigmata in early infancy or childhood and cancer embedded salivary gland tumors by comparative genomic in adolescence or early adulthood. All families but one were small, and hybridization. de novo mutations were found. Outside clinically identifiable Cowden G. Floridia1, F. Censi1, M. Foschini2, V. Falbo1, D. Taruscio1; families, PTEN mutations may not contribute to inherited breast can- 1Dipartimento di Biologia cellulare e Neuroscienze, Istituto Superiore di SanitÃ , cer. Roma, Italy, 2Section of Pathology, University of Bologna, Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy. P0611. Analysis of TP53 Arg72Pro and MDM2 SNP309 T>G Salivary gland tumours (SGTs) are rare tumors of the neck and head polymorphisms as modifier factors in hereditary retinoblastoma. with an overall incidence in the Western world of approximately 2.5- K. Sampieri1, F. Ariani1, D. Giachino2, G. Mandrile2, M. De Marchi2, M. Bruttini1, 3/100.000/year. SGTs involve the major glands (parotid, submandibu- M. Mencarelli1, F. Mari1, T. Hadjistilianou3, S. De Francesco3, A. Acquaviva4, A. lar and sublingual) and the minor glands (oral mucosa, palate, uvula, Renieri1; floor of mouth, posterior tongue, retromolar area and peritonsilla area, 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Medical Genetics SSD, larynx and paranasal sinuses). ASO San Luigi Orbassano, Turin, Italy, 3Retinoblastoma Referral Center, De- SGTs are remarkable for their histopathologic and biologic diversity; partment of Ophtalmology, Siena, Italy, 4Pediatrics Department, University of they include benign and malignant tumors of epithelial, mesenchymal Siena, Siena, Italy. and lymphoid origin. Retinoblastoma (RB) is the most common primary intraocular ma- Although exposure to ionizing radiation has been implicated as a cause lignancy in children, arising by two-hit inactivation of the RB1 gene. of SGTs, the etiology of most of these tumors cannot be determined; Hyper-expression of negative p53 regulators was recently found as a moreover it’s difficult to determine the prognosis and select the optimal frequent somatic event. Most RB1 mutation carriers develop multifocal therapeutic modality. The study of molecular pathogenesis of SGTs is RB. However, they show a broad range of phenotypic variability (age a challenging task because of the rarity and histopathological diversity of onset, involvement of one/two eyes and needed therapy). To test the of these malignancies. hypothesis that this may in part results from variable function of genes Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) is a powerful tool for de- involved in cell cycle and apoptosis, we investigated the effect of two tecting chromosomal aberrations in archival paraffin embedded tumor functional polymorphisms, one in TP53 (Arg72Pro) and the other in the samples. promoter of MDM2 (SNP309 T>G), on the age of tumour diagnosis. CGH analysis, performed on four adenoid cystic tumor samples (with The TP53 Pro allele has been shown to have a weaker proapoptotic different hystotypes) and one pleomorphic adenocarcinoma , revealed activity and to influence age of onset in Lynch syndrome; the MDM2 fourteen aberrations (on average 2.8 per case). Gains involved chro- 309G allele to accelerate tumour formation in Li-Fraumeni syndrome mosomal regions 3q28-29, 4q35, 6q27, 10q15, 18p11, 20p13,22q12- and sporadic cancers. We tailored specific Pyrosequencing (C) as- 13; losses involved 2q36 -q37, 6p25, 11p15, 22q13. The correlation says for the two SNPs and genotyped 43 RB patients with a charac- of CGH results with clinical-pathological data and a comparison with terized or suspected RB1 germline mutation (i.e. familial and bilateral literature data will be discussed. cases). At univariate analysis, neither the MDM2 nor the TP53 SNP This work has been funded in the frame of “Programma di collabora- did reveal significant differences on RB onset. We then evaluated their zione ISS-NIH , Area Malattie Rare” Fasc.526/B combined effect through modelling estimates. Patients with the GG- ProPro genotype showed an earlier tumour onset compared to those P0614. Gene copy number profiling mucoepidermoid with GG-ArgArg or GG-ArgPro. An increased number of patients is carcinomas of salivary glands by using array comparative needed to firmly establish this association. This approach could help in genomic hybridization better characterizing the role of the p53 pathway in RB carcinogenesis, K. Jee1, K. Heikinheimo2, S. Knuutila1, I. Leivo1; and defining more accurate prognosis for patients. 1Haartmanin Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute of Dentistry, Turku, Finland. The recent development of DNA microarray- based comparative ge- P0612. RNASEL gene polymorphisms and the risk of prostate nomic hybridization has greatly facilitated the identification of chromo- cancer: a meta-analysis somal regions of imbalance and the target genes in them. The purpose H. Li1, B. Tai2; of this paper is to identify whole genome aberrations in mucoepider- 1National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University moid carcinoma (MEC) of salivary gland and to corelate genetic differ- of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. ences and histologic in mucoepidermoid carcinomas. We performed Studies revealing conflicting results of the role of RNASEL polymor- an oligonucleotide based array-comparative genomic hybridization phisms Glu265X, Arg462Gln and Asp541Glu on prostate cancer risk (aCGH) survey in 9 cases of low-and 5 cases of high-grade mucoepi- led us to perform a meta-analysis on published data investigating the dermoide carcinomas. All cases of low-grade MECs had no genomic association of these polymorphisms and the prostate cancer risk. aberrations while in high-grade MECs were seen a complex for copy We performed a meta-analysis of 5 studies with Glu265X genotyping, number aberrations including 3q amplification. 7 studies with Arg462Gln genotyping and 6 studies with Asp541Glu In conclusion, by using aCGH, we defined differences of copy number genotyping. The overall results of the meta-analysis suggested no ma- aberrations between the histologic grades of the MECs that might be a jor influence of these variants on the prostate cancer risk. However, directly influence to the behavior of these tumors. analysis of the Asp541Glu polymorphism by ethnicity showed that the genotypes with Glu variant including Asp/Glu (Familial cases vs. P0615. SEMAB is a candidate tumor suppressor gene on Control: OR=1.38, 95% CI=1.04 - 1.82; Sporadic cases vs. Control: 19p13.3 OR=1.26, 95% CI=1.07 - 1.48; Prostate cancer vs. Control: OR=1.29, V. V. Strelnikov1,2, E. B. Kuznetsova1,2, E. A. Pudova3, S. S. Larin4, M. V. 95% CI=1.12 - 1.48) and Asp/Glu+Glu/Glu (Familial cases vs. Control: Nemtsova1,2, D. V. Zaletayev1,2; OR=1.37, 95% CI=1.10 - 1.70; Sporadic cases vs. Control: OR=1.24, 1Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre 95% CI=1.07 - 1.44; Prostate cancer vs. Control: OR=1.27, 95% for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Russian State Medical CI=1.13 - 1.44) increased the prostate cancer risk in Caucasians, thus University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Institute of Gene Biology, Moscow, suggesting a dominant model for the Glu variant. Analyses by sub- Russian Federation. population also showed no evidence of effects of either Arg462Gln or It was previously suggested, by the results of high-resolution 19p13.2- Glu265X on the prostate cancer risk in Caucasians. 13.3 allelotyping in breast carcinomas, that this region might contain Our meta-analysis of available studies indicates that as compared with at least four tumor suppressor genes corresponding to the peak fre- genotype Asp/Asp, the Glu variant at the Asp541Glu polymorphism in- quencies of loss of heterozygosity (LOH). We have recently found creases the risk of prostate cancer by no more than 2-fold in Caucasian one of the 19p13.3 genes, SEMA6B, to be abnormally methylated in subjects, regardless of family history of the disease. This suggests that breast cancer. The SEMA6B promoter CpG island was methylated genuine genetic effects of this polymorphism probably account for only in 37/98 (38%) tumors and in 3/98 (3%) adjacent apparently normal a small part of prostate cancer in the Caucasian population. tissue samples (p<0,0001). Gene expression analysis performed by real-time RT-PCR revealed SEMA6B downregulation in 11/25 (44%) breast cancer samples, upregulation in 1/25 (4%) and unchanged ex-Cancer genetics 11 pression (compared to the adjacent tissue) in 13/25 (52%) samples P0618. Detection of hypermethylated APC DNA in squamous (p=0,0006). Expression was normal in the MCF7 cell line and absent in cell carcinoma of esophagus and possible application as a the T47D cells. SEMA6B LOH studies are hampered by the absence of molecular marker the informative microsatellite markers within the gene. Thus we have M. Zare1,2, F. Rastgar Jazii1, M. Alivand1,2; elaborated a single nucleotide primer extension-based method allow- 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Khatam higher education institution, ing semiquantitative analysis with capillary electrophoresis of fluores- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cently labeled products (SNaPshot, Applied Biosystems). Two intra- Squamous cell carcinoma of esophagus (SCCE) is a very lethal type of genic SNPs with the heterozygosity close to 50% were selected for the cancer with the highest incidence rate in Iran. For effective treatment LOH analysis, one located within exon 1 of the gene (rs2304213) and of SCCE, early detection and availability of molecular markers could the other intronic (rs4807602). By this approach SEMA6B LOH was be very helpful. Methylation of cytidine nucleotide in CpG islands of detected in 31/98 (32%) samples, indicating high frequency of dele- genes is a mechanism of transcriptional regulation. The importance tions in this locus. Taken together, our data suggest that SEMA6B is a of this event becomes prominent especially in case of tumor suppres- strong candidate tumor suppressor gene on 19p13.3. Recently identi- sor genes which leads to inactivation of these genes. Evaluation of fied tumor suppressor function of a number of other members of the methylation status of the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) tumor semaphorin family supports this suggestion. The study was supported suppressor gene has formerly been shown to be well applicable as in part by Applied Biosystems, USA. a molecular marker for adenocarcinoma of esophagus. Regarding to this, an optimized method of Methylation Specific PCR was applied P0616. Expression study of receptor tyrosine kinase targets of to analyze the methylation status of promoter region of APC in pa- Imatinib mesylate in skull base chordomas tients of SCCE with different stages of tumorogenesis. Extracted DNA M. Stroppi1, F. Orzan1, M. Longoni1, M. R. Terreni2, N. Boari3, P. Mortini4, C. from tumor and normal tissues of SCCE were digested with appro- Doglioni2, P. Riva1; priate restriction enzyme, treated with sodium bisulfite, and amplified 1Department of Biology and Genetics, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Depart- in a two-step PCR applying methylation specific primers. According ment of Pathology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Department to our results, all normal tissues were observed to be unmethylated, of Neurosurgery, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 4Department of while 45% of tumor tissues were methylated such that 35% were ho- Neurosurgery, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. mozygous and the 65% were heterozygous. Indeed hypermethylation Chordoma is a rare embryonal neoplasm arising from notochordal of APC was seen even in early-stage tissues. These results indicate remnants. The current therapy is a combination of surgery and radio- that hypermethylation of APC gene provides an important mechanism therapy; chemotherapy is not applied due to its reported low efficacy. for APC inactivation and its involvment in esophagous cancer, so APC Evidence on the efficacy of Imatinib mesylate (STI571), an inhibitor of promoter hypermethylation changes could provide a molecular marker the tyrosine kinases c-kit and PDGFRs, has been reported in five chor- system for the detection of esophagus cancer and could be applied in doma patients expressing PDGFRβ. We determined the expression of combination with other molecular markers. PDGFRA and PDGFRB, encoding PDGFRα and PDGFRβ receptor subunits respectively, by means of RT-PCR in 15 skull base chordo- P0619. Novel splice isoforms of STRADα differentially affect mas including a primary tumor and its recurrency. Fourteen tumors LKB1 activity, complex assembly and subcellular localization expressed both genes, while the recurrency expressed only PDGFRB. N. Resta1, P. A. Marignani2, K. D. Scott2, R. Bagnulo1, D. Cannone1, A. Stella1, We then performed immunohistochemistry of PDGFRα and PDGFRβ G. Guanti1, C. Simone1,3; in 11 chordomas, which stained stromal cells and focally some tumor 1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Biomedicine in Childhood, Univer- cells. In order to identify a possible autocrine or paracrine loop, we sity of Bari, Italy, 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty determined by RT-PCR the expression of their ligands PDGFA and of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 3Sbarro Institute for PDGFB, which were found to be both expressed in 8 tumors, while Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for Biotechnology, College of PDGFB was observed in one sample. Because homodimeric or het- Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, United States. erodimeric PDGF ligands activate both homodimeric or heterodimeric STRADα is a pseudokinase which forms a heterotrimeric complex with PDGFRs, it can be hypothesized that in 9 chordomas PDGFRα and/or the scaffolding protein MO25 and the tumor suppressor serine threo- PDGFRβ are activated. KIT mRNA was detected in three chordomas, nine protein kinase LKB1. Mutations in LKB1 are responsible for the while its ligand SCF only in one tumor, not expressing KIT. The expres- Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS) which predisposes to hamartomatous sion study will be extended to additional chordomas to verify whether polyposis and are also observed in some sporadic tumors. The LKB1/ PDGFR expression in stroma is a characteristic of this kind of tumor. STRAD/MO25 complex is involved in the regulation of numerous sig- Protein phosphorylation status will be determined in suitable samples. naling pathways including metabolism, proliferation, and cellular polar- This work provides new insight on STI571 targets in chordoma and ity of human intestinal epithelial cells. might contribute to address pharmacological and clinical research. Cell polarization, together with tissue-restricted transcription, rep- resents the main feature of enterocytes differentiation. Since a full- P0617. Mutation Analysis of RAP1A in Sporadic Breast Cancer length STRADα transcript has not been reported so far in these cells, H. Ebrahimi1, A. Jalali1, H. R. Khorram Khorshid1, A. Aghajani1, M. Gilanipour1, we evaluated the expression of endogenous STRADα in 5 colorectal M. R. Etminan1, A. Kian Mehr1, N. Ahmadbeigy2, M. Ohadi1; cancer cell lines characterized by their diverse ability to differentiate 1Genetic Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation, in vitro. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Hematology Department, Tarbiat Modarres We report herein the absence of full-length STRADα in these cells, University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and the discovery of several novel splice isoforms of STRADα that dif- Breast cancer is one of the most common neoplasms and is the main ferentially affect the kinase activity, complex assembly and subcellular cause of death due to cancer among females in civilized and in many localization of LKB1. developing countries. Among the genetic abnormalities, Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH) is fre- P0620. Construction of a new chimeric receptor for T_cell quently observed in 1p13.3, the region that is involved in the sporadic therapy by using single domain antibody type of breast cancer. The tumor suppressor gene, RAP1A, which has S. Aghaee Bakhtiari1, F. Rahbarizadeh1, A. Biglari2, M. Rasaee1, D. Gilham3; a critical role in contact inhibition, is located at this locus. In this study, 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Zanjan Univer- 50 sporadic breast cancer tumor specimens were examined using sity of Medical Sciences, Zanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Paterson Institute PCR-SSCP analysis and sequencing. No deleterious mutations were for Cancer Research, Mancheter, United Kingdom. observed in the promoter (500 base pairs upstream of the transcrip- The specific activation of the immune system to control cancer growth tion initiation site), and the protein-coding exons including exons 3, 4, has been a long-lasting goal in cancer immunotherapy. Employment 5, 6 and 7. We observed variations including an A>T transversion in of T cells for tumor therapy is an attractive approach. In order to re- intron 3 at nt + 29 and nt + 44 (4%). These observations indicate that direct and enhance the ability of the patient’s own immune cells to mutations are not a common cause of RAP1A abnormality in sporadic fight cancer, the chimeric receptor (CR) approach that endows lym- breast cancer. Other means of RAP1A inactivation such as promoter phocytes with antibody specificity was developed. The CR consists of hypermethylation need to be investigated in sporadic breast cancer. scFv that is linked through an extracellular linker to transmembrane Cancer genetics 12 and cytoplasmic domains of lymphocyte triggering moieties.The most roid tumors. Haplotype analysis and functional study of these variants important problem of this type of immunotherapy is scFv, because of is currently ongoing and results will be presented. its poor solubility and stability, the big size and unstable linker. Part In parallel, we previously identified disruptive mutations in a panel of the humoral immune response of camels and lamas is based on of sporadic oncocytic thyroid tumors in genes of complex I subunits heavy-chain antibodies where the light chain is totally absent. These encoded by mitochondrial DNA. These changes correlated with the unique antibody isotypes interact with the antigen by virtue of only one biochemical defects identified in oncocytic neoplasia. However, the single variable domain, referred to as VHH. VHH have these unique mutations do not account for all the cases of thyroid oncocytic tumors, features: suggesting that other nuclear changes might be involved. We are cur- 1) Solubility and stability rently screening nuclear genes encoding for the complex I subunits 2) Specificity and binding to their antigen with nanomolar affinity and for PolG, the mitochondrial polymerase. Results of the screening 3) Recognizing unique conformational epitopes that are currently out will be presented. of reach for conventional antibodies 4) Homology to human VH sequences that causes VHH is not immu- P0623. Tumor necrosis factor gene -308 (G→A) polymorphism nogene for human and risk of Non-Hodgkin lymphoma We are developing a new construct which expresses a CR contain- A. R. Nestorovic1, M. Radojkovic2, B. Ristic2, M. Stankovic1, M. Andjelic3, D. ing VHH instead of scFv. This construct might provide opportunities to Radojkovic1; develop a new generation of T cell therapy that hope to solve some of 1Institute of molecular genetics and genetic engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, the problems of T_cell therapy. 2Clinic of Internal medicine, Clinical Center Dr. Dragisa Misovic, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Department of Pulmonology, University Clinical Centar Zvezdara, Bel- P0621. A novel approach for the determination of T-cell clonality grade, Serbia. using microarray Common genetic variants in inflammatory response genes can affect O. A. Gra1, J. V. Sidorova2, E. A. Nikitin2, A. B. Sudarikov2, A. S. Zasedatelev1, the risk of developing Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). The tumor ne- T. V. Nasedkina1; crosis factor (TNF) is central in proinflammatory response and there- 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian Academy of Sciences, Mos- fore represents a strong candidate for mediating the risk of developing cow, Russian Federation, 2Hematology Research Center, Russian Academy of immunologicaly related malignant disease. Recent data have sug- Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. gested that TNF -308 (G →A) polymorphism might be associated with T-cell lymphomas account for 15-20% of all lymphoid malignancies in increased risk of NHL. Genotype AA is associated with higher serum Western countries. Determination of T-cell clonality has important for levels of soluble TNF. the differential diagnosis between malignant and non malignant T-cell This study investigated the potential influence of TNF -308 polymor- proliferation. phism on the etiology on NHL in Serbian population. A total of 48 NHL We developed a new method for the post-PCR analysis of TCR-γ re- patients and two control groups consisting of 102 diabetes patients arrangements using hybridization on oligonucleotide microchip. The and 120 healthy blood donors were included in the analysis. All subject TCR-γ has become a favorite target for T-cell clonality assays because were genotyped for TNF -308(G→A) by PCR-RFLP analysis. One of the γ-chain undergoes rearrangement before the α- and β-chains and, 48 patients (2%) was homozygous (AA), and 13 of 48 patients (27 consequently, is rearranged in all lymphocytes. %) were heterozygous (GA). In control group consisted of diabetes The microchip contains oligonucleotide probes for all variable (V) and patients, 3 of 102 (3%) were homozygous and 28 of 102 (27%) were joining (J) gene segments involved in rearrangements of the TCR-γ heterozygous and in healthy blood donors control group, two of 120 locus. To estimate the accuracy of the method, we examined 49 sam- (2%) were homozygous and 30 of 120 (25%) were heterozygous. Our ples of patients with lymphoproliferative disorders and 47 samples of study found no association between TNF-308 polymorphism and risk normal donors. The results of hybridization on the microchip displayed of NHL:the differences in allelic and genotype distribution was not 100% coincidence with the results obtained by other methods. The statistically significant among tested groups. However, hypothesis on sensitivity of the method is sufficient to determine 10% of clonal cells involvement of TNF -308 polymorphism in NHL deserves further in- in the sample. vestigation on a larger cohort of patients. In future studies additional Furthermore this biochip has been used for determination of the of Vγ polymorphisms within the TNF gene and inflammatory response genes and Jγ genes frequencies. Among the Vγ gene segments, those of should be taken into consideration family 1 were most commonly used (total frequency 62%), while the lowest frequency (3.5 %) was observed for the family 4 gene segment P0624. TP53 mutation frequency analysis in breast cancer Vγ11. As for the Jγ gene segments, the Jγ1 and Jγ2 gene segments against other carcinoma types are most commonly used in clonal rearrangements: their frequency D. Macic1, L. Kapur1, J. Ramic1, N. Pojskic1, N. Obralic2, S. Beslija2, N. Bi- was 81.6% in the total rearrangements with the Jγ gene segments. lalovic3, K. Bajrovic1; The results demonstrate the principal possibility of detecting T-cell 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and clonality in patients with T-cell lymphoid malignancies by hybridization Herzegovina, 2Institute of Oncology, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, on the microchip. 3Institute of Pathology, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. The aim of this study was to compare occurrence of somatic mutations P0622. “Familial and sporadic Thyroid Tumors: new variants at codons 248 and 273 of TP53 gene in patients with breast cancer to in candidate genes and their relevance for the oncocytic patients diagnosed with other types of cancer. phenotype.” TP53 is a tumor suppressor gene involved in control of cell division E. Bonora, C. Evangelisti, L. Pennisi, G. Romeo; and mutations in the gene are considered to represent the most com- Unit of Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy. mon genetic alteration in human cancers. These mutations may dam- Familial Non-Medullary Thyroid Cancer (fNMTC) is associated with age the normal function of TP53 as a transcription factor and the induc- some of the highest familial recurrence among all cancers. Inheritance tion of repair or apoptosis may be diminished. Consequently, genetic patterns indicate that fNMTC is transmitted as an autosomal domi- alterations may accumulate in the cell. nant trait with reduced penetrance, but a multigenic inheritance is not Codons 248 and 273 are positioned at DNA binding domain of TP53 excluded. TCO (Thyroid tumor with Cell Oxyphilia), a predisposing gene and mutation that are to be tested are single base substitution locus for recurrence of oxyphilic/oncocytic tumors, characterized by A>G in exons 7 and 8. As a result amino acid sequence is changed the presence of oncocytic cell, rich in mitochondria, was previously from Arg-Gln and Arg-His respectively. mapped to the 19p13.2 region. This study included 100 subjects, half of which are breast cancer af- In order to identify the TCO gene, genes on chromosome 19p13.2 fected individuals and rest are patients with other cancers. Genetic were analyzed in patients of the families contributing to linkage. We material was extracted from bioptic tissue specimen. Mutations occur- screened 9 genes with a role in tumor development and/or mitochon- rence in TP53 (codons 248 and 273) was determined by PCR analysis drial functions: MUC16, DNMT1, ICAM1, EIFS4, MBD3L1, SMARCA4, using single strand conformation polymorphism and restriction enzyme ILF3, TYK2, ZNF358. We identified new variants in the coding region digestion. Pathohistological findings obtained from clinic were correlat- of MUC16, a member of the mucin family and highly expressed in thy- ed with molecular alterations. Genetic data were evaluated in respect Cancer genetics 1 to available biological markers values (ER, PR, Her2 status, lymph de Compostela, Spain, 3Servicio de Oncología-Hospital Clínico Universitario, nodes status, age, etc). Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 4Servicio de Medicina Interna-Hospital Comar- cal do Salnés, Vilagarcía de Arousa, Spain, 5Servicio de Neurología-Complejo P0625. Identification of tumor-suppressor loci that may Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain. contribute to the pathogenesis of uveal melanoma Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) is a dominantly inherited cancer syndrome I. K. Manokhina1, N. V. Sklyarova2, S. V. Saakyan2, D. V. Zaletaev1; caused by mutations in the VHL tumour suppressor gene. Tumours 1Institute of Molecular Medicine, I.M. Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, associated to VHL are haemangioblastomas of brain, spinal cord, and Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Helmholts Moscow Research Institute of Eye retina, renal cell carcinoma, pheochromocytoma and endolymphatic Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation. sac tumours. Manifestations and severity are highly variable within Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common primary intraocular neo- and between families. Molecular genetic testing is indicated for at-risk plasm. More than 50% of uveal melanomas are linked to large dele- subjects in order to identify those deserving surveillance. We present tions or monosomy of chromosome 3, but the specific genetic mecha- two kindreds with clinical diagnosis of VHL, molecular genetic test- nisms responsible for the malignant behavior of UM are still unknown. ing and counselling. Proband of FamS had bilateral renal carcinoma, OBJECTIVE: To identify tumor-suppressor loci that may contribute to kidney and pancreatic cysts, a cerebellar syndrome since infancy the pathogenesis of UM. METHODS: Loss of heterozygosity on chro- and neck-face dystonia, but no brain or spinal haemangioblastomas. mosome 3 was investigated by PCR-based microsatellite analysis Family history: daughter (renal and pancreatic cysts), son (testicular in 45 tumors and related to clinical data. Microsatellite analysis was cysts), maternal aunt (metastasic tumour), and cousin (pheochromo- performed using markers at 3p25.3, 3p21.3, 3p14.2, 3q26.3, 13q14, cytoma age 30). A mutation not previously described in VHL was found 9p21.2-p21.3, close to or within the VHL, RASSF1, FHIT, TRAIL, RB1, in the proband and both affected children: c.261_263delATGinsGCT CDKN2A loci. The methylation status of the VHL, RASSF1, FHIT, RB1, (W88L). A third, 9-year old child, tested negative for W88L. The muta- CDKN2A promoter regions was analyzed using methyl-sensitive PCR. tion was not present in her cousin. In FamV two individuals fulfilled RESULTS: In the majority of cases, LOH on chromosome 3 was de- VHL criteria (brain and spinal cord haemangioblastomas, pancreatic tected at all informative markers, indicating of monosomy 3 (20 of 45 and renal cysts). No mutations were identified in VHL after sequencing tumors). RASSF1 promoter methylation was detected in 10 of the 45 and dosage analysis by MLPA. Genetic counselling was requested for (22%) patients with primary UM regardless of LOH status. No hyper- a 28 year-old, asymptomatic sibling. None of the affected individuals methylation of the VHL and FHIT promoter regions was found. Neither showed retinal angiomas, one of the cardinal features of VHL. These LOH at RB1 locus, nor hypermethylation of the RB1 promoter region families exemplify practical situations in which genetic counselling may was found. Methylation of the CDKN2A promoter and LOH in its lo- be hampered: 1) Novel mutations without proven pathogenicity, 2) Tu- cus occured in some tumors. CONCLUSIONS: These data show that mours of the VHL spectrum in family members not co-segregating the monosomy 3 could be the most common event in UM development, mutation (phenocopies) and 3) Failure to identify the causative muta- potentially of clinical relevance. LOH and promoter hypermethylation tion. of Rb1-pathway genes are rare events in UM. Further studies are nec- essary to understand if the RASSF1 promoter methylation could have P0628. A frequent XPC mutation in xeroderma pigmentosum a pathogenic effect in UM. patients from North Africa N. Soufir1, A. Sarasin2, A. Bourillon1, A. Stary2, K. Khadir3, B. Grandchamp1, H. P0626. Inactivation of the VHL gene in sporadic clear cell renal Benchikhi3; cancer 1Hopital Bichat, APHP, Paris, France, 2Institut gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, D. Mikhaylenko1,2, R. Kurynin3, A. Popov4, O. Karyakin4, M. Enikeev3, Y. Aly- 3CHU Ibn Rochd, Casablanca, Morocco. aev3, M. Nemtsova1,2, D. Zaletayev1,2; Introduction. Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is a rare autosomal reces- 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa- sive disorder that is associated with a germline nucleotide excision re- tion, 2Institute of Molecular Medicine at Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, pair defect. Patients exhibit extreme sensitivity to sunlight and a 4000- Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Clinic of Urology at Sechenov Moscow Medical fold increased frequency of skin cancers. Seven XP complementation Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Medical Radiological Research Cen- groups and a variant group have been identified, three of which are ter RAMS, Obninsk, Russian Federation. believed to be more frequent (XPC, XPA, XPD-ERCC2). Renal cell carcinoma is the most common variant of the kidney can- Methods. We investigated the role of XPC, XPD and XPA genes in cer, which accounts approximately 75% patients with this disease. The eight unrelated consanguineous XP families from Maghreb (six from majority of those tumors are characterized by inactivation of the VHL Morocco, two from Tunisia). All index cases presented typical XP gene suppressor as a result of mutations, allelic deletions and/or meth- symptoms including pronounced photosensitivity, multiple basal cell ylation. We have conducted the complex molecular-genetic analysis carcinomas (80%), and malignant melanomas (20%). DNAs was ex- of 64 samples obtained from patients with the clear cell renal cancer. tracted after informed consent and initially subject to microsatellite VHL mutations were detected by SSCP and subsequent sequencing, analysis by studying 2 microsatellites located in each three XP gene. loss of heterozygosity was analyzed using STR-markers D3S1317 Homozygous patients were further analysed by sequencing the entire and D3S1038, methylation was tested by methylsensitive polymerase gene coding sequence on a ABIPRISM 3130. chain reaction. All revealed variations were statistically analyzed Results: A previously reported and recurrent homozygous nonsense in respect to the parameters of primary tumors in various groups of mutation in the XPA gene, R228X, was found in a patient from Tunisia. patients. Seventeen VHL somatic mutations were detected, 12 from Surprisingly, in the remaining seven unrelated families (87%), we iden- which were described for the first time. Allelic deletions of VHL were tified the same homozygous frameshift mutation, c.1643_1644delTG, found in 31.6%, and methylation - in 7.8% samples of the renal cancer. p.V548AfsX572. This mutation was previously reported in two other As a whole, VHL inactivating events were presented in 46.9% cases unrelated families from Maghreb. XPC haplotype analysis highly sug- of disease, in 51.7% - among renal cancer patients with stage I. We gested a common fondator effect. have not observed any association of mutations, loss of heterozygos- Conclusion. Our study suggests a predominant involvement of XPC ity and methylation with clinical-pathological parameters of disease. as a XP susceptibility gene in countries from North Africa. The high Results of this investigation can be used in creation of a molecular frequency of the frameshift XPC mutation could, if confirmed, simplify markers system of the renal cancer, for example, a methylation panel the molecular diagnosis of XP patients from Maghreb, and facilitate of suppressor genes, they can be applied in investigation of properties prenatal diagnosis if requested by the families. of various VHL mutations. P0627. Molecular genetic testing in Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome: limitations and implication for genetic counselling. B. Quintáns1, M. Sobrido2, B. Graña3, F. Barros2, A. López-Soto4, M. Castro5, J. Castro2, A. Carracedo2; 1Grupo de Medicina Xenómica-Hospital Clínico Universitario, Santiago de Com- postela, Spain, 2Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 Po05. Molecular and biochemical basis of P0631. ABCB4 molecular characterization in patients with Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy (ICP): is high serum disease gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (gammaGT) level a marker for unambiguous genetic deficiency? P0629. The relationship between the -765G>C COX-2 D. Degiorgio1, B. Acaia2, C. Colombo3, S. Saino2, M. Seia1, L. Porcaro1, V. polymorphism and the development of cutaneous inflammatory Paracchini1, L. Costantino1, D. A. Coviello1; process 1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Po- S. Schipor1, R. Cocoş2, E. Păune-Buşe3, I. Nicolae4, R. Creţu2, A. Ştefănescu- liclinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Patologia della Gravidanza, Winterlike5, F. Raicu6,7; II Clinica Ostetrica, Fondazione IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Man- 1C. I. Parhon Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Carol giagalli Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 3Centro Fibrosi Cistica, Università degli Studi Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 3University di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e of Bucharest, Faculty of Biology, Bucharest, Romania, 4Centre of Dermato- Regina Elena, Milan, Italy. venereology, Dermato-venerological Hospital “Prof. S. Longhin”, Bucharest, Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is a disorder that occurs Romania, 5Caritas Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 6Department of Clini- mainly in the third trimester of pregnancy and is characterized by pru- cal Sciences and Imaging G. d’Annunzio University Foundation Chieti-Pescara, ritus, elevated fasting serum bile acids (>10μmol/L), and spontaneous Chieti-Pescara, Italy, 7Aging Research Center (CESI), G’ d’Annunzio University relief of signs and symptoms within 2 to 3 weeks after delivery. It is Foundation, Chieti, Chieti, Italy. regarded as a benign disease with no meaningful consequences to Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is up-regulated in epidermis inflamma- the mother but associated to an increased perinatal risk with increased tory processes and plays an important role in control of keratinocytes rates of fetal morbidity and mortality. To date, γGT is considered a proliferation and differentiation. We analysed the association between marker to differentiate between ICP due to ABCB4 deficiency (high COX-2 polymorphism (-765G>C) and molecular markers that quantify γGT) from ICP due to ATP8B1 or BSEP deficiency (normal γGT). the inflammatory reaction. ABCB4 mediates the translocation of phospholipids across the cana- The study was conducted on 67 subjects, divided into 3 groups: 26 licular membrane of the hepatocyte, a process that is of crucial im- normal subjects in group 1, 28 patients with cutaneous malign tumors portance in protecting cholangiocyte membranes from high concentra- in group 2 and 13 patients with psoriasis in group 3. tions of detergent bile acids. We enrolled 26 women with ICP pheno- The intensity of inflammatory process was assessed by determining type and all the 27 coding exons of ABCB4 were sequenced. In three the seric levels of C-reactive protein (CRP), fibrinogen and alpha1-acid women we identified heterozygous missense mutations: two of them glycoprotein (AAG). The -765 G>C variant of the COX-2 gene was are already described (T424A, R590Q) in others ABCB4 deficient phe- genotyped by restriction endonuclease digestion of polymerase chain notype and one is a new mutation (L627V); all three mutations are reaction products. located in the very well conserved Nucleotide Binding Domain. Our Patients carrying the -765C allele had markedly lower seric levels of patients had serum γGT values within the normal range. Our finding CRP, AAG and fibrinogen vs patients homozygous for -765G in the indicate that ABCB4 mutations are present not only in ICP patients groups 2, 3 respectively. with high γGT but also in women with normal γGT; these results are The authors suggest that there is an association between COX-2 poly- in agreement with the recent finding by linkage analysis of a splice morphism (-765G>C) and the amplitude of cutaneous inflammation, site mutation in a large ICP Mennonite pedigree (Schneider G. et al.; probably as a result of the alteration of binding sites from COX-2 gene Hepatology 2007; 45(1):150-8). promoter for various transcription factors that participate in the initia- tion and progression/resolution of inflammatory process. P0632. A missense CNGA3 mutation which is rare in Western populations is frequent among both Muslim and Oriental Jewish P0630. Progressive Familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis type 3 patients with achromatopsia (PFIC3): evidence of allelic heterogeneity and of a possible D. Sharon, L. Bida, A. Greenberg, A. Blumenfeld, S. Merin, A. Rosenmann, E. evolutionary marker for mammalian ABCB4 genes Banin; D. Degiorgio1, C. Colombo2, M. Seia1, L. Porcaro1, V. Paracchini1, L. Costanti- Hadassah- Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. no1, L. Zazzeron2, D. Bordo3, D. A. Coviello1; Achromatopsia is a heterogeneous autosomal recessive condition 1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore characterized by the absence of cone function causing reduced vi- Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Centro Fibrosi Cistica, sual acuity, nystagmus, photophobia and lack of color vision. Three Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Poli- causative genes have been identified so far. Aiming to study the ge- clinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 3Bioinformatica e Proteomica netic basis of achromatopsia in the Israeli population, we recruited 9 Strutturale, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genoa, Italy. Arab-Muslim and 7 Jewish families with the disease. Clinical evalu- PFIC3 is an autosomal-recessive disorder due to mutations in the ation included a full ophthalmologic examination, color vision testing ATP-binding cassette, sub-family B, member 4 gene (ABCB4). ABCB4 and full-field electroretinography. We excluded the most frequently is the liver-specific membrane transporter of phosphatidylcholine, a reported achromatopsia-causing mutation, c.del1148C in the CNGB3 major and exclusive component of mammalian bile. The disease is gene, in all studied patients. In contrast, a rare missense CNGA3 mu- characterized by early onset of cholestasis with high serum-glutam- tation (c.1585g>a, V529M) that was reported in only three patients yltranspeptidase activity, that progresses to cirrhosis and liver failure worldwide, was found homozygously in patients from 5 families and before adulthood. We analysed 68 children with a PFIC3 phenotype heterozygously in patients from 2 additional families. Interestingly, the by sequencing of the entire open reading frame of ABCB4 gene.In 13 V529M mutation was found in both Arab-Muslim families (6/18 chro- patients mutations were found on both alleles, whereas in 5 cases only mosomes, 33%) and Oriental Jewish families from Iraq, Iran, Buchara, one mutated allele was identified; in total, 31 different mutated ABCB4 and Afghanistan (6/8 chromosomes, 75%). On the other hand, it was alleles were observed with 25 new mutations. Exon 17 showed a high- not found in any of the 6 analyzed chromosomes from Ashkenazi- er frequency of mutations (20.7%). The elucidation of the three-dimen- Jewish origin. The mutation was also absent in 13 patients with the sional structure of bacterial homologues allows to locate the position clinical diagnosis of cone dystrophy. Haplotype analysis using markers of the mutated amino acids in the predicted ABCB4 tertiary structure. located within the CNGA3 gene suggested two different CNGA3 hap- The mutations are located in the NBDs (8 mutations, accounting for lotypes in both groups. In summary, we report here the identification the 27.6% of the total), in the TMDs (10 cases, 34.5%) and in the ICDs of a specific CNGA3 mutation which is the cause of disease in 44% of (9 cases, 31%); only, one mutation was found in the EC4 and one in Israeli achromatopsia cases. Our results demonstrate genetic differ- the linker region. Our results indicate a broad allelic heterogeneity of ences in the etiology of achromatopsia between the Israeli population the disease with exon 17 that, as recently demonstrated for the closely and the American / European populations that were thus far reported related paralogous ABCB1 gene, could contain an evolutionary marker in the literature. for mammalian ABCB4 genes in the seventh transmembrane segment (TM7). The low detection rate of ABCB4 mutation in our patients (about 26%) suggest genetic heterogeneity of PFIC type 3 disease.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 P0633. Acute intermittent porphyria: impact of newly found stasis, Geneva, Switzerland. mutations on the biochemical and enzymatic protein properties Congenital afibrinogenemia is a rare bleeding disorder characterised D. Ulbrichova, M. Hrdinka, J. Zeman, P. Martasek; by the complete absence of fibrinogen in blood. To date, 72 causative 1st School of Medicine, Prague 2, Czech Republic. mutations accounting for complete fibrinogen deficiency have been Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is a low-penetrant autosomal domi- identified in the three fibrinogen genes, FGA, FGB and FGG. Among nant inborn error. It results from the half-normal activity of porphobi- these, 9 missense or late-truncating nonsense mutations have been linogen deaminase (PBGD, EC 4.3.1.8), the third enzyme in the heme shown to specifically impair secretion of fully assembled fibrinogen biosynthetic pathway. AIP is manifested by life-threatening neurovis- molecules, implying the existence of a quality control for fibrinogen ceral attacks. Acute attack can be provoked by various factors such secretion. We previously revealed opposite roles for the homologous as drugs, hormones, and alcohol, and is accompanied by massive betaC and gammaC domains in secretion and demonstrated that se- accumulation of porphyrin precursors in the urine. To date, over 300 cretion-impaired fibrinogen mutants are retained in a pre-Golgi com- different mutations have been found in the PBGD gene. partment. The aim of this study was to restore the secretion of these During systematic genetic analysis of Czech and Slovak AIP patients, mutants and study the properties of the rescued fibrinogen hexamers. we found four novel mutations (610 C>A, 675 delA, 750 A>T, 966 insA) We found that the secretion defect of two missense mutants but not and five previously reported mutations (76 C>T, 77 G>A, 518 G>A, that of late-truncating nonsense mutants can be partially corrected by 771+1 G>T, 973 insG) in eight unrelated families. Mutational screen- incubating cells at low temperature (27°C) in a co-transfected COS-7 ing was performed by PCR, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis cell model. By contrast, exposure of cells to the chemical chaperones (DGGE), and DNA sequencing. 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and triethyl- To establish the effects of these mutations on the protein structure of amine N-oxide (TMAO) failed to rescue the secretion of any mutant. PBGD, we expressed mutant constructs with the described mutations The mutants rescued at low temperature could be incorporated into in E. coli, and we analyzed their biochemical and enzymatic properties. fibrin clots and formed factor XIII-mediated gamma-gamma dimers in All purified enzymes carrying causative mutations had relative activi- contrast to a dysfibrinogenemia mutant, used as a negative control for ties lower then 1.0 % of the average level expressed by the normal these assays. However, plasmin digestion analyses revealed abnor- allele. mal patterns for the mutants compared to normal fibrinogen, suggest- The identification and characterization of these novel mutations within ing that the rescued mutants have a non-native conformation. Our data the PBGD gene of the newly diagnosed AIP patients provide insight underline the importance of careful functional investigations before into the molecular heterogeneity of AIP. Investigation of the effects of validating chemical or pharmacological chaperone-based therapies for the present mutations on the protein structure and function provide misfolded proteins. further understanding of the molecular basis and interaction of the mol- ecules in the system. P0636. CACNA1F gene mutation is behind Åland Island eye (Supported by Grants MSM0021620806, 1M6837805002, GAUK) disease R. Jalkanen1,2, N. Bech-Hansen3, R. Tobias3, E. Sankila4,5, M. Mäntyjärvi6, H. P0634. Neurodegeneration in X-Adrenoleukodystrophy: a Forsius4, A. de la Chapelle7, T. Alitalo1,2; mitochondrial disease? 1Biomedicum Helsinki, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki A. Pujol1, S. Fourcade1, J. López-Erauskin1, A. Schlüter1, E. Domènech-Es- University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, tévez1, J. Galino1, J. Martínez-García1, M. Portero-Otin2, I. Ferrer1; University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Departments of Medical Genetics and 1IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, BArcelona, Spain, 2Universitat de Lleida, Surgery, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 4The Folkhälsan Institute Lleida, Spain. of Genetics, Department of Molecular Genetics and Population Genetics Unit, X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD), is the most frequent inher- Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Ophthalmology, Helsinki University Central ited monogenic demyelinating disease (minimal incidence 1:17,000). Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Ophthalmology, University of Kuo- X-ALD leads to death in boys or to motor disability in adults (adreno- pio, Kuopio, Finland, 7Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State University, myeloneuropathy or AMN). The gene mutated in the disease (ABCD1) Columbus, OH, United States. is a peroxisomal ATP-binding transporter of very-long-chain-fatty acids Åland Island eye disease (AIED), also known as Forsius-Eriksson (VLCFAs), whose accumulation in plasma and tissues is the hallmark syndrome, is an X-chromosomal recessive retinal disease character- of the disease. We have generated and characterized mouse mod- ized by a combination of fundal hypopigmentation, decreased visual els for X-ALD, by classical knockout of the ABCD1 gene. These mice acuity due to foveal hypoplasia, nystagmus, astigmatism, protan color exhibit a late-onset phenotype closely related to AMN patients, with vision defect, progressive myopia and defective dark adaptation. We neurodegenerative features (excitotoxicity, microgliosis, axonal de- have previously localized AIED to the pericentromeric region of the generation, slower nerve conduction velocity and psychomotor impair- X-chromosome, but the causative gene is still unknown. In this study, ment), that begins at 15 months of age (1,2,3). The pathogenesis of we screened the CACNA1F gene from genomic DNA and lymphoblast X-ALD is largely unknown, so are the mechanisms of toxicity through mRNA to identify the mutation underlying the disease phenotype in VLCFAs. Using microarrays, Q-PCR and Western Blots of mouse spi- the original AIED family. A novel deletion in the CACNA1F gene was nal cords, we have identified and confirmed dysregulation of oxida- identified, covering exon 30 and portions of the flanking introns. Ex- tive stress routes and mitochondria depletion as early events in the pression studies indicated that the particular exon was excluded from pathogenesis. Indeed, markers of oxidative lesions of lipids (MDAL), the mRNA. This CACNA1F mutation co-segregated completely with glucides (CML) and proteins (AASA) are upregulated in mutant spinal the disease phenotype in the AIED family and was not observed in 121 cords. Treatment with VLCFAs of glial and neuronal cultures induces control chromosomes. Mutations in CACNA1F are known to cause ROS generation and decrease of mitochondria membrane potential. the incomplete form of X-linked congenital stationary night blindness Ex-vivo organotypic spinal cord slice cultures recapitulate closely the (CSNB2). Since the clinical picture of AIED is quite similar to CSNB2, pathogenic events seen in spinal cords, and will constitute a powerful it has long been discussed, whether these disorders might be allelic or screening tool for therapeutic agents, and for deciphering molecular form a single entity. CACNA1F mutations have been identified in pa- cues underlying neurodegeneration in X-ALD. tients with an AIED-like phenotype, but previous studies have failed to (1) Pujol et al, Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Mar 1;11(5):499-505; (2) Pujol reveal any CACNA1F mutation in patients of the original AIED family. et al, Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Dec1;13(23):2997-3006; (3) Ferrer et al, Our results now show that AIED is caused by a novel deletion mutation Hum Mol Genet 14(23):3565-77 (2005) within CACNA1F. P0635. Functional analysis of secretion-impaired fibrinogen P0637. Gene conversion leading to a severe Adenylate Kinase mutants rescued at low temperature: implications for treatment deficiency. of protein-misfolding disorders. C. Brunel, H. Wajcman, M. Goossens, S. Pissard; D. Vu1, C. Di Sanza1, M. Neerman-Arbez1,2; INSERM U841, Eq 11, Lab Biochimie et Génétique, Créteil, France. 1University Medical Centre, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, We describe a family in which a 15-year-old boy displays a non-sphe- Geneva, Switzerland, 2University Hospital, Division of Angiology and Haemo- rocytic chronic haemolytic anaemia associated with a mental retarda- tion, and a Willebrand disease. This phenotype led us to measure the Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 activities of erythrocyte enzymes including the Adenylate Kinase 1. The L4A4 genes can be associated with the autosomal recessive and dom- proband had an AK1 deficiency (OMIM:103000) with an activity equal inant type of Alport syndrome or benign familial hematuria. In view of to 0. This rare recessive disorder is due to mutations in AK1 (Gen- the wide spectrum of phenotypes, an exact diagnosis is sometimes dif- Bank J04809; 9q34.12). Molecular screening of the AK1 gene showed ficult to achieve. This study involved screening each exon with bound- the proband to be homozygous for a missense mutation within exon 4 ary intronic sequences of COL4A3, COL4A4 and COL4A5 genes by (c.63G>T; p.Lys21Asn) whereas the mother was heterozygous for this optimised PCR-SSCP analysis in 17 families with Alport syndrome and mutation and the father wild type. To explain this genetic discrepancy, in 40 families diagnosed as having benign familial hematuria. Twelve we searched a familial inconsistency and/or a deletion in the AK1 pa- different mutations were found in the COL4A5 gene in Alport syndrome ternal allele in the proband. Microsatellites analysis on chromosomes patients, comprising nine missense mutations, a splice site mutation, 1 to 5 showed an exclusion of paternity; and using QMPSF method we a mutation causing frameshift and a nonsense mutation. One of the found that the proband was not hemizygous for the AK1 exon 4. We missense mutations (p.G624D) was present not only in one family with also showed that the proband had two different chromosomes 9, by Alport syndrome, but also in five families with suspected benign fa- studying haplotypes for several microsatellites tightly surrounding the milial hematuria. Three heterozygous mutations in the COL4A3 gene AK1 locus, ruling out the hypothesis of a consanguinity. Considering (two missense and one frameshift) and four heterozygous mutations the rarity of the AK1 deficiency (only 9 families described including in COL4A4 (two splice site, one in-frame deletion and one missense) 3 molecular characterizations), the most likely event leading to this were identified in patients with benign familial hematuria. genotype should be a conversion of the paternal allele. Enzymes activities and haplotypes surrounding AK1 locus (9q34.1) P0640. Cytoskeleton proteins are modulators of mutant tau- induced neurodegeneration in drosophila Proband Mother Father O. Blard, S. Feuillette, J. Bou, B. Chaumette, T. Frebourg, D. Campion, M. AK1 0 UI/gHb 108 UI/gHb 292 UI/gHb Lecourtois; (N: 164-228 UI/gHb) Inserm U614 and Rouen University Hospital, Institute for Biomedical Research, Hexokinase Rouen, France. 1.00 UI/gHb 0.80 UI/gHb 0.85 UI/gHb (N: 0.74-1.14 UI/gHb) Tauopathies, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and fronto-temporal D9S290 262/262 262/260 dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), are D9S159 301/299 301/293 a group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by the presence D9S1831 258/258 258/243 of intraneuronal filamentous inclusions of aberrantly phosphorylated 2.5 Mb AK1 AK1 tau. Tau is a neuronal microtubule-associated protein involved in mi- D9S179 247/233 247/241 D9S1847 190/182 190/182 crotubule assembly and stabilization. Currently, the molecular mecha- D9S164 91/96 91/97 nisms underlying tau-mediated cellular toxicity remain elusive. To ad- dress the determinants of tau neurotoxicity, we first characterized in Drosophila the cellular alterations resulting from the overexpression P0638. Elevated alpha synuclein mRNA levels are associated of a mutant form of human tau associated with FTDP-17 (tau V337M). with alcohol dependence We found that the overexpression of tau V337M, in Drosophila lar- A. E. Taraskina1, V. A. Filimonov2, U. A. Kozlovskaya1, M. N. Morozova1, D. V. val motor neurons, induced disruption of the microtubular network at Gaschin2, A. Schwarzman1; presynaptic nerve terminals and changes in neuromuscular junctions 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, morphological features. Second, we performed an extensive misex- 2Medical Center «Bekhterev», Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. pression screen to identify genetic modifiers of the tau V337M-induced Dopaminergic neurotransmission has been suggested to be a main neurodegeneration. The screening of 1250 mutant Drosophila lines al- system mediating alcohol dependence. However, genetic factors that lowed us to recover 30 modifier genes, including several components contribute to risk for alcohol addiction are unknown. We hypothesize of the cytoskeleton, and particularly from the actin network. Further- that genetic variations of gene expression of key proteins of dopa- more, we found that numerous tau modulators identified in our screen minergic system determine the basic phenotypes associated with al- were involved in maintenance of synaptic function. Taken together, cohol dependence. Several studies have linked alcohol dependence these findings strongly suggest that disruption of the microtubule net- phenotypes to chromosome 4. One candidate gene is a gene cod- work in presynaptic nerve terminals could constitute early events in the ing for alpha synuclein (SNCA). Therefore, the main goal of our study pathological process leading to synaptic dysfunction in tauopathies. was to investigate whether the expression of alpha synuclein gene is associated with alcoholism. The SNCA mRNA expression level was P0641. Possible mechanism of mirror symmetry motifs forming measured by quantitative polymerase chain reaction in the peripheral in amyloidogenic proteins lymphocytes of 26 male alcoholics and 20 nondrinking healthy control V. V. Egorov1, J. P. Garmaj2; subjects from North West region of Russia. The expression differences 1Influenza Institute, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2State Polytechnical between control and alcohol were evaluated using one-way ANOVA the University, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. SPSS 12.0 software package. The SNCA expression in patients with In our previous investigation we showed that mirror symmetry motifs alcoholism (1,2 ΔCT; SD 0,53; p=0,006) was significantly higher when play role in abnormal fibrillogenesis of several proteins. Now we sug- compared with healthy control subjects (0,8 ΔCT; SD 0,4). In contrast, gest the mechanism of such motifs forming. This mechanism is similar no differences were found for mRNA expression for transcription fac- to mechanism of the expansion diseases developement. So we show tor Nurr1(NR4A2) in lymphocytes between these groups (p=0,09). We that expansion of repeats in DNA sequence may lead to mirror sym- suggest that increased level of alpha synuclein might contribute to the metry motifs forming. A computational method for mining shared short development of alcohol dependence in addicted patients. repeats in protein sequence was developed. Testing of our in silico This work was supported by Russian Fund for Basic Research (grand method on sequence of prion protein and alpha-synuclein allowed us 06-04-49075-a). to find known repeats in amyloidogenic determinants of these proteins. This method can be useful for mining of potential amyloidogenic de- P0639. Sixteen novel mutations identified in COLA, COLA terminants in proteins. Proposed mechanism allow us to suggest a and COLA genes in Slovenian families with Alport syndrome role of short DNA repeats in forming of protein-protein interaction sites and benign familial hematuria during evolution. D. Glavac1, M. Šlajpah1, A. Meglič2, A. Vizjak1, A. Hvala1, M. Ravnik-Glavač1, D. Ferluga1; P0642. A novel frameshift mutation in SLC12A6 in patients with 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljublja- Andermann syndrome. na, Slovenia, 2Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Medical Center E. Nelis1, K. Yilmaz2, P. De Jonghe1,3; Ljubljana, Slovenia. 1Neurogenetics Group, VIB - Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Alport syndrome and benign familial hematuria are type IV collagen Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3University inherited disorders. Mutations in COL4A5 are generally believed to cause X-linked Alport syndrome, while mutations in COL4A3 and CO-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 Hospital Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium. two novel mutations, one frameshift (Gln711ArgfsX787) and one mis- Andermann syndrome (OMIM 218000) or agenesis of the corpus cal- sense (Leu881Pro) detected in two unrelated patients referred with losum with peripheral neuropathy (ACCPN) is an autosomal reces- complete AIS. Patients 1 and 2, aged 9 and 14 years old respectively, sive trait characterised by severe progressive motor and sensory neu- had a 46, XY karyotype but exhibited a complete female phenotype. ropathy, mental retardation and a variable degree of agenesis of the Both presented with inguinal hernia, while patient 2 also reported pri- corpus callosum. The disease is rare, but has a high prevalence in mary amenorrhea. PCR reaction was performed for exons 2-8 of the the province of Quebec, Canada due to a founder effect. Up to date AR gene followed by direct sequencing. The Gln711ArgfsX787 mu- five different protein-truncating mutations and one missense mutation tation, revealed in patient 1, concerns a single nucleotide deletion were found in the gene that encodes the solute carrier family 12 (po- (2494delA) at codon 711. This frameshift mutation results in glutamine tassium/chloride transporters), member 6 (SLC12A6)(1,2). to arginine substitution at that position as well as in the formation of a Here we report a Turkish family with a novel homozygous truncating premature stop codon at position 787. Further molecular analysis re- mutation in SLC12A6 in 2 sibs. The patients have agenesis of the vealed the same mutation in patient’s mother as well as in two affected corpus callosum and motor and sensory neuropathy consistent with with CAIS maternal aunts. The Leu881Pro mutation, detected in pa- the diagnosis of Andermann syndrome. Mutation screening was per- tient 2, is a single base alteration (3004 T>C) that results in leucine to formed by sequencing analysis of all coding exons and intron/exon proline substitution at position 881. Molecular analysis of the patient’s boundaries of SLC12A6 (NM_133647.1). In exon 21, a 1-bp deletion mother revealed normal alleles in her peripheral blood thus implying was detected at nucleotide position 2902 (c.2902delC). This mutation that the mutation is either de novo or the result of a possible gametic is predicted to cause a frameshift and a premature stop (Arg968fsX6), mosaicism. Both mutations are reported for the first time and provide deleting the K-Cl co-transporter domain of the SLC12A6 protein. The further evidence on the phenotypic outcome of various AR mutations. mutation was homozygous in both patients; the asymptomatic parents Acknowledgements were heterozygous for the sequence variation. This study extends the The project is co-financed within Op. Education by the ESF (European spectrum of SLC12A6 mutations observed in patients with Andermann Social Fund) and National Resources. syndrome. 1. Howard HC et al. Nat Genet 2002; 32(3):384-392. P0645. G743E mutation in the androgen receptor gene detected 2. Uyanik G et al. Neurology 2006; 66(7):1044-1048. in a familial primary amenorrhea R. Braham1, S. Trimeche1, B. Lakhal1, H. Elghezal1, M. Gribaa1, F. Audran2, C. P0643. Exclusion of SARA2 gene in 2 families with genetic lipid Sultan2, L. Chaieb1, A. Saad1; malabsorption syndrome: Anderson’s disease (or Chylomicron 1Hopital Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Hopital Lapeyronie, Montpellier, Retention Disease). France. M. Varret1, M. Parisot2, M. Silvain3, A. Grodet4, A. Munnich1, C. Boileau1, L. Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) is an X-linked genetic disorder Ferkdadji5, L. P. Aggerbeck3, J. Schmitz6, M. E. Samson-Bouma7; of male sexual differentiation caused by mutations in the androgen 1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2INSERM U781, Paris, France, 3Centre de Gé- receptor (AR) gene. The defects of receptor function that have been nétique Moléculaire, CNRS, Gif sur Yvette, France, 4INSERM U773 / Université characterized fall into two categories. The first are those that disrupt Paris VII D Diderot, Paris, France, 5Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, Hôpital R the primary sequence of the AR. The second is that which is caused by Debré, Paris, France, 6Département de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Mala- single amino acid substitutions within the AR protein. Mutations in the des, Paris, France, 7INSERM U773, Paris, France. AR gene result in a wide range of AIS phenotypes. The study of naturally occurring mutations in hypocholesterolemic pa- We report here a new case of amino acid replacement G◊E at codon tients presenting with lipid malabsorption syndrome has been useful 743 in exon 5 within the hormone binding domain of the AR in a 17- in identifying new target for lipid-lowering therapy. Anderson’s disease year-old pubertal female who consulted for primary amenorrhea. She (or Chylomicron Retention Disease), is a very rare lipid malabsorp- had a family history of amenorrhea (2 aunts) but no history of am- tion syndrome, usually diagnosed in early infancy, characterized by biguous genitalia. She had fully developed breasts, pubic hairs, and an inability to export dietary lipids as chylomicrons due to a recessive no axillary hair (Tanner stage M4, P3, A0). External genitalia were a genetic defect in lipoprotein secretion. Recently, the molecular basis normally sized clitoris, normal labia majora and minora. The follow- of this defect was shown to be due to mutations in the SARA2 gene ing serum levels of hormones were determined: Testosterone, 9,6 ng/ encoding the Sar1b protein. This protein is involved in the vesicular ml; estradiol, 50 pg/ml and LH, 5,6 mUI/ml. A sonogram of the pelvis transport between the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi appara- demonstrates the absence of uterus and the presence of testes in the tus. We report here 4 patients from 2 families, clearly diagnosed as inguinal canal. The karyotype was 46,XY. This female phenotype with Anderson’s disease patients. They had low levels of cholesterol and pubic hair is defined as partial AIS. of lipid soluble vitamins. No chylomicrons were secreted after a fat At our knowledge, this mutation was identified in only one case led to load, and alpha and betalipoproteins were 50% of normal. Endoscopy complete AIS. With the advent of molecular analysis of the AR gene, showed a typical white stippling-like hoar frosting covering the intesti- it was hoped that a correlation between a molecular defect and a par- nal mucosal surface. Ultrastructural examination of intestinal biopsies ticular phenotype could be established. showed an accumulation of free lipid and lipoprotein-like particles, re- flecting the secretory defect. Direct sequencing of the 7 exons of the P0646. Analysis of molecular defects in Polish Angelman SARA 2 gene revealed no mutation. This result thus excludes, in these Syndrome patients patients, SARA2 as the molecular basis of the lipoprotein secretory M. Gos1,2, A. Szpecht-Potocka1, R. Struniawski1, J. Polosak1, M. Laniewski- defect and suggests the existence of at least another gene. Proteins Wolk1, J. Bal1, T. Mazurczak1; involved in the intracellular processing of chylomicron secretion would 1National Research Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2MSCM be good candidates. Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. Informed written consent was obtained from all participants or from Angelman Syndrome (AS) is a rare neurogenetic disorder that is their legal guardians (RBM 93018, CCPPRB 94002). caused by impaired UBE3A gene expression resulting from changes in the parental genomic imprinting or specific mutations. Four known P0644. Two novel mutations in the AR gene in Greek patients types of molecular defects might be responsible for the AS: deletion with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome of 15q11-q13 region, paternal uniparental disomy, imprinting defects A. Galani1, C. Sofocleous1, F. Karahaliou2, A. Papathanasiou3, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, or UBE3A mutations. The imprinting defects may result from micro- E. Kanavakis1, A. Kalpini-Mavrou1; deletion of the imprinting center or somatic mosaicism. The aim of the 1Department of Medical Genetics, Choremeio Research Laboratory, Agia Sofia study was the identification of molecular defect in the patients with Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Growth and Development, clinical manifestation of AS. P. and A. Kyriakou Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Department of Endo- Two hundred twelve patients with clinical symptoms of AS were in- crinology, P. and A. Kyriakou Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece. cluded in the study. First, the analysis of imprinting defect was done Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome (AIS) is an X-linked disorder, charac- with PCR-based DNA methylation analysis of PW71 and SNRPN loci terized by incomplete or absent virilization in 46XY individuals, caused (MS-PCR). When the mosaic methylation pattern was detected, the by mutations along the Androgen Receptor (AR) gene. We report on quantitative methylation assay (QAMA) has been performed (28 cas-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 es). The patients with the normal methylation pattern were qualified to or severe FAP. However, six of the eight patients presented with an the analysis of the UBE3A coding sequence. attenuated or atypical polyposis phenotype. The QAMA analysis did not reveal somatic mosaicism in any of the Our data demonstrate that in a fraction of FAP patients the causative patients selected for this procedure. In patients without imprinting de- APC mutation may not be detected due to weak signals or somatic mo- fect several single nucleotide polymorphisms have been found (T/G in saicism that is restricted to tissues other than blood. SNaPshot analy- intron 7, T/C in intron 9, A/G in exon 13, insT in intron 6). In one patient, sis was proven to be an easy, rapid, and reliable method of confirming the G>A substitution in exon 6 was found that changes alanine into low-level mutations and evaluating the degree of mosaicism. Part of threonine within hydrophobic domain of the protein. the deviations from the expected phenotype in FAP can be explained The molecular analysis performed for AS patients revealed several by the presence of somatic mosaicism. new genetic variantsin UBE3A. Moreover, the QAMA method was de- The study was supported by the Deutsche Krebshilfe. veloped for the mosaicism detection and can be used to diagnostic procedure of AS. P0649. Apolipoprotein A5 T-1131C alleles in pediatric patients with obesity and metabolic syndrome P0647. RSPO4 mutations cause autosomal recessive anonychia K. Horvatovich1, L. Magyari1, A. Maász1, P. Kisfali1, S. Bokor2, B. Faragó1, V. and cluster in the furin-like cysteine-rich domains of the Wnt Csöngei1, L. Járomi1, E. Sáfrány1, C. Sipeky1, D. Molnár2, B. Melegh1; signaling ligand R-spondin 4 1Medical Genetics and Child Development, Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of C. Bergmann1, J. Senderek1, V. Frank1, C. T. Thiel2, A. B. Ekici2, M. van Pediatrics, Pécs, Hungary. Steensel3, S. Dominik4, G. Nürnberg4, A. Akar5, M. Lerone6, D. Rigopoulos7, O. The prevalence of the metabolic syndrome is elevated among obese Caglayan8, M. Dundar8, H. Hamm9, P. Nürnberg4, A. Reis2, J. Frank3, K. Zerres1; children and adolescents. The aim of present study was to examine the 1Department of Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany, 2Department of Human distribution of -T1131 C allele of apolipoprotein A5 gene in pediatric pa- Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 3Department of Dermatology, Maastricht, The tients with metabolic syndrome and obesity. A total of 76 children with Netherlands, 4Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 5Department metabolic syndrome and 64 with obesity were studied. In both groups of Dermatology, Ankara, Turkey, 6U.O. Genetica Medica, Genova, Italy, 7Depart- the serum triglycerides were significantly higher as compared with 116 ment of Dermatology, Athens, Greece, 8Department of Medical Genetics, Kay- pediatric, or with 189 adult controls (p<0.05). Triglyceride levels in seri, Turkey, 9Department of Dermatology, Würzburg, Germany. children carrying -1131C allele were significantly increased, compared Congenital anonychia is a rare autosomal recessive disorder charac- to the subjects carrying -1131T allele (p<0.05). In obese children the terized by absence of finger- and toenails. In a large German non-con- prevalence of the ApoA5 -1131C allele frequency was approximately sanguineous family with four affected siblings with isolated total con- two fold elevated compared to the healthy pediatric and adult controls genital anonychia we performed genome-wide mapping and showed (10.9% vs. 6.40% and vs. 5.60% respectively; p<0.05); while in meta- linkage to 20p13. Analysis of the RSPO4 gene within this interval bolic syndrome patients the prevalence of the ApoA5 -1131C allele fre- revealed homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations in this quency did not differ from the healthy pediatric or adult controls (6.60% and other families with autosomal recessive anonychia of different eth- vs. 6.40% and vs. 5.60%). Multiple regression analysis model adjusted nic origins. All mutations were not present among controls and shown for total serum cholesterol levels, BMI, triglycerides revealed that the to segregate with the disease phenotype. RSPO4 is a member of the ApoA5 -1131C variant confers risk for the development of obesity in recently described R-spondin family of secreted proteins that have children (OR at 95% CI was 5.95, range 1.48-23.97, p<0.012). Since been shown to activate the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway known to the -T1131C variant was found previously to confer risk for adult meta- be evolutionary conserved and pivotal for embryonic development by bolic syndrome, increased prevalence of this variant in pediatric obese regulation of cell morphology, proliferation, and motility. Given that all subjects suggest, that perhaps these children are the future selected but one RSPO4 mutations detected so far, affect the highly conserved candidates to develop metabolic syndrome in adulthood. exons 2 and 3 and adjacent introns, it can be postulated that RSPO4 mutations cluster in the furin-like cysteine-rich domains. This is in line P0650. Apolipoprotein A5 T-1131C variant confers risk for with experimental data proposing that for ß-catenin stabilization a metabolic syndrome shortened R-spondin 4 protein comprising just these two furin-like re- A. Maasz1, K. Horvatovich1, P. Kisfali1, M. Mohas2, L. Marko2, V. Csongei1, B. gions is sufficient. Our findings add to the increasing body of evidence Farago1, L. Jaromi1, L. Magyari1, E. Safrany1, C. Sipeky1, I. Wittman2, B. Me- indicating that mesenchymal-epithelial interactions are crucial in nail legh1; development and put anonychia on the growing list of congenital mal- 1University of Pecs, Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, formation syndromes caused by Wnt signaling pathway defects. To the Pecs, Hungary, 2University of Pecs, 2nd Department of Medicine and Nephro- best of our knowledge, this is the first gene known to be responsible for logical Center, Pecs, Hungary. an isolated, non-syndromic nail disorder. Objectives: The promoter region T-1131C mutation of the recently identified apolipoprotein A5 (ApoA5) gene has been shown to associ- P0648. Somatic APC mosaicism in FAP quantified by SNaPshot ate with increased triglyceride levels in several studies. This variant analysis was found to confer risk for development of ischaemic heart disease S. Aretz1, D. Stienen1, N. Friedrichs2, S. Stemmler3, S. Uhlhaas1, N. Rahner1, P. and stroke. The gene is in linkage disequilibrium with factors known Propping1, W. Friedl1; to correlate with impaired glucose homeostasis; one of the criterias of 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2In- metabolic syndrome. Therefore, the distribution of the ApoA5 -1131C stitute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of allele was examined in patients with metabolic syndrome. Methods Human Genetics, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany. and results: PCR-RFLP assays were performed to detect the -1131C Somatic mutational mosaicism presents a challenge for both molecular variant in a total of 122 patients affected with metabolic syndrome and and clinical diagnostics and may contribute to deviations from predict- 210 controls. The triglyceride levels of patients carrying -1131C al- ed genotype-phenotype correlations. During APC mutation screening lele were significantly elevated in carriers than in non-carriers in both in 1248 unrelated patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), groups (3.40 ± 0.59 mmol/l vs. 2.40 ± 0.14 mmol/l in the metabolic we identified 75 cases with an assumed or confirmed de novo muta- syndrome patients, p<0.05; 2.10 ± 0.19 mmol/l vs. 1.22 ± 0.05 mmol/l tion. Prescreening methods (PTT, DHPLC) indicated the presence of in the controls, p<0.05). The serum cholesterol levels did not differ be- somatic mosaicism in eight cases (11%). tween subjects with C allele and non-carriers in either group. In meta- Sequencing of the corresponding fragments revealed very weak muta- bolic syndrome patients the prevalence of the ApoA5 -1131C variant tion signals, pointing to the presence of either nonsense or frameshift was increased compared to the healthy controls (12.7% vs. 6.20%, mutations at low level. All mutations were confirmed and quantified by p<0.05). Logistic regression analysis model adjusted for differences in SNaPshot analysis: in leukocyte DNA taken from the eight patients, age, gender, total serum cholesterol levels, acute myocardial infarcts the percentage of mosaicism varied between 5.5% and 77%, while the and stroke events revealed that the ApoA5 -1131C variant confers risk proportion of the mutation in adenomas was consistently higher. for the development of metabolic syndrome (OR: 2.458 at CI: 95%: The eight mutations identified as mosaic are localised within codons 1.294-4.671; p=0.006). Conclusions: The data presented here show 216-1464 of the APC gene. According to the known genotype-pheno- that bearing ApoA5 T-1131C variant represent independent risk factor type correlation, patients with mutations in this region exhibit typical for metabolic syndrome.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 P0651. Androgen insensitivity syndrome: mutations in exon 3 of College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. AR gene in patients with partial and mild forms Mutations in genes encoding desmosomal proteins have been reported C. Vretos, E. S. Ramos; to cause arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), an University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil. autosomal dominant disease characterised by progressive myocardial Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) is one of the entities of ab- atrophy with fibro-fatty replacement. We screened 54 ARVC probands sent or deficient masculinization in individuals 46, XY. It can present for mutations in desmocollin-2 (DSC2), the only desmocollin isoform a clinical spectrum [complete (normal female phenotype), partial (P) expressed in cardiac tissue. We identified three heterozygous muta- or frankly ambiguos, and mild (M) or normal or near-normal male], de- tions (c.304G>A (p.E102K), c.631-10C>T and c.1034C>T (p.I345T)) in pending on alterations of the androgen receptor gene (AR), located on three probands and in five family members. The two missense muta- chromosome Xq11-12. The objective of the present study was to eval- tions p.E102K and p.I345T map to the N-terminal region, relevant to uate patients referred to the University Hospital, School of Medicine adhesive interactions. In individual carrying the c.631-10C>T mutation, of Ribeirão Preto (USP), with a clinical diagnosis of AIS. The medical cDNA analysis failed to detect aberrant transcripts, and real-time quan- records of 31 patients were reviewed, and 14 patients with a probable titative RT-PCR showed an approximately 50% reduction of DSC2 ex- diagnosis of AISP and eight with AISM were submitted to cytogenetic pression, implicating haploinsufficiency as the operant mechanism in analysis and studied by PCR-SSCP, for each of the eight exons of this DSC2 mutation. the AR gene. One novel point mutation not previously reported in the To evaluate the pathogenic potentials of the DSC2 missense mutations literature involving exon 3 was detected in an AISP patient (Met623Ile). detected in patients affected with ARVC, full-length wild-type and mu- Three other point mutations previously described in the same exon tated cDNAs were cloned in eukaryotic expression vectors to obtain a were identified: one patient with AISP (Arg607Gln), one patient with fusion protein with green fluorescence protein (GFP); constructs were AISM (Gly589Gln), and one patient with AISM (Tyr602Pro). Based on transfected in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes and in HL-1 cells. Unlike these results, it was verified that it is possible to systematically employ wild-type DSC2, the N-terminal mutants are predominantly localised in SSCP-PCR as a very useful screening tool of patients referred to med- the cytoplasm, thus suggesting the potential pathogenic effect of the ical services, for the confirmation of the etiopathogeny of the disease, reported mutations. the clinical management of patients and genetic counseling. Mutations in DSC2 gene in patients with ARVC provide further evi- dence that many forms of ARVC are due to alterations in cell-cell ad- P0652. Genotyping of patients with arrhythmias hesion. A. Bittnerová1, J. Kadlecová1, T. Novotný2, O. Toman2, J. Špinar2, R. Gailly- ová1, P. Kuglík1,3; P0654. Assay of determination of the frequency of different 1University Hospital Brno, Department of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech desmosomal genes in Arrhythmogenic right ventricular Republic, 2University Hospital Brno, Department of Cardiology, Brno, Czech cardiomyopathy Republic, 3Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Genetics and V. Fressart1, E. Delacretaz2, F. Hidden Lucet1, F. Simon1, C. Coirault3, D. Molecular Biology, Brno, Czech Republic. Keller4, P. Cosnay5, R. Frank1, P. Charron1, B. Hainque1; Electrical heart disorders are caused by problems with the electrical 1Hôpital de la Pitié Salpétrière, Paris, France, 2University Hospital, Bern, Swit- system that regulates the steady, rhythmic beat of the heart. Some zerland, 3Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 4Hôpital de Bale, Bale, arrhythmias are dangerous and cause sudden cardiac death. Other Switzerland, 5Hôpital Trousseau, Tours, France. type of the electrical heart disorder is the Long QT Syndrome (LQTS). Background. Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy LQTS is associated with two cardiac muscle ion channels: voltage-gat- (ARVC) is a rare disease characterized by fibrofatty replacement in ed K+ channels and voltage-gated Na+ channels. To the voltage-gated the right ventricular. It is a familial disease in 30-50%, with autosomal K+ channels belong I and I channels. I channels consist of KvLQT1 dominant inheritance. Genes encoding desmosomal proteins were Kr Ks Ks (KCNQ1) as an α subunit and minK (KCNE1) as a β subunit, while I identified as responsible for ARVC. Preliminary studies suggest that Kr channels have HERG (KCNH2) subunit and MiRP1 subunit. plakophilin-2 (PKP2) is involved in about 11-47%, desmoglein (DSG2) Common genetic variations might modify arrhythmia susceptibility in in 10% and desmoplakin (DSP) in 5-16% of ARVC. Mutation in Plako- the general population. Polymorphisms located within the gene cod- globin gene (JUP) is reported in autosomal recessive Naxos disease. ing region can directly influence the structure of its protein product, Objectives. Our aim was to identify mutations in PKP2, DSG2, DSP and while others located within the gene regulatory sequence can influ- JUP genes and estimate their prevalence in ARVC patients. Methods. ence the regulation of its protein expression levels. For this reason it For 23 independent patients with classical ARVC, after DNA extrac- is important to study polymorphisms of genes associated with LQTS tion from blood samples, mutation screening analysis was performed (play important role in standard heart function) in sudden cardiac death by direct sequencing of PKP2, DSG2, JUP and DSP genes. Results. survivors. PKP2 gene: Eight causal mutations (3 frame shift, 2 small deletions, 1 The mutation analysis of KCNQ1 and KCNH2 was performed using insertion, 2 missense) and 3 additional missense variants were identi- methods multiplex-PCR, multiplex SSCP (single strand conformation fied in 10/22 index patients. DSG2 gene: three mutations were found polymorphism) as the screen method, and automated sequencing. in 6 / 16 patients (1 frame shift and 2 missense mutations). Among 19 In the group of of 20 patients (sudden cardiac death survivors), we analysed patients, two missense mutations were identified in DSP and have identified some characteristic nucleotide polymorphisms (Y662Y, none in JUP. Conclusions. We reported high prevalence of PKP2 and I489I, F513F, IVS13+22G>A, IVS8+40GG>CA). DSG2 gene mutations among ARVC patients with respective frequen- Prevalence of cardiac ion channel genes polymorphisms seems to be cy of 45% and 37%. Rarely, we found mutations in DSP gene (1%) much more common than hypothesized thus far. and none in JUP gene in our population. These results highlight the This work was supported by grants IGA MZ CR NR/9340-3, MSM frequency of the PKP2 and DSG2 gene involved in ARVC and suggest 0021622415 and by the Czech Society of Cardiology. the interest of molecular analysis of this gene for clinical purpose. P0653. Identification and functional characterization of three P0655. ARX syndrome is due to a variable duplication size at the novel mutations in desmocollin-2 gene associated with critical region arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy O. Reish1, T. Fullston2, M. Regev1, J. Gecz2; G. Beffagna1, M. De Bortoli1, A. Nava2, M. Salamon1, A. Lorenzon1, M. Zacco- 1Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, Israel, 2Women’s and Children’s Hospi- lo3, L. Mancuso4, L. Sigalotti5, B. Bauce2, G. Occhi1, C. Basso6, G. Lanfranchi1,7, tal, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. J. A. Towbin8, G. Thiene6, G. Danieli1, A. Rampazzo1; We describe a novel polyalanine tract expansion mutation of the ARX 1Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padua, Italy, 2Department of gene, a 27-bp duplication of exon 2, which segregates in a newly iden- Cardiothoracic-Vascular Sciences, University of Padua Medical School, Padua, tified family. Italy, 3Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine, Padua, Italy, 4Venetian Institute The index case was ascertained due to psychomotor retardation, of Molecular Medicine, University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 5Cancer Bioimmuno- hypotonia and myoclonic seizures with normal brain MRI. Additional therapy Unit, Department of Medical Oncology, Padua, Italy, 6Institute of Pathol- affected boys were reported in this family, which is otherwise compat- ogy, University of Padova, Padua, Italy, 7CRIBI Biotecnology Centre, University ible with X linked inheritance. Using PCR and sequence analysis on of Padua, Padua, Italy, 8Department of Pediatrics, Section of Cardiology, Baylor peripheral blood cell DNA, a 27-bp duplication of the critical region of Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 10 exon 2 of the ARX gene, starting from position c.430, was detected. Autónoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa, Programa de Doctorado en Biologia Ex- This mutation affects the same region as the recurrent 24-bp duplica- perimental, Mexico, 3Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, Mexico, Mexico, 4Hospital tion. Mutation segregation and haplotype analysis shows that this mu- regional 1° de Octubre, ISSSTE, Mexico, Mexico, 5Instituto Nacional de Pedia- tation arose de novo in the grand mother on the great grand paternal tria, Mexico, Mexico. chromosome. Our data also suggest that the grand mother might be Asthma is an inflammatory disease of the small airways of the lung. a somatic mosaic for the 27-bp duplication. The 27-bp mutation was Asthma has now reached epidemic proportions, with more than 10% transmitted steadily, i.e. without signs of somatic instability, through 2 of children being affected in many westernized societies. This disease generations leading to the affected proband. has been characterized by chronic and allergic airway inflammation, Conclusions: 1. ARX gene mutation analysis is strongly recommended which induces cytological and histological changes in the in the arir- in families with yet undefined X linked mental retardation. 2. The criti- way structure overtime. Those changes have been called airway re- cal region of exon 2 may involve at least two variable duplication sizes, modeling, involving changes in the extracellular matrix, collagen and 24bp and also 27 bp. 3. Post zygotic duplication leading to mosaicism elastin; airway smooth muscle globet cell hyperplasia; subepitelial in the carrier female, may be a possible mechanism in the evolution of fibrosis; and hyperplasia and hypertrophy of airway smooth muscle the ARX condition. cells. Recent studies have demonstrated the molecular and cellular mechanisms of remodeling. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and P0656. Hypometylation at the KvDMR in clinically normal the metalloproteinase inhibitor (TIMP)-1 play an important role in tis- children conceived by assisted reproductive technologies sue remodeling. Patients with severe or uncontrolled asma show in- M. V. M. Gomes, J. Huber, R. A. Ferriani, E. S. Ramos; creased activity of these proteins in the bronchial biopsy specimens, University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil. blood, induced sputum, and brochoalveolar fluid. Our aim was to in- Recent evidences have suggested an association between assisted vestigate whether MMP9 and TIMP1 polymorphisms are associated reproductive technologies (ART) and alterations in the mechanism with asthma in Mexican Pediatric patients. We performed a case-con- of genomic imprinting. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is trol study in 110 Mexican patients with clinical diagnosis of asthma and a congenital overgrowth disorder characterized by abnormalities in 250 control individuals without allergy or asthma history. We genotyped the 11p15.5, mainly hipomethylation at the KvDMR imprinting control 3 SNPs in the MMP9 and TIMP1 genes using the 5´ exonuclease as- region. A 4-9 fold increased incidence of BWS has been reported in say (TaqMan) for allelic discrimination. The TIMP1 polymorphism did children conceived by ART when compared to naturally conceived chil- not show association with asthma. However, both MMP9 SNPs ana- dren. In the present study, we investigated the methylation pattern at lyzed (rs2274755G/T and rs2274756G/A: R668Q) which are in linkage the KvDMR, by the methylation-specific PCR approach (MS-PCR) in disequilibrium were significantly associated with the risk of childhood samples obtained from 18 clinically normal children conceived by ART. asthma (5.2% vs 2%, P=0.003; OR= 2.30; 95% CI = 1.30-4.06). Our Abnormal methylation pattern (hypomethylation) at KvDMR was found results shown that the MMP-9 gene might be involved in the develop- in three children. Paternal uniparental disomy (UPD) was considered ment of asthma in our population. unlikely by the identification of normal methylation pattern (mono-allel- ic) at H19DMR in all patients. Although the limited sample size and the P0659. Role of mitochondria in Ataxia-Telangiectasia: qualitative aspect of methylation obtained by the MS-PCR approach, Investigation of mitochondrial deletions and Haplogroups we speculate that hypomethylation at the KvDMR is not sufficient to M. Shafa Shariat Panahi, M. Houshmand, M. Sanati, M. Banoei, B. Hooshiar cause the clinically aspects of BWS and might be present in clinically Kashani; normal children conceived by ART. Additionally, follow-up studies are National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, indicated to determine the consequences of this unusual hypomethyl- Islamic Republic of Iran. ated pattern at the KvDMR in these cases. Ataxia-Telangiectasia (AT) is a rare human neurodegenerative auto- somal recessive multisystem disease that is characterized by a wide P0657. Sperm Mitochondrial DNA is better than blood in range of features including, progressive cerebellar ataxia with onset pathogenesis of asthenozoospermia during infancy, occulocutaneous telangiectasia, susceptibility to neo- R. Dada1, R. Kumar1, R. K. Sharma2, R. Kumar1; plasia, occulomotor disturbances, chromosomal instability and growth 1AIIMS, New Delhi, India, 2Army Research and Referral Hospital, New Delhi, and developmental abnormalities. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has the India. only non-coding regions at the displacement loop (D-loop) region that Mitochondria play an important role in cellular energy metabolism, free contains two hypervariable segments (HVS-I and HVS-II) with high radical generation and apoptosis. The number, shape and size of mi- polymorphism. We investigated mt-DNA deletions and haplogroups in tochondria vary from tissue. In addition number of mitochondrial DNA AT patients. In this study, 24 Iranian patients suffering from AT and 100 also vary. Mitochondria thus contain their own genome and their own normal controls were examined. mt-DNA was extracted from whole transcription, translation and protein assembly machinery. Mutation in blood and examined by 6 primers for existence of mitochondrial dele- mitochondrial DNA has been known to cause several neuromuscular tions. We also amplified and sequenced the mtDNA HVS-I by standard diseases, cardiomyopathies but their role in pathogenesis of sper- sequencing techniques. mtDNA deletions were observed in 54.1% matogenetic arrest and impaired sperm motility is not known. In the (13/24) of patients (8.9 kb deletion in all samples, 5.0 kb in one and 7.5 present study we analysed mitochondrial mutation in blood and sperm kb in two patients), representing mtDNA damage which may be due to mitochondrial DNA. The mitochondrial DNA mutation in sperm DNA oxidative stress in mitochondria. Our results showed that there is no was higher (32 substitutions) as compared to blood (20 substitutions). association between mtDNA haplogroups and AT. This data may indi- A comparison of the sequences of the above genes with a reference cate involvement of mitochondrial damage in the pathogenesis of AT. sequence revealed a total of 32 nucleotide substitutions in the sperm mtDNA but not in the DNA from the blood cells. Of the 32 substitutions P0660. ABCA1 transporter in atherosclerosis development. in sperm DNA, 7 were in COI, 12 were in COII, 4 were in ATPase8, and T. Rodygina1, E. Demina1, A. Sheydina1, V. Zvereva1, A. Denisenko2, A. Sh- 9 were in ATPase6. This may be due to ROS mediated damage. As varcman1; sperm has just 10-100 copies of mitochondrial genome,mutations in 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina Leningradskaya oblast, Rus- these result in early phenotype manifestation. In such cases sperms of sian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg Institute of Experimental Medicine, Saint- men with impaired motility are due to disruption of OXPHOS pathway. Petersburg, Russian Federation. The effects of these mutations to correlate the mitochondrial DNA mu- Abnormalities in reverse cholesterol transport (RCT) are involved in ar- tation with phenotype are required. This will aid in providing compre- terial atherosclerosis (AA). ABCA1 transporter is a key protein of RCT hensive counseling and most adapted therapeutics to the couple. and facilitates cholesterol efflux from peripheral cells to high density lipoproteins particles. However, the genetic factors that contribute in P0658. Association Analysis MMP9 Polymorphisms with Asthma ABCA1-mediated RCT are not well understood. in Mexican population It is reasonable to propose that polymorphic alleles of ABCA1 as well S. Jimenez-Morales1,2, J. L. Jimenez1, L. A. Muñoz1, F. Cuevas3, N. E. Marti- as genetic variation in ABCA1 gene expression may contribute to AA. nez-Aguilar4, G. Escamilla5, Y. Saldaña1, L. Orozco1; Our aim was to study correlation between polymorphic markers C69T, 1Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Mexico, Mexico, 2Universidad C(-17)G, 319insG, R219K of ABCA1 gene, the level of ABCA1 gene Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 11 expression and AA development. We have investigated association of between patient subgroups and between patient and control groups in C69T, C(-17)G, 319insG, R219K genetic variants with atherosclerotic both polymorphisms. lesions among patients with angiographically verified atherosclerosis we found a significant higher serotonina concentration in the patient (N=108). Carriers of 319insG allele of ABCA1 gene have less athero- group when compared with control individuals. We did not find sig- sclerotic lesions than individuals that did not have this allele (p=0.01). nificant differences between the different genotypes of both polymor- For measuring ABCA1 gene expression, we employed real-time quan- phisms and serotonin concentration. titative polymerase chain reaction using cDNA isolated from peripheral In this study we did no find any association between serotonin trans- leucocytes of patients with angiographically verified AA (N=9) and con- porter gene polymorphisms and autism. trols (N=5). Autistic patients have higher intraplatelet serotonin concentration, We have discovered 2-fold reduction in mRNA levels (mean) of which may contribute for their characteristic behaviour disturbances. ABCA1 gene in patients comparing with controls (0.928 versus 0.470, Intraplatelet serotonin concentration is independent of serotonin trans- p=0.007). porter gene polymorphisms. We suggest that ABCA1 gene expression level is a significant risk fac- tor in AA development. P0663. Prevalence of complete and partial AZF deletions in The study was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research Russian infertile men (grant 06-04-49609). T. M. Sorokina, V. B. Chernykh, E. M. Grishina, L. V. Shileiko, L. F. Kurilo, A. L. Chukhrova, T. S. Beskorovainaya, S. V. Gudzenko, E. V. Il’ina, F. S. Myachina, P0661. The p22 phox gene is transcriptionaly regulated by NF- A. V. Polyakov; KB and AP-1 in human aortic smooth muscle cells Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci- A. Manea, A. Gafencu, S. Manea, M. Raicu, M. Simionescu; ences, Moscow, Russian Federation. Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology “Nicolae Simionescu”, Bucharest, The aim of presented study was to evaluate a prevalence of complete Romania. and partial AZF deletions in Russian infertile men. We have exam- Objective: Accumulating evidence demonstrates the involvement of ined a cohort of 446 men from infertile couples. The semen analysis the oxidative stress in the pathophysiology of several major cardio- had been performed according to the WHO recommendations (WHO, vascular diseases including atherosclerosis, hypertension, stroke or 1999). The patients with chromosome abnormalities were excluded heart failure. However, the molecular mechanisms accountable for the from this study. Complete AZF deletions have been detected accord- increased production of reactive oxygen species remain uncertain. ing to Laboratory guidelines for molecular diagnosis of Y-chromo- Among others, NADPH oxidase is one of the most important sources somal microdeletions (EAA/EMQN, 1999), with some modifications. of superoxide in vascular cells. NF-kB and AP-1 transcription factors Molecular analysis for partial deletions within AZFc region has been are down stream targets of NADPH oxidase-derived radicals, which performed using multiplex PCR amplifications with following STSs: control the expression of inflammatory and immune genes, matrix sY142, sY1192, sY1197, sY1291, sY1206, and sY1125. remodeling, apoptosis, and cell proliferation. Here we investigate the Complete AZF microdeletions and partial AZFc deletions have been role of NF-kB an AP-1 itself in the regulation of p22phox, an essential found in 6.3% and 12.1% examined patients, respectively. ‘Classic’ subunit of NADPH oxidase, in human aortic smooth muscle cells. AZFc (b2/b4) deletions comprised 86% complete AZF deletions. In Methods and results: Computer analysis revealed the presence of other cases complete AZFa (n=2) and AZFb+c (n=2) deletions have potential NF-kB and AP-1 cis-acting elements in the human p22phox been identified. In contrast to partial AZFc deletions the complete AZF gene promoter. Deletion analyses together with transcription factor deletions were identified only in azoospermic and severe oligozoo- pull-down assays demonstrated that NF-kB and AP-1 are particularly spermic patients (sperm count ≤5mln/ml). Between examined men important in the regulation of p22phox transcriptional activity. Real time with partial AZFc deletions the sperm parameters varied from astheno- PCR and Western blotting analysis showed that p22phox mRNA and zoospermia, oligozoospermia to azoospermia. The commonest type of protein expression are significantly down-regulated by NF-kB and AP- Y chromosome microdeletions was b2/b3 deletion. This partial AZFc 1 inhibitors or decoy oligodeoxynucleotides. deletion has been revealed in about 9% examined men. In 2.5% pa- Conclusions: Taken together, the present study provides evidence that tients the gr/gr deletions have been found. Three unclassified partial NF-kB and AP-1 transcription factors are important regulators of the AZFc deletions were characterized of an absence of sY1197; sY1192 NADPH oxidase essential subunit, p22phox, in human aortic smooth and sY1206; sY142 and sY1197 loci, respectively. muscle cells. Given the importance of reactive oxygen species in vas- We have demonstrated high prevalence of both complete AZF dele- cular physiology and pathology, members of this transcription factor tions and partial AZFc deletions in Russian infertile men. family may be important therapeutic targets in the treatment of cardio- vascular diseases. P0664. Microarray-based mutation analysis of Bardet-Biedl This work was supported by the Romanian Academy (grant no. genes in Spanish patients 56/2006). I. Pereiro1,2, C. Ayuso2, M. Baiget2, G. Antiñolo2, J. Millán2, M. Carballo2, D. Valverde1,2; P0662. Serotonin transporter gene polymorphisms and 1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2EsRetNet, Spain, Spain. intraplatelet serotonin concentration in autism The Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a complex and genetically het- J. Ferreira, P. Levy, M. Bicho; erogeneous disorder with diverse clinical manifestations (early retinal Genetics Laboratory, Lisbon Medical School, Lisbon, Portugal. dystrophy, polydactily, mental delay, obesity and hipogonadism). Until Serotonin is released in pre-synaptic membrane and can reach spe- now, 12 BBS genes have been described (BBS1-BBS12), with evi- cific receptors in post-synaptic membrane or be partially reuptaked by dence for at least one more gene implicated. Its inheritance pattern is its specific transporter at the synaptic cleft. Serotonin circulating levels not clear, since there are families that show a complex inheritance of and its effects depend on specific serotonin transporter activity whose the syndrome. Therefore, genetic analyses of BBS are complicated To efficacy changes with its gene polymorphisms. In that way, overcome this challenge we screened our population with a genotyp- serotonin transporter gene may be a likely candidate in autistic dis- ing microarray comprehending 9 BBS genes (BBS1-BBS10) (Asper order. The aim of this study is to determine a possible association Ophtalmics, Estonia) that contains 110 disease-associated changes between serotonin tranporter gene polymorphisms 5-HTTVNTR and and other SNPs currently known, enabling simultaneous detection of 5-HTTLPR and autism and to evaluate intraplatelet serotonin concen- the BBS genes variants. tration. Until now, we have analyzed 44 BBS samples, with at least one mu- Patient group was made of 118 individuals (3,6 and 41 years) subdivid- tation identified in 41% of them. The distribution of the mutated al- ed in 82 with idiopathic autism, 15 with pathology associated autism, leles identified was: 1 patient with three mutated alleles, 9 patients 15 with PPD-Nos and 6 with Asperger syndrome. Control group was with two mutated alleles, and 8 patients with one mutated allele. The made of 68 individuals (45,57±11,23 years). most prevalent mutation was the M390R, accounting for 36% of all the We studied 5-HTTLPR and 5-HTTVNTR by PCR and intraplatelet se- mutations detected. rotonin concentration by ELISA. The BBS genotyping microarray is a robust, cost-effective, and com- We found no significant differences in genotype and allelic frequencies prehensive screening tool for genetic variation analysis, suitable for Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 12 the study of one heterogenetic? syndrome as BBS. Nevertheless, it is Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy. necessary to search for new mutations to update the chip and improve Beta thalassemia is a very important health problem in Italy not only its clinical application. associated to the Italian population but also to other different ethnic Project: FIS PI060049 groups due to the increased Asian and African immigration. In fact the considerable level of immigration in our country over the last decade P0665. A digenic defect on both the chloride channels ClC-Ka has obviously led to significant social and economic changes as far as and ClC-Kb mimics a Bartter like type IV Syndrome. public health is concerned. So far more than 250 different mutations N. Borsa1, M. Syrèn1,2, C. Melotti1, C. Radaelli1, A. Bettinelli3, D. Coviello1, S. have been found in the beta globin gene. We report a new beta thalas- Tedeschi1; semia mutation detected in four members of two different families of 1Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Italian origin. In the first family two subjects were beta thalassemia Milan, Italy, 2Dept. of Pediatrics and Neonatology, University of Milan, Milan, trait (mother and her daughter) while on the second one the A->T sub- Italy, 3Dept. of Pediatrics, San Leopoldo Mandic Hospital, Merate, Lecco, Italy. stitution at IVS1 nucleotide 7 was identified in an adult woman in the Usually mutations in the BSND gene product, a protein called barttin, heterozygous state and in her child related to the codon 39 mutation. are responsible for a Bartter syndrome associated with sensorineural The genetic compound codon 39/IVS1-7 was found in a fifteen years deafness (Bartter type IV or BSND), an inherited tubulopathy kidney old boy with the thalassemia intermedia phenotype. disease. The BSND syndrome is characterized by a marked polyhy- The new mutation here described seem to be completely in super- dramnios, severe renal salt wasting and deafness. position with the haematological phenotype associated to the IVS1-6 There is only one exception, previously reported, where a patient was mutation in carrier state. It is assumable that this mild phenotype can affected by sensorineural deafness and renal Bartter phenotype with- be related to the progressive distance between the mutation and the out BSND mutations; simultaneous mutations in both CLCNKB and consensus sequence of the first intron donor site of the β gene, reliev- CLCNKA genes (coding for ClC-Kb and ClC-Ka chloride channels re- ing the negative consequence of the efficiency of the splicing mecha- spectively) were demonstrated to be the disease-causing mutations. nism. We describe here a new patient who has a digenic disorder due to a contemporary combined impairment of two closely related genes, P0668. A Novel Cryptic Splice Site in IVSI-110 β-thalassemia CLCNKA and CLCNKB, leading to a phenotype that combines a se- S. Mansoori Derakhshan1,2,3, H. Wardan1, M. Kleanthous4, S. Christou5, J. vere renal salt wasting and sensorineural deafness. The molecular Vadolas1; analysis performed on the BSND, CLCNKB and CLCNKA genes re- 1Cell and Gene Therapy Group, The Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, vealed the absence of mutations in the former gene and a homozy- Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 2Paediatrics department, Mel- gous deletion of exons 1-6 for the CLCNKB gene and of exons 7-19 for bourne University, Melbourne, Australia, 3Tabriz University of Medical Science, the CLCNKA.The simultaneous disruption of both ClC-Ka and ClC-Kb Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genet- chloride channels leads to a syndrome clinically not distinguishable ics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 5The Thalassaemia Center, Nicosia, Cyprus. from Bartter type IV. This event should be due to the tight topology The IVSI-110 β-thalassemia mutation was first described in 1981 and of the highly homologous CLCNKA gene which might predispose to is one of the most common β-globin splicing mutations found in pa- an unequal crossing over leading to partial or complete deletions of tients of Greek or Cypriot origins. This mutation is the result of a G to A the CLCNKB gene. We hypothesize that this chimaeric resulting gene substitution at position 110 in the first intron. This mutation has previ- interferes with the correct function of both the channels, and leads to a ously been reported to generate an aberrant 3’ acceptor splice site, Bartter IV-like phenotype. which is preferentially recognised by the spliceosome over the normal 3’ acceptor splice site. The IVSI-110 mutation leads to a 90% reduc- P0666. Evaluation of the stress effect on expression of BEST-5 tion in normal β-globin chain synthesis causing transfusion-dependent gene in cultured hepatocytes and cloning of this gene disease in homozygous patients. Our group recently reported the cre- G. Hassanshahi; ation and characterisation of ‘humanised’ transgenic mice containing Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran. the IVSI-110 human β-globin locus. Using human β-globin-specific RT- Liver has important roles in body metabolic regulation and for this PCR, we noted two human β-globin-specific aberrant spliced products. reason hepatocytes are used worldwide. Investigations showed that We observed quantitative differences in the aberrant β-globin specific isolation of hepatocytes causes activation of stress related genes. The RT-PCR spliced products in peripheral blood and bone marrow-de- aim of this study was to study the stress related expression of BEST-5 rived cells from ‘humanised’ IVSI-110 transgenic mice and IVSI-110 following hepatocytes isolation and culture.The BEST5 gene is cloned human patient-derived peripheral blood cells. We attribute the rela- and analysed for the first time from isolated and cultured rat hepato- tive differences in the level of aberrant splice products to mRNA in- cytes. Very little is known about this gene and almost nothing is known stability. In this study, we confirm by cloning of RT-PCR products and about its function. RNA was isolated from hepatocytes after 3h culture DNA sequencing the identity of the novel activated cryptic 3’ acceptor and used for generation of PCR products corresponding to the BEST5. site in mice and also in humans containing the IVSI-110 mutation. We cDNA generated was cloned into pCR®2.1 plasmid vector. Following conclude, that the identification of novel cryptic splice site indicates transformation into TOPO10 oneshot® cells, the cells were grown in LB that IVSI-110 splicing is more complex than previously reported, and is agar plates containing X-Gal and ampicillin, overnight at 37°C. To con- worthy of further investigation. firm that the plasmids contained inserts of the correct size, the vectors obtained from mini-preparations were digested with the desired restric- P0669. Combination of Hb Knossos [Cod 27 (G-T)] and IVSII-745 tion enzymes. Sequencing was performed for the gene. RT-PCR and (C-G) in a Turkish Patient with Beta-Thalassemia Major Northern blotting analysis showed that BEST5 mRNA is expressed, 3h I. Keser1, E. Manguoglu1, O. Kayisli1, A. Yesilipek2, G. Luleci1; after isolation and culture of primary hepatocytes (3h) BEST5 mRNA 1Akdeniz University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Anta- was observed until 5h of culture and then there is no detectable band lya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, of BEST5 at further time points. Comparison of expression of the level Antalya, Turkey. of mRNA of BEST5, when data statistically were analysed, there was Beta-thalassemia is the most common disease among hemoglobin- a significant difference between the expression of BEST5 mRNA ex- opathies in Antalya, Turkey, as well as worldwide. Mutations found in pression at 3h with 0h, 24h, 35h and 48h of culture (P<0.001). Key Turkish beta-thalassemia patients constitute a heterogeneous group, words: BEST-5, Stress, Hepatocytes, RT-PCR, Northern Blotting consisting mostly of point mutations. Only in very rare cases, deletions or insertions cause affected or carrier phenotypes. Hb Knossos (beta P0667. A new IVSI-7 A→T beta globin mutation discovered in 27 (B9) Ala-Ser) is a rare variant with a normal HbA2 level. In this three beta carrier subjects and in a beta thalassemia intermedia study, we aimed to investigate the effect of compound heterozygosity patient. for Hb Knossos [Cod 27 (G-T)] and IVSII-745 (C-G). To our knowledge, G. Ivaldi1, C. Curcio2, D. Leone1, M. Baffico1, M. I. Parodi1, V. Tieran2, A. Biasi2, this is the first report of such a combination related with beta-thalas- F. Dagna Bricarelli1, D. A. Coviello2, M. Travi2; semia major phenotype in a Turkish family, where Reverse Dot Blot 1Laboratorio di Genetica, EO Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Genova, Italy, 2Labo- Hybridisation (RDBH) and DNA sequencing analysis were used. Het- ratorio Genetica Medica, IRCCS Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, erozygous inheritance of the mutation results in mild beta-thalassemia Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 phenotype, whereas homozygous inheritance leads to intermediate β- P0672. Semax exerts vasotropic and neuroprotective effects in thalassemia. As a result, the compound heterozygosity of Hb Knossos experimental brain ischemia with IVSII-745 appears as the cause of the beta-thalassemia major V. V. Stavchansky1, L. V. Dergunova1, V. V. Yuzhakov2, T. V. Tvorogova3, V. I. phenotype in our case. In conclusion, we suggest that combination of Skvortsova3, S. A. Limborska1; these mutations in beta-globin gene is important in expression of beta- 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Medical thalassemia major phenotype in a marriage between a beta-thalasse- Radiology Research Center RAMS, Obninsk, Russian Federation, 3Institute of mia carrier and a person who has Hb Knossos and its like some other Stroke RSMU, Moscow, Russian Federation. silent beta-thalassemia mutations are not associated with an elevated We have analyzed the effects of Semax ( synthetic peptide Met- Glu- HbA2 level. His-Phe-Pro-Gly-Pro; its N-terminus represents a fragment of adre- nocorticotropic hormone - ACTH 4-7) and its C- terminal fragment P0670. Genetic diagnosis in the Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome Pro-Gly-Pro (PGP) on functional morphology and proliferative activity S. Giraud1, E. Chanard1, C. Bourdin1, S. Lefebvre1, I. Coupier2, D. Bessis3, of cells from different cerebral regions of the rats subjected to global O. Caron4, A. Hovnanian5, P. Delobre1, M. Avril6, A. Calender1, S. Richard7,8, brain ischemia. The study was carried out on brain of 2-month-old male French NCI “Inherited Kidney Cancer Network”; Wistar rats (n=45). After 15 minutes of irreversible bilateral common 1Hôpital E. Herriot, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 2Hôpital Arnaud de carotid artery occlusion the animals were exposed to intraperitoneal in- Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 3Hôpital Saint Eloi, Montpellier, France, 4Hôpital jection of Semax, PGP or 0,9% NaCl. The repeated introductions were Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 5Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 6Hôpital made at 1h, 4h and 8h after operation. Animals were decapitated at 30 Cochin-Tarnier, Paris, France, 7Hôpital de Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, min and 24 h after operation. Intact and sham-operated animals were 8EPHE-FRE2939, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. used as a control group. The sections were stained with hematoxylin Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome is an inherited autosomal dominant and eosin for histological analysis. Murine monoclonal antibodies to genodermatosis characterized by predisposition to cutaneous fibrofol- PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) were used for immunostain- liculomas, lung cysts leading to pneumothorax and renal cell carcino- ing of proliferating cells. In intact animals, comparative morphofunc- mas. The age-dependent penetrance and the great variability of the tional analysis of effect of Semax or PGP has indicated that both pep- clinical manifestations even within a given family suggest that BHD re- tides have exerted vasotropic effects based on activation of capillary mains underdiagnosed. The disease is caused by heterozygous germ- network. The increase of intensity of immunopositive reaction of prolif- line mutations in the BHD gene, encoding fibrofolliculin. Mutations are erating cells demonstrates trofic action of Semax on ependyma of ven- identified in 85% of BHD patients. All mutations previously reported tricles, cells of blood-brain barrier and neuroglia. In this study, among putatively lead to protein truncation. More than 50% of mutations are these investigated peptides only Semax has manifested neuroprotec- frameshift located in a C-poly-tract in the exon 11. tive action on animals with acute stroke. Semax decreases ischemic We have performed genetic diagnosis with DNA sequencing of BHD injury of neurons and prevents progress of local foci of destruction of and Multiplex PCR/Liquid Chromatography for detection of rearrange- neuronal tissue. Furthermore, signs of vascular stasis decrease in the ment of this gene. We have analyzed 100 unrelated index cases with ischemized rat brains under Semax trearment. suspected or confirmed clinical diagnosis of BHD syndrome and identi- fied 14 germline BHD different mutations in 24 probands: 8 frameshifts P0673. Estrogen receptor (ER) beta2 negatively regulates the with two recurrent mutations (one duplication in exon 11 was found in transactivation of ERα in human breast cancer cells 9 patients, one deletion in the exon 9 in three patients), 3 nonsense C. Zhao1, J. Matthews2, M. Tujague1, J. Wan3, A. Ström1, G. Toresson1, E. W-F mutations, two splice site mutations, one missense mutation and one Lam4, G. Cheng1, J. Gustafsson1, K. Dahlman-Wright1; rearrangement. Ten were novel mutations including the missense mu- 1Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 2University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, tation and the large rearrangement that have not yet been described Canada, 3KTH-Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Imperial in BHD. Presymptomatic diagnosis was then performed in 47 relatives College London, London, United Kingdom. revealing 34 gene carriers at whom clinical surveillance including kid- Estrogens, by binding to and activating two estrogen receptors (ERs), ney imaging has been proposed. ERalpha and ERbeta, are critically involved in the development of the We discuss our results according to patients’ clinical manifestations mammary gland as well as breast cancer. An isoform of ERbeta, ER- and clinical indications of research of BHD mutations. beta2 (also called ERbetacx), with an altered C-terminal region, is co- expressed with ERalpha in many human breast cancers. In this study, P0671. The Bloom‘s syndrome helicase interacts with the MutS we generated a stable cell line from MCF7 breast cancer cells express- homolog, MSH4, during meiosis ing an inducible version of ERbeta2, along with endogenous ERalpha, F. Lespinasse, F. Lahaye, V. Paquis-Flucklinger, S. Santucci-Darmanin; and examined the effects of ERbeta2 on the ERalpha protein levels Equipe M3R UMR CNRS 6543, Nice, France. and function. We showed that ERbeta2 inhibited ERalpha-mediated Bloom’s syndrome (BS) is a recessive human genetic disorder char- transactivation via ERE and AP-1 sites of reporter constructs as well acterized by marked genetic instability associated with a greatly in- as the endogenous genes pS2 and MMP-1. Chromatin immunopre- creased predisposition to cancers of most types. The gene mutated in cipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that ERbeta2 expression caused a BS encodes a 3’-5’ DNA helicase (BLM) identified as a member of the significant reduction in the recruitment of ERalpha to both the pS2 and RecQ family. BLM is involved in the cellular response to DNA damage MMP-1 promoters. Furthermore, ERbeta2 expression induced protea- and stalled replication forks. Moreover, several studies support a role some-dependent degradation of ERalpha. The inhibitory effects of ER- of BLM during meiosis and it is noteworthy that human males homo- beta2 on ERalpha activity were further confirmed in HEK293 cells that zygous for BLM mutation are infertile. However, the specific function lack functional endogenous ERs. We also demonstrated that ERbeta2 of BLM during meiosis remains unclear. Here, we provide biochemical can interact with ERalpha both in vitro and in mammalian cells which evidence indicating that BLM interacts with MSH4 during meiotic pro- is compatible with a model where ERbeta2/ERalpha heterodimers are phase I. These data are consistent with cytological analyses showing targeted to the proteasome. Finally, in human breast cancer samples, that both BLM and MSH4 foci are located on chromosome cores at we observed that expression of ERbeta2 significantly correlated with the same stages of the meiotic prophase I. MSH4 is a meiosis-specific ERalpha-negative phenotype. Our data suggest that ERbeta2 could MutS homolog known to participate to several steps of meiotic recom- influence ERalpha-mediated effects relevant for breast cancer devel- bination process. MSH4 acts first at the step of homologous chromo- opment including hormone responsiveness. somes synapsis and, in ensuing steps, to promote meiotic crossovers. Based on the biochemical properties of BLM and MSH4, we consider P0674. STAT6 and ADAM33 single nucleotide polymorphism in the possibility that interaction between BLM and MSH4 may have im- association with Bronchial asthma plications in the regulation of meiotic recombination events which is F. Kopriva1, R. Vodicka1, R. Vrtel1, L. Dusek2, M. Godava1, M. Markova1, J. crucial since impaired meiotic recombination process may result in Bohmova1, J. Zavodska1, A. Plocova1, E. Schneiderova1, E. Krejcirikova1; nondisjunction of homologous chromosomes at the first meiotic divi- 1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub- sion and formation of aneuploid germ cells. lic, 2CBA Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. Bronchial asthma is one of the most frequent childhood chronic ail- ments, defined on the basis of epidemiological, physiological, patho-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 logical and immunological criteria. elevated levels of serum creatine kinase [hyperCKemia]. By Molecu- Immunopathological process induces both local and general changes lar -genetics analysis we detected two mutation in heterozygous oc- and can negatively influence child development. currence of a missense and deletion mutations: c.550del A (exon 4) Main aim of this project, supported by IGA MZ CR: NR8383-3/2005 and c.1302C>T (exon 10). These mutations are no conjunction with a is to test if the bronchial hyperreactivity level is associated with cer- frame-shift mutation. The c.1302C>T mutation did not descript in the tain alleles or haplotypes of genes (ADAM 33 and STAT 6) involved in mutation data base. We suggested that this mutation have the impor- immune system activity in course of allergic illness development and tant role in clinical phenotype (compound effect). bronchial epithelium remodelling . Conclusion: Our results illustrate the importance of DNA analysis for Examination of responsible polymorphisms of ADAM 33 and STAT 6 reliable establishment of mutation status, and provide a new insight genes was accomplished by sequence analysis in 20 children with into the process of genotype-phenotype correlations of LGMD2A pa- asthma bronchiale, their sibs and parents and 20 control healthy chil- tients. dren. Statistical evaluation of association of genes polymorphisms with P0677. Molecular and clinical study of Bulgarian patients asthma bronchiale occurrence and bronchial hyperreactivity level in with Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A, children will be presented by our poster. Calpainopathy) Examination of polymorphisms positively associated with allergic re- B. Georgieva1, A. Todorova1, T. Todorov1, I. Tournev2, I. Kremensky3, V. Mitev1; action could become a routine part of diagnostics. The description of 1Sofia Medical University, Medical Faculty, Department of Chemistry and Bio- influence of particular sequence changes could contribute to additional chemistry, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Sofia Medical University, Alexandrovska Hospital, insight to the bronchial hyperreactivity genetic background. Department of Neurology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Sofia Medical University, Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria. P0675. Functional consequences of eIF2B mutations in cells A total 24 LGMD2A Bulgarian patients (22 unrelated families) were di- from affected patients agnosed on DNA. Two of them were reported previous [Richard et al., L. Horzinski1, C. Gonthier1, L. Kantor2, O. Elroy-Stein3, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1,4, 1999]. In about 40% of the cases the first clinical diagnosis was differ- A. Fogli1; ent from LGMD2, namely DMD/BMD and SMA. The affected females 1INSERM UMR384, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2Department of cell reserach are two times more than the male patients. Calf hypertrophy, early con- and immunology, George S Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel-Aviv, Israel, tractures, proximal muscle weakness in the four extremities simultane- 3Department of cell research and immunology, George S Wise Faculty of Life ously, pelvic/shoulder muscles weakness were more frequently found Sciences, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 4CHU, Centre de référence Leucodystrophies, Cler- in male patients. Females present with later onset, slowly progression, mont-Ferrand, France. milder course of the disease, become wheelchair bound later than The Childhood Ataxia with diffuse Central nervous system Hypomy- male patients. Heart involvement was seen in 2 cases. Interfamilial elination (CACH)/Vanishing White Matter (VWM) syndrome is an auto- and intrafamilial variability were also observed. somal recessive leukodystrophy characterized by a progressive spas- We detected 12 CAPN3 gene mutations. Five of them (42%) fall in tic ataxia and a CSF-like aspect of the white matter on MRI. Severity exons 4 and 7 and cover 70% (28/44) of the affected unrelated chro- is correlated with age at disease onset and with episodes of rapid mosomes. deterioration following febrile infection or head trauma. Mutations in The most frequent mutations are c.550delA (50%), p.Glu323X (7%) the five subunits of the eIF2B translation initiation factor (alpha to ep- and the big deletion del2-8 (5%). They were found in 68% (15/22) of the silon) are the most frequent cause of the disease. eIF2B is involved in families and cover 61% (27/44) of the affected chromosomes. The rest the first step of protein synthesis by activating the translation initiation mutations were found in single cases and five of them (p.Arg118Gly, factor eIF2 thanks to its guanine nucleotide exchange activity (GEF p.Arg169Gly, p.Gly333Asp, c.1811_1812delTC, c.1981_1984de- activity). By regeneration of active eIF2, eIF2B is a key factor in the lATAG) were detected only in Bulgarian patients. In six families the cellular stress response. We demonstrated that GEF activity of eIF2B second mutation was not found. is decreased 63 CACH/VWM patients lymphoblastoid cell lines (llb) Calpainopathy occurred the most frequent LGMD2 form in Bulgaria in correlation with disease severity whereas no significant decrease which accounts for at least 50% of all LGMD2 cases. We developed was observed in 10 primary fibroblasts. Determination of llb GEF activ- a systematic approach for DNA diagnostics of LGMD2A, starting with ity is relevant to prescreen patients eligible for eIF2B sequencing. In mutation screening in exons 4 and 7. The introduced method permits contrast, no difference in reticulum endoplasmic stress responsse was to perform an adequate prophylaxis of the disease in our country. observed between eIF2B-mutated and control llb whereas mutated fi- broblasts expressed an enhanced response to stress in comparison to P0678. Distinct spectrum of CFTR mutations and IVS8 poly (T) control ones. Therefore we initiated a differential transcriptomic study variants in Persian males with congenital bilateral absence of (on pangenomic chips arrays) on 10 couples (mutated patients versus the vas deferens controls) with or without cellular ER-stress. The first results suggest R. Radpour, H. Gourabi, M. Sadighi Gilani, A. Vosough Dizaj; the involvement of multiple pathways. Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center of Royan Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P0676. Primary calpainopathy, the new mutation detected in the Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD) is a fre- CAPN3 gene (the case of Moldavian LGMD2A patient). quent cause of obstructive azoospermia and nearly 75% of patients V. C. Sacara1, E. V. Ilina2; have at least one detectable CFTR mutation. To study the CFTR gene 1Centre of reproductive health and medical genetics, Chisinau, Republic of mutations in Persian CBAVD patients with presumed low cystic fibrosis Moldova, 2Research Centre of Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. (CF) frequency, we analyzed 112 Persian CBAVD and 7 CUAVD males Introduction. Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A) is an from Iran with 52 fertile males as control. All 27 exons and their flank- autosomal recessive muscular disorder caused by mutations in the ing sequences was analyzed using a combination of the SSCP and gene coding for calpain 3, a calcium-dependent protease. While a direct sequencing. Forty-six of the 112 patients (41.07 percent) had large number of CAPN3 gene mutations have already been described two mutations in the CFTR gene, 41 of them had the 5T allele. Forty- in calpainopathy patients, the diagnosis has recently shifted from mo- three patients (38.39 percent) had a mutation in one copy of CFTR lecular genetics towards biochemical assay of defective protein. gene. In 23 patients (20.53 percent) no CFTR mutations were found. Methods. Mutation search was conducted using SSCP and direct se- IVS8-5T was observed with TG12 or TG13 haplotypes, on 61 chromo- quencing methods. somes thus confirming the association of this variant with CBAVD in Rezults. We perform direct sequencing analysis in 8 exons (exons 4, Persian patients. Screening for the IVS8-5T and F508del together led 5,10,11, 12,20, 21 22) in Laboratory of DNA-diagnosis (Moscow) of to the identification of more than one-third of alleles. Exon 9 skipping patient with clinical features of LGMD,2A. The onset of the disease was strongly joined with 5T/5T genotype, the rate of normal CFTR is 16-17 age. Involvement was first evident in either the pelvic, with mRNA increased by having IVS8-9T (TG) and IVS8-7T (TG) . 9-10 10-11-12 asymmetry of wasting when the upper limbs were first involved. Spread We could detect one novel nonsense mutation (K536X) in the NBD1 from the lower to the upper limbs occurred within 26-27 years. Pseudo- region and two novel missense mutations (Y122H & T338A) in the M2 hypertrophy of the calves was not established. Biochemical analysis: and M6 regions of CFTR gene. The combination of the 5T allele in one Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 copy of the CFTR gene with a cystic fibrosis mutation in the other copy P0681. Clinical phenotype in a Portuguese patient with a is the most common cause of CBAVD in Persian population. deletion of the entire coding region of the connexin 32 gene R. Cerqueira1, L. Lameiras1, H. Gabriel1, L. Negrão2, A. Matos2, P. Tavares1, A. P0679. Molecular genetic diagnostics of celiac sprue from frozen R. Fernandes1; biopsy material and significance of multi-disciplinal cooperation 1CGC Centro Genética Clínica, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço de Neurologia, Hospi- J. Simova, D. Markova, J. Dvorackova, I. Urbanovska, M. Cegan, D. Kon- tais da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. valinka; X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX) is a peripheral nerve CGB laboratory Ltd, Ostrava, Czech Republic. disorder that has been linked to mutations in the connexin 32 (Cx32) Celiac disease (CD) is a multi-factorial disease characterised by a gene (GJB1). Cx32 works as a gap junction protein found in myelin- lifelong abnormal immune response showing the features of an au- ated peripheral nerve and mutations in the protein are predicted to toimmune reaction to gluten, causing morphological changes in the interfere with the formation of functional channel in a dominant nega- intestinal mucosa to occur in sensitive individuals. CD manifests itself tive manner. The majority of GJB1 mutations are missense mutations, through various atypical symptoms and can be masked by a symptom- while a minority is nonsense mutations or small deletions. CMTX is atology leading to a diagnosis of another disease. Prevalence range characterized by a moderate to severe motor and sensory neuropathy from 1/200-1/300 individuals. The disease is closely associated with in affected males, and usually mild to no symptoms in carrier females. HLA class II alleles. About 95 % of the persons with CD possess HLA Here we report an 18 year old Portuguese male patient, with walking class II alleles DQA1*0501 and DQB1*0201/202 (coding heterodimer difficulties, prominent muscular atrophy of muscles below the knee, DQ2) and DRB1*04 (in close relation with heterodimer DQ8). lower limbs with ‘invert champagne bottle’ appearance and with step- The diagnostics of CD is currently based on assessment of clinical page gait, associated with a deletion that, at least, eliminates the symptoms, serologic tests, histological and enzymohistochemical ex- Cx32 gene entire coding sequence. A few families with deletions of aminations of the duodena mucosa. The spectrum of diagnostic ap- the GJB1 gene have recently been reported [1,2]. This rare mutation proaches at our laboratory is supplemented with a molecular detec- is described for the first time in a CMTX Portuguese patient. As in the tion of selected risk HLA alleles, which may substantially contribute previous reported cases, the CMTX clinical phenotype of this patient is particularly to the differential diagnostics of infiltrative type CD (type similar to the ones associated with missense or nonsense mutations in 1 according to the Marsh´s modified classification), which occurs both this gene. However, he has a complete absence of the Cx32 gene and, in CD-diagnose patients being on a gluten-free diet, CD-manifest rela- therefore, a model of dominant negative inactivation of the function of tives (,,potential CD“) and Duhring-dermatitis-herpetiformis-diagnose other gap junction does not apply, at least in this case. patients. The presence of risk HLA alleles was determined using the [1] Nakagawa M. et al, J Neurol Sci. 2001, 185: 31-7 PCR method. [2] Takashima H. et al, Acta Neurol Scand. 2003, 107:31-7 The cooperation between pathologists and molecular geneticists sub- stantially contributes to vindicating the clinical diagnosis of CD, par- P0682. Mitochondrial Coupling Defect in Fibroblasts from ticularly in cases unclear in histological terms as well as in potential Patients with Mfn2-Related Charcot-Marie-Tooth Type 2a and latent forms of the disease. It makes possible to find other risk D. Bonneau1,2, D. Loiseau1,2, A. Chevrollier1,3, C. Verny4, V. Guillet1, M. Poux1, individuals among the relatives of CD patients. The absence of these Y. Malthièry1,2, P. Amati-Bonneau1,2, P. Reynier1,2; examinations may result in a diagnostic unclearness. 1INSERM, U694, Angers, France, 2Dept de Biochimie et Génétique, CHU, Angers, France, 3Dept de Biochimie et Génétique, Angers, France, 4Dept de P0680. Expression of Centa2 during early heart development: Neurologie, CHU, Angers, France. a new candidate gene for the onset of cardiovascular The mitofusin 2 gene (mfn2) encodes a dynamin GTPase, located malformations in the outer mitochondrial membrane, which is involved both in the M. Venturin1, S. Brunelli2,3, G. Gaudenzi4, F. Cotelli4, P. Riva1; maintenance of the mitochondrial network and in the modulation of 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, Medical Faculty, cellular energy balance. Mutations of mfn2 may account for at least a University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Stem Cell Research Institute, H. San Raffaele third of the cases of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A (CMT2A). Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Experimental Medicine, Univer- In this study, we investigate mitochondrial cellular bioenergetics in sity of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Biology, University of Milan, MFN2-related CMT2A. Methods: mitochondrial network morphology Milan, Italy. and metabolism were studied in cultures of skin fibroblasts obtained We previously showed that cardiovascular malformations (CVMs), in- from four CMT2A patients harboring novel missense mutations of the cluding pulmonic stenosis, septal and valve defects, have a higher in- MFN2 gene. We studied intracellular reactive oxygen species, mito- cidence in patients (pts) with NF1 microdeletion syndrome, compared chondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm), respiratory parameters, rate of to classical NF1 pts, likely owing to 17q11.2 region haploinsufficiency. mitochondrial ATP synthesis and ATP/O ratio. Results and interpreta- RT-PCR and Northern blot analysis of 9 genes within the NF1 deleted tion: No alteration of the morphology of the mitochondrial network was region showed that Centa2, Suz12 and C17orf40 are expressed in hu- observed. In contrast, the mitochondrial energetic metabolism was man fetal and mouse embryonic heart. In situ hybridization on mouse greatly altered in the fibroblasts from patients with MFN2 mutations. whole embryos and sections allowed us to asses their expression pat- We found a significant coupling defect leading to reduced OXPHOS tern during development. Centa2 was expressed in encephalon, gut, efficacy (reduction of ATP/O). However, this uncoupling did not lead otic vesicles, developing limbs and heart; in particular, a strong hybrid- to a deficiency in ATP production since it was compensated by an in- ization signal was detected in heart at 9-9.5 dpc, when the heart tube crease in the basal respiration. In other words, the ATP production was begins to loop and endocardial cushions, primordia of the valve leaf- maintained, although at a higher energetic cost. A 30% decrease of lets and membranous septa are forming; Centa2 expression in heart the ΔΨm was also observed in fibroblasts patients as a direct conse- continued until the last stage analyzed (15 dpc). Suz12 was found in quence of impaired mitochondrial coupling. These results suggest that encephalon, pharyngeal arches and developing limbs, with a weak sig- the sharply reduced efficacy of oxidative phosphorylation in MFN2- nal in heart at 10 dpc. C17orf40 was expressed in otic vesicles, pha- related CMT2A may contribute to the pathophysiology of the axonal ryngeal arches and limbs, but not in heart. Preliminary results following neuropathy. RT-PCR and in situ hybridization experiments on zebrafish showed expression of Centa2 in adult heart. P0683. Duplication of the Xq28 region including GDI and FLNA, These findings suggest that Centa2 might be involved in heart de- but not MECP2, in a family with moderate MR and ataxia velopment and in CVMs onset. Expression studies of Centa2 will be H. Van Esch1, J. Vandewalle2, E. Pijkels1, P. Marynen2, J. Fryns1, G. Froyen2; extended to zebrafish embryos and immunohystochemistry with anti- 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Human Genetics Centa2 antibodies on mouse sections will be performed to provide - Human Genome Laboratory - VIB, Leuven, Belgium. further evidence on the involvement of Centa2 in heart development The advent of new techniques such as array-CGH and MLPA has and CVMs. led to the characterization of several new cryptic microdeletions and duplications as the cause of mental retardation syndromes (MR). By high resolution chromosome X specific array-CGH, we identified small duplications of the MECP2 locus as the underlying cause of a distinct Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 severe MR phenotype in males (Van Esch et al. AJHG, 77, 2005). Most gene located at chromosome 7q34 might account for some of the un- of these duplications comprise, next to the MECP2 gene, several other identified families with HP. Using semi-quantitative fluorescent multi- MR-related genes, such as L1CAM, GDI and FLNA. However, delinea- plex PCR and FISH, we identified a triplication of a ~605 kb segment tion of the minimal critical region and detection of a twofold increased containing the PRSS1 gene on chromosome 7 in five out of 34 French expression of MECP2 mRNA in the patient-derived cell lines compared HP families, in which no known point mutations in the PRSS1, PRSS2, to controls, pointed to an increased dosage of MECP2 as the major SPINK1 and CFTR genes had been found. We also investigated tryp- cause of the MR phenotype in these families. sinogen copy number variations in 1246 French Caucasians with ICP. Here we present a large X-linked MR family with a small duplication at The ~605 kb triplication and a novel duplication of the trypsinogen lo- Xq28 harboring the GDI and FLNA genes, but not the MECP2 gene, cus were detected in 10 and four subjects with ICP, respectively. Of the segregating in the family. The MR phenotype consists of mild to mod- 14 events, 12 (6%) were found in the 202 ICP patients whose age of erate MR and ataxia as cardinal features. disease onset was <20 years. Our results thus have revealed a novel Further screening of patients for this duplication, not including MECP2, molecular mechanism (i.e. increased copy number or gene dosage) revealed one additional family. This finding illustrates that a duplication causing HP and ICP; and demonstrated that chronic pancreatitis is of the GDI and/or FLNA genes can also result in an MR phenotype, also a genomic disorder. and might play an additive effect in the larger duplications also includ- ing MECP2. The clinical data of this second family, delineation of the P0686. Mutations screening in patients with different types of extent of both duplications as well as proposing the most likely candi- hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies date gene will be presented. N. V. Hryshchenko, L. A. Livshits; Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics National Academy of Science of P0684. Functional analysis of pancreatitis-associated missense Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine. mutations in the pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (SPINK1) Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN), including Charcot- gene Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease, is a common disability impairing the pe- A. Boulling1,2, C. Le Maréchal1,2, P. Trouvé1,2, O. Raguénès1,3, J. Chen4,1, C. ripheral nerve function in 1:2500 persons. We have provided the mo- Férec1,2; lecular genetic analysis of duplication/deletion of chromosome 17p11.2 1INSERM, U613, Brest, France, 2Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Faculté including PMP22 gene encoded Pmp22 protein which plays a crucial de Médecine de Brest et des Sciences de la Santé, Brest, France, 3Centre role in the development and maintenance of compact myelin in auto- Hospitalier Universitaire de Brest, Hôpital Morvan, Laboratoire de Génétique some dominant HMSN patients. We identified 17p11.2 duplication/de- Moléculaire et d’Histocompatibilité, Brest, France, 4Etablissement Français du letion using STR markers from 17p11.2 region (D17S122, D17S921, Sang – Bretagne, Brest, France. D17S1358, and D17S2226). For fragment STRs analysis Cy5-labeled Variations in the SPINK1 gene [encoding pancreatic secretory tryp- primers and the “ALF express II” were used. Duplications were found sin inhibitor (PSTI)] are associated with chronic pancreatitis. We in 19 CMT type 1A families form Ukraine. We detected the deletion in 2 have recently determined the functional consequences of three mis- patients of one family with hereditary neuropathy with liability to pres- sense mutations which occurred within the signal peptide sequence sure palsies (HNPP type). The CMTX1 is X-linked type of HMSN asso- of PSTI by Western blotting analysis of wild-type and mutant PSTI ciated with mutations in GJB1(Cx32) gene coding for the gap junction expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Here, this approach was protein connexin 32. CMTX1 may arise due to incorrect trafficking of extended to analyse seven missense mutations [p.N34S, p.G48E, Cx32 protein or reduction in the gap junction mediated communication p.D50E, p.Y54H, p.P55S, p.R65Q, and p.R67C) occurring within the pathway in PNS. So the next aim of our investigation was the screen- mature peptide of PSTI. This analysis enabled us to classify these mis- ing of Cx32 gene mutation variants. We have developed and applied sense mutations into three categories. The first category comprises denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis of Cx32 ex- the p.N34S and p.P55S polymorphisms, both of which occurred in ons 1B and 2 for suspected X-linked CMT patients. DGGE analysis evolutionarily non-conserved residues, involved amino acid substitu- revealed 4 aberrant Cx32-probes. We analysed and identified these tions with similar physico-chemical properties, and did not cause any probes by direct sequencing.It has been sown the PMP22 duplication/ significant reduction in terms of PSTI mature peptide expression. The deletion and Cx32 gene mutations association with CMT1A, HNPP second category contains only the p.R65Q missense mutation, which and CMTX1 clinical phenotypes. The methods of 17p11.2 duplica- occurred in a well-conserved residue, involved the substitution of a tion/deletion detection and Cx32 mutation variants analysis in Ukraine positively charged amino acid by a non-charged one, and caused have been developed. about 60% reduction of protein expression. The third category con- sists of p.G48E, p.D50E, p.Y54H, and p.R67C, all of which occurred in P0687. Early onset Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease caused by strictly conserved residues, involved charged amino acids, and caused Leu239Phe mutation in the GDAP1 gene in three Russian complete or nearly complete loss of PSTI expression. Having excluded families: evidence for a founder effect the possibility that the reduced protein expression may have resulted O. A. Schagina1, E. L. Dadali1, V. P. Fedotov2, A. V. Polyakov1; from reduced transcription or unstable mRNA, we surmise that these 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Vorone- missense mutations may have disturbed the intracellular transporta- zhskaya medical genetics consultation, Voronezh, Russian Federation. tion of their respective mutant proteins. This is suggestive of a possible Mutations in the ganglioside - induced differentiation-associated pro- unifying pathological mechanism underlying both the signal peptide tein 1 (GDAP1) gene are common a cause of the Charcot-Marie-Tooth and mature peptide mutations. (CMT4A) disease with autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. To date more than twenty mutations in the GDAP1 gene have been re- P0685. Triplication/duplication of the trypsinogen locus in ported in patients suffering from the demyelinating, axonal or mixed patients with hereditary and idiopathic chronic pancreatitis form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. C. Férec1,2, E. Masson1,2, C. Le Maréchal1,2, J. Chen3,1; 24 patients from 20 unrelated families with severe early onset polyneu- 1INSERM, U613, Brest, France, 2Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Faculté ropathy and possible autosomal recessive inheritance were screened de Médecine de Brest et des Sciences de la Santé, Brest, France, 3Etablisse- for mutations in GDAP1 gene by SSCP analysis. ment Français du Sang – Bretagne, Brest, France. In one affected family we revealed c.458C>T (Pro153Leu) mutation. Hereditary pancreatitis (HP) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder. A c.715C>T transversion at codon 239 (Leu239Phe) was detected in Apart from an early age of onset and a positive family history, HP is seven affected subjects from five apparently unrelated families. All pa- clinically indistinguishable from other forms of chronic pancreatitis. HP tients had early onset and axonal type of CMT disease. as well as idiopathic chronic pancreatitis (ICP) have previously been Haplotype analysis of the GDAP1 locus for markers D8S279; D8S1776; reported to be caused by ‘gain of function’ missense mutations in the D8S286; D8S551; D8S548; D8S1805; D8S1705 and D8S1757 dem- cationic trypsinogen (PRSS1) gene. These findings as well as other onstrated a common disease haplotype for markers D8S286; D8S551, complementary observations potentiated the importance of a tightly D8S548, and D8S1805. The association of the mutation with a com- regulated trypsin activation/inhibition balance for pathophysiology and mon haplotype suggested a founder effect. suggested that trypsinogen may be sensitive to a gene dosage effect. This work was pertly supported by Russian President‘s grant We therefore surmised that an increased copy number of the PRSS1 NSh5736.2006.7Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 P0688. Coffin-Lowry syndrome - two novel mutations in the onstrated that in Sao Miguel Island the CHD prevalence is relatively RSK2 gene in Polish patients high: 9.16 per 1000 live births. Considering that half of the population D. Jurkiewicz, E. Popowska, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, E. Ciara, M. Boruc- lives in small rural localities and the internal migration is reduced, as- ka-Mankiewicz, P. Kowalski, M. Gajdulewicz, K. Spodar, K. Chrzanowska, M. pects that increase endogamy and inbreeding, we performed a struc- Krajewska-Walasek; tured family questionnaire which includes: 1. queries for CHD risk fac- Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. tors (maternal diabetes mellitus, alcohol and drug abuse by the mother Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is an X-linked semidominant disorder during pregnancy, viral infections of the fetus and genetic conditions), characterized by mental retardation, facial dysmorphism and skeletal and 2. a detailed family history to construct the ascending genealogy abnormalities. CLS is caused by mutations of the RSK2 gene (RP- until the 3rd generation. To that end, 195 CHD families were contacted S6KA3) located in Xp22.2 region and split into 22 exons. The gene by phone and/or letter, 109 (55.9%) of which accepted to participate. encodes for a serine/threonine kinase RSK2, composed of two func- We identified 39 (35.8%) multiplex families (with 2 to 5 patients), 5 tional kinase catalytic domains. RSK2 acts at the distal end of the mito- (4.6%) consanguineous families, and 5 (4.6%) multiplex families with gen induced Ras-MAPK signaling pathway involved in regulating wide consanguinity. In order to carry out molecular genetic analysis, a bio- range of cellular functions. bank consisting of DNA and RNA from patients and parents was built The aim of the study was to identify RSK2 mutations in a group of after written informed consent. The first mutation analyzed was the Polish patients with clinically recognized Coffin-Lowry syndrome as- C677T of the MTHFR gene in 469 healthy individuals from Sao Miguel, sembled in Department of Medical Genetics of the Children’s Memorial being 84 (17.2%) homozygous for the mutation (TT) and 221 (45.5%) Health Institute in Warsaw. Mutation screening of the entire RSK2 gene heterozygous (CT). From these observed genotypes, the C677T allele was performed in seven patients. Twenty-two exons were amplified by frequency in Sao Miguel population is 41.5%, the second highest value PCR and subsequently analyzed by SSCP and sequencing technics. in Europe. A comparative analysis will be performed for this mutation Molecular analysis revealed the presence of two novel mutations in the in the CHD patients, as well as for other candidate genes (NKX2.5, RSK2 gene. One of them was a one-nucleotide deletion (c.896delT) TBX5 and GATA4). in exon 11. The deletion creates a stop codon at codon 311, resulting in a truncated RSK2 protein lacking a part of N-terminal domain and P0691. The analysis of a mouse mutant that models aspects of the whole C-terminal domain. The other mutation was a substitution G human Cri du Chat syndrome. to A in the first position of intron 10 (c.845+1G>A), affecting the splice E. Rivkin, G. Xie, S. Cordes; site. In both cases mutations appeared de novo. Further studies are Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada. planned to evaluate the role of the RSK2 gene in the pathogenesis of Human Cri Du Chat Syndrome (CDCS) is a common deletion disorder CLS in Polish population. with an incidence of 1 in 20,000 live births. Hallmarks of CDCS include a The study was supported by MNiI Project 0624/P01/2006/31 and par- cat-like cry, mental retardation, hypotonia, microcephaly, micrognathia, tially by CHRU de Strasbourg (Dr. JP Delaunoy). and a spectrum of behavioural abnormalities. Ultimately, identification of the key genes involved and analysis of their functions should aid in P0689. Mutational spectrum in steroid 21-hydroxylase gene the design of better diagnoses and therapies for CDCS patients. To (CYP21A2) in Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia patients of Russia identify novel mouse mutations that affect cranial nerve development N. S. Osinovskaya, T. E. Ivaschenko, E. L. Soboleva; we performed a small-scale, recessive mutagenesis screen using the Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- chemical mutagen N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU). In one of the mutants, tion. anti-neurofilament staining of 10.5dpc revealed an abnormally sprout- More than 90% of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) of cases re- ing facial nerve (cranial nerve VII). At embryonic days 11.5-12.5dpc, sult from 21-hydroxylase deficiency caused by mutations in the CY- homozygotes have severely reduced lower jaws (micrognathia), ab- P21A2 gene. By means of PCR analysis the spectrum of mutations in normally shaped heads, and various vascular defects. These mutants the steroid 21-hydroxylase gene (CYP21A2) was analyzed in 72 Rus- are lethal at day 13.5dpc. Using meiotic recombination I mapped this sian patients with salt-wasting (SW) and simple virilizing (SV) forms phenotype to a 1.4Mb region on mouse chromosome 15, which is syn- of CAH. Specific patterns of diagnostically important mutations were tenic to the critical interval associated with craniofacial abnormalities identified for each clinically different CAH forms. The salt-wasting form and mental retardation of human CDCS. By sequencing the genes of the disease is most frequently associated with gene deletion (48%) within this interval and by expression analyses, I have identified an ex- and the 655A/C→G mutation in the second intron (24%) of CYP21A2 cellent candidate gene and am currently employing further molecular gene. 1172N mutation in exon 4 (18%), 655A/C→G mutation (24%) and genetic approaches to understand its role in normal craniofacial and gene deletion (14%) were most frequent in the patients of simple development and in Cri Du Chat syndrome. virilizing CAH form. Altogether mutation detection rates were equal to 86% and 66% of affected chromosomes from the patients with the SW P0692. Novel CARD15/NOD2 mutations in Finnish patients with and SV forms respectively. Crohn’s disease and their relation to phenotypic expression P30L, del8, delA2, 655A/C→G, I172N, V237G, V281L, Q318X, M. Lappalainen1, P. Paavola-Sakki2, L. Halme3, U. Turunen4, M. Färkkilä4, H. R356W, P453S mutations were studied in 26 patients affected with Repo5, K. Kontula1; the non-classical form (NC) of CAH. Mutations were detected in 60% 1Research Program for Molecular Medicine, Biomedicum Helsinki and Depart- (15/26) of the chromosomes from the patients with NC form altogether. ment of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Novel type of mutation - CYP21gene/CYP21pseudogene hybrid gene Medicine, University of Helsinki and Department of Gastroenterology, Helsinki was identified in 31% (8/26) of patients. Hybrid gene resulted from University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Transplantation and the fusion of 5’ part of CYP21A2 gene with 3’ part of the neighboring Liver Surgery, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of CYP21A1P pseudogene with the common junction site located some- Gastroenterology, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department where after exon 8 of CYP21A2 These data are of substantial practi- of Bacteriology and Immunology, the Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, cal value for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnostics of CAH in Helsinki, Finland. Russia. Crohn’s disease (CD) is a multifactorial trait with significant genetic predisposition. R702W, G908R, and 1007fs mutations of the CARD15/ P0690. Congenital heart disease: a genealogical and genetic NOD2 gene associate with CD and account for 80% of disease sus- study in São Miguel Island, Azores ceptibility caused by this gene. In Finland, only 16% of the CD patients R. Cabral1,2, R. Anjos3, L. de Fez1, P. R. Pacheco1,2, M. São-Bento1, C. T. carry one of these mutations even though CD prevalence and inci- Gomes1, C. C. Branco1,2, C. P. Duarte4, L. Mota-Vieira1,2; dence are comparable to other Western populations. Our aim was to 1Mol Genetics & Pathology Unit, Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto explore whether Finnish type of CARD15 mutations exist that would Gulbenkian Ciencia, Oeiras, Portugal, 3Pediatric Cardiology Department, Hos- explain the residual linkage to chromosome 16. We screened the pital Santa Cruz, Carnaxide, Portugal, 4Pediatric Department, Hospital Divino CARD15 gene in 240 CD patients. For in vitro functional studies, blood Espirito Santo, Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal. mononuclear cells were cultured alone or with MDP, and IL8 levels Congenital heart defects are among the most common birth defects, were measured. We identified 30 sequence variations, including 12 and the leading cause of birth defect-related deaths. Recently, we dem- new ones. Allele frequencies for the R702W, G908R, and 1007fs muta-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 tions were 3.3%, 0.4%, and 4.8%, respectively. Five novel amino acid and heterozygous forms of CAH in Turkey. substitutions (R38M, W355X, P727L, W907R, R1019X) were found in five CD patients; four of these patients also carried another CARD15 P0695. No evidence for a founder effect of CYP21A1P/CYP21A2 variant. The biochemical nature of these mutations, cross-species chimeric genes causing 21-hydroxylase deficiency in Brazil comparisons, and low IL8 production all favour their pathogenic role. F. B. Coeli1, R. D. Bernardi1, R. R. De Carvalho1, R. J. Petroli1, F. C. Soardi1, G. These mutation carriers had a complicated form of ileal or ileocolonic Guerra-Junior2, S. H. V. Lemos-Marini3, M. P. De Mello1; disease. We were unable to identify any novel population-prevalent 1Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Campinas, Brazil, 2Cen- CD susceptibility allele, and only the 1007fs mutation associated with tro de Investigação em Pediatria, Campinas, Brazil, 3Centro Investigação em CD susceptibility. In conclusion, our data suggest that there may be yet Pediatria, Campinas, Brazil. undetectable pathogenic mutations in the flanking or intronic regions of CYP21A2 gene which encodes 21-hydroxylase enzyme, as well as the the CARD15 gene. Compound heterozygosity or homozygosity for the class III histocompatibility genes, is located between HLA-B and HLA- CARD15 mutations should be considered in complicated CD patients. DR loci. In the same loci there is a cluster of overlap genes including RP, C4, CYP21 and TNX which is known as RCCX module. Almost P0693. Molecular analysis of the CUL7 gene in 3 M syndrome 70% healthy individuals present a duplicated RCCX module arranged C. Huber1, A. L. Delezoide2, C. Baumann3, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1, the in tandem (bimodular), but mono- or trimodular arrangements are also international collaborative group on 3 M syndrome; observed in normal populations. The variability of RCCX number is 1Department of Medical Genetics and INSERM U781, Hopital Necker, Paris, considered to be a result of unequal crossovers. Mutations on CY- France, 2Foetopathology Unit , Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Depart- P21A2 gene cause 21-hydroxylase deficiency which is responsible for ment of Medical Genetics, Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France. 95% Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia, an inborn error of metabolism 3M syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by that impairs cortisol synthesis in the steroidogenesis. In Brazil, after pre- and post-natal growth retardation, facial dysmorphism, large head studying the molecular basis of 21-hydroxylase deficiency in 112 unre- circumference, normal intelligence and skeletal changes including long lated patients, a total of 44 disease-causing alleles were found to carry slender tubular bones and tall vertebral bodies. Studying a series of 29 a chimeric CYP21A1P/CYP21A2 gene (20%). In the present study we families, we have mapped the disease locus gene on chromosome describe different compositions of chimeric genes observed in mono- 6p21.1, and then identified mutations in the CUL7 gene. , bi- and trimodular alleles (50%, 41% and 9%, respectively). Seven Following this initial study, we have collected the samples of 29 addi- different chimeric CYP21A1P/CYP21A2 haplotypes were observed in tional 3 M families and identified CUL7 mutations in 16/29 comprising momomodular alleles whereas five and four chimeric haplotypes were 18 novel mutations. This series included one terminated pregnancy identified in bi- and trimodular alleles, respectively. In conclusion, the at 33 weeks of gestation. The fetus presented with severe growth results described here indicated that there is no evidence for a founder retardation, normal head circumference, facial features, prominent effect of alleles bearing chimeric genes causing 21-hydroxylase defi- heels and long slender tubular bones suggestive of 3 M syndrome. ciency in Brazil. By direct sequencing, we first identified a CUL7 splice site mutation (c.1215+1G>A), inherited from the father. In addition, we found a large P0696. Cystic fibrosis studies: an individual spectrum of CFTR de novo deletion (> 3.84 Mb) encompassing the CUL7 gene. Histo- gene mutations in Lithuania logical study of the femoral growth plate from this case showed an V. Kucinskas1,2, K. Končiūtė1,2, A. Utkus1,2; increase in the chondrocyte density and size in the resting and prolif- 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius erative zones but no major abnormalities in the prehypertrophic and University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University hypertrophic zones, suggesting that CUL7 is mainly involved in the Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. chondrocyte proliferation but not in their differentiation. Mutational testing of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regu- We conclude that CUL7 is the major gene responsible for 3 M syn- lator (CFTR) gene is in action in Lithuania since 1993. However, mo- drome accounting for 77.6 % of our cases (45/ 58). The absence of lecular genetic diagnostics of cystic fibrosis (CF) in is still a consider- any mutation in 13 patients and the exclusion of the 6p21.1 locus in 5 able problem due to mutational heterogeneity of this gene in the Lithu- consanguineous families argue in favor of a genetic heterogeneity. anian population. 68 unrelated CF patients (136 CF chromosomes) were tested for CFTR gene mutations combining different methods. P0694. Mutational analysis of CYP 21 gene in patients with non- Initial testing for F508del using PCR with oligonucleotide primers classical and heterozygous forms of 21-Hydroxylase deficiency bridging the deletion was followed by the DGGE-based screening T. Bilgen1, G. Karaguzel2, S. Karauzum1, I. Bircan2, S. Akcurin2; of all CFTR gene exons and subsequent identification of the muta- 1Departments of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz tions by direct sequencing. Duplex PCR was applied to identify the University, Antalya, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Faculty of CFTRdele2,3(21kb) mutation. The CF patients with one or two CFTR Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey. gene mutations unidentified were tested for 33 most common muta- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a common autosomal reces- tions using Cystic Fibrosis v.3 Genotyping Assay (Abbott, Germany). sive disorder and more than 90% of CAH cases are caused by muta- 18 different CFTR gene mutations were identified in Lithuania. Out tions in the CYP 21 gene. Variable degrees of 21-hydroxylase enzyme of them, five appear to be relatively common: F508del (61.76%), impairment caused by different mutations are correlated with the clini- CFTRdele2,3(21kb) (5.15%), R553X, N1303K, 3849+10kbC>T (each cal severity of the disease. Two forms of CAH exist depending on the 2.94%). Other mutations were identified in single cases (0.74%). clinical symptoms. The classical, severe form consists of the simple Some of them are relatively common in other populations (W1282X, virilizing and the salt-wasting types, whereas the non-classical (NC) G542X, 394delTT), but the majority are rare (G314R, R1066H, 3667in- form is milder and later onset. In this study, we screened CYP 21 gene sTCAA, 574delA, L138ins, 4006-4A>G, E217G, V754M) or even not in forty-one NC and heterozygote form of patients to detect the most yet described elsewhere (4171insCCTA, 794delC). Mutations on 20 common mutations, other rare mutations, and possible novel muta- CF chromosomes (14.71%) have not yet been identified. In conclu- tions. At first, we screened all cases for the V281L mutation by PCR- sion, the applied PCR-based approach resulted in 18 different CFTR RFLP. We detected V281L mutation in three patients, one of whom gene mutations in CF patients from Lithuania with the overall identifi- was homozygote, and two were heterozygote for the mutation. Using cation rate of 85.3%. F508del prevails (61.76%), but the spectrum of sequencing technique, we detected two different partial gene conver- CF mutations in Lithuania appears to be individual in comparison with sions comprising the promoter and the first exon of the CYP 21 gene. other European populations. Some alterations associated with 21-hydroxylase deficiency were detected, such as C89T, C/A655G, C2108T, and C2578T. We also P0697. Cystic fibrosis and modifier genes in mexican population described three novel non-synonymous exonic alterations (T2555A, C. N. Sanchez-Dominguez1, M. A. Reyes-Lopez1, R. Ortiz-Lopez2, H. L. Gal- A2094T, and C2700A) that could be considered as potential mutations lardo Blanco2, A. Bustamante Saenz2; affecting the enzymatic activity. In addition, we identified a new ge- 1Instituto Politecnico Nacional, Reynosa, Mexico, 2Universidad Autonoma de nomic change (G-47A) in the promoter region of the gene. The other Nuevo Leon, Monterrey, Mexico. alterations detected in this study were intronic or at the 3’ UTR of the Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common monogenic disease in Cau- CYP 21. This is the first study characterizing the molecular basis of NC casian population, its frequency is about one in 2500 live born. The Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 estimated frequency in Mexican population is about 1/8500. The muta- showed that the short deletion creates a new sequence that is the tar- tion frequency differs specially for low frequent alleles. Heterogene- get site of an SR protein allowing the definition of the new exon. In or- ity in pulmonary manifestations cannot be explained by the genotype. der to elucidate the mechanisms involved in the aberrant splicing, we Recent studies are focused to the study of genes modifiers, which are carried out hybrid minigene experiments. With these experiments, we different genes from the primary gene cause of the disease that influ- demonstrate that the short nucleotide deletion in intron 6b is the cause ences the clinical manifestations. This work shows some advances in of altered splicing as we found in the 2 CF patients at RNA level. CF diagnosis and modifier genes analysis in Mexican population. DNA RNA-protein interaction studies are in progress to detect which protein was extracted from peripheral blood of CF patients. Thirty six frequent interacts with the mutated allele. mutations in CFTR gene were analyzed by PCR and reverse hybrid- ization with Allele Specific Oligonucleotides probes. The polymorphism P0700. Mapping and sequencing of the mouse Dac2j mutation, a analyses of modifier genes were made by PCR-RFLP. Mutation was model for human ectrodactyly SHFM3 detected in one or both alleles in 15 out of 19 patients (79%). Delta M. Friedli1, F. Spitz2, R. Lyle3, S. Nikolaev1, M. Arcangeli1, D. Duboule4, S. E. (D) F508 frequency was 45%, lower than the reported for Caucasian Antonarakis1; population (60-70%), and in agree of a published paper for our popula- 1University of Geneva, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, tion. Twenty nine percent was different mutant alleles of DF508, and Geneva, Switzerland, 2EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Department of Medical 26% of the mutant alleles remain undetected. This work is in prog- Genetics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4University of Geneva, ress of selection and recruitment of patients and controls, as well as Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, Geneva, Switzerland. standardization of the other genes modifiers, along with some other SHFM3 is a congenital limb malformation affecting the hands and biomarkers that will allow to understand the physiopathology of CF and feet. It is caused by an ~500kb duplication at 10q24. Dactylaplasia is to define a possible genetic risk profile of severe pulmonary disease, a similar inherited limb malformation in mice and is thus a model for and the pursuit of patients with risk profile with the purpose of improv- human SHFM3. Sidow et al reported two alleles, Dac1J and Dac2J, ing the quality of life. mapping in the region syntenic with the duplication in SHFM3. Dac1J is an insertion of a transposon 10kb upstream of Fbxw4, while the P0698. CFTR gene study in African children with cystic fibrosis- exact molecular lesion in Dac2J has not yet been characterized. Here, like phenotypes: identification of a novel p.A204T mutation we report mapping and sequencing of Dac2j by inverse PCR and show L. Mutesa1, C. Verhaeghe1, K. Segers1, J. Vanbellinghen1, L. Ngendahayo2, C. that it is caused by insertion of an transposon, similar to the Dac1j Oury1, L. Koulischer1, V. Bours1; allele. Complete sequencing of the Dac2j and Dac1j insertions demon- 1University of Liège, liège, Belgium, 2National University of Rwanda, Butare, strated that both elements belong to the MusD family of retroelements. Rwanda. We constructed a phylogenetic tree including our sequences and all Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most common autosomal recessive Blast matches. These MusD elements are close to each other, and disease in Caucasians with an incidence of 1 in 2500 births. However, they branch within the clade of other active young MusD elements very little is known about CF in Black populations from Africa where this from the mouse genome, suggesting that active MusD elements group disease has been considered to be rare. Nevertheless, CF is still un- together. Interestingly, Dac2j occurs within a highly conserved element der-diagnosed in this population. Indeed, CF clinical features are often that may represent a regulatory sequence. We tested for duplication of similar to those of other frequent diseases in Africa such as malnutri- the region in Dac mice, since this is the mutation mechanism in human tion, tuberculosis, chronic pulmonary infections and HIV/AIDS. More- SHFM3. qPCR on genomic DNA failed to identify any copy number over, molecular analyses remain inaccessible in many African coun- differences between either Dac mutant and wild-type littermates. Both tries. We investigated 60 unrelated Rwandan children with CF clinical the human and mouse phenotypes seem to be caused by a disruption features. We applied a gene scanning approach using DHPLC and in the normal gene expression patterning in limb bud development, but MLPA techniques to analyse all exons and flanking intron sequences the mechanisms are not known. of the CFTR gene, in order to characterise CF mutations, sequence variations and gross genomic rearrangements. Four different CF- P0701. Mutational analysis of the ATP2A2 gene in Darier’s mutations, including one previously undescribed missense mutation Tunisian families (p.A204T in exon 6a), and 9 polymorphisms were identified. A study of M. Bchetnia1,2, C. Charfeddine1, S. Kassar3,2, H. Zribi4, H. Ouragini1, S. Boubak- CFTR-p.A204T mutation by immunoblotting in transiently transfected er3, M. Mokni4,2, A. Dhahri-Ben Osman4, S. Abdelhak1; HeLa cells, revealed a lower level of p.A204T CFTR mature protein 1Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases Research Unit (MIGOD) relative to CFTR-wild type. The frequencies of coding single-nucleo- UR 26/04, Institut Pasteur de Tunis., Tunis, Tunisia, 2Study of Hereditary Keratini- tide polymorphisms (c.2694T>G, c.4521G>A and c.1540A>G) were zation Disorders Research Unit (THK) UR 24/04, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis., Tu- similar in a control group. Our study identified five African patients with nis, Tunisia, 3Anatomo-Pathology Department, Institut Pasteur de Tunis., Tunis, CF clinical features, a positive sweat test and a single CFTR mutation. Tunisia, 4Dermatology Department, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis., Tunis, Tunisia. One of them carried a novel mutation. Despite of multiple phenocopies Darier’s disease (DD, MIM 124200) also known as keratosis follicu- due to environment-linked diseases, we consider that a sweat chloride laris, is a rare autosomal dominant genodermatosis characterized by test and, if positive, a specific CFTR mutation screening could be use- altered keratinisation of the epidermis, nails and mucous membrane. ful for these patients with CF-like symptoms. The typical clinical presentation includes keratotic papules and plaques in seborrheic regions, palmoplantar pits and nails dystrophy, with histo- P0699. A new splicing mutation in CFTR gene logical acantholysis and dyskeratosis. The disorder has an estimated V. Faa‘1, A. Meloni1, M. Masala2, D. Corda2, G. Ibba2, F. Incani2, A. Cao1, M. prevalence of 1: 55 000. Several mutations within ATP2A2 gene have Rosatelli2; been identified as the cause of the disease. This gene encodes the 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, CNR, Cagliari, Italy, 2Diparti- sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase type 2 (SERCA2) involving mento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Universita’ degli Studi, Cagliari, in intracellular calcuim signalling. Italy. We report here the first molecular investigation of DD in Maghrebian We describe 2 unrelated Italian patients affected by Cystic Fibrosis population. Mutations analyses were performed by direct sequencing whose CFTR mRNA contains an insertion of 100 nt between exons 6b of five Tunisian patients belonging to two unrelated families. Two pre- and 7 corresponding to a portion of intron 6b.this sequence resembles viously reported heterozygous mutations were identified (R677X) and a cryptic exon because it is characterized by an upstream ag and a (D702N), within exon 14 and exon 15 of ATP2A2 gene respectively. downstream gt sequence which is most probably recognized as 5’ and Previous studies showed that R677X mutation resulted in the synthe- 3’ splice site by the spliceosome. At DNA level, sequencing analysis of sis of truncated protein and D702N completely abolished ATPase ac- the 2 patients showed a short deletion in intron 6b. We hypothesized tivity. We compared clinical data of examined patients with phenotypic that the mechanism involved in the aberrant splicing may be that the features described among patients from the literature, and found no mutation creates a new sequence identified as a target sequence of obvious genotype-phenotype correlation. Phenotype variability was an SR protein. In fact, the inserted sequence at transcript level was observed even among Tunisian patients sharing the same mutation analyzed by ESEfinder web site (http://exon.chsl.edu/ESE/) that iden- suggesting that additional factors are important contributors to the tifies exonic splicing enhancer (ESE) consensus motifs. The analysis clinical phenotype.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 10 P0702. Identification of reduced copy number of DAZ genes in a P0704. Diamond-Blackfan Anemia - Haploinsuffiency or RNA group of Romanian idiopathic infertile men binding? R. Cocoş1, F. Raicu2,3, D. Neagoş1; J. Schuster, J. Badhai, A. Fröjmark, E. Davey, P. Frisk, N. Dahl; 1Carol Davila”University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2De- University Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden. partment of Clinical Sciences and Imaging G. D’Annunzio University Founda- Diamond-Blackfan-Anemia (DBA) is a congenital disorder with ab- tion Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy, 3Aging Research Center (CESI) G’ D’Annunzio sence/decrease of erythroid precursors in the bone marrow. ~25% of University Foundation Chieti, Chieti, Italy. DBA patients carry a mutation in the ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19), Male infertility is now a major reproductive health problem and the field ~2% in the RPS24 gene. The molecular basis underlying DBA is yet has attracted considerable attention from scientists and clinicians. Ap- unclear. proximately 15% of men with idiopathic infertility have microdeletions We investigated fibroblast from patients with RPS19 and RPS24 mu- of the Y chromosome. The DAZ genes are candidate fertility factors tations and found a significantly prolonged (P<0.05) generation time that lie within the human Y chromosome’s AZFc region. AZFc deletions (41h and 37h) compared to controls (~25h). These results might reflect including all four members of DAZ gene family represent the most fre- haploinsuffiency as a suggested mechanism in DBA. To investigate quent molecular cause of spermatogenic impairment. Besides com- whether these mutations have an effect on ribosomal proteins (RPs), plete DAZ family deletions, partial deletions are also associated with we measured relative amounts of several RPs in mutant fibroblasts. impaired spermatogenesis. PCR digest assay is one of the methods No consistent reduction of RP-levels could be detected. To clarify the that can distinguish among the different copies of the four DAZ genes regulation of RPS19 transcript and protein levels, we analyzed the using subtle sequence differences located in introns and among mem- RPS19 transcript and its interaction with protein more intensively. Us- bers of the DAZ genes. These differences are termed sequence family ing 5’RACE, we identified a surprising variation in the transcription start variants (SFVs). We use this approach to determine the exact number site. Over 10 previously unknown 5’UTR variants could be detected of genes in a group of idiopathic infertile men. We screened the ge- (up to 95 additional nucleotides at 5’ end compared to NM_0010122). nomic DNA of 54 infertile males and 40 healthy fertile controls. Using The longer variants seem to be less abundant but highly structured. PCR digest assay we determined that 2 patients of 54 had a deletion qRT/PCR revealed tissue specific expression patterns of these vari- of two copies of DAZ (DAZ1 and DAZ2) showing that these deletions ants. Furthermore, we discovered that the RPS19 protein binds to the can be the cause for spermatogenic failure No deletions were detected 5’UTR of its own mRNA with a K of 28.5±2.9nM. Preliminary map- d in the control group. Initial molecular investigation by multiplex PCR ping of the binding site indicates binding of RPS19 protein close to was conducted according to European guidelines for the molecular the 5’TOP-sequence in the 5’UTR. Taken together, our data suggest a diagnosis of Y chromosome microdeletions and all patients presented regulatory mechanism of RPS19 mRNA by the interaction with RPS19 no deletions for DAZ genes. Our study, the first in a Romanian popula- itself and, by a variety of transcript variants which differ in the highly tion, suggest a cause and effect relationship between partial DAZ gene structured 5’UTR. microdeletion and idiopathic infertility. P0705. A novel Titin mutation causing dilated cardiomyopathy P0703. Growth factor-induced stem cell differentiation into inner was found in family from Galilee ear hair cell precursors on two- and three- dimensional surfaces G. Yoskovitz1,2, M. Gramlich, D. Freimark1, L. Thierfelder3, H. Lahat1, M. Peverelli1,2, H. Dahl1,3, A. J. O’Connor4, A. Robertson1, M. G. de Silva1,5; H. Reznik-Wolf2, M. S. Feinberg1, E. Pras2, M. Arad1, B. Gerull3; 1Heart Failure 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Service and Heart Institute, and 2Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Australia, 2Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Sheba Medical Center and Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Australia, 3Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Australia, 4De- Aviv, Israel, 3Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany. partment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Melbourne, Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a major cause of heart Melbourne, Australia, 5Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, failure and heart transplantation in young adults. In about 30% of the University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Austria. cases DCM is a familial disease. We studied a large Muslim-Arab kin- Sensorieural hearing loss is associated with damage and loss of inner dred from Galilee with familial DCM inherited as an autosomal domi- ear hair cells. Although hair cells within the avian and reptile cochlea nant trait. are able to undergo spontaneous regeneration following damage to We identified 13 affected individuals: 8 males and 5 females. Two were the auditory system, mammalian hair cells do not possess this ability. cardiac transplant recipients and 7 had symptomatic heart failure. The availability of stem cells has presented the opportunity to establish None had skeletal myopathy. therapies based on replacing or regenerating damaged cells within the Linkage analyses to candidate loci excluded the following established inner ear. To explore these therapies it is essential to understand the causes of DCM: MYH7, MYH6, SCN5A, DES, TNNT2, LMNA and normal hair cell differentiation pathway. Our investigations focused on SGCD. ACTC and PLN were excluded by direct sequencing. the ability of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells to commit to hair cell Haplotype surrounding the titin (TTN) gene, was found in all of the lineage by identifying key cytokines involved in hair cell determina- affected individuals. LOD score calculation yielded a maximal score tion. ES cells were differentiated into embryoid and neurectodermal of 3.44. embryoid bodies and treated with different combinations of cytokines. During sequence analysis we identified an Adenine insertion at position Commitment to hair cell lineage was assessed by expression of hair 59014 creating a stop codon 4 bp down stream, predicting a truncated cell markers via semi-quantitative RT-PCR and flow cytometry. Since protein. The mutation was not found in 400 normal chromosomes but terminally differentiated hair cells were not generated with high effi- was identified in 6 non-affected family members. The novel mutation ciency on 2D tissue culture plates, a tissue engineering approach was was not found in 2 other Muslim-Arab families with DCM. undertaken using biodegradable polymers. The copolymer poly(lactic- TTN, mapped to chromosome 2q31, encodes to a giant muscle protein co-glyoclic acid) PLGA was formed into 3D constructs using thermally with a key role in muscle assembly, force transmission and mainte- induced phase separation. Morphology of polymers mimicked key nance of resting tension. architectural features of the inner ear sensory epithelium to encour- TTN is a structural protein required for sarcomere function, which has age growth and differentiation of cells into inner ear types. Taking the been considered a rare cause of DCM. Truncation at about 3/4 of the most promising culture conditions from 2D work, partially differentiated protein’s length is predicted to compromise titin’s binding to myosin ES cells were successfully grown on PLGA scaffolds with cells co- (at the A-band) and its anchoring to the M-disk, thereby impairing the expressing hair cell markers. These approaches provide encouraging sarcomere’s structure and passive tension. results for the possibility of differentiating inner ear hair cells in vitro. Identification of the mutation in asymptomatic family members should facilitate early diagnosis and therapy in pre-clinically affected individu- als.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 11 P0706. MLPA assay as a screening tool for mutations in DMD/ each sample 20,000 cells were measured and the percentage of cells BMD patients and their female relatives with DNA-fragmentation was determined. In comparison, samples of E. M. Neagu1, G. Girbea1, A. Constantinescu1, C. Constantinescu1, D. Iancu1, 37 additional patients were analyzed as described above, both natively E. Manole2, C. Matanie3, E. Ionica3, N. Butoianu4, S. Magureanu4, L. Barbarii1; and according to density gradient centrifugation. 1National Institute of Legal Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 2Colentina Clinical The average DFI was 17.6% in native ejaculate, while, after purifica- Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, tion by MACS, this percentage was reduced to 11.29%. By purifica- 4“Al. Obregia” Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. tion via density gradient centrifugation a percentage of 11.83% was Our study, part of a current national research program, aims to evalu- obtained, while the percentage in native ejaculate was 15.96%. So ate the dystrophin gene mutational pattern for the Duchenne/Becker we obtained a reduction via MACS of 35.85% and via density gradient muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD). Knowing the mutational pattern of centrifugation of 25.88%. these diseases is proved to be of prognostic value and major impor- On the basis of our results it has been found that by means of MACS tance for genetic counseling. For this purpose we recently introduced the DFI can be reduced distinctly (35.85% vs. 25.88%). Furthermore, the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) method the high DFI in the samples purified by density gradient shows that to identify mutations on the dystrophin gene in a series of DMD/BMD DNA-fragmentation cannot be reduced by this common method. patients and their female relatives. We report our one year results and experience with the MLPA DMD commercial kits, which allow scanning P0709. Folate gene alteration: Dose it influence the chromosome of all 79 dystrophin exons in two PCRs. The amplicons were analysed 21 nondisjunction in Down syndrome on a 3100 Avant ABI Genetic Analyzer. We investigated 102 DNA sam- S. Aleyasin, S. Rezaee, F. Jahanshad; ples from: 52 male patients with clinical and muscular biopsy picture of National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic DMD, 43 female relatives, one amniotic fluid sample from a possible Republic of Iran. affected fetus. We assessed the extent and location of deletions and Common polymorphisms in the MTHFR (C677T and A1298C) and duplication and ascertained frequency of de novo or familial mutations MTRR (A66G) genes have been reported to be a maternal genetic risk with major importance for genetic counselling. The MLPA screen re- factor for Down syndrome in some populations. However, considering vealed mutations in 75% of cases: 85.72% deletions, 14.28% duplica- parental origin of trisomy 21 in mother of Down syndromes has drawn tions and one non-contiguous deletion. The largest deletion detected less attention in previous studies. This may cause reduction in degree involved almost half of the gene (exons 3-42), while the others were of associations of those maternal genetic risk factors and occurrences restricted to 2-5 exons, especially the exons 45 - 50. Because most the of chromosome 21 trisomy. In this study parental origin of chromosome detected mutations encompassed more exons, no additional analysis 21 were tested in 260 families of Down syndromes using five STR was performed. The method proves to be easy to handle, accurate, markers related to chromosome 21 (D21S11, D21S1414, D21S1440, highly reproducible. Our results recommend the MLPA assay as a rou- D21S1411, D21S1412). Parental origins were determined successful- tine screening tool for dystrophin mutations. ly for 226 of cases. Mothers have been categorized in maternal (198) and paternal (28) groups. All mothers of Down patients totalled 226 P0707. Identification of deletions and duplications of the DMD individuals, and a normal control group contaned 176 mothers with gene in Macedonian patients using Multiplex Ligation-dependent halthy children. These were tested for common polymorphisms C677T, Probe Amplification (MLPA) A1298C in the MTHFR and C66G in the MTRR gene. A significant S. A. Kocheva1,2, S. Trivodalieva1, S. Vlaski-Jekic3, M. Kuturec2, G. D. Efre- association was detected between maternal derived chromosome 21 mov1; mothers and A1298C of the MTHFR gene (P<0.002, χ2>12.06). This 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, MASA, Skopje, study has showed for the first time the importance of parental origin The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, determination in the study of maternal genetic risk factor of Down syn- Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 3Department of Neurol- drome. The significance of A1298C polymorphism of MTHFR gene as ogy, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. maternal genetic risk factor of Down syndrome in Iranian population Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and Becker muscular dystrophy increases the knowledge about etiology of Down syndrome and helps (BMD) are caused in the majority of cases by deletions of the DMD in better prevention of Down syndrome. gene. Mutational analysis is complicated by the large size of the gene, which consists of 79 exons and 8 promoters spread over 2.2 million P0710. Homozygous Dubin-Johnson Syndrome. A Novel base pairs of genomic DNA. The majority of recognized mutations are Mutation in MRP2 Gene in a Large Family from Slovakia however, copy number changes of individual exons, which tradition- L. Barnincova1, J. Behunova2, P. Martasek1; ally have been identified by three common multiplex polymerase chain 1Department of Pediatrics and Center of Applied Genomics, 1st School of Medi- reaction. Here we report the use of the newly developed quantitative cine, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Children´s Hospital, Kosice, Slovakia. assay multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to de- Hepatobiliary excretion of conjugated bilirubin is mediated by an ATP termine the copy number of each of the 79 DMD exons. The sensitivity dependent canalicular transporter, the multidrug resistence associated and accuracy of MLPA were assessed and compared with multiplex protein 2 (MRP2/cMOAT). MRP2 is responsible for biliary excrection PCR in total of 92 subjects with DMD or BMD. MLPA was able to de- of glucuronide and glutathione conjugates of endogenous and exog- tect all previously detected deletions. In addition, we detected five new enous compounds. deletion and four duplications. The extend of the deletions and dupli- Dubin-Johnson syndrome (DJS) is an inherited autosomal recessive cations could be more accurately defined which in turn facilitated a disorder characterised by the absence of functional protein MRP2 at genotype - phenotype correlation. the canalicular membrane of hepatocytes. Known mutations in this gene cause impaired maturation and trafficking of the mutated protein P0708. Reduction of sperm DNA-fragmentation via Magnetic from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi complex. Assisted Cell Sorter (MACS)-system As a result, conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, increased urinary excrec- T. Winkle1, F. Gagsteiger2, T. Paiss1, N. Ditzel1; tion of coproporphyrinogen isomer I, and deposition of melanin-like 1ReproGen- Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2IVF-Zentrum Ulm, Ulm, Germany. pigment are found. Otherwise liver function is normal. In the course of an ART and especially an ICSI the used spermatozoa Here we present a study of a large Slovak family with unconjugated are meticulously examined according to WHO-criteria, like concentra- hyperbilirubinemia Dubin-Johnson type. These subjects were found to tion, motility and morphology. So a fragmentation or other deterioration be homozygous for the novel mutation 1012delGT, which causes a of the DNA cannot be detected. The aim of our study is to determine frameshift. and, if required, reduce the amount of spermatozoa with DNA-frag- Dubin-Johnson syndrome is very rare disorder, and the homozygous mentation (DNA-Fragmentation Index, DFI) within the ejaculate. form of mutations has been reported only in unique cases. Ejaculate samples of 55 patients were purified via the MACS-system. Supported by MSMT 0021620806 The native and the purified part of the sample were then measured in a cytometer. The purification was carried out with the help of magnetic marked Annexin V and an appropriate column (the MACS-System). The DNA was stained by 4´-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). In Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 12 P0711. Investigation of mitochondrial tRNALys and ATPase «Génétique Médicale et Développement», Marseille, France, 10., ., France. 6/8 genes mutation in Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) Dysferlinopathies belong to the heterogeneous group of autosomal patients recessive muscular dystrophies. Mutations in the gene encoding dys- M. Zamanpoor1, M. Houshmand1, M. Dehghan Manshadi1, M. Shafa Shariat ferlin (DYSF) lead to distinct phenotypes, mainly Limb Girdle Muscular Panahi2; Dystrophy type 2B (LGMD2B) and Miyoshi myopathy (MM). 1Special Medical Centre, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of Due to the clinical heterogeneity, initial dysferlin protein analysis on Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of muscle biopsy samples is essential to orientate diagnosis. However, Iran. diagnosis should be confirmed by molecular analysis of the DYSF Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked recessive genetic gene. disorder resulting from mutations in the dystrophin gene. About two- The large size of the DYSF gene (> 150 kbp, 55 exons) makes this a thirds of the affected patients have large deletions or duplications, challenging task on a routine basis. Methods for mutation screening which occur in the 5′ and central region of the gene. The mitochondrial are particularly useful in this regard. tRNAlys and ATPase6/8 genes mutations are the hot spots in mitochon- Here, we report the results of mutational screening in the largest cohort drial disorders. We performed mutations screening of tRNALys gene reported to date. Altogether, 144 patients presenting dysferlin protein and also ATPase6/8 genes in 20 patients who referred as DMD to eval- deficiency identified on muscle biopsy samples using immunohisto- uate probable role of mitochondrial mutations in DMD. Mitochondrial chemical or Western-blot analysis were included. tRNALys gene and ATPase 6/8 genes were studied by PCR and auto- Genomic DNA was screened for DYSF mutations using DHPLC analy- mated DNA sequencing methods to find out any possible mitochon- sis, and subsequent sequencing of detected variants, in a routine di- drial DNA (mtDNA) damage. We found 7 different mtDNA mutations in agnostic setting. 8 patients (40%) out of 20 cases including T8503C, G8697A, A8850G, In 100 patients (70%), molecular analysis identified two disease-caus- G8697A, C8684T, G8584A, A8701G and C8574T, meanwhile 87.5% ing mutations, confirming the diagnosis of primary Dysferlinopathy on of the mutations were observed on MT-ATP6. a genetic basis. Furthermore, one mutation was identified in 17 (12%) Also, our study showed that 4 patients (20%) had an 8.9kb deletion patients, without identification of a second deleterious allele. Among in mtDNA. This study suggests that mitochondrial mutations may be the identified mutations, 37 have not been reported before, which cor- important in pathogenesis of DMD. responds to more than 10% of all DYSF mutations reported to date. Most of the identified mutations are predicted to produce a truncated P0712. A case of Smith-McCort Syndrome caused by a new protein or one amino-acid substitution, but we a report a high propor- mutation in the Dymeclin (FLJ2001) gene tion of nonsense mutations as compared to previous series. M. R. Almeida1, H. C. Fernandes2, J. L. Nunes2, H. G. Santos1; 1GenoMed, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Centro Hospitalar P0714. A dominant negative form of the transcriptional factor C- do Funchal, Madeira, Portugal. Jun alters the expression of two lipid metabolism related genes Dyggve-Melchior-Clausen (DMC) and Smith-McCort (SMC) are auto- that result in opposite effects on mouse plasma lipid levels somal recessive allelic spondyloepimetaphyseal disorders caused by K. Drosatos1,2, D. Sanoudou3, K. Kypreos4, D. Kardassis1,5, V. I. Zannis4,1; mutations in the Dymeclin / FLG20071 gene (Cohn et al., 2003; El 1University of Crete School of Medicine, Heraklion, Greece, 2Department of Ghouzzi et al., 2003). Most DMC and SMC rare families described in Biology, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece, 3Foundation for Biomedical Re- the literature are from Middle East and North Africa. Clinical identical search of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 4Boston University School of features of both disorders are short limbs and trunk, a barrel shaped Medicine, Boston, MA, United States, 5Institute for Molecular Biology & Biotech- chest, progressive kyphoscoliosis, varus and valgus deformity of the nology, Heraklion, Greece. knees, limitation in joint movement and brachydactyly. The two os- c-Jun (cellular Jun) is a transcription factor activated by phosphory- teochondrodysplasias are only distinguished by the presence in the lation by the SAPK (Stress Activated Protein Kinase) / JNK (c-Jun- DMC patients of important development delay or mental retardation N-terminal-Kinase) pathway in response to extracellular signals and (Spranger et al, 1976). Radiological features include platyspondyly, cytokines. We show that adenovirus mediated gene transfer of dn- metaphyseal and epiphyseal irregularities and a patognomonic lacy cJun (dominant negative form of c-Jun) in C57BL/6 mice increased appearance of the iliac crests. Here we describe a case of Smith- greatly apoE (apolipoprotein-E) hepatic mRNA and plasma levels, McCort of a 6 years girl from a consanguineous family from Madeira which resulted in dyslipidemia characterized by elevated plasma lipid Island. This affected girl presents the main clinical and radiological levels and accumualtion of discoidal HDL (High-Density-Lipoprotein). features of this disorder not revealing any development delay. Molecu- A similar but more severe phenotype was generated by overexpres- lar analysis of the all entire coding region of Dymeclin gene was per- sion of the mouse apoE in C57BL/6 mice, suggesting that the dyslipid- formed. A novel missense variant was identified in exon 15, C542R, emia induced by the dn-cJun can be attributed to the overexpression in homozygosity. In order to clarify its clinical significance, additional of apoE. studies were carried out. The comparison of the Dymeclin protein se- Unexpectedly, infection of apoE-/- mice with adenovirus expressing quence and homologous proteins in other species showed that this dn-cJun reduced by 70% plasma cholesterol, suggesting that the dn- amino acid residue is evolutionary conserved. This variant was also cJun influenced the expression of other genes that control plasma excluded in 50 Portuguese healthy individuals screened (100 chro- cholesterol levels. To identify these genes we performed whole ge- mossomes), which strongly supporting a pathogenic role. Therefore, nome expression analysis of livers from two groups of 5 apoE-/- mice, we believe that this homozygous C542R mutation is responsible for infected with adenoviruses expressing either the dn-cJun or the Green the Smith-McCort phenotype. Fluorescence Protein. Bioinformatical analysis and Northern Blotting Study supported by FLAD. validation, revealed that dn-cJun increased greatly the apoE mRNA and reduced by 70% the Scd1 (Stearoyl-CoA-Desaturase 1) mRNA. P0713. Mutational spectrum of the DYSF gene based on a large The involvement of Scd-1 in lowering plasma cholesterol was con- cohort of dysferlin deficient patients. firmed by restoration of the high cholesterol levels of apoE-/- mice fol- M. Krahn1, R. Bernard1, K. Nguyen1, V. Labelle1, G. Bassez2, D. Figarella-Bran- lowing coinfection with adenoviruses expressing dn-cJun and Scd-1. ger3, J. Pouget4, E. Di Salvo1, E. Hammouda5, C. Béroud6, B. Eymard2, J. Urtiz- Conclusively dn-cJun appears to trigger two opposing events in mice berea7, F. Leturcq8, N. Lévy1,9, .. and the French Network on LGMD10; that affect plasma cholesterol and triglyceride levels: One results in 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d’enfants de la Timone, Mar- apoE overexpression and triggers dyslipidemia and the other results in seille, France, 2Institut de Myologie, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, inhibition of Scd-1 and offsets dyslipidemia. France, 3Laboratoire d’Anatomopathologie, Hôpital Timone, Marseille, France, 4Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Timone, Marseille, France, 5AFM et Généthon, P0715. Functional studies of in silico predicted splicing Evry, France, 6Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Génétique regulatory elements in the dystrophin gene Humaine, Montpellier, France, 7Hopital Marin, APHP, Hendaye, France, 8Labo- O. Leroy1, S. Le Guédard1, M. Faburel2, D. Thorel2, C. Saquet2, D. Hamroun1,2, ratoire de Biochimie Génétique, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 9Inserm U491 : P. Khau van Kien1,2, C. Béroud1,2, M. Claustres1,2, S. Tuffery-Giraud1,3; 1INSERM U 827, Montpellier, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 3Université MONTPELLIER1, Montpellier, France. University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 13CHU Montpellier, Hôpital The splicing of pre-mRNA is accomplished by the combinatorial rec- Saint Eloi, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Montpellier, France, 14CHU Montpellier, ognition of multiple degenerate signals, resulting in a network of RNA- Hôpital Saint Eloi, Service de Neurochirurgie, Montpellier, France. protein interactions across an exon and/or intron. In addition to canoni- Dystonia is a neurological movement disorder characterized by invol- cal sequence elements adjacent to splice junctions, more distant aux- untary movements or postures. The only currently identified primary iliary regulatory elements such as exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs) Early-Onset Torsion Dystonia (EOTD) gene is TOR1A that encodes and exonic splicing silencers (ESSs) play a crucial role in many RNAs the torsinA chaperon protein. The majority of cases from various ethnic for correct splicing. Identifying functional ESE or ESS sites is rather groups are caused by a unique and recurrent autosomal dominantly difficult due to the short and degenerate nature of these elements and inherited deletion: c.907delGAG. EOTD prevalence in the general Eu- the lack of understanding of their sequence context. Besides the iden- ropean population is estimated between 0.3 to 0.5:100,000, that would tification of naturally occurring exonic mutations that cause splicing correspond to a calculated number of symptomatic carriers ranging defects in patients and provide valuable tools to identify such auxiliary from 184 to 307 in the French population. Collaborations have been RNA cis-elements, we have developed a new strategy to identify splic- established between the four French laboratories in charge of this di- ing signals in the dystrophin gene. This strategy is based on two com- agnostic: 52 probands with EOTD of which 26 cases in a familial con- plementary approaches: (1) the bioinformatics prediction of putative text of the disease have been diagnosed with the mutation. Whenever splicing signals using the Splice Site Finder software (http://www.umd. possible, the presence of the deletion in each parent, the number of be/SSF), and (2) the experimental validation of the in silico predicted relatives carrying the mutation, and their phenotypic status (symptom- sequences. Functional assay relies on an easy-to-use and reliable atic or asymptomatic) has been investigated. Overall, 108 individuals system based on fluorescent splicing reporter minigenes, allowing flow were found to carry the mutation of which 20 were asymptomatic. This cytometry analyses, in which the level of fluorescence depends on the number of TOR1A carriers, lower than expected, may be related to splicing of a tested exon. The characterization of functional cis-acting non exhaustive testing of these families and/or lower prevalence of splicing sequences such as branch points and ESEs will contribute to TOR1A-linked dystonia in France. the comprehensive knowledge of multiple signals that regulate splic- Haplotypes with TOR1A flanking microsatelites could be constructed in ing of this huge gene. Also, the identified sequences could constitute 31 families. The common Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) haplotype was found therapeutic targets of the exon-skipping strategy to reverse the severe in two families and the second AJ haplotype previously reported (Lebre DMD phenotype into the milder BMD one. 1999) has been found in two other families. Only one other recurrent haplotype has been characterized in two other families confirming the P0716. Different profiles of SNPs association with high arterial quasi absence of founder effect for the TOR1A mutation in France. pressure syndromes O. A. Perevesentsev1, V. A. Bortnikova2, R. I. Strjuk2, A. V. Karpukhin1, V. F. P0718. Novel splice mutation in the EDAR gene in a Lebanese Sitnikov3; female with an atypical form of anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moskow, Russian Federation, 2Mos- C. Cluzeau1, H. Mégarbané2, E. Bal1, P. Guigue1, F. Stephan3, A. Munnich1, A. cow state medical-stomatology university, Moskow, Russian Federation, 3Rus- Mégarbané4, A. Smahi1; sian state medical university, Moskow, Russian Federation. 1U 781 INSERM, Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Mala- There are a number of syndromes connected with high arterial pres- des, Paris, France, 2Unité de Génétique Médicale, Laboratoire de Biologie sure that have genetic predisposition. This circimstanse arise a ques- Moléculaire et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine, Université Saint-Joseph, tion concerning of molecular bases of genetic predisposition and Beyrouth, Lebanon, 3Service de dermatologie, Hôtel-Dieu de France, Beyrouth, differentiation of the syndromes on association with different genes. Lebanon, 4Unité de Génétique Médicale, Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire We investigated a role of AGT, ACE, ADRB2 and APOE genes in es- et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine, Université Saint-Joseph, Bayrouth, sential arterial hypertension (EAH), gestantional hypertension (GH) Lebanon. and preeclampsia. Different profiles of SNPs association with the syn- More than 170 different pathological clinical conditions have been de- dromes were revealed. The ADRB2 Arg16Arg variant was associated fined as ectodermal dysplasia (ED). They all share as common feature with EAH (OR=3,84, P=0,005). The association of APOE PI-22M/Q abnormalities in hair, teeth, nails and sweat glands, but must be asso- polymorphism with EAH was not significant. However an association ciated with anomalies in other organs and systems. EDA is character- of APOE 22QQ with ADRB2 Arg16Arg among patients with EAH that ized by the triad of signs comprising sparse hair, abnormal or missing significantly increases a risk was found (OR=6,82, P=0,01). This may teeth and inability to sweat due to lack of sweat glands. Here we pres- be due to a contribition of dysbolism of plasmatic lipids in EAH onset. ent a 18-year-old woman, born to first cousin parents that belong to Three genes (AGT, ACE, ADRB2) were significantly associated with the Lebanese Shiite Muslim community. Behind the triad of features GH (OR=2,87-3,91; P=0,01-0,005). An addition GAH was characteri- characteristics of EDA she presents an atypical association with vari- sized by genetic interaction between ACE D/D and ADRB2 Arg16Arg ous clinical manifestations. Lacrimation was nearly absent and sali- with a risk increasing (OR=5,80, P=0,01). These results may be ex- vary secretions reduced. The lips were thick and everted. The skin was plained by increasing of RAAS system activity during a pregnancy. dry and velvet. Absence of breasts and a rudimentary extranumerary The AGT T235T variant was associated with preeclampsia (OR=3,2; areola and nipple on the left side were noted as well. She also had P=0,01). The data suggest a possibility distinguish predisposition to marked palmar and plantar hyperkeratosis. Light microscopy of skin the syndromes with high arterial pressure by different profiles of SNPs biopsies showed orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis and absence of sweat association. glands. We identified a novel homozygous mutation (IVS9+1 G>A) in EDAR gene. RT-PCR performed on patient skin biopsy RNA, showed P0717. Inventory of TOR1A mutation carriers in France. that the mutation results in total absence of EDAR transcript and con- S. Tuffery-Giraud1,2, F. Clot3,4, A. Durr3,5, A. Brice3,5, G. Lesca6,7, I. Vuillaume8,9, sequently of the EDAR protein, which likely results in total abolition of A. Calender6,7, B. Sablonnière8,9, T. Besnard1,2, C. Saquet10, D. Thorel10, L. Oze- Ectodysplasin mediated NF-kB signaling. NF-kB signaling is involved lius11, L. Hjermind12, A. Roubertie13, L. Cif14, M. Claustres1,10, M. Frederic1,2, G. principally in early development of ectodermal appendages and in Collod-Beroud1,2; tooth development. It’s recent involvement in embryonic salivary gland 1INSERM U 827, Montpellier, France, 2Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, development as well as EDAR expression in lacrimal, and mammary France, 3INSERM U 679, Paris, France, 4Université Pierre and Marie Curie- glands may explain the complex phenotype observed in our patient Paris 6, IFR70, UMR S679, Paris, France, 5AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié- carrying EDAR mutation. Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique Cytogénétique et Embryologie, Paris, France, 6Hôpital Edouard-Herriot, Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Clini- P0719. Functional consequences of EDAR mutations on NF-kB que, Lyon, France, 7Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France, and Lef-1/β-catenin signalling 8CHRU de Lille, Institut de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Lille, France, C. Cluzeau1, E. Bal1, N. Chassaing2, S. Hadj-Rabia3,1, C. Bodemer3,1, P. Cal- 9INSERM U 837, Lille, France, 10CHU Montpellier, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneu- vas2, M. C. Vincent2, A. Munnich1, A. Smahi1; ve, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, France, 11Department of 1U 781 INSERM, Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Genetics and Genome Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, Paris, France, 2Service de Génétique médicale, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, NY, United States, 12Department of Medical Genetics, The Panum Institute, France, 3Service de Dermatologie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 France. CàT and 754 or 755 del T). Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (EDA) is an ectodermal differentia- This study was carried out in four EV independent nuclear Tunisian tion disorder characterized by sparse hair, abnormal or missing teeth families. Mutation analysis was performed by direct DNA sequenc- and inability to sweat. X-linked EDA is caused by mutations in EDA ing. None of the two Algerian explored mutations was found, suggest- gene, encoding ectodysplasin, a member of the TNF family. Autosomal ing that Tunisian patients do not share the same mutations as those forms of EDA, have been also described and are accounted for by described among Algerians. Three SNPs were identified: 1049C/T, two genes. EDAR, encoding a TNF receptor and EDARADD encoding IVS5+47A/G, and IVS5+26A/T, the last one being a novel sequence EDARADD (for EDAR-Associated Death Domain). Recently, 17 novels variation. mutations were described in EDAR gene in both familial and sporadic cases of EDA. The six truncating mutations result probably in the ab- P0722. Autosomal recessive erythropoietic protoporphyria sence of EDAR and consequently in total abolition of NF-kB signal- J. M. Saraiva; ling. Among the 11 missense mutations, 5 are located in EDAR Death Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra and Faculdade de Domain, and are responsible for both dominant and recessive EDA. In Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. order to determine the effect of these mutations on EDAR function and Erythropoietic protoporphyria (MIM 177000) results from deficiency of signalling involving EDAR, site-directed mutagenesis was performed ferrochelatase (FECH)(EC 4.99.1.1.). It is a disorder of heme biosyn- and NF-kB activation was first assessed after HEK293T cells transfec- thesis in which most cases are autosomal dominant inherited. However tion. The recessive I418T, T403M and R375H mutations affect NF-kB its penetrance is reduced. Overt disease requires the presence of one activation without impairing the expression of the mutated proteins. of the almost one hundred mutations in the FECH gene reported so far Interestingly, the dominant L377F and T413P mutations resulted in the and the common allele in some populations IVS3-48C in trans. Less absence of EDAR expression leading to total abolition of NF-kB signal- than 5% of the cases are classified as autosomal recessive forms. We ling. Behind the central role of the Lef-1/β-catenin pathway in normal describe one of such cases where the family studies also corroborate embryonic development and carcinogenesis, it also play important the relationship with disease manifestation of FECH mutations and the roles in ectodermal differentiation and hair follicle development and it IVS3-48C allele. was interestingly shown that EDAR represses the Lef-1/β-catenin-de- The proband had skin photosensitivity since the age of 3 years old and pendent transcriptional activity, independently of its effect on the NF- colelithiasis at the age of 28. Her parents, brother and sister were all kB pathway. We are currently investigating the effect of our mutations healthy adults. The family concern was the care of the first son of the on Lef-1/β-catenin pathway. proband, then 6 months old. In order to be able to assess the health care required genetic counselling was requested. P0720. Polymorphism of IL4RA gene is associated with The molecular characterization of the FECH gene identified two del- endometriosis eterious mutations in the proband: IVS1-23C>T and C411G. All the M. Kozlovskaya, G. Demin, M. Yarmolinskaya, T. Ivashchenko, V. Baranov; other five family members were classified as heterozygous, three for Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. the mutation C411G and two for the IVS1-23C>T. Although the allele Endometriosis is a common multifactorial disease. Typical endome- IVS3-48C was also present in two of the five heterozygous it was so trioid cells are characterized by increased cytokine activity. Cytokine in cis. genes are highly polymorphic that results in synthesis of proteins with This family is one of the few examples reported of autosomal recessive various functional activities. The goal of the study focuses on the role inheritance of erythropoietic protoporphyria and is yet another exam- of allelic variants of IL4 and IL4RA genes in pathogenesis of endome- ple of how a common allele modulates the penetrance of a dominant triosis. mutation. DNA samples from the patients with endometriosis (n=36) and control group of women without any gynecologic complications (n=69) were P0723. Analysis of p as a candidate gene for bladder included in the study. Polymorphisms of IL4 (-590T>C) and IL4RA exstrophy (1902A>G or Gln551Arg) were defined by PCR-RFLP assay. M. Ludwig1, H. Reutter2, C. Nauta3, Y. Lakshmanan4, J. P. Gearhart4, S. A. The distribution of IL4 and IL4RA genotypes was in agreement with Boyadjiev3; the HWE law (p>0.05). The frequencies of alleles and genotypes of 1Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Dept. of IL4 gene did not differ between studied groups (p>0.05). However the Human Genetics University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Section of Genetics, frequency of Arg/Arg genotype of IL4RA gene was significantly higher Dept. of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, United in endometriosis patients (16.7%) if compared to the control group States, 4Dept. of Urology, The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, (1.4%, p<0.01). Baltimore, MD, United States. The results of this pilot study demonstrate an association of IL4RA The Bladder-Exstrophy-Epispadias-Complex (BEEC) represents a gene polymorphism with endometriosis. According to odds ratio value spectrum of urologic abnormalities in which part or all of the distal uri- (OR=13.60; CI: 2.43-76.26) Arg551/Arg551 genotype could be re- nary tract fail to close and are exposed on the outer abdominal wall. sponsible for 13-fold increase in the risk of endometriosis . Our data This rare congenital anomaly is thought to be a clinical spectrum rang- substantiate the conclusion that Gln551Arg polymorphism could be ing from isolated epispadias (EP) to classic bladder exstrophy (CBE), treated as prognostic geneic marker of endometriosis. to its most severe form - cloacal exstrophy (CE). P63, a homolog of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene, encodes multiple tissue-specific iso- P0721. Genetic investigation of epidermodysplasia verruciformis forms that act as transcription factors essential for proper embryologic in Tunisian patients: exclusion of Algerian mutations development. Null p63 mice exhibit severe craniofacial, limb, and skin O. Messaoud Ezzeddine1, H. Ouragini1, C. Charfeddine1, S. Kassar2, M. Mok- anomalies. In addition to these, bladder exstrophy was recently re- ni3, S. Boubaker2, S. Abdelhak1, A. Ben Osman-Dhahri3; ported in ΔNp63-/- mice. Human p63 mutations have been associated 1UR 26/04 : Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases Research with at least five developmental phenotypes, some with anomalies of Unit (MIGOD), Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunisia., Tunis, Tunisia, 2Anatomo- the urogenital system, but not BEEC. We have initiated p63 analysis Pathology Department, Institut Pasteur de Tunis., Tunis, Tunisia, 3Dermatology in a cohort of BEEC patients. Direct sequencing of the entire coding Department, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia. region of p63 did not identify obvious mutations in genomic DNA of 15 Epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EV: MIM#226400) is a rare genoder- CBE and five CE patients. RT-PCR of cDNAs derived from normal and matosis associated with a high risk of skin cancer. EV is inherited as exstrophic human bladder and lymphoblast RNA is in progress. Sev- an autosomal recessive trait. To date, 2 loci (EV1 and EV2) have been eral previously unreported p63 isoforms were observed in both control reported and 2 genes in EV1 locus, EVER1 and EVER2, have been and exstrophic samples. Furthermore, unusual RT-PCR band patterns identified. Mutations in these genes, encoding TMC6 (Transmembrane were observed in some patients’ samples and are being currently char- channel-like) and TMC8 respectively, are responsible for EV. Few pop- acterized. These data indicate that while genomic mutations of p63 ulations have been studied and for the two genes, so far six mutations cannot explain BEEC in our study group, further studies of this BEEC have been reported. As for several genodermatosis, similar mutational candidate gene are warranted. spectrum has been identified among Algerian and Tunisian patients, EV Tunisian patients were screened for the “Algerian mutations” (280 Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 P0724. Hereditary Multiple Exostoses: report of a case and a Marseille, France, 3Service de Pédiatrie et neuropédiatrie, APHM, Marseille, novel mutation in EXT1 in Iran France, 4INSERM U491, Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France. M. Noruzinia1,2, M. Akbari1,2; Facio scapulo humeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is an autoso- 1Tarbiat Modares University, Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic mal dominant disease associated with a contraction of the repeated Republic of Iran, 2Akbari Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Re- D4Z4 sequence at the 4q35 subtelomeric region. Routine diagnosis public of Iran. of FSHD is based on pulsed-field-gel-electrophoresis using the D4Z4 Hereditary multiple exostoses is an autosomal dominant disorder char- adjacent p13e11 probe. However, sequences homologous to D4Z4 ex- acterized by multiple benign cartilaginous tumors at the juxta-epiphy- ist in other chromosomal regions and cross hybridization might appear. seal regions growing outward from the metaphyses of long bones. We Moreover, 4q subtelomeric region is subject to frequent translocations report a 28 years old man with hereditary multiple exostoses. He and with the subtelomeric region 10q26, while D4Z4 contraction on 10q his fiancée wanted to know the risk of transmission of theses bony is not pathogenic. Towards clearing diagnosis procedures in FSHD, overgrowth to their future infants. Clinical examination revealed mul- allele characterization is improved by the use of BlnI, cleaving only tiple exostoses in humerus, femur, scapular and knee joints and short- canonical 10q26 unit. ening of metacarpals. Here, we report two unrelated patients presenting typical FSHD fea- Molecular analysis of the genes EXT1 and EXT2 showed a novel mu- tures (Asymetric weakness, wasting of the upper limb girdle and face) tation in exon 8 of EXT1. This mutation occurred in nucleotide 1701 with a particular molecular pattern. While simple digestion by EcoRI (1701ins5) and produced a truncated protein in aminocid 620(L620X). evidenced only normal-sized, supposedly non-pathogenic, D4Z4 al- Two genes have been identified so far mapping to 8q23-q24 and leles, EcoRI/BlnI double digestion revealed a short D4Z4 repeat ar- 11p11-p12, respectively. A third gene is supposed to be located on the ray on chromosome 4, suggesting a complex rearrangement between short arm of chromosome 19 . About 90% of cases of Hereditary Mul- 4q35 and 10q26 within the D4Z4 repeat. This feature is shared by sev- tiple Exostoses are linked to these loci. The detection of this mutation eral relatives, including one of the unaffected parents in each family. has enabled us to provide appropriate genetic counseling concerning Our knowledge of the FSHD pathophysiological processes is still in- this complex situation. There has been no study on Iranian patients complete, and these observations raise questions on the validity of with HME. A national program to detect the genetic causes of HME usual molecular diagnosis tests in FSHD as well as their use for ge- in Iran can help to find novel mutations and to define proper mutation netic counselling. Developing novel and/or complementary technical detection strategy. approaches, as for example competitive dosage analysis, is thus an absolute necessity to improve molecular diagnosis as well as for a P0725. Extralysosomal Localization of Globotriaosylceramide in better knowledge of the molecular structure of the region in affected Fabry Disease patients. H. Askari1, C. Kaneski1, C. Semino-Mora2, A. Ang3, B. A. Wustman4, R. Schiff- mann1; P0727. Molecular characterization of hemophilia A in South East 1National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, MD, United Bulgaria States, 2Laboratory of Gastrointestinal and Liver Studies, Uniformed Services E. Sukarova Stefanovska1, P. Tchacarova2, G. H. Petkov2, G. D. Efremov1; University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3HistoRx,Inc., 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, MASA, Skopje, New Haven, CT, United States, 4Amicus Therapeutics, Inc., Cranbury, NJ, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, United States. Stara Zagora, Bulgaria. OBJECTIVE: To describe cellular and subcellular localization of glo- Hemophilia A is a common X-linked bleeding disorder affecting 1 in botriaosylceramide in order to assess potential abnormal interactions 5,000 males worldwide. The most common molecular defect is intron of globotriaosylceramide leading to disease in Fabry patients. METH- 22 inversion, while the rest of the mutations are single nucleotide sub- ODS: We used an anti-globotriaosylceramide monoclonal antibody stitutions in different parts of the gene. The knowledge of the causative for immunogold electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, and im- gene defect has become an important tool in hemophilia care with munofluorescence studies of tissues from patients on long-term en- respect to prediction of the patients’ clinical course and safe genetic zyme replacement therapy (ERT) and controls. RESULTS: Immunore- counseling of relatives. The aim of this study was to determine the activity for globotriaosylceramide was present in heart, kidney, brain, molecular defects underlying hemophilia A patients from South-East intestines, adrenal gland, aorta, skin, liver and spleen in a variable Bulgaria. The molecular characterization of fVIII gene was performed pattern. In the brain, positive neuronal immunoreactivity was found in 50 unrelated hemophilia A patients. Southern blot analysis was used only in the parahippocampal region. In all organs examined, globo- for detection of inversions in intron 22, while PCR followed by SSCP triaosylceramide immunostaining was present in the cell membranes or DGGE was performed for mutation screening. The molecular de- and cytoplasm of endothelial cells, even in the absence of lysosomal fect was found in 33, or 66%, of analyzed patients. The most frequent inclusions. Immunofluorescence immunolabeling of heart and kidney molecular defect was inversion in intron 22, found in 18 (36%) of all tissues from a Fabry patient showed colocalization of globotriaosylce- studied patients. In one severely affected patient an Alu insert was ramide with lysosomal, ER, and nuclear markers. Immunogold elec- found, in exon 14 at Cd.1224. Nucleotide substitutions were found tron microscopy confirmed the presence of globotriaosylceramide in in 14 (28%) patients. Using SSCP as a screening method, we have the cell membrane, lysosomes, ER, nuclear membrane and nucleus identified an Arg531→Cys missence mutation in exon 11 in six (12%) of vascular endothelial cells and fibroblasts even in the absence of unrelated patients with mild to moderate hemophilia A. In two unre- lysosomal inclusions. Cultured fibroblasts from patients showed simi- lated patients the same nonsense mutation was found (Cd-5; CGA→ lar findings. Immunolabeling of organ tissues and cultured fibroblasts TGA). Six missense mutations (Asn90→Thr; Arg372→His; Tyr473→ from 3 unaffected controls was uniformly negative for globotriaosylce- His; Glu456→Val; Arg1689→Cys; Arg2163→His) were private. Two of ramide by immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy. CONCLU- them were found for the first time. SIONS: A substantial amount globotriaosylceramide immunoreactivity remains in cells and tissues even after years of ERT in Fabry disease. P0728. Angelman syndrome caused by an identical familial 1487- For the first time we demonstrate the presence of accumulated globo- kb deletion triaosylceramide in extralysosomal cellular regions. These findings are N. Matsumoto1,2, M. Iwakoshi3; crucial for the understanding of disease mechanism and suggest the 1Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan, 2SORST, Japan Science and use of immunostaining for globotriaosylceramide to assess response Technology Agency (JST), Kawaguchi, Japan, 3Nishinomiya Municipal Wakaba- to novel specific therapies. en, Nishinomiya, Japan. Angelman syndrome (AS, OMIM#105830) is a neurodevelopmental P0726. Diagnosis in Facio Scapulo Humeral dystrophy remains disorder characterized by mental retardation, ataxia, hypotonia, epi- challenging: atypical molecular patterns in two families lepsy, absence of speech, and specific facial features. At least four ma- J. Gallard1, C. Vo Van1, R. Bernard1, S. Attarian2, B. Chabrol3, K. Nguyen1, N. jor mechanisms causing AS were validated: i) an interstitial deletion of Lévy1,4; 15q11-q13 (70-75%), ii) uniparental disomy (2-3%), iii) imprinting de- 1Département de Génétique Médicale, APHM, Marseille, France, 2Service de fects (3-5%), iv) UBE3A mutations (20%). Most deletions are similar in Neurologie, centre de référence pour les maladies neuromusculaires, APHM, size (approximate 4 Mb) and occur de novo through maternal unequal Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 crossing over between low copy repeats (LCRs). Paternal occurrence tions in the catalytic domain. We conclude that the novel missense of similar deletions, instead, results in Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS, mutation of GalNAc-T3 causes FTC. OMIM#176270). In PWS no coding mutations have been found in con- trast with UBE3A mutations in AS, suggesting that PWS is caused by P0731. A study of FGFR3 gene mutations in brazilian patients loss of function of multiple genes. with achondroplasia, hypochondroplasia and thanatophoric Different sized deletions associated with AS are very rare. To our dysplasia knowledge, at least two familial atypical deletions were reported, and J. M. Pina-Neto, D. Ortolan, W. A. Silva-Jr; the microdeletions caused AS in maternal inheritance but no PWS fea- School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. tures in paternal inheritance, enabling differentiation of the PWS criti- We studied the FGFR3 mutations in 80 brazilian patients with achon- cal region (PWSCR) from the AS critical region (ASCR). droplasia , 22 with hypochondroplasia and 9 with thanatophoric dys- We encountered a similar family with an atypical microdeletion, con- plasia. The DNA methodology used was first the RFLP with restrition sisting of an AS boy later confirmed, and asymptomatic mother and enzymes and, if the mutation was not detected, we used direct se- maternal grandfather. All three had an atypical microdeletion. We quencing of all gene. could successfully determine deletion breakpoints of the family, and In Achondroplasia we detected 75 cases with the G1138A mutation, 2 will discuss about genes responsible for PWS. cases with the G1138C mutation, 1 case with the G1123T and 1 case with a C1150T mutation. When we studied the C1150T mutation in 50 P0729. Familial Defective apo B-100 (FDB): founder effect in normal Brazilians from different ethinic origins we detected 1 person a population of the South of Europe and comparison with the with this mutation, and concluded that this mutation is a polymorphism Familial Hypercholestolaemia (FH). .We didn’t detected the pathologic mutation in two typical achondro- I. Ejarque-Doménech, E. Milián, J. Real, F. Chaves, A. García-García, J. Asca- plasia patients. so, R. Carmena; In Hypochondroplasia we found 14 patients with the C1620G mutation Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valencia, Valencia, Spain. and 7 cases with the C1620A mutation . We didn’t detected the muta- We have identified a large number of subjects (n=19) with FDB (OMIM tion in one typical hypochondroplasia patient. = 144010) due to the R3500Q mutation at APOB gene in a population In Thanatophoric Dysplasia we had 7 patients with the type I, all of of the South of Europe and the 7th FDB homozygote in the world. This them presented the C742T mutation and, 2 cases of the type II, both was possible through identification of the first FDB heterozygous in presented the A1948G mutation. Spain. The study of his family and the population of the same geo- This is the first study of a brazilian patients sample for FGFR3 mutations graphic area allowed us to identify the rest of the FDB cohort. and we could concluded that the types and frequencies of FGFR3 mu- We studied the lipoprotein phenotype of 19 FDBs, and compared it tations detected are similar to that described in other regions studied. with the one of subjects with classic FH of the same geographic origin, We could define that the C1150T mutation ( Trujillo et al., 2004) and taking in account the type of mutations at LDLR gene: null-mutations detected by us in one achondroplasia patient is a polymorphic variant TC= 343.7 (69.6), missense mutations affecting binding 3-5 repeat re- not related to diseases determined by mutations in FGFR3 gene. gion TC= 394.4 (47.9), and missense mutations not affecting that bind- ing region TC= 335.2 (60.2). FDB subjects showed a milder clinical P0732. MEFV Mutations in Turkish Patients Suffering From and lipoprotein phenotype TC= 286.5 (57.9). Familial Mediterranean Fever We have also studied the founder effect of our FDBs and the history M. Ozdemir1, O. Cilingir1, C. Korkmaz2, M. H. Muslumanoglu1, D. Uzun1, O. of that geographic area of the Valencian Region. The analysis of the Kutlay1, S. Artan1; haplotype of the gene APOB of our FDBs and historical records of that 1Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genet- geographic zone leads us to conclude that their mutation originated ics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Depart- 7000 years ago in the Southwestern region of Germany, between Rhin ment of Rheumatology, Eskisehir, Turkey. and Main rivers. Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive auto- TC = Total Cholesterol; data expressed in mg/dl with P<0.05 ANOVA. inflammatory periodic disorder characterized by febrile and painful at- tacks due to inflammation involving the serosal membranes in the ab- P0730. A novel missense mutation in GALNT3 disrupts O- domen, chest or joints. Over 50 mutations have been identified in the glycosylation activity and causes familial tumoral calcinosis MEFV gene responsible for FMF. AIM: To identify the distribution and A. Benet-Pagès1, K. Kato2, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, J. B. Díaz López3, P. Blay the frequency of the MEFV gene mutations in Turkish FMF patients Albors3, H. Clausen2, T. M. Strom1,4; PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study was carried out on 354 clinical- 1Institute of Human Genetics, GSF-Research Center, Munich, Germany, 2De- ly diagnosed Turkish FMF patients. Mutation screening of the MEFV partment of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, gene was performed by DNA sequencing of exon 10 in all patients Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Servicio de Metabolismo Osseo y Mineral, Hospital and by FMF specific StripAssay (this assay is based on a Polymerase San Agustín, Oviedo, Spain, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University, Chain Reaction-Reverse Hybridization technique) for E148Q, P369S Munich, Germany. and F479L mutations of exons 2,3, and 5, respectively in 88 patients. Familial tumoral calcinosis (FTC) is an autosomal recessive disorder RESULTS: Of the 354 unrelated patients investigated, 179 (50.6%) characterized by ectopic calcifications and elevated serum phosphate had one or two mutations : 38 patients (10.7%) were homozygous; 44 levels. FTC is caused by mutations in the GALNT3 gene, which en- (12.4%) were compound-heterozygous; 97 (27.4%) heterozygote mu- codes the UDP-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine:polypeptide N-acetylgalac- tations. Of the mutations, M694V (A>G), M680l (G>C), V726A, R761H tosaminyltransferase 3 (GalNAc-T3), or by mutations in the FGF23 accounted for 73.7, 18.4, 5.3, and 2.6 %, respectively. The E148Q, gene, which encodes the fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23). GalNAc- P369S and F479L mutations of exons 2, 3 and 5 were seen in one T3 controls the initiation step of mucin-type O-glycosylation whereas case each. One case was E148Q/M680I compound-heterozygous. FGF23 is a secreted phosphaturic factor involved in the regulation CONCLUSION: Exon 10 is the most common site for FMF mutations of phosphate homeostasis. Our previous studies demonstrated that in Turkish population is exon 10 whereas exons 2,3 and 5 accounts FGF23 O-glycosylation by GalNAc-T3 is required for the secretion of for about 4.5% of the cases. The commonest mutation among Turks functional intact FGF23. We performed a mutation analysis in a fam- is M694V (A>G). Morever, because of confirmed results, StripAssay ily with two affected individuals who presented the clinical features of for 12 common mutations might be used in routine mutation screening FTC. Sequencing of GALNT3 revealed a homozygous missense mu- analysis. tation (c.985G>A) at the amino acid position p.G329R which is highly conserved within the 15 members of the human GalNAc transferase P0733. Identification of two new alternatively spliced MEFV family and among species. This residue is situated in the linker re- transcripts in human peripheral blood leukocytes gion between the catalytic and the ricin-like domain of GalNAc-T3. In S. Grandemange1, C. Notarnicola2, I. Touitou1; vitro analysis of FGF23 O-glycosylation by GalNAc-T3(G329R), per- 1Institut de génétique humaine, Montpellier, France, 2INSERM, Montpellier, formed by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, showed lack of GalNAc- France. T3(G329R) activity. Previously reported GALNT3 mutations in FTC Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive dis- have been null mutations or compound heterozygous missense muta- ease characterized by recurrent attacks of fever and serositis. FMF is Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 caused by mutations in the MEFV gene. MEFV, expressed in granulo- alleles, 7 were not associated with clinical FMF, and 3 manifested only cytes and monocytes, encodes marenostrin/pyrin (M/P), a presumed mild disease, suggesting that P369S might ameliorate the phenotypic regulator of inflammation. effect of exon 10 mutations. Recently, multiple alternatively spliced MEFV transcripts were identi- We detected 12 mutations in 2400 individuals with clinical signs sug- fied suggesting the existence of several proteins in vivo. The expres- gestive of FMF and found P369S rare mutation in 14 of them: 9 het- sion pattern of the native protein has poorly been investigated espe- erozygotes, 3 compound heterozygotes (1 with P369S/F479L and 2 cially in cells physiologically expressing MEFV. with P369S/E148Q), and 2 displayed complex alleles (P369S/E148Q/ To address this issue, we performed RT-PCR analysis of MEFV mRNA R761H; P369S/E148Q/M694V). Evaluation of the phenotypic features from human control peripheral blood leucocytes using exonic primers of the patients with P369S mutation showed the presence of 8 as- spanning exon 1 to 10. The PCR products were cloned and directly ymptomatic individuals. Four patients with P369S mutation, one - with sequenced. P369S/E148Q and one - with P369S/E148Q/M694V had the FMF We identified two new transcripts due to alternative splicing events. clinical picture. A complex transcript, MEFV-d2-9ext, resulted in an in-frame deletion On the basis of our results and recent data, we suggest that in some of exon 2 and a 5’ 117 bp extension of exon 9 introducing a premature cases other factors along with MEFV genotype, such as environment stop codon. The second transcript, MEFV-d2-3-4 was generated by or possibly other genetic factors play a role in the determination of the removal of exon 2, 3 and 4, resulting in a frameshift that predicts a severity of the inflammatory attacks in FMF. short protein corresponding to exon 1 only. We raised polyclonal antibodies against 6 peptides designed from the P0736. Disruption of conserved non-coding elements in a MEFV coding sequence, and detected by Western-blotting protein t(2;3)(q12;p13)de novo isoforms that we are currently characterizing. Previous data and ours E. Engenheiro1, D. Goode2, A. Woolfe2, M. Pinto3, G. Soares3, Z. Tümer1, G. strongly support that numerous MEFV transcripts are produced by al- Elgar2, N. Tommerup1; ternative splicing. Because alteration of MEFV expression regulation 1Wilhelm Johannsen Center for Functional Genome Research, Department of may be involved in FMF pathophysiology, we will analyze the pattern Medical Genetics, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, University of splicing of MEFV transcripts, in FMF patients. Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Functional Genomics Group, School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End P0734. Heteregenous clinical profile of familial mediterranean Road, London, United Kingdom, 3Instituto de Genética Médica Jacinto Magal- fever associated to M680I (G/C) mutation in a Tunisian arab hães, Porto, Portugal. muslim family from Sfax It was recently discovered that not only can disruption of important N. B. Abdelmoula1, N. Hmida2, F. Thonney3, T. Rebai1; developmental genes cause disease, but so can disruption of the 1Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Private Sector, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Centre Hos- regulatory landscapes surrounding these genes, e.g. by translocations pitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland. that remove regulatory elements from the gene they regulate. Here we Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disor- present a balanced t(2;3)(q12.3;p13)de novo in a patient with men- der particularly common in Mediterranean population,characterised by tal retardation, speech defect and strabismus. The breakpoints were recurring attacks of fever and serositis. mapped by FISH using BAC clones to a gene empty region upstream The cloning of the FMF gene on 16p13 and the subsequent finding of FOXP1 on chromosome 3p13. The breakpoint on chromosome 3p13 that its tissue expression is limited to granulocytes, has helped to ex- disrupts a cluster of conserved non-coding elements (CNEs) associ- plain the dramatic accumulation of neutrophils at the symptomatic se- ated with FOXP1. It has recently been shown that similar conserved rosal sites. The most frequent sequence alterations in MEFV gene are elements probably function as tissue-specific enhancers and that they M694V, V726A, M680I, M694I and E148Q. The wide clinical variability are important for the diverse spatio-temporal functions of the associ- of the disease has been related to MEFV allelic heterogeneity. ated key developmental genes. The disrupted elements upstream of In this study, we report clinical profiles and molecular findings in a Tu- the breakpoint on chromosome 3p13 have been studied in vivo by a nisian Arab Muslim family from Sfax town. Only two members of this functional assay using zebrafish. Several of these elements revealed large consanguineous family fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for FMF GFP expression in the zebrafish central nervous system. Recently, with typical acute and recurrent crises of fever and serosal inflamma- FOXP2, which encodes another member of the Forkhead box (Fox) tion, leading improperly to abdominal surgery. Other subjects mani- family of proteins, has been identified as the gene underlying a human fested a mild or atypical phenotype. All members underwent molecular developmental language abnormality. Since FOXP1 is specifically co- genetic exploration to confirm diagnosis for some ones and establish localized with FOXP2 in the bird and human brain, it is predicted to be carrier status for others. Mutations were investigated by PCR amplifi- related to speech disorders as well. The objectives of this study are to cation and digestion with appropriate enzymes made to distinguish the identify regulatory sequences related to the candidate gene associ- wild type from the mutant allele. Genetic analysis revealed a M680I ated with the 3p13 breakpoint in this translocation and contribute to the (G/C) mutation in all members of the family. Heterozygote members understanding of the etiology of speech defect associated with mental were healthy but homozygotes were heterogeneously affected. retardation and strabismus. We discuss clinical presentations of FMF disease in this Arab Mus- lim family and emphasize the role of genetic analysis.We conclude P0737. Frequency of FRAXA and FRAXE and polymorphism at that specific MEFV mutations are probably not the sole determinants FMR1 and FMR2 genes in Indian population of phenotype, and that unknown environmental factors or modifying K. Lavanya1, B. Thelma2, V. Om Sai Ramesh3, V. Naga Rathna3, M. Ananda- genes act as accomplices in this disease. raj1; 1Institute of Genetics & Hospital for Genetic Diseases, Hyderabad, India, 2De- P0735. Different expression of the P369S mutation in the MEFV partment of Genetics, Delhi University, New Delhi, India, 3National Institute for gene in the Armenian population Mentally Handicapped, Secunderabad, India. H. Hayrapetyan, T. Sarkisian, A. Egiazaryan, A. Arakelyan; Fragile X syndrome (FRAX) is one of the main causes of mental retar- Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia. dation. It is caused mainly by dynamic expansions at FMR1 (FRAXA) Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is the most prevalent hereditary and FMR2 (FRAXE) genes at Xq27.3 and Xq 28. In agreement with inflammatory disorder with diverse clinical presentation. The identifica- the polymorphism of the CGG/CCG repeats and the methylation sta- tion of MEFV gene mutations causing the disease have provided an tus of the gene, the FRAXA and FRAXE alleles can be divided into important laboratory tool that helps in the diagnosis of FMF and per- three categories; normal (2-60), premutation (60-200) and full mutation haps in understanding its heterogeneous clinical presentation. (>200). Screening of healthy controls in Armenian population for MEFV muta- A total of 203 individuals (194 males; 9 females) with MR of unknown tions compared with the distribution of the mutations in the patients, etiology, were analyzed for the expansion and also for the polymor- has shown that P369S mutation is the most common in the normal phism at FMR1 and FMR2 genes. Radioactive-PCR and southern population (4.9%) but is less frequently represented in the patients blotting using Stb12.3 (for FRAXA) and Oxe20.0 (for FRAXE) were (0.1%). This suggests a reduced penetrance of P369S. employed in analyzing the patients. 5 males did not show amplifica- Among 250 controls we detected 10 genotypes with P369S complex tion for FRAXA allele because of the full mutation. These were again Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 confirmed by southern blot analysis. Therefore, a total of 207 and 212 P0740. Investigation for point mutations on different parts of X-chromosomes were analyzed for the CGG repeat number in FRAXA Mitochondrial DNA, relating to adjunct of pathogenesis of FRDA, and GCC repeats in FRAXE respectively. The most frequent FRAXA on 20 Iranian patients with Friedreich‘s ataxia allele size was 29 CGG repeats (25.6%). 28 repeat containing alleles S. EtemadAhari1, S. Kasraie1, M. Houshmand1, M. Moin2, M. Shafa Shariat were the next frequent (16.9 %) allele. A total of 25 FRAXA allelic Panahi1; variants from 11-45 CGG repeats were observed. The most frequent 1Department of Medical genetics, National Research Center of Genetic En- FRAXE allele size had 15 GCC repeats (24.1%) followed by allele con- gineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Im- taining 18 repeats (18.3%). A total of 20 FRAXE allelic variants from munology, Asthma & Allergy Research Institute, Tehran, Iran., Tehran, Islamic 4-31 GCC repeats were observed. Our study revealed frequency of Republic of Iran. FRAXA to be 2.5% and FRAXE to be 0% indicating the absence or Friedreich’s ataxia (FA,FRDA) is the most common inherited ataxia. rarity of FRAXE mutation in our population. Clinically, FRDA is characterized by multiple symptoms including pro- gressive gait and limb ataxia, dysarthria, diabetes mellitus, and hyper- P0738. FRAXA locus investigation of mentally retarded patients trophic cardiomyopathy. The gene defective in FRDA, encodes a mi- Z. Daneberga1,2, Z. Krumina1, B. Lace1, D. Bauze1, N. Pronina1, R. Lugovska1; tochondrial protein known as frataxin. A triplet repeat expansion within 1Medical Genetic Clinic, University Children`s Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga intron 1 of the FRDA gene results in a marked decrease in frataxin Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. expression.There is much evidence to suggest that FRDA results from Mutations at FRAXA locus on distal Xq may cause mental impairment. mitochondrial iron accumulation leading to cellular damage and death Most common mutation at FRAXA locus is expansion of CGG triplet by the production of toxic free radicals by Fenton chemistry. Due to repeats located in the 5‘-untranslated region of the fragile X mental the important role of the mitochondria and considering the clinical retardation-1 (FMR1) gene. The expanded CGG triplet repeats are hy- symptoms of FRDA, failure in ATP production and presence of free permethylated and the expression of the FMR1 gene is repressed in radicals in mitochondria of patients with FRDA we are analyzing differ- patients with fragile X syndrome (FXS), which leads to the absence of ent parts of mtDNA; MT-ATP8 , MT-ATP6, and highly mutative genes FMR1 protein (FMRP) and subsequent mental retardation (MR). Nor- like; MT-LTI , MT-NDI, MT-COII, MT-TK, in 20 Iranian FRDA patients mal alleles vary from 6 to 50 CGG repeats. Intermediate alleles 45 to find any probable point mutation by PCR method and automated - 55 repeats, premutation alleles 59 - 200 repeats, full mutation greater DNA sequence that can be involved as an adjunct in the pathogenesis than approximately 200 repeats (methylated). of FRDA The group of 292 unrelated patients with MR referred from clinical ge- neticists was screened by PCR for a normal allele. For 179 chromo- P0741. Hypomethylation is restricted to the D4Z4 repeat array in somes CGG repeats number was detected by Applied Biosystems pro- phenotypic FSHD tocol on ABI Prism 310. The prevalence of 29, 30 and 31 CGG repeats J. C. de Greef1, M. Wohlgemuth2, O. A. Chan1, K. B. Hansson3, D. Smeets4, R. were found. Five affected patients were detected (1.71%). The final R. Frants1, C. M. Weemaes5, G. W. Padberg2, S. M. van der Maarel1; diagnosis of FXS confirmed by Southern blotting. In four FXS families 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, we found 4 females permutation carriers, 3 females with full mutation, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, Radboud University 3 affected males with full mutation, 1 affected mosaic male. All permu- Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Clinical Cytogenetics tated and mutated alleles in FXS families were associated with single Laboratory, LDGA, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) ATL1 allele G. 4Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen- 105 chromosomes of patients with normal CGG repeats number were ter, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University analyzed for ATL1 SNP. For 62% of analyzed chromosomes ATL1 al- Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. lele A was found. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is an autosomal The estimation of STR-based haplotype structure for further investiga- dominant myopathy affecting predominantly the muscles of the face, tion of Latvian FXS patients and their families are in progress. shoulder and upper arm. Most FSHD patients show a contraction of the D4Z4 repeat array in the subtelomere of chromosome 4q. This P0739. GAA repeat expansion-associated DNA methylation contraction is associated with significant allele-specific hypomethyl- changes in Friedreich ataxia ation of the repeat, suggestive for a chromatin restructuring at 4qter in S. Al-Mahdawi, O. Ismail, D. Varshney, S. Lymperi, R. Mouro Pinto, M. A. FSHD. Hypomethylation of D4Z4 is also observed in phenotypic FSHD Pook; patients without D4Z4 contraction and in patients suffering from the Brunel University, Uxbridge, United Kingdom. immunodeficiency, centromeric instability and facial anomalies (ICF) Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenera- syndrome, an unrelated disorder that does not present with muscular tive disorder that is primarily caused by a GAA repeat expansion mu- dystrophy and is in part caused by mutations in the DNMT3B gene. In tation within intron 1 of the FXN gene, leading to a decreased level order to identify the gene defect in phenotypic FSHD and to unravel of frataxin protein expression. The mechanism by which this mutation the pathogenic epigenetic pathway in FSHD, we have aimed to iden- acts is currently unknown, but two models have been put forward. tify the differences and commonalities in phenotypic FSHD and the Firstly, it has been suggested that the GAA repeat expansion may ICF syndrome by (1) investigation of DNA methylation of non-D4Z4 re- adopt an abnormal triplex structure that interferes with FXN gene tran- peat arrays, (2) analysis of mitogen-stimulated lymphocytes to detect scription. Secondly, there is evidence that the GAA repeat expansion pericentromeric abnormalities involving chromosomes 1, 9 and 16, (3) is associated with epigenetic changes, such as DNA methylation and determination of IgA, IgG and IgM levels and (4) mutational analysis modification of histones, producing a heterochromatin-mediated gene of candidate genes to identify a second disease locus involved in the silencing effect. pathogenesis of phenotypic FSHD. Our results do not show epigenetic In support of this second hypothesis, we have recently obtained data or phenotypic commonalities between phenotypic FSHD and ICF other that shows increased DNA methylation of specific CpG sites immedi- than the earlier observed D4Z4 hypomethylation, suggesting that phe- ately upstream of the expanded GAA repeat sequence in FRDA pa- notypic FSHD is not caused by a defect in the same molecular path- tient autopsied brain tissue, compared with non-GAA repeat expansion way as ICF. We neither could identify any mutations in the candidate containing brain tissue. In contrast, no such changes were identified in genes tested for. the FXN promoter region. We have also identified similar DNA methyl- ation increases in brain and heart tissues from our recently established P0742. Comprehensive mutation analysis in a clinically well GAA repeat expansion-containing FXN YAC transgenic mouse model, defined cohort of patients with exudative vitreoretinopathy. compared with similar non-GAA repeat expansion FXN YAC transgen- L. H. Hoefsloot1, C. E. van Nouhuys2, N. Boonstra3, J. Schuil3, I. J. de Wijs1, ic mice. These studies will be detailed, together with our more recent K. P. van der Donk1, K. Nikopoulos1, A. Mukhopadhyay1, H. Scheffer1, M. A. D. investigations to identify potential GAA repeat expansion-associated Tilanus4, F. P. M. Cremers1; changes in methylation and acetylation of histones at the FXN locus. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen- Such epigenetic studies to identify the potential GAA repeat expansion tre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Canisius Wil- mechanism of action will provide valuable information for novel FRDA helmina Hospital, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Bartimeus Institute for the Visu- therapies. ally Impaired, Zeist, The Netherlands, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 1 University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. is reminiscent of Vohwinkel’s disease. Using fluorescent fusion pro- Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR) is a hereditary disorder teins, we show that the mutation causes a transport defect similar to characterized by vitroretinal pathology. Retinal exudates, retinal neo- that found for the Vohwinkel syndrome mutation D66H. vascularisation, retinal folds and retinal detachment as well as vitre- ous haemorrhage have been described to occur in the first decade of P0745. Genetic polymorphism of glutathione-S-transferase T1 life. The disease is slowly progressive, with in the terminal stages of and M1 in the newborns with neonatal syndromes in Ukrainian severely affected eyes a chronic retinal detachment, leading to total population blindness. To date, 3 genes and 1 locus have been described. FZD4 N. Gorovenko, Z. Rossokha, S. Podolskaya; mutations were found in patients with autosomal dominant EVR. X- National Medical Academy of Post-Graduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine. linked EVR is caused by mutations in NDP, and LRP5 mutations can The more recent discovery suggested the physiological role glutathi- be inherited both automal dominant as well as autosomal recessive. one-S-transferases (GSTs) in protecting against chronic diseases that The EVR3 (605750) locus maps to 11p12-p13. In a series of 30 spo- arise from oxidative tissue damage. The development of the neonatal radic patients and dominant families, we analysed the involvement of syndromes are connected with perinatal hypoxia. The functional al- the NDP, FZD4 and LRP5 genes by sequence analysis. We found in lele of these genes may protect from hypoxia and the risk of neonatal one patient a mutation in the NDP gene. Mutations in the FZD4 gene syndromes. were found in approximately 30% of the patients and families, (9/30), Material and methods: We conducted a case-control study of 117 cas- with the c.957G>A (p.Trp319X) mutation as the most frequent muta- es of severe perinatal pathology with neonatal syndromes, such as: tion (5/30). The analysis of LRP5 revealed a mutation in one family, perinatal damage of the central nervous system, respiratory distress and an alteration of unknown pathogenicity in another. Careful clinical syndrome, necrotizing enterocolitis, neonatal jaundice and 70 control evaluation of the patients will lead to determination of a possible rela- group (clinical healthy newborns). Genetic polymorphism of GSTT1 tionship between phenotype and genotype in this cohort. Furthermore, and GSTM1 were detected by multiplex polymerase chain reaction families without a mutation in one of the known genes, will help to (PCR). Differences in these groups were assessed by χ2 analyses. identify new loci for FEVR. Results: In our investigation an increased significant frequency of GSTT1“-“ genotypes among neonates with perinatal pathologies P0743. Molecular Identification of Mutations in G6PD Gene in (29,91%) compared to newborns in the control group (12,86%), χ2 Patients in Kerman and Yazd Provinces of Iran. =6.17, P<0.05 was observed. There as no significant difference be- M. Noori-Daloii; tween the polymorphism of GSTM1 genotype in two groups. The rate Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of of GSTT1“-“ / GSTM1“-“ allelic combination was also significantly in- Medical Sciences Tehran,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. creased in the neonates with severe perinatal pathologies and neona- Glucose- 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is a housekeeping en- tal syndromes (17,09%) compared to newborns in the control group zyme and its gene is located on the Xq28 region of X chromosome. (2,86%), χ2 =7.24, P<0.01. Conclusion: Our investigations have shown G6PD deficiency is one of the most common inherited disorders of associations between GSTT1 „-“ genotype, combination of GSTT1“- mankind affecting more than 400 million people worldwide. The main “ / GSTM1“-“ genotypes in newborns and increased risk of perinatal clinical manifestations are neonatal jaundice and acute hemolytic. pathologies in newborns. Thus determining the factors of inheritance More than 130 mutations and 400 biochemical variants have been re- predisposition in the neonates can allow to predict the risk of neonatal ported. Since, the variants including Mediterranean, G6PDA- and Cha- syndromes. tham are reported in all over the world, and among them Mediterra- nean variant is the most common, also in Arabic countries and Persian P0746. The -3440 C->A variant in the gtPBREM region of the Gulf, in this study, we investigated Mediterranean, Chatham, Cozenza UGT1A1 gene enhances gene expression. and A- mutations in the central areas of Iran. The extracted DNA from M. Rosatelli1, D. Corda1, V. Faa’2, F. Incani1, G. Ibba1, M. Masala1, A. Cao2, A. 119 patients with history of favism was analyzed by polymerase chain Meloni2; reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) 1Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Cagliari, Italy, 2Istituto di for above mutations. The results determined that, from the total 119 Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, CNR, Cagliari, Italy. samples, 41 samples from state of Kerman (63%) and 35 samples Gilbert, Crigler-Najjar Type I and II Syndromes are characterized by from state of Yazd (64%) hence a total of 63.86% had G6PD Mediter- unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia caused by molecular defects of the ranean and 2 from each states had G6PD Chatham (3.36%). Cosenza UGT1A1 gene codifying for the UGT1A1 enzyme. CN1 syndrome is and A- mutation were not observed. G6PD Mediterranean was the the most severe form characterized by complete absence of UGT1A1 commonest mutation in Iran and the most of other countries in tropi- enzyme activity and serum bilirubin levels of 540-850 μm/l. CN2 syn- cal and subtropical areas. The frequency of Chatham was the second drome, less severe, presents intermediate levels of hyperbilirubinae- minimum in Central provinces in comparison with others in Iran. The mia and the UGT1A1 enzyme can be induced by Phenobarbital ad- Major ethnic groups in this region are Fars, Arab Turk and minorities of ministration. Mild hyperbilirubinaemia is associated with Gilbert Syn- Kurd. For unknown samples other Methods such as SSCP and DNA drome due to the presence of the TA7 or TA8 repeat at the promoter sequencing are using to determine other mutations. sequence A(TA)6TAA. Recently, the gtPBREM enhancer module of the human UGT1A1 was characterized, which is activated by nuclear P0744. A new Vohwinkel-like disease is caused by a novel receptors such as CAR and PXR in response to xenobiotics. A -3279 missense mutation in GJB2 T->G mutation in the gtPBREM region led to hyperbilirubinaemia. In M. A. M. Van Steensel1, E. de Zwart-Storm1, H. Hamm2, M. van Geel1; this study, we analyzed a polymorphic variant located at position -3440 1University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2University of Würzburg, C->A of the gtPBREM flanking the PXR binding site which is not com- Würzburg, Germany. mon in the general population but highly frequent in Sardinia. To test Gap junctions are intercellular channels that mediate rapid intercel- the functional consequences of the -3440 variant, we quantified the lular communication. They consist of connexins, small transmembrane transactivation activity of the variant in epatic cells. We also evaluated proteins that belong to a large family found throughout the animal king- if the PXR receptor could bind to the consensus sequence after Rifam- dom. In the skin, several connexins are expressed and are involved in picine treatment. These experiments demonstrated that the -3440 vari- the regulation of epidermal growth and differentiation. The gap junction ant does not modify PXR’s binding capacity and shows a prominent gene GJB2, that codes for the protein connexin26, is highly expressed transactivation activity compared to the wild type sequence. The -3440 in the epidermis and is associated with a wide variety of diseases, variant could balance the reduced activity of UGT1A1 due to presence showing a strong genotype-phenotype correlation. Despite extensive of the TA7 allele and would explain the asymptomatic phenotype of research in the past few years, this phenomenon is poorly understood. patients with the (TA)7/(TA)7 genotype. The identification of novel diseases caused by mutations in GJB2 may help to shed light on its strong genotype-phenotype correlation and help elucidate the function of different parts of the protein. Here, we report on a novel GJB2 mutation that causes a syndrome of focal pal- moplantar keratoderma with sensorineural deafness, a phenotype that Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 200 P0747. Functional analysis of 14 GLB1 mutant alleles found in P0749. The GP IIb gene expression, Ile843Ser GP IIb gene GM1-gangliosidosis and Morquio B patients polymorphism, glycoprotein IIb-IIIa number and platelet R. Santamaria1,2, A. Chabás3,4, L. Vilageliu1,2, D. Grinberg1,2; aggregation in healthy donors 1Dept. Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, ISC O. V. Sirotkina1, A. M. Zabotina1, E. L. Zheleznjak1, A. N. Stolyarova1, T. V. III, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 3Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Barcelona, Spain, Vavilova2; 4CIBERER, ISC III, Barcelona, Spain. 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute Russian Academy of Science, Saint-Pe- GM1-gangliosidosis and Morquio B disease are lysosomal storage tersburg, Russian Federation, 2Mechnikov State Medical Academy, Saint-Pe- disorders caused by β-galactosidase deficiency due to mutations in tersburg, Russian Federation. the GLB1 gene. Three major clinical forms of GM1-gangliosidosis Platelet hyperaggregation is a risk factor for coronary thrombosis and have been established on the basis of age of onset and severity of platelet GPIIb-IIIa receptor plays a key role in this process. It’s known symptoms: infantile, late infantile/juvenile and adult. All these subtypes that the Leu33Pro GPIIIa gene mutation and quantity of the GPIIb- share a different degree of psychomotor retardation with neurologi- IIIa receptors are associated with high aggregation. In our study the cal involvement and high amounts of ganglioside GM1 storage. On GPIIb gene expression, Ile843Ser GPIIb gene polymorphism and their the other hand, Morquio B disease is characterized by progressive, effect on the GPIIb-IIIa number or platelet activity were investigated. generalized skeletal dysplasia without central nervous system involve- We formed a group of 57 volunteers (21-54 years) and analyzed the ment and no clinical signs of storage disease in neuronal tissues. β- Ile843Ser GPIIb by PCR-RFLP technique, the GPIIb gene expression galactosidase is a lysosomal enzyme that cleaves β-galactoses from (level of mRNA from 10 donors) by RT-PCR using the TaqMan assay different substrates such as ganglioside GM1, keratan sulfate or gly- in ABI Prism 7000 Sequence detection System, cDNA prepared from copeptides. total RNA isolated from platelets, ADP-induced platelet aggregation Our group had previously identified different GLB1 mutations in GM1- by photometric method and the GPIIb-IIIa number per platelet by flow gangliosidosis and Morquio B patients. In the present work some of cytometry with mAB. We revealed 17 carriers of IleIle genotype, 30 these mutations were heterologously expressed and the resulting mu- carriers of IleSer genotype and 10 - SerSer genotype. The GPIIb-IIIa tated proteins characterized by residual enzyme activity and Western numbers varied from 40500 to 82700 per platelet and the GPIIb mRNA blot analysis. In vitro expression was performed by transfecting COS-7 levels were widely varied too - from 1,6 to 15,6. However no correlation cells with plasmids bearing the different mutant GLB1 cDNAs. Twelve between these parameters was found may be because small analyz- mutations and 2 functional polymorphisms (p.R521C and p.S532G) ing group. The Ile843Ser GPIIb gene polymorphism didn’t influence were studied. Ten of these changes had not been expressed before. the GPIIb mRNA level. But the 843Ser allele was associated with high- Mutations causing the infantile form of GM1-gangliosidosis resulted in er velocity of aggregation - 56.8±6.4%/min vr. 39.2±3.2%/min in IleIle the complete absence of the enzyme activity, whereas mutations asso- carriers (p=0.04). The platelet activity also depended on the GPIIb-IIIa ciated with the milder forms of the disease resulted in a great reduction number (Spearman correlation R from 0.4 to 0.5 for ADP 1.2μM and of the enzyme activity. The two polymorphisms showed only a partial 2.5μM, p<0.005). In conclusion, the impact of the GPIIb gene expres- reduction of the activity. Therefore, in most cases a good correlation sion on platelet function deserves further investigation. between residual activity and phenotype could be established. P0750. Functional characterization and proteome analysis of P0748. PATCHED mutations and the Nevoid Basal Cell synaptic endings in the crv mouse, a spontaneous model for Carcinoma Syndrome: clues to an active participation of dermal hereditary ataxia affecting metabotropic glutamate receptor 1. fibroblasts in the Basal Cell Carcinoma development V. Conti1,2, L. Musante2,3, V. Musante4, F. Piccardi5, J. L. Guenet6, G. Candiano3, A. Valin1, S. Barnay-Verdier1, F. Brellier2, O. Chevallier-Lagente1, P. Gorry3, M. R. Ravazzolo1,7, A. Pittaluga4, A. Puliti1,7; Avril4, T. Magnaldo1; 1Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Unit, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 1Laboratoire Génomes et Cancers - CNRS FRE 2939, Institut Gustave Roussy, 2RenalChild Foundation, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 3Laboratory on France, 2Friederich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzer- Pathophysiology of Uremia, Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 4Dept. of Experi- land, 3Laboratoire d’Oncologie Génétique, Institut Bergonié, France, 4Service mental Medicine, University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 5Animal Models Facility, de Dermatologie, Hopital Tarnier, France. Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy, 6Pasteur Institute, The Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) or Gorlin syn- Paris, France, 7Dept. of Pediatric Sciences “G. De Toni”, University of Genova, drome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder due to germinal mutations Genova, Italy. in the PATCHED tumor suppressor gene. NBCCS patients present de- A mouse mutant recently described by our group, crv4, carries an LTR velopmental defects and a high predisposition to Basal Cell Carcinoma intronic insertion which disrupts splicing of type 1 metabotropic gluta- (BCC). BCC is the commonest cancer in adult human. Increasing evi- mate receptor (Grm1) gene and causes absence of the protein. crv4 dences have revealed the contribution of the stroma in tumorigenesis. homozygous mice present mainly with an ataxic phenotype. Hereditary Stromal dependency of BCC cells seems of particular interest provid- ataxias may be caused by mutations in different genes and, although ed the virtually null metastatic potential of this tumor and the incapac- no Grm1 mutations have been reported in human so far, emerging evi- ity of BCC cells to grow in vitro. In order to define the influence of the dence indicate as glutamate signaling from Grm1 plays an important stroma cells in the BCC proneness phenotype of NBBCS patients, we role in ataxia pathophysiology. cultured primary fibroblasts and keratinocytes from NBCCS patients. Grm1 is involved in synaptic plasticity, indeed it has been suggested to Using these cells we set up a system of organotypic skin cultures, al- control presynaptic glutamate release thus modulating synaptic func- lowing us to study the consequences of PATCHED mutations in mes- tion. enchyme-epithelium interactions. The presence of NBCCS fibroblasts We characterized the functional effects of Grm1 mutation in the crv4 induced a delayed and reduced expression of epidermal differentia- mice at presynaptic level and investigated expression profiles of pro- tion markers, while paradoxically, a decrease of the Ki67 proliferation teins in tissues (cerebral cortex, hippocampus and cerebellar cortex) marker was observed in overlaying normal and NBCCS keratinocytes. critical for pathways involving Grm1. These observations strongly suggest that NBCCS fibroblasts alter By using cortical synaptosomes in experimental conditions known to the proliferation/differentiation balance of keratinocytes. To further permit the selective activation of Grm1, we have confirmed the ex- document the implication of NBCCS dermal fibroblasts in mechanisms istence of presynaptic Grm1 in mouse cortical nerve endings whose leading to BCC development, we performed a whole genome microar- activation potentiates the release of glutamate evoked by depolarizing ray assay using mRNA from NBCCS and normal fibroblasts cultured stimuli. in a tri-dimensional collagen dermal equivalent. Results of this screen, Then, we have demonstrated that the crv4 mutation abolishes this pre- sustained by Q-RTPCR, WB and ELISA analyses, show that NBCCS synaptic positive control of glutamate release from synaptosomes. The fibroblasts over-express proteins involved in the tumorigenesis pro- loss of the auto−regulatory mechanism in crv4 mice may affect the cess such as the pro-tumoral Matrix Metalloproteinase 3. glutamate amount in the biophase and glutamate−mediated regula- tion of synaptic events contributing to the development of the affected phenotype. Finally, we compared total synaptic proteins (proteome) obtained from synaptosomes of crv4 homozygous and control mice by the 2D-DIGE Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 201 technique to define key molecules involved in Grm1 mediated synaptic tify additional proteins that may interact and thus regulate PLN, we activity. screened an adult human cardiac cDNA library using the yeast two- hybrid system. P0751. Molecular studies on chromosome 9p haploinsufficiency We identified HS-1 associated protein X-1 (HAX-1), a ubiquitously ex- and DMRT1 gene mutations in 46,XY patients with gonadal pressed mitochondrial protein with anti-apoptotic function, as a new dysgenesis PLN-binding partner. The minimal binding regions were mapped to M. P. De Mello1, F. B. Coeli1, J. G. Assumpção2, T. M. Castro1, A. T. Maciel- amino acids 203-245 for HAX-1 and 16-22 for PLN. GST pull-down Guerra3, A. P. Marques-de-Faria3, M. T. M. Baptista4, G. Guerra-Jr5; and in vitro binding assays confirmed the direct interaction between 1Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Campinas, Brazil, PLN and HAX-1, while kinetic studies determined a K of ~1μM as the D 2Centro Infantil Boldrini, Campinas, Brazil, 3Departamento de Genética Médica, binding affinity of the protein complex. The interaction was found to be Campinas, Brazil, 4Departamento de Clínca Médica, Campinas, Brazil, 5Centro modulated by PLN phosphorylation and changes in Ca2+ concentra- de Investigação em Pediatria, Campinas, Brazil. tion. Moreover, SERCA2a was also detected in the pull down samples, SRY gene is responsible for testis determining in mammals. Among suggesting that HAX-1 forms part of the PLN/SERCA2a complex. Im- patients with gonadal dysgenesis (GD), only 15-20% presents an in- munofluorescence studies localized HAX-1 to the mitochondria. How- activating mutation in SRY coding region. It is well known that 9p chro- ever, in the presence of PLN, HAX-1 redistributed and co-localized at mosomal deletion can cause sex reversal in 46,XY individuals. In the the endoplasmic reticulum. Importantly, the anti-apoptotic function of present study, 9p haploinsufficiency was invstigated using five different HAX-1 was found to be enhanced in the presence of PLN, indicating 9p microsatellites: D9S1779, D9S1858, D9S143, D9S54, D9S1813. an important role of the PLN/HAX-1 interaction in cell survival, pos- Were included thirty-three SRY-normal non-related patients and seven sibly through the regulation of SR Ca2+-homeostasis and consequent 46,XY individuals of a family, three with GD (one complete and two mitochondrial Ca2+ redistribution. partial), the father and three normal siblings all of them bearing the R30I SRY mutation. Homo- or hemizygosis for five and four loci was P0754. Mutation analysis of the GJB2 gene in Latvian patients observed in one and two patients, respectively. The three affected in- with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss dividuals of the family bore identical 9p genotype, which was different O. Sterna1, N. Pronina1, I. Grinfelde1, S. Kuske2, A. Krumina3, R. Lugovska1; from normal individuals in the sibling. DMRT1 gene maps to 9p24.3 1Medical Genetics clinics, Latvian State Childrens` Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 22Lat- within the sex reversal region on 9p. The DMRT1 g.133T>A nucleotide vian Childrens` Hearing centre, Riga, Latvia, 3Riga Stradins University, Riga, change was observed in 24 T/T homozygous and in 9 T/A heterozy- Latvia. gous patients. This results in S45T mutation but is considered a neu- Mutations in the GJB2 gene at the DFNB1 locus on chromosome tral SNP (rs3739583). Interestingly, the A allele is the most frequent in 13q11-q12 have been established to be the major cause of nonsyn- four out of five populations deposited in database, whereas this study dromic sensorineural hearing impairment (NSHI) in different popula- showed frequencies of 76% and 23% for T and A, respectively. The tions. Up to date there are reported 110 different GJB2 mutations.One g.52198T>C and g.52308C>T variations in exon 3 were detected in particular frame shift mutation named 35delG is the most prevalent in one patient; both are rare SNPs. Finally, a new 3’UTR g.126313insT the populations of the Caucasian origin. was found in a heterozygous patient. The involvement of those SNPs The aim of our work was to investigate the prevalence of the GJB2 on either function or expression of DMRT1 must be investigated to gene mutations within Latvian NSHI individuals from 41 families. All confirm them as causing DG. samples were screened for 35delG mutation using RFLP method. Re- maining GJB2 mutations were identified by the direct sequencing. P0752. Borate transporter SLC4A11 mutations cause both Four different mutations in the GJB2 gene have been identified in Lat- Harboyan syndrome and non-syndromic corneal endothelial vian patients with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss: 35delG, dystrophy 311-324del14, 235delC and M34T. J. Desir, G. Moya, O. Reish, N. Van Regemorter, H. Deconinck, K. L. David, F. The most prevalent mutation in patients with NSHI in Latvia is 35delG M. Meire, M. Abramowicz; (62% of all probands are homozygotes for this mutation). Frequency of Medical Genetics Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium. 311-324del14 mutation is 7%, but 235delC and M34T mutations were Harboyan syndrome (CDPD) consists of congenital corneal endothe- found in 2% of patients. lial dystrophy and progressive perceptive deafness and is transmit- ted as an autosomal recessive trait. CDPD and autosomal recessive, P0755. Integrated approach to the study of Congenital Heart non-syndromic congenital hereditary endothelial corneal dystrophy Diseases (CHED2) both map at overlapping loci at 20p13, and mutations of A. Baban1, M. Marini1, G. Trocchio2, M. Lerone1, M. Di Duca3, G. Gimelli1, M. SLC4A11 were recently reported in CHED2. We here report genotype Pelegrini4, G. Pongigliono4, R. Ravazzolo1; studies in six families with CDPD and one family with either CHED or 1Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Unit,, Genoa, Italy, 2Cardiology Unit, CDPD, from various ethnic backgrounds (in the seventh families hear- Genoa, Italy, 3Laboratory of Nephrology, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Genoa, ing loss could not be assessed because of the proband’s young age). Italy, 4Cardiology Unit, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy. We found novel SLC4A11 mutations in all patients. Why some muta- This study is part of a research project financed by the European Com- tions cause hearing loss in addition to corneal dystrophy is presently munity (Health-e-Child, Contract n°: IST-2004-027749), that involves unclear. Our findings extend the implication of the SLC4A11 borate three Pediatric European Centers. It foresees vertical integration of transporter beyond corneal dystrophy to perceptive deafness. epidemiological, clinical, radiological, laboratory, biological, and ge- netic data. P0753. HAX-1 is a new interacting protein of phospholamban The study includes congenital heart diseases that lead to Right Ven- and a novel regulator of calcium homeostasis and cardiac cell tricular Overload (RVO): Atrial Septal Defects (ASD), Post-operative survival Tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) and Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Return E. Vafiadaki1, D. Sanoudou1, D. A. Arvanitis1, D. H. Catino2, E. G. Kranias3,1, A. (APVR). The study aims to collecting the following data : Kontrogianni-Konstantopoulos2; -Clinical Evaluation: demographic information, personal and family his- 1Foundation for Biomedical Research, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Physi- tory, family pedigree, and detailed physical examination. ology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Department of -Instrumental Evaluation: Electrocardiogram (ECG), Holter ECG, Sig- Pharmacology and Cell Biophysics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, nal-Averaged ECG, Chest X-ray, 2D and 3D echocardiography, tissue United States. doppler imaging, acoustic boundary detection, integrated backscatter, Phospholamban (PLN), a 52 amino acid transmembrane protein of color kinesis, transesophageal echocardiography and magnetic reso- the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), is a key regulator of Ca2+-homeo- nance imaging, cardiac catheterisation. stasis and contractility in the heart. Its regulatory effects are mediated -Chromosomal analysis by standard karyotyping; through its interaction with the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase, -In case of normal karyotype, screening of three candidate genes (SERCA2a), resulting in alterations of its Ca2+-affinity. Impaired SR (GATA4, TBX5 e NKX2.5), known to be fundamental for normal car- Ca2+ cycling is a characteristic of human heart failure and mutations diac development and function. in PLN have been associated with dilated cardiomyopathy. To iden- -The negativity of the previously mentioned tests make the patient can-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 202 didate for CGH array. P0758. High throughput Genotyping: New Diagnostic During this initial phase of application of the diagnostic protocol, we Resequencing Microarray for Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia have identified a mutation in the TBX5 gene in a patient who was previ- C. Dufke1, R. Schüle2, A. Seibel2, M. Bonin3, S. Poths3, P. Bauer1, L. Schöls2; ously considered to be affected with isolated ToF. The mutation leads 1Institute of Human Genetics, Tübingen, Germany, 2Hertie-Institute für Klinische to aminoacid substitution of arginine into a stop codon (R279X). Care- Hirnforschung, Tübingen, Germany, 3The Microarray Facility, Tübingen, Ger- ful physical examination of the patient showed subtle hand malforma- many. tion in form of long first metacarpal, that can coincide with Holt Oram Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (HSP) is a heterogenous group of inher- syndrome diagnosis. To the best of our knowledge this mutation has ited neurological disorders. Insidiously progressive spastic weakness never been associated with ToF phenotype. of the lower extremities is the common criteria in all 33 forms described so far. Autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive and X-linked mode P0756. Purple and Yellow. Hereditary Coproporphyria and of inheritance have been described. Clinically HSP is differentiated into Gilbert’s Syndrome in Czech Family. pure (uncomplicated) and complex (complicated) forms, depending on J. Prochazkova, L. Barnincova, M. Tomkova, J. Zeman, P. Martasek; isolated impairment of corticospinal tracts or more wide spread affec- Department of Pediatrics, 1st School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, tion of neuronal circuits or systemic involvement. Czech Republic. For proper diagnosis moleculargenetic analysis is fundamental since Hereditary coproporphyria is a rare acute hepatic porphyria with auto- clinical parameters alone are not reliable in distinguishing HSP forms. somal dominant inheritance characterized by deficient activity of cop- In order to establish high throughput genotyping, we designed a HSP roporphyrinogen III oxidase (CPO). The gene encoding human CPO resequencing microarray (Affymetrix platform) covering the coding ex- has been cloned and localized to chromosome 3q11.2. The CPO gene ons and flanking intronic sequences of the HSP genes L1CAM (SPG1), spans 14 kb and has a single promoter and seven exons. The cDNA PLP1 (SPG2), Atlastin (SPG3A),Spastin (SPG4), NIPA1 (SPG6), Para- encodes a protein containing 354 amino acids. The enzyme is active plegin (SPG7), KIF5A (SPG10), HSP60 (SPG13), BSCL2 (SPG17), as a homodimer of 76 kDa. Spartin (SPG20), Maspardin (SPG21), Gilbert´s syndrome (GS) is a hereditary, autosomal recessive disorder (13 - 94kb, 5 - 28 coding exons), as well as the 59 most frequent small with mild, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. In Caucasian patients, Gil- deletions, insertions and insertion/deletions in these genes. bert’s syndrome is linked primarily with a TA insertion in the TATA box We present data on microarray analysis of 20 autosomal dominant promoter of the UGT1A1 gene, most frequently present as A(TA)7TAA HSP index patients. rather than A(TA)6TAA. In this study, we report on patient with hereditary coproporphyria asso- P0759. Elucidating the molecular function of Zfyve27, the gene ciated with Gilbert´s syndrome. Molecular diagnosis of the regulation mutated in hereditary spastic paraplegia (SPG33) region of the UGT1A1 gene showed a TA insertion in the promoter. A. U. Mannan, K. Pantakani, W. Engel; Analysis of the CPO gene revealed a small deletion of 3 bp at nucleo- Institute of Human Genetics, Goettingen, Germany. tide 1168 (390delGly) in exon 5. This deletion removes glycine without Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are a group of neurodegenera- altering the coding frame. Mutational analyses were carried out on six- tive disorders, which are clinically characterized by progressive spastic teen members of proband’s family. paralysis of the legs, usually caused by a length-dependent distal de- Supported by MSMT 1M6837805002, MSMT 0021620806, GACR generation of the corticospinal tract axons. HSP are genetically hetero- 303/03/H065 geneous and till now 35 loci have been identified. Recently, we report- ed a mutation in a novel endosomal protein ZFYVE27 (SPG33) in a P0757. Analysis of connexin 32 gene (GJB1, Cx32) in the German family with autosomal dominant HSP. ZFYVE27 was identified hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) patients from as a spastin interacting protein and we have characterized the interac- Bashkortostan tion between these two proteins in mammalian cells. Moreover, our E. G. Latypova1, I. M. Hidiyatova1, N. B. Krupina2, R. V. Magjanov2, E. K. Khus- studies revealed that the mutated ZFYVE27 protein shows aberrant nutdinova1; intracellular pattern in tubular structure of cells and its interaction with 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir spastin is severely affected. Intracellular distribution studies revealed State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. that ZFYVE27 is expressed in punctate vesicles which were both of Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) or Charcot-Ma- endosomal and endoplasmic reticulum origin. Furthermore, overex- rie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous pression of GFP-ZFYVE27 in fibroblast (NIH3T3) cell line, promoted disorder of peripheral nervous system. The HMSN frequency in Bash- neurite formation through directional membrane trafficking process. A kortostan Republic (BR , Russia, the territory of the South Urals) is comprehensive expression analysis of Zfyve27 through Western blot 10,3:100000. HMSN type I is prevalent in BR. In 104 unrelated HMSN revealed high level of Zfyve27 primarily in the HSP affected tissues in families gene PMP22 duplication screening was carried previously and mouse such as brain, cerebellum and spinal cord. To gain mechanis- obtained that this mutation frequency in BR is 20,63% for all types of tic insights in murine Zfyve27 function, currently, generation of loss of HMSN and 45,0% - for HMSN type I. function mouse models by using both gene-trap and knockout strategy In this investigation the searching of mutations in GJB1 gene in pa- are in progress.Conceivably the phenotype of these mouse models tients without PMP duplication (114 affected members from 77 un- might mimic the pathological features of HSP, therefore will provide related families) was carried.Two mutations and one polymorphism us with a valuable model system to elucidate the underlying cause for - Pro87Ala, Arg22Gln and 45G>A we determined using SSCP analysis HSP etiology. followed by sequencing of shifted samples. It turned out, that Pro87Ala mutation is frequent among HMSN patients from Bashkortostan, it was P0760. MLH1 promoter methylation in peripheral blood cells of revealed in 13 unrelated families, that amount 12,03% for all types of 12 patients clinically presenting HNPCC features HMSN and 20,63% - for HMSN type I. This mutation was the most fre- M. Grabowski1, H. K. Schackert2, N. Rahner3, M. Ebert4, C. Walldorf3, B. Roy- quent in patients of Bashkir ethnic origin (35% in Basckir patients), less er-Pokora5, B. Betz5, W. Schmiegel6, M. von Knebel-Doeberitz7, W. Dietmaier8, frequent - in Russian (10,8%) and Tatars (3,20%). Arg22Gln mutation G. Keller9, B. Kerker1, G. Leitner10, E. Holinski-Feder11; was defined in three patients from two families of Tatar ethnic origin 1Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Department of (2,77% for all patients from BR and 6,45% for Tatar patients without Chirurgic Research, University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 3Institute of HMSN type differentiation. Both found mutations were described previ- Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Hospital for Gastroen- ously, they cause the dominant form of HMSN type I with relatively mild terology and Hepatology, Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany, clinical features. The polymorphism 45G>A revealed in two unrelated 5Institute of Human Genetics, University of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, patients of Mordvinian ethnic origin, it was not describe earlier. 6Hospital of the University of Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 7Institute of Pathol- ogy, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 8Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 9Institute of Pathology, Uni- versity of Technology, Munich, Germany, 10Center of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany, 11Institute of Human Genetics, Ludwig-Maximilians-University/Center Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 20 of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany. wide spectrum of craniofacial malformations ranging from lethal forms Germline mutations in mismatch repair genes, tumors with high mi- (alobar HPE with cyclopia) to less severe forms such as lobar HPE crosatellite instability (MSI-H) and loss of protein expression are the and normal face. The aetiology is very heterogeneous involving envi- hallmarks of HNPCC or Lynch-Syndrome respectively. While involve- ronmental factors, chromosomal abnormalities and at least 7 genes. ment of somatic MLH1 promoter hypermethylation is accepted in tu- Since 1996, our team has started to work on the wide clinical and morigenesis of defferent sporadic tumors, abnormal germline MLH1 genetic variability of holoprosencephaly. Patient samples (foetuses promoter methylation is controversly discussed as a disease-predis- or children with normal karyotype) and clinical data (from HPE to mi- posing mechanism for HNPCC. croforms) were collected from medical teams in France and Europe. To clarify the MLH1 deficiency of 94 HNPCC suspected individuals Systematic mutation analysis and genomic rearrangements of the five with immunohistochemically MLH1-negative and MSI-H tumors but main genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF, GLI2) were performed. About without germline mutation in MLH1 or other mismatch repair genes, 19%sequence changes were identified among 350 DNA samples. we studied the methylation pattern in the MLH1 promoter region by The familial cases confirmed an extreme clinical variability. Then, mi- bisulphite conversion, methylation-specific PCR, and sequencing. crorearrangements were detected by QMPSF, MLPA and CGH array MLH1 promoter methylation in peripheral blood cells was found for (particularly in foetuses) improving the rate of molecular defects to a twelve patients displaying a HNPCC-phenotype with early-onset total of 30%. Several patients samples with 2 microdeletions and/or colorectal cancer and/or multiple neoplasias. The aberrant methyla- duplications were identified supporting multiple-hit hypothesis involv- tion was complete in all CpG dinucleotides analysed and displayed ing others genetics and/or environmental factors. We performed mo- allele-specifity in seven cases with a heterozygous SNP. The causality lecular prenatal diagnosis four times with foetal US scan and cerebral between a new promoter mutation and methylation in-cis in one case MRI screening. At last, we showed involvement of cerebral malforma- can not be ruled out. Peripheral blood cells as well as normal colonic tions as Aprosencephaly/Atelencephaly linked to SIX3 mutations and tissue, buccal mucosa, and tumor tissue available from three patients cerebellar hypoplasia to SHH gene. Pan-hypopituitarism and cleft lip/ presented the epigenetic MLH1 defect. Expression analysis revealed palate were associated with GLI2. This work has improved molecular monoallelic MLH1 expression and complete silencing in one case, in diagnosis in Holoprosencephaly and therefore genetic counselling. another case only partial silencing was found by signal reduction of one allele. P0763. Extented neonatal screening for homocystinuria in the Our findings confirm that abnormal MLH1 promoter methylation in nor- Qatari population mal body cells mimics HNPCC. The identification of hypermethylation T. I. M. M. Ben-Omran1, H. Gan-Schreier2, J. Fang-Hoffmann2, G. Abdoh1, as a pathogenic pre-lesion has definitive implications on surveillance N. Shahbek1, H. Al Rifai1, M. Lindner2, G. F. Hoffmann2, M. Kebbewar3, J. recommendations, while the heritability of methylation is questionable Zschocke3, J. Zschocke3, J. Zschocke3; and was not found in offspring of methylation-carriers. 1Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar, 2Department of Pediatrics & Insti- tute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 32Ruprecht-Karls-University, P0761. Hereditary Polyneuropathy with Liability to Pressure Heidelberg, Germany. (HNPP). Report of a case. Homocystinuria is an autosomal recessive disorder of methionine and P Vorgia 1, E. Papadopoulou1,2, G Amiridis 2, P Paspalaki 1, E Michailidou 1, homocysteine metabolism caused by a deficiency of cystathionine β- M Kalmanti 1; synthase . We previously reported that homocystinuria due to cystathi- 1Pediatric Department University Hospital, Iraklion Crete, Greece, 2Neurophysi- onine β-synthase deficiency is common in Qatar with an incidence of ology Laboratory University Hospital, Iraklion Crete, Greece. approx. 1:3000. As determinations of methionine in dried blood spots An 11 year old girl was referred for a neuropediatric consultation by (DBS) proved insensitive for neonatal screening, we developed a novel an orthopedist because of an acute right hand paresis after a minor two-tear strategy. To measure total homocysteine (Hcy) in DBS, a ro- traumatism while playing. The severity of the traumatism could not jus- bust, stable HPLC method with tandem mass spectrometry detection tify very well the paresis. The clinical evaluation revealed right ulnar is described, including all practical details and analytical performance and median nerve paresis and a milder left median nerve paresis as results. For mutation analysis, DNA was extracted from DBS and com- well. The rest of the neurological evaluation was normal. The girl was mon mutations R336C and D234N in the CBS gene were tested for admitted in our pediatric department for further investigations. Stan- only native Qatari. Both methods are suitable for processing a large dard hematological and biochemical control, VDRL, coagulation and number of samples. immunological investigations were all normal. Antibodies for Borrelia, We have analyzed 6597 newborns from Qatar, of which 2586 were of Mycoplasma, Rickettsias, and Hepatitis were normal. Only the title of Qatari origin. A total of 4 neonates with homocystinuria were identified. IgGs antibodies of Bartonella was elevated. Cerebral and Cervical All showed highly elevated Hcy concentrations in DBS whilst methio- MRI were also normal, but the neurophysiological investigations were nine was elevated in two neonates only. Three children were homozy- compatible for a polyneuropathy, especially for HNPP. HNPP is an gous for the common mutation R336C; follow-up sequence analysis autosomal dominant disorder characterized by recurrent entrapment in the fourth patient revealed homozygosity for mutation G347S, not neuropathies usually after minor traumatism. Her personal medical previously observed in the Qatari population. Metabolic screening of history was marked from an uncomplicated prematurity and asthma t-HCY in DBS appears to have 100 % sensitivity for the detection of well controlled but her mother suffered from a polyneuropathy the last classical homocystinuria and support a very high incidence of homo- 10 years. The clinical presentation of the patient, the positive family cystinuria in Qatar, possibly reaching up to 1:600 and caused by a high history and the results of the neurophysiological investigations were degree of consanguinity. Molecular neonatal screening is feasible but compatible for the diagnosis of HNPP. PCR analysis confirmed the metabolic screening appears to have a higher sensitivity for the detec- diagnosis by showing loss of PMP-22 gene. PMP-22 gene is the hall- tion of homocystinuria in Qatar. mark of HNPP. The child has completely recovered with physiotherapy in a month. The point of this case report is that a first peripheral nerve P0764. Partial hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase paresis after a minor traumatism could hide a much more complicated deficiency as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome variant - the first case diagnosis than a trivial traumatism. detected in Lithuania J. Songailienė1,2, A. Matulevičienė1, J. Bierau3, V. Kučinskas1,2, L. Spaapen3; P0762. Holoprosencephaly: 10 years of genetic study on 400 1Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariškių Clinics, patients Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of C. Dubourg1,2, L. Pasquier3, C. Bendavid1, C. Henry4, S. Jaillard4, I. Gicquel1, Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Department of Biochemical M. Durou2, V. David1,2, S. Odent1,3; Genetics, Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. 1UMR6061 CNRS, Rennes, France, 2Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Rennes, Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is a rare, X-linked recessive inheritable dis- France, 3Génétique Médicale, CHU, Rennes, France, 4Cytogénétique, CHU, order caused by a deficiency of the enzyme hypoxanthine-guanine Rennes, France. phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) (OMIM #300322). HPRT gene has Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common brain malformation been mapped to Xq26-q27 and more than 200 mutations responsible resulting from incomplete cleavage of the prosencephalon (1 out of for this disease have been characterised. Depending on the amount 16.000 live births; 1 out of 250 conceptuses). HPE is associated with a of residual enzyme activity the spectrum of the disease expression Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 20 is wide: from isolated hyperuricemia and gout, to hyperuricemia with Genome U133 Plus 2.0 2 arrays. Here we present initial results on the profound neurobehavioral dysfunction. Diagnosis could be made ac- molecular pathogenesis of the p.Lys542Asn LMNA mutation. cording to clinical symptoms, biochemical blood and urine test results, enzyme activity and molecular genetic testing. P0767. A Fourth Phenotype for Autosomal Dominant We present a patient with severe neurological symptoms and mild dys- Hypercholesterolemia morphism of phenotype. Our patient is a one year and eight months A. Marques, M. Abifadel, J. Bonneau, M. Devillers, D. Erlish, A. Munnich, C. old boy, first child of healthy non consanguineous parents. Pregnancy Junien, J. Rabes, C. Boileau, M. Varret; has been complicated .The genealogy of this family is uncomplicated. INSERM U781, paris, France. Patient’s development was normal till first five months. The phenotype Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH), characterized by is characterised by macrocephaly, thin upper lip and cryptorchism. isolated elevation of LDL-cholesterol, is associated with high risk of Muscle hypotonia with psychomotoric development delay and indiffer- premature cardiovascular disease. Three genes have already been ence to pain are observed. Clinical follow-up showed next findings: implicated : LDLR (low density lipoprotein receptor), APOB (apolipo- symptoms of frontal lobes atrophy and internal hydrocephaly (CT protein B-100) and PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilysin kexin-like scan), kidney ultrasound results without pathology. Laboratory in- 9). We now report a large French ADH family in which involvement of vestigations revealed increased serum uric acid, 0.5 mmol/l (normal these three genes was excluded and named the pathology HCHOLA4. range 0.13-0.23 mmol/l) and urinary uric acid, 6.3 mmol/mmol creat. Our aim is to identify the new disease gene and to define the associated (ref. < 2.1 mmol/mmol creat.). Moreover, increased amounts of urinary pathophysiology. A whole-genome scan, using 232 polymorphic micro- hypoxanthine, xanthine and inosine (195; 109; 10 µmol/mmol creat. satellite markers, located the HCHOLA4 gene at 16q22.1. Functional were found, respectively. Subsequently severely decreased of HPRT candidate genes in the critical interval were tested by sequencing but activity - 0.10 μmol/mmol Hb/hr (ref range 0.92-4.37) was detected in no causal mutation was detected. In vivo kinetics of apolipoprotein B- lysed erythrocytes. This led to diagnosis of HPRT deficiency. Allopuri- 100-containing lipoproteins, conducted in 2 affected members, mainly nol therapy is started. showed a decrease in LDL catabolism. Q-PCR analysis of LDLR ex- pression in EBV-transformed lymphoblasts showed that cells of two P0765. Investigation of tRNALeu/Lys and ATPase 6 , 8 genes affected subjects do not reply to cholesterol deprivation by activating mutations in Iranian Huntington‘s Disease LDLR expression contrary to controls in whom the expression rate in- S. Kasraie1, S. EtemadAhari1, M. Houshmand1, M. Moin2, M. Bahar3, M. Shafa creases 2-fold. These results suggest that this novel form of ADH is Shariat Panahi1; due to an alteration, direct or not, in LDL receptor endocytosis or in- 1Department of Medical genetics, National Research Center of Genetic Engi- tracellular traffic. Furthermore, we performed two-dimensional electro- neering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Immu- phoresis for cytosolic and membrane proteins from lymphoblasts and nology, Asthma & Allergy Research Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, fibroblasts and observed different profiles for affected subjects when 3Shahid Motahari Burns and Reconstruction Researech Center, Tehran, Islamic compared to non-affected relatives. Mass spectrometry for twenty of Republic of Iran. the more significatively different proteins is in process. We expect to Huntington disease (HD) is a genetically dominant condition caused by identify one or more proteins for wich the coding gene is localized in expanded CAG repeats coding for glutamine in the HD gene product the 16q22.1 interval of interest. huntingtin. Huntingtin is expressed in almost all tissues, so abnormali- ties outside the brain might be expected. Mitochondria dysfunction is P0768. PCSK9, from gene to protein: a new protagonist reported in HD brains. Mitochondria are organelles that among other implicated in autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia functions regulate apoptotic cell death. Involvement of nuclei and mito- M. Abifadel, J. Bonneau, A. Marques, M. Devillers, D. Erlish, J. Rabes, C. chondria in HD pathophysiology has been suggested. The tRNA gene Boileau, M. Varret; mutations are one of hot spots that cause mitochondrial disorders. We INSERM U781, paris, France. performed mutation screenings of tRNA leu/lys genes and also ATPase 6 Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is one of the most genes in 20 patients with HD. frequent human inherited disorders. Until 2003, mutations in two major Mitochondrial tRNA leu/lys genes and ATPase 6,8 genes were studied genes had been clearly implicated : LDLR and APOB. We were the by PCR method and automated DNA sequencing to evaluate any pos- first to identify a third gene involved in ADH by analysis of non-LDLR/ sible mtDNA damage. We found some mutations including an A8656G non-APOB French families : PCSK9 (Proprotein Convertase Subtili- mutation in one patient. We propose that it may causal to the disease. sin Kexin 9). Several hypercholesterolemic mutations of PCSK9 have Understanding the role of mitochondria in the pathogenesis of neuro- been reported: S127R, F216L, D374Y, R218S and R357H. Two non degenerative diseases could potentially be important for the develop- sense variations Y142X and C679X were associated with a reduction ment of therapeutic strategies in HD. of LDL-cholesterol levels and of CHD. The R46L variation is associ- ated with a reduction of LDL-cholesterol of 15% and 47% of CHD. P0766. Pathogenic significance of the homozygous LMNA We studied the frequency of 2 variations in 600 Caucasians. R46L was missense mutation p.Lys542Asn in patients with autosomal found only in controls with a frequency of 2%. A443T was identified in recessive Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome a woman with mild hypercholesterolemia and was not found in 340 M. Plasilova1, C. Chattopadhyay2,3, P. Pal2,4, A. Ghosh2, K. Heinimann1; French Caucasians controls. This variation turns out to be a rare poly- 1Research Group Human Genetics, Division of Medical Genetics UKBB, Center morphism in whites, more frequent in blacks, associated with lower of Biomedicine DKBW, University Children’s Hospital, University of Basel, Swit- plasma levels of LDL-C but which has been found in both low and high zerland, 2Institute of Child Health, Calcutta, India, 3Calcutta Project Foundation, LDL-C subjects in the Dallas Heart Study. Finally, the R237W that we University of Basel, Switzerland, 4S.B. Devi Charity Home, Calcutta, India. had first described in a Canadian woman with hypercholesterolemia, Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is an extremely rare but has been reported to be a hypocholesterolemic variation by Berge genetic disorder with children displaying features reminiscent of pre- et al., seems to be found only in high-LDL-cholesterol subjects in the mature senescence. Recurrent heterozygous de novo point mutations Dallas Study. in the LMNA gene encoding lamin A/C, a component of the filamentous PCSK9 is an attractive therapeutic target for LDL-C lowering but fur- meshwork of the nuclear lamina, have been shown to cause sporadic, ther investigations are required to understand its precise role in cho- non-familial HGPS. Recently, we have provided molecular evidence lesterol homeostasis and to identify its substrates and inhibitors. for autosomal recessive inheritance of HGPS in a consanguineous In- dian family. In this family all 4 affected children carry the homozygous P0769. Identification of a novel mutation of troponin-T gene missense mutation c.1626G>C (p.Lys542Asn) in LMNA, whereas their causing malignant form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy parents as well as a sister are healthy heterozygous mutation carriers. L. Losonczi1, K. Kádár2, R. Sepp3, K. Németh1, C. Földesi2, M. Csanády3, G. To assess the pathogenic consequences of the p.Lys542Asn muta- Fekete1; tion, we investigated primary cultured skin fibroblasts from affected 12nd Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, homozygous and healthy heterozygous mutation carriers for a) mor- Budapest, Hungary, 2Gottsegen György Hungarian Institute of Cardiology, phological changes in the nuclear envelope, b) telomere length altera- Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Internal Medicine and Cardiology Center, tions, and c) differences in gene expression using GeneChip® Human Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 20 Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary. sensitivity of the probe to a polymorphism. From the 48 imbalances Objectives: Genetic origin is important in the development of hyper- detected by the P036 kit and confirmed by P070, 7 were not verified trophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) which is characterized by myocardial by FISH analysis. From the 7 FISH/MLPA and 7 P036/P070 discrep- hypertrophy and rhythm disorders. The third most common mutated ancies, 6 imbalances were detected in one parent of the patient and gene leading to HCM is the troponin-T (TNNT2) gene with an inci- therefore were not considered to be phenotype related. Real time PCR dence of 2%. Our aim was to analyze mutations of the TNNT2 gene in was performed on the 8 discordant samples left. Aberrant copy num- children and young adults. ber detected by quantitative PCR confirmed MLPA analysis against Patients and methods: DNA was isolated from peripheral blood of 26 FISH findings for 6 of them. patients followed by PCR (TNNT2 gene, exons 8,11,14,15,16). Mu- MLPA is a sensitive, cost-effective technique for screening mentally re- tation analysis was performed using dHPLC and positive chromato- tarded patients which results must be validate by another cytogenetic grams were sequenced. or molecular method. Results: One mutation was found in the patient cohort (3,8%). It is a novel mutation, a deletion of a glutamic acid in exon 11, at one of the P0772. Molecular Diagnosis of Immunodeficiencies Syndromes amino acid positions between 165-168. This mutation has not been A. Mori1, R. Gershoni-Baruch1,2; published in the literature so far. The patient is a 19 year-old girl, who 1Institute of Human Genetics, Haifa, Israel, 2the Bruce Rappoport Faculty of had endured aborted sudden cardiac death (SCD) twice, so implanta- Medicine, Technion-Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. tion of an implantable cardioverter defibrillator was necessary. Fam- Fourteen children with primary immunodeficiency diseases were in- ily screening revealed that the patient’s mother also had HCM. Her vestigated. Clinical and family history data was recorded. A molecu- disease was characterised by mild septal hypertrophy, pronounced lar investigation, tailored to match the clinical diagnosis, was devised fibrosis and an uncommon restrictive diastolic dysfunction. She had for each patient independently. Five candidate genes, namely, BTK, suffered malignant arrhythmias several times and died of progressive ITGB2, SLC35C1, UNG and WASP were screened in a multistep anal- heart failure at the age of 30. In another patient, two polymorphisms ysis, including, PCR, RFLPs, DHPLC (denaturating high performance were found in intron 14 (base 18497C>G, base 18585C>T). liquid chromatography) and sequencing technology. Altogether, eleven Conclusion: We have identified a novel TNNT2 gene mutation which mutations were identified in ten patients, including five new unreported resulted in malignant ventricular arrhythmias and aborted SCD despite mutations and six previously described. a mild myocardial hypertrophy. The phenotype was consistent with the Missense mutations detected in patients with LADI and LADII were previous data of TNNT2 gene mutations causing HCM published in the restricted to conserved sequences, in line with those previously re- literature earlier. ported. A deletion encompassing two exons in BTK, no doubt disrupt- ing the structure of the protein caused a mild disease in our patient P0770. An A8296G mutation in mitochondrial tRNALys gene in a with XLA but was otherwise lethal to other family members who died in patient with epilepsy; Pathogen or rare polymorphism?! infancy. Two splicing mutations, which majorly disrupt the protein, were M. Ataei1, A. Ahadi2, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi1, M. Houshmand1, M. Sadeghiza- identified in two WAS patients. In two of the four patients in whom no deh2, K. Gharagozli3; mutations were detected, the diagnosis of HIGM syndrome was sub- 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, sequently revised. Genotype-phenotype correlation analyses in our Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tarbiat Modaress University, Tehran, Islamic Republic patients support several concepts. The notion that genetic diseases of Iran, 3Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Repub- and the immune response in particular, involve a complex interplay lic of Iran. between environmental and genetic factors is sustained. The muta- Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations are important cause of human tions contributing to LADI and LADII were restricted to conserved re- diseases. A homoplasmic A8296G mutation was detected in a 24yr-old gions thereby implicating that variations located in other regions do not man with idiopathic generalized epilepsy. He experienced his first sei- cause a disease. The view that the WAS phenotype, which may vary zure at age 13. He suffers from deafness. His seizures begin suddenly from isolated thrombocytopenia to severe classic lethal immunodefi- and without warning. He loses consciousness and experiences typical ciency is “mutation” dependent is confirmed. generalized tonic or tonic-clonic seizures listing 1-5 minute each. The A8296G mutation in the mitochondrial DNA tRNALys gene has been P0773. The functional polymorphism -703T/C in the promoter associated with severe mitochondrial diseases in a number of reports. of the human IL gene is associated with atopic and non-atopic The pathogenesis of this mutation or its association with a specific bronchial asthma, but not with atopic dermatitis disease is unclear. This mutation has been reported alone as well as M. Freidin1, E. Bragina1, O. Fedorova2, E. Nemerov2, L. Ogorodova2, V. together with other mutations in trials in mtDNA. As in this case the Puzyrev1; mutation was homoplasmic and there were no clinical finding in other 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medi- family members, we suggest that this mutation is rare polymorphism cal Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State Medical University, or it acts as pathogen in combination with other mutations inside or Tomsk, Russian Federation. outside of the tRNALys. Analysis of association between -703T/C polymorphism in promoter of IL5 gene and atopic bronchial asthma (BA), non-atopic BA, and P0771. Evaluation of MLPA in routine diagnostics for the atopic dermatitis (AD) was carried out by case-control study. It was detection of subtelomeric rearrangements in 1040 patients with shown that -703C allele is associated with overexpression of the IL5 idiopathic mental retardation gene, probably, because of moving off the binding site for negative S. Drunat, A. Delahaye, A. Aboura, J. Rousseau, A. Verloes; regulator CLOX and therefore may predispose to atopic disease. Us- Robert Debré Hospital, APHP, Paris, France. ing logistic regression analysis we found significant association of the We screened 1041 patients with idiopathic Mental Retardation for sub- -703C allele both with atopic and non-atopic BA (p<0.0001), but not telomeric aberrations by a multi-step strategy consisting in 1) analysis with AD (p=0.686). When AD patients were divided into two groups in with the P036 MLPA kit assay, 2) confirmation with the P070 kit, 3) respect to atopic BA developing within three years after first diagnosis verification by conventional FISH analysis. (AD), we found a weak association between the -703C allele and BA 79 rearrangements were detected by the P036 kit (7.6%). 48 (61%) of in patients with AD (p=0.016), but again with not AD alone. Therefore, them were confirmed by the P070 probes panel. 30 of this confirmed we found that -703T/C exhange in IL5 gene is a risk factor for bron- rearrangements were verified by FISH analysis and 10 are still under choobstructive syndrome irrelatively of risk of atopy. This confirms that cytogenetic investigations. end-organ and systemic atopy-related genetic predisposing factors of Then, we focused on discrepancies between the P036 and P070 or, atopic disease are different. This also suggests that the IL5 gene is an MLPA and FISH results. end-organ specificity candidate gene associated with BA itself rather From the 31 rearrangements detected by the P036 kit, 13 could not than with atopy. be found in a second experiment with the same kit, showing non- reproducibility of the technique in about 1% of cases. When the 2 kits mapped the same locus and gave different results (11/31), the imbalance detected was considered as a false positive reflecting the Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 20 P0774. IRF gene’s nucleotide sequence changes in patients JPD. with nonsyndromic orofacial clefting from Lithuania To refine the clinical characteristics of the PARK2-associated JPD, A. Morkūnienė1,2, L. Ambrozaitytė1, A. Utkus1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; we investigated 77 patients referred to our diagnostic lab for PARK2 1Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Human and Medical analysis. Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Searching for point mutations by sequencing and for large rearrange- Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. ments by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA kits The hunt for the causes of nonsyndromic orofacial clefing (NS-OFC) P051/P052, MRC-Holland) gave the following results: is extremely complex, involving multiple techniques that have been Presence of LRRK2 Type of PARK2 Age at onset used to identify numerous candidate genes in which disruption results Number p.Gly2019Ser Number mutations (P: point : mean ± Molecular of PARK2 of pati- diagnosis in increased risk of clefting. In recent years, a number of independent mutation (detected mutation, 2SD (range) mutations ents of JPD groups have targeted for investigation the involvement of IRF6 (inter- by the MLPA kits) R: rearrangement) in years feron regulatory factor 6 gene). IRF6 is related to syndromic OFC - Van 24 ± 11 2 no 15 19 R + 11P yes der Woude syndrome. (17-35) Our study was aimed to investigate whether mutations in the IRF6 1 no 2 2 P (35-51) no gene contribute to NS-OFC in the population of Lithuania. 36 ± 21 0 no 55 no Patients with NS-OFCs from Lithuania were tested for nucleotide se- (3-53) quence changes in the IRF6 gene (206 patients). DNA fragments cov- 1 yes 2 2 P (43-not no available) ering exonic parts of the IRF6 gene were PCR-amplified and direct sequenced. 0 yes 3 37-54 no 23 different nucleotide sequence changes were revealed in the IRF6 gene by comparison of sequencing results with reference DNA se- The distribution of PARK2 genotypes (2, 1 or 0 mutation) differed dra- quences of the genes. Scanning IRF6 gene resulted in ten novel matically from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, strongly suggesting that, nucleotide sequence variants. Out of them, four were missense muta- for most patients with no identified PARK2 mutation, the phenotype is tions (p.S212I, p.L295P, p. Q340K, p.R400L), which, together with the independent from PARK2 gene rather than due to mutation in PARK2 p.A61G mutation found in the case of Van der Woude syndrome, might unexplored regions. be related to the NS-OFC phenotype in the population of Lithuania. Onset of disease was younger than 36 years in all the patients with Our study highlights the IRF6 gene sequence variability and supports 2 PARK2 mutations. However, PARK2-related JPD was established the hypothesis that variation in this gene contributes to NS-OFC phe- in only 40% of patients with age at onset less than 36 years old. The notype encouraging further investigations to test if IRF6 gene muta- LRRK2 G2019S mutation was found in cases significantly older than tions identified in the individuals from Lithuania are rare alleles caus- parkin cases. Patients presenting with 2 PARK2 mutations were clini- ative for NS-OFC. cally indistinguishable from the others, according to the frequency of rigidity, bradykinesia, tremor, positive response to levodopa, and P0775. The R176C amino-acid change in hemojuvelin as a asymmetric onset. novel haemochromatosis mutation: phenotypic and functionanl Altogether, these results show that early age at onset is the major clini- evidences cal criteria for PARK2 molecular diagnosis of Parkinson disease. C. Ka1, G. Le Gac1, E. Letocart1, I. Gourlaouen1, L. Bryckaert1, B. Martin2, C. Ferec1; P0777. Lamellar ichtyosis caused by TGM1 DNA mutation in a 1Inserm, U613; Univ Bretagne Occidentale; Etablissement Français du Sang, Family from Azerbaijan Brest, F-29200, France, 2Etablissement Français du Sang, Niort, F-79000, E. G. Okuneva, N. N. Vasserman, A. V. Polyakov; France. Medical Genetics Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation. Background: Juvenile haemochromatosis (JH) is an early-onset auto- A case of autosomal recessive lamellar ichthyosis in two newborn somal recessive condition of iron metabolism caused by mutations in male sibs from consanguineous Azerbaijan family is presented. The either the hemojuvelin (HJV) or the hepcidin-encoding gene (HAMP). parents of the children are the first cousins. The first child was born in The two JH gene products are implicated in a same physiologic pro- the 34-th week of the pregnancy and died on the third day. The second cess, where hepcidin controls iron flow into plasma and hemojuvelin child was born in 37-th week and died on the first day. Both of them enhances hepcidin expression at the transcriptional level via the clas- had got the same clinical sign : tight shiny covering, described as col- sical bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) cell signalling pathway. Aim lodion membrane and erythroderma. During the first hour of life the of the study and results: In this study, we report a novel missense membrane is disrupted. They had got severe ectropion and eclabiun HJV mutation that leads to the replacement of arginine by a cysteine too. There is no any biological material from the sibs, but the pariens residue at position 176 (R176C). We associate homozygosity for this is caused by heterozygous mutations in 3-d exon of TGM1 gene P.142 novel mutation with the iron overload phenotype observed in a 17- Arg>His. The mutation of TGM1 gene is known to be responsible for year-old girl. We also show that the HJV 176C mutated protein fails phenotypes of lamellar ichthyosis. to up-regulate the hepcidin promoter activity. Lastly, we suggest that, due to its nature and position, the R176C amino-acid change prevents P0778. Spectrum of NPHP6 (CEP290) Mutations in Leber an autocatalytic cleavage that normally occurs during HJV intracellular Congenital Amaurosis and Delineation of the Associated processing. Conclusion: Our results definitively demonstrate that the Phenotype R176C substitution is a novel HJV loss-of-function mutation. They also I. Perrault1, N. Delphin1, S. Hanein1, S. Gerber1, J. Dufier2, O. Roche2, H. Doll- highlight that rapid advances in comprehension of the HJV intracellular fus3, A. Munnich4, J. Kaplan4, J. Rozet4; processing and function have paved the way for functional character- 1Unité de Recherches Génétique et Epigénétique des Maladies Métaboliques, izations. Neurosensorielles et du Développement, INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2Ser- vice d’Ophtalmologie, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 3Service de Génétique P0776. Early age at onset is the major clinical feature in Médicale, Hôpital Haute-Pierre, Strasbourg, France, 4Unité de Recherches Parkinson disease related to PARK2 gene mutations Génétique et Epigénétique des Maladies Métaboliques, Neurosensorielles et C. Cazeneuve1, C. San1, E. Lohmann2, S. Lesage2, E. Leguern1,2, A. Durr3,2, A. du Développement, INSERM U781, PARIS, France. Brice4,2, the Parkinson Disease Genetics Group; Mutations in the NPHP6 gene were shown to account for Joubert syn- 1Dpt of Genetics, Neurogenetics laboratory, Hospital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, drome and Senior-Loken syndrome as well as Leber congenital amau- France, 2Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unit U679, rosis (LCA). All reported patients affected with LCA carried an intronic Hospital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Dpt of Genetics, Clinical Genetics, mutation resulting in an aberrantly spliced transcript and low levels of Paris, France, 4Dpt of Genetics, Hospital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. wild-type transcript that was believed to explain the absence of cer- Autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinson disease (JPD) is character- ebellar and renal involvement in LCA patients. The aim of the pres- ized by rigidity, bradykinesia, rest tremor, age at onset before 40 years, ent study was to give the survey of NPHP6 mutations in our series. good response to levodopa treatment, and slowly progressive disease. 192 unrelated LCA cases were screened for mutations. The natural Mutations in the parkin gene (PARK2) are the major genetic cause of history and ophthalmologic data were reviewed for all patients har-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 20 bouring NPHP6 mutations NPHP6 mutations were identified in 38/192 (3) a combination of LGMD 1B and histologically proven localized LCA families of our series. The common NPHP6 intronic mutation ac- scleroderma (morphea), and (4) a severe infantile polyneuropathy in counted for 33/76 of all disease alleles in our series. Twelve unrelated two sibs distinct from HMSN 2B1. The latter two may present novel LCA cases did not carry this common intronic mutation, ten of which, at phenotypes. In a subset of families with EDMD-like phenotypes we least, harboured two mutations expected to truncate the protein. found neither emerin nor LMNA mutations, which may indicate the ex- We confirm the high frequency of NPHP6 mutations in LCA (19.8%) as istence of other genes producing similar disorders. well as that of the c.2991+1655A>G mutation (43% of disease alleles). We also suggest that a significant fraction of LCA families segregate P0781. Bone remodeling in MADA disease: involvement of two NPHP6 null alleles questioning the relevance of the assumption matrix metalloproteinases secretion according to which the retinal-restricted phenotype in LCA patient F. Lombardi, G. F. Fasciglione, R. Caruso, G. Monteleone, M. R. D’Apice, F. could be due to a residual NPHP6 activity. Indeed, Joubert syndrome Pallone, S. Marini, G. Novelli; was excluded by cerebral MRI in all patients presenting with devel- University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. opmental delay. Finally, we show that all patients of our series are af- Mandibuloacral dysplasia type A [MADA; OMIM # 248370] is a rare fected with the cone-rod subtype of the disease whatever their NPHP6 multysistem disorder belonging to a heterogeneous group of diseases, genotype. collectively called Laminopathies. These disorders are caused by mu- tations in the LMNA gene. Bone is one of the most involved tissues. P0779. The mutation p.Phe128Ser (c.383T>C) in the TAZ (G.) The MADA patients are characterized by postnatal growth retardation gene in a patient with left ventricular non-compaction along with typical skeletal abnormalities such as hypoplasia of the V. Lança1, R. Cerqueira1, N. C. Dias2, M. G. Varela2, H. Madeira2, H. Gabriel1, mandible and clavicles, acroosteolysis, delayed closure of the cranial L. Lameiras1, P. Tavares1, A. R. Fernandes1; sutures and joint contractures. Bone alterations are mediated by ex- 1CGC Centro Genética Clínica, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço de Cardiologia, Hospi- tracellular matrix (ECM) dysregulation which involve modification in tal de Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal. the expression profile and activities of the matrix metalloproteinases Left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) is a rare cadiomyopathy of (MMPs). We investigated the MMP production by TNF-α stimulation genetic origin, characterized by deep trabeculations in the ventricu- in MADA fibroblasts, as model in vitro, in order to mime the changing lar wall. Clinically, is characterized by systolic and diastolic dysfunc- that could be occurred in an alterate homeostasis of bone and in the tion, and associated at times with arrhythmias and systemic embolic extracellular matrix remodeling. events, and has a high mortality rate. Dermal fibroblasts from MADA and control patients were seeded in Mutations in the TAZ (G4.5) gene are mainly associated with Barth multi-well plates in complete media. Ninety percent confluent cells were Syndrome, but may also be the cause of LVNC. treated with TNF- α (15ng/ml) for 48h in serum free media. Superna- The finding of the mutation p.Phe128Ser (c.383T>C) of the TAZ (G4.5) tants were assayed for some MMPs by western blot and zymography gene in a 17 years old male, that suffered from LVNC, is presented. analysis. A significant decrease of some MMP protein levels in stimu- This mutation was previously referenced on a case of a child with lated MADA fibroblasts conditioned media was observed, suggesting a Barth Syndrome [1]. modification of the MMPs pathway that occurs in MADA disease. The subject presented class III-IV progressive congestive heart fail- ure according to the New York Heart Association functional classifi- P0782. Molecular diagnosis of congenital long-QT syndrome in cation system. The diagnosis was obtained by echocardiography and Polish patients magnetic resonance imaging. Complete sequencing of the TAZ (G4.5) M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, E. Popowska, P. Kowalski, D. Jurkiewicz, E. Ciara, gene was performed on an Applied Biosystems 3700 system. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, K. Bieganowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; The mutation c.383T>C is located within exon 5. Tazfarin, the protein Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. encoded by TAZ, presents itself in 5 isoforms, 2 of witch containing Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a cardiac disorder that causes sud- the amino acid sequence encoded by exon 5. Our results are in ac- den death from ventricular tachyarrhythmias, specifically torsade de cordance with other observations that indicate a relevant role for the pointes. The molecular basis of LQTS is associated with delayed re- isoforms containing exon 5. polarization of the myocardium increasing the QT interval measured Genetic analysis of the TAZ (G4.5) gene was helpful for establishing on electrocardiogram. LQTS can be inherited as a more common au- the precise diagnosis of LVNC and for adequate genetic counselling. tosomal-dominant disorder (Romano-Ward syndrome, R-W type 1-6) This finding also underlines the variability of phenotype associated or a rarer autosomal-recessive disorder associated with congenital even with one sole mutation in the TAZ (G4.5) gene [2]. neuronal deafness (Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome, JL-N type [1] http://www.barthsyndrome.org/english/View.asp?x=1357 1-2). Mutations in a group of genes encoding cardiac ion channels [2] Gonzalez IL. Am J Med Genet. 2005, 134:409-14. (KCNQ1, KCNH2, KCNE1, KCNE2 and SCN5A) are involved in the LQTS pathogenesis. P0780. LMNA mutations and phenotypes in Russian families The aim of the study was to investigate the molecular basis of long QT G. E. Rudenskaya, S. M. Tverskaya, A. L. Chukhrova, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya, syndrome, inheritance traits and type of the disease in Polish popula- A. V. Polyakov; tion. Thirty-three patients suspected of having LQTS from 29 unrelated Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. families treated at the Cardiology Department of the Children’s Memo- LMNA gene (1q21.2-21.3) encodes two nuclear envelope proteins _ rial Health Institute in Warsaw were screened. Genomic DNA was ex- lamins A and C. Numerous mutations of the gene cause a wide spec- tracted from lymphocytes, and coding regions of three genes (KCNQ1, trum of disorders called laminopathies. We performed a search of KCNH2, KCNE1) were amplified and analyzed by SSCP and sequenc- LMNA mutations in a group of families with characteristic phenotypes. ing analyses. In 8 families pathogenic mutations in gene KCNQ1 In 11 families, ten different mutations were found, namely Arg249Gln, (p.Y171X, p.R243H, p.V254M, p.A341V, p.G306R, p.V416fsX462 and Asp47His, Gly232Arg, del Lys261+ins15bp in 4 families with autoso- p.C445X) and gene KCNH2 (p.C108R, p.N633S and p.P1122L) were mal dominant Emery_Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (AD EDMD); Arg- identified. Among them five families presented R-W syndrome type 1 249Gln, Arg377His in two families with limb girdle MD type 1B (LGMD or 2, and three families JL-N syndrome (one family without hearing 1B); Arg541His, Ala350Pro, Gly635Asp, Leu52Pro in 4 families with loss). In many patients several polymorphic nucleotide substitutions autosomal dominant arrhythmic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCMP 1A), (p.G38S and p.D85N in gene KCNE1, p.F485F and p.S546S in gene heterozygous Asn459Tyr in a family with autosomal recessive poly- KCNQ1, and p.I489I and p.L564L in gene KCNH2) were found. neuropathy (second mutation in this families was not detected). Muta- The study was supported by KBN Project 6P05E15021. tions Arg249Gln and Arg377His were reported previously, eight muta- tions are novel. Seven cases are familial, four cases present mutations P0783. A new diagnostic service for lymphoedema: Screening of de novo, among them both Arg249Gln mutations. Since this mutation VEGFR (FLT) and FOXC2 occurred de novo also in other reported cases, a mutational “hot point” N. Williams1, R. Poh1, N. Elanko1, S. Cottrell1, P. Ostergaard2, S. Jeffery2, G. is supposed. Three families show an overlap between DCMP 1A and Brice3, S. Mansour3, R. Taylor1; MD’s. Along with common phenotypes, atypical variants were found 1South West Thames Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, St Georges Hospital, out, i.e. (1) a severe Duchenne-like EDMD, (2) an infantile DCMP 1A, London, United Kingdom, 2Medical Genetics Unit, St George’s University of Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 20 London, London, United Kingdom, 3South West Thames, Regional Genetics otides microarray, global gene expression pattern of healthy testis bi- Unit, St Georges Hospital, London, United Kingdom. opsies versus an home made RNA universal reference. Lymphoedema is a chronic tissue swelling usually of the lower extremi- Our preliminary research revealed a group of 2.718 up-regulated and ties caused by abnormal lymph drainage. There are 3 main clinical sub- 2.654 down-regulated annotated UniGene in testis as compared to the types of primary lymphoedema - Milroy disease (MD), Lymphoedema reference RNA pool. These annotated genes were grouped together Distichiasis (LD) and Meige disease, all of these conditions exhibit au- using the EASE software, which allowed us to identify a list of biologi- tosomal dominant inheritance. MD patients present with lymphoedema cal process. Among these the most abundant categories were those at birth or in early infancy. The penetrance of MD is estimated to be related to physiological processes and metabolism, which are very un- about 88%. LD presents with distichiasis (aberrant eyelashes arising specific classes, while less represented but more specific were those on the inner eyelid) and lymphoedema in late childhood or puberty and containing genes involved in fuction related to human testis, such as is about 90% penetrant. reproduction, meiosis, imprinting. Among these, of interest is the pres- To date two genes have been identified; VEGFR3 (or FLT4), associ- ence of genes mapped within the AZF loci of the Y chromosome such ated with MD and FOXC2, associated with LD. Mutations reported in as DAZ, BPY, DBY, SMCY as well as DAZL autosomal homolog gene. the VEGFR3 gene are primarily missense and have to date only been Our results clearly demostrates that expression profiling using micro- found in exons 17-26 which encodes the highly conserved tyrosine array technology is able to evidence genes specifically involved in tes- kinase domain. Diagnostic testing has been developed for the 10 ex- ticular fuction, and to provide a general pattern of the human normal ons in the VEGFR3 gene using dHPLC on the Transgenomic WAVE testis trascriptome, which could be certainly useful for understanding Analyser and any variants observed are sequenced in both directions. also the pathological pathway. The FOXC2 gene consists of a single 1.5kb exon encoding a fork- head transcription factor. Bi-directional sequencing of 4 overlapping P0786. Gene expression studies in testicular tissue. fragments of FOXC2 is employed as a screening technique. To date Suitability of PBGD and HPRT as internal references genes for FOXC2 mutations found in the laboratory consisted only of small in- normalization sertions and deletions. However, missense and stop mutations have E. Terribas1, S. Bonache1, E. Guinó2, J. Sánchez3, E. Franco4, L. Bassas3, S. been previously reported. Screening of both these genes is offered as Larriba1; a clinical molecular diagnostic service. 1Centre de Genètica Mèdica i Molecular-IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 2Unitat de Bioinformàtica i Bioestadística-ICO-IDIBELL, P0784. Genetic screening for patients with non-obstructive L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servei d’Andrologia-Fundació infertility from Ukraine Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain, 4Servei d’Urologia-Hospital Universitari de Bell- O. Fesai; vitge, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics National Academy of Science of Semiquantitative gene expression experiments require normalization Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine. to compensate for differences in the amount and quality of biologi- Microdeletions of the long arm of the human Y-chromosome are asso- cal material and reverse transcription reaction efficiency in the tested ciated with spermatogenic failure and have been used to define three samples. An extended strategy is to normalize to internal reference regions of Yq (AZFa, AZFb, AZFc) that are recurrently deleted in infer- genes, which should show similar expression in the samples inves- tile males. It was supposed that apart from cystic fibrosis, mutations tigated. in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) We have assessed the suitability of PBGD and HPRT genes as can- gene are involved in male infertility. Mutations in the CFTR gene cause didates for gene normalization in both pathological and normal tes- congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD) in approxi- ticular tissue. We have analysed their expression levels in testicular mately 1% of the infertile males. biopsies of 13 non-obstructive infertile men, who showed either severe We have screened Y-chromosome microdeletions, mutations and poly- hypospermatogenesis or maturation arrest (patient group 1), 7 men T sequence of CFTR gene in 680 patiens (azoospermia and oligosper- diagnosed with germ-cell tumour (patient group 2) and 10 infertile men mia) and in 621 healthy valantiers by PCR-based methods. For each with obstructive azoospermia (control group). The quantitative real- patient, multiplex PCR analyses were performed on DNA isolated from time PCR reactions were performed in a LightCycler® 1.5 Instrument leukocytes derived from peripheral blood to screen 18 sY-sequences (Roche), using SYBR Green I fluorescence dye. The Mann-Whitney on Yq. Cytogenetic investigation was performed according to standard U test was used to analyse gene expression differences in case and methods (GTG-banding). No chromosomal anomalies were found in control patients. men. Non-significant differences were observed in PBGD expression levels Microdeletions were detected in 2,79% infertile men. During patients in both patient groups 1 and 2 compared to controls (P= 0.077 and P= research we have made a conclusions: a) damage of genes from AZFb 0.262, respectively) and in HPRT expression profile between patient region results in impairments of last stage spermatogenesis; b) dele- group 1 and control group (P= 0.515). Interestingly, HPRT was found tions in AZFc region are critical for early stage spermatogenesis. to be differently expressed in patient group 2 compared to controls (P= The frequency of CFTR gene mutations carriers detected in 630 pa- 0.001) suggesting that HPRT would not be a suitable reference gene tients was statisticaly significant higer than in control group. 5T allele to be used for normalization of target genes expression data in tes- of CFTR gene associated with CBAVD was detected in 1,93% of pa- ticular malignant phenotype. Hence, while choosing reference genes, tients. The obtained data produce the evidence of the possible invol- the testicular phenotype under study should be considered to avoid ment of CFTR protein in spermatogenesis. The genetic consultation erroneous normalizations. and preimplantation analysis were recommended for the couples with Supported by FIS (PI05/0759, CP03/00088, C03/07) identified Y-chromosome deletions and CFTR gene mutations. P0787. Microdeletions in AZF region of Y chromosome in P0785. Expression profiling of human normal testis by infertile males, a study from Latvian population microarray technology A. Puzuka1, A. Krumina1, V. Baumanis2, N. Pronina3, V. Lejins4, J. Erenpreiss5, F. Raicu1, V. Gatta2, A. Ferlin3, C. Foresta3, G. Palka2, L. Stuppia2; J. Bars6, I. Grinfelde3; 1Department of Clinical Sciences and Imaging, G. d’Annunzio University 1Riga Stradins University, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Riga, Foundation, Chieti-Pescara, Italy, 2Department of Biomedical Sciences, G. Latvia, 2Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 3Children d’Annunzio University Foundation, Chieti-Pescara, Italy, 3Department of Medi- University Hospital, Medical Genetics Clinic, Riga, Latvia, 4EGV Clinic, Riga, cal and Surgical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. Latvia, 5Riga Stradins University, Laboratory of Andrology, Riga, Latvia, 6Clinic Spermatogenesis is a complex process that demands several genes of Medical Genetics, Department of Prenatal Diagnostics, Riga, Latvia. to action but the biological mechanisms underlying sperm production Male factor infertility accounts for about half the cases of couple in- are still largely unknown. In this view, it is crucial to obtain a full picture fertility in Latvia. The most common genetic cause of human Y-linked of the global expression profile of normal testis. male infertility is partial or complete deletions of the AZF region on the In order to identify the list of testis up and down regulated genes direct- Y chromosome. AZF region consists of three intervals, AZFa, AZFb, ly linked to testis metabolism and function towards the human general and AZFc, which are associated with different spermatogenic failure. metabolism, we start to analyse, using an 21,329 spotted oligonucle- The aims were to introduce the molecular screening method of Y-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 20 chromosomal microdeletions in Latvia and to detect microdeletions in P0790. Sequence analysis of multidrug resistance protein AZFa, AZFb, and AZFc gene families. 3 (MDR3) in Italian patients with intrahepatic cholestasis of Objects for Y-chromosomal microdeletions and male infertility associa- pregnancy with raised serum γ-GT tion study were 55 individuals with different spermatogenic arrest such D. Tavian1, D. Degiorgio2, C. Redaelli1, N. Roncaglia3, P. Vergani3, D. A. Covi- as azoospermia, severe oligozoospermia, oligo-astheno-terato-zoo- ello2, R. Colombo1; spermia. All cases of spermatogenic failure resulting from endocrine 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Biology and Genetics, Catholic University of or obstructive causes or with a cytogenetic abnormality were excluded the Sacred Heart, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics Fondazione from our study. IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Microdeletions in AZF region were determined by two multiplex PCR Italy, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Milano-Bicocca, amplifications using ten primer pairs. Two non-polymorphic STS loci Monza, Italy. were analyzed in each AZF region (sY84, sY86, sY127, sY134, s134, Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is characterized by intense sY254, sY255). Internal PCR control (ZFX/ZFY) was used as well as pruritus and abnormalities of liver function tests and bile acids. Usually, DNA sample from a fertile male and from a female. serum gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GT) activity remains within Out of 55 analyzed samples we have found three cases (5.5%) with normal limits. However, in some cases γ-GT is increased. Although microdeletions that were observed only in AZFc region at SY254 and the prognosis is generally favourable for the mother, ICP is associated SY255 STS loci in DAZ gene. with increased fetal risks, such as preterm delivery and fetal distress. The frequency of Y-chromosomal microdeletions is low in Latvian pop- Intrauterine fetal death has been reported in 0.8-1.6% of ICP cases. ulation, however, Y chromosome microdeletion screening is important The cause of ICP is still unknown, but there are evidences that geneti- not only to define the aetiology of spermatogenic failure but also be- cally disfunction MDR3 is associated to the development of ICP. MDR3 cause it gives precious information for more appropriate clinical man- P-glycoprotein is a canalicular phopholipid translocator involved in the agement of both the infertile male and his future male child. biliary secretion of phospholipids. The aim of this study was to identify new disease-causing mutations in a specific group of Italian women P0788. Analysis of three Glycine substitutions in loop-regions suffering from ICP with raised serum γ-GT (>40 mg/dL). DNA sequence of calcium-binding Epidermal Growth Factor-like domains of analysis of the MDR3 promoter and the 27 coding exons with their fibrillin-1: possible key positions for domain folding. exon-intron boundaries was performed in 11 ICP patients with raised P. Khau van Kien, D. Baud, N. Pallares-Ruiz, M. Claustres; γ-GT levels and in 43 control women. Two heterozygous mutations CHU Montpellier/INSERM U827, Montpellier, France. were found in the ICP patients. One is a novel mutation consisting of Among the patients refered to our centre for molecular diagnosis of A to G transition at the 3’ acceptor splice site of MDR3 intron 7 (IVS7[- Marfan syndrome (MFS) we identified several novel heterozygous 2]A→G); the second one is R590Q, a mutation previously reported in a missense mutations of the FBN1 gene. Interestingly, three of them patient with primary sclerosing cholangitis. The identification of MDR3 were predicted to result in Glycine substitutions that occur in a loop- mutations in 18% of the affected women supports the hypothesis that region of the corresponding calcium-binding Epidermal Growth Fac- genomic variants of this gene play a pathogenetic role in the subset of tor-like (cb-EGF-like) domains of fibrillin-1 : c.1753G>C (p.Gly585Arg ICP patients presenting with raised γ-GT values. in cb-EGF-like#5), c.4981G>A (p.Gly1661Arg in cb-EGF-like#24) and c.6418G>A (p.Gly2140Arg in cb-EGF-like#32). These mutations were P0791. The first laboratory expierence of diagnostics of MEN2 identified in three probands with MFS (Ghent criteria fullfilled) or sus- syndrome in KMUH (Lithuania) pected MFS (a criterium is missing). Familial investigations, molecular L. Kucinskas1, L. Juodele1, D. Serapinas2, A. Vitkauskiene3, J. Jeroch4; studies (DNA/RNA), in silico analyses (conservation, 3D modeling) 1Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Kaunas Medical coupled with data of the literature provide positive arguments for a University Hospital Genetic Consultation, Kaunas, Lithuania, 3Kaunas Medical crucial role of the corresponding Glycine position in cb-EGF-like type 1 University Hospital Laboratory of Immnulogy and genetics, Kaunas, Lithuania, domain structure maintenance. 4Institute for Biomedical research, Kaunas Medicine University, Kaunas, Lithu- ania. P0789. SIL1 and SARA2 mutations in a family with Marinesco- MEN2 syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant syndrome with medul- Sjogren and Chylomicron Retention Diseases lary thyroid carcinoma and other tumours of endocrinological system. G. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1, F. Annesi1, E. V. De Marco1, D. Civitelli1, A. Torroni2, MEN2 syndrome has three subtypes: MEN2A (medullary thyroid carci- A. Quattrone1,3; noma, pheochromocitoma and primary hyperparathyroidism), MEN2B 1National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Dipartimento di Ge- (medulary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocitoma and typical pheno- netica e Microbiologia, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, type - marphanoid constitution with ganglioneuromatosis) and FMTC University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. (familiar medullary thyroid carcinoma). RET is the only gene known Marinesco-Sjogren Syndrome (MSS) is an autosomal recessive dis- to be associated with MEN 2. In 2006 year the diagnostics of MEN2 order, characterised by cataracts, ataxia, and mental retardation.Re- syndrome was performed for members of two families in Kaunas cently, Anthonen identified the linkage of the MSS phenotype to 5q31 Medical University Hospital. The molecular genetics diagnostics was chromosome in a Finnish family, and identified a mutation of the SIL1 performed using two restrictions enzymes Fok I and Pag I. The first gene in all investigated MSS patients. Senderek using homozygos- family was of medullary carcinoma patient and her 4 year old son. The ity mapping in three small consanguineous families with typical MSS mutation was pC618R in RET gene codon 618. The presymptomatic narrowed a critical region on 5q31. In the current study, we further diagnostics was performed for the child of patient and results showed, investigated a small Italian pedigree. In this family, two brothers had that he has no mutation. Another family has the girl with medullary MSS syndrome, with a very low serum concentration of vitamin E carcinoma. The girl was 8 years old when operation was performed. and absence of postprandial chylomicrons, a finding consistent with She had phenotypic signs of MEN2B syndrome: ganglioneuromatosis chylomicron retention disease (CMRD). On a subsequent study , we of tongue and lips. The mutation analysis using restriction enzymes demonstrated that these two brothers carried a mutation in the SARA2 confirmed the most typical mutation of MEN2B syndrome :p.M918T in gene belonging to the Sar1-ADP-ribosylation. On the basis of the re- exon 16 of RET gene. cent data on SIL1 in MSS, we analyzed the SIL1 gene in our patients The molecular diagnostics using restriction enzymes is cheap, fast and with MSS and CMRD, in their healthy parents. Sequencing of the SIL1 easy performed. This laboratory diagnosis can be used for confirma- gene revealed a homozygous mutation at position 331 in exon 4 re- tory of diagnosis, presymptomatic diagnosis and corelation between sulting in a premature stop codon at amino acid 111 (R111X) in the af- mutation and disease prognosis. fected brothers, while both parents were heterozygous for the mutation . In our previous study , we hypothesized that both MSS and CRMD P0792. Serine-arginine repressor protein, SRrp35, is disrupted found in the two Calabrian brothers could be due to defects in a gene by an inv(6)(p21.3q15) in a patient with mental retardation and crucial to the assembly of the chylomicron particle.The present results, obesity however, demonstrate that CMRD and MSS observed in our patients J. G. Dauwerse1, K. B. M. Hansson1, D. J. Halley2, M. Kriek1, M. H. Breuning1, are distinct diseases due to defects in two different genes, SARA2 D. J. M. Peters1; and SIL1. 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Clinical Genetics Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 210 Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. allele at a higher rate than their respective controls (42,0% and 1,3%, Mental retardation (MR) is defined by an overall IQ score below 70 and p<0,05). deficits in adaptive behavior that are recognized in childhood. Genetic The frequencies of genotypes of A1298C mutation were not signifi- abnormalities frequently give rise to a MR phenotype. cantly different between parents of NTD cases and controls. The pa- Here, we present an obese, mentally retarded patient with a de novo tients with NTD were homozygous (16,7%) and heterozygous (56,7%) pericentric inversion of chromosome 6, inv(6)(p21.3q15). FISH per- for A1298C variant allele at a higher rate than the health control (34,0% formed with BAC and PAC clones revealed that RP11-355M6 (6p21.2) and 8,0%, p<0,05). Our study provides evidence that the maternal and RP11-63L7 (6q15) span the breakpoints. We could show that C677T homozygous mutant genotype, the paternal heterozygous for both breakpoints disrupt a gene, on 6p21.2 the C6orf128 gene and the C677T variant allele and the patient’s TT, CT genotypes of C677T on 6q15 the SRrp35 gene. Mutation analysis for both genes, in 150 mutation, ac and cc genotypes of A1298C mutation are a possible risk Prader-Willi like MR patients, did not reveal any mutations. There are factor for NTD in Kazakh population. no strong indications for C6orf128 being a candidate gene for MR. No other 6p21 rearrangements in MR patients are known from the litera- P0795. Mitochondrial abnormalities in murine models of Mut ture, the gene is ubiquitously expressed and its function is unknown. class methylmalonic acidemia SRrp35, however, is more indicative for being a good candidate, since R. J. Chandler1, S. Shanske2, J. Sloan1, P. M. Zerfas3, V. Hoffmann3, S. Di- 12 MR patients have been reported with deletions of 6q15, the region Mauro2, C. P. Venditti1; SRrp35 is mapping. Furthermore, SRrp35 is predominantly expressed 1National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, in fetal and adult brain and the SRrp35 protein is member of the group Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Department of Neurobiology Columbia Uni- of proteins that are SR (serine-arginine) protein-like alternative splic- versity Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, 3Division of Veterinary ing regulators. Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) also has the phenotypic Resources, Office of Research Services, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, characteristics of obesity and MR. The PWS candidate gene SNRPN MD, United States. (SNURF-SNRPN) is highly expressed in the brain and also has a role Mut class methylmalonic acidemia (mut-MMA) is an autosomal reces- in mRNA processing. Therefore it has been postulated that mental re- sive inborn error of metabolism caused by a defective activity of meth- tardation may be caused by defects in mRNA processing. ylmalonyl-CoA mutase. Affected patients suffer from life-threatening intermittent metabolic decompensation, pancreatitis, and renal failure; P0793. Common allelic variants of APOA5 gene in the metabolic the etiology of these alterations remains unknown. Current treatments syndrome include dietary restriction of precursors, alkali supplementation, and P. Kisfali1, K. Hovatovich1, M. Mohás2, A. Maasz1, L. Markó2, V. Csöngei1, B. liver transplantation in the most severely affected patients. Mitochon- Faragó1, L. Járomi1, L. Magyari1, E. Sáfrány1, C. Sipeky1, I. Wittman2, B. Me- drial dysfunction has been suggested as contributory to symptoms in legh1; the affected patients but never convincingly demonstrated. To assess 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, the role of mitochondria in this disorder, murine models of mut-MMA Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Medicine and Nephrological Center, Uni- were created and used to examine ultrastructural and energetic as- versity of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. pects of mitochondrial function. Megamitochondria in the hepatocytes The metabolic syndrome affects the 15-30 percent of the European of the mut-MMA animals were observed. Liver extracts displayed population. It is characterized by hypertriglyceridaemia, hyperten- electron transport chain dysfunction, with a substantial decrease in sion, diabetes mellitus and obesity. Naturally occuring variants of the cytochrome c oxidase activity in the mutant animals. Over time, the APOA5 gene associated with elevated triglyceride levels. The T-1131C proximal tubules of the kidney and exocrine pancreas also developed variant has been found to associate with cardio- and cerebrovascular abnormal mitochondria, which were enlarged with distorted cristae and disorders like coronary artery disease and stroke.Relationship of the contained inclusions and unusual lamellar structures whereas mito- common four SNPs was examined using PCR/RFLP tests. 220 pa- chondria were normal in the skeletal muscle and heart. Our findings in- tients affected with metabolic syndrome and 140 apparently healthy dicate a tissue specific response inherent to mut-MMA and for the first controls were genotyped for T-1131C; IVS3 +G476A, T1259C and time, connect mitochondrial function to the etiology of organ system C56G variants of the APOA5 gene.The allele frequencies for metabolic pathology in this disorder. Furthermore, these observations explain syndrome patients/controls were as follows: 10.4/4.1 % for -1131C, the protective effects of liver transplantation in methylmalonic acide- 8/2.5% for IVS3+ G476A, 8.2/7% for 1259C and 7.25/4% for 56G. mia and should guide the development and testing of new therapies We found increased serum triglyceride levels in carriers compared for affected patients. with non-carriers for three polymorphisms (T-1131C; IVS3+ G476A, T1259C, p<0.05 carriers vs. non carriers). The serum cholesterol lev- P0796. Feasible contribution of inherited thrombophilia factors els measured were similar in all subjects. The multiple logistic regres- in pregnancy miscarriage sion analyses adjusted for age, gender, total serum cholesterol, acut O. Malysheva, O. Bespalova, T. Ivashenko, V. Baranov; myocardial infarction and stroke revealed that -1131C and IVS3+ 476A Ott’s Institute of obstetrics and gynecology, St.Petersberg, Russian Federation. variants confer a significantly increased risk for development of meta- To determine whether the inherited thrombophilia risk factors are asso- bolic syndrome (OR 2,874; 95% CI: 1.241-5.123; p=0.010; and OR ciated with spontaneous abortion (SA) of unexplained etiology, geno- 3.529; 95% CI: 1.308-9.029; p=0.009). Further association studies are types distributions of the 2 mutations (FV Leiden, PROT G20210A) required to delineate the significance of the naturally existing haplo- and two gene polymorphisms (FGBG-455A and MTHFR C677T) were types in the development of metabolic syndrome. compared in 172 women with at least 1 SA before the 20th week of gestation and 108 women with the live birth and without a history of P0794. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene and the neural pregnancy loss. The analysis of anti-PL antibodies (APA) for 94/172 tube defects in Kazakh population patients with SA was provided retrospectively. No significant differenc- Z. Makhmutova, G. Svyatova; es were observed between distributions of any studied genotypes both Scientific centre of obstetrics, gynaecology and perinatology, Almaty, Kazakh- in the miscarriage and control groups. Meanwhile, in the subgroup stan. women with with ≥3 SA the frequency of MTHFR677 T/T genotype This study determined the frequencies of the C677T and A1298C 5,10- was significantly higher when compared to the control group (9/57, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene’s mutations for 15,8% versus 5/108, 4,6%; p<0,05). It was especially pronounced in 30 neural tube defects (NTD) cases, 84 mothers, 39 fathers of NTD the women with ≥3 SA and no live births in anamnesis (9/46, 19,6%; cases and 50 males and 100 females for the controls of Kazakh popu- p<0,01). Patients with APA had ”thrombophilic genotypes” (MTHFR677 lation. T/T, FGBG-455 A/A and/or FV Leiden and PROT G20210A in hetero- The frequency of homozygous TT genotype in mothers of NTD cases zygotes) more often than non-APA patients (17/49, 34,7% versus 7/45, (8,3%) was statistically higher than their respective controls (1,0%, 15,5%; p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: 1. Genotype MTHFR677 T/T is as- χ2=4,3; p<0,05). The fathers of NTD patients were heterozygous for sociated with recurrent spontaneous abortions with ≥3 fetal loss. 2. the C677T variant allele (59,9%) at a higher rate than the males of Presence of inherited thrombophilia factors correlates with presence control group (38,0%, χ2 =3,8; p<0,05). Kazakh NTD cases were ho- of APA in 69,6% (16/23) of cases. It could be speculated that both APA mozygous (13,3%) and heterozygous (66,7%) for the C677T variant and inherited thrombophilia could be treated as cumulative risk-factors Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 211 initiating SA or that thrombophilia itself plays a role of initial predisposi- 6Department of Human Genetics, München, Germany, 7Department of Pediatric tion factor in production of APA. Nephrology, Ankara, Turkey, 8Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 9Department of Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany, 10Department of Basic P0797. Mitochondrial DNA haplogroups in infertile males Health Sciences and Biotechnology, Ankara, Turkey, 11Department of Clinical M. Houshmand1, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi1, F. M.A Mohammad2, L. Bastaki3, K. Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. Naguib4, A. Olivieri5, B. Hooshiar Kashani1, V. Khalili1; Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is an autosomal recessive, usually 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, lethal multisystemic disorder characterized by early developmental Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kuwait Medical Genetic Centre, Maternity Hospital, anomalies of the central nervous system, cystic kidney dysplasia, hep- Kuwait, Kuwait, 3Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Kuwait University,, Kuwait, atobiliary ductal plate malformation and postaxial polydactyly. Three Kuwait, 4Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Kuwait University, Kuwait, Kuwait, MKS loci have been mapped and recently, two genes were identified: 5Dipartimento di Genetica e Microbiologia, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy. MKS1 on 17q22 in Caucasian kindreds and MKS3 on 8q22 in Omani A variety of mtDNA mutations responsible for human diseases have and Pakistani families, putting MKS on the growing list of ciliary dis- been associated with molecular defects in the OXPHOS system. It has orders (“ciliopathies”). We performed linkage analysis for MKS1-3 in been proposed that mtDNA genetic alterations can also be responsi- 14 consanguineous and/or multiplex families of different ethnic origins ble for sperm dysfunction. To investigate any possible association be- with histologic diagnosis and at least three classic MKS manifestations tween infertility and mtDNA haplogroups (hg), the nucleotide sequence in each kindred. Unexpectedly, only five families were linked to any of of the Hypervariable Segment I (HVS-I) of mtDNA was determined in the known MKS loci, clearly indicating further locus heterogeneity. All 99 unrelated Kuwaiti patients with infertility and 54 normal controls with five families showed homozygosity for MKS1 and, intriguingly, were the same ethnicity. DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood after of non-Caucasian origin. MKS1 sequencing revealed no mutation in having obtained informed consent. The nucleotide sequence of HVS- two of these pedigrees, whereas different, novel splicing defects were I (np 16,024-16,383) was directly determined. High-resolution RFLP identified in the three other families and an additional sporadic Ger- analysis and control-region sequencing revealed high proportion of man patient. Given that all of our mutations and two of the in total haplogroup J and M in normal controls (64% and 20.3%) compared to four known MKS1 changes cause aberrant splicing (while the other infertile men (26.2% and 8.1%) respectively. (P= 0.002 for J and 0.03 two known mutations were frameshift mutations), we hypothesize that for M) Therefore, we hypothesize that individuals classified as hap- splicing defects are a crucial mutational mechanism in MKS1 which logroup J and M demonstrate a significant decrease in risk of infertility apparently is one of the main loci and key players in MKS. Our results in Kuwaiti population. indicate that MKS1 mutations are not restricted to the Caucasian gene pool and suggest further genetic heterogeneity for MKS. Overall, our P0798. Mutational analysis of the mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) gene data have immediate implications for genetic counselling and testing in Tunisian patients with mitochondrial diseases approaches in MKS. E. Mkaouar-Rebai1, A. Tlili1, S. Masmoudi1, N. Belguith1, I. Charfeddine2, M. Mnif3, C. Triki4, F. Fakhfakh1; P0800. Multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) 1Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire humaine. Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, analysis of the dystrophin gene in Bulgarian patients with Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service d’O.R.L., C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba de Sfax, Tunisia, Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD) Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service d’endocrinologie, C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba de Sfax, Tu- A. Todorova1, T. Todorov1, M. Lukova1, B. Dworniczak2, V. Mitev1; nisia., Sfax, Tunisia, 4Service de Neurologie, C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba de Sfax, 1Sofia Medical University, Medical Faculty, Department of Chemistry and Biosh- Tunisia., Sfax, Tunisia. emistry, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Muenster, Germany. The mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) gene (MTTL) is a hot spot for patho- MLPA is a quantitative method for detection of deletions/duplications genic mutations that are associated with mitochondrial diseases with of one or more exons of a gene.In more than 70% of the DMD/BMD various clinical features. Among these mutations, the A3243G muta- cases the disease causing mutations are deletions or duplications in tion was associated with various types of mitochondrial multisystem the dystrophin gene. The MLPA method provides a cheap and power- disorder, such as Mitochondrial Inherited Diabetes and Deafness ful tool to screen the whole dystrophin gene in two multiplex reactions. (MIDD), Mitochondrial myopathy, Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis and We analyzed 24 unrelated DMD/BMD Bulgarian families without de- Stroke like episodes (MELAS), Myoclonus Epilepsy with Ragged Red letions in the dystrophin gene after multiplex PCR. We used SALSA Fibres (MERRF), maternally inherited Progressive External Ophthal- PO34/PO35 kit specific for the dystrophin gene. In 19 families we moplegia (PEO), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and a subtype of Leigh found deletions or duplications. We found 12 deletions distributed in syndrome. the main deletion hotspot of the gene. These deletions include exons We screened 128 Tunisian patients presenting various mitochondrial 42-45, 44 (2 times detected), 45-47, 45-50, 46-50, 46-52, 49-50, 53- diseases (MIDD, diabetes, hearing loss, Leigh Syndrome, cardiomy- 54, 55, 58, 79. In addition, 7 different duplications were detected, all opathy, metabolic encephalopathy…) for the A3243G mutation in the but two starting in the 5’-end of the gene. Duplications include exons mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) gene. This screening was carried out using 2-10, 2-33, 8-11, 8-13, 13-40, 48-50, 51. Carrier status was clarified PCR-RFLP with the restriction endonuclease ApaI. None of the 128 in all females at risk. MLPA failed to detect deletions or duplications patients or the 100 controls tested were found to carry the mitochon- in five families where the disease causing mutation could be a point drial A3243G mutation in the tRNALeu(UUR) gene in homoplasmic or het- mutation or the clinical diagnosis might need reevaluation.The present eroplasmic form. After direct sequencing of the entire mitochondrial work proved that MLPA is a powerful tool in clarifying the molecular de- tRNALeu(UUR) gene and a part of the mitochondrial NADH dehydroge- fects along the dystrophin gene. MLPA permits to detect carrier status nase 1, we found no mutations or polymorphisms in the MTTL1 gene of female relatives of affected boys. Moreover, this analysis is the only in the tested patients and controls and we confirmed the absence of one which allows DNA testing in families where the index patient is no the A3243G mutation in this gene. We also found a T3396C mutations more available. MLPA became a method of choice for genetic analysis in the mitochondrial ND1 gene in one family with nonsyndromic hear- of Bulgarian DMD/BMD families. ing loss. This substitution was absent in the other patients and in 100 normal individuals. No polymorphisms or other mutations were found P0801. Point mutation p.Tyr997X in exon 23 of the dystrophin in the mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) gene in the tested patients. gene detected by MLPA analysis in Bulgarian DMD family (case report) P0799. Aberrant splicing is a common mutational mechanism in T. Todorov1, A. Todorova1, M. Lukova1, B. Dworniczak2, V. Mitev1; MKS1, a key player in Meckel Gruber syndrome 1Sofia Medical University, Medical Faculty, Department of Chemistry and Biosh- V. Frank1, N. Ortiz Brüchle1, S. Mager1, S. G. M. Frints2, A. Bohring3, G. du emistry, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Muenster, Germany. Bois4, I. Debatin5, H. Seidel6, N. Besbas7, U. Todt8, C. Kubisch8, T. Grimm9, F. We introduced and optimized for diagnostic purposes the new MLPA Teksen10, S. Balci11, K. Zerres1, C. Bergmann1; method. The SALSA PO34/PO35 kit specific for deletions/duplications 1Department of Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany, 2Department of Clini- detection along the dystrophin gene was applied to screen Bulgarian cal Genetics, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3Department of Human Genetics, DMD/BMD patients. The mathematical calculations were performed Muenster, Germany, 4Institute of Chromosomal Diagnostics and Genetic Coun- with Excel program. In 19 Bulgarian families we found 11 different de- selling, Böblingen, Germany, 5Department of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, letions and 7 different duplications in the dystrophin gene.In one of Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 212 the tested families MLPA showed no pick for exon 23 on the electro- P0804. A Retrospective Analysis of Patients Previously phoregrams, whish supposed deletion of this exon. A single PCR am- Tested For Gene Polymorphisms Implicated In Influencing plification of exon 23 showed the exon presence in the patient. Further Susceptibility To Thrombosis In A Reference Center in Izmir/ sequencing analysis revealed a point mutation generating stop codon Turkey in exon 23 - c.2991C>G, p.Tyr997X. The nucleotide change affects F. Ozkinay1,2, H. Onay1, G. Itirli1,3, C. Gunduz4, M. Kayikcioglu5, E. Kumral6, O. the place of hybridization of the exon 23 specific MLPA probe, which Cogulu1,2, H. Akin1, C. Ozkinay1; is the reason for absence of exon 23 on the electrophoregrams. The 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, patient was severely affected by Duchenne-type muscular dystrophy. Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Both patient’s mother and sister were found to be carriers of the muta- Turkey, 3Ege University, Department of Biotechnology, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege Uni- tion p.Tyr997X. Our experience in MLPA analysis stressed upon the versity, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 5Ege fact that single exon deletions should be interpreted with caution and University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Cardiology, Izmir, Turkey, 6Ege should be proved by alternative methods. In some cases it is possible University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Izmir, Turkey. to detect point mutations and polymorphisms by MLPA analysis. Arterial and venous thromboembolism is one of the most common diseases affecting populations throughout the world. Recently the P0802. Screening for subtelomeric abnormalities in patients with polymorphisms found in a number of genes which play a role in the idiopahtic mental retardation by MLPA thromboembolic processes have been reported to be risk factors for D. S. Iancu1, C. Rusu2, E. Neagu1, G. Girbea1, A. Constantinescu1, C. Constan- thromboembolism. tinescu1, C. Scrypnik3, V. Bica4, L. Barbarii1; For two years our department has made use of a strip test (CVD Stri- 1National Institute of Legal Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 2University of Medi- pAssay, ViennaLab, Austria) detecting the following gene polymor- cine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 3University of Medicine, Oradea, Romania, phisms. These polymorphisms; FV R506Q(Leiden), FV H1299R, Pro- 4“Alfred Rusescu” Children Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. thrombin G20210A, Factor XIII V34L, ß-Fibrinogen -455 G-A, PAI-1 Recent studies ascertained that 5 to 10% of mental retardations are 4G/5G, GPIIIa L33P(HPA-1), MTHFR C677T, MTHFR A1298C, ACE due to mutations in the subtelomeric regions. Knowing the mutational I/D, Apo B R3500Q,Apo E2/E3/E4. pattern is of major importance for genetic counseling. We have studied In this study we retrospectively investigated the referral indications and the subtelomeric rearrangements using a MLPA assay in a series of the frequencies of the polymorphisms in the children and adult pa- clinically selected patients with mental retardation and negative chro- tients tested using this CVD stripassay at the Ege University Medical mosomal analysis. The study was initiated in the framework of a mul- Genetics Department. The frequencies of the polymorphisms found in ticentric national research program. The MLPA probes included in the patients were compared to the frequencies of the liver transplantation commercial kits allowed us to scan all the subtelomeric regions in two donors who were routinely tested before transplantation. PCR reactions. The amplicons were analyzed on a 3100 Avant ABI During the two year period, 426 patients (146 children, 280 adults) Genetic Analyzer. We investigated 123 DNA samples and assessed were tested using the CVD strip test. The majority of patients in the the location of deletions and duplications. The MLPA screen revealed adult group were referred to our department with indications of cardio- mutations in 6% of cases (on the short arms of chromosomes 1, 7 vascular and/or cerebrovascular diseases from the cardiology, neurol- and 18). Except one, all the mutations were deletions and no multiple ogy and internal medicine departments. The frequencies of Factor V deletions were detected. One case revealed a double subtelomeric (H1299R) beta fibrinogen(455G-A) and MTHFR (C677T) were found mutational pattern, consisting of a 7q deletion associated with 9q du- to be significantly higher in patients having cardiovascular and/or cere- plication. The MLPA method proved to be easy to handle, accurate and brovascular diseases compared to the frequencies found in control highly reproducible. For the patients carrying subtelomeric rearrange- group (p<0.05). ments, further investigations (FISH) are planned in order to confirm the As a conclusion Factor V (H1299R) β-fibrinogen (455G-A) and MTHFR mutation and DNA samples from their relative are collected. (C677T) polymorphisms might play a role in susceptibility to thrombo- sis in our population. P0803. First case of Gamma-Thalassemia C. Badens1, K. Gonnet1, F. Merono1, N. Bonello1, N. Levy1, I. Thuret2; P0805. Targeted mutation reveals essential functions of the 1Department of Genetics, Hospital La Timone, Marseille, France, 2Pediatric homeodomain transcription factor Shox2 in sinoatrial and Hematology, Hospital La Timone, Marseille, France. pacemaking development. Numerous deletional Thalassemia have been reported, involving one R. J. Blaschke1, N. D. Hahurij2, S. Kuijper3, S. Just4, L. J. Wisse2, K. Deissler5, or several globin genes in combination. However, deletions specifically T. Maxelon1, K. Anastassiadis6, J. Spitzer1, S. E. Hardt4, H. Schöler7, H. Feits- targetted on the fetal β-like genes have never been reported so far, ma4, W. Rottbauer4, M. Blum5, F. Meijlink3, G. Rappold1, A. C. Gittenberger-de- likely due to a fetal lethal phenotype induced by homozygous muta- Groot2; tions in these genes. By contrast, heterozygosity is likely clinically si- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, lent. Here, we report on the observation of a fetal β-like genes deletion 2Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden University Medical Center, that we detected because it was located in Cis of a Sickle Cell β-globin Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute of gene. Developmental Biology, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 4Department of Internal The proband is a newborn diagnosed at birth as having Sickle Cell Medicine III, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Institute for Anemia (SCA) in the course of neonatal screening. During the first Zoology, University Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany, 6Max-Planck-Institute for consultation, at 6 weeks of age, haemoglobin analysis revealed the Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics MPI-CBG, Biotec,TU Dresden, Dresden, following Hb rates : HbF 55%, HbS 27% and HbA 15% . Molecular Germany, 7Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany. analysis of the β-globin gene showed, as a single defect, heterozygos- Background: The identification of molecular pathways regulating the ity for the prevalent sickle cell mutation. During the course of evolution, development of pacemaking and coordinated heartbeat is crucial for a the level of HbA raised slowly to a normal value and, finally, a typical comprehensive mechanistic understanding of arrhythmia related dis- profile for HbS carrier was observed at 8 month of age. eases. Elucidation of these pathways has mainly been complicated by In order to further explore this peculiar phenotype, the whole β-globin an insufficient definition of the developmental structures involved in locus was explored by means of MLPA technical procedures and al- these processes and the unavailability of animal models specifically lowed to evidence a heterozygous deletion of the fetal genes, A γ and targeting the relevant tissues. We here report on a highly restricted G γ-globin. We conclude that a deletion of the fetal genes have led to a expression pattern of the homeodomain transcription factor Shox2 in premature switch on the adult βS-gene and to SCA profile at birth. This the sinus venosus myocardium, including the sinoatrial nodal region is the first case of γ-thalassemia ever reported, representing a pitfall in and the venous valves. Methods: To investigate its function in vivo, we neonatal screening of SCA. have generated mouse lines carrying a targeted mutation of the Shox2 gene. While heterozygous animals did not exhibit obvious defects, ho- mozygosity of the targeted allele led to embryonic lethality at 11.5 to 13.5 dpc. Results: Shox2-/- embryos exhibited severe hypoplasia of the sinus venosus myocardium in the posterior heart field including the si- noatrial nodal region and venous valves. We furthermore demonstrate Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 21 aberrant expression of Connexin40 and Connexin43 and the transcrip- P0808. Mutations in mtDNA in Children with manifestations of tion factor Nkx2.5 in vivo specifically within the sinoatrial nodal region, mitochondrial encephalomyopaties and show that Shox2 deficiency interferes with pacemaking function J. Pilch1, M. Asman2, E. Jamroz1, M. Kajor3, E. Kotrys-Puchalska4, M. Goss4, in Zebrafish embryos. Conclusion: From these results, we postulate a M. Krzak2, M. Tarnowski2, J. Witecka2, J. Gmiński4, A. L. Sieroń2, E. Marszał1; critical function of Shox2 in the recruitment of sinus venosus myocar- 1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Po- dium comprising the sinoatrial nodal region. land, 2Department of General & Molecular Biology & Genetics, Medical Univer- sity of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 3Department of Anatomopathology, Medical P0806. Multiple sulfatase deficiency is due to hypomorphic University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 4Department of Biochemistry, Medical mutations of the SUMF1 gene University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. I. Annunziata1, V. Bouchè1, L. Schlotawa2, T. Dierks2, A. Ballabio1; Mitochondrial encephalomyopaties are composed disorders with wide 1TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Universitaet Bielefeld Universitaetsstr, Bielefeld, Ger- range of clinical manifestations. Lack of specific correlation between many. genotype and phenotype makes the genetic diagnostic even more dif- Sulfatases catalyze the hydrolysis of sulfate esters bonds from a wide ficult. Particularly tedious is identification of mutations in mitochondrial variety of substrates. Several human inherited diseases are caused DNA. In years 2004 to 2006 in Department of Child Neurology muscle by the deficiency of individual sulfatases. Multiple sulfatase deficiency biopsies were performed in a group of sick children with manifestations (MSD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the of mitochondrial encephalomyopaties. In the biopsies the biochemical, simultaneous deficiency of all known sulfatases. MSD patients carry histopathological, and ultrastructural analyses have been conducted. mutations of the Sulfatase Modifying Factor 1 (SUMF1) gene encod- The cellular respiratory chain enzymes activities were assayed in mus- ing the α-formylglycin generating enzyme (FGE) which is required for cles and skin fibroblasts. Based on clinical manifestations and results the post-translational modification of sulfatases. Residual sulfatase ac- of enzymatic assays a group of 21 sick children was selected for fur- tivities are detectable, at variable levels, in all MSD patients. We have ther molecular studies. used a recently developed Sumf1 KO mouse line which completely Aim of the study: The goal was to identify mutations in mitochondrial devoid of all sulfatase activities to investigate on the nature of the re- DNA isolated from muscle biopsies of affected children. sidual sulfatase activities detected in MSD patients. Four mutations Material and methods: Molecular analysis performed in two steps for (i.e. S155P, R224W, R345C, R349W) found in homozygosis in MSD entire mitochondrial DNA. First step was to screen the mitochondrial patients were over-expressed, using viral-mediated gene delivery, in DNA for any mismatches by heteroduplex analysis using endonucle- Sumf1-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). The results obtained ase SURVEYOR kit (Trangenomic, Inc., Omaha, NE, USA). DNA frag- indicate that mutant SUMF1 cDNAs encode stable SUMF1 proteins ments showing mismatches were subjected to DNA sequencing using which are of the appropriate molecular weight and are properly lo- ABI PRISM 310 DNA analyzer. calized in the endoplasmic reticulum. Expression of these cDNAs in Results: The most common changes found in all analyzed fragments Sumf1-/- MEFs results in low, albeit significant, FGE activity, and in of mitochondrial DNA were polymorphisms. Mutations were detected partial rescue of sulfatase activities. These data indicate that MSD is in few genes e.g.: a) 16S rRNA (in 8 children); b) subunits ND2, ND4L, due to hypomorphic SUMF1 mutations and suggest that a complete ND5, and ND6 of complex I (in 6); c) tRNA for leucine (in 1); and d) loss of SUMF1 function is likely to be lethal in humans. tRNA for proline (in 1). Further analysis is necessary for comparing genotypes with clinical phenotypes to final confirmation of pathogenic P0807. Frequency of LHON mutations in mitochondrial disease character of detected mutations. phenotypes from Centre Portugal M. M. Grazina1,2, J. M. Pratas2, S. Oliveira2, M. Oliveira2, L. Diogo3, P. Garcia3, P0809. Mutational analysis of the mitochondrial 12SrRNA and C. Macário4, C. R. Oliveira1,2; tRNASer(UCN) genes in patients with aminoglycoside-induced 1Faculty of Medicine, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Centre for Neuroscience and Cell and nonsyndromic hearing loss from Volga-Ural region and Biology, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Paediatric Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal, 4University Siberia (Russia) Hospitals, Coimbra, Portugal. L. U. Dzhemileva1, O. L. Posukh2, N. A. Barashkov3, A. M. Tazetdinov1, S. A. INTRODUCTION: Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a Fedorova3, N. R. Maximova3, E. E. Fedotova3, V. N. Tadinova4, E. K. Khusnut- maternally mitochondrial disorder, characterized by bilateral visual dinova1; loss, most frequently found in young males. Classical LHON is main- 1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of ly associated to mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations G11778A, Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, G3460A and T14484C, localized in the coding regions for ND4, ND1 Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Yakutsk Research Centre, Siberian Branch and ND6 (complex I subunits of mitochondrial respiratory chain), re- of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 4Re- spectively. Other mutations (secondary) have also been described in publican Altai Children’s Hospital, Gorno-Altaisk, Russian Federation. LHON cases. Several mtDNA mutations have been found to be associated with METHODS: We have studied a total of 648 subjects, counting with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss (NSHL). The m.1555G>A 46 healthy family members. The techniques employed included PCR, (12SrRNA) was confirmed as the main cause of aminoglycoside in- RFLP and sequencing analysis. We investigated 7 point mutations, duced deafness in different populations. The m.7445A>G, m.7472_ described as primary (G3460A, G11778A, T14484C) or secondary 7473insC, m.7510T>C, m.7511T>C (tRNASer(UCN)) were reported to (T4216C, A4917G, G13708A, G15257A), associated previously to be associated with NSHL. Pathogenicity of some other variations in LHON. 12SrRNA and tRNASer(UCN) genes associated with NSHL has not RESULTS: We have found 40 positive cases (6.2%), corresponding to yet been confirmed (http://www.mitomap.org). We report here the re- the analysis of 52 tissues. Considering the total number of cases stud- sults of mutational screening for 12S rRNA and tRNASer(UCN) genes ied, the frequencies found were: 0.002; 0.012; 0.003; 0.034; 0.026; among Cx26- and Cx30-negative deaf individuals of different ethnic- 0.014 and 0.012, for mutations G3460A, G11778A, T14484C; T4216C, ity from some regions of Russia. Previously, 301 unrelated patients A4917G, G13708A and G15257A, respectively. (70 with aminoglycoside-induced deafness, and 231 with NSHL) from DISCUSSION: The most frequent mtDNA alterations found, among Volga-Ural region, 78 unrelated patients with NSHL from the Republic primary and secondary mutations studied, were G11778A and Sakha (Yakutia, northeastern Siberia), and 119 deaf patients (75 un- T4216C, respectively. The primary mutations were found only in LHON related families) from the Republic Altai (south Siberia) were analyzed or LHON-plus cases. Secondary mutations were observed in a wide for Cx26 and Cx30 mutations. Different variations at the 961 position in variety of phenotypes, as expected. On the other hand, the primary 12S rRNA gene have been found among deaf individuals from Volga- mutations were found isolated, whereas secondary mutations were Ural region. Four patients of Tatar ethnicity, one with m.961delTinsCn, frequently encountered in combinations. and three with m.961delTinsC, two Russian patients, one with m.961T>G, and another with m.961T>A, were detected. Moreover, the m.7444G>A (tRNASer(UCN)) was found in one Russian patient with NSHL. The m.1555G>A (12S rRNA) was detected in one Yakut patient (Republic Sakha). Finally, m.7445G>C (tRNASer(UCN)) was found in two sibs of one Kazakh family (Altai region) in whom moderate sen-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 21 sorineural hearing loss was co-existed with goiter. Further studies are P0812. A66G polymorphism of methionine synthase reductase needed to confirm pathogenicity of some mtDNA variations associated (MTRR) gene is associated with spontaneous abortions with deafness in patients from some regions of Russia. O. N. Bespalova1, T. E. Ivaschenko1, N. I. Matveeva1, I. Y. Vasileva2, V. S. Baranov1; P0810. Common polymorphism of A1298C in MTHFR gene 1Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Di- is associated with maternal meiosis I chromosome 21 agnostic medical genetical Center, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. nondisjunction in Down syndrome Spontaneous abortion (SA) is a frequent health problem of women of S. Rezaee, A. Aleyasin; the reproductive age. A number of causes including uterine anoma- National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic lies, maternal\paternal balanced translocations, luteal phase defect, Republic of Iran. hyperhomocysteinaemia have been attributed to the origin of SA. Parental origin and stage of meiotic error of chromosome 21 nondis- MTRR is an enzyme essential for normal folate metabolism. A com- junction has been determined in 226 families with Down syndrome. mon polymorphism in this gene was recently found to be associated Their mothers hav e been genotyped for common polymorphisms in with increased risk of neural tube defects. It also might contribute to the MTHFR (C677T and A1298C) and MTRR (A66G) genes to iden- increased risk for SA. tify any specific association of these previously described maternal The 66A\G polymorphism of the MTRR gene was studied by PCR- genetic risk factor to the etiology of chromosome 21 nondisjunction. RFLP analysis in 108 women with one and more normal pregnancies Five STR markers related to chromosome 21 (D21S11, D21S1414, and no SA in anamnesis (control group I) , in 78 nonpregnant women D21S1440, D21S1411, D21S1412) were used to determine the pa- with a history of at least one SA (II group), in 75 patients with two recur- rental origins and stage of meiotic error successfully for 226 cases. rent SA (III group) and in 67 patients with numerous ( >- 3) recurrent In total, 140 cases showed a meiotic error in meiosis stage I, 58 in SA(IV group). meiosis maternal meiosis stage II, 20 in paternal meiosis I and 8 in The distribution of genotype frequencies for MTRR gene was signifi- paternal meiosis II. All four groups of mother cases and a normal con- cantly different (p<0,01: df2) between 3 groups with SA and the control trol group consisted of 176 normal mothers with at least one healthy group (Table.I). child were tested for common polymorphisms of C677T, A1298C in Table I. The frequencies of genotypes MTRR gene in 4 studied the MTHFR and C66G in the MTRR genes. Significant association groups was detected between maternal meiosis I chromosome 21 nondisjunc- genotype Igroup(n=108) IIgroup(n=78) IIIgroup(n=75) IVgroup(n=67) tion and the A1298C polymorphism of the MTHFR gene (P<0.0014, A\A (23)21,3% (10)12,8% (10)13,3% (7)10,5% χ2>11.13). This study has showed for the first time the importance of A\G (61)56,5% (39)50% (38)50,7% (35)52,2% stage of meiotic nondisjunction in the study of maternal genetic risk G\G (24)22,2% (29)37,2% (27)36% (25)37,3% factor of Down syndrome. The significant association of stage I meiotic nondisjunction and A1298C polymorphism of MTHFR gene in mother Conclusions: Thus, the polymorphism A66G of MTRR gene might be consid- of Down syndrome presents the relationship of acid folic metabolism in ered as a risk factor for spontaneous abortions. the etiology of Down syndrome in Iranian cases. P0813. A report of three cases affected with Mucolipidosis type II P0811. Is the MTHFR C677T gene polymorphism a modifier F. Afroozan1, V. Hadavi1, N. Almadani1, R. Kariminejad1, H. Najmabadi1, J. G. factor in SMA? Huijmans2, W. J. Kleijer2, O. van Diggelen2, M. H. Kariminejad1; P. Apostol1, D. Cimponeriu1, M. Stavarachi1, I. Radu1, L. Dan1, L. Cherry1, M. 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Toma1, N. Butoianu2, C. Burloiu2, S. Magureanu2, L. Gavrila1; Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Enzyme Laboratory, Department Clinical Genetics, 1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Alexandru Obregia Hospital, Bu- Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands Antilles. charest, Romania. Mucolipidosis type II is a Hurler-like condition with severe clinical and The methylation process is essential for the regulation of genes ex- radiologic features, peculiar fibroblast inclusions, and no excessive pression controlling the development and function of the neurons. The mucopolysacchariduria. It first was described in 1967 by Leroy and formation of SMN complex, responsible for motoneurons survive, is de- DeMars and named it I-cell disease. This disease is inherited as an pendent by the symmetric dimethylation of some component proteins. autosomal recessive trait and both sexes are affected equally. We speculated that this interaction could be affected by the MTHFR Here we report three cases affected with Mucolipidosis type II, who gene although any data regarding this association are not available. had short stature and microcephaly at birth. Growth and developmen- The MTHFR C677T polymorphism is strongly associated with the re- tal retardation and hypotonia developed in the first year of life. They duction of MTHFR activity. Based on this observation, we analyze a suffered from coarse facial features, prominent and thick upper lip, possible association of this polymorphism with the SMA severity in the depressed nasal bridge, thick eyebrows, bulbous nose, sparse hair Romanian patients. and died in the first year of life. CT scan revealed brain atrophy. En- Our study was carried out on 63 SMA clinically diagnosed patients, zyme analysis showed decreasing in fibroblast cultures and in contrast classified by ISMAC criteria, 60 parents and 100 controls. The blood increases in plasma in all cases and confirmed Mucolipidosis type II. samples were obtained from Bucharest pediatric hospital. Informed oral consent was obtained from all subjects. The MTHFR C677T gene P0814. Seventeen years experience of prenatal diagnosis of polymorphism was analyzed by PCR-RFLP method. Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) in Iran The highest frequency of TT genotype was observed in the SMA III M. H. Kariminejad1, F. Afroozan1, B. Bozorgmehr1, N. Almadani1, V. Hadavi1, O. group (21,05%) compared with SMA II (17,6%) and I (14,8%), and with P. Van Diggelen2, W. J. Kleijer2, J. G. Huijman2, R. Karimi-Nejad1; parents (13,3%) and control (7%) groups. This genotype may increas- 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, es the risk for disease in SMA type I (OR = 2,31) and II (OR =2,84), Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Enzyme Laboratory, Department Clinical Genetics, while in SMA type III, only the presence of one T allele was associated Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands with the disease. Antilles. We can not exclude the contribution of mutated allele to the SMA phe- Most of the metabolic disorders due to lysosomal storage disease in- notypes because our lots are not very large. cluding MPS are fairly frequent in Iran, because of high frequency of intermarriage. Due to the lack of curable or beneficial symptomatic MTHFR677CC MTHFR677CT MTHFR677TT treatment, upon a scientific collaboration, families having affected off- spring suspected for MPS disease have been enzymatically analyzed. SMA 19 33 11 In 82 families the deficit enzymes were detected. Seventy prenatal Parents 22 30 8 diagnoses for pareous at risk were performed, revealing 53 unaffected and 17 affected fetuses. All families with affected fetuses opted for Control 48 45 7 pregnancy termination. The postnatal results of unaffected newborns confirmed the prenatal diagnosis findings. The summary of clinical findings and epidemiological distribution of MPS disorders and PND results are shown in the table.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 21 P0815. Multiple Sclerosis: Defect on GD3 synthase as a factor nephronophtisis are caused by large deletions in the 2q13 region. determining B-cell response Two previously described markers (NPHP804/6 and NPHPC11) lo- S. Husain1, M. Schwalb1, S. Cook1, E. Vitale1,2; calised within the common NPHP1 deletion interval were amplified in 1UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, United States, 2CNR Insti- multiplex PCR with control markers - exon 13 of the PAH gene, map- tute of Cybernetics, Pozzuoli (NA), Italy. ping outside the deleted region. Cell surface gangliosides represent the major class of glycoconjugates We have studied 6 unrelated patients. A homozygous deletion of the on neurons and bear the majority of sialic acid within the central ner- NPHP1 gene was found in 3 of 6 probands. vous system (CNS). In a previous study we found that a variant in All patients with deletion had polyuria, polydipsia, isosthenuria and dif- GD3 synthase (GD3S) was associated with a disruption of the ganglio- fusive ostepenia. side pathway in a unique pedigree segregating Multiple Sclerosis. The This work was partly supported by Russian President’s grand NSh- patients show a reduced expression of GD3 synthase enzyme which 5736.2006.7. leads to a different co-localization of GD3 ganglioside (GD3G) on pe- ripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and these could represent P0818. Missense alterations in the NF1 gene: how to make sense a foundation of the disease in this family. Here we present evidence of them? that GD3S is mainly expressed on the B cell surface thus providing L. M. Messiaen, T. Callens, J. Williams, M. Herbst, B. R. Korf; evidence of a potential role of B cells in this autoimmune disease Medical Genomics Laboratory, University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL, The ability to recognize self from non self components it is crucial for United States. the immune system as this can lead to the disruption of the body’s own Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), notorious for its phenotypic variability, tissue. MS is the result of a complex interaction of genes and environ- is characterized by neurofibromas, skinfold freckling and café-au-lait ment and the need to understand this complex mechanism is essential spots. Recently, a relationship between a 3-bp inframe deletion in the to establish the correct therapies. Although MS is considered to be NF1 gene and a specific phenotype, i.e. absence of cutaneous neuro- mediated by T-helper 1 (Th1) cells, emerging evidence implicates B fibromas, was found. This finding holds promise that other missense lymphocytes and their products in the pathogenesis of this disorder. or 1-2 AA-deletions may exist that correlate a specific missense (or Evidence from recent pathology studies has led to a renewed interest 1-2 AA-deletion) to the expression of a specific clinical phenotype. As in the role that chronically activated B cells may play in the pathogen- a first step, all putative missense alterations need to be classified cor- esis of MS, independent of antibody production. rectly. We developed a comprehensive NF1 assay using RNA- and DNA- P0816. Microsatellite Expansion in Myotonic Dystrophy Patients: based techniques including long-range RT-PCR, cDNA sequencing, The Search for Underlying Pattern FISH and MLPA and use this approach in a clinical setting. For all B. Veytsman1, L. Akhmadeeva2, F. Morales3,4, G. Hogg3, T. Ashizawa5, P. patients, the phenotype is recorded using a standardized checklist. Cuenca4, G. del Valle4, R. Brian4, M. Sittenfeld4, A. Wilcox3, D. E. Wilcox3, D. G. So far, we identified a pathogenic mutation in 1400 unrelated patients. Monckton3; All 172 different missense alterations, found in 299 patients, were fur- 1George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, United States, 2Bashkir State Medical ther analyzed for effect on splicing; presence/absence of another pos- University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United sible deleterious NF1 mutation; presence/absence in >1000 control al- Kingdom, 4Universidad de Costa Rica, San Jose, Costa Rica, 5The University of leles; evolutionary conservation; in silico predicted effect by PolyPhen, Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, United States. SIFT and AGVGD; familial clinical and genetic assessment. Using this Microsatellite expansion is the cause of a number of severe diseases approach, we classified 17 different “missense“ alterations, present in including fragile X, Huntington disease and myotonic dystrophy. An in- 46 patients, as splicing mutations, 19 novel alterations, residing in cis teresting common feature of these disorders is the instability of the mu- or trans of a clearly deleterious mutation, as rare benign variants and tation: once expanded, the number of repeat units continues to change 2 as variants of still unknown significance. The remaining 136 differ- in patient’s cells. An understanding of the mechanism and dynamics ent missense alterations were classified as pathogenic mutations. As of microsatellite expansion will provide more informative genotype to 30 of these mutations are recurrent in unrelated families, collection of phenotype relationships, which will in turn be of considerable utility phenotypic data of affected family members may provide additional in allowing patients and families to make more informed life and re- genotype-phenotype correlations. productive choices, and facilitate the clinical management of disease. Recently (J. Theor. Biol., 242, 401-408 (2006)), a mathematical model P0819. Functional analysis of splicing mutations in exon 7 of was proposed to describe the dynamics of microsatellite expansion NF1 gene and the resulting distribution of repeat lengths in patient’s DNA. In this I. Torrente1, I. Bottillo1, A. De Luca1,2, A. Schirinzi1, V. Guida1, S. Calvieri3, C. work, we compare the theoretical predictions with observed repeat Gervasini4, L. Larizza4, A. Pizzuti1,2, B. Dallapiccola1,2; length distributions in a large cohort of myotonic dystrophy type 1 pa- 1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine tients. We find that the theoretical predictions agree fairly well with the and Pathology, University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 3Department of clinical data with the observed distributions close to those predicted Dermatology - Venereology and Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University by the mathematical model. We also used the clinical data to estimate of Roma “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 4Division of Medical Genetics, San Paolo the theoretical parameters underlying the model: the rate of increase School of Medicine, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. of the number of repeats and the rate of widening the distribution. We Background. Neurofibromatosis type 1 is one of the most common au- find that while these parameters have large individual variations, the tosomal dominant disorders, affecting about 1:3,500 individuals. NF1 average values give reasonable predictions for the development of exon 7 displays weakly defined exon-intron boundaries, and is particu- mutations. These values can be used to estimate the initial mutation larly prone to missplicing. (the number of repeats in the progenitor allele) and to predict the de- Methods. In this study we investigated the expression of exon 7 velopment of the disease. transcripts using bioinformatic identification of splicing regulatory se- quences, and functional minigene analysis of four sequence changes P0817. Molecular-genetic diagnostic of Juvenile [c.910C>T (R304X), c.945G>A/c.946C>A (Q315Q/L316M), c.1005T>C nephronophthisis. (N335N)] identified in exon 7 of three different NF1 patients. A. Stepanova1, L. Prihodina2, A. Polyakov1; Results. We detected three exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs) and one 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2The putative exonic splicing silencer (ESS) element. The wild type minige- Moscow scientific research institute of pediatrics and children’s surgery, Mos- ne assay resulted in three alternative isoforms, including a transcript cow, Russian Federation. lacking NF1 exon 7 (NF1ΔE7). Both the wild type and the mutated Juvenile nephronophthisis (NPHP) is an autosomal recessive cystic constructs shared NF1ΔE7 in addition to the complete messenger, but kidney disease, which leads to end-stage renal failure at an average displayed a different ratio between the two transcripts. In the pres- age of 13 years following the initial symptoms of polyuria, polydipsia, ence of R304X and Q315Q/L316M mutations, the relative proportion renal salt loss, and secondary enuresis. between the different isoforms is shifted toward the expression of Juvenile nephronophtisis is most often caused by mutations in the NF1ΔE7, while in the presence of N335N variant, the NF1ΔE7 expres- NPHP1 gene, encoding nephrocystin. About 70% of cases of Juvenile sion is abolished.Conclusions. It appears mandatory to investigate the Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 21 role of each nucleotide change within the NF1 coding sequence, since P0822. Cancer or not cancer : differential impact of mutations a significant proportion of NF1 exon 7 mutations affects pre-mRNA in the XPD helicase in xeroderma pigmentosum and splicing, by disrupting exonic splicing motifs and modifying the delicate trichothiosdystrophy ? balance between aberrantly and correctly spliced transcripts. T. Magnaldo, Valérie Bergoglio, Lydia Riou, Odile Chevalier-Lagente; CNRS, Villejuif, France. P0820. The role of Nonsence-mediated RNA decay (NMD) Genetic alteration of the repair of UV-induced DNA lesions (cyclobu- mechanism in modifying clinical course and mode of inheritance tane pyrimidine dimers, CPD, and 6-4 photoproducts, 6-4 PP) by nu- of cardiac arrhythmias cleotide excision (NER) may result in photo genodermatoses, such E. V. Zaklyazminskaya, A. V. Polyakov, M. Kurnikova; as the cancer prone xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) syndrome or, the Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. cancer free trichothiodystrophie (TTD) syndrome. We aimed at com- Background: Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is an mRNA paring the impact of mutations in the XPD gene resulting in either the quality-control mechanism that degrades aberrant mRNAs containing XP-D (R683W) or the TTD/XP-D (R112H) syndrome. We cultured pri- premature translation termination codons (PTCs). The PTC mutations mary fibroblasts and keratinocytes from small skin biopsies of XP-D in cardiac ion channels genes can realize through haploinsufficiency and of TTD/XP-D patients. Comparative study of DNA repair kinet- due to elimination of the mutant mRNA. Thus, these mutations lead ics demonstrated faster and better DNA repair capacity of TTD/XP-D to the presence only normal ion channel proteins on surface of the cells compared to XP-D cells and hence, a shorter P53 stabilisation in cardiomyocyte but in depressed amount. the former. In order to reproduce the 3D cutaneous architecture, we Methods: Blood samples were collected from 85 unrelated Russian elaborated organotypic TTD/XP-D and XP-D skin cultures. Response families with Long QT syndrome (LQTS) and from 14 Brugada syn- to UVB (290_320 nm) irradiation in term of DNA repair and apoptosis, drome (BrS) patients. Genomic DNA and total RNA were extracted was also better in TTD/XP-D XP-D than in XP-D organotypic skins. from blood using standard methods. Mutation screening was performed We also assessed expression of markers of epidermal homeostatis using PCR-SSCP method and direct sequencing. Results: We identi- and revealled alteration or extinction of some epidermal differentiation fied 4 PTC mutations in 18 LQT1 patients (fifteen heterozygous and 3 markers such as filaggrin in XP-D, but not in TTD/XP_D organotypic homozygous mutations), 1 PTC mutation in 5 related LQT2 patients skin cultures. and 3 PTC mutations in 3 BrS patients. All heterozygous carriers of Altogether these results indicated that the R112H XPD mutation result- PTC mutations in KCNQ1 had favorable clinical course of disease. Ho- ing in the cancer-free TTD/XP-D syndrome are associated to a better mozygous carriers of PTC mutations in KCNQ1 had extremely malig- vital prognostic of cutaneous cells compared to the XPD R683W muta- nant forms. Heterozygous patients with PTC mutations in KCNH2 and tion characteristic of XP-D cancer-prone syndrome. SCN5A had characterized by moderate clinical sings but SCD were recorded in these families. Conclusions: All heterozygous carriers of P0823. Investigation of plasma carnitine ester profiles in a family PTC mutations in KCNQ1 had mild clinical course of disease. Such with homozygous and heterozygous OCTN2 deficiency mutations in KCNH2 and SCN5A were not so propitious. Homozygous G. C. Talián1, K. Komlósi1, L. Magyari1, É. Nemes2, R. Káposzta2, G. Mogyor- LQT1 probands with two “favorable” mutations had unexpectedly fatal ósy2, K. Méhes1, B. Melegh1; manifestations. We speculate that haploinsufficiency of IKr- and INa- 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, channel subunits have more serious consequences for repolarization Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Pediatrics, Medical and Health Science Center, than the same for IKs. University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. This work was partly supported by Russian President’s grants NSh- OCTN2 is the high affinity transporter protein for carnitine uptake into 5736.2006.7; RFFI-06-04-08363-ofi the cells. In the gene coding for this protein, slc22a5, a homozygous 844C deletion causing a V295X nonsense mutation was found in a P0821. Biochemical and structural characterization of Noonan three-year old male Roma patient with hepatopathy and cardiomyopa- syndrome-causing mutations affecting SHP-2’s phosphotyrosyl- thy. This kind of mutation has already been described in another Hun- binding pockets garian Roma subject with primary systemic carnitine deficiency. We S. Martinelli1, P. Torreri1, G. Bocchinfuso2, L. Stella2, E. Flex1, A. Grottesi3, G. measured 20 short-, medium- and long-chain carnitine esters by ESI Chillemi3, M. Ceccarini1, A. Palleschi2, B. D. Gelb4, T. C. Petrucci1, M. Tartaglia1; tandem mass spectrometry from plasma samples of the patient, his 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Università “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, consanguineous parents (first cousins) and siblings. The free carnitine 3CASPUR, Rome, Italy, 4Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United and all circulating carnitine esters were severely decreased in the pro- States. band. The three heterozygous pediatric siblings in the family (2 males Missense mutations in PTPN11 cause Noonan syndrome (NS), a ge- and 1 female) showed also reduced carnitines levels between the nor- netically heterogeneous developmental disorder with a pleiomorphic mal controls and the proband. The parents, who were also hetero- phenotype. PTPN11 encodes SHP-2, an SH2 domain-containing pro- zygotes, exhibited a highly similar pattern. Oral supplementation with tein tyrosine phosphatase that relays signals from activated cell-sur- 50 mg/kg/day dose of L-carnitine normalized the hepatomegaly, el- face receptors to RAS. NS-causing mutations promote SHP-2’s gain of evated transaminases and the previous pathologic cardiac ultrasound function by either destabilizing its catalytically inactive conformation or parameters of the proband. In the plasma samples 2 and 13 months increasing the affinity and/or specificity of the SH2 domains for phos- after the onset of carnitine treatment the free carnitine and many of photyrosyl ligands. While the identity of substitution does not seem to the carnitine esters increased to about half-normal level in response be critical in some cases, suggesting a crucial role in SHP-2’s function to the therapy; however, some individual esters remained still much for the residue being replaced, an invariant amino acid change is fre- below the controls. The data presented here show severely affected quently observed, indicating a specific role for the introduced residue. carnitine ester metabolism besides the dramatic decrease of the free Here, we characterized functionally and structurally two invariant NS- carnitine in primary systemic carnitine deficiency caused by deleteri- causing mutations, T42A and E139D, affecting residues placed in the ous slc22a5 mutations. The possible functional consequences of the N- and C-SH2 pockets which mediate SHP-2 binding to phosphoty- reduced carnitine esters associated with the heterozygous genotype rosyl-containing signaling partners. By analyzing in vitro biochemi- require further investigations. cal behavior (basal and ligand-stimulated phosphatase activity, and ligand-binding properties assayed by surface plasmon resonance) of P0824. Mutational analysis of OCA patients in Denmark all possible substitutions arising from a single base change affecting K. Grønskov, J. Ek, A. Sand, T. Rosenberg, K. Brøndum-Nielsen; codons 42 and 139, we show that T42A and E139D SHP-2 proteins Kennedy Institute - National Eye Clinic, Glostrup, Denmark. are the only mutants exhibiting a significant increase in ligand-induced Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a genetic heterogeneous disorder phosphatase activity and enhanced phophopeptide binding affinity. caused by hypopigmentation of the eyes, hair and skin. The hypopig- Molecular dynamics simulations performed on selected mutants pro- mentation results from defects in melanin production. Lack of melanin vide structural insights of the effects generated by individual mutations in the eyes causes misrouting of the optic nerve fibers, resulting in on protein function. In conclusion, this study provides functional expla- nystagmus, foveal hypoplasia, strabismus, photophobia and greatly nation for the invariant occurrence of the T42A and E139D mutaions in decreased visual acuity. Hypopigmentation of the skin results in en- NS as well as the molecular mechanism of their pathogenicity. hanced sensitivity to light and increased risk of skin cancers.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 21 Clinical diagnosis of subtypes of OCA is difficult due to phenotypic P0827. Morphological abnormalities of the mitochondrial variation and overlap between the different types of OCA, and genetic network in fibroblasts of patients affected with autosomal analysis is often necessary to establish the diagnosis. We investigat- dominant and recessive optic neuropathies ed 58 patients with OCA for mutations in four genes known to cause S. Gerber, N. Khadom, A. Munnich, J. Kaplan, J. M. Rozet; OCA, namely TYR causing OCA1 (OCA1A and OCA1B), OCA2 caus- Unité de Recherches Génétique et Epigénétique des Maladies Métaboliques, ing OCA2, TYRP1 causing OCA3 and MATP causing OCA4. Overall, Neurosensorielles et du Développement, INSERM U781, Paris, France. we found two mutations (homozygous or compound heterozygous) Inherited optic atrophies (OPA) are frequently inherited as an auto- explaining the OCA in 44 % of the patients (26 patients of 58), and somal dominant trait. Most of them are related to mutations in the one mutation in 29 % (17 of 58). In the remaining 26 % (15 of 58) we OPA1 gene. An other uncommon loci have been reported on 22q12.3 found no mutations in any of the four genes. Of the 26 patients with (OPA5). Besides, autosomal recessive non syndromic OPA are rare. two mutations, 62 % (16 of 26) had two mutations in TYR, 31 % (8 of Only one locus has been reported on 8q23 (ROA1). 26) had two mutations in OCA2 and 7 % (2 of 26) had two mutations in OPA1 and genes involved in syndromic forms of OA were shown to MATP. No mutations were found in TYRP1. play a crucial role in the mitochondrial function. The purpose of this study was to investigate a possible involvement of mitochondria in P0825. Skin changes in oculo-dento-digital dysplasia are autosomal dominant and recessive isolated OAs of unknown genetic correlated with truncating mutations in GJA1 origin. M. Vreeburg, E. A. De Zwart-Storm, D. Markus-Soekarman, M. van Geel, M. A. Fibroblasts of 1 OPA1, 2 OPA5 and 2 ROA1 patients were labelled Van Steensel; using MitoTracker RedCMXRos dye and compared to control fibro- University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. blasts. Oculo-dento-digital dysplasia (ODDD, OMIM no.164210) is a pleiotro- Morphological abnormalities of the mitochondrial network were ob- pic disorder caused by mutations in the GJA1 gene that codes for the served in the five patients compared to the respective controls. The gap junction protein connexin43. While the gene is highly expressed cellular distribution of mitochondria in fibroblasts of patients related to in skin, ODDD is usually not associated with skin symptoms. We re- OPA5 and OPA1 was superimposable: the labelling of the MitoTracker cently described a family with ODDD and palmoplantar keratoderma. appeared fragmented and highly concentrated around the nucleus of Interestingly, mutation carriers had a novel dinucleotide deletion in the cells (ring-like aspect). GJA1 gene that resulted in truncation of part of the C-terminus. We Interestingly, the distribution of mitochondria in the fibroblasts of the speculated, that truncation of the C-terminus may be uniquely asso- two ROA1 patients was also superimposable but different from that of ciated with skin disease in ODDD. Here, we describe a patient with other patients. The labelling of the MitoTracker was highly heteroge- ODDD and palmar hyperkeratosis caused by a novel dinucleotide neous and testified a fragmentation of the mitochondrial network but deletion that truncates most of the connexin43 C-terminus. Thus, our no nuclear ring-like aspect was noted. findings support the notion that such mutations are associated with the This study suggests that a selective vulnerability of the optic nerve to occurrence of skin symptoms in ODDD and provide the first evidence perturbations in mitochondrial function may help selecting candidate for the existence of a genotype-phenotype correlation. genes as genes encoding proteins with high mitochondrial targeting probability for both the OPA5 and ROA1 loci. P0826. Genotype-phenotype correlations in mitochondrial optic neuropathies P0828. Molecular Analyses of OPN Gene in Urolithiasis Patients P. Amati-Bonneau1, M. Ferré1, C. Verny2, M. Barth1, V. Guillet1, A. Chevrollier1, B. Gogebakan1, A. Arslan1, Y. Igci1, M. Igci1, S. Oguzkan1, S. Erturhan2, H. Y. Malthièry1, D. Bonneau1, P. Reynier1; Sen2; 1Département de Biochimie et Génétique, CHU, Angers, France, 2Département 1Gaziantep University, Health Institution, Department of Medical Biology, Ga- de Neurologie, CHU, Angers, France. zantep, Turkey, 2Gaziantep University, Medical Biology, Urology, Gazantep, Mitochondrial optic neuropathies include Autosomal Dominant Optic Turkey. Atrophy (ADOA), Leber’s Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON) and Urolithiasis, which is largely composed of calcium oxalate, is a common Autosomal Dominant Optic Atrophy and Cataract (ADOAC). ADOA disease and urinary tract stone development has not been elucidated generally starts in childhood, is characterized by progressive de- at the molecular level yet. Accumulating evidences suggest that uro- crease in visual acuity and optic atrophy. Mutations in the optic atrophy lithiasisis a complex process including crystal nucleation, growth, ag- 1 (OPA1) gene are implicated in about 40% of the cases of ADOA. gregation, and crystal retention within the renal tubules. Several model LHON, caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA, is characterized by studies suggest that the protein constituents of stone matrix are the severe bilateral optic atrophy usually starting between the ages of 18 stone formation modulators. One of these proteins is osteopontin, an and 35. ADOAC, a rare phenotype of optic atrophy and cataract, is due aspartic acid rich urinary protein and a potent inhibitor of CaOx stone to mutations in a mitochondrial protein nuclear encoded (OPA3). formation. OPN gene is located on chromosome 4q21-25 and consists We report here a molecular study of 600 patients with optic atrophy of 7 exons. OPN gene has a large promoter region site. We think that referred to our center during the last three years. Of these, 60% were OPN gene promoter region may play an important role in the CaOx familial cases and 40% sporadic. The mutation responsible for the dis- stone formation process. The upstream nucleotide sequence of OPN ease was identified in 290 patients (49%). Mitochondrial DNA muta- promoter region is between 111-2268 bp (D14813). In this study, three tions were found in 90 patients (15%), OPA1 mutations in 186 patients families having familial transmission (n=21), and sporadic urolithiasis (31%) and OPA3 mutations in 14 patients (2%). Several ADOA pa- patients (n=20), and control cases (n=20) were analyzed for OPN tients were affected by neurosensorial deafness or peripheral axonal gene. OPN gene was analyzed by PCR-SSCP and DNA sequencing, neuropathy. A specific genotype-phenotype correlation was observed respectively. We found two SNP’s in exon 7 (C6983A, T8274C) and in patients harboring the R445H OPA1 mutation and optic atrophy as- three SNP’s in promoter (G-1748A, A-592T, G-155T). In this study, we sociated to deafness. 10% of sporadic patients carried pathogenic mu- demonstrated that new five SNP’s in OPN gene. Our preliminary work tation in the OPA1 gene.Mitochondrial DNA and OPA1/3 gene analy- is the first study for investigating the role of OPN gene promoter region ses allow diagnosing about 50% of the patients. Our results suggest in urolithiasis. The results showed that SNP’s in promoter region of the that patients with hereditary optic neuropathies could greatly benefit OPN gene may be related to familial urolithiasis. We concluded that from neurological investigations and that sporadic cases of optic atro- these new SNP’s need to be analyzed in large patients groups with phy need to be explored at the molecular level. urolithiasis in different populations. P0829. Estrogen-related receptor gamma genotype influences bone mass in a healthy population of French-Canadian women. F. Rousseau1,2, L. Elfassihi3, G. Cardinal3, S. Giroux3; 1CanGeneTest consortium & Université Laval, Quebec, PQ, Canada, 2URGHM, Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier universitaire de Québec, Québec, PQ, Canada, 3URGHM, Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier universitaire Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 21 de Québec, Quebec, PQ, Canada. oretically lead to an impaired signal transduction and diminished ovar- Background: The relationship between osteoporosis and decreasing ian reserve. Genes encoding three inhibin subunits can be proposed estrogen levels at menopause has been known for 60 years. Some as candidates for POF due to its role in negative feedback control of genes involved in the estrogen pathway, mainly estrogen receptor 1 FSH. POF was first noted as an unexpected phenotype among FMR1 (ESR1), have been widely studied in association with bone density. gene premutation carriers. The association of Asn680Ser transition in Estrogen-related receptors (ESRRs) are orphan receptors identified FSHR, Ala257Thr transition in INHα1 and CGG-repeats in 5’UTR re- on the basis of their sequence similarity to ESR1 and for which no gion of FMR1 genes with POF and individual susceptibility to exogeno- natural ligand is identified to date. All three (ESRRalpha, ESRRbeta cal GT was studied. The frequencies of INHa1 Ala257Thr transition and ESRRgamma) were shown to interfere with estrogen signaling. (7,8%) and mutant FSHR genotype Ser680Ser (23%) in women with Methods: Given the cross-talk between ERs and ESRRs, we studied clinical POF diagnosis (n=77) were higher (4,4% and 16%) than in the association between their sequence variants and bone measure- control (n=183). The high risk alleles of FMR1 gene (> 40 CGG-re- ments (heel QUS and DXA at femoral neck(FN) and lumbar spine(LS)) peats) were revealed in 3,9% of POF patients. 2,6% of patients, but in 2481 French-Canadian women. Sixteen women were sequenced to nobody in control group, had Ala257Thr transition and high risk alleles identify polymorphisms that were then genotyped by high-throughput of FMR1 gene. The quantity of oocytes after stimulation were signifi- ASO-PCR. cantly lower in Ala257Thr transition carriers versus women without Al- Results: We report statistically-significant associations between a a257Thr transition. The frequency of Ser680Ser FSHR (32%) mutant silent coding variant of ESRRgamma and LS, SOS, BUA and SI in genotype was statistically higher (16%) in “poor responders” group women (p-values from 0.006-0.04). The association with FN was not (n=28) than do normal-ovulatory controls (n=122). Our data demon- significant (p=0.05). Given that this variant might be in linkage dis- strated that investigated mutation in genes encoding FSHR, INHa1 equilibrium with another unidentified polymorphism, we analyzed the and FMR1 proteins involved in POF-pathogenesis and altered ovarian linkage block containing this variant using TagSNPs selected from sensitivity to exogenous FSH. HapMap data. Eight SNPs were selected in a block of 20kb and were genotyped in a sample of 1340 premenopausal women with the Se- P0832. Mutational analysis of the p63 gene in EEC syndrome quenom platform. Among those, two SNPs were more strongly associ- and related disorders ated than Ser319Ser with bone phenotypes in a large group of 5021 R. Bocciardi1, M. Divizia1, M. Lerone1, F. M. Senes2, M. Seri3, M. Priolo4, A. women aged from 25 to 91 years, pre and postmenopausal. Conclu- Adami5, F. Benedicenti6, R. Ravazzolo1,7; sion: ESRRgamma appears to be associated with bone density in 1G.Gaslini Institute, Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Unit, Genova, Italy, women. 2G.Gaslini Institute, Orthopedics and Traumatology Unit, Genova, Italy, 3Dept of Internal Medicine, Cardioangiology and Epatology, University of Bologna, Bo- P0830. Further delineation of OTX2 as a causative gene for logna, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, Bianchi-Melacrino-Morelli Hospital, Reggio microphthalmia: use of LightScanner and MLPA for rapid Calabria, Italy, 5Pediatrics and Neonatal Patology Unit, San Carlo Borromeo, mutation detection. Milano, Italy, 6Genetic Counselling Service, Central Hospital, Bolzano, Italy, A. W. Wyatt1, D. Bunyan2, C. Ponting1, A. Martin1, A. Salt3, R. O. Collin3, D. 7Dept of Pediatric Sciences G. de Toni, University of Genova, Genova, Italy. Robinson2, N. K. Ragge1,3; The p63 (TP73L) gene codes for a protein belonging to the p53 family. 1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Wessex Regional Genetics Coding sequence consists of 16 exons generating several different Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 3Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, transcripts. The protein contains two transactivation domains, a central United Kingdom. DNA binding domain (DBD), an isomerization domain, a protein-pro- Developmental eye anomalies, including anophthalmia and microph- tein interaction and an inhibitory domain. p63 plays a crucial role in the thalmia (AM), are a major cause of childhood visual impairment and af- formation and maintenance of stratified epithelia, skin and its append- fect 1/3-4,000. We previously identified heterozygous mutations in the ages, and limb development. Heterozygous mutations have been as- bicoid-type homeodomain gene, OTX2 (MIM 600037) in eight families sociated with syndromes affecting skin, ectodermal derivatives, limbs with developmental eye anomalies, including twins. The principal fea- and cranio-facial district. Prototype of this family of syndromes is EEC, tures were AM and retinal dystrophy in association with developmental characterized by Ectrodactyly, Ectodermal displasia, Cleft lip-palate. delay, seizures and brain malformation. There was a high incidence of p63 is mutated in the 98% of cases of EEC syndrome type 3, in other gonosomal mosaicism and complex inheritance patterns. We screened related disorders (AEC, LMS, ADULT, Rapp-Hodgkin) and in isolated a further cohort of 60 individuals with developmental eye anomalies ectrodactyly. and identified six patients with heterozygous mutations or deletions of We describe 11 patients, 9 sporadic cases and a family with two af- OTX2. One patient had a visible cytogenetic deletion of 14q22-q23 that fected members. 4 individuals affected by EEC syndrome, 6 individu- included the OTX2 gene, four had novel mutations detected by High- als with isolated ectrodactyly, and a single case with ectrodactyly/cleft Res Melting™ in a Lightscanner™ machine, confirmed on sequencing, lip-palate associated with complex phenotype. Mutational analysis of and one had a small deletion of the OTX2 gene detected by MLPA. p63 coding exons allowed identification of 5 heterozygous variants: 4 The first mutation was c.85G>A (p.V29M) (unlikely to be causative different mutations in the EEC patients and a polymorphic variant in since patient has distinctive Donnai-Barrow syndrome, and patient’s a case with isolated ectrodactyly. In the EEC patients, we have found unaffected father also has mutation). The other mutations were: (1) three different missense mutation leading to residue substitution in the c.93C>G (p.Y31X); (2) c.313C>T (p.Q105X) (patient also has a twin DBD of the protein: R204W, S272T, R279C for which we propose func- with a less severe phenotype); (3) c.395delAG (p.E132fs143X); and tional speculations. Moreover, we have found an intronic substitution all cause premature truncation of the protein. The findings support a resulting in aberrant splicing, as assessed on patient’s cDNA. Experi- model of loss-of-function mutations in OTX2 causing microphthalmia. ments aimed to clarify the impact of this mutation on protein function Furthermore, the presence of the mutations in some unaffected fam- will be described. ily members supports our previous finding of incomplete penetrance of OTX2 mutations. The use of LightScanner™, MLPA and direct se- P0833. Paraoxonase PON1 gene polymorphisms, enzyme quencing in tandem allowed rapid identification of these novel muta- activity and lipid profile relationship in healthy volunteers tions and their inheritance pattern. Y. Dahmani1,2, M. Lima1, J. Montoya2, M. López Pérez2, C. Dìez sánchez2; 1Departamento do Biología, CIRN, Universidade dos Açores., Ponta Delgada. P0831. The association of mutation in FSHR, INHα and FMR1 9501-801, Portugal, 2Departamento de Bioquímica Biología Molecular y Celu- genes with ovarian dysfunction. lar. University of Zaragoza, 50013 Zaragoza, Spain. G. Livshits1,2, A. Bychkova2, L. Livshits1; Human serum paraoxonase 1 (PON1), a high-density lipoprotein 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics (National Academy of Sciences of (HDL)-associated enzyme, has been shown to reduce the oxidation Ukraine), Kiev, Ukraine, 2Clinica “ISIDA”, Kiev, Ukraine. of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and HDL by degrading lipid perox- Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a secondary gonadotrophic amen- ides. This property of PON1 accounts for its ability to protect against orrhoea affecting 1-3% of females. FSH (follicle stimulation hormone) atherosclerosis. The gene encoding this enzyme PON1 shows two and its receptor (FSHR) play a major role in the development of follicles polymorphisms Q192R and L55M. Q/R alleles show high and low lipid and regulation of steriogenesis in ovary. Mutations in FSHR might the- peroxides hydrolysis ability, respectively. The aim of the present study Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 21 was to investigate in healthy male volunteers (N= 89, 18-55 years) of our work let us conclude that exon rearrangements in the PARK2 from Zaragoza (north centre of Spain) the relationship of the PON1 gene have a significant role in the pathogenesis of sporadic PD in Q192R and L55M polymorphisms with lipid profile parameters. PON1 patients from Russia and it is rational to start detection of these muta- gene polymorphisms were checked by PCR/RFLPs, and serum para- tions with the analysis of exons 3 and 4. Detection of exon rearrange- oxonase/arylesterse activities were measured spectrophotometrically ments in the PARK2 gene can be used for the diagnosis of Parkinson’s by hydrolysis of paraoxon and phenylacetate respectively. Plasma lip- disease, symptomless stage included, which is very important for the ids: Triglycerides (TG), Cholesterol (Chol), HDLc, LDL were measured effective treatment. by routine enzymatic methods, and atherogenic indice (AI) was deter- mined: Chol/HDLc. P0836. Analysis of the human periostin promoter and its The allelic frequencies of PON1 192/55 were: p(Q)=0.63, p(R)=0.37, polymorphic variants p(L)=0.66, P(M)=0.34 and were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Re- F. Giacopelli, R. Marciano, A. Covone, R. Ravazzolo; sults of activities paraoxonase and arylesterase were respectively Molecular Genetics, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy. 118.9 ± 72.5 U/l and 95.4 ± 20.5 U/l; and ratio paraoxonase/aryles- Periostin is a secreted protein that is highly expressed in early osteo- terase showed a good correlation with genotype as described in Cau- blastic cells in vitro and periosteum, periodontal ligament tissues in casian population (p<0.0001). Also, this ratio was corrolationated sig- vivo, as well as in the endocardial cushions and valves of the develop- nificatively with the AI which was higher in individual aged more than ing heart. It is known to support cellular adhesion and spreading in 40 years and specially who’s carrying R allele (ANOVA P<0.0001). vitro of chondrocytes, fibroblasts, and a number of cancer cell lines. These results allow us to conclude that R allele from 192 PON1 poly- The mechanisms of transcriptional regulation of human periostin are morphism could represent an atherogenic risk factor associate to the poorly understood. With the objective to clarify the molecular basis of age and lipid profile. gene regulation, we have undertaken a characterization of the human Periostin regulatory region by transfection of promoter fragments, from P0834. LRRK2 mutations and alpha-synuclein level in patients -1790, -1000 and -500 to +1, fused to the luciferase reporter gene into with familial Parkinson’s disease. the U20S osteosarcoma cell line. Transcriptional activity of all promot- A. K. Emelianov1, A. E. Taraskina1, O. N. Ivanova2, E. Y. Smirnova1, A. V. Solo- er constructs was well appreciable: the promoter construct containing vieva1, A. F. Yakimovskii2, S. N. Pchelina1,2; region -1000/+1 showed the highest luciferase activity compared to the 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, other constructs. DNA elements with negative effect on transcriptional 2Pavlov’s State Medical University of Saint-Petersburg, Saint-Petersburg, Rus- activity were detectable between -1000 and -1790 and positive effect sian Federation. between -1000 and -500. Analysis of the periostin 5’ UTR revealed the Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenera- presence of variants inside the promoter region. Genotyping of 100 tive disease in humans; its etiology is largely unknown. The increased caucasian blood donors showed that there are three polymorphic sites level of alpha-synuclein (SNCA) is implicated in PD pathogenesis. The in the first 2000 bp upstream of the ATG start codon: -1945 (MAF 0.22), identification of causative mutations in several genes demonstrates the -1658 (MAF 0.16), -941 (MAF 0.22). The effect and characterization of existence of monogenic forms of PD. PD caused by mutations in the different combinantions of the above variants are discussed. leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene is the most frequent. We screened common mutations in the LRRK2 gene (G2019S, I2012T, P0837. Based on allele-specific ligation reaction PCR-analysis I2020T, R1441C/G/H) in 222 PD patients (mean age 62,7±9,8 years) for registration of the most frequent mutations in the PAH gene. from the North-Western region of Russia. Three families bearing the M. Sokolova, A. Stepanova, A. Polyakov; G2019S mutation (3/63; 4.8%) were found. In addition, we found one Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. patient with the G2019S mutation and one patient with the R1441C Phenylketonuria (PKU) is the most common inborn error of amino acid mutation among 159 patients with sporadic PD. The levels of SNCA metabolism in Europeans. It is caused by mutations in the phenylala- mRNA in lymphocytes were estimated in nine familial PD patients nine hydroxylase (PAH) gene (MIM# 261600). Up to date it is known (mean age 62.7±11.4 years) with unknown etiology of the disease more than 500 mutations. This disease is associated with a severe and eighteen controls (mean age 62.6±16.3 years) using quantitative mental retardation. real-time PCR with TagMan probes. The level of G protein (GNB2L1) For most frequent in Russian PKU-patients mutation screening mRNA was used as internal control. The level of SNCA mRNA was (p.Arg408Trp, IVS12+1g>a, IVS10-11g>a, IVS4+5g>t, p.Arg252Trp, higher in PD patients (2.1±0.67) than in controls (1.0±0.53) (p<0.0001). p.Arg261Gln, p.Arg158Gln, p.Pro281Leu) in exons 4, 5, 7, 11 and 12 Our study showed the high frequency of the LRRK2 mutations among of the PAH gene the multiplex system based on allele-specific liga- PD patients in Russia and demonstrated further support that elevated tion reaction PCR-analysis was created. This system applied to detect level of SNCA expression might be implicated in PD pathogenesis. 81,1% mutations in our patients. The PAH probemix contains 24 different probes with amplification P0835. Analysis of the parkin gene (PARK2) exon 1-12 dosage in products between 83 and 139 bp. Length difference between consecu- patients with sporadic Parkinson‘s disease from Russia tive amplification products is 3 or 4 bp. E. Semenova1, M. Shadrina1, G. Bagyeva2, M. Farkhiulina1, P. Slominsky1, S. This work was partly supported by Russian President’s grand NSh- Illarioshkin2, S. Limborska1; 5736.2006.7. 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Rus- sian Federation, 2Department of Neurogenetics, Institute of Neurology, Moscow, P0838. Phenotype-genotype correlations for patients with Russian Federation. phenyketonuria in Latvia Most patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) have sporadic form of the N. Pronina1,2, R. Lugovska1, O. Sterna1, Z. Daneberga1; disease with a multifactorial etiology due to interactions between en- 1Latvian State Children`s Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Rigas Stradins University, vironmental conditions and the genetic constitution of the individuals. Riga, Latvia. One of the causes of PD is homozygous or compound heterozygous Deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) impairs hepatic hydrox- mutations in the PARK2 gene. Deletions and duplications of single ex- ylation of phenylalanine to tyrosine and is the most common inborn ons or exon groups account for a large proportion of the gene muta- error of amino-acid metabolism in Caucasians. Mutations of the PAH tions, therefore it becomes necessary to assess the frequency of these gene coding the hepatic enzyme result in various degrees of enzyme mutations in patients with sporadic PD. To detect these mutations, we impairment, resulting in different metabolic and clinical outcome of hy- developed and applied an effective technique based on the real-time perphenylketonuria (HPA). For diagnostic and therapeutic purposes is TaqMan PCR system. We analyzed rearrangements in exons 1-12 of used the following phenotype classification: ,,classic”, ,,moderate” and the PARK2 gene in 140 patients with early-onset Parkinson’s disease ,,mild” PKU and ,,mild hyperphenylalaninemia”. (EOPD, age of onset less than 50 years) and in 100 patients with clas- The prevalence of the R408W mutation among Latvian PKU patients sical sporadic Parkinson’s disease (age of onset more than 50 years). determines the severe clinical form for the disease. The R408W muta- All the patients were from Russia. The frequency of these mutations in tion (c.1222C->T), a C to T transition in exon 12 of the PAH gene, re- EOPD patients was 12%, in classical sporadic PD patients - 3%. Most sults in the substitution of tryptophan for arginine at amino-acid residue frequent rearrangements were detected in exons 3 and 4. The results 408 and is a null mutation associated with < 0,3% of normal enzyme Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 220 activity. In Latvian population the R408W mutation is associated with transcripts analysis has allowed to assess that mutations in the con- RFLP haplotype 2, the VNTR-3 allele, and the 238bp-STR allele with sensus splicing sites are deleterious for PLP1 gene expression and to frequency 77% from all mutant chromosomes. Almost 56% of patients identify the different cryptic sites that are alternatively used. are homozygous for the R408W, 40% are compound heterozygous This study demonstrates that splicing abnormalities can result from and 3,3% have no R408W mutation. According to the pre-treatment various types of mutations. Therefore, such approaches are useful to Phe blood level and Phe tolerance, 90,2% (55/61) patients are classi- better evaluate the genotype-phenotype correlations and to identify in- fied as having a classical PKU phenotype, 4,9% (3/61) patients - mod- tronic or exonic splicing regulatory elements. erate, and 4,9% (3/61) patients - mild. Patients with moderate and mild PKU phenotype are compaund het- P0841. Polycystin-2 regulates cellular proliferation in a p21/ erozygotes, five of them have R408W in one allele and G272X, A104D Cdk2-independent manner and E178G in other allele, two patients have an unidentified other K. N. Felekkis1, P. Koupepidou1, E. Kastanos1, N. Gretz2, C. Bai3, L. Tsiokas3, allele and one patient has no R408W mutation. Final results are in C. Deltas1; progress. 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Medical Research Center, Klinikum Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 3Department of P0839. PLP1 overexpression in PMD and PMLD patients: interest Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma, OK, of fibroblasts analysis United States. M. Bonnet-Dupeyron1,2, P. Combes1, L. Ouchchane3, G. Giraud1, O. Boespflug- Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a com- Tanguy1,4, C. Vaurs-Barriere1; mon inherited disorder, characterized by progressive cyst formation 1INSERM, UMR384, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, and loss of kidney function. ADPKD is principally linked to two genes, Cytogénétique Médicale, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 3CHU de Clermont- PKD1 and PKD2. The pathogenesis is currently thought to involve Ferrand, Département de Santé Publique, Unité de Biostatistique, Télématique dysregulated epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation, alteration et Traitement d’Image, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 4CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, in membrane proteins polarity and abnormal fluid accumulation. The Génétique Médicale, Clermont-Ferrand, France. molecular mechanism of cystogenesis has not been fully elucidated. The myelin proteolipid protein 1 (PLP1), which encodes for the main A recent report implicated polycystin-2 in the regulation of epithelial proteins of the CNS myelin, is implicated in the X-linked disorders of cell proliferation. Specifically, the authors suggested that PC-2 over- CNS myelination, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease (PMD) and Spastic expression suppresses cell proliferation through inhibition of the p21/ Paraplegia 2 (SPG2). Large duplications including the whole gene ac- Cdk2 pathway. To better understand the role of PC-2 in epithelial cell count for 60% of gene alterations. Transgenic mice with additional Plp proliferation, we utilized various cellular models generated by stable gene copies are identically hypomyelinated and have demonstrated expression of mutated (R742X and 1-702) and wild-type PKD2. In that Plp overexpression may act in a dominant negative effect on my- contrast to the previous data, over-expression of wild-type or mutated elinating oligodendrocytes that enter into apoptosis. polycystin-2 in two different cell-lines does not affect cellular growth. By real time quantitative RT-PCR, we quantified PLP/DM20 mRNA On the contrary, electrophysiology experiments demonstrated that levels in nerve biopsies (n=6) and primary cultured fibroblasts (n=14), overexpression of wild-type PKD2 increases both inwards and out- from PMD patients carrying a PLP1 gene duplication. An overexpres- wards K+ currents in these cells. Interestingly, primary renal epithelial sion of the PLP/DM20 transcripts was observed in all samples com- cells from transgenic rats generated by expression of the 1-702 PKD2 pared to controls, suggesting that PLP1 expression in fibroblasts and have elevated levels of the proliferation marker, PCNA. However, in in PNS may reflect PLP1 expression level in the CNS. Therefore, fi- both primary cells and stable cell lines, wild -type or mutated PC-2 do broblasts from 17 male PMD/SPG2 patients without identified PLP1 not alter p21 levels and Cdk2 activity. Collectively, these data suggest or GJA12 abnormality (PMD Like, PMLD), were analyzed. Among that in our models, PC-2 regulates epithelial cell proliferation in a p21/ them, 8 present with a PLP/DM20 mRNAs overexpression, implicat- Cdk2-independent manner and that PC-2 inactivation by itself is not ing a PLP1 dysregulation due to mechanism(s) alternative to the gene sufficient for abnormal cell proliferation. Experiments are underway to duplication. All have a mild form of dysmyelination. Neither genomic verify these data by genome-wide expression and pathway analysis. mutations nor rearrangements have been found in the PLP1 promoter and in the ASE cis regulating elements. A mutation was observed for P0842. Digenic/Triallelic inheritance in polycystic kidney disease one patient in the 3’UTR. Its functional relevance on the mRNAs stabil- suggests a new mutational mechanism with mutations in a ity is under evaluation. transcription factor and its regulated gene In conclusion, fibroblasts represent a useful tool to quantify the PLP1 N. Ortiz Brüchle1, V. Frank1, K. Häffner2, K. Zerres1, C. Bergmann1; gene expression level and have allowed us to demonstrate that the 1Department of Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, PLP1 gene may remain a candidate gene for PMLD patients. Freiburg, Germany. The transcription factor HNF1ß has been recently shown to be cru- P0840. Splicing abnormalities associated with different types of cial for kidney development, as demonstrated by in vivo experiments PLP1 mutations. where Xenopus embryos microinjected with mutant HNF1ß RNA tran- M. Bonnet-Dupeyron1, P. Combes1, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1,2, C. Vaurs-Bar- scripts had impaired pronephros development. HNF1ß binds specifi- riere1; cally as homo- or heterodimer in concert with HNF1α to the proximal 1INSERM UMR384, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2CHU de Clermont-ferrand, PKHD1 promoter and stimulates transcription of the gene responsible Génétique Médicale, Clermont-Ferrand, France. for autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). Recent The myelin proteolipid protein 1 (PLP1) gene encodes, by alternative studies revealed that mutations of the HNF1 binding site, expression splicing of its exon 3, for the main proteins of the CNS myelin: PLP of a dominant-negative HNF1ß mutant and mice with renal-specific and DM20. Duplications of the gene and point mutations are impli- inactivation of Hnf1ß exhibit a drastic defect in PKHD1 expression. cated in the X-linked disorder of CNS myelination: Pelizaeus-Merz- Here we present a patient with polycystic kidney disease heterozy- bacher Disease and Spastic Paraplegia 2. To assess the functional gote for the novel PKHD1 1-bp deletion c.1151delA (p.P383fs), while consequences of different types of PLP1 mutations (7 exonic punctual a second PKHD1 change was not identified. HNF1ß mutation analysis mutations, 3 deletions of 1 nucleotide, 3 consensus splicing site and 1 revealed the novel, non-conservative missense mutation c.244G>A nucleotide substitution in intron 3 of unknown significance), PLP/DM20 (p.D82N) that affects an evolutionarily highly conserved residue and transcripts were sequenced from peripheral nerves and/or primary cul- considerably disturbs the protein’s DNA binding domain. Further argu- tured fibroblasts. ments of its pathogenic character are the conservation of p.D82 in Transcripts analysis has shown that the intron 3 mutation leads to the its counterpart HNF1α and that it was not present among 500 tested intron retention, demonstrating its implication in the phenotype and chromosomes. Reporter gene analysis is currently underway to further suggesting the potential existence of an intron splicing regulatory ele- corroborate its functional significance. Beyond the first description of ment in the surrounding sequence. Unexpectedly, one of the 7 exonic digenic and/or triallelic inheritance in polycystic kidney disease, our punctual mutations, initially thought to be a missense, was demon- study is of general interest as it demonstrates an intriguing new regula- strated to impair the splicing by creating a new donor site exclusively tory mutational mechanism with mutations in a transcription factor and used, at least in the fibroblasts, instead of the classical site. In addition, its activated gene.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 221 P0843. Classic Rett syndrome (RTT) and Preserved Speech with multiple developmental anomalies. Prox1 is expressed in many Variant: new approaches to understand the genetic differences organs including the heart. E. Scala1, R. Caselli1, F. Papa1, F. Ottimo1, R. Artuso1, M. A. Mencarelli1, I. Me- This study assessed the candidacy of PROX1 as a cause for HLHS loni1, F. Mari1, M. Zappella2, G. Hayek2, F. Ariani1, A. Renieri1; including expression in the human heart during cardiogenesis and in- 1Dep. Molecular Biology, U.O. Genetica Medica, University of Siena, Siena, vestigation of children with HLHS for mutations within PROX1. Italy, 2Infantile Neuropsychiatry, Siena General Hospital, Siena, Italy. Human embryonic and fetal tissue was obtained with informed consent In classic RTT, the III stage is characterized by mild improvement of and ethical permission. Hearts were available from fetuses aged be- eye contact. At the same stage the Preserved Speech Variants (PSV) tween 7-11 weeks post conception (wpc). Using an antibody raised to recover the ability to speak and to use hands. Both phenotypes are the Prospero and homeodomains (Abcam), PROX1 immunoreactivity due to similar or identical de novo mutations in MECP2 (http://www. was detected in critical areas of the heart. These included the aortic biobank.unisi.it and Sampieri, Hum Mut 2007). In order to under- valve, aortic wall, atria and lymphatic vessels. We therefore investi- stand the genetic differences between the two phenotypes we have: i) gated patients with HLHS for changes in the nucleotide sequence of searched for statistically significant differences in allele frequencies of coding exons and splice sites of PROX1. The DNA from 12 patients polymorphisms in genes associated to a similar phenotype (CDKL5), was directly sequenced but no nucleotide changes were detected. target genes (BDNF) or genes involved in neurodegeneration (APOE); The localisation of PROX1 within the heart during cardiogenesis sup- ii) analysed differences in genomic variations by array-CGH in two ports a role for PROX1 in normal development and as a strong candi- sisters with discordant phenotypes, balanced XCI, and the same date gene for HLHS. MECP2 partial deletion absent in parents. We have established that the p.Q791P CDKL5 polymorphism is not involved in the modulation P0846. Mutations in the gamma-carboxylase gene GGCX cause a of RTT phenotype. Array-CGH analysis on the above described RTT novel Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum-like disorder sisters showed a duplication of 390 Kb on chromosome 16 in the clas- O. M. Vanakker1,2, L. Martin3, D. Gheduzzi4, B. P. Leroy1, B. Loeys1, P. C. sic RTT girl inherited from the healthy father and absent in the PSV Coucke1, S. F. Terry5, L. J. Schurgers6, C. Vermeer6, I. Pasquali-Ronchetti4, A. sister. The duplication includes 10 genes. Two are disease-genes: one De Paepe1; related to a known myopathy and the other to a CNS disease. Our hy- 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Re- pothesis is that one or more duplicated genes could be dosage sensi- search assistant for the Fund for Scientific Research, Flanders, Belgium, 3De- tive and could act as modifiers of the phenotype generated by MECP2. partment of Dermatology, Porte-Madeleine Hospital, Orléans, France, 4Biomed- Understanding the genetic differences between classic RTT and PSV ical Sciences Department, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, will help in designing therapeutic strategies. Italy, 5PXE International, Washington, DC, United States, 6VitaK & CARIM, Dpt. of Biochemistry, University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. P0844. Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia with normal axoneme Aims: We recently described a novel autosomal recessive PXE-like ultrastructure caused by DNAH11 mutations disorder, characterized by a generalized increase of excessive, leath- L. Bartoloni1, K. Hoffmann2, N. T. Loges3, D. Birker4, C. Rossier1, M. M. deSan- ery skin folds, a mild retinopathy with limited angioid streaks and ti5, H. Olbrich3, M. Fliegauf3, M. Failly1, U. Liebers2, M. Collura6, G. Gaedicke2, preserved visual acuity and a deficiency of the vitamin K-dependent S. Mundlos2,4, U. Wahn2, J. L. Blouin1, B. Niggemann2, H. Omran3, S. E. An- clotting factors. Ultrastructural analysis showed distinct differences in tonarakis1, G. C. Schwabe2; mineralization and fragmentation of dermal elastic fibres compared to 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Charité University Hospital, PXE. Furthermore, no mutations in the ABCC6 gene, responsible for Berlin, Germany, 3Albert Ludwigs University, Freiburg, Germany, 4Max Planck PXE, could be detected. This study aimed to unravel the molecular Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 5University of Siena, Siena, pathogenesis of this phenotype. Italy, 6Ospedale Civico, Palermo, Italy. Methods: Using a candidate gene approach, we performed molecular Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) is a disorder characterized by per- analysis of the VKORC1 and GGCX genes in 7 patients. Both candi- turbed or absent beating of motile cilia and often associated with ran- date genes cause hereditary deficiency of the vitamin K-dependent dom organ lateralization (Kartagener Syndrome, KS). We present clotting factors. Using conformation-specific ELISAs, the balance be- a German family with five individuals affected by PCD and one with tween carboxylated (functional) and non-carboxylated (inactive) serum KS. Ciliary beating was reduced or absent in native respiratory cilia of osteocalcin and matrix gla protein (MGP) was assessed. the majority of affected individuals. Analysis using high-speed video Results: Direct sequencing revealed missense and nonsense muta- microscopy revealed an abnormal hyperkinetic beating of respiratory tions in GGCX in 6 patients. The GGCX-enzyme is important for ac- cilia with a reduced bending capacity of the axonemes. The axonemal tivation (γ-carboxylation) of vitamin K-dependent proteins such as ultrastructure was normal and outer dynein arms were intact, as ana- clotting factors but also known inhibitors of calcification (e.g. MGP, lyzed by electron microscopy and immunohistochemistry. Microsatel- osteocalcin), thus explaining the combined phenotype. ELISA experi- lite analysis indicated linkage to the dynein heavy chain DNAH11 on ments revealed imbalances in the ratios of active and inactive serum chromosome 7p15. All affected individuals were found to be compound gla proteins, supporting the causality of the mutations and hence our heterozygotes for mutations c.12415C>G and c.13583_13639del. pathogenetic hypothesis. Both mutations are located in the C-terminal domain and result in a Conclusion: We have identified GGCX as being the defective gene in truncated DNAH11 protein (p.4128Y>X, p.A4518_A4523delinsQ). Our a novel PXE-like syndrome. Interestingly, this enzyme has a critical findings indicate that mutations in the DNAH11 gene indeed cause function in pathways involved in inhibition of ectopic mineralization. PCD and KS, and that the reported DNAH11 nonsense mutations are Because of the clinical and histopathological resemblance with PXE, associated with a normal axonemal ultrastructure and are compatible this rare disorder may give us valuable insights in the pathogenesis with normal fertility. of PXE. P0845. Investigation of PROX1 expression during human P0847. Pyridoxamine 5‘-phosphate oxidase deficiency: A new cardiogenesis and it‘s potential role in congenital heart defects. inherited lethal disorder causing neonatal seizures, treatable S. R. Parsons, C. Spalluto, V. J. Phillips, H. Cox, A. P. Salmon, S. Diaper, N. A. with pyridoxal phosphate. Hanley, D. I. Wilson; M. Khayat1, P. Frankel1, S. H. Korrman2, Z. Weintraub3,4, S. Hershkovitz3, V. University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. Shefer3, M. Ben Elisha3, R. A. Wevers5, T. C. Falik-zaccai1,4; Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) is a severe congenital heart 1Istitute of Medical genetics, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel, 2Meta- defect characterised by hypoplasia of the left ventricle with aortic and bolic Diseases Unit, Haddassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, mitral valve stenosis or atresia. HLHS is frequently associated with Israel, 3Department of Neonatology, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel, lymphoedema and maldevelopment of the lymphatic system. 4Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion- Israel Institue of Technology, Haifa, The homeobox transcription factor, PROX1, is located within 1q32, de- Israel, 5Laboratory of Pediatrics and Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen letions of which are a cause of congenital heart defects and therefore Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands Antilles. a region critical to cardiac development. PROX1 has a role in organo- Neonatal seizures present a serious diagnostic dilemma. A compre- genesis and cell type specification including budding and sprouting of hensive workup and immediate treatment are essential. the lymphatic system. Knockout mice lacking Prox1 die mid-gestation We present a female infant born who suffered severe seizures few Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 222 hours after birth, did not respond to a wide range of anticonvulsant GSTM1 0/0 genotype in case group (0.77) was significantly (p=0.018) drugs, and died at the age of 6 weeks. higher than in control group (0.50). The frequency of GSTT1 0/0 Metabolic investigations showed elevated glycine and threonine con- genotype in the case group (0.25) was higher than in control group centrations in plasma and CSF, and elevated Homovanillic acid and (0.19) but this difference was not significant. The frequencies of NAT2, Vanillactic acid in the urine and CSF. This biochemical profile indicates CYP1A1 and GSTP1 “slow alleles” were practically identical in both a possible deficiency of pyridoxine 5’-phosphate oxidase (PNPO), the analysed groups. It had been shown that GSTM 0/0 variant really can enzyme that converts pyridoxamine to its active form pyridoxal phos- be involved in process recurrent pregnancy loss, which may be con- phate (PLP). PLP acts as an important coenzyme for more than 100 nected with changes in steroid hormones level. enzymes. The biochemical findings in our patient were suggestive of a defect in P0850. Mechanisms of apoptosis mediated by dependence PNPO activity. receptors: The model of Ret Sequence analysis of the PNPO gene revealed a homozygous G>A D. Fusco1, M. Vargiolu1, E. Bonora1, R. Baumeister2, G. Romeo1; transition at nucleotide 284 in exon 3 (c.284 G>A) resulting in a R95H 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Bologna, Italy, 2Bio3/Bioinformatics and Molecular missense mutation. Expression studies in CHO cells, using mutated Genetics, Freiburg, Germany. PNPO, showed that the c.284 G>A mutation reduced the enzymatic Dependence Receptors constitute a newly described family of func- activity of PNPO to 18% relative to wild-type. PNPO deficiency is a tionally-related receptors which transduce a positive signal leading recently described rare and lethal autosomal recessive disorder that to survival, differentiation or migration in the presence of their ligand, has been reported in less then 15 patients worldwide. This potentially whilst in its absence, a proapoptotic fragment which initiates a nega- treatable entity should be considered in the differential diagnosis of tive signal for apoptosis, is generated by caspases cleavage. neonatal seizures. Molecular and biochemical diagnosis is feasible One member of this family is the proto-oncogene RET (rearranged and will provide tools for comprehensive genetic counseling and PND during transfection), a classical tyrosine kinase receptor spliced in two to interested couples, as well as screening of couples at risk for this main alternative forms: RET9 and RET51. devastating disorder. Mutations in RET proto-oncogene have been associated with both neoplasia (MEN2A, MEN2B and FMTC) and a congenital neural crest P0848. Q6NUR6 gene is overexpressed in an autistic patient with defect (Hirschsprung disease). a translocation (7,16) de novo. Hitherto, the positive signal transduced by RET has been well studied, R. M‘rad1, N. Bayou1, A. Belhaj2, S. Briault3, L. Ben jemaa1, H. Daoud3, R. while less is known about the signal transduction leading to apopto- Zemni4, M. Chaabouni1, F. Maazoul5, M. Hélayem2, H. Chaabouni1; sis. 1department of human genetics, faculty of medicine Tunis, Tunisia, 2department To shed light on new proteins involved in this latter pathway, we of child psychiatry, Razi Hospital La Manouba, Tunisia, 3unité INSERM U619, planned to use a modified yeast two hybrid method named “split ubiq- faculty of medicine Tours, France, 4department of human genetics, faculty of uitin system” employing as baits RET51 against a human brain expres- medicine Sousse, Tunisia, 5department of human genetics, Charles Nicolle sion library. hospital Tunis, Tunisia. We identified ten proteins potentially interacting with RET51. The inter- Based on the hypothesis that the autism has an important genetic action between four of these and RET51 has been confirmed through component, our goal is to map and identify the gene (or genes) that co-immunoprecipitation analysis and co-localization assay, while one predispose to autism. The proposed strategy is to test candidate re- of these proteins (GSTP1, an enzyme belonging to the family of the gions identified by cytogenetic studies. glutathione-S-transferase) appears to be a false positive interactor. We describe a 10 years old child with autistic disorder and a de novo Currently, we are verifying the role of such interactors (as modifiers balanced (7,16) (p22.1,p16.2) translocation. G-banded chromosomes of RET associated diseases in patients) and the interaction between and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) were used to examine the RET-51 and the remaining proteins. patient’s karyotype as well as his parents’. FISH with specific RP11- Furthermore, the “split ubiquitin system” is going to be used employing BAC clones mapping near 7p22.1 and 16p11.2 were used to refine the also RET9 and RET (708-1017) as baits. location of the breakpoint The breakpoint’s spanning clone on 7p22.1 fully overlaps a human P0851. An oncogenic mutation in exon 27 of the RB1 gene known protein coding sequence corresponding to the Q6NUR6 gene D. Mitter, I. Nowak, B. Ansperger-Rescher, D. R. Lohmann; which was analyzed by TaqMan. The study demonstrated a signifi- Institut für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany. cant overexpression of this gene in the patient. We postulate that the Retinoblastoma (Rb) is initiated by mutational inactivation of the RB1 rearrangement is responsible for the patient’s phenotype and for his gene, a tumour suppressor composed of 27 exons. The spectrum of Q6NUR6 gene overexpression. point mutations (1900 mutation events) is dominated by nonsense (44%) and frameshift (23%) mutations, which result in premature ter- P0849. The study of CYP1A1, GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTP1 and NAT2 mination codons located > 55bp upstream of the last exon-exon junc- polymorphisms genes and possible role in recurrent pregnancy tion. Therefore, the mutant mRNA is likely to be subject to nonsense loss mediated decay. No mutation was identified in exons 26 and 27 so P. Tatarskyy1, L. Livshits1, K. Khazhilenko2; far. We have performed mutational analysis of the RB1 gene in more 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics (National Academy of Sciences of than 900 patients. In view of the mutation spectrum, we suspended Ukraine) Department of Human Genomics., Kiev, Ukraine, 2ISIDA clinic, Kiev, direct sequencing of exons 26 and 27 recently. However, we now iden- Ukraine. tified a frameshift mutation in exon 27 of the RB1 gene (RBg.177098_ The aetiology of recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) remains largely un- 177099dup) by quantitative multiplex PCR in a boy with sporadic uni- clear. Epidemiological studies have suggested that the risk of sponta- lateral Rb. His father is a heterozygous carrier of this mutation. We neous abortions associated with exposure to endogenous or exoge- showed that the mutation occurred de novo. The mutant +2bp tran- nous substances may be modified by the genetic variation in individual script was detected by RT-PCR on RNA prepared from peripheral metabolic detoxification activities, thus in the phase I/phase II balance. blood cells. We performed sequencing of exons 26 and 27 in patients Glutathione S-transferase (GST) catalyses the binding of a large va- (8, 13, and 8 patients with familial, isolated unilateral, and bilateral Rb, riety of electrophils to the sulphydryl group of glutathione, they are respectively) in whom we had not identified an oncogenic mutation involved in the detoxification of free radicals and have main function previously. None of these 29 patients showed a mutation.Our results in binding and transport of a wide variety of harmful compounds. GST indicate that a frameshift mutation in the terminal exon of the RB1 are present in large amounts in many tissues including those of the gene can be oncogenic. In view of the phenotypes associated with the genital tract and placenta. The aim of this study was to investigate the mutant allele in the reported family it can be expected that mutations in role of CYP1A1, GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTP1 and NAT2 polymorphisms this region will be associated with milder phenotypic expression. in the pathogenesis of RPL. After informed consent we have studied the polymorphic variants of genes encoding enzymes in 49 women (case group) with recurrent pregnancy loss and in 169 women (con- trol group) with an uncomplicated obstetric history. The frequency of Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 22 P0852. Mutations in the MECP2 gene in patients of Slavonic hypothesis we studied women with RS (12), CREST syndrome (13), origin with Rett syndrome Primary Biliary Cirrhosis (PBC) (12) and a control group paired by sex D. Zahorakova1, A. Baxova2, J. Zeman1, P. Martasek1; and age (24). 1Department of Pediatrics, First School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Methods: after signed consent, information on male pregnancies, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Clinical Genetics, General University transfusions, abortions and older brothers in the sibship of index Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. cases, 5 ml of whole blood was obtained for lymphocytes cultures, Rett syndrome is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder FISH studies in interphase nuclei (IN) and DNA extraction for Q-PCR affecting almost exclusively females. It has an incidence of 1:10,000 of SRY gene sequences. CEP-X spectrum green probe was used for female births and is characterized by apparently normal development MX analysis, and CEP-15 spectrum orange as control. Samples were for the first 6-18 months of life followed by the loss of acquired motor blindly assessed and 500 IN were analysed in each subject. and language skills, autistic features, and development of stereotypic Results: Median ages in the different groups were quite similar (59- hand movements. Rett syndrome is caused primarily by de novo mu- 61). Proportion of MX IN were 14% (13.1-14.8); 11.5% (10.5-12.1); tations in the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 gene (MECP2). Methyl- 11.3% (10.7-12.3) and 7.2% (6.8-7.7) for RS, CREST, PBC and con- CpG-binding protein 2 plays important roles in the regulation of gene trols respectively. Chi-square comparisons of the amount of MX cells, expression and RNA splicing. Here we report the mutational analysis showed significant statistical differences (SSD) between each AID and of the MECP2 gene in 95 patients from the Czech and Slovak Repub- controls, between RS and CREST, and RS and CBP. Q-PCR of SRY lics and the Ukraine with classical Rett syndrome. The patients, all sequences discarded MQ as a confounding factor. girls, were screened for mutations by DNA sequencing of the entire Conclusions: Our results confirm that MX is significantly increased in coding sequence and the exon/intron boundaries of the MECP2 gene. AID respect healthy controls, that MQ is not an associated cause and RFLP analysis was performed to confirm the mutations that cause the that probably an additive effect could explain the SSD between RS and creation or abolition of the restriction site. Mutation-negative cases the other two AID. were subsequently examined by multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to identify large deletions. Sequencing analysis P0855. A real time PCR assay to detect causative mutations of revealed 33 different mutations in 74 patients, and MLPA analysis re- the ryanodine receptor gene vealed large deletions in two patients. The detection rate was 78%. I. Valášková1, E. Flodrová1, R. Gaillyová1, Š. Prášilová1, P. Kuglík1,2; One mutation in exon 1 (c.48_55del8) has not been published yet. Our 1University Hospital Brno, Department of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Re- results confirm the high frequency of MECP2 mutations in females with public, 2Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Genetics and Rett syndrome and provide data concerning the mutation heterogene- Molecular Biology, Brno, Czech Republic. ity in the Slavonic population. The project was supported by grants The ryanodine receptor (RYR1) is an essential component of the cal- MSM0021620849 and IGA 8355-3. cium homeostasis of the muscle in mammals. Defects in the RYR1 gene in humans (chromosome 19q13.1) are associated with malig- P0853. Large genomic rearrangements in the MECP2 gene in nant hyperthermia (MH), life-threatening and frequently fatal disorder Polish patients with Rett syndrome triggered by commonly used anesthetics. Susceptibility to MH (MHS), E. Popowska, D. Jurkiewicz, E. Ciara, M. Borucka - Mankiewicz, P. Kowalski, dominantly inherited predisposition to MH, is diagnosed by using an D. Piekutowska - Abramczuk, M. Gajdulewicz, K. Spodar, K. Chrzanowska, A. invasive diagnostics test on excised muscle bundles, the in vitro con- Tylki - Szymanska, M. Krajewska - Walasek; tracture test (IVCT). This test is based on the differential contractile The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. response of normal and MH muscle to caffeine and halothane. Rett syndrome (RTT, MIM#312750) is a neurodevelopmental disor- Molecular genetic screening plays an integral role in the diagnosis of der affecting almost exclusively females with prevalence estimated to MHS. Genetic data provide additional diagnostic information or con- be 1 in 10000-15000 live births. In affected girls a period of appar- tribute information independent of IVCT. Genetic screening is very dif- ently normal development is followed by mental retardation, loss of ficult due to low incidence of each mutation and the vatness of the acquired skills, stereotypical hand movements, seizures, scoliosis and RYR1. Until now, 23 RYR1 mutations causing MH have been listed by autonomic dysfunction. The disease is caused by mutations in the X- European MH Group. A detection MH causative RYR1 mutations can linked MECP2 gene encoding methyl CpG binding protein (MeCP2). be used in predictive genetic testing. We describe an assay that allows The gene contains four exons and produces two transcripts consisting analysis of RYR1 genotypes using real time PCR. We provide a test of exons 2, 3 and 4 (MeCP2A isoform) or exons 1, 3 and 4 (MeCP2B based on melting point analysis of fluorscently labelled probes after isoform). To date, more than 370 various MECP2 mutations have been high speed PCR amplification. After nucleic acid extraction from the found. Of 140 Polish patients with classic form and variants of RTT, 57 white blood cells, or muscle cells RYR1 mutation can be detected in harbor point mutations and small deletions or insertions in MECP2 ex- less than 1hour. This assay is cheaper and faster than traditional one ons 3 and 4. Recently, several patients with mutations involving exon used to date. Our RYR1 mutation analysis protocol currently screens 1 have been reported. for the most common RYR1 mutations in Czech population. Our aim is The aim of our study was to identify large genomic rearrangements to develop analysis test for all published MH causative mutations. in the MECP2 gene in Polish RTT patients. Molecular analysis was performed in forty-six patients, who had been tested negative for muta- P0856. Characterization of COX16, a novel human COX tions by SSCP and sequencing of MECP2 exons 2, 3 and 4. Patients’ assembly gene genomic DNAs were screened for large deletions/duplications by mul- L. Salviati1, E. Trevisson1, A. Casarin1, M. Doimo1, S. Sacconi2; tiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) using SALSA 1Dept. of Pediatrics, Padova, Italy, 2Dept. of Neurology, University of Nice, P015C kit (MRC-Holland). Large deletions including promoter region France. and exon 1 were identified in three patients, and deletions covering COX16 is a gene essential for cytochrome c oxidase (COX) biosyn- exon 4 and, probably, exon 3 in two patients. Besides, partial deletion thesis in yeast.. We have now cloned and characterised its human of exon 4 was observed in one RTT girl. homologue. The study was supported by MNiI Project 2P05A12129. The human gene was identified in the expressed sequence tags (EST) database using a cyberscreening method.. Human COX16 is com- P0854. Monosomy of the X chromosome in primary and prised of 4 exons on chromosome 14 and encodes a 106 aa protein overlapping autoimmune diseases. with a N-terminal putative transmembrane domain and a C-terminal O. M. Mutchinick, Y. Svyryd, G. Hernández, N. Monroy, J. Sánchez; hydrophilic domain, with no homology to any known family of proteins. Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, México, The gene is expressed ubiquitously with highest levels in muscle, Mexico. heart, and liver. We found multiple transcription initiation sites, the The significant female predominance of autoimmune diseases (AID) most upstream of which is located 100 bp from the ATG. has been associated to acquired X-chromosome monosomy (XCM) Cox16 protein is located in mitochondria, presumably in the mitochon- and foetal cell microchimerism (MC). However, this characteristic was drial inner membrane. not investigated in overlapping AID like Reynolds syndrome (RS). Ra- Silencing of the COX16 transcript by siRNA caused a significant reduc- tionale: RS show higher rate of XCM than single AID. To address this tion of COX activity after 48 hours in transfected cells.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 22 The precise function of COX16 is unknown. Its small size suggests cant sclerosis of the long bones, ribs, pelvis and skull, leading to facial that it doesn’t have a catalytic role, but rather that it could act by sta- distortion and entrapment of cranial nerves. The sclerosteosis gene bilizing nascent COX subcomplexes in analogy to PET100. The effect has been mapped to 17q12-21 and is known as the SOST gene en- of COX16 silencing on COX activity is striking, suggesting that COX16 coding sclerostin protein. We report on one familial and one sporadic may play an important role in the regulation of the COX assembly pro- case with clinical and molecular diagnosis of sclerosteosis. cess. Case 1: 34-year-old male, with difficulty in opening mouth, hemifacial The role of COX16 in COX deficiency has yet to be determined. A and tongue pain, gustatory hyperlacrimation and hypoacusis. Four previous study failed to detect mutations in patients with isolated COX sisters had similar clinical complaints, three of whom had cutaneous deficiency, we are now screening a novel cohort of patients for muta- syndactyly of some fingers. Physical examination: macrocephaly, long tions in this gene. face and widely spaced teeth. Radiological studies: poor development of the mandible angle, asymmetric face, sclerosis of the skull and cra- P0857. Investigation of the Spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 niofacial bones, hyperostosis of the ribs, pelvis and long bones. mutation in the Cypriot population Case 2: 6-year-old girl, presented with recurrent facial paralysis. There C. Votsi, A. Georghiou, T. Kyriakides, M. Pantzaris, S. Papacostas, E. Zamba- was no significant facial dysmorfism. Cutaneous syndactyly of the in- Papanicolaou, K. Christodoulou; dex and middle fingers was present. Radiological studies: sclerosis of The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. the skull, spine, pelvis and long bones. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 belongs to the group of neurodegener- The clinical diagnosis of sclerosteosis in both cases was confirmed ative diseases known as autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias. Ge- by analysis of the SOST gene showing the same mutation (Trp124X). netic studies in patients with SCA so far revealed 12 genes responsible We reported this mutation previously in other Brazilian patients. Curi- for ADSCA and 12 mapped loci without gene identification. SCA10 is ously, both families were from the same state in Brazil, but they denied characterized by progressive ataxia and seizures. The underlying mu- familial relationship. tation is a large expansion of an ATTCT repeat in intron 9 of the SCA10 In conclusion, these patients confirm the clinical picture as found in gene. Our aim is to determine the relative frequency of SCA10 in Cy- other cases with a loss of function mutation in the SOST gene. prus, which constitutes part of our wider effort to identify the genetic defects of the Cypriot SCA sporadic patients and families, which prove P0860. Determining the expression of the human SPP2 in to be exceptional in comparison with other populations. We analyzed lymphocytes, endothelial cells and monocytes and the effect of the ATTCT repeats in 37 SCA patients, previously excluded from other TNF-α and LPS on the expression using RT-PCR method genes (FRDA, SCA1-3, SCA6-8, SCA12, SCA17 and DRPLA). We H. Khorram Khorshid1, R. Dalgleish2; also determined the size of repeats in 57 normal controls from the 1Genetic Research Centre, The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences Cypriot polulation. The repeat lengths were analyzed by polymerase University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Genetics, Univer- chain reaction followed by fragment analysis. Southern blot analysis sity of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. is currently performed for samples with one allele detected, in order Secreted phosphoprotein 24 (spp24) is a member of the cystatin su- to confirm homozygosity or presence of a SCA10 expansion. Normal perfamily and was first identified in cattle as a minor component of control sample repeat lengths ranged from 11 to 20 with 82,5% het- cortical bone. Subsequently it was recognised as a component of the erozygosity and the 14 repeats allele is more frequent (38%) in the fetuin-mineral complex. In the original study, the expression of the Cypriot population. In the patient group, repeats ranged from 12 to18 gene encoding spp24 (Spp2) was demonstrated in bovine bone peri- with 73% heterozygosity. Three patients have already been confirmed osteum and liver and it was later demonstrated that Spp2 is expressed to be homozygous for a normal range allele. In conclusion, our results in chicken and mouse T-cells and also in the mouse thymus. Hence, it agree with other studies demonstrating that SCA10 is rare in polula- was decided to investigate the expression pattern of the human spp24 tions other than the Mexican. gene (SPP2) in peripheral white blood cells. Mononuclear lymphocytes and monocytes were isolated from whole P0858. SCA17 transgenic mice exhibit a neurodegenerative fresh human blood and endothelial cells were prepared from the um- phenotype bilical cord of a neonate. PCR amplification of reverse-transcribed H. Nguyen, C. Bauer, T. Ott, T. Hennek, O. Riess, P. Bauer; mRNA indicated that SPP2 is expressed in human lymphocytes and Department of Medical Genetics, Tübingen, Germany. endothelial cells, but not in monocytes. SCA17 is a progressive neurodegenerative disease leading to cer- The effects of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and tumour necrosis factor ebellar ataxia and dementia. Several accessorial symptoms such as alpha (TNFα) on the expression of the human SPP2 gene were stud- Parkinsonism, dystonia, and psychiatric disturbances commonly ag- ied by their addition to cultures of monocytes, mononuclear cells and gravate the disease course. Genetically, a CAG/CAA expansion in the endothelial cells for up to 24 hours. Under standard culture conditions, TATA binding protein (TBP) is expanded in SCA17 patients, leading to which included bovine serum albumin (BSA) in the culture medium, an expanded polyglutamine chain in this ubiquitously expressed tran- there is expression of SPP2 in mononuclear lymphocytes and in en- scription factor. dothelial cells at 16 hours, but not in monocytes. The addition of either We have generated transgenic mice overexpressing a 64 CAG/CAA LPS or TNFα down-regulates SPP2 expression in lymphocytes in a repeats containing human TBP (Q64TBP) gene under the control of time-dependent fashion. However, the down-regulation effect of TNFα the truncated human prion protein promoter (PrP). on endothelial cells is, by comparison, only modest. These findings Transgene protein expression throughout different brain regions (cor- may help us understand the function of spp24. tex, basal ganglia, cerebellum, and brain stem) was clearly demon- strable. Onset of motor dysfunction (Accellerod) started by 20 weeks P0861. Mitochondrial DNA instability and recessive POLG and the life span of transgenic animals was reduced. mutations in patients with isolated adult-onset sensory ataxic We present detailed morphological and phenotypical data for this ro- neuropathy dent model of SCA17, which enables us to further study the pathogen- S. Bannwarth1,2, K. Fragaki1,2, J. Pouget3, D. Figarella-Branger4, V. Paquis- esis of this progressive neurodegenerative disease. Flucklinger1,2; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Nice, France, 2UMR CNRS 6543, Nice, P0859. SOST gene mutation in two Brazilian families with France, 3Department of Neurology, Marseille, France, 4Department of Anatomo- sclerosteosis pathology, Marseille, France. C. A. Kim1, R. S. Honjo1, D. R. Bertola1, L. M. J. Albano1, L. A. N. Oliveira1, S. Nuclear gene defects affecting mtDNA stability include the mtDNA M. C. P. Jales1, J. T. T. Siqueira1, W. Balemans2, E. Piters2, K. Jennes2, W. van polymerase (POLG), the adenine nucleotide transporter (ANT1) and Hul2; the Twinkle helicase. There is a considerable variability in the phe- 1Instituto da Criança, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ant- notype associated with POLG mutations which are responsible for werpen, Belgium. autosomal dominant and recessive progressive external ophtalmople- Sclerosteosis is a rare, autosomal recessive disease characterized by gia (PEO), Alpers syndrome, a sensory ataxic neuropathy, dysarthria a progressive craniotubular hyperostosis. The main features are: high and ophtalmoparesis (SANDO) and a mitochondrial recessive ataxic stature, nail dysplasia, cutaneous syndactyly of some fingers, signifi- syndrome. Nevertheless, patients with POLG mutations and sensory Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 22 ataxic neuropathy always presented with associated muscular and/or identified the direct binding of HRC to SERCA2 in cardiac muscle. This central neurological system features. The aim of our study was to test interaction involves the histidine and glutamic acid-rich domain of HRC whether POLG mutations can be responsible for isolated sensory atax- (320-460 aa) and part of the N-terminal cation transporter domain of ic neuropathy. We screened 15 patients by direct sequencing. Seven SERCA2 (74-90 aa), which projects into the SR lumen. The SERCA2 patients were men and the median age of the population was 57 years. binding domain is upstream from the triadin binding region in human The presenting and only feature was ataxia caused by axonal sen- HRC (609-699 aa). Ca-titration experiments indicated that the binding sory neuropathy. A 50 year-old woman was found to be a compound of HRC to SERCA2 was reduced by 75%, when the Ca concentration heterozygous carrying the c.1391T>C mutation (M464T) in combina- as raised from 0.1 to 100 μM. Increasing Ca-concentrations had op- tion with the c.2302A>G substitution (K768E). No POLG mutation was posite effects on the HRC binding to triadin. Collectively, our data sug- found in other patients. Nevertheless, a muscle biopsy was performed gest that HRC may be involved in the regulation of SR Ca-cycling by its in two cases. Ragged-red and COX negative fibers were found in one direct interaction with SERCA2 and triadin, which may be affected by patient, with multiple mtDNA deletions by both long range PCR and local Ca changes. Thus, HRC may mediate a fine cross-talk between Southern blot analysis. The patient was a 67 year-old man who de- SR Ca uptake and release. velopped ataxic symptoms at the age of 47. ENMG revealed normal motor potentials and absent sensory potentials in the four limbs. No P0864. Mutation spectrum of IL2RG gene in Russian families mutations were detected in ANT1 or Twinkle. with X-linked combined immunodeficiency. In conclusion, mitochondrial disease has to be considered as a cause I. G. Sermyagina1, S. M. Tverskaya1, A. V. Polyakov1, I. V. Kondratenko2; of isolated adult-onset sensory ataxic neuropathy. 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian Children’s Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation. P0862. Sepsis and mitochondrial DNA X chromosome-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID) A. Pyle1, S. V. Baudouin2, P. F. Chinnery1; is a rare disease of serious imbalance cellular and humoral immune 1Mitochondrial Research Group, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Surgi- function. X-SCID results from a mutation in the gene encoding the cal and Reproductive Sciences, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. gamma subunit of the interleukin-2 receptor (IL2RG), a component Sepsis-induced multiple organ failure is the major cause of mortality of several IL receptors. IL2RG gene contains 8 exons and has been and morbidity in critically ill patients. However, the precise mecha- mapped to the Xq13.1 region. nisms of this dysfunction are largely unknown. Genetic studies sug- Direct DNA sequencing of all exons and exon-intron junctions and gest a strong genetic component to both the risk of developing sepsis PCR-RFLP performed a search of IL2RG gene mutations. and the subsequent outcome in terms of survival. We have detected 8 mutations in 9 unrelated families with X-SCID. In The failure of cellular oxygen use appears to be important in the devel- this molecular investigation we identified 6 novel mutations, the others opment of multiple organ dysfunction in severe sepsis. Mitochondria have been reported. are small membrane-bound intracellular organelles. They are involved In exon 2 and exon 3 of IL2RG gene we show three missence muta- in multiple cellular processes such as energy metabolism, apoptosis tions: reported - p.Glu68Lys, p.Tyr105Cys and novel - p.Cys72Trp. We and generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). identified a new missense mutations (p.Cys182Ser) and (p.Cys182Tyr) Impaired mitochondrial function in septic patients is associated with in exon 4 of IL2RG gene in a two affected probands with X-SCID. In a poor clinical outcome. Epidemiological studies indicate that premature two patients with X-linked combined immunodeficiency in our Center death from infection has a strong inherited component and natural we found two unicue splice mutations (IVS 5 as-2nt a->g) and (IVS 5 genetic variation in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) provides a potential as-1nt g->a) in intron 5 of IL2RG gene. One insertion (c.837ins9bp) we explanation. identified in a boy with X-SCID in exon 6 of IL2RG gene. Human mtDNA is maternally inherited. The population can be divided The mothers of all patients were heterozygous for the mutation. Also, into several mtDNA haplogroups on the basis of specific single nucleo- three prenatal diagnostics of X-SCID were made. tide polymorphisms (SNPs) scattered throughout the mitochondrial In this molecular investigation of nine familys with X-linked combined genome, indicating that mutations accumulated by a discrete maternal immunodeficiency we have detected different mutations in exon 2, 3, lineage during evolution. The SNPs that define the mtDNA haplogroups 4, 6 and intron 5. We supposed two “hot spots” in exon 4 and in intron are markers of a particular maternal lineage of mtDNA. The majority 5 of IL2RG gene. of Europeans belong to one of nine haplogroups with haplogroup H being the most common (44%). Our group found an improved sur- P0865. Identification of small genomic deletions flanking the vival in septic patients with haplogroup H. MtDNA copy number was human SHOX gene measured in 59 haplogroup H patients and 34 control samples. Differ- S. Thomas, K. Baker, D. Bunyan, J. Harvey; ences in mtDNA copy number were observed between survivors and Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom. non-survivors. In addition to point mutations and gene deletions, haploinsufficiency of the human SHOX gene can also result from deletions 3’ of the gene. P0863. Histidine-Rich Calcium Binding Protein Interacts with These are generally 80 to 500 kb in size, with a 29kb minimal deleted SERCA2 in a Ca-Dependent Manner region, that exert a position effect. These classes of mutation account D. A. Arvanitis1, E. Vafiadaki1, B. A. Mitton2, K. N. Gregory2, F. Del Monte3, A. for only 70% of Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) patients. There- Kontrogianni-Konstantopoulos4, E. G. Kranias2,1, D. Sanoudou1; fore we have used the MRC-Holland SHOX MLPA kit supplemented 1Molecular Biology Division, Foundation for Biomedical Research, Academy of with additional probes to screen for novel types of SHOX mutation Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Pharmacology and Cell Biophysics, in 73 cases in whom no mutation was previously identified (16 with College of Medicine, University of Cincinnnati, Cincinnati, OH, United States, LWD, 12 with short stature and 45 with undefined skeletal dysplasia). 3Department of Cardiology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Upstream of SHOX we identified two deletions, of maximum size 73kb Hospital, Boston, Boston, MA, United States, 4Department of Physiology, and 160kb, each in a single patient. Neither deletion was present in 88 School of Medicine, University of Maryland Baltimore, Baltimore, Baltimore, normal controls. Downstream (3’) of SHOX we identified two deletion MD, United States. classes: 12 of the 73 patients (16%) carried an approximately 10kb Deregulation of Ca cycling by the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) in the deletion and two LWD patients (3%) were compound heterozygotes for cardiomyocyte has been associated with depressed cardiac function the 10kb deletion and a larger overlapping deletion of up to 60kb. The which may progress to heart failure. The histidine-rich calcium binding larger deletion was absent among the 88 controls, but there were 13 protein (HRC) is a low affinity, high capacity Ca-handling SR protein carriers of the 10kb deletion (15%). Among 12 LWD mutation positive that binds to triadin. Through this interaction HRC may affect Ca re- cases, there were two 10kb deletions (17%) and one larger deletion lease by the ryanodine receptor. HRC overexpression in transgenic (8%). In summary additional types of SHOX mutation are likely to ex- mouse hearts was associated with decreased rates of SR Ca uptake ist, although it will be difficult to assess their functional significance. and delayed relaxation, which progressed to hypertrophy upon aging. The deletions identified in this study do not appear to cause classical Using a combination of in vivo co-immunoprecipitations and pull-down SHOX haploinsufficiency, however it is possible they may act to modify assays in human and mouse cardiac homogenates, and in vitro blot phenotypic expression. overlay experiments with GST and MBP recombinant proteins, we Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 22 P0866. Bisulfite based methylation analysis of the 6th CTCF P0868. Molecular analysis of SPG and SPGA mutations in target site within the IGF2/H19 imprinting centre region 1 (ICR1) families with hereditary spastic paraplegia has a higher sensitivity compared to Southernblot analysis of C. Thieleke-Matos1, L. Miller-Fleming1, P. Magalhães1, P. Coutinho2, J. Se- the 3rd CTCF target site queiros1,3, I. Silveira1, J. Loureiro1,2; M. Zeschnigk1, B. Albrecht1, K. Buiting1, T. Eggermann2, J. Gromoll3, S. Kaya- 1IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital S.Sebastião, Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal, Westerloh1, S. Seeland1, B. Horsthemke1; 3ICBAS, Porto, Portugal. 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Insti- Autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegias (AD-HSPs) are a tut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Aachen, Aachen, Germany, 3Institut genetically and clinically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative für Reproduktionsmedizin, Universität Münster, Münster, Germany. disorders, characterized mainly by progressive weakness and spastic- Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a clinically and genetically hetero- ity of the lower limbs. Overall, SPG4 and SPG3A mutations account geneous syndrome characterized by severe pre- and postnatal growth for about half of all AD-HSP cases. SPG4 encodes spastin, and is retardation, body asymmetry and a typical facial phenotype including associated with a pure phenotype, with no predictable age-at-onset, triangular face and relative macrocephaly. Apart from rare families, whereas SPG3A encodes atlastin, being also associated with a pure most patients are sporadic. Approximately 10 % of patients have ma- phenotype, but particularly distinguishable by its early onset and a ternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7. In another 30 % of pa- slower progression of symptoms. Recent data suggested that spastin, tients, the differentially methylated IGF2/H19 imprinting centre region an ATPase from the AAA protein family, and atlastin, an oligomeric (ICR) at 11p15 is hypomethylated. This region contains seven CTCF GTPase, are binding partners and function in the same biochemical target sites (CTSs). In previous studies methylation of a HpaII restric- pathway. To genetically characterize Portuguese families with HSP, tion site close to CTS3 was analysed by Southern-blotting (Gicquel et 80 unrelated patients, 61 with AD-HSP and 19 isolated cases were al., 2005). Using bisulfite treatment and a real time PCR based meth- analysed. Mutational analysis was performed by DHPLC followed by ylation assay (QAMA), we determined the methylation at CTS6 in 15 sequencing. Twelve mutations in SPG4, nine of which novel ones, as patients who showed a normal CTS3 methylation by Southern analy- well as one novel mutation in SPG3A have been identified, so far. The sis. We observed CTS6 hypomethylation in 6 patients. The degree of SPG3A mutation was a novel frameshift causing early onset (< 10 methylation ranged from 4 - 16 %. By Multiplex Ligation-dependent years) and a pure phenotype; all the patients presenting SPG4 muta- Probe Amplification (MLPA) we extended the methylation analysis to tions had a pure phenotype; p.G370R was the only recurrent mutation four additional ICR loci located between 300bp upstream and 2150bp in Portuguese HSP patients. In conclusion, we genetically identified downstream of CTS6 and found similar degrees of hypomethylation in 21% of all AD-HSP in our group of Portuguese families. SPG4 mu- all of the six patients. As transmission of SRS has been observed, we tations had a frequency of 20%; together with the five other SPG4 analysed the degree of methylation in spermatozoa from one patient families previously described, SPG4 accounts for approximately 28% and found complete methylation of CTS6, which is consistent with a of known AD-HSP Portuguese cases. normal methylation pattern. P0869. SMN1 mutation analysis in 803 Spanish spinal muscular P0867. Heterogeneity of NSD1 alterations in 116 patients with atrophy patients. Sotos syndrome L. Alias1, M. J. Barceló1, C. Hernández Chico2, J. M. Millán3, S. Alcover1, P. Saugier-Veber1, C. Bonnet1, A. Afenjar2,3, V. Drouin-Garraud1, C. Coubes4, I. Cuscó1, E. Also1, Y. Martín2, L. Sáez2, E. Aller3, E. Galán4, S. López5, M. S. Ferenbach1, M. Holder-Espinasse5, J. Roume6, V. Malan7, N. Jeanne7, C. Fernández Burriel6, M. Baiget1, E. F. Tizzano1; Baumann8, D. Héron9, A. David10, M. Gérard8, D. Bonneau11, D. Lacombe12, V. 1Hospital St. Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, Cormier-Daire13, T. Billette de Villemeur2, T. Frebourg1, L. Burglen7; 3Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 4Hospital Materno Infantil, Badajoz, Spain, 1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital and Inserm U614, Institute 5Hospital Virgen de la Candelaria, Tenerife, Spain, 6Hospital de Mérida, Bada- for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 2Department of Neuropediatrics, joz, Spain. Trousseau University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Centre de référence des Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disease anomalies du développement embryonnaire, Trousseau University Hospital, characterised by degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Montpellier University cord and caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene. We present the re- Hospital, Montpellier, France, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Lille University sults of a systematic SMN1 gene analysis in 803 unrelated Spanish Hospital, Lille, France, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Poissy-Saint Germain SMA patients. en Laye Hospital, Poissy, France, 7Department of Genetics, Trousseau Univer- In 729 patients (91%) the molecular defect was absence of the sity Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 8Department of Genetics, Robert Debré SMN1 gene and in 41 cases (5%) it was the presence of SMN hy- University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 9Department of Genetics, Pitié- brid genes. We detected 24 subtle mutations (3%), 14 of which were Salpêtrière University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 10Department of Medical c.399delAGAG (representing 1.7% of the total Spanish SMA cases). Genetics, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France, 11Department of Medical Two of these cases were homozygous for the mutation. By quantita- Genetics, Angers University Hospital, Angers, France, 12Department of Medical tive PCR techniques, the remaining patients were heterozygous for Genetics, Bordeaux University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 13Department of the SMN1 gene deletion. In the other allele we identified the following Medical Genetics, Necker University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France. mutations: p.Y272C (one case), p.T274I (one case) and 813ins/dup11 Sotos syndrome is an overgrowth syndrome characterized by distinc- (two cases) described in other populations and p.I116F, p.Q136E, tive facial features, learning difficulties and macrocephaly with frequent c.738-740insC and c.867+2T>G described to date only in Spanish pre- and postnatal overgrowth with advanced bone age. Here we re- SMA patients. Furthermore, two novel mutations, c.311-312insA (exon port on our experience in the molecular diagnosis of Sotos syndrome 3) and p.W190X (exon 4) were identified. In the remaining 9 patients on 116 patients. Using direct sequencing and a QMPSF-based assay no changes were detected in the sequence of the codifying regions allowing accurate detection of both total and partial NSD1 deletions, and exon intron boundaries. mRNA was available in two of these pa- we identified NSD1 abnormalities in 104 patients corresponding to 102 tients and no SMN1 transcripts were detected. Novel variants were Sotos families (90 %). NSD1 point mutations were detected in 80 % found in the promoter region of these patients. However, it is not pos- of the index cases, large deletions removing entirely the NSD1 gene sible to ascribe these variants to the SMN1 or SMN2 promoter. in 14 % and intragenic NSD1 rearrangements in 6 %. Among the 69 Employing this systematic approach, the SMN1 genotypes of the vast detected distinct point mutations, 48 were novel. The QMPSF assay majority of the Spanish SMA patients were characterised, including the detected an exonic duplication and a mosaic partial deletion. QMPSF existence of non-functional SMN genes. FIS 05-2416. mapping of the 15 large deletions revealed the heterogeneity of the deletions which size varies from 1 to 4.5 Mb. Clinical features of NSD1- P0870. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF): mRNA positive Sotos patients revealed that the phenotype in patients with expression in rat brain focal ischemia under the treatment with non-truncating mutations was less severe that in patients with truncat- neuropeptides Semax and PGP ing mutations. This study confirms the heterogeneity of NSD1 altera- V. G. Dmitrieva1, L. V. Dergunova1, I. V. Vlasova1, O. V. Povarova2, V. I. tions in Sotos syndrome and therefore the need to complete sequenc- Skvortsova2, S. A. Limborska1; ing analysis by the screening for partial deletions and duplications in 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of order to ensure an accurate molecular diagnosis of this syndrome.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 22 Stroke RSMU, Moscow, Russian Federation. compared with 197 healthy controls from the same area. Consisting of a fragment of ACTH4-7 and C-terminal PGP tripeptide We reconstructed tau haplotypes genotyping 3 SNPs (BanII in exon neuroprotective polypeptide Semax is used for acute therapy of stroke. 3, MspI in exon 9, AluI in exon 11) and a dinucleotide polymorphism To investigate Bdnf mRNA expression after treatment either with sa- in intron 9. Of interest, we found a significant overrepresentation of line, Semax or PGP the brains of male Wistar rats were analyzed at the H2 haplotype in PD patients ( OD 2.26 - 95% CI 1.64-3.18), sug- three time points following permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion gesting that the H2 haplotype is a risk factor for parkinsonism in our (pMCAO): 3, 24 and 72 hours. The intraperitoneal injection of solutions sample. Southern Italy population appears different from most of other were done at 15 min, 1 h, 4 h after the occlusion and then after every Caucasian populations in which, on the contrary, the tau H1 haplotype 4 hours. The last injection was done at 56 h after operation. Real-time contribute to susceptibility to Parkinson’s disease. reverse transcription and polimerase chain reaction has been used to measure changes in Bdnf expression in the ipsilateral and contralat- P0873. Genetic screening for beta-thalassemia point mutations eral frontoparietal cortex and subcortex of rat brains. Gapdh was used using two-steps effective approach as the internal control. L. Dan1, R. Talmaci2,1, L. Cherry1, D. Coriu2,3, M. Dogaru3, D. Cimponeriu1, A. In the lesioned cortex Bdnf mRNA expression was increased at 24 Pompilia1, D. Uşurelu1, L. Gavrilă1; h post-MCAO and returned to control level after 72 h. Decreasing of 1Institute of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2University Bdnf mRNA expression in contralateral hemisphere 3 h after operation of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania, 3Fundeni Clinical is probably concerned with depolarization expansion and neuroplastic- Institute, Bucharest, Romania. ity. Under Semax treatment in ischemic cortex such increasing of Bdnf The occurrence of β-thalassemia in Romania is not so common. Taking mRNA expression was detected at 3 h after operation and the level of into account that thalassemia demography is in continuous changing, Bdnf mRNA was high at 24 and 72 h post-MCAO. Thus Semax sup- a developing country should handle with its prevention. A first stage ports earlier increasing of Bdnf expression in the ischemic tissue and to this objective is to characterize the molecular spectrum of β-globin helps to retain high level of Bdnf mRNA to the point of 72 h after occlu- gene mutation in the respective population. One hundred and twenty sion. C-terminal PGP tripeptide also increases Bdnf mRNA expression eight β-thalassemic chromosomes derived from ninety-four β-thalas- 3 h after ischemia but then Bdnf expression returned to control level. semia carrier and seventeen homozygous patients were investigated for their β-globin mutations. Molecular screening approach was per- P0871. A microdeletion on chromosome 1q21 is required but formed in two steps: indirect scanning by DGGE followed by direct not sufficient for development of thrombocytopenia-absent radii PCR based methods - ARMS and PCR-RFLP. Applying this effective (TAR) syndrome approach, we were able to find a total of 12 mutations: IVS I-110 (G-A)- E. Klopocki1, H. Schulze2, C. Ott1, F. Trotier1, G. Strauss2, H. Ropers3, R. Ull- 43 chr., IVS I-6 (T-C)-21 chr., Cd 39 (C-T)-17 chr., IVS II-745 (C-G)-15 mann3, D. Horn1, S. Mundlos1,3; chr., IVS I-1 (G-A)-9 chr., Cd 6 (-A)-5 chr., -87 (C-G)-4 chr., Cd 8 (-AA)- 1Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Medical Genetics, Berlin, Ger- 4 chr., Cd 5 (-CT)-3 chr., +22(G-A)-1 chr., Poly A (A-G)-1 chr., Cd 51 many, 2Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Klinik für Allgemeine Pädiatrie, Ber- (-C)-1 chr. Besides these mutations, DGGE reveals four uncharacter- lin, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute of Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. ized mutations which remain to be sequenced. All the identified muta- Thrombocytopenia-absent-radius (TAR) syndrome is a rare congenital tions, less cd 51 (-C), are of Mediterranean origin which demonstrates disorder with an incident of 1-2 in a million. TAR syndrome is charac- a gene flow from that area. terized by hypomegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia and bilateral radial Funding from the European Commission for the “eInfrastructure for aplasia in the presence of both thumbs. Other frequent associations Thalassaemia Research Network”, Coordination Action - Contract no are congenital heart disease and a high incidence of cow’s milk intoler- 026539 - for which this study was partially funded is gratefully acknowl- ance. The molecular basis as well as the inheritance pattern for this edged. disorder is still ill-defined. Here, we present evidence that a microdeletion of about 200 kb on P0874. Genetic Polymorphism in Deep Vein Thrombosis chromosome 1q21 encompassing about 11 annotated genes is essen- H. Samli1, M. Emmiler2, C. U. Kocogullari2, A. Ozgoz1, M. Solak1, A. Cekird- tial for developing TAR syndrome. We tested 32 individuals affected by ekci2; TAR syndrome from 30 unrelated families by submegabase microarray- 1Afyonkarahisar Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH), fluorescence Medical Biology, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Afyonkarahisar Kocatepe University, in situ-hybridization (FISH), or quantitative RT-PCR and detected the School of Medicine, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Afyonkarahisar, microdeletion in all samples tested. The absence of this deletion in a Turkey. cohort of control individuals argues for a specific role of the microdele- A deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is a blood clot (thrombus) that develops tion in the pathogenesis of TAR syndrome. The microdeletion occurred in a deep vein, usually in the lower leg. Factor V Leiden (FV Leiden) de novo in about 25% of pedigrees analyzed. Intriguingly, in the other (G1691A) mutation is one of the most important genetic factors causes pedigrees inheritance of the deletion along the maternal as well as deep vein thrombosis. Another genetic thrombosis reason thought the paternal line was observed. The deletion was also present in ad- to cause venous thrombosis tendency is Prothrombin Factor II (FII) ditional unaffected family members spanning up to three generations. (G20210A) mutation. Some study reports on hyperhomosisteinemia Thus, it is obvious that the occurrence of the microdeletion is required being a risk factor in DVT, made us think searching Methylenetetra- but not sufficient to cause TAR syndrome. We therefore conclude that hydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) (C677T) gene polymorphism in this TAR-syndrome has to be considered a genetically complex disorder patient group might be significant. rather than a monogenic disorder, suggesting the presence of a yet to In our study 27 patients diagnosed to be DVT by Cardiovascular Sur- be identified modifier of TAR (mTAR). gery experts and 31 healthy controls were investigated. In all cases FV Leiden, FII and MTHFR gene polymorphism investigations were P0872. The tau H2 haplotype contribute to susceptibility to performed by PCR-ELISA method. Parkinson disease in a Southern Italy population. Even though the result of genetic analysis performed for the frequency D. Civitelli, P. Tarantino, E. V. De Marco, F. Annesi, S. Carrideo, I. C. Cirò Can- of FV Leiden mutation and MTHFR gene polymorphism were detected diano, F. E. Rocca, G. Annesi; to be high in the patient group, it was not found to be statistically mean- National Research Council, Mangone, Italy. ingful (p>0,05). FII mutation was found to be significantly high in the There are many evidences that tau protein is involved in common neu- patient group (p<0,05). rodegenerative pathways, and a number of association studies have Generally genetic predisposition for thrombosis is clinically silent unless been conducted to clarify the role of the tau gene in neurodegenerative additional environmental factors interfere. In this study it was aimed to diseases, including Parkinson’s disease (PD). A contribution of the H1 evaluate distrubution of genetic venous thrombosis in patients with DVT. haplotype to PD susceptibility was suggested. Several polymorphisms In the performed genetic investigation, no significant association were localized along the entire tau gene length are inherited in complete detected between DVT and FV Leiden mutation and MTHFR gene poly- linkage disequilibrium as 2 distinct extended haplotypes designated morphism, whereas prothrombin mutation detected to show a positive H1 and H2, respectively. Here, we investigated the distribution of tau association.These data are the first results of the planned comprehen- haplotypes in a group of 262 sporadic PD patients from Southern Italy sive study, and were evaluated with the similar studies in the literature.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 22 P0875. Frequency and forms of thrombophilies at patients with In a yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) screen, myospryn (CMYA5) and phos- syndrome of loss of fetus in Kazakh population phoglucomutase 1 (PGM1) among others were identified as potential G. K. Rapilbekova, G. S. Svyatova; ligands of the M10 domain. Further two-hybrid and protein chemical The Scientific Centre of obstetric, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, Ka- studies have been performed to confirm the interactions. At least the zakhstan. titin-myospryn interaction seems genuine, as it is disrupted in the Y2H The aim of this research is the determine the frequency and forms of system by the FINmaj mutation, but conclusive evidence from protein the genetically forms of thrombophilies at patients with syndrome of chemical studies is still pending. loss of fetus in Kazakh population. Several lines of evidence support that proteolytic processing of C-ter- We investigated the genotype’s frequencies of C677T mutation of minal titin is altered in TMD/LGMD2J, potentially extending the effect MTHFR gene, G20210A mutation of prothrombin gene and Leiden of the disease mutations to a larger region in M-line titin. mutation at 100 kazakh patients with loss of fetus in anamnesis and 100 healthy female for controls. The genetically forms of thrombophi- P0878. Investigating Factor V Leiden, Prothrombin mutations lies was founded at 53% patients. Thus C677T mutation was founded and Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase gene polymorphism at 41% patients, from them a 37% women has a heterozygous forms in newborns and 4% patients has a homozygous forms. The isolated form of this U. Yigit1, A. Bukulmez1, H. Samli2, R. Koken1, A. Ozgoz2, M. Solak2; mutation was founded at 28% patients and in combination with other 1Afyonkarahisar Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Pedi- mutations -at 13%. The C677T mutation was founded at 24% patients atrics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Afyonkarahisar Kocatepe University, School of of control group, from them at 23% are heterozygous forms and at 1% Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey. patients are homozygous forms. The Leiden mutation was founded Among childhood age groups, the term trombosis most frequently seen at 9% patients and all causes were heterozygous of these mutations. is newborn term. Trombosis is multifactorial. In this study it is aimed The isolated form was founded at 4% patients and in combination with to evaluate distrubution of genetic venous thrombosis risk factors in other mutations -at 5%. Leiden mutation was founded at 3% patients newborns with Intrauterine Growth Retardation and in premature new- of controls. The G20210A mutation of prothrombin gene was founded borns. Due to this, Factor V Leiden (FV Leiden) (G1691A), Prothrom- at 4% patients, and all causes were heterozygous. The isolated form bin (FII) (G20210A) mutations and Methylenetetrahydrofolate reduc- was founded at 2% patients and in combination with other mutations tase (MTHFR) (C677T) gene polymorphism were investigated. -at 2%. In controls this mutation was not founded. The combinations 96 newborn babies were included in our study. Babies included in the two and even of three defects of thrombophilies was founded at 18% study were divided into four groups. These groups were as following: patients and in control group was founded only isolated forms. 1.Term and IUGR (n=10), 2. Preterm and IUGR (n=15), 3. Preterm and AGA (n=29), 4. Term and AGA (control group) (n=42). In all groups, FV P0876. Functional characterization of a novel mutation in TITF-1 Leiden, FII mutations and MTHFR gene polymorphism investigations in a patient with Benign Hereditary Chorea were performed by PCR-ELISA method. L. Veneziano1, C. Provenzano1, E. Mantuano1, S. Guida1, R. Appleton2, M. When the genetic investigation results of the groups were evaluated, Frontali1, D. Civitareale1; highest muation frequencies were detected to be for FV Leiden muta- 1Istituto di Neurobiologia e Medicina Molecolare. CNR, Rome, Italy, 2Royal tion in group III, for FII mutation in group IV and for MTHFR (C677T) Liverpool Children’s Hospital Eaton Rd, Liverpool L12-2AP, United Kingdom. gene polymorphism in group I. Benign hereditary chorea (BHC) is an autosomal dominant disorder of The control group and the three case groups were compared for FV early onset characterised by non progressive choreic movements with Leiden and FII gene mutations and no significant differences were normal cognitive function occasionally associated with hypothyroidism found (p>0.05), whereas among the control group and the three case and respiratory problems. Numerous pieces of evidence links BHC groups statistically significant difference was found for MTHFR gene with TITF-1/NKX2.1 gene mutations. We studied a patient with a famil- polymorphism (p<0.05). These data are the first results of the planned ial Benign Hereditary Chorea and normal thyroid and respiratory func- comprehensive study, and were evaluated with the similar studies in tion. Sequence analysis of TITF-1 exon 1, 2 and 3 of proband’s DNA the literature. revealed the presence of a heterozygous C>T variation resulting in a substitution of a highly conserved aminoacid for a stop codon in the P0879. Sequence analysis of TSPY repetitive gene in male with protein homeodomain. A functional analysis shows that the mutated impaired fertility and patients with seminoma TTF-1 neither binds DNA, nor activates a canonical thyroid target gene R. Vrtel1, R. Vodicka1, V. Svacinova1, L. Dusek2, J. Sanatavy1; promoter and does not interfere with the ability of wildtype TTF-1 to 1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub- activate transcription. In addition, the mutated protein is predominantly lic, 2CBA Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. cytoplasmic, rather than nuclear as occurs with the wildtype TTF-1. The human TSPY gene family is situated in the MSY region on the The results show that the mutation leads to a haploinsufficiency of Y chromosome. The role of the TSPY gene in spermatogenesis and TITF-1 and opens the question of genotype/phenotype correlation. tumourogenesis has recently being intensively investigated. The aim of this study (supported by IGA MZ CR NR/7821-3) was TSPY P0877. Molecular studies on the titinopathies TMD/LGMD2J gene sequence comparison in DNA from patients with testicular tu- J. Sarparanta1,2, A. Vihola1,3, I. Richard4, P. Hackman1,3, B. Udd1; mour, infertile patients and controls. 1FolkhÃ¤lsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Helsinki Graduate School Genomic DNA samples from 51 infertile patients, 6 seminomas and 10 in Biotechnology and Molecular Biology, Helsinki, Finland, 3University of Hel- controls were sequenced in whole gene. sinki, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 4Généthon, Evry, France. There were found statistically significant differences in both the infertile Tibial muscular dystrophy (TMD) is a dominant late onset distal my- group and the patients with tumour. opathy, caused by mutations in the C-terminal (M-line) part of the sar- Comparision of infertile patients to controls: p < 0.001 comeric protein titin. In homozygotes, the same mutations lead to the Breakdown Table of Descriptive Statistics N=61 different, more severe limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 2J (LGMD2J). In (No missing data in dep. var. list) Finland, TMD/LGMD2J is caused by the FINmaj mutation, exchanging Infertility Mean N SE 4 amino acids in the titin M10 domain. Other missense and nonsense 0 3.412669 10 0.251166 mutations in M-line titin cause TMD/LGMD2J outside the Finnish pop- 1 2.064455 51 0.149818 All Grps 2.285473 61 0.146088 ulation. The molecular pathways behind TMD/LGMD2J are unknown, but mus- Comparision of patients with seminoma to controls: p < 0.001 cle selectivity and normal sarcomere ultrastructure suggest a defect in Breakdown Table of Descriptive Statistics N=16 signalling functions of titin rather than structural disruption of the sarco- (No missing data in dep. var. list) meres. Loss of protein interactions of C-terminal titin is likely, caused by Seminoma Mean N SE 0 3.412669 10 0.251166 direct disruption of the binding or by cleavage of the entire titin C-termi- 1 1.666862 6 0.249400 nus. Our aim is to elucidate the molecular pathomechanism of TMD/LG- All Grps 2.757991 16 0.281166 MD2J by identifying the protein interactions disrupted and by determin- ing the effect of the mutations on the stability of C-terminal titin. Sequence analyses surprisingly revealed generally higher occurrence of SNPs in Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 22 controls, which supports the hypothesis on possible emergence of particular lineages distribution of tumour cells in lymph nodes requires multiple sectioning with reduced function, which affects fertility and tumour genesis. The number of SNPs to achieve high sensitivity. In this regard molecular markers detected alone has obviously no influence on pathogenesis. Surely there could play a great at the RNA level provide an obvious advantage. role particular representation and combination of SNPs. It is important to realize, that the male lineage haplotype structure is changing rarely except for natural genome P0882. Tumor necrosis factor-α promotor polymorphisms and mutability. type 1 diabetes mellitus T. Zemunik, V. Boraska, V. Skrabic; P0880. Abnormal cortical lamination with brain stem and vermis Faculty of Medicine, Split, Croatia. hypoplasia resulting from TUBA mutations Aim: Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is complex, heterogenous dis- A. Goldenberg1, A. Laquerrière2, K. Poirier3, S. Marret4, V. Drouin-Garraud1, E. ease initiated by an autoimmune response against pancreatic β cells Verspyck5, D. Eurin6, P. Saugier-Veber1, T. Frebourg1, J. Chelly3; and followed by progressive defect of insulin secretion from β cells. Tu- 1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital and Inserm U614, Institute mor necrosis factor (TNF-α) is a potent cytokine, with a wide range of for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 2Department of Pathology, Rouen proinflamatory activities that has been implicated in the pathogenesis University Hospital, Rouen, France, 3Inserm U567, Cochin University Hospital, of many kinds of inflammatory or autoimmune diseases. Therefore we Paris, France, 4Department of Neonatology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, tested an association of two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in France, 5Department of Obstetric and Gynecology, Rouen, France, 6Depart- promoter region of TNF-α gene with the susceptibility to T1DM in the ment of Pediatric Radiology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. Dalmatian population. Developmental defects of cortical lamination are severe brain malfor- Materials and methods: 229 T1DM patients and 445 controls were mations characterized by abnormal gyral pattern ranging from focal genotyped for G-238A and G-308A promoter variants of TNF-α gene. cortical dysgenesia to agyria-pachygyria. These malformations can re- The PCR products were digested with MspI to detect TNF-α -238A al- sult from abnormal neuronal migration related to mutations within sev- lele and NcoI to detect TNF-α -308A allele. Haplotype analysis of these eral genes, namely LIS1, DCX, ARX, RELN and VLDLR. The TUBA3 two SNPs was made using the statistical program EH+. Genotype and gene encoding the α-Tubulin has recently been shown to be involved haplotype association and susceptibility to T1DM was further analyzed in two patients presenting with agyria-pachygyria associated to partial using chi-square test. corpus callosum agenesis and pontocerebellar hypoplasia. We report Results: A genotype distribution of G-238A and G-308A TNF-α promot- here two additional unrelated cases with TUBA3 mutations. The first er variants did not differ between the T1DM patients and the controls case is a 30 months old girl presenting with severe mental retardation, (p=0.147, p=0.119, respectively). However the TNF-α -238A minor al- early onset seizures and bilateral ptosis. MRI revealed partial corpus lele was significantly more frequent in the controls (p=0.046). Further- callosum agenesis, periventricular laminar heterotopia, brain stem and more, a specific haplotype (-238G, -308A) was observed more often vermis hypoplasia. In the second case, foetal ultrasonography at 34 but not quite significantly in the T1DM patients (p=0.069) indicating its WG showed microcephaly with complete agyria, severe ventricular possible role as a risk factor. dilatation in addition to brain stem and vermis hypoplasia. Medical ter- Conclusions: Our findings indicate that haplotype combination (-238G, mination of the pregnancy was performed at 36 WG according to the -308A) of TNF-α gene may contribute to the susceptibility to T1DM in French law. Neuropathological examination revealed absence of corti- the Dalmatian population. cal lamination combined with severe hypoplasia and disorganisation of basal ganglia. Brain stem nuclei were absent. The cerebellum was P0883. Determination of the pathogenicity of USH2A and MYO7A strongly dysplastic with failure of Purkinje cells migration. Screening genes variations. of the entire coding region of the TUBA3 gene lead to the identifica- S. Le Guédard1, O. Leroy1, L. Larrieu2, D. Baux2, M. Faburel2, M. Claustres1,2, tion of two de novo missense mutations, c.562A>C (p.Ile188Leu) and A. Roux1,2, S. Tuffery-Giraud1,3; c.908T>G (p.Val303Gly) in case 1 and case 2, respectively. These two 1INSERM, U 827, Montpellier, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, new cases suggest that the presence of TUBA3 mutations should be 3Université Montpellier1, Montpellier, France. considered in abnormal cortical lamination associated with brain stem Abnormalities of pre-mRNA splicing are increasingly recognized as an and cerebellum hypo-dysplasia. important mechanism through which gene mutations cause disease. It has been shown that intronic or exonic enhancer (ISE/ESE) or silencer P0881. Evaluation of p16INK4A, Cytokeratins and HPV-mRNA as (ISS/ESS) cis-regulatory elements are required for splice site (ss) rec- potential markers for lymph node micrometastases and occult ognition. Consequently, nonsense, missense and even silent mutations tumor cells could be a novel form of splicing mutations. Numerous intronic and ex- A. Fishta1, A. Berndt2, E. Schulze2, N. Häfner1, M. Duerst1; onic variations for which the pathogenic effect is not well established 1Gynäkologische Molekular Biologie, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Ger- were found in the MYO7A and USH2A genes responsible for Usher many, 2Institut für Pathologie, Klinikum der Friedrich-Schiller-Universität, Jena, syndrome. In this study, the putative effect on splicing of some of these Germany. variations was determined. As specific transcripts analysis was not In patients with cervical cancer, lymph nodes metastases represent possible in these patients, we use a splicing reporter minigene system. the most important prognostic factor for recurrence. However, 15% of We first concentrated on intronic variations localized inside or outside patients suffer from recurrent disease although their lymph nodes were the canonical splice sites. Several mutations revealed a splicing altera- free from histologically evident metastases (pN0). The role of occult tion. For instance, a mutation localized in position -14 and predicted to tumour cells in cervical lymph nodes is still unknown and is currently create a novel 3’ss, was found to activate a downstream exonic cryptic being addressed in several studies. We have assessed an immun- splice site. Another one, localized in position +3 and not predicted to histochemical approach (IHC) and reverse transcription nested PCR alter the splicing by in silico tools, induces an exon skipping. Secondly, (RT-PCR) for the detection of metastatic tumour cells in sentinel lymph we evaluated the effect of missense or silent mutations predicted to nodes (SLN). IHC was done with a pan-reactive antibody against cy- alter ESE sequences, in particular SF2/ASF sites, by measuring the tokeratins (AE1/3), an antibody against CK19 and an antibody against ability of these predicted ESE to rescue splicing of an enhancer-de- p16INK4A. The latter protein is invariably upregulated in cervical can- pendent exon using a fluorescent reporter minigene. These results are cers and is a surrogate marker of viral oncogene activity. Viral onco- of great help to assess the pathogenicity of unclassified variants and gene activity (HPV-mRNA) was also directly detected by RT-PCR. A will also contribute to a better understanding of the splicing regulatory total of 120 SLN from 48 patients were analysed. There was perfect mechanisms in genes involved in Usher syndrome. agreement among all IHC markers, except CK19, for the detection of metastases and micrometastases. However, considerable discor- P0884. Genetic screening of 1500 warfarin receiving patients dance was observed for all markers for the detection of tumour cell L. Chen1, J. Lindh2, N. Eriksson3, M. Wadelius4, R. McGinnis1, A. Rane2, P. clusters (<0.2mm), multiple tumour cells and isolated tumour cells. As Deloukas1; expected, disagreement was most evident at the single cell level. Dis- 1The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Division of cordance was also observed when comparing IHC with RT-PCR. This Clinical Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Uppsala pilot study clearly shows that a single marker is not specific enough for Clinical Research Center, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Department of Medical Sciences, the reliable detection of occult tumour cells. Moreover, the non-random Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 20 Clinical Pharmacology, University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. common H1069Q mutation presence in Eastern Europe. Warfarin (Coumadin, Marevan, Waran) is the most widely prescribed From the identified patients, pre-symptomatic diagnosis was con- anticoagulant drug but is very difficult to administer because of its firmed in one patient, thus preserving the patient from irreversible liver high inter-individual dose variation and its narrow therapeutic range. of brain damage. Moreover, warfarin treatment may lead to bleeding, an adverse drug On the basis of clinical information from patients with confirmed di- response in around 5% patients. agnosis by DNA analysis, Wilson disease diagnostics criteria were In a cohort study with 201 Swedish patients, we examined 850 single re-evaluated and more impact was addressed towards diagnosing nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 30 genes involving warfarin ac- disease at an early stage for the better therapeutic effect. From WD tion and metabolism. Common variants in VKORC1, CYP2C9, PROC, scoring system the most valuable information comes from ceruplasmin age, bodyweight, diagnosis and other medications were used in a level in blood and copper level in 24 hour urine. regression model that could explain 62% of the variance in warfarin There were no patients observed with Kayser-Flesischer ring and neu- dose. However, our results suggested that GGCX, EPHX1, and ORM1 rological symptoms were not suggestive. may be additional predictors but their contribution needed replication in an independent as well as larger cohort. P0887. Extremely skewed X-chromosome inactivation in juvenile We selected to test 29 genes on 1518 warfarin receiving patients who idiopathic arthritis were recruited in the National WARG (Warfarin Genetics) project in E. Uz1, R. Topaloglu2, C. A. Mustafa1, Y. Bilginer2, O. Kasapcopur3, A. Dursun2, Sweden (http://www.druggene.org/), and type a total of 201 tag SNPs. S. Ozen2, N. Besbas2, A. Bakkaloglu2, T. H. Ozcelik1; Most patients had been monitored for at least 3 months, and the aver- 1Bilkent University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and age weekly warfarin dose ranged from 7mg to 82mg. Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, I. Dogramaci Children’s Hospi- Among the 29 genes tested, VKORC1 demonstrated the strongest cor- tal, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa relation with warfarin dose with the most significant SNP located in the Medical School, Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey. extended promoter region. The study also replicated the effect of the Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is the most common childhood rheu- CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 alleles and their role in poor metabolising matic disease with an incidence between 7-21/100,000. The genetic patients. We are currently accessing the impact from the other genetic basis of JIA is unknown. It rarely manifests familial recurrence. But the and non-genetic factors which will be presented at the meeting. monozygotic twin data suggest that there is a considerable genetic basis, which is likely to involve multiple epigenetic events (Autoimmun P0885. Molecular pathology of Menkes and Wilson diseases in Rev, 5:279, 2006). We identified an association between extremely Czech Republic skewed X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) and female predisposition to L. Pospisilova1, L. Kralik1, Z. Marecek2, R. Bruha2, P. Fruhauf3, E. Flachsova3, autoimmunity (Arth&Rheum, 52:1564, 2005; Eur J Hum Genet 14:791, H. Hansikova1, J. Zeman1,3, P. Martasek1,3; 2006). Since JIA is thought to have an autoimmune etiology, we stud- 1Department of Pediatrics and Center of Applied Genomics,1st School of Medi- ied the XCI patterns of 72 female patients diagnosed with JIA and 183 cine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Internal Medicine 4, 1st female controls. The control group comprised of newborns (n=91) and School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Faculty Gen- children with no history of an autoimmune condition (n=92). To deter- eral Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Prague, Czech Republic. mine XCI status, androgen receptor locus was analyzed by methyla- Copper plays an essential role in biology as a cofactor for many en- tion sensitive Hpa II digestion followed by PCR. A male control (46, XY) zymes. There are two intracellular copper binding P-ATPases in hu- was used for complete digestion. Extremely skewed (>90% skewing) mans: ATP7A, connected with X linked Menkes disease, and ATP7B, XCI was observed in DNA from the peripheral blood cells in 9 of 56 in- connected with autosomally recessive inherited Wilson disease. Here formative patients (16.1%), and in 4 of 124 informative controls (3.2%, we report the mutational analysis of the ATP7A and ATP7B genes of P=0.0039). When patients and controls with 80-89 percent skewing 3 patients with Menkes disease and 101 patients with Wilson disease were also included in the analysis, 14 patients (25.0%) and 12 con- from the Czech Republic. trols (9.7%, P=0.0108) displayed skewed XCI. These results show that Genomic DNA was used to amplify 23 exons of ATP7A gene and 21 there is a significant association (odds ration 16.9, 95% confidence exons of ATP7B gene. PCR products were examined by RFLP and interval 6.2-45.8) between extremely skewed XCI and JIA. “Loss of automatically sequenced. mosaicism” for X-linked gene expression could be considered as a Molecular analysis revealed 3 mutations in ATP7A gene, two of which potential mechanism in break-down of self tolerance. Supported by have not been previously published (Q724X and E1249X), and 14 mu- grants from TUBITAK-SBAG 3334, ICGEB-CRP/TUR04-01. tations in the ATP7B gene (including the H1069Q mutation, prevalent in Central Europe, and the newly found A1135T mutation ). P0888. Transcriptional effects of mutations in the XLMR gene Molecular analysis of the ATP7A gene allows for genetic counsel- JARID1C ing and prenatal diagnosis in families affected by Menkes disease. L. R. Jensen1, B. Lipkowitz1, C. Moraine2, J. Fryns3, J. Chelly4, H. van Bok- Screening of the prevalent H1069Q mutation in ATP7B gene shows, hoven5, B. Hamel5, J. Gecz6, H. Ropers1, A. W. Kuss1; that the frequency- 36,6% of analysed alleles- is in accordance with its 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Services de occurrence in Central Europe. Génétique (INSERM), Tours, France, 3University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Supported by Grants MSMT 1M6837805002, GAUK 109/06 and IGA Belgium, 4Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France, 5Radboud MZ NR/9215-3 University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 6University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. P0886. Another side on Wilson disease Moderate to severe X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) affects ap- B. Lace1, I. Micule1, A. Zarina1, J. Keiss2, V. Sondore2, A. Krumina1; proximately 2 in 10.000 males. Non-syndromic XLMR (NS-XLMR) 1Dept. of Med.Biology and Genetics, Riga, Latvia, 2Infectology centre of Latvia, in which mental retardation is the only clinically consistent feature is Riga, Latvia. genetically heterogeneous and mutations have been found in >20 dif- Wilson disease is an inherited disorder of copper metabolism, charac- ferent genes. One of these is the transcription factor JARID1C, where terized by liver cirrhosis and CNS involvement. DNA analysis of Wilson mutations have been found in 13 families, 12 of which belong to the disease (WD) gene ATP7B had numerous advantages to clinical con- cohort of the Euro-MRX Consortium. In order to investigate transcrip- firmation of the diagnosis. Since 2004 sixty four patients were referred tional effects of JARID1C deficiency we first performed genome-wide for the DNA analysis with WD suggestive symptoms. The most com- expression analysis of mRNA from a patient cell line with a prema- mon mutation H1069Q of ATP7B gene was tested for all of them. Gene ture termination codon in JARID1C and 3 controls, using a Sentrix sequencing was performed for ten patients, who were heterozygous Human-6 Expression Beadchip together with the BeadStudio analysis carriers for mutation H1069Q or WD point score exceeded 3. Twelve software (Illumina). This investigation revealed consistent differential patients were confirmed homozygous carriers of H1069Q mutation, expression between the JARID1C deficient cell line and each of the one was compound heterozygous H1069Q/ 3106G>A. Cascade 3 controls in 55 genes. In a second set of experiments we were able screening revealed 11 heterozygous carriers of H1069Q mutation. In a to verify the expression pattern for 25 genes by quantitative RT-PCR very short period of time diagnosis of Wilson disease was confirmed in or Northern blot analysis using RNA from all 12 Euro-MRX patient cell 13 patients of Latvia, thus indirectly leading to conclusion about more lines and 5 controls. Our results revealed among others up-regulation Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 21 of MYC and MKNK2 and down-regulation of TNFSF4, and show that These data along with i) the respective frequencies of mutations in the JARID1C missense changes and nonsense mutations had an equal RP2 and RPGR (exon1-14 and ORF15) genes and ii) the identification impact on transcription. Therefore our results suggest that RNA ex- of highly recurrent mutations, allowed the drawing of a decision-mak- pression profiling in XLMR mutation carriers might be a tool for the ing flowchart for the molecular diagnosis in families segregating RP. identification of putative pathways which play a role in cognition. Furthermore they show that this approach could in general be useful P0890. Duplication of the MECP2 gene region is a frequent for refining the molecular diagnosis of patients with disorders where cause of mental retardation in males. mRNA expression is affected. M. M. Nawara1,2, M. Smyk1, B. Nowakowska1, K. Szczaluba1, E. Obersztyn1, T. Chilarska3, P. Stankiewicz1, E. Bocian1, J. Bal1, T. Mazurczak1; P0889. Comprehensive survey of mutations in RP2 and RPGR 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate School of Molec- in patients affected with distinct retinal dystrophies: Genotype- ular Medicine, Warsaw, Poland, 3Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital- Research phenotype correlations and impact for genetic counselling Institute, Lodz, Poland. V. Pelletier1, M. Jambou1, N. Delphin1, E. Zinovieva1, M. Stum1, N. Gigarel1, H. X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is a very heterogenous disorder. Dollfus2, C. Hamel3, A. Toutain4, J. Dufier5, O. Roche5, A. Munnich1, J. Bonne- Until recently mutations in large number of genes have been identified font1, J. Kaplan1, J. Rozet1; to cause XLMR. One of these genes is MECP2, its mutations and large 1Unité de Recherches Génétique et Epigénétique des Maladies Métaboliques, deletions are responsible for most of the Rett syndrome cases among Neurosensorielles et du Développement, INSERM U781, PARIS, France, 2Ser- females. The phenotypes resulting from MECP2 mutations in males vice de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Haute-Pierre, Strasbourg, France, 3Unité are variable and depend on the mutation severity (from lethal neonatal de Recherches INSERM U583, Montpellier, France, 4Service de Génétique encephalopathy to mild MR). The search for microdeletions and mi- Médicale, CHU de Tours, Tours, France, 5Service d’Ophtalmologie, Hôpital croduplications on X chromosome by array-CGH led to identification Necker, Paris, France. of the whole MECP2 region duplications in males with severe MR and X-linked forms of RP (XLRP) account for 10-20 % of families with neurological symptomes. RP and are mainly accounted for by mutations in the RP2 or RPGR We decided to screen for MECP2 duplications in mentaly retarded pa- genes. The purpose of this study was to give a comprehensive survey tients with additonal clinical findings. Dosage analysis of the MECP2 of mutations in these two genes in 93 familial cases of RP suggesting gene and flanking regions was performed by multiplex ligation-depen- X-linked inheritance (48/93 families with expression in females but no dent probe amplification (MLPA) method. male to male transmission), 7 male sibships of RP, 25 sporadic male In a preliminary study we have analysed 33 patients and identified 2 cases of RP and 2 cone dystrophies (COD). duplications. In patient 1 the duplication involves also IRAK1 gene. In RP2 and RPGR mutations were identified in 15.9% and 74.8% of fa- patient 2 the duplication is larger and encompasses IRAK1, L1CAM, milial cases of RP suggestive of X-linked transmission, respectively. IDH3G and SLC6A8 (11Kb, 160 Kb, 236Kb and 507 Kb upstream to These frequencies are in accordance to that reported previously (RP2: MECP2 respectively). We also included in the group of MECP2 dupli- 6-20 %; RPGR: 55-90%). Interestingly, while more than 99% of women cated patients a third patient identified by array-CGH. In patient 3 the harbouring RP2 mutations do not develop RP, in 40.6% of families duplication involves IRAK1 and L1CAM. segregating RPGR mutations, at least one carrier woman was affected Our results suggest the high frequency of MECP2 duplication among with a severe form of the disease. mentally retarded males. However, the clinical phenotype is not simi- RP2 or RPGR mutationsWe show that about 30% of male sporadic lar. The only common feature is severe MR. After finishing the studies cases and 30% of male sibships of RP carried , confirming the per- in a larger group of patients we are planning to include this analysis in tinence of the genetic screening of XLRP genes in male patients af- routine diagnostics of MR. fected with RP commencing in the first decade and leading to profound visual impairment before the age of 30.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 22 Po06. Genetic analysis, linkage, and publications about influence of the ACE polymorphism on other physi- ological features, and -the most intriguing- on emotional spheres. It association was shown that ACE has influence on personality characteristics (nov- elty seeking) in females. P0892. Application of the 2-locus TDT for testing NOD1 and The present study examined the possibility ACE I/D functional polymor- NOD2 effects on Crohn’s disease phism might be associated with particular personality traits of athletes. S. Kotti1,2, C. Jung3, J. P. Hugot3, F. Clerget-Darpoux1,2; In current investigation 204 athletes (synchronized swimming, swim- 1University Paris-Sud, UMR-S535, Villejuif, France, 2Inserm U535, Villejuif, mers, footballers, hockey players, and skiers) participated. All persons France, 3Inserm Avenir U458, Paris, France. have the sports category from the first sports up to the master of the Crohn’s disease (CD) is a multifactorial disease caused by the inter- international class. Control group consisting of non-trained persons play of multiple genetic and environment factors. The NOD proteins: (N=105). Firstly we study I -and D-alleles distribution in various groups NOD1 (encoded by CARD4) located on 7p14 and NOD2 (encoded by and discovered the considerable differences in allele frequency. Part of CARD15) located on 16q21, are very similar in composition and both persons was tested with psychological questioner (Buss-Durkee Hos- activate the nuclear factor kappa B pathway and cell death in response tility Inventory) to determine the level of different forms of aggression. to bacterial lipopolysaccharide. Our findings are that the ACE I/D polymorphism of synchronized swim- Up to date, only NOD2 has been definitively associated with CD. How- ming (females) is clearly associated with the physical aggression. ever, the involvement of NOD1 in CD remains controversial and uncer- tain. In the absence of noticeable main effect of NOD1 and considering P0895. No Association Between the DAT1 10-Repeat Allele and the fact that the two genes are recognized as key elements of the ADHD in the Iranian Population metabolic pathway involved in the CD pathogenesis, we propose to M. M. Banoei1, T. Majidizadeh1, E. Shirazi2, M. Narges3, H. Najmabadi3, M. apply the 2-locus TDT for NOD1 and NOD2 genes. Ohadi3; In fact, we have recently developed a new method: the 2-locus TDT for 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, tehran, Islamic detecting susceptibility genes with weak or no marginal effect. In such Republic of Iran, 2Mental Health Research Center, Iran University of Medical a situation, we have shown that our method is particularly powerful for Sciences, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Research Center, Univer- detecting the effect of two genes through their interaction. sity of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, tehran, Islamic Republic of A total of 1252 individuals (390 CD families composed of 308 trios and Iran. 82 ASP) were genotyped for NOD1 rs 2075822 and 3 SNPs (R675W, Association studies between attention deficit hyperactivity disorder G881R and 980fs) on NOD2 by TaqMan and direct sequencing. The 2- (ADHD) and the 10-repeat allele of a polymorphism (a 40 bp variable locus TDT is achieved in two steps. First, we estimate the penetrances number of tandem repeats) in the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) using the transmitted and non-transmitted parent gametes. Secondly, have resulted in mixed findings in different populations. We performed we test the fit of these estimates to an independent effect of the two a case/control study to clarify the contribution of this allele with ADHD in loci. Results will be presented at the meeting. the Iranian population. No association was observed between the 10- allele and disease (Chi 2 = 0.081, p<0.9). Furthermore, no significant P0893. Novel mutation in CUL in Yakut patients with 3-M difference was observed in the homozygosity of this allele between syndrome the case and control groups (Chi 2 = 0.022, p<0.9). Implication of the N. R. Maksimova1, K. Hara2, I. A. Nikolaeva1, A. N. Nogovicina3, A. L. Sukho- dopamine transporter gene in the pathophysiology of ADHD warrants myasova3, O. Onodera2; investigation of other functional polymorphisms within this gene in the 1Yakutsk Scientific Center of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences and the Iranian ADHD patients. Government of the RS(Y), Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, Niigata, Japan, 3Republican Hospital N1-National P0896. Increasing the mutation detection rate for Autosomal Center, Yakutsk, Russian Federation. Dominant Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia: screening SPGa, We identified 37 families with short stature prevalent in the Republic NIPA1, and REEP1. of Sakha (Yakutia) in Russia. Clinical features are resembles a rare D. J. Moore, S. Abbs; autosomal recessive disorder 3-M syndrome characterized by sever Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. pre-and postnatal growth retardation, facial dysmorphism, normal in- Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a heterogeneous group of dis- telligence, and characteristic radiological findings (MIM 273750). We orders characterised by progressive lower limb spasticity, hyperreflex- compared with clinical presentation of 3-M syndrome described so ia and weakness. The autosomal dominant form of the disease (AD- far, Yakut families had a distinct feature, that is 41.9% of patients had HSP) accounts for approximately 70-80% of HSP families and by se- severe respiratory distress at birth. A genome-wide linkage analysis quencing SPG4 we currently detect a mutation in approximately 29% for these families revealed linkage to region 6p21.1 with the highest of families (58 in 202). Mutations detected include novel missense, multipoint LOD score of 24.6 at D6S282. In the critical region of 3.1 nonsense, small insertions, deletions and duplications. One mutation cM between D6S1552 and D6S451, we found CUL7, that has just has been found in 6 apparently unrelated individuals, suggesting a been identified as a causative gene for 3-M syndrome and 25 muta- possible founder effect, and in one case a modifying mutation acted in tions in CUL7 have been identified in 29 families with 3-M syndrome concert with a truncating mutation to lead to early onset in a patient. originated from Tunisia, Morocco, France, Algeria, Syria, Portugal, Sri To increase the mutation detection rate, we have implemented MLPA Lanka, Turkey, Germany, Austria, Italy, Surinam, India, and Brazil (Hu- for SPG4 and SPG3a and have screened 36 patients, finding an exon ber et al., 2005). Mutational analysis revealed a novel homozygous 1 deletion and three aberrations due to mutations in the probe binding mutation 4582 ins T in exon 25 in CUL7, resulting in a frameshift and sites. We are now offering sequencing of the Atlastin (SPG3a), NIPA1 subsequent premature stop codon at 1533 (Q1533X) in all 43 patients. (SPG6) and REEP1 (SPG31) genes. Atlastin has been reported to ac- Haplotype analysis revealed a strong linkage disequilibrium spanning count for 20-30% of AD-HSP cases and a high percentage of early on- 623kb, suggesting a strong founder effect in Yakut patients with 3-M set cases (we have detected SPG3a mutations in two families). NIPA1 syndrome. and REEP1 have not been extensively studied to date and both are small genes with 5 and 7 exons respectively. A UK family has been P0894. The influence of the ACE gene polymorphism on shown to harbour a NIPA1 mutation (Reed et al 2005) and mutations personality traits of athletes in REEP1 have been shown to account for around 6.5% of cases of V. A. Shleptsova1, M. A. Timofeeva2, N. V. Maluchenko3; AD-HSP (Zuchner et al., 2006). 1Faculty of basic medicine, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federa- After implementation of these services, we hope to increase our detec- tion, 2Biological faculty , Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federa- tion rate for AD-HSP to around 70%. tion, 3Biological faculty, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation. It is well known that a I/D polymorphism of the human angiotensin-1- converting enzyme (ACE) gene is associated with ACE activity and endurance. The I allele is low active and traditionally is connected with high endurance during physical performance. Recently it is occurred Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 P0897. Role of HLA in Anti-Endothelial Cell antibody positive in senile (P=0.014). PON1*R allele frequency was higher among long- Indian SLE patients livers in comparison with other age groups, excluding young (P<0.05). U. Shankarkumar, V. Pradhan, M. Patwardhan, A. Pawar, K. Ghosh; PON2*C/*C genotype frequency was lower among senile in compari- Institute of Immunohaematology, Mumbai, India. son with young (P=0.006) and elderly (P=0.011). Using CHAID algo- Anti-endothelial cell antibodies (AECA) are heterogeneous group of rithm from SPSS (v. 13.0) we found that in group of 43-52 years old antibodies against a variety of antigenic determinants of endothelial persons frequencies of CAT*C/*T genotype (P<0.001) and CAT*T al- cells (EC). AECA plays an immunopathogenic role in triggering EC ac- lele (P<0.05) were reduced in comparison with groups of 1-42 and tivation leading to vascular damage. The presence and the strength 53-109 years old persons. of AECA have been found to correlate with disease activity in various Thus, we have demonstrated diversity of PON1, PON2 and CAT genes systemic vasculitic diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus. To as- polymorphisms genotypes and alleles frequencies between different sess the involvement of HLA alleles in AECA production, 45 clinically age groups. Possibly, the same polymorphic variant plays a protective and histopathologically proven cases of class IV lupus nephritis were role for an organism at its different age stages. studied for their HLA A and HLA B alleles by standard NIH microlym- phocytotoxicity assay. All patients fulfilled ARA classification criteria for P0900. Alcoholism candidate gene polymorphisms and SLE. AECA were detected by indirect immunofluorescence using cul- Alexithymia in alcoholic outpatients tured human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Forty percent P. Levy1, M. Bicho1, S. Pombo2, A. Barbosa2, F. Ismail2, J. Neves Cardoso2; of the SLE patients possessed the AECA antibodies. The HLA alleles 1Genetic Laboratory, Medical School, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, A9 (24) (OR=2.90, EF=0.29,p value 0.08) and B21 (OR=74, EF= 0.11, 2NETER, Psychiatric Department, S. Maria Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal. p value 0.038) were significantly increased while HLA A1 (OR=0.27, Candidate gene polymorphisms that changes alcoholism-related in- PF= 0.35, p value 0.039) and B40 (OR= 0.29, PF= 0.25, p value 0.076) termediate phenotypes include dopaminergic system polymorphic were significantly reduced among AECA positive SLE patients when variants (DRD2 and DAT), 5-HTT gene promoter polymorphisms, compared with AECA Negative patients. Further two-locus haplotype Catechol-O-Methyltransferase (COMT), and monoamine oxidase A analysis revealed that A19-B35, A3-B21, and A28-B21 were observed (MAO A). A recent study indicates a possible association between the with significant T value among AECA positive patients. The common COMT Val108/158Met gene polymorphism and alexithymia (Ham et clinical symptoms among the AECA positive patients observed were al., 2005). lupus nephritis (84%), involvement of skin (22%), involvement of Alexithymia (disability to identify and to describe emotions) is an use- joints (17%) and CNS as well as hematological involvement (11%). ful construct in the understanding and treatment of alcohol dependent Our findings suggest that immunogenetic mechanism may be involved patients. Patients with alexithymia show significant differences in psy- in AECA antibody production leading to the immunopathogeneis in a chological, behavioral and biochemical features. Alexithymia associ- subset of SLE patients. ated with depression and work problems delimited an alcoholic thy- mophatic subtype (Cardoso et al., 2006) in our alcoholism research P0898. The association of regulatory genes‘ polymorphisms with unit (NETER). aerobic and anaerobic performance of athletes Males at high genetic risk for alcoholism are more alexithymic and data I. A. Mozhayskaya1, I. I. Ahmetov1, D. V. Popov2, S. S. Missina2, O. L. Vinogra- suggest that MAO-A polymorphism moderates the development of dova2, I. V. Astratenkova1, V. A. Rogozkin1; psychopathology and influences vulnerability to environmental stress 1St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian (Kim-Cohen et al., 2006) Federation, 2SRC Institute for Biomedical Problems of the Russian Acad. Sci., The aim of the study is to investigate the relationship between alcohol- Moscow, Russian Federation. ism candidate gene polymorphisms and alexithymia. The aim of the study was to investigate an allelic distribution of PPA- Our sample (N=95) of sequential alcohol-dependent patients submit- RA (G/C polymorphism), PPARG (Pro/Ala), PPARD (+294T/C) and ted to an outpatient therapeutical program integrated in the alcoholism PGC1A (Gly482Ser) genes in rowers (n=205) and controls (n=659), unit of Santa Maria General Hospital were tested using TAS-20 scale. and to find correlation between genotypes and physiological param- They were genotyped using polymerase chain reaction for 5HTLPR, eters. Genotyping was performed by restriction fragment length poly- 5-HTVNTR, COMT, DRD2, DAT and MAO-A polymorphisms. morphism analysis. Physiological parameters were evaluated by PM We found an significant association between MAO-A polymorphism 3 Rower Ergometer and MetaMax 3B Gas Analyzer. The frequencies and alexithymia (factor 1 and 2 of TAS-20) indicating that alcoholic of PPARA G (90.1% vs 83.6%) and PPARG Ala (23.1% vs 16.2%) al- patients carrying the 4 allele tend to have a more disability in the affec- leles in elite athletes, and of PPARD C (19.1% vs 10.5%) and PGC1A tive-emotional process. Gly (75.4% vs 66.5%) alleles in sub-elite athletes were significantly This data may suggest a linkage between MAO-A polymorphism and higher than in controls. Furthermore, PPARA G (when oxygen pulse the thymophatic subtype of our clinical typology of alcohol dependent was measured) and PGC1A Gly (when maximal aerobic power and patients. anaerobic threshold (%) of VO were measured) alleles were as- 2max sociated with high values of aerobic performance. Thus, PPARA G, P0901. Detection of novel mutations in Alexander disease using PPARG Ala, PPARD C and PGC1A Gly alleles can be considered as DHPLC analysis of GFAP gene. genetic markers associated with enhanced physical performance. M. Cardoso-Ferreira1, G. Blanquier1, F. Gauthier-Barichard2, O. Boespflug-Tan- guy3, I. Creveaux1; P0899. Polymorphism of paraoxonases and catalase genes in 1CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2INSERM UMR 384, Cler- connection with age gradation in Tatars from Russia. mont-Ferrand, France, 3CHU Clermont-Ferrand, INSERM UMR 384, Clermont- V. V. Pauk, T. R. Nasibullin, I. A. Tuktarova, L. P. Zueva, O. E. Mustafina; Ferrand, France. Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. Alexander Disease (AXD) is a severe neurological disorder, charac- It was generally recognized that toxic effect of lipid metabolism and terized by a leukodystrophy associated with Rosenthal Fibers (RFs, respiration by-products contributes to aging. Gene polymorphic struc- eosinophilic inclusions within astrocytes). This autosomal dominant ture may influence composition and activity of protein production. The disease is caused by de novo mutations in Glial Fibrillary Acidic Pro- aim was to investigate genes polymorphisms of paraoxonase 1 (PON1, tein (GFAP) gene. Mutations seem to induce a toxic gain of function Q192R), paraoxonase 2 (PON2, C311S) and catalase (CAT, -262C/T) resulting in GFAP aggregation in astrocytes (RFs) and subsequent in different age groups in Tatars from Bashkortostan (Russia). white matter suffering. We examined 1627 healthy persons: young (1-20 years), maturity (21- In infantile and juvenile classical forms of AXD, brain MRI criteria have 55 years), elderly (56-74 years), senile (75-89 years) and long-livers been defined in order to screen patients for GFAP mutations. This (90-109 years). Genotyping was performed using PCR-RFLP. Fisher’s molecular screening is usually performed by exons amplification and two-tailed exact rest (Statistica v. 6.0) was used for age groups com- direct sequencing. However, numerous GFAP mutated patients with parison. atypical brain imaging and unusual clinical symptoms have been de- PON1*Q/*Q genotype frequency was lower in group of long-livers then scribed. To improve the rapidity of this screening for a larger number among maturity (P=0.039), elderly (P=0.035) and senile (P=0.021). of patients, we developed a new protocol based on DHPLC analysis of PON1*R/*R genotype frequency was raised among long-livers than PCR products and selective sequencing of abnormal profiles.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 During the last 2 years, 67 patients (29 index cases, sporadic and rays. We are individually genotyping the other promising loci. some familial forms) were entirely tested by DHPLC. 20 index cas- es were found mutated with 13 different mutations, 8 of which being P0904. Association of Long Polyglycine Tracts (GGN repeats) in previously reported. DHPLC detected 5 novel mutations believed to Exon 1 of the Androgen Receptor Gene with Cryptorchidism and generate AXD as: mutations arose de novo, were absent from healthy Penile Hypospadias in Iranian Patients relatives and from 100 control chromosomes, affected a conserved R. Radpour1, M. Rezaee2, A. Tavasoly3, S. Solati3; amino-acid and a functionally important domain, and no other change 1Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center of Royan Institute, Tehran, Islamic was detected. Several prenatal diagnosis have been already carried Republic of Iran, 2Avesina Research Institute, Beheshti University, Tehran, out. DHPLC screening for GFAP mutations is confirmed to be a rapid, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biomedical Research Center of Military University of sensitive and reliable, cost-effective and high-throughput method for Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. AXD diagnosis. Hypospadias and cryptorchidism are the two most common congeni- tal malformations in males affecting 0.3-0.7% and 2-4%, respectively, P0902. The analysis of Eotaxin (CCL11) gene single nucleotide at birth. To study the association of CAG/GGN trinucleotide repeats polymorphisms in allergic rhinitis patients and healthy donors in the androgen receptor gene (AR gene) with cryptorchidism and from Volga-Ural region of Russia hypospadias in Iranian population, we performed a comprehensive A. Khuzina1, A. Karunas1, A. Biktasheva2, A. Yuldasheva3, E. Etkina2, E. Khus- case-control study of 76 cryptorchid and 92 hypospadiac (divided into nutdinova1; subgroups of glanular, penile, and penoscrotal hypospadias) Iranian 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir males. The length of the CAG/GGN repeat segment was evaluated Medical State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Pediatric polyclinic N1, Ufa, by using PCR-sequencing in exon 1 of AR gene. To eliminate other Russian Federation. mutations in the AR gene, exons 2-8 of AR gene were screened by Allergic rhinitis (AR) is an inflammatory disease of the nasal mucosa PCR-SSCP. Exclusion of known causes of male infertility was done that is characterized by sneezing, nasal congestion, and watery rhinor- by karyotype analysis, Y chromosome microdeletion analysis, cystic rhea. It is the most common form of atopic disease, affecting about fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene (CFTR) mutation analysis, and 20% population in the world. Eotaxin is believed to play an important INSL3/LGR8 gene mutation analysis. There were no significant dif- role in AR as a potent chemoattractant and activator of eosinophils and ferences in CAG lengths between the cases and controls but GGN Th2 lymphocytes. numbers were found to be significantly higher (median 24 vs. 22) The purpose of this study was to investigate the allele and genotype among both subjects with penile hypospadias (P = 0.018) and those frequencies of two polymorphisms (−384A>G and 67G>A) of the gene with a history of cryptorchidism (P = 0.001), compared with controls. In in AR patients and in controls. addition, the GGN numbers among subjects with penile hypospadias The patient group consisted of 285 individuals with allergic rhinitis, the were significantly different, compared with the two other subgroups of control group included 169 unrelated non-allergic individuals. Genomic hypospadias (P = 0.001). We were able to identify 12 different CAG DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes by standard phe- alleles and 8 different GGN alleles in the cryptorchid group. Although nol/chloroform method. Genotyping was performed by PCR followed further studies are needed to elucidate the possible role of specific by restriction digestion. CAG/GGC combinations, our data suggested the possible association No significant difference was observed in allele or genotype frequen- between polyglycin tract polymorphism in androgen receptor gene and cies of any SNP between AR patients and controls. The most common cryptorchidism. genotype of −384A>G polymorphism was AG, revealed in 48,16% of patients and in 53,13% of control group . The frequency of GG geno- type was insignificant higher in patient (29%) than in healthy donors (23%). The GG genotype of 67G>A polymorphism was prevalent in P0905. Allelic variants of APOA5 and its transcription factor both groups (65,96% - in the patient, 69,82% - in the control). USF1 predispose to atherogenic dyslipidemia Thus, the data of this study has revealed negligible differences in the P. P. Laurila1, J. Naukkarinen1, P. J. Barter2, C. Ehnholm1, L. Peltonen1,3; distribution of polymorphic alleles and genotypes of the CCL11 gene 1National Public Health Institute of Finland and Department of Medical Genet- between compared groups, but not detected significantly association ics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2The Heart Research Institute, of single nucleotide polymorphisms of Eotaxin gene with AR in Volga- Sydney, Australia, 3The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Boston, MA, United Ural region of Russia . States. Atherogenic dyslipidemia (AD) is a component of the metabolic syn- P0903. Whole-genome association study of Alzheimer’s Disease drome, a well-known cluster of risk-factors for type 2 diabetes. AD is using DNA pooling with microarrays characterized by abnormally high serum triglyceride and low HDL-cho- G. Kirov, N. Norton, L. Georgieva, R. Abrams, A. Morgan, V. Moskvina, I. Niko- lesterol levels. lov, P. Hollingworth, P. Holmans, M. O’Donovan, J. Williams, M. Owen; The USF1 transcription factor and apolipoprotein A5 (APOA5) are key Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. players in lipid metabolism. The two genes operate on the same path- Late-onset Alzheimer’s Disease (LOAD) has a strong genetic compo- ways with USF1 known to be a major regulator of APOA5. We recently nent but the only susceptibility gene definitively identified to date is reported the association of USF1 with FCHL, a common dyslipidemia APOE. We wanted to identify further susceptibility genes by perform- predisposing to cardiovascular disease (Pajukanta 2004) and also es- ing a whole-genome association study. In order to reduce the cost, tablished the significance of USF1 in prospective population cohorts we used a DNA pooling approach. We constructed pools of 1000 (Komulainen 2006). Multiple studies link plasma levels of APOA5 and LOAD cases and 1200 age- and gender-matched controls. We used the allelic variants of this gene with elevated plasma triglycerides. Affymetrix 250K Sty and Nsp SNP genotyping arrays, as well as Illu- Here we show for the first time that allelic variants of APOA5 (S19W, mina HH300 and HH240S arrays. These assay a total of over 1 million -1131T>C, -1464T>C) associate with AD (p=0.009) as well as its SNPs, of which 80,000 are represented on both platforms. Depending component traits, changes in plasma triglycerides (p=0.00001) and on the cost and quality of the hybridisations, we replicated each pool HDL-cholesterol (p=0.0001) in 130 Australian AD families (n=533). We between 4 and 15 times on each array, and used between 3 and 8 high observed a dose-dependent association of a common APOA5 hap- quality replicates of each array for analysis. In order to prove that our lotype with elevated triglycerides and decreased HDL-cholesterol. A experiment is capable of detecting true genetic association, we exam- protective haplotype was also observed. Conditioning for the carrier- ined whether we were able to detect the known association at APOE. 7 ship of the APOA5 risk allele, a risk haplotype of USF1 was identified, SNPs close to APOE showed differences in allele frequencies of >6%, in agreement with previous studies. Importantly, individuals carrying of which 4 were >10%. This work demonstrated the accuracy of our risk haplotypes for both genes had even higher plasma triglyceride pooling method and indicates that we would have easily detected the levels than those carrying either APOA5 or USF1 risk haplotype alone association with APOE, in spite of the fact that neither of the two SNPs (p=0.001). that determine the ApoE4 genotype is on the arrays. Two of the four We thus hypothesize that the joint effect of risk alleles of APOA5 and arrays detected the effect, probably due to the different SNP coverage its regulator, USF1, contribute to the pathogenesis of AD and poten- and low LD in this region, showing the potential benefit of using all ar- tially also to the metabolic syndrome.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 P0906. Apolipoprotein A5 gene T1259C polymorphism ity to common aeroallergens, total serum IgE levels (IgE), bronchial associated with elevated circulating triglyceride levels but does hyperresponsiveness to methacholine, linkage on chromosome 13q14 not confer susceptibility for ischaemic stroke has been detected for elevated IgE. Association of the PHF11 gene L. Járomi1, A. Maász1, Z. Szolnoki2, P. Kisfali1, K. Horvatovich1, L. Magyari1, E. with IgE and atopic dermatitis (AD) was found in two recent studies Sáfrány1, V. Csöngei1, C. Sipeky1, B. Melegh1; (Nat Genet 34:181;2003; Genes Immun 6:264;2005). 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, We have now performed a linkage and association study of the PHF11 Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Neurology and Neurophysiology, Pándy Kálmán gene polymorphisms in a subset of 24 families (144 subjects) which County Hospital, Gyula, Hungary. have shown positive linkage for IgE. The following SNPs located in- Objectives: The common apolipoprotein A5 (ApoA5) gene variants, the side the gene and reported to be associated with IgE and AD in the T1131C, T1259C, IVS3+476G→A and S19W are subjects of extensive above mentioned studies were selected and analysed: b7_2 (intron1); investigations due to the central role of the ApoA5 in the triglyceride rs2031532 (ex2); rs2247119 (intron3); rs2274276 (intron4); b4_2 (in- metabolism. We examined the possible pathogenic role of the T1259C tron5); b5_2 (intron9); rs1046295 (3’UTR). These SNPs were geno- in triglyceride metabolism and in development of ischaemic stroke. typed by minisequencing (SNaPShot Multiplex kit, Applera, on ABI- Methods and results: A total of 399 patients who had stroke events PRISM 310 sequencer using Genescan software) or by enzymatic were categorized into three stroke subgroups (small-vessel, large-ves- restriction. sel and mixed groups), 182 healthy subjects served as controls. The Linkage analysis was perfomed using MERLIN software and associa- ApoA5 T1259C variant was determined by PCR-RFLP test. We found tion study was performed by Transmission Disequilibrium Test (TDT) elevated triglyceride levels in patients bearing 1259C allele in each using the unphased software: http://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/personal/ subgroup. However, the serum cholesterol levels showed no difference frank/software/unphased/. A correction for multiple test of the obtained between subjects carrying C allele and subjects with TT genotype in data was applied. either group. The 1259C allele frequencies were similar in each stroke Statistical analysis results confirmed our previous findings of linkage subgroups and in controls (small-vessel: 11.6; mixed: 13.4; large-ves- of this chromosomal region to IgE in allergic asthma, but did not show sel: 11.5; overall: 12 vs. 10.2%; p<0.05). Using logistic regression anal- significant association of the PHF11 gene SNPs with any of the stud- yses adjusted for differences in age, gender, total serum cholesterol ied phenotype. In our population, association might be due to other levels, ischaemic heart disease, bmi, hypertension, diabetes, smoke, polymorphisms of the PHF11 gene or in other genes located in this drink and triglyceride levels we did not find direct association between chromosomal region. carrying C allele and development of stroke. Conclusions: Our results suggest that bearing 1259C allele elevates triglyceride levels, but does P0909. Asthma and atopy in Italian families: a genome-wide not confer risk factor for stroke. Further investigations are needed to linkage analysis clarify the possible significance of the 1259C and the associated hap- C. Patuzzo1, G. Malerba1, L. Xumerle1, E. Trabetti1, M. Biscuola1, R. Galavotti1, lotypes in the development of ischaemic stroke. L. Pescollderungg2, A. L. Boner1, P. F. Pignatti1; 1Department of Mother and Child and Biology-Genetics, Verona, Italy, 2Institute P0907. Autozygosity mapping in a large Iranian pedigree with of Paediatrics, Hospital of Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy. autosomal recessive mental retardation reveals linkage to the To identify genetic susceptibility regions for asthma, atopy and inter- CC2D1A locus on Chromosome 19 mediate phenotypes, 123 Italian families with at least two affected sib- M. Garshasbi1, Y. Heshmati2, M. Fakhri2, P. Pop Ristova1, K. Kahrizi2, F. Be- lings were previously screened with 396 DNA microsatellite markers hjati2, S. S. Abedini2, S. Ghasemi Firoozabadi2, L. Abasi Moheb1, A. Tzschach1, (Malerba G et al., Clin Exp Allergy 1999; 29 Suppl 4:27-30). Affected H. H. Ropers1, H. Najmabadi2, A. W. Kuss1; sib pairs (numbers in parentheses) for the following phenotypes have 1Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Genetics Re- been studied: atopy (170), bronchial hyper responsiveness to metha- search Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Teh- choline (BHR, 95), clinical asthma (56), elevated total serum IgE (77), ran, Islamic Republic of Iran. rhinitis (79), skin prick test reactivity to common aeroallergens (144) Little is known about the molecular basis of non-syndromic autosomal and dust mite (69). Nonparametric linkage analysis has indicated sug- recessive mental retardation (NS-ARMR). This is partly due to insuf- gestive linkage (nominal p-value <0.001) with at least one phenotype ficient family sizes and lack of consanguinity, which hinder successful on 4q, 5p, 9p, 13q, and 22p chromosomal regions. mapping and identification of candidate loci in western societies. Up With explorative purposes we investigated the presence of linkage to now, only three genes have been found for NS-ARMR: PRSS12 and gene-gene interaction by Maximized LOD score (MOD score) and (neurotrypsin1), CRBN (Cereblon) and CC2D1A (Coiled-coil and C2 conditional analysis. Parametric linkage analysis, based on optimized Domain-containing 1A). By identifying 8 new loci for NS-ARMR we models, accounted also for imprinting effects. The analysis indicated have recently provided evidence for the considerable genetic hetero- possible paternal imprinting on chromosome 9p for mite sensitivity (in- geneity of this disorder, which is in keeping with the fact that so far only creased MOD from 3.16 to 5.32 inferring imprinting effect). one mutation was found for each known gene. Gene-gene interaction analysis was performed selecting the families During the course of our ongoing efforts in elucidating the genetic having LOD ≥ 0 for the regions showing a LOD peak ≥ 1 in the main causes of ARMR we have now identified the first locus overlapping nonparametric linkage analysis: increased allele sharing in 16p and 7p a known NS-ARMR gene. Through array based SNP genotyping (Il- chromosomal regions for the high level IgE phenotype has been found lumina IVb panel) and linkage analysis in a large consanguineous (LOD = 2.19). family from Iran we observed a 14 MB linkage interval with a para- The results suggested that complementary linkage methods might help metric LOD score of 3.4 on Chr19 (Chr19p12-p13.3). This locus en- in disclosing possible epigenetic or interactive genetic effects, unde- compasses the previously described CC2D1A gene, which encodes a tectable when standard nonparametric linkage analysis are applied. putative signal transducer involved in the NF-κB pathway, and we are presently screening the coding region and exon-intron boundaries for P0910. ALOX5 promoter polymorphism and response to mutations. leukotriene inhibitors in asthmatic patients The possible finding of a sequence change in CC2D1A would enable J. J. Telleria1, A. Blanco-Quirós1, D. Varillas1, A. Armentia2, I. Fernández1, M. J. us to report the first recurrence of an ARMR gene, while the detection Alonso1, I. Díez3; of sequence integrity for this gene would indicate the presence of a 1Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital Pío del Río Hortega, causative mutation in a different gene and thus provide further evi- Valladolid, Spain, 3Hospital Txagorritxu, Vitoria, Spain. dence for the genetic heterogeneity of NS-ARMR. Leukotrienes are a family of polyinsaturated eicosatetraeoic acids de- rived from the arachidonic acid. They show multiple farmacologic and P0908. Association study of SNPs in the PHF11 gene in Italian physiological effects and seem to play a critical role in the pathogen- families with allergic asthma esis of asthma. C. Bombieri, P. Zorzi, G. Malerba, L. Xumerle, P. Pignatti; Drugs that modify the action of leukotrienes have demontrated to be Sec Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. useful in order to control mild and moderate asthma. In an our previous genome wide scan for asthma in 123 Italian fami- In leukocytes, 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) catalyses the conversion of ara- lies, phenotyped for clinical asthma and rhinitis, skin prick test positiv- chidonic acid into leukotriene which afterwards is transformed to leu-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 kotrienes B4→E4. Prague, Czech Republic. 5-LO is coded by gene ALOX5 which has a VNTR polymorphism within Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease is the most common the transcription factor binding region at position -147 to -176 in its hereditary renal disease. ADPKD is a systemic disorder, with cysts and promoter. In human cells in vitro, the cell lines containing other than connective tissue abnormalities involving many organs. The disease is the 5 tandem repeats allele in the promoter region of ALOX5 show caused by mutations of PKD1 (MIM 601313; affecting roughly 85 % of diminished reporter gene transcripition ADPKD patients) and PKD2 (MIM 173910; 14 % of ADPKD patients) We have studied 61 patients with mild and moderate persistent asth- genes. In the Human Mutation Database (HGMD) have been reported ma and previously untreated with leukotriene receptor inhibitors, the 270 different germline mutations of the PKD1 gene and 73 different correlation between the VNTR. This patients recieved treatment with germline mutations of the PKD2 gene. Montelukast during 6 months. The response to therapy was measured Presymptomatic DNA diagnosis using highly polymorphic microsatel- by means of the variation in FEV1, number of exacerbations during lite markers for DNA linkage analysis was performed in 280 unrelated the last month and number of beta2 agonists puffs per day during the ADPKD families. last month. The direct detection of mutations in the non-duplicated region of the There were not differences between groups defined by the genotype PKD1 gene was performed in 90 nonrelated families. An affected before therapy; Nevertheless, after it, we found statistical differences member from each family was analyzed using denaturing gradient gel for every parameter at the end of the study. Z score value of FEV1 electrophoresis and by sequencing. We detected 19 different muta- of patients homozygous for the allele 4 obtained a p=0.0002 when tions in 21 families. 16 mutations are unique. We identified 8 nonsense compared to 5 allele homozygous, p=0.0098 for the demand of beta2 mutations, 6 missense mutations, 2 frameshifting mutations and 3 mu- agonists and 0.0086 for the nr. Of exacerbations within the last month. tations in splice site. Heterozygous patients showed values similar to those of the 5 homo- The direct detection of PKD2 mutation was performed in 147 nonre- zygous, with the exeption the FEV1 that showed intermediate values. lated families. An affected member from each family was analyzed by heteroduplex analysis and by sequencing. We detected 14 different P0911. Evidence for association between HTR1B and males with mutations in 30 families. 11 different mutations are unique. We iden- Autism Spectrum Disorders. tified frameshifting mutation c.203dupC (p.Pro68fsX23) in 10 nonre- G. M. Orabona1,2, K. G. Oliveira1,2, E. Vadasz3, E. S. Moreira4, V. N. O. Taka- lated families and the nonsense mutation c.478C>T (p.Gln160X) in 5 hashi1, P. Otto1,2, S. R. Matioli2, M. R. Passos Bueno1,2; nonrelated families. 1Centro de Estudos do Genoma Humano, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Instituto de Bio- The identification of new mutations in both PKD genes could help to logia, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Hospital das Clínicas, São Paulo, Brazil, 4Instituto find the functional important areas of both polycystins. Fleury, São Paulo, Brazil. Supported by the grant projects IGA NR/9427-3 and VZ0021620806 Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by qualitative impairments in communication, social interaction, and P0913. High frequency of AZFc microrearrangements in infertile restricted and repetitive patterns of interests or behaviors. Onset is and normozoospermic French population generally before 3 years of age and results in life-long disabilities for V. Roze1, J. L. Bresson1,2, F. Fellmann3; affected children. From early 1960s, when hyperserotonemia was first 1EA MENRT 3185 Génétique et Reproduction - IFR133 IBCT, besancon, Fran- reported in autistic children, to the modeling of serotonergic deficits ce, 2Service de Génétique - Histologie – BDR and CECOS, CHU, Besancon, seen in ASD using animal models, several different alterations in pro- France, 3Service de Génétique Médicale CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland. cesses involving serotonergic innervation was found in ASD patients. The Azoospermia factor c (AZFc) region on the Y chromosome long However, the role of serotonin receptors in its pathophisiology still re- arm consists essentially of multiple palindromes prone to rearrange- mains poorly understood. In this study, we present results from a case- ments. The impact of the various types of deletions (gr-gr, b1-b3, b2- control association study within 14 polymorphisms in five serotonin b3), duplications or deletions followed by duplications on male fertility receptors genes (HTR1A, HTR1B, HTR1D, HTR2A, HTR2C). Positive is discussed. The most studied genes in AZFc are DAZ and CDY1, results were found for HTR1B haplotypes (p=0,0448) in a sample of present in 4 and 2 copies respectively. We screened 344 infertile and 242 ASD patients. Transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) was then 136 control men for AZFc deletions and duplications. PCR analyses of performed for HTR1B, which shown evidence for transmission disequi- specific AZFc STS (sY1192, sY1291, sY1197), DAZ SNV sY587 and librium (p=0,0415) in a sample of 163 trios. A sex-specific analysis quantitative dosage of sY255 and sY586 for DAZ genes were used to showed an increased effect in our male sample (p=0,0015, table 1), detect AZFc microrearrangements. CDY1 gene dosage used RT-PCR and no effect in the female sample (p=0,3). Our results confirm previ- with sY639 and PCR-digestion assay of CDY7750. All patients were ous publications describing a sex-specific genetic contribution in the haplotyped for YAP, 12f2, and 92R7 polymorphisms, and individuals etiology of ASD. FAPESP with AZFc rearrangements also for the Tat, M9, and SRY-4064 SNPs, Table1- Transmition disequilibrium test for HTR1B gene in a male defining altogether five haplogroups (Yhg): E, J, K(xN3,P), N3 and P, sample. and one paragroup Y*(xD,E,J,K). Haplotypes* Transmited Non transmited TDT Forty-two (8.7%) rearrangements were identified representing a high frequency of chromosomal recombinations, with similar frequencies C-A-C-G 14 20 of deletions and duplications in infertile and control populations. The G-T-C-G 42 29 analysis of DAZ and CDY1 SNVs and dosage of CDY1 copies by RT- PCR allowed to better characterise these rearrangements and their T-A-C-C 35 33 mechanisms. Complex rearrangements (deletion / duplication) were T-A-C-G 39 33 found in infertile patients only, including 2 from Yhg-N3 and 2 from Yhg-J. This study brings complementary data about AZFc rearrange- Others 2 17 ments and their potential impact on male infertility. Total 132 132 Gl obal p=0,0015 *NCBI id-rs11568817-rs130058-rs130057-rs6296 P0914. A case of Y chromosome microdeletion transmission from a father to his azoospermic sons P0912. DNA analysis in families with autosomal dominant A. Hatzaki1, L. Klentzeris2, D. Apostolopoulou1, S. Christopoulou1, C. Makatso- polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) in Czech Republic ris1, C. Mourtzakis2, V. Velissariou1; J. Štekrová1, J. Reiterová2, S. Svobodová1,3, M. Merta2, J. Židovská1, M. Ko- 1Mitera Maternity and Surgical Center, Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology houtová1; lab, Athens, Greece, 2Mitera Maternity & Surgical Center, IVF and Fertility Unit, 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics,General Teaching Hospital and 1st Athens, Greece. Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department Y chromosome microdeletions especially in the AZF regions which in- of Nephrology,General Teaching Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty, Charles clude DAZ genes are usually de novo deletions associated with prima- University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Faculty of Science, Charles University, ry oligo- and azoospermia. It has been evaluated that 5-15% of men with spermatogenic failure harbour microdeletions of Yq. The present study refers to the investigation of azoospermia in two brothers and Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 their father. casian population and tasters make up the remaining 70%. Tasters We received DNA samples from blood of all 3 individuals and sample can be further divided into 2 sub-groups, medium- and super-tasters. from testicular biopsy from the younger brother. Cytogenetic analysis These percentages can vary, depending on geographic location and (GTG-high resolution) was performed in both brothers. Y microdele- ethnic origin. tion analysis was carried out including SRY gene (Yp) and 23 STS Evidence suggests that the expression of phenotype reflects the inter- (Yq) in AZFa, AZFb, AZFc regions. We investigated also DAZ-like gene action between the TAS2R38 gene and enviromental factors. (3p24) polymorphisms in exons 2 and 3. CFTR gene mutation screen- In this study, we determined the PROP phenotype distribution and the ing and IVS8-polyT polymorphism was also performed. correlation between taster status and TAS2R38 genotype in two dif- Cytogenetic analysis was normal in all 3 members of the family and ferent genetically and geographically isolated populations: Carlantino also in testicular tissue sample of the younger brother. A Y microde- (Southern Italy) and Stoccareddo (Northern Italy). letion was detected, encompassing 10 STS and DAZ gene copies, A sample of 696 adults, from 15 to 89 years old of age, was recruited identical in the fertile father and the two azoospermic sons. No poly- from the two villages. morphism in exons 2 (nt 260) and 3 (nt 386) of DAZL gene was de- Our data showed that the percentage of PROP non-tasters was com- tected. CFTR screening was negative. This study provides additional parable to other Caucasian populations, although the percentage of evidence that the clinical phenotype of azoospermia can neither be super-tasters in Stoccareddo was very low. attributed to the Y microdeletion itself, nor to probable expansion of the The contribution of TAS2R38 alleles to the phenotype was lower in deletion during the vertical transmission from the father to his two sons Carlantino (64%), compared to Stoccareddo (76%). For this reason as it has been reported previously. It is likely that azoospermia in these we analyzed, only in Carlantino, three additional bitter taste receptor two cases is probably due to other environmental and genetic factors genes (TAS2R16, TAS2R4, TAS2R14) and BDNF gene. Linear regres- involved in spermatogenesis. sion and stepwise algorithms were used to determine the influence of the selected genes on the PROP/PTC phenotype. P0915. Balkan endemic nephropathy (BEN) - impact of Preliminary results showed no correlation between the PROP/PTC Cytochrome P450, GSTs and NAT2 gene polymorphisms in its phenotype and these genes. A whole linkage analysis will be per- etiology formed to identify other genes or genetic determinants that might con- R. B. Saraeva1, I. E. Andonova1, J. A. Genova1, A. D. Horvath1, V. A. Sime- tribute to this phenotype. onov2, P. S. Dimitrov3,4, E. A. Petropoulos4, C. B. Eap5, V. S. Ganev1,4; 1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, P0918. Quantitative trait genetic linkage analysis of Body- 2Nephrology Unit, Vratza`s Hospital, Vratza, Bulgaria, 3National Center of Pro- Mass Index in familial coronary artery disease using a variance tection of Public Health, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Institute of International Health, Michi- component approach and a regression-based procedure. gan State University, East Lasting, MI, United States, 5Unit of Biochemistry and S. Barlera1, C. Specchia2,1, E. Nicolis1, M. Farrall3, B. Chiodini1,4, M. Franzosi1, Clinical Psychopharmacology, Hopital de Cery, Lausanne, Switzerland. PROCARDIS Consortium; BEN is a chronic, noninflamatory kidney disease spread among the 1Istituto Mario Negri, Milan, Italy, 2University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 3Univer- rural population of alluvial valley regions along tributaries of the Dan- sity of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Guy’s, King’s, and St. Thomas’ School ube River in Bulgaria, Bosnia, Croatia, Romania and Serbia. Although of Medicine, London, United Kingdom. the etiology of BEN is still unclear, it was supposed that the disease Body mass index (BMI) is one of the most reproducible and commonly may develop in genetically susceptible individuals exposed for a long used proxy for obesity and is known to be influenced by many environ- time to multiple environmental toxins. To evaluate this hypothesis we mental causes as well as genetic factors. launched case-control study, focused on the identification of common No susceptibility genes for BMI regulation have been unequivocally variants in genes, coding for proteins participating in the metabolism identified. Reasons for these controversial results are both method- and transport of xenobiotics and their association with BEN. ological and related to obesity aetiology. Genomic DNA from 58 BEN patients and 104 healthy individuals from A genome-wide linkage analysis was performed to localise QTLs in- Vratza`s district of Bulgaria was used. PCR-RFLP (CYP1A1, CYP1A2, fluencing BMI levels in a large cohort collected in the PROCARDIS CYP2E1, CYP3A4, GSTP1, NAT2 variants), tetra-primer PCR (CY- coronary heart disease study consisted of 1812 informative families. P2D6*4 allele 1934G>A), triplex PCR (simultaneously detection of the Multipoint linkage analysis for BMI was conducted using both a vari- null deletions in GSTM1 and GSTT1) and TaqMan assay (CYP2C19, ance component approach and a model-free regression method im- CYP2D6, CYP3A5, MDR1 polymorphisms) were performed. plemented by MERLIN and the resulting LOD-scores were compared. Fourteen of the studied variants did not show statistically significant Maximum LOD-score was detected on chromosomes 13 (LOD 1.6). genotype distribution between the explored groups. The polymorphic Other regions showing a LOD-score greater than 1 were observed on variant 4889A>G in CYP1A1 and the deletion allele CYP2D6*5 were chromosomes 3, 5, 11, 12 and 15. Results were mainly confirmed by prevalent in BEN patients (p=0.036 and 0.020). Conversely, carriers of the three different approaches used in the analysis. at least one GSTM1 wild type allele were more common among BEN Our study did not find any locus strongly supporting evidence for link- patients compared to controls (p=0.005). Combined genotype distri- age to BMI even in such a large sample which could provide a power butions demonstrated statistically significance for the combinations: equal to 80% in detecting a putative QTL. Nevertheless our results CYP1A1/CYP2D6*5 (p=0.021), CYP1A1/CYP3A4*1B (p=0.017), seem to confirm the substantial genetic heterogeneity influencing BMI CYP1A1/CYP3A5*3 (p=0.051), GSTM1/CYP1A1 (p=0.007), GSTM1/ regulation emerged from the majority of genome scans so far pub- CYP2D6*3 (p=0.046), GSTM1/CYP2D6*5 (p=0.008), GSTM1/CY- lished. P2E1 (p=0.001), GSTM1/CYP3A4*1B (p=0.023), GSTM1/CYP3A5*3 (p=0.025). P0919. Retrospective analysis of genetic polymorphisms and Conclusion: The genetic heterogeneity in xenobiotic metabolizing en- prospective genetic testing in atopic bronchial asthma (ABA) zymes CYP1A1, CYP2D5 and GSTM1 alone or in combination with patients other Phase I enzymes associates with BEN. V. S. Baranov1, T. E. Ivaschenko1, O. V. Lavrova2, G. B. Fedoseev3; 1Ott’s Institute Obstetrics & Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa- P0917. The molecular basis of bitter taste genetics: a study in tion, 2Pavlov’s State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, genetically isolated populations 3Pavlov’s State Medical Universitygy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. C. Lanzara1,2, A. d’Adamo1, A. Ferrara1, S. Ulivi1, L. Esposito1, U. Hladnik3, I. 100 pregnant women affected with ABA and their 100 newborns were Koelliker4, B. Tepper4, P. Gasparini1; tested for genetic polymorphisms of 7 genes such as GSTT1 (del), 1IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Università di Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Latemar Re- GSTM1(del) CCR16 (G38A), TNFA (-238G/A;-308 G/A), IL4 (C590T), searcher, Trieste, Italy, 3B.I.R.D. Europe Foundation Onlus, Vicenza, Italy, IL4R (Q576R) and NOS1 ( AAT repeats in intron 20 GSTM1 0/0 geno- 4Dept. of Food Science, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, United States. type was recorded in 57% ABA women compared to 39% in the control. Some individuals are taste blind to bitter compounds having the thio- Respective figures for GSTT10/0 genotype were even more impres- urea moiety (-N-C=S), such as phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) and 6-n- sive -40% in ABA and 21% in the control. Homozygotes for GSTM1 propylthiouracil (PROP). Taste sensitivity to PTC/PROP is bimodally or GSTT1 deletions were registered in 70% of ABA patients while the distributed: nontasters make up approximately 30% of the adult Cau- number of double homozygotes (GSTM10/0;GSTT1 0/0) in the ABA Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 women group more than 5 times exceeded these ones in the con- P0922. Polymorphic Purine-Rich Complex Located at the trol (30% and 6,5% respectively). Alleles and genotypes frequences Enhancer Regions of the Human Caveolin-1 Gene for polymorphisms of CC16, NOS1, IL4 & IL4R in ABA group were Y. Heshmati, h. Khoram Khorshid, M. Ghadiri, M. Eslami, M. Etminan, M. Gi- found within control limits. 22% of newborns from ABA women had no lanipour, A. Mirabzadeh, N. Moghimi, M. Ohadi; adverse genotypes or alleles for GSTM1,GSTT1,IL-4 or IL4R(Q576), University of Social Walfare and Rehabilitation, Tehran, Islamic Republic of (C590), while 43% of newborns possessed at least 3-4 unfavorable ( Iran. ABA predictive) genotypes or alleles and they were enrolled in ABA- Caveolin-1 (CAV1) is the principal structural protein of caveolae mem- prone group. So far chronic atopic dermatites and other manifestations branes that are found in most cell types. Aberrant expression and mu- of allergy were registered in 83% and 50% respectively of newborns tation of this gene are associated with a wide range of disorders includ- from the ABA high-risk group and these complications were twice more ing neurodegenerative disorders, various cancers and autoimmunity. often in this group when compared to the ABA-mother born childs with- We report a novel polymorphic purine complex located at between out obvious genetic predisposition. Genetic testing of childs or could -1698bp to -1549bp of the enhancer region of the human CAV1 gene. be now efficiently implemented for more sophisticated presymptomatic This region contains GGAAand GAAAmotifs, the consensus binding selection of individuals with elevated inborn risk of ABA. sites for the Ets and IRF family transcription factors, respectively, and is highly conserved in distantly-related non-human primates in respect P0920. Impact of ACE (Ins/Del), ApoB (R3500Q) and ApoE (E2/ with location and motif sequence. The effect of this complex sequence E3/E4) polymorphisms on myocardial perfusion: correlation on the expression of CAV1 and possible association of the haplotypes with myocardial single photon emission computed tomographic of these regions with disease phenotypes remain to be clarified. imaging G. Wozniak1,2, M. Samara2, P. Georgoulias1, I. Chiotoglou2, A. Kontos1, V. Valo- P0923. A whole-genome scan reveals significant linkage of tassiou1, P. Kollia2; celiac disease to 6q21-22 and 22q13 in extended pedigrees from 1Department of Nuclear Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Thessaly, Hungary and Finland Larissa, Greece, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics and Cytogenetics, School of E. Einarsdottir1, L. Koskinen1, I. Korponay-Szabo2, K. Mustalahti3, K. Kurppa3, Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece. J. Partanen4, M. Mäki3, J. Kere1,5, P. Holopainen1; Coronary artery disease (CAD) is associated with multiple genetic and 1Department of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Heim Pal Children’s Hos- environmental risk factors, whose cumulative effects have been the fo- pital and University of Debrecen, Budapest, Hungary, 3University of Tampere cus of intensive research. Several studies have shown an association and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 4Finnish Red Cross Blood between CAD and polymorphisms in genes implicated in the control of Service, Helsinki, Finland, 5Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. blood pressure and lipid metabolism. We studied 182 CAD patients with Celiac disease is a complex genetic disorder caused by inflamma- exercise-rest Tc-99m tetrofosmin myocardial perfusion single photon tory responses to gluten. Apart from the known susceptibility genes at emission computed tomography (SPECT) and calculated the summed HLA-DQ locus, the search for additional risk genes continues. We per- stress score (SSS), summed rest score (SRS) and summed differ- formed a whole-genome linkage scan in two extended four-generation ence score (SDS) indexes. Genetic analysis for ACE (Ins/Del), ApoB pedigrees consisting of multiple individuals with celiac disease. Our (R3500Q) and ApoE (E2/E3/E4) polymorphisms were determined by aim was to identify genomic regions shared by the affected individu- polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and RFLP analysis on agarose gel als within the pedigrees, regions harbouring genetic factors influencing electrophoresis. A significant correlation (p<0.001) was found between susceptibility to celiac disease. ACE, Apo E, ACE +ApoE (SUM) and SSS, SDS SPECT indexes, while Approximately fifty thousand single-nucleotide polymorphisms were no association was found between ApoB (R3500Q) and either SSS or genotyped with the Affymetrix 50K microarray system and analysed by SDS. Patients with a low SUM score (≤ 2) had significantly better myo- affecteds-only non-parametric linkage analysis. We selected individu- cardial SPECT studies (p<0.001) and a generally better performance als separated by as many meiosis as possible in order to minimise ran- during exercise testing compared to patients with a SUM score ≥ 5. dom sharing of genomic segments and to narrow down the disease- Only one of sixty patients with a normal SPECT study had a genetic linked genetic regions. Our material consisted of one pedigree from SUM score ≥ 5, while 39 patients had a SUM score ≤ 2. Furthermore, central Hungary and one from Finland. Six patients from the Finnish only two patients with abnormal myocardial SPECT had a SUM value family were genotyped and seven from the Hungarian family. ≤ 2. These data provide the first evidence for an association of ACE In addition to the well known HLA-DQ risk genes, we identified link- and ApoE polymorphisms with SPECT studies and suggest that the age in both families to a locus on chromosome 6q21-22 (LOD= 2,01 proposed effect of ACE and ApoE polymorphisms in the process of p=0.0012). The Finnish family also showed linkage to a locus on chro- CAD may be modified by the ACE and ApoE genotype. mosome 22q13 (LOD= 1,29, p=0.007). These regions have previously been suggested to be involved in celiac P0921. A Polymorphic Purine-Rich Sequence at the 1.5 kb disease in European populations, but the primary risk genes at these Downstream Region of the Human Caveolin-1 Gene loci remain unknown. Further finemapping in our larger independent Y. Heshmati, h. Khoramkhorshid, M. Eslami, M. Gilanipor, M. Etminan, A. Mira- family materials will be performed to narrow down the linked region bzadeh, N. Moghimi, M. Ohadi; and to identify the disease-associated gene(s). Characterization of University of Social Walfare and Rehabilitation, Tehran, Islamic Republic of novel genetic factors in celiac disease will help us understand the Iran. pathogenesis of this complex disorder. Caveolins are a family of proteins that coat the cytoplasmic face of caveolae, vesicular invaginations of the plasma membrane. Aberrant P0924. Linkage and association study of the CELIAC2 locus expression of the CAV1 gene is implicated in the pathogenesis of a (5q31-33) in Hungarian and Finnish families with celiac disease wide variety of disease phenotypes. Mechanisms of gene expression L. Koskinen1, I. Korponay-Szabo2,3, K. Mustalahti4, K. Kurppa4, K. Kaukinen4, and regulation in this gene may shed light on the pathophysiology of E. Einarsdottir1, M. Mäki4, J. Partanen5, J. Kere1,6, P. Holopainen1; the related disorders. We report a novel polymorphic purine stretch 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Heim Pal Children’s Hospital, Buda- containing GGAA tetranucleotide repeats in the 1.5kb downstream re- pest, Hungary, 3University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 4University of Tam- gion of the human CAV1 gene with likely effect on the expression of pere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 5Finnish Red Cross the respective gene. The allele length of this polymorphic locus ranges Blood Service, Helsinki, Finland, 6Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden. from 40 to 134 bp, and contains motifs for the Ets transcription factor Celiac disease is an autoimmune inflammation of small intestinal mu- family members. The effect of this polymorphic purine stretch on the cosa. It is triggered by dietary gluten in genetically predisposed indi- expression of CAV1 and possible association of the alleles of this re- viduals and it affects approximately 1% of the Caucasian population. gion with disease phenotypes remain to be clarified. The only known genetic risk factors, HLA-DQ2 and -DQ8 on chromo- some 6p21.3 (CELIAC1), are necessary but not sufficient alone for the disease onset. The search for other risk genes in several candidate regions continues. The most promising risk locus for celiac disease af- ter the HLA locus is on chromosome 5q31-33 (CELIAC2). However, no risk genes have been identified from this region yet. This region har-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 bours several genes that have an immunological function, and which nean basin and middle Est. All the individuals were screened for 54 could therefore have a putative role in celiac disease. microsatellites markers covering the 9 known loci. PCR products were 41 single-nucleotide polymorphisms that tag 17 immunologically rel- resolved in an ABI-Prism 3100 automated sequencer and analyzed evant genes in a region spanning nearly 20 Mb (130.7-150.0 Mb) at with Genescan and Genotyper software (ABITM). Assignment of the the CELIAC2 locus were selected for this study. They were genotyped families to each locus was established by homozygocity mapping and in a total of 541 Hungarian and Finnish affected sib-pair and trio pedi- linkage analysis using Allegro1.2. When a linkage was suspected the grees. coding sequences of the corresponding gene were sequenced. The The analysed region showed linkage to celiac disease in the com- fragments were analyzed with sequencing analysis and SeqScape bined Finnish and Hungarian material (p=0.0015) and in the Finnish software (ABI). We identified 14 families (41%) with linkage to one population alone (p=0.004). Borderline significant linkage values were of the known loci. CMT4B1 (MTMR2) and CMT4C (SH3TC2) are the observed in the Hungarian population (p=0.03). Several genes and most frequent (14.9% each). They represent about 30% of the known haplotype blocks showed suggestive association with celiac disease. loci, in our series and are found in families originated from Algeria, More finemapping will be needed to identify the gene or genes pos- Bosnia, France, Morocco, and Saudi Arabia. CMT4D (NDRG1) is less sibly associated with celiac disease in the region. Functional studies of frequent (5.9%). CMT4A (GDAP1) represents 2.8% of the known loci. the associated genes will also be required to confirm their role in the CMT4A and 4D were found only in Italian families. CMT4B2 (MTMR13) pathogenesis of celiac disease. and CMT4F (PRX) were suspected in one Tunisian family (2.8%). Se- quencing of the corresponding genes is in progress. 59% of families P0925. Gene expression variability of immunologicaly important were not associated with the known loci, demonstrating further genetic genes in blood and intestine of celiac patients: a comparative heterogeneity. study S. Adamovic1, E. Hanson1, A. Gudjόnsdόttir2, H. Ascher3, S. Nilsson4,5, J. Wahl- P0927. A molecular genetic study of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Type 1 ström1, Å. Torinsson Naluai1,6; in Turkey 1Institution of Biomedicin, Göteborg, Sweden, 2Department of Paediatrics, E. Battaloglu1, B. Bilir1, I. Baris1, B. Senergin1, I. Akat1, O. N. Maracı1, Y. Par- The Queen Silvia Children’s Hospital, Sahlgrenska University Hospital / Östra, man2; Göteborg, Sweden, 3The Nordic School of Public Health, Göteborg, Sweden, 1Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. 4Chalmers University of Technolog, Göteborg, Sweden, 5Bioinformatics Core Charcot-Marie-Tooth Type 1 (CMT1) is a genetically heterogeneous Facility, Göteborg, Sweden, 6Genomics Core Facility, Göteborg, Sweden. neuropathy that is associated with PNS demyelination. It is character- Is it possible to estimate the extent of inflammation in the intestine ized with reduced NCV values (<38m/s) and segmental demyelination of a celiac patient by monitoring changes in gene expression in the on nerve biopsies. peripheral blood? We are trying to find an answer to that question by The PMP22, MPZ, and LITAF genes have been associated with auto- comparing the expression of 94 relevant immune genes between in- somal dominant CMT1 and Cx32 is responsible for the X-linked form flamed tissue and blood in two celiac cases and two controls. Among of the disease. About 60-70% of CMT1 patients have duplications on genes we are testing there are cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, chromosome 17p11-11.2 that contains the PMP22 gene. immune regulators, apoptosis markers, ischemia markers, tissue-spe- In this study, the molecular basis of demyelinating dominant CMT in cific markers, and other genes taking part in immunological responses. the Turkish population was investigated in a total of 140 patients. For this purpose we are using pre-designed Low Density Arrays based The CMT1A duplication was identified in 46 CMT1 patients (32.8%) on TaqMan® technology. Blood samples and biopsies from the duo- screened by STR analysis. Consanguineous marriages were ob- denum and small intestine are taken at the same occasion in all indi- served among parents of 45 patients raising the possibility of reces- viduals.Our preliminary results are showing that a number of genes sive inheritance. Thus, the duplication frequency was recalculated and expressed in the intestine are not measurable in blood. On the other found to be 48.4% (46/95) that was still a low value compared to that of hand, the altered expression of several genes in the intestine corre- other populations. Twenty-five of the duplications were familial muta- sponds to an altered expression of the same genes in the peripheral tions and eleven were sporadic. Pedigrees were not available for ten blood, which makes them potential markers for inflammation. Our aim cases. is to investigate if some of those genes may co-act in a distinct inflam- Patients negative for the duplication were further investigated for mu- matory pathways and whether measuring expression of one gene can tations in the PMP22, MPZ, Cx32, and LITAF using SSCP and subse- predict the expression level of other genes. Moreover, we are trying to quent sequencing analyses. Six Cx32, five MPZ, four PMP22, and two establish a method to correlate changes in gene expression in periph- LITAF mutations were identified in heterozygous condition. The phe- eral blood to a level of intestinal damage in celiac cases. notypes of the mutated patients were in accordance with the identified genotypes with respect to the site and type of the mutations. P0926. Demyelinating Autosomal Recessive Charcot-Marie- Autosomal dominant inheritance and low NCV values among 32 cases Tooth disease (ARCMT1): Estimation of loci frequencies in 34 (33.6%) for which mutations could not be identified suggests further consanguineous families originated from the Mediterranean genetic heterogeneity of CMT1 disease. basin and middle Est C. Verny1,2, H. Azzedine1,2, E. Mikesova1, A. Thiam3, P. Latour4, M. A. M. Salih5, P0928. Relationship between MTHFR C677T and A1298C and M. Tazir6, M. Hamri7, M. Sifi7, N. Birouk8, N. Ravise1, M. Mayer9, O. Dubourg1,10, maternal risk for having a child with chromosomal aneuploidy A. Brice1,11, E. Leguern1,11; S. Trivodalieva, G. D. Efremov, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska; 1INSERM, U679, Paris, France, 2INSERM, U694, Angers, France, 3Service de Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre for Genetic Neurologie, CHU de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal, 4Laboratoire de Biochimie Pedi- Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of atrique, Hopital Debrousse, Lyon, France, 5Department of Paediatrics College Macedonia. of Medecine, Ryadh, Saudi Arabia, 6CHU Mustapha, service de neurologie, Maternal impairments in folate metabolism due to polymorphisms in Algiers, Algeria, 7Service de Neurologie, CHU de Canstantine, Canstantine, 5, 10- methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene have been Algeria, 8Service de neurophysiologie, Hôpital des spécialités, Rabat, Morocco, suggested as a risk factor for having an offspring with chromosomal 9Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 10Laboratory of aneuploidy. Two common polymorphisms in the MTHFR gene, C677T Neuropathology, Escourolle, La pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 11Lab- and A1298C, are known to reduce the activity of this enzyme, which can oratory of neurogenetics, Department of Genetics, Cytogenetics and Enmbryol- lead to DNA hypomethylation and abnormal chromosomal segregation ogy, la Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France. during meiosis (non-disjunction). Contradictory results are published CMT is a pathological and genetic heterogeneous group of heredi- in recent studies concerning the relationship between chromosomal tary motor and sensory neuropathies. Two major types have been nondisjunction and MTHFR polymorphisms. In this study we examined distinguished on neuropathological and electrophysiological grounds: the C677T and A1298C polymorphisms in the MTHFR gene by single demyelinating and axonal CMT. Nine loci have been reported and 7 base extension reaction using SNaPshot multiplex kit and subsequent genes identified in demyelinating ARCMT. We selected 34 consan- analysis on ABI 310 genetic analyzer. We analyzed 47 women; 24 with guineous families in whom 62 subjects presented ARCMT1 in a total a child with Down syndrome and 23 with a prenatally diagnosed fe- of 156 individuals. These families are originated from the Mediterra- tus with aneuploidy (10 with trisomy 21, seven with trisomy 18, three Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 20 with trisomy 13, two with Turner syndrome and one with Klinefelter P0931. Founder effect in CMT-families with mutations in GJB1 syndrome). The MTHFR C677T allele (C-57,4% and T- 42,6%) and gene from different regions of Russia genotype frequencies (C/C-36,2%, C/T-42,5%, T/T- 21,3%), as well T. B. Tiburkova1, O. A. Schagina1, E. L. Dadali1, V. P. Fedotov2, A. V. as the MTHFR A1298C allele (A-68,5% and C-31,5%) and genotype Polyakov1; frequencies (A/A-52,2%, A/C-32,6%, C/C-15,2%) among women with 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Vorone- a child with chromosomal aneuploidy did not differ from the frequen- zhskaya medical genetics consultation, Voronezh, Russian Federation. cies observed in the general population in the Republic of Macedonia. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), as known as hereditary motor Our results failed to support the relationship between MTHFR C677T and sensory neuropathies (HMSN), that is characterized by symmetri- and A1298C polymorphisms and the risk of having a child with aneu- cal distal mussel weakness and atrophy, sensory and tendon reflexes ploidy. depressed, fridrich’s foot deformation, typical change of gait, ataxia, tremor. The X-linked dominant form of CMT (CMTX1) is associated P0929. Genetic factors determining predisposition to chronic with mutations in gap junction B1 (GJB1) gene. We analyzed four course of virus hepatitis and fibrosis in liver families with Arg142Trp mutation, five families with Arg164Gln muta- I. A. Goncharova1, E. V. Beloborodova2, M. B. Friedin1, E. I. Beloborodova2, V. tion and three families with Val181Met mutation. We performed hap- P. Puzyrev1; lotype analysis of mutant chromosomes by PCR-AFLP method using 1Scientific Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, eight microsatellite markers from Xq13 region: DXS1275, DXS8040, 2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. DXS1216, DXS8111, DXS983, DXS8107, DXS8052, DXS8060. We Polymorphic variants in IL4 (C-590T), IL4RA (I50V), TNFα (G-308A) find out that all families with Val181Met mutation have common hap- genes were studied for association with chronic viral hepatitis (HCV lotype for all markers. In two families with Arg142Trp mutation we re- or HBV) and extent of the disease chronization which is marked by vealed common haplotype in all markers too. In all families with muta- hepatic fibrosis stage. Association study was performed for levels of tion Arg164Gln common haplotype was not detected. Existence of a interleukins 4, 10, 12, tumor necrosis factor - α, fibronectin, collage- common haplotypes of chromosomes with Val181Met mutation allows nase, protease inhibitors, macroglobulines, elastases, free and pro- us to speculate on the existence of founder effect. Common haplotype tein-bound hydroxiproline. chromosomes with mutation Arg142Trp also indicate the founder ef- It has been found that Val/Val genotype of IL4RA (I50V) polymorphism fect. In families with mutation Arg164Gln the founder effect doesn’t is associated with HBV: in the patients, this genotype was registered exist, and probably codon 164 is a “hot spot” in GJB1 gene. with frequency of 3.08% whereas in control group and in patients with HCV frequency of Val/Val genotype was 15.6% and 15.3%, corre- P0932. Copynumber alterations of TEKT in Charcot-Marie-Tooth spondingly. In the group of patients with weak fibrosis, a higher fre- disease quency of “A” allele of TNFα (G-308A) was found (24,5%), comparing M. A. J. Weterman1, F. van Ruissen1, M. de Wissel1, L. Bordewijk1, J. E. to the population sample (11.2%). Decreasing of “A” allele frequency Hoogendijk2, J. Samijn3, F. Meggouh1, F. Baas1; was observed from patients with weak fibrosis to patients with cirrhosis 1AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2UMC, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3MCRZ, (8.7%). “CT” genotype of IL4 (C-590T) was more frequent in patients Rotterdam, The Netherlands. with cirrhosis (68,2%) than in patients with moderate fibrosis (39,1%). The most frequent form of demyelinating CMT (CMT1a) is linked to It has been shown that “A” allele of TNFα (G-308A) polymorphism is chromosome 17p11.2. Intrachromosomal duplications, mainly of a associated with decreased TNF-α, increased IL-4 and IL-12, as well 1.5Mb region harboring the PMP22 gene, or mutations in this gene are as with low level of protein-bound hydroxiproline. In addition, associa- found in the majority of CMT1a patients. tion of “CT” genotype of IL4 (C-590T) polymorphism and high level of Here we describe an aberrant chromosome 17 duplication proximal of protein-bound hydroxiproline has been identified. the PMP22 gene in several CMT1 patients. In these patients mutations The results suggest that “A” allele of TNFα (G-308A) polymorphism is in the coding region of PMP22 or the non-coding first exons of the two associated with favourable course of chronic viral hepatitis, and “CT” alternative transcripts were absent. This rare copy number polymor- genotype of IL4 (C-590T) polymorphism is associated with severe phism (CNP), starting approximately 33 kb centromeric of PMP22, en- course of the disease. compasses the entire TEKT3 gene, in addition to the uncharacterized transcript CDRT4/LOC653497 and co-segregates with the disease in P0930. BCL3 gene association analysis with nonsyndromic cleft two affected families that were studied. The duplication is 186 kb in lip and/or cleft palate in Latvia size and identical in nine different individuals from five different fami- I. Prane1, B. Lace1, L. Piekuse1, B. Barkane2, I. Akota2, A. Krumina1; lies. Sequence analysis and microarray CGH both show that this dupli- 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Riga Stradins University, Riga, cation fully maps within the commonly seen 1.5 Mb duplication and de- Latvia, 2Department of Oral and and Maxillofacial Surgery, Institute of Stomatol- viates from it at both ends. This CNP was not detected in 2124 normal ogy, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. chromosomes nor in 40 patients with CIDP. We therefore propose that Background: Nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or cleft palate (CL+/-CP) is this rare variant is the cause of CMT in these patients and most prob- one of the most common congenital malformations with multifactorial ably results in the disease through effects on expression of PMP22. Of trait. The incidence of CL+/-CP is in the range of 1/700-1/1000, the note, most diagnostic tests for CMT will not detect this CNP. disease frequency in Latvia is 1 in 700 newborns, The BCL3 (B-cell leukemia/lymphoma-3) gene has been considered a P0933. Quantitative fluorescent PCR in the detection of susceptibility locus for nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft pal- duplication/deletion of the PMP22 gene in Belarussian patients ate, based on association and linkage studies in some populations. with CMT1A and NHPP. Matherials and methods: Four SNPs (rs10401176, rs7257231, K. Mosse, T. Osadchuk, N. Rumyantseva; rs8103315 and rs2927456) in the BCL3 gene were analysed with Scientific-Practical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. MALDI-TOFF technique for allelic association with the nonsyndromic Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A (CMT1A) accounts for 70-80% CL+/-CP in 75 families (proband with both parents) from Latvia. Ob- of CMT1 cases and is most frequently caused by the duplication of a served data analysed with transmission disequilibrium test (TDT). 1.4-Mb genomic fragment on chromosome 17p12 containing PMP22 Results: Significant association of BCL3 gene in patients with CL+/-CP gene. For molecular diagnosis of CMT1A, based on quantitative PCR had been found with rs10401176 (P = 0.0001, df 1) and rs7257231 (P analysis of short tandem repeats (STRs), we used 5 markers locat- = 0.0046, df 1). Borderline association of BCL3 gene in patients with ed within the duplicated region. D17S2218, D17S2220, D17S2223, CL+/-CP had been found with rs8103315 (P = 0.045, df 1). Association D17S2226 and D17S2229 were analysed in two multiplex PCR reac- was not found with rs2927456 (P = 0.317, df 1). tions followed by automated capillary electrophoresis on the ABI Prism Conclusion: BCL3 gene plays a role in development of CL+/-CP. 310. Heterozygosity values of the selected STRs in Belarus population are 81.2%, 94.5%, 72%, 77,6% and 84,3% respectively. Using this panel we genotyped 130 unrelated individuals with presumable clinical diagnoses of CMT neuropathy and 130 their family members. 36 dupli- cations of the PMP22 gene in affected individuals from 17 families, and 3 gene deletions responsible for hereditary neuropathy with liability to Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 21 pressure palsy (HNPP) in one family were identified. The duplication These results suggest that non-HLA genes might be responsible for detection rate for D17S2218 is 15/36, D17S2220 - 28/36, D17S2223 the onset of coeliac disease in this Maltese family. Further investiga- - 17/36, D17S2226 - 11/36 and D17S2229 - 15/36. The high detection tions of the indicated loci are going to be performed by sequencing of rate of D17S2220 can be explained by the complex structure of the candidate genes. polymorphic marker, which have not only tetra but also dinucleotide repeat inside. No individual marker was informative in every patient. P0936. COL4A3/COL4A4 mutations in Cypriot families explain However, in all positive cases we were able to detect three different the recurrent hematuria-thin basement membrane nephropathy alleles of at least one STR. The described analysis is fast simple and that progresses to focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and reliable for pre- and postnatal diagnosis of CMT1A and NHPP in Be- occasionally to end stage renal failure. Extended founder effect larussian families. phenomena and mutation dating K. Voskarides1, L. Damianou2, V. Neocleous3, I. Zouvani4, S. Christodoulidou2, P0934. A coeliac disease genome-wide association study V. Hadjiconstantinou2, K. Ioannou5, Y. Athanasiou5, C. Patsias6, E. Alexopou- identifies a novel susceptibility locus los7, A. Pierides5, K. Kyriakou3, C. Deltas1,3; D. A. van Heel1, L. Franke2, K. A. Hunt1, R. Gwilliam3, A. Zhernakova2, M. In- 1Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Lefkosia, Cyprus, ouye3, W. McClaren3, R. McManus4, R. McGinnis3, L. Cardon5, P. Deloukas3, C. 2Department of Nephrology, Evangelismos Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3The Wijmenga6,2; Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 4Department 1Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2University Medi- of Histopathology, Lefkosia General Hospital, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 5Department cal Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, of Nephrology, Lefkosia General Hospital, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 6Department of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Trinity Centre for Health Science, Dublin, Ireland, Nephrology, Larnaca General Hospital, Larnaca, Cyprus, 77Nephrology Clinic, 5University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Genetics Department, Gronin- Faculty of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. gen, The Netherlands. Focal Segmental Glomerular Sclerosis is a frequent histological finding Coeliac disease is a common (1% prevalence) chronic inflammatory of heterogeneous aetiology caused by primary and secondary clinical disease of the small intestine, caused by an immune response to di- conditions. In 11 families with autosomal dominant inheritance of FSGS etary wheat, rye and barley. HLA-DQ2 (present in 95% of coeliacs) is and microscopic hematuria, 372 patients and healthy relatives were necessary to present wheat epitopes to CD4 T cells, but not sufficient investigated. Linkage analysis was performed with markers around four for disease (present in 30% of the population). Previously, linkage chromosome regions and screening for mutations was accomplished studies were the only cost-effective way to map and isolate non-HLA by the SURVEYOR plant endonuclease, followed by automated DNA genes contributing to coeliac disease. We have performed a genome- sequencing. For locus 2q36 the total LOD score was 7.75, clearly impli- wide association study and genotyped 310,605 SNPs with minor al- cating mutations in either the COL4A3 or COL4A4 gene. DNA sequenc- lele frequency >1% in 778 coeliac cases and 1422 population controls ing revealed two COL4A3 and one COL4A4 mutations in 90 patients. In from the UK using the Illumina HumanHap300 BeadChip. Overall SNP one family there was compound heterozygosity and cosegregation of call rate was 99.87%. An extended region of highly significant associa- two mutations in COL4A3 while two individuals had inherited both muta- tion was seen around the HLA locus (Ï‡2=769.1, P<10-19, OR 7.04 tions and developed the Alport syndrome. Mutation COL4A3 - G1334E [95% CI 6.08 - 8.15]). Excluding the HLA region, we observed one was found in eight families that share a common COL4A3 haplotype, other SNP that remained significant after permutation testing (P=2.0 x from three geographic locations of Cyprus. Five are from Kaimakli, a 10-7, empirical genome-wide significance P=0.045). This finding was city near Nicosia, thereby documenting a founder effect. This finding independently confirmed in Dutch and Irish collections (meta-analysis may prove to explain a high frequency of patient referrals with chronic P=3.8 x 10-11, OR 0.66 [95% CI 0.58 - 0.74]). This SNP maps around renal failure from Kaimakli. Mutation dating suggested that this muta- a biologically plausible candidate gene and genetic variation in this tion is about 300 years old. This is the first detailed investigation of gene may predispose coeliac patients towards unwanted immune re- Cypriot families with COL4 pathology with Thin Basement Membrane sponses to cereal antigens. In addition to the replicated SNP, a greater and FSGS as a prominent feature. Our data enhance the observation number of significant SNPs were observed than expected by chance: that isolated microscopic hematuria is not always a benign condition. P<10-6 (2 vs 0.3 expected) and P<10-5 (12 vs 3 expected). All SNPs Further epidemiological studies are needed in the Cypriot population with P<0.005 are currently followed in multiple independent cohorts. for investigating additional founder phenomena and providing proper genetic counselling in concerned families and practicing physicians. P0935. A genome-wide linkage scan in an extended Maltese family with a high incidence of coeliac disease P0937. The association of a polymorphism within the COL5A1 C. Vidal1, J. Borg1, A. E. Felice1, A. Xuereb-Anastasi2,3, C. Scerri1; gene an Achilles tendon injury in a second Caucasian 1Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, Msida, Malta, 2Department of population Pathology, Msida, Malta, 3Institute of Health Care, Msida, Malta. A. V. September1, J. Cook2, C. Handley2, M. Schwellnus1, M. Collins1,3; Gluten-sensitive enteropathy, or coeliac disease, is an autoimmune 1UCT/MRC unit for Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, Department of Hu- disorder characterized by inflammation, villous atrophy and hyperpla- man Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 2La Trobe sia of the small intestinal mucosa. Coeliac disease is caused by both University, Victoria, Australia, 3Medical Research Council, Cape Town, South environmental and inherited factors. A small number of family based Africa. linkage studies were performed so far, where the HLA locus and other As many as 30-50% of sports injuries are tendon injuries of which a chromosomal regions were linked with the disease. In this study, link- large proportion are Achilles tendon injuries (ATI). The exact mecha- age analysis was performed in a Maltese family with a high incidence nisms underlying ATI are poorly understood, however it is widely ac- of coeliac. cepted that ATI is a multifactorial condition caused by the interaction A whole genome linkage scan using 400 microsatellite markers was of both intrinsic, which includes a genetic component, and extrinsic performed in seventeen family members, four of whom where diag- risk factors. Our group has reported an association between polymor- nosed as coeliac by biopsy and another two were symptomatic but phisms within the COL5A1 gene with ATI in a physically active Cauca- were following a gluten free diet. Multipoint parametric and non-para- sian population. COL5A1 codes for a polypeptide component of type V metric linkage analyses were performed by EasyLinkage v4.01 using collagen which is involved in the regulation of fibrillogenesis. The aim GENEHUNTER v2.1, assuming dominant and recessive modes of in- of this study was therefore to repeat this previous association study heritance with variable penetrance. Disease allele frequency was as- within a second Caucasian population. sumed to be 0.001. The study comprised 152 Caucasian individuals from Australia, of Highest NPL (5.27; p=0.0039) and LOD (1.46) scores were observed to whom 91 were diagnosed with ATI and 61 asymptomatic control (CON) marker D10S1731. NPL and LOD scores of 4.12 (p=0.0313) and 1.46, individuals. The BstUI restriction fragment length polymorphism was respectively, were observed to another marker on chromosome 11p12. used to genotype all the individuals for the C>T transition at nucleotide These results were confirmed after fine mapping at these regions. No 414 of exon 66 of COL5A1 (rs12722). evidence of linkage was observed to the HLA region on chromosome There was a significant difference in the allele frequencies of the CO- 6, where sequencing of HLA-DQA1, DQB1 genes confirmed that nei- L5A1 BstUI RFLP between the ATI and CON subjects (p<0.001). The ther DQ2 nor DQ8 HLA heterodimers were found in this family. frequency of the TC genotype was significantly higher in the ATI group Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 22 (69.2%) than in the CON group (36.1%) (odds ratio of 4.0; 95% CI lies are in progress. Mutations have been identified in seven different 2.0-7.9; p<0.001). genes revealing both known and novel mutations. These findings provide additional evidence that the COL5A1 BstUI The methods include genome wide linkage analyses, locus specific RFLP is associated with Achilles tendon injuries. STS marker analyses of cataract loci or direct DNA sequencing of cataract genes. The analysis comprises all known congenital cataract- P0938. COL5A1 genotype effects on range of motion associated genes and the analyses may be applied for medical genetic measurements counseling in the future. M. Collins1,2, G. G. Mokone1, A. V. September1, L. van der Merwe3, M. P. The results from the first 16 families demonstrated mutations in the al- Schwellnus1; pha-, beta- and gamma- crystallin gene families, the alpha gap junction 1UCT/MRC unit for Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, Department of Hu- gene family, the heat shock factor genes and in regulatory genes. man Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 2South African Several of the families represent distinct cataract phenotypes as the Medical Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa, 3Biostatistics Research ant-egg-cataract (1) and the combination of microcornea and cataract. unit, South African Medical Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa. The results, the geno-/phenotypic relations and the structural and func- A reduced joint range of motion (ROM) has traditionally been postu- tional consequences of the mutations will be presented at the meeting. lated to increase the risk of musculo-tendinous, including Achilles ten- 1) Hansen L, Yao W, Eiberg H, Funding M, Riise R, Kjaer KW, He- don, injuries during exercise. There is, however, conflicting evidence jtmancik JF, Rosenberg T. The congenital “ant-egg” cataract pheno- with regard to the role of musculo-tendinous flexibility in Achilles ten- type is caused by a missense mutation in connexin46. Mol Vis. 2006; don injuries (ATI). We have recently shown that the BstUI restriction 12:1033-1039. fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) within the COL5A1 gene is as- sociated with ATI. Mutations within this gene have been implicated in P0941. Linkage screening in a large Iranian family with Ehlers Danlos syndrome which is characterised by joint hypermobility. congenital motor nystagmus (CMN) The aim of this study therefore was to investigate the possible asso- A. Kian Mehr1, Y. Shafeghati1, H. R. Khorram Khorshid1, H. Ebrahimi1, Y. Hesh- ciation of the BstUI RFLP within the COL5A1 gene and musculo-ten- mati1, M. Karimlou2; dinous flexibility in subjects with Achilles tendon injuries and asymp- 1Genetic Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- tomatic control subjects. Lower limb ROM measurements, including ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Biostatistics department, University of the sit and reach (SR) test and the passive straight leg raise (SLR), Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. were conducted on 118 physically active Caucasian subjects, which Idiopathic congenital motor nystagmus (CMN) is a genetic disorder comprised 50 subjects with chronic Achilles tendinopathies and 34 characterized by bilateral ocular movements that start within early with acute Achilles tendon ruptures, and 34 asymptomatic control sub- months of life. To date different typs of inheritance patterns have been jects. The BstUI RFLP was used to genotype all these individuals for reported for CMN, but no causative gene has been determined for the C>T transition at nucleotide 414 of exon 66 of COL5A1 (rs12722). CMN so far. This Iranian pedigree shows a typical X-linked dominant Gender, age and the COL5A1 BstUI RFLP genotype contributed signif- pattern with reduced penetrance (about30%) among obligate carrier icantly to the optimal SLR model. The factors contributing significantly females. There is no male to male transmission. Investigations have to SR were weight, age and the COL5A1 BstUI RFLP genotype. This been done so far indicated five out of six families with X-linked CMN to data suggests that the COL5A1 gene may be associated with lower be linked to a nearly distinct area in long arm of chromosome X . We limb flexibility. designed linkage screening for some microsatellite markers previously confirmed for linkage on chromosome X. Linkage study was performed P0939. Analysis of a functional catechol-O-methyltransferase on Xp by DXS993 ruled out linkage to this locus. The second marker gene polymorphism in healthy females: association with on Xq,DXS1047 , was not informative in our Iranian population. Our aggressive behavior study on other markers on Xq is under way. M. Kulikova, N. Maluchenko, A. Tonevitsky; Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation. P0942. Insertion/deletion polymorphism of Angiotensin Several lines of research have reported that functional polymorphism Converting Enzyme (ACE) gene in children with connective in the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene that is responsible tissue dysplasia. for substantial variability in COMT enzymatic activity is associated with I. A. Kostik1, M. L. Chukhlovina2, V. I. Larionova2, T. I. Kadurina1; aggression and impulsivity. The most of recent researches have been 1Medical Academy Postgradute Studies, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, conducted on males therefore we suggest that it is important to inves- 2State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. tigate an association of aggression with COMT genotypes in females. Connective tissue dysplasia (CTD) is a group of geterogenous diseas- A common low-activity variant of the enzyme contains a Met residue es with hereditary and inborn collagen synthesis disturbance. These at amino acid 158 of COMT whereas the common high activity variant patients have different neurological complaints, such as, headache, has a Val at this site. Considering the role of COMT in dopamine me- weakness, fatigue, dizziness, syncope, lypothymia, associated with tabolism and the involvement of dopaminergic pathways in the forma- cerebral hemodynamic disturbance. Previous studies have suggested tion of aggression, we screened athletes (78 females) and non-trained an influence of ACE gene alleles on cerebrovascular disorders (CVD) control group (83 females) to determine whether a behavioral associa- in adults and children. tion with the COMT polymorphism exists or not. Case-control analyses The aim of our study was to investigate the relationship between ACE suggested a strong association between the ValVal genotype in both gene polymorphism and cerebrovascular disorders in these children. groups and high aggressive and dangerous behavior (P < 0.04). Also One hundred and three CTD children (36 girls, 68 boys) were included we have found that allele distribution is different in the groups and it in our study. The mean age of patients was 12.97 ±3.93 years, 61,0% could be the evidence of genetic propensity in sports. had CVD. Total genomic DNA was extracted by a standard method and ACE genotypes were determined using polymerase chain reaction P0940. Congenital cataract - a national wide study in Denmark (PCR) followed by analysis of PCR products by agarose gel electro- L. Hansen1,2, H. Eiberg1, K. Kjaer1,2, T. Rosenberg3; phoresis in 41 children. 1Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2The Wilhelm Johannsen We have revealed the next genotypes and alleles distribution in these Centre for Functional Genome Research, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3, Kennedy children: II-31,7%, ID-39,0%, DD-29,3%; I-51,2% and D-48,8%. We Institute-National Eye Clinic, Copenhagen, Denmark. have no significant differences in ACE genotypes and alleles distribu- Inherited congenital cataract leads in most cases to loss of vision if it tion between boys and girls. The incidence of homozygous deletion not treated. Congenital cataract is present at or develops shortly after (DD) genotype in children with CVD was 37,5% compared to 25,0% birth. Mutations in more than 20 human genes have now been associ- in children without CVD. Children with II genotype had CVD only in ated with congenital cataract and mainly in combination with autoso- 16,7% cases, but children with ID genotype had CVD in 42,9% cases mal dominant inheritance. and children, carriers of DD genotype had CVD in 50,0% cases. A study of 30 Danish families with inherited congenital cataract has Conclusion: the role of ACE gene insertion/deletion polymorphism in been initiated in order to identify the disease causing mutations. Muta- cerebrovascular disorders in children with connective tissue dysplasia tions were found in 16 families and analyses of the remaining fami- still needs to be determined.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 P0943. Ignoring intermarker linkage disequilibrium induces expression. false-positive evidence of linkage for consanguineous pedigrees To elucidate CHD predisposing genotypes of the TLR pathway, we an- when genotype data is missing for any pedigree member alysed the complete haplotype information of 16 genes within this path- B. Li, S. M. Leal; way, encoding for receptors, ligands, and signal transducers (TLR1, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, CD14, CD36, MyD88, TOLIP, Traf6, TAB1, TBK1, Missing genotype data can increase false-positive evidence for linkage TAK1, TRAM, TIRAP, IRAK1 and IRAK4). In a large scale case-control when either parametric or nonparametric analysis is carried out ignor- association study (1103 early-onset CHD patients and 736 controls), ing intermarker linkage disequilibrium (LD). Previously it was demon- 136 tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (tSNPs) were genotyped strated by Huang et al (2005) that no bias occurs in this situation for using the high-through-put SNPlexTM technology. To adjust for all con- affected sib-pairs with unrelated parents when either both parents are ventional CHD environmental risk factors, multiple logistic regression genotyped or genotype data is available for two additional unaffected analysis was performed with stepwise selection (Wald). Before and af- siblings when parental genotypes are missing. However, this is not ter adjustment, polymorphisms of TLR4 and TLR5 showed significant the case for consanguineous pedigrees, where missing genotype data p-values. The tSNPs of TLR4 and TLR5, showing significant p-values for any pedigree member within a consanguinity loop can increase after stratification for environmental factors (p=0.029 and 0.018, re- false-positive evidence of linkage. The false-positive evidence for link- spectively) were replicated with a second population of further 2206 age is further increased when cryptic consanguinity is present. The CHD patients and controls. Genotyping was performed using the Taq- amount of false-positive evidence for linkage is highly dependent on ManTM technology, and associations were adjusted by logistic regres- which family members are genotyped. When parental genotype data sion. Before and after adjustment, no evidence for associations with is available, the false-positive evidence for linkage is usually not as CHD was detected for the replicated tSNPs at both, the allele and strong as when parental genotype data is unavailable. Which family genotype level. members will aid in the reduction of false-positive evidence of linkage Thus, the study does not indicate any association of a TLR-pathway is highly dependent on which other family members are genotyped. specific allele with an increased risk of CHD susceptibility in the Cau- For a pedigree with an affected proband whose first-cousin parents casian population. have been genotyped, further reduction in the false-positive evidence of linkage can be obtained by including genotype data from additional P0946. Functional gene variants in the regulatory regions affected siblings of the proband or genotype data from the proband’s of COX-2 gene and non-melanoma skin cancer after organ sibling-grandparents. When parental genotypes are not available, transplantation. false-positive evidence for linkage can be reduced by including in the M. Gomez Lira1, S. Mazzola1, G. Tessari2, L. Naldi3, A. Forni4, C. Rugiu5, S. analysis genotype data from either unaffected siblings of the proband Piaserico6, G. Girolomoni2, A. Turco1; or the proband’s married-in-grandparents. 1Department of Mother and Child Care, Section Biology and Genetics, Univer- sity of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Department of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences P0944. Polymorphism of cytokines genes in COPD patients from – Section of Dermatology and Venereal, Verona, Italy, 3Centro Studi Gruppo Russia Italiano di Studi Epidemiologici in Dermatologia., Verona, Italy, 4Kidney Trans- G. F. Korytina, D. Ksenya, Y. Dily, V. Tatyana; plantation Center. University of Verona, Verona;, Verona, Italy, 5Division of Institut of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. Cardiac Surgery. University of Verona. Verona, Verona, Italy, 6Department of The purpose of this study was to investigate the possible roles of the Nephrology. University of Verona. Verona, Verona, Italy. cytokines genes in the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary Overexpression of COX-2, which results in excessive prostaglandine disease (COPD). Polymorphisms in the genes encoding IL1b, IL- production, has been observed in human epidermal keratinocytes 1RN, TNFA, LTA, IL6, IL8 & IL10 were investigated in COPD patients after UVB injury, in squamous cell skin cancer, in actinic keratoses (N=319) and healthy individuals (N=403) living in Ufa, the Republic of and in early stages of carcinogenesis. The dysregulation of COX-2 Bashkortostan. expression observed in carcinogenesis can in part be due to functional We observed that IL1RN*2/IL1RN*2 genotype of IL1RN gene was as- changes affecting regulatory elements in the 5’ or 3’ UTR regions of sociated with susceptibility for COPD (9.8% vs 4.67%; χ2=5.45, df=1, the gene. Two polymorphisms (-765G>C, and -1195A>G) in the pro- p=0.02; OR=2.21). Analysis of the LTA gene polymorphic locus 252A/ moter and one polymorphism in 3’UTR (8473T>C) regions have been G showed that in patients with COPD, the frequency of the GG geno- described. To elucidate if these COX-2 variants can be associated to type was significantly higher than that in the control group (7.84% vs non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) susceptibility after transplanta- 3.72%; χ2=5.00, df=1, p=0.025). The increase of this genotype was tion, we genotyped 240 North Italian transplant patients (107 cases significant in case of IV stage of COPD (11.18% vs 4.79%; χ2=3.075, and 133 controls). The distrubution of COX-2 univariant genotypes, df=1, p=0.07). Frequency of genotype combination TNFA-308 G/G and of estimated haplotypes was not significantly different between and LTA252 A/A significantly decreased in COPD group (38.55% vs the overall NMSC group and controls. However, stratification by kind 46.93% in control group; χ2=8.82, df=1, p=0.0039). The frequency of of tumors (SCC or BCC), and age at transplant, showed that allele - GG genotype of the IL6 gene was higher in the patients with IV stage 765C was never present in BCC cases who underwent transplantation of COPD (43.75% vs 31.54%, χ2=4.14, P=0.041). before 50 years (CC+CG vs GG Fisher exact test P=0.00042) sug- Our results indicate that the genotype frequency of the -511 T/C, 3953 gesting a protective effect of allele -765C in this subclass of patients. T/C of IL1B, -308G/A of TNFA , -174G/C of IL6, -251A/T of IL8 and To determine if other polymorphisms in these regions can contribute to - 627C/A of IL10 genes polymorphisms was similar in COPD and NMSC susceptibility, heteroduplex screening of the proximal 5’ and 3’ healthy control groups. regulatory regions of the gene was performed. One rare polymorphism (-62C>G), which was present in both study groups was identified. No P0945. Alleles of the Toll-Like-Receptor signaling pathway in other variant was found suggesting that sequence variations in these Coronary Heart Disease patients regulatory regions of the COX-2 gene do not likely contribute to NMSC A. S. Schaefer1, N. E. Mokhtari2, M. Nothnagel3, R. Simon2, H. Katus4, S. S. risk in this population. Schreiber1; 1Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, P0947. Maternal mosaicism of a RYR2 mutation. Kiel, Germany, 2Clinic of Cardiology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, H. Bikker1, J. P. van Tintelen2, Z. A. Bhuiyan1, A. A. M. Wilde3, A. C. P. Wies- Kiel, Germany, 3Institute for Medical Informatics and Statistics, University Hos- feld4, M. M. A. M. Mannens1; pital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 4Cardiology, Angiology, Pneumology, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Depart- University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany. ment of Clinical Genetics, UMCG, Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Department Atherosclerosis is characterized by signs of chronic inflammation and of Cardiology, AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Cardiology, systemic immune responses. Bacterial infection and inflammation UMCG, Groningen, The Netherlands. have been implicated in the pathogenesis of coronary heart disease Mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RYR2) gene have been (CHD). Toll Like Receptors (TLRs) are the initial sensors of invading reported to cause autosomal dominant catecholaminergic polymor- microbes, and interact with endogenous ligands such as oxLDL. They phic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT). Exposure to stress or exercise in activate multiple pathogen-specific immune responses, e.g. cytokine these patients can lead to ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 death. More than 60 mutations in RYR2 have been reported. They of the A-allele of TNFA gene have 3-fold increase of Crohn’s disease cluster in 3 regions: the amino terminus, a central domain and the risk (OR=3.20, 95% CI:1.43-7.15). Interestingly that combined hetero- carboxyl terminus. zygous genotype -238A/238G + -308A/-308G of TNFA gene resulted The diagnosis CPVT was made in a 10year old boy. He presented with in considerable increase of CD risk (OR=18.8; 95% CI:1.02-345.97). syncope at the age of 9 years. Family history was remarkable: one TNFA is a key component of inflammatory process development and sister died at the age of 3 weeks while crying and another sister died a target for anti-TNFA therapies which are used as a second or third- suddenly at the age of 13 years while being angry. Both parents had line treatment. Therefore further research may help to develop of new not experienced symptoms of ventricular tachycardias. therapeutic strategies for the treatment of chronic inflammatory dis- In the index-patient, a mutation in the RYR2 gene was identified. The eases by anti-TNFA medicines. mutation c.12446A>C, resulted in a p.Tyr4149Ser amino acid change. Tyr4149 is located in the I-domain, a hydrophobic RYR2 region that P0950. Variations in C-reactive protein gene and COPD: tagging is postulated to transduce cytoplasmic events by regulating the Ca2+ SNPs analysis in case-control study pore-forming domain. This domain is a hot-spot for arrhythmia-linked D. G. Yanbaeva1, M. A. Dentener1, M. A. Spruit2, A. Van de Kruijs2, A. Derks2, RYR2 mutations. E. F. M. Wouters1,2; DNA sequencing of the RYR2 gene in the parents suggested that they 1Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Centre for Integrated were both homozygous for the wild-type allele. A de novo mutation was Rehabilitation of Organ failure, Horn, The Netherlands. not expected, because the parents already lost two daughters with BACKGROUND Chronic low-grade systemic inflammation (i.e. in- symptoms compatible with CPVT. Further investigation (dHPLC and creased C-reactive protein, CRP) has been recognized to be present in digestion with Bse1) indicated that the mother was somatic mosaic for COPD and, in turn, may have a systemic impact. However, remarkably the mutation. little is known about the underlying mechanisms of systemic inflamma- This finding confirms the occurrence of somatic mosaicism and has tion in COPD. Systemic inflammatory response might be modulated implications for the genetic counselling of apparently de novo cases by genetic background. The aim of this study was to examine whether of CPVT. variations in CRP gene coding for acute phase protein are associated with susceptibility for COPD. P0948. Association of variants of the IL2R and ATG1L1 genes METHODS A total of 265 clinically stable patients with moderate-to-se- with susceptibility to pediatric Crohn’s disease vere COPD (mean age 64 years, FEV1 39% pred, FEV1/VC, 44.6%) M. Devoto, R. N. Baldassano, J. P. Bradfield, D. S. Monos, C. E. Kim, J. T. entering pulmonary rehabilitation and 90 healthy smokers (mean age Glessner, T. Casalunovo, E. C. Frackelton, G. Otieno, S. Kanterakis, J. L. Sha- 56 years, FEV1 109% pred, FEV1/VC, 77%) were enrolled. All sub- ner, R. M. Smith, A. W. Eckert, L. J. Robinson, C. C. Onyah, D. J. Abrams, R. jects were Dutch Caucasians. M. Chiavacci, R. Skraban, S. F. A. Grant, H. Hakonarson; Six tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs3091244, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. rs1800947, rs113084, rs1205, rs2808630, rs3093077) within CRP Two recent genome wide association studies reported association of gene have been selected for genotyping from Seattle SNPs database Crohn’s disease (CD) in adults with single nucleotide polymorphisms (r2 0.8, MAF 5%). (SNPs) in the interleukin-23 receptor (IL23R) and autophagy-related RESULTS All tested SNPs were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium both 16-like 1 (ATG16L1) genes. The aim of this study was to examine the in cases and controls. We found that carriers of 5237TT genotype impact of these SNPs on risk of CD in children. Utilizing data from our (rs2808630) had 50% lower risk of having COPD (p=0.006, reces- ongoing genome-wide association study, we investigated the associa- sive model). In addition, two trends have been shown: homosigosity of tion of the previously reported SNPs at the IL23R (rs11209026) and 1444A (rs1130864), previously associated with elevated CRP plasma ATG16L1 (rs2241880) genes in a preliminary cohort of 142 pediatric levels, has increased the disease risk by 2.1-fold (p=0.06, recessive CD cases with the childhood form of this disease and 281 matched and additive models), and carriage of 1059C allele (rs1800947) also controls. The minor allele frequency (MAF) of SNP rs11209026 in the was found to be associated with increased risk of COPD (p=0.07, cases was 1.75% while it was 6.61% in controls, yielding a protective OR=1.93, additive model). Analysis of CRP haplotypes confirmed odds ratio (OR) of 0.25 (95% CI 0.10 - 0.65; one-sided P = 9.2x10-4). A these findings. transmission disequilibrium test with 65 trios derived from our initial pa- CONCLUSIONS Results indicate that SNPs in CRP gene might be tient cohort confirmed the significant association with rs11209026 (one- associated with susceptibility for COPD. sided P = 0.0017). Similarly, the frequency of allele G of rs2241880 in the cases was 63.73% while it was 51.96% in the controls, yielding P0951. Family based association analysis of TGFB1 as modifier an allelic OR of 1.62 (95% CI 1.21 - 2.18; one-sided P = 6.93x10-4). gene in Cystic Fibrosis The ORs in our pediatric study are comparable with those reported M. D. Bettin1, C. Bombieri1, G. Malerba1, L. Xumerle1, F. Belpinati1, C. Castel- previously in adult IBD case-control cohorts. As such, these variants lani2, B. M. Assael2, P. F. Pignatti1; confer a similar magnitude of risk of CD to children as for their adult 1Section of Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Cystic counterparts. Our findings provide an independent confirmation of the Fibrosis Veneto Regional Center, Hospital of Verona, Verona, Italy. effect of variants of these two genes on risk of CD. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a lethal, multi-system autosomal recessive ge- netic disorder primarily affecting Caucasian populations, caused by P0949. Crohn’s disease and polymorphisms of the NOD2/ mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regula- CARD15 and TNFA genes tor (CFTR) gene. Severity of clinical presentation in CF, particularly Y. Nasykhova1, T. Ivashchenko1, N. Semenov2, B. Baranov1; the pulmonary manifestation, are highly variable, even among CF pa- 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, tients presenting the same genotype. This variability is only partially 2Medical Academy of Postgraduate Study, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. explained by allelic heterogeneity at the CFTR gene. Literature data Crohn’s disease (CD) is a complex multifactorial disorder, which is suggest that the severity in CF may be correlated with other genetic thought to result from the influence of environmental factors on ge- factors. Two polymorphisms (-509C/T and Leu10Pro) of the TGFB1 netically predisposed host. We studied the mutation frequencies gene, which encodes for a cytokine involved in inflammation and tis- (Gly908Arg, Arg702Trp,1007insC) in NOD2/CARD15 gene in the sue repair and expressed by several cells, have recently been associ- group of patients with Crohn’s disease and in the control group. The ated to a more severe CF pulmonary manifestation in the American frequencies of these mutations were following: Gly908Arg - 3,2% Ar- population (Drumm et al, NEJM 353:1443; 2005). We here report a g702Trp-3,8%, 1007insC - 4,4%. 20,5% of the patients had at least TDT analysis of three TGFB1 functional polymorphisms (-509C/T, one mutation in the NOD2/CARD15 gene. We analyzed also polymor- Leu10Pro e Arg25Pro) in Italian CF patients. Eigthy-three family trios phic variants of TNFA gene within a promoter region. Recently it was were collected through a CF patient attending the Veneto Regional CF reported that this polymorphism is associated with a level of TNFA Centre of Verona. All the 83 patients were severe/severe CFTR muta- proinflammatory cytokine production and therefore is implicated in an tion carriers and were clinically evaluated for respiratory parameters, inflammatory process. The frequency of -308G/-308A genotype was gastrointestinal and nutritional status parameters, and other clinical significantly higher in the group of patients (p=0.003, OR=3.89; 95% variables related to the common CF complicances (diabetes, DIOS, CI:1.57-9.65). According to the odds ratio it was found that the carriers etc). We found evidence of association between Arg25 homozygotes Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 and FEV1 (p=0.018). No association was found among other poly- P0954. Polymorphisms of the IL1B and IL1RN genes are morphisms and studied clinical parameters. In order to confirm these associated with essential hypertension in Tatars from Russia preliminary data, we have enlarged our population, and we are now Y. R. Timasheva1, T. R. Nasibullin1, A. N. Zakirova2, O. E. Mustafina1; genotyping a second group of 60 unrelated Italian CF patients. 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. P0952. Syntaxin 1A: a possible modifier of lung disease in cysic Essential hypertension (EH) is a common disease and a major risk fibrosis (CF) factor for many cardiovascular events. The hereditary nature of hy- J. Racine1, R. Kraemer2, A. Schaller1, T. von Kaenel1, M. Schneider1, J. Sanz1, pertension is well established. Inflammation plays a pivotal role in the S. Gallati1; pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease. Inflammatory damage of en- 1Division of Human Genetics, Dept. of Paediatrics, University of Bern, Bern, dothelium leads to impairment of the vascular tone. Interleukin-1 (IL-1) Switzerland, 2Dept. of Paediatrics, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. regulates the expression of genes involved in inflammatory response. Phenotypic presentation, primarily progression of lung disease, var- IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) is an endogenous inhibitor of IL-1 ies significantly even among patients with the same CFTR genotype. signaling. The rare allele (IL1RN*2) of a variable number tandem re- There is growing evidence that polymorphic variants in genes besides peat polymorphism in the IL1RN gene was demonstrated to signifi- CFTR play an important role in phenotype determination. Mainly genes cantly reduce IL-1Ra level. that modulate the chloride-transport or the cycle of inflammation may The aim of the present study was to investigate the association be- lead to progressive lung disease. Syntaxin 1A (STX1A), a SNARE pro- tween IL1B and IL1RN polymorphisms with EH in Tatar ethnic group tein essential for the docking and fusion of exocytotic vesicles, binds (Bashkortostan, Russia). to the N-terminal tail of CFTR and down-regulates its function by direct Our study comprised 360 hypertensive patients. The control group protein-protein interaction making it a promising candidate as a CF consisted of 242 healthy individuals. Genomic DNA was isolated from modifier. peripheral blood by phenol-chloroform extraction. Genotyping was DNA from 63 F508del homozygous and clinically well characterized performed using polymerase chain reaction followed by AvaI digestion patients was screened for mutations in the STX1A gene using our very (for IL1B-511T/C polymorphism). Genotypes and allele frequencies sensitive (98%) SSCP/HD method followed by direct sequencing of distribution was estimated using Fisher’s exact test. Odds ratios with the variants. Eight different sequence variants (c.31-21T>C, 3.17%; 95% confidential interval were calculated. c.150C>T, p.N50N, 6.35%; c.204T>C, p.D68D, 37.30%, c.284-66G>A, IL1RN*2 allele was found to be associated with risk of early onset (be- 2.38%; c.467-38A>G, 42.06%; c.540+52C>T, 42.86%; c.790-15C>T, fore 45 years) of EH (OR=3.27, CI: 1.65-6.49). We have shown that 3.97%, c.959+92C>T, 3.17%) were identified and tested for associa- IL1B-511*C/*C genotype was less frequent among hypertensive pa- tions with lung function parameters such as functional residual ca- tients who had stroke (37.5% versus 57.52% in group of patients with pacity determined by whole-body plethysmography (FRCpleth), lung non-complicated EH, P=0.03). We may conclude that IL1B-511*C/*C is clearance index (LCI), trapped gas (VTG) and indexes of flow limi- associated with decreased risk of stroke in patients with EH (OR=0.44, tation (FEV1, FEF50). Most significant associations were found be- CI: 0.22-09). tween c.204T>C and c.467-38A>G and the lung parameters LCI and Our results suggest a significant role for IL1 family genes in the devel- FEF50. opment of cardiovascular disease. Homozygosity for F508del combined with both c.204T/T and c.467- 38G/G predicts a progressive and severe lung disease (n=11), com- P0955. Screening for SLC26A4 gene mutation in unilateral bination with c.204C/C and c.467-38A/A, however, is associated with hearing impairment and same-side EVA a much milder course (n=18; p = 0.001 for LCI, p=0.002 for FEF50). L. Jonard1, D. Feldmann1, A. David2, H. Dollfus3, V. Drouin-Garraud4, F. Fell- Thus, the STX1A gene seems to act as a modifier of lung disease in mann5, C. Francannet6, B. Gilbert7, H. Journel8, E. Garabedian1, R. Couderc1, CF patients. C. Petit9, F. Denoyelle1, S. Marlin1; 1AP-HP, Trousseau, Paris, France, 2CHU, Nantes, France, 3CHU, Strasbourg, P0953. Cystic Fibrosis modifier genes and outcome of the France, 4CHU, Rouen, France, 5CHU, Besançon, France, 6CHU, Clermont Fer- disease. Correlation with the age of the patients. rand, France, 7CHU, Poitiers, France, 8CHU, Vannes, France, 9INSERM U587, J. J. Telleria1, J. Gobernado2, C. Vázquez3, F. Baranda3, M. J. Alonso1, I. Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. Fernández1, J. M. F. Fernández1, A. Blanco-Quirós1; Mutations of the SLC26A4 (PDS) gene are involved in either syndromic 1Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital Clinico Universitario, deafness, characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss and Valladolid, Spain, 3Hospital de Cruces, Bilbao, Spain. goitre (Pendred syndrome), or congenital isolated deafness (DFNB4). In Cystic Fibrosis (CF) patients, the CFTR genotype is not a good pre- In our previous studies, we identified mutations in cases with bilat- dictor of pulmonary disease, which is the direct cause of death in over eral hearing impairment and unilateral enlarged vestibular aqueduct 90% of CF patients. Genotype-phenotype studies showed a high vari- (EVA) in two cohorts (Pendred and DFNB4). In the present study, we ation in severity of pulmonary disease, even between patients sharing screened SLC26A4 by DHPLC in 25 patients presenting with unilateral the same CFTR genotype, suggesting that outcome is under the influ- hearing impairment associated with same-side EVA. None of these pa- ence of other genetic or/and environmental factors. tients had two deleterious genetic changes in trans. Seven of them had The aim of this study was to study the role of several potential modifier a single heterozygous SLC26A4 variation. Among these variations, we genes and if this role changes as the disease progress. found three established mutations and three potentially deleterious Sixty one cystic fibrosis patients over 23 years were initially included genetic changes. in the study. CFTR mutations were identified and genotype was car- We conclude that causative SLC26A4 mutations in patients with unilat- ried out for the following genes: PI (alpha-1-antitrypsin), TNFA, TGFB1 eral deafness and same-side EVA are at best infrequent. (codons 10 and 25), IL10, IL6 and IFNG. In order to minimise the role of the CFTR genotype, patients with mild P0956. No evidence for an association of the mutations were excluded of the study. Data corresponding to the basal methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene CT polymorphism forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1), Crispin-Norman score, and with major depressive disorder forced vital capacity (FVC) were retrospectively recorded. D. Gaysina1,2, S. Cohen2, F. Hoda2, N. Craddock3, A. Korzsun4, M. Owen3, I. Results showed a double distribution of modifying effect: PI and IFNG Craig2, A. Farmer2, P. McGuffin2; showed good correlation to FEV1 and FVC between 10 and 15 years, 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2MRC SGDP whereas for TGFB and IL6 we found good correlation in patients over Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London, London, United King- 18 years. Crispin-Norman score showed good correlation only with dom, 3Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, School of TGFB1 codon 10 genotype. We did not find correlation neither for IL10 Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 4Centre for Psychiatry, Wolfson Institute of nor for codon 25 of TGFB1. Preventive Medicine, Barts and The London Queen Mary’s School of Medicine, These findings suggest that the role played by the modifier genes London, United Kingdom. deppends on the stage of the disease, and changes as the disease Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is a complex disorder thought to progress result from multiple genes interacting with environmental and devel- opmental components. The 5,10-methylentetrahydrofolate reductase Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 gene (MTHFR) is considered to be an important candidate gene of DN. In combined sample analysis using the Mantel-Haenszel model, MDD. A single base mutation C677T (rs1801133) results in the pro- 43 SNPs (1.5%) reached the significant level of association (P<0.01). duction of a mildly dysfunctional thermolabile enzyme. The MTHFR The P values for two most significant SNPs among these 43 SNPs 677T/T genotype and, to a lesser extent the 677C/T genotype, is as- were 0.0000038 and 0.00006. respectively. For the follow-up studies, sociated with a significant elevation in the circulating concentrations of a large DN cohort containing more than 1000 cases and 1000 controls the homocystein and a decrease in serum folate concentrations, which from the FinnDiane project in Finland is used. Genotyping of these 43 may parallel a similar reduction in 5-methyltetrahydrofolate in CNS SNPs in the FinnDiane cohort for replication studies is ongoing. and may lead to a reduction in monoamine neurotransmitter function and elevated risk of MDD. To test the hypothesis that MTHFR C677T P0959. Association of a dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) polymorphism can be involved in predisposition to MDD we conducted polymorphism with alcohol dependence in Russian population the association study in sample of 1222 patients with recurrent MDD from West Siberia and 833 control subjects. The statistical power of our sample to de- A. V. Marusin1, M. O. Abushaeva2, N. A. Bokhan2, A. S. Gureev3, M. G. Spiri- tect an odds ratio of 1.5 for 677T/T genotype was 88%. There are not donova1, Y. R. Pels1, V. A. Stepanov1; significant differences in genotype/allele frequencies between depres- 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Acad- sive patients and controls, neither in total samples, nor in females and emy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Research Institute of males separately. We also failed to confirm the association of this gene Mental Health, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, with MDD using meta-analysis of 4 case-control studies. Our results Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Tomsk State University, Biology and Soil science exclude a major role for the MTHFR C677T polymorphism in confer- Faculty, Tomsk, Russian Federation. ring susceptibility to recurrent unipolar depression in British popula- The dopamine transporter (DAT1 or SLC6A3) plays the important role tion. However, there are many rare mutations in the MTHFR gene, in dopamine metabolism, serves as a critical regulator of dopaminer- also associated with minor changes in the enzyme activity of MTHFR, gic neurotransmission. The association of DAT1 VNTR with alcoholism which could play a role in susceptibility to depression. was found in many populations. Two polymorphisms in DAT1 gene, VNTR in 3’-untranslated region and 1342 A/G polymorphism in exon P0957. Association of INSR and IRS-1 gene polymorphisms with 9 were investigated in three groups: alcoholics (n=92), non-alcoholic type 2 diabetes in the Northern Greek population controls (n=81) and population samples from three Russian popula- A. Leondiadou, A. Kouvatsi; tions of Tomsk area (n=583). For both loci the genotype frequencies Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece. obeyed the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in all groups. No association Type 2 diabetes is a heterogeneous disorder. Several genes have of exon 9 A/G polymorphism with alcoholism was found. As to VNTR been proposed to contribute to its pathogenesis. Associations found polymorphism the protective effect of 10/10 genotype was revealed: in a particular population were often not confirmed in others, suggest- the odds ratio (OR) for this genotype for alcohol dependence were ing regional differences. In the present study we tested the possible 0.49 (95 % CI 0.25 - 0.96; P = 0.025) in patient/control and 0.64 (95 association of variants in the genes for insulin receptor (INSR) and % CI 0.40 - 1.02; P = 0,048) in patient/population samples compari- insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) with type 2 diabetes in the North- sons. Thus, obtained data testify for importance of DAT1 variability in ern Greek population. The distribution of three polymorphisms of the predisposition to alcoholism. This work was supported by the Russian INSR gene (3559C>T or Y984Y, 3560G>A or V985M and 3781C>T Foundation for Basic Research (project no. 05-04-98007-p_ob_a). or H1058H) and one polymorphism of the IRS-1 gene (3932G>A or G972R) were determined in 100 unrelated diabetic patients and 100 P0960. Contribution of the dopamine transporter (SLCA) and age-matched unrelated control subjects. Genotyping was performed the dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2) genes to cocaine addiction: a by PCR amplification followed by restriction digestion with appropri- case-control association study in the Spanish population ate enzymes. Samples with certain patterns were further sequenced N. Fernández1,2, M. Ribasés3, B. Gonzalvo3, M. Casas3,4, C. Roncero3,4, B. in order not to conceal the coupling between the Y984Y and V985M Cormand1,2; polymorphisms. 1Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, Instituto de Salud Genotypic and allelic frequencies were compared between the two Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servei de Psiquiatria, Hospital Universitari Vall groups. No association was found for the four polymorphisms with dia- d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4Departament de Psiquiatria i Medicina Legal, betes. The analysis of composite genotypes revealed that individuals Universitat Autònoma, Barcelona, Spain. heterozygous for the Y984Y polymorphism and homozygous normal Drug addiction is a complex neuropsychiatric disorder in which envi- for the other three, were found more frequently among the controls ronmental, social and genetic factors are involved. Several evidences (p=0.033). This genotype might be protective against type 2 diabetes suggest that the dopaminergic system may play an important role in in Greek individuals. cocaine abuse and dependence and that decreased dopaminergic function underlies cocaine addiction. The dopamine transporter (DAT1) P0958. Using high-density SNP genotyping to fine-map the and the dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2) mediate cocaine effects in the diabetic nephropathy locus on 3q in patients from Finland central nervous system. In this regard, cocaine binding to DAT1 causes B. He1, A. Österholm1, M. Wessman2, C. Forsblom2, J. Tuomilehto3, P. Groop2, an overstimulation of the dopamine reward system, and decreased K. Tryggvason1; DRD2 availability has been reported in cocaine addicts. In addition, 1Matrix Biology, MBB, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Folkhälsan consistent associations have been reported between cocaine addic- Research Center, Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3National Public tion and several polymorphisms in the dopamine transporter (SLC6A3) Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland. and the dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2) genes. We aimed to replicate Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is the leading cause of end-stage renal these results by genotyping the Int8 VNTR of the SLC6A3 gene and disease and affects about 30 % of all diabetic patients. Our previous the TaqIA and TaqIB RFLP polymorphisms within the DRD2 gene in genome scan using discordant sib pairs from Finland identified the a Spanish sample of 85 cocaine addicts and 85 sex-matched healthy 3q locus with a suggestive linkage (LOD 2.6, P=0.0004) to DN (Kid- controls. The case-control study showed an overrepresentation of the ney International 2007;71:140). To capture genetic variants in LD with 5R/5R genotype of the SLC6A3 gene in the group of cocaine abusers the causal SNP, we carried out a high-density SNP genotyping strat- when compared to controls (p=0.009). However, no significant associ- egy for fine-mapping the 3q locus. Based on the HapMap database, ation was detected when allele frequencies of the SLC6A3 Int8 VNTR 3072 tagged SNPs (r2>0.7, MAF>2%) covering 28 Mb, from 124 to or genotype, allele or estimated haplotype frequencies of the DRD2 152 Mb on chromosome 3 (build 35), were selected by the LD-based TaqIA and TaqIB SNPs were considered. We also evaluated potential tagging method and were genotyped in 643 samples (456 Finnish and epistatic effects between the SLC6A3 and DRD2 genes but found no 187 Icelandic) using the Illumina SNP genotyping platform. In results, evidence supporting the existence of interactions. Although additional 635 samples (98.7%) and 2820 SNPs (92%) reached the threshold of research in other datasets with an increased sample size is required, data quality controls. In association analysis, 154 SNPs in the Finnish our preliminar results suggest that the SLC6A3 gene may predispose samples and 149 SNPs in the Icelandic samples showed allelic as- to cocaine addiction. sociations (P<0.05) between cases and controls. Eight SNPs with the same direction in both two sets showed significant associations with Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 P0961. Mutational screening in Dysferlin gene ACE genotypes were compared to those of 405 healthy individuals. L. Gonzalez-Quereda1, J. Juan1, N. de Luna2, E. Gallardo2, M. Rodriguez1, C. Results: Allele and genotype frequencies differed significantly be- Paradas3, I. Illa2, M. Baiget1, P. Gallano1; tween the groups. The frequency of the D allele was 0.78 in the elite 1Genetics, Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Neurology, Hospital de long distance runners and triathletes, 0.66 in the control group, and Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Neurology, Hospital de Valme, Sevilla, Spain. 0.57 in the sprinters and long jumpers (Χ2 = 10.04, P = 0.006). More- Mutations in dysferlin gene (DYSF) cause different muscular dystro- over, the ACE DD genotype was significantly more prevalent among phy phenotypes with autosomal recessive inheritance including Limb the long distance runners (0.63) compared to the controls (0.43), and Girdle Muscular Dystrophy 2B (LGMD2B), Miyoshi Myopathy (MM) compared to the sprinters and long jumpers (0.34) (Χ2 = 21.99, P = and Distal Anterior Compartment Myopathy (DAT). DYSF gene, that 0.0002). Importantly, in the group of elite athletes the odds ratio of ACE maps to chromosome 2p13, has 55 exons and codifies a protein of DD genotype for endurance performance was 3.24 (95% confidence about 237 kDa. interval 1.38-7.61), and of ACE II genotype was 0.25 (95% confidence Dysferlin protein is expressed in skeletal muscle and peripheral blood interval 0.06-0.97). monocytes. The genomic analysis of the DYSF gene has proved to Conclusions: The present study clearly indicates a positive association be time consuming because its long size. We designed a mutational of the ACE D allele with sustained high-level endurance performance. screening strategy based on cDNA from monocytes to find out whether These data support the notion that increased ACE activity may be of the mutational analysis could be performed in mRNA from a source benefit to endurance-type elite athletes. less invasive than the muscle biopsy We studied 50 patients from 31 families clinically diagnosed as MM, P0964. Association of TNF-alpha G-308A promoter LGMD2B and DAT through: 1) the analysis of dysferlin expression by polymorphism with human embryo viability immunohystochemistry in muscle biopsies and Western blot in periph- M. S. Nazarenko, V. P. Puzyrev, I. N. Lebedev; eral blood monocytes and, 2) the screening of mutations in DYSF gene State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. by sequencing monocytes cDNA, amplifying 14 fragments that covers Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), a multifunctional cytokine, is the 55 exons. Finally, the results were confirmed in genomic DNA. expressed in embryonic tissues practically at all stages of human de- We identified mutations in DYSF gene in the thirty one families stud- velopment. It is believed that TNF-alpha boosts death signaling to kill ied: 17 of them in a homozygous state and 14 in a heterozygous state. the embryo if damages triggered by detrimental stimuli may culminate We found the two mutated alleles in twenty eight families and only one in structural anomalies, and stimulate protective mechanisms if the re- mutated allele in 3 families. Seventeen mutations were missense, 10 pair of these damages may prevent maldevelopment. Nonetheless, nonsense, 13 frameshit and 2 splice site mutations. no data about the influence of TNF-alpha G-308A promoter polymor- This report furnish evidence of reliable mutational analysis using phism for embryo viability itself are found. Samples of trophoblast tis- monocytes cDNA and constitutes a good alternative to genomic DNA sue from delayed miscarriages (n=118) and dried blood spots of new- analysis. borns (n=300) were analyzed for TNF-alpha G-308A polymorphism. The genotypes -308GA and -308AA TNF-alpha were more prevalent P0962. Haplotypic classification of DEB in Tunisia: evidence for among newborns (24%) than in the group of delayed miscarriages genetic variability among the different geographic regions (14.4%; P=0.03). Carriers of allele -308A predominated in the neo- H. Ouragini1, F. Cherif2, W. Daoud2, S. Kassar3, S. Nouira1, S. Boubaker3, A. natal group to compare with delayed miscarriages (12,3% vs. 7,2%; Ben Osman-Dhahri2, S. Abdelhak1; P=0.04). In conclusion, high frequency of mutant TNF-alpha allele 1Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases, Institut Pasteur de Tunis, among newborns reflect the possible advantage for embryo survival, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Dermatology department, Hôpital de la Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia, that in turn, may lead to its stable frequency in population. 3Anatomo-Pathology service, Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia. The dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB), a group of heritable blis- P0965. Polymorphism of IL4RA gene is associated with tering skin diseases, is characterized by abnormalities in the anchoring endometriosis fibrils at the dermal-epidermal basement membrane zone. Mutations M. A. Kozlovskaya1,2, G. S. Demin1,2, M. I. Yarmolinskaya1, T. E. Ivashchenko1, within COL7A1 gene that encodes type VII collagen, the major compo- V. S. Baranov1,2; nent of the anchoring fibrils, is responsible for DEB. 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, In order to study the mutational spectrum of DEB in Tunisia, we clas- 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. sify the DEB Tunisian patients on the basis of their haplotype. Thirty re- Endometriosis is a common multifactorial disease. Typical endome- cessive DEB patients, belonging to 24 families, have been genotyped trioid cells are characterized by increased cytokine activity. Cytokine with five microsatellite markers overlapping the COL7A1 region. genes are highly polymorphic that results in synthesis of proteins with The genetic investigation showed that there are two common haplo- various functional activities. This study is devoted to definition of role types, 3-1-6-3-3 and 1-11-14-6-6, which are shared by 6 and 2 families of allelic variants of IL4 and IL4RA genes in pathogenesis of endome- respectively. The most frequent haplotype, 3-1-6-3-3, shared by 25% triosis. of the families, is mainly found among families originating from Cen- DNA samples from the patients with endometriosis (n=36) and control tral Tunisia, and the second one, 1-11-14-6-6, shared by 8% is found group of women without any gynecologic complications (n=69) were among families originating from North Eastern region. The other stud- included in the study. Polymorphisms of IL4 (-590T>C) and IL4RA ied DEB patients have different haplotype and scattered on different (1902A>G or Gln551Arg) were defined by PCR-RFLP assay. cities of the country. All together, seven different haplotypes have been The distribution of IL4 and IL4RA genotypes was in agreement with identified. This study shows haplotypic heterogeneity among Tunisian the HWE law (p>0.05). The frequencies of alleles and genotypes of DEB families, thus suggesting a mutational heterogeneity. IL4 gene did not differ between studied groups (p>0.05). However the frequency of Arg/Arg genotype of IL4RA gene was significantly higher P0963. The ACE insertion/deletion genotype is associated with in patients with endometriosis (16.7%) than in control group (1.4%, elite athletic performance p<0.01). R. E. Amir1, M. Sagiv1, E. Attias1, C. Yamin1, M. Sagiv1, Y. Meckel1, O. Amir2; The results of this pilot study demonstrate a role of IL4RA gene poly- 1Zinman College of Physical education and sport sciences at the wingate insti- morphism in development of endometriosis. According to odds ratio tute, Netanya, Israel, 2Lady Davis Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. the presence of Arg551/Arg551 genotype more than 13-fold increases Background: Growing evidence suggests a significant genetic contri- the risk of endometriosis (OR=13.60; CI: 2.43-76.26). Obtained data bution to human physical performance. The deletion (D) allele of an- allow defining Gln551Arg polymorphism as perspective prognostic giotensin-I converting (ACE) gene has been associated with higher marker of endometriosis. ACE activity. In the current study we evaluated the association be- tween ACE ID polymorphism and elite endurance athletic ability. Methods: Ninety-two elite athletes, classified as either endurance type performers (51 long distance runners and triathletes) or power athletes (41 sprinters and long jumpers), were genotyped for the ACE ID poly- morphism using polymerase chain reaction on leukocytes DNA. Their Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 P0966. Novel gene loci for the Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct 1N Paulescu Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Syndrome Romania, 3Titu Maiorescu University, Bucharest, Romania. R. Birkenhäger, K. Jaekel, R. Laszig, A. Aschendorff; Diabetic nephropathy is the leading cause of ESRD. The literature University, Freiburg, Germany. suggests that genetic predisposition to ESRD is very complex. Background: Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct Syndrome (EVA-Syn- In this study we assessed the association of six polymorphisms with drome) (MIM 603545) is the most common form of congenital inner ESRD in Caucasian subjects from South part of Romania. ear abnormality seen in radiological assessment, associated with sen- We analyzed blood samples from unrelated dialyzed patients (etiology: sorineural hearing impairment or syndromic forms of deafness such T1DM: 83, T2DM: 87, chronic glomerulonephritis: 84) and healthy con- as Pendred syndrome (MIM 274600). Up to now only mutations in trols (n=494). Six genes polymorphisms associated with extracellular the SLC26A4 gene, located on Chromosome 7q31, have been made matrix proliferation (HSPG BamH1, TGF-beta-509C/T) or regulation responsible for Pendred- and EVA-Syndrome. This gene product, a of blood flow and vascular function (ACE ID, AGTR1, eNOS, MTHFR) transporter of iodide and chloride, is called pendrin. In this study we were genotyped by PCR or PCR - RFLP. Genotype distribution for both analyzed 64 patients with EVA and hearing loss to distinguish between cases and controls is in respect with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for the Pendred- and EVA-syndrome. all studied polymorphisms. Methods: Individual exon and intron transitions of the SLC26A4 gene Our results showed that eNOS ID polymorphism increases the risk of patients were PCR amplified. Direct automatic sequencing of vari- for ESRD in all groups. The highest value was observed in T1DM pa- ant fragments was performed with the same primers. A genome-wide tients (OR :3.9844, CI95%:1.9198<OR<8.2694). The risk for renal DD linkage analysis was accomplished using the Affymetrix 10K/50K XbaI failure was increased by AGTR1 A1166C in T1DM patients (OR:1.401, SNP GeneChip® mapping array. CI95%: 0.6753<OR<2.9066) and by TGF-beta -509 CC (OR = 1.9) Results: In the analysed patient collective with Pendred syndrome in T2DM patients. A little differences in distribution of MTHFR C677T and/or enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, a total of eighteen (OR :1.48, CI95%:0.8197<OR<2.6722) and ACE ID (OR :1.2374, TT DD SCL26A4 mutations were detected. A mutation could not be detected CI95%:0.8134<O.R.<1.8824) was observed only in dialyzed nondia- in 36 % of the cases. With a genomewide linkage analysis, of these betic patients. HSPG BamH1 polymorphism has not a significant con- families, using SNP technology, it was possible to identify potential tribution to ESRD. We observed no difference regarding the contribu- new gene loci for the EVA-Syndrome. tion of these genotypes or alleles between men and women whatever Conclusions: The novel gene loci will be analyzed for additional genes renal disease is. In conclusion, our preliminary results suggest that the involved in the development of the EVA-Syndrome. Our results indi- genetic predisposition to renal failure depends on the etiology of re- cate evidences of a accessory gene for this Syndrome. nal disease. Further clarification is anticipated as we increase our lots size. (This study was supported by Romanian CEEX53/2005 grant). P0967. Clinical and genetic familial study of 61 children showing different epileptic phenotypes P0969. Variations in ERα gene predict the outcome of ovarian R. Combi1, S. Redaelli2, D. Grioni3, M. Contri2,3, D. Barisani4, M. L. Lavitrano5, stimulation in in vitro fertilization G. Tredici2, M. L. Tenchini6, M. Bertolini2,3, L. Dalprà2; S. Altmäe1, K. Haller2, M. Peters2, O. Hovatta3, A. Stavreus-Evers3, H. Karro2, 1Dept. Biotechnologies and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, A. Metspalu1, A. Salumets4,2; Italy, 2Dept. Neurosciences and Biomedical Technologies, University of Milano- 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Dep. of obstetrics and Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 3Infantile Neuropsychiatry Clinic, S Gerardo Hospital, gynaecology, Univ. of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3CLINTEC, Karolinska Institutet, Monza, Italy, 4Dept. Experimental Medicine, University of Milano-Bicocca, Mon- Stockholm, Sweden, 4Institute of Molcular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia. za, Italy, 5Dept. of Surgical Sciences and Intensive Therapy, University of Mi- Introduction - The outcome of in vitro fertilization (IVF) depends sub- lano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 6Dept. Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, stantially on the effectiveness of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation University of Milano, Milano, Italy. (COH) by administration of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH). Endog- During the last 10 years many advances in the genetics of epilepsies enously produced estrogens extend the action of exogenous FSH in have been done. In particular, several mutations have been detected promoting folliculogenesis in COH. In the current study we determined in genes encoding ion-channels, suggesting that epilepsies are “chan- the association between genetic variations in ERα and ERβ genes and nelopathies”. Nevertheless, the genetic basis of idiopathic epilepsies different causes of infertility, and analyzed the influence of these varia- remain unknown for a large number of cases and the genetic transmis- tions on the COH outcome in regards to the age and clinical param- sion of these diseases appear to be “complex” because of the great eters of IVF patients. Material & methods - PvuII T/C (rs2234693) and genetic heterogeneity and the coexistence of different epileptic types XbaI A/G (rs9340799) SNPs, and (TA) microsatellite polymorphism in n in each familial cluster. Moreover, in different epilepsies, mutations in ERα gene as well as RsaI G/A (rs1256049) SNP and (CA) microsatel- n the same gene have been reported. lite polymorphism in ERβ gene were genotyped in 159 IVF patients. We performed a clinical and genetic study on 60 Italian families (61 Results - Women‘s age was associated with poorer COH outcome in probands) showing idiopathic epilepsies by sequencing DNA regions linear manner. In addition, patients with endometriosis represented di- previously associated to epilepsies in order to collect data on the type minished ovarian response to FSH compared to tubal factor infertility. and frequency of ion channel mutations. Partial epilepsies represented ERα PvuII T/C, XbaI A/G and ERβ RsaI G/A were associated with the 28% of the sample, whereas the remaining 72% was constituted by length of the microsatellites of the respective genes. Shorter ERα (TA) n generalised epilepsies, subdivided in myoclonic (JME, BMEI, MAE, gave a higher risk for unexplained infertility. Longer ERα (TA) repeat in n SMEI) and non-myoclonic (GEFS+, GTCS, CAE, FS) epilepsies. association with ERα PvuII C allele were associated with better COH We observed a genetic complexity in all phenotype groups: any epi- outcome in an age-independent manner. Conclusions - Variations in leptic type may be transmitted in either an autosomal dominant or a re- ERα gene, in addition to the woman’s age, predict the outcome of COH cessive manner, and furthermore even within a single family, epilepsy in IVF. can be transmitted in either manner. No significant phenotype identity among generations was observed. P0970. A Genomewide scan in Spanish BRCAX Families: Three Moreover, we found an excess of transmitting mothers but no differ- new candidate loci for susceptibility in Familial Breast Cancer ences in the sex of children, suggesting a possible role of mitochondria J. M. Rosa-Rosa1, A. González-Neira1, G. Pita1, I. Blanco2, O. Díez3, M. de la in the disease pathogenesis. The frequency of known mutations in the Hoya4, I. Tejada5, E. González1, V. Fernández1, T. Caldés4, T. Ramón y Cajal3, analyzed regions resulted very low, while a new missense mutation in G. Llort2, J. Benítez1; SCN1A was identified in one subject. 1Human Cancer Genetics Programme, CNIO, Madrid, Spain, 2Institut Català d’Oncologia, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital P0968. The analysis of association of six polymorphisms with Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 5Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo-Bizkaia, development of ESRD in Romanian population - a preliminary Spain. report Introduction: The two major breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol2, D. Ungureanu3, C. Moldovan3, A. Craciun1, C. Se- and BRCA2 have been shown to be involved in a significant proportion rafinceanu1, D. Usurelu2, M. Stavarachi2, M. Toma2, L. Cherry1, L. Dumitrescu2, (25%) of families affected with breast and ovarian cancer. On the other P. Cimponeriu1, L. Gavrila2; hand, it is also clear that a large proportion of families segregating Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 breast cancer alone are not caused by mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 consanguineous parents and the rest of the families had a putative or (BRCAX families). Unfortunately, the discovery of additional breast established X-linked inheritance pattern. In order to detect fragile X cancer predisposition genes has so far been unsuccessful, presum- syndrome, we performed molecular and cytogenetic detection meth- ably because of genetic heterogeneity, low penetrance, and/or reces- ods simultaneously. sive/polygenic mechanisms. From the total number of families (1000), we identified 127 (12.7%) Material and Methods: With the aim of finding breast cancer predispo- families with fragile X syndrome, 21 of which also had other chromo- sition genes, we genotyped 6000 SNPs across the genome using a somal abnormalities. Among the consanguineous families, 8.2% were high-throughput technology (Illumina Linkage panel IV), in 41 BRCAX positive for fragile X syndrome. families from Spanish population. SNP data analysis has been per- Fragile X syndrome accounts for ¼ of X-linked mental retardation cas- formed using the new version of Merlin (MERLIN v.0.10.2) to model es, therefore one could assume that up to 30% of the families in our marker-marker linkage disequilibrium in order to avoid artefacts due population with the autosomal recessive mental retardation (ARMR) to LD among SNPs. pattern of inheritance could contribute to X-linked mental retardation. Results: These data analysis have allowed us to identify two regions Our findings clearly demonstrate that the genetic counselor should rule with suggestive linkage (Dominant Parametric LOD score ~ 2.3, alpha out the X-linked gene in ARMR inheritance as part of the routine diag- ~0.3) in chromosomes 3q and 6q, and one region with complete link- nostic protocol. age (Dominant Parametric LOD score > 3.2, alpha ~0.5) in chromo- some 21q. In order to confirm these regions, and narrow them if pos- P0973. A PCR screening test for recurrent mutations associated sible, we are genotyping 2 cM density microsatellite map within them. to X linked mental retardation FRAXA / FRAXE / ARX / PQBP1 M. Fradin1, E. Scherrer1, M. Cossée1,2, M. Antin1, E. Sistermans3, H. Dollfus2,4, P0971. Cardiovascular symptoms associated with mutations in J. Mandel1,2, V. Biancalana1,2; the genes encoding fibrillin-1 (FBN1) and transforming growth 1Laboratoire de Diagnostic Genetique, Faculte de Medecine-CHRU, Stras- factor beta receptor type II (TGFBR2) bourg, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, EA3949, Faculté de Mé- S. Waldmüller1, M. Müller1, H. Warnecke2, W. Rees2, W. Schöls3, G. Walter- decine et Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France, 3Department of Human busch4, J. Ennker5, T. Scheffold1; Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Neth- 1University of Witten Herdecke, Dortmund, Germany, 2Heart Centre Osnabrück- erlands, 44. Service de génétique médicale, fédération de génétique, Hôpitaux Bad Rothenfelde, Bad Rothenfelde, Germany, 3Heart Centre Duisburg, Duis- Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. burg, Germany, 4St.-Johannes-Hospital Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany, 5Heart This study presents molecular investigation of recurrent mutations Centre Lahr/Baden, Lahr (Baden), Germany. associated to 4 syndromes presenting with mental retardation : CGG Objectives: Mutations in the genes encoding fibrillin-1 (FBN1) and expansion in exon 1 of FMR1 gene for Fragile X syndrome (FRAXA), transforming growth factor beta receptor type II (TGFBR2) are known CCG expansion in FMR2 gene for FRAXE mental retardation syn- causes of Marfan syndrome (MFS) and related disorders. The objec- drome, c.428_451dup24 and c.333_334ins(GCG)7 in exon 2 of Arista- tive of the present study was to assess whether the type of mutation is less related X gene (ARX) and insertions/deletions frameshift muta- linked to a particular clinical subtype of the cardiovascular condition. tions in exon 4 of PQBP1 gene. The aims of the underlying study were Methods: The genetic and clinical records of 36 patients referred to to validate the FRAXA PCR screening on different genotypes of FMR1 us for molecular genetic diagnosis were reviewed. The frequency of a gene including rare patients who are mosaic for a full mutation and an number of clinical signs was determined for the following three groups allele in the normal range, to estimate the prevalence of FRAXE, ARX of patients: 1. carriers of a FBN1 mutation that affects a Ca2+-binding and PQBP1 syndromes among individuals referred for FRAXA testing epidermal growth factor-like domain (cbEGF); 2. carriers of a mutation and eventually to enlarge the clinical phenotype of ARX and PQBP1 associated with a premature termination codon, PTC, in FBN1; 3. indi- syndromes. viduals with no mutation detected in either FBN1 or TGFBR2. We have first validated our protocol on well defined samples with the Results: Throughout the study cohort, the incidence of aortic dissec- recurrent genes mutations and have used it for the diagnostic evalua- tions per se did not depend on the type of mutation. However, we found tion of 624 male and 283 female probands, including 15 affected sib- that mutations affecting the calcium-binding epidermal growth factor- pairs, combined with a retrospective study of 172 males known to be like domain were more frequently associated with a dissection of distal normal by southern blotting at FRAXA locus. In the male group we parts of the aorta than mutations that lead to a premature termination have identified one PQBP1 mutation in two brothers and no FRAXE codon (χ2: p=0.013), suggesting that the spatio-temporal pattern of expansion or ARX duplication. FRAXA full mutation was identified in 10 1 vascular deterioration may vary with the type of mutation. male and 4 female patients. In frame deleting variations were detected Conclusion: Routine genetic testing of patients with suspected MFS or in both ARX exon 2 and PQBP1 exon 4, as well as duplication in ARX thoracic aortic aneurysms/dissections could provide further insight into gene that are likely to be non pathogenic. genotype/phenotype correllations related to aortic dissection. The test can be used for performing diagnoses, postnatal and prena- tal. P0972. Fragile X syndrome screening in families with consanguineous and nonconsanguineous marriages in the P0974. Sub-Components of Event Related Potentials (ERP) Iranian population Associated with Polymorphisms in Glutamate, GABA and S. S. Abedini1, K. Kahrizi1, R. Kariminejad2, V. Hadavi2, F. Behjati1, N. Man- Dopamine Neurotransmitter Receptors soorian2, N. Nikzat1, S. Esmaeeli Nieh3, S. Banihashemi1, S. N. Almadani2, F. C. Beyazyurek1,2, A. Ademoğlu1, Y. K. Ergen3, B. Umay2, T. Demiralp3; Afroozan2, Y. Shafeghati1, A. Tzschach3, A. Kuss3, H. H. Ropers3, H. Najmaba- 1Bosphorus University, Biomedical Engineering Institute, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Is- di1,2; tanbul Memorial Hospital Reproductive Genetics Laboratory, Istanbul, Turkey, 1Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 3Istanbul University Faculty of Medicine, Physiology Department, Istanbul, Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology Turkey. and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Max Planck Institute for Event related potentials (ERPs) reflect perceptual and cognitive pro- Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. cesses and therefore provide an electrophysiological window on to Fragile X syndrome is the most common form of inherited mental retar- brain function during cognition. P300 component as well as spectral dation (MR). It is caused by the expansion of CGG triplet repeats in the components of ERPs is highly heritable. Potential candidates for the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene. Normal individuals have genetic determinants of ERPs are genes encoding several most im- <50 CGG repeats and permutation carriers have 50-200 repeats, but portant neurotransmitter receptors. In this study, we aimed to identify affected individuals with full mutation have over 200 repeats, which are associations of functional polymorphisms of genes encoding glutamate generally hypermethylated. The objective of this study was to screen receptor 2A subunit, (NMDAR2A), GABA receptor gamma-2 subunit for and compare the frequency of fragile X syndrome in families afflict- (GABRG2) and dopamine receptor D2 subunit (DRD2) with auditory ed with MR having consanguineous and nonconsanguineous parents. ERPs. EEG recordings and genetic analysis of 72 Turkish male healthy We examined a total of 1000 families afflicted with MR that had been volunteers were performed in this study. Groups were formed accord- referred to the Genetics Research Center (GRC) and Kariminejad- ing to their polymorphism types for each of the three neurotransmitter Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center. Of these, 558 families had receptors. Three cognitive paradigms were designed to generate audi-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 20 tory ERPs. ERP recordings of each polymorphic group were analyzed P0977. Genetic polymorphisms in metabolizing genes and in the time domain by measuring P300 amplitude and latency, and susceptibility to childhood leukemia in the Russian population. furthermore, in the time-frequency domain by decomposition of ERP T. V. Nasedkina1, O. A. Gra1, O. V. Makarova2, Z. M. Kozhekbaeva1, A. S. Glo- signals by using wavelet transform with analysis of variance (ANOVA). tov3, E. V. Samochatova2; Results provide evidence of strong effect of GABRG2 polymorphism 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Mos- with ERP characteristics both in time domain and in time-frequency cow, Russian Federation, 2Federal Clinical Research Center of Pediatric Oncol- domain. The effects of NMDAR2A and DRD2 polymorphisms are less ogy/Hematology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and significant on P300 wave. However, time-frequency decomposition of Gynecology, Russian Academy of Medical Science, St.Petersburg, Russian ERP data showed other effects could be observed in specific frequen- Federation. cy bands of all three polymorphisms that were not reflected in the time- Genetic polymorphisms in metabolizing genes have been reported to domain representation of the data. The results of this study show that be individually associated with increased susceptibility to childhood extended analyses on the correlations of genetic differences among leukemia. A case-control study including 332 patients with Acute Lym- normal population on electrophysiological parameters may extend our phoblastic Leukemia (ALL), 71 patients with Acute myelogeneous leu- view on the genetic basis of cognitive activities. kemia (AML) and 490 healthy individuals was conducted. All patients were 0-18 years old, all controls were 18-34 years old and so failed the P0975. GDAP1 gene mutation study among four Iranian families; possibility to develop childhood leukemia. The polymorphic variants of Axonal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 4 disease genes CYP1A1 (4887C>A, 4889A>G, 6235T>C), CYP2D6 (1934G>A, M. Rostami1, M. Dehghan Manshadi1, T. Majidizadeh1, s. Seyedhasani1, r. 2637delA), GSTT1 (deletion), GSTM1 (deletion), MTHFR (677C>T, mirfakhraei1, M. Ebrahimi2, M. houshmand1; 1298A>C), MTRR (66A>G), NQO1 (609C>T), CYP2C9 (430C>T, 1National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- 1075C>T), CYP2C19 (681G>A) and NAT2 (341T>C, 481C>T, lamic Republic of Iran, 2special medical center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 590G>A, 857G>A) have been studied using allele-specific hybridiza- Autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease (CMT4) is a tion with Pharmagen-biochip (EIMB). We found that “rapid acetylator” complex group of severe childhood motor and sensory neuropathies, NAT2 genotype 341T/T,481C/C,590G/G, as well as combination of a characterized by an early age of onset with rapidly progressive dis- “rapid acetylator” NAT2 genotype with “null” GSTT1 genotype, “null” tal limb weakness and atrophy. CMT disease caused by mutations in GSTM1 genotype and double “null” GSTT1/GSTM1 genotype more the ganglioside induced differentiation-associated protein 1 (GDAP1) frequently occurred in patients than in population control and this dif- gene is a a severe autosomal recessive neuropathy originally reported ference is statistically significant. Also polymorphic variant CYP1A1 in families with either demyelinating CMT4A neuropathy or axonal neu- *1/*2A was found to be more frequent among children with relapse ropathy with vocal cord paresis, which maps to the CMT4A locus on comparing with primary patients (OR = 2.11, p = 0.0291), while GSTT1 chromosome 8q21.1 “null” genotype was less frequent among relapsed patients (OR = 0.55, we studied four families with 5 affected patients. Significant evidence p = 0.0265). Our findings suggest that polymorphic variants of GSTT1, for linkage was found for several markers from chromosome 8q GSTM1, NAT2 genes may consider as risk factors modulated the sus- (D8S279, D8S551, D8S1474, D8S1289, ceptibility to leukemia among children in Russia, while polymorphic and D8S84). variants of CYP1A1, NAT2, GSTT1, GSTM1 genes may have an im- Following an initial indication for linkage of the family to the CMT4A pact on clinical outcome. locus on chromosome 8, we sequenced the Ganglioside-induced dif- The work was supported by the Basic Foundation for Russian Science ferentiation-associated protein 1 (GDAP1) gene whose genomic struc- (project 06-04-49771) ture contains six exons, and identified mutation. We conclude that a novel GDAP1 mutation is associated with AR-CMT. P0978. Effect of 5HTT genetic polymorphism on agression in atheletes P0976. Genome wide linkage of a large serbian family with M. Timofeeva1, N. Maluchenko1, A. Tonevitsky2; GEFS+ 1Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian Research F. Annesi1, G. Provenzano1, S. Carrideo1, A. J. Ristic2, S. Jankovic2, G. Maksi- Institute of Sport and Physical Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. movic2, B. Gnjatovic2, I. Petrovic2, N. Vojvodic2, D. Sokic2, A. Gambardella1,3, G. Genetic variations of serotonin transporter gene (5HTT) are closely re- Annesi1; lated with human adaptive ability to control emotion and very attractive 1National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, in investigation of athletes whose life is accompanied by high emotion- Clinical Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute of Neurology, University al pressure. Present study investigated the effect of genetic polymor- Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. phism of 5HTT on aggression of athletes, 86 synchronized swimmers Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) is a familial and 83 non-trained female controls were genotyped. 73 (age 8-18) epilepsy syndrome characterized by heterogeneous phenotypes in- of synchronized swimmers are actively engaged in competition, 64 of cluding febrile seizures (FS), FS+ in which children had seizures with them participated in psychological testing of aggression (Buss-Durkee fever in early childhood that continued beyond age 6 years, or were as- Hostility Inventory). Analysis of primary of this test reveals, that Indirect sociated with afebrile tonic-clonic seizures, and FS+ with other types of Hostility is increased with both short alleles SS compared with other generalized (absence, myoclonic, or atonic) or partial seizures. GEFS+ groups (SL and LL). is an autosomal dominant disorder with incomplete penetrance. Muta- Furthermore, it was shown that the frequency of 5HTT alleles in groups tions in the SCN1B gene on 19q13 cause GEFS+ type 1. Mutations in of elite athletes of different kind of specialization are differ between the SCN1A gene on 2q24 cause GEFS+ type 2. Mutations in the GA- kind of sport and between athletes and control group. Interrelation of BRG2 gene on 5q31.1-q33.1 cause GEFS+ type 3. GEFS+ type 4 has 5HTT genotype, aggressiveness and athletic successfulness are vig- been mapped to chromosome 2p24. Mutations in the GABRD gene orously discussed. can cause GEFS+ type 5. Mutations in the SCN2A gene causes febrile seizures associated with afebrile seizures. Recently, a novel FS locus P0979. Genome-wide association mapping of the QT-interval in a was reported on chromosome 21q22 in a family with 13 individuals 500k scan: confirmation of the NOS1AP locus and identification affected by FS and afebrile seizures. We identified a large multigen- of a spectrum of additional QTLs erational GEFS+ Serbian family with 20 affected individuals and we A. Pfeufer1, M. Akyol1, M. F. Sinner2, S. Perz3, C. Gieger3, B. M. Beckmann2, M. performed genetic linkage analysis for exclusion of known candidate Hinterseer2, H. Prucha2, T. Illig3, H. E. Wichmann3, S. Kääb2, T. Meitinger1; genes and loci. Subsequently, we conducted a genome wide scan by 1TU Munich, Munich, Germany, 2LMU Munich, Munich, Germany, 3GSF Natio- the Linkage Mapping set version 2.5 (Applied Biosystems) genotyping nal Research Center, Neuherberg, Germany. 382 microsatellite markers located at on average of 10cM distance Background: The electrocardiographic QT-interval is a normally distrib- thoughout the genome. We used a dominant genetic model with 0.90 uted quantitative trait in the general population with over 30% heritabil- penetrance and a disease allele frequency of 0.001. Genome scan ity, which is associated with sudden cardiac death. In a previous100k revealed linkage at some chromosomal loci and analysis of implicated scan we have identified a QTL for QT-interval at the NOS1AP gene regions is in progress. which explained approximately 1,5% of trait variance. Aim: To comprehensively map the spectrum of QTLs we now under-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 21 took a 500k genome-wide scan in a larger sample of individuals. P0982. No modifier effect of the Glu298Asp polymorphism of Method: From the population-based KORA S3 survey 1,644 randomly ENOS gene in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease selected individuals were genotyped on Affymetrix 500k arrays. Asso- N. Stefanakis1, E. Tsaliki1, M. Vasilakou1, P. Zirogiannis2, S. Trigonis2, K. M. ciation was calculated using single and multi-marker tests under addi- Lamnissou1; tive, dominant and recessive models adjusting for covariates known to 1Department of Biology, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Nephrology, explain parts of QT variance. “G.Gennimatas” Hospital, Athens, Greece. Results: In the 500k dataset the QTL at the NOS1AP gene gave a Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is one of the clear unmistakably association signal. 60 SNPs throughout a 500kb most common monogenic hereditary diseases. It is characterized by genomic region were associated with significance levels down to 1e- a substantial variability in the severity of renal phenotype, primary as- 7.5. In addition we identified 55 additional QTLs between 1 and 5 sessed by the age at end - stage renal disease (ESRD). The role of SNPs in size with significance levels smaller 1e-5. Five of these QTLs modifier genes has been shown in different hereditary diseases, in- were confirmed in a n=1.200 replication sample. cluding ADPKD. ENOS, the gene coding for the endothelial nitric oxide Conclusions: The QTL at the NOS1AP gene was confirmed as the synthase is considered to have modifier effect in ADPKD. In this study single most significant signal from a 500k-genomewide scan. Its strong we investigated the influence of one of the most studied polymor- signal is due to its high allele frequency (MAF=0.35), 500kb long LD phisms of ENOS gene, the Glu298Asp polymorphism, on the age at relationship and relatively strong effect size. Newly identified QTLs dis- ESRD. We analysed a total of 100 ADPKD unrelated patients and 104 play a spectrum of different effect sizes, allele frequencies, surround- healthy cohorts from Greece. The frequencies of the three genotypes ing LD patterns and coverage by genotyping arrays, which in combina- GG, GT, TT of the Glu298Asp polymorphism were 0.48, 0.38, 0.14, tion decreased their detection probability and explains why they went respectively in the group of patients and 0.47, 0.46, 0.075, respec- undetected in the previous association scan. tively, in the control group. Analysis of the dada regarding progression to ESRD within 5 years or after more than 5 years following clinical P0980. Gestational hypertensive disorders, newborn birth weight diagnosis of ADPKD provided no evidence of statistical difference. In and maternal IGF2/ApaI and H19/RsaI polymorphisms contrast to some earlier studies our results do not support that the F. M. Araujo1, M. R. Soares1, M. V. M. Gomes1, G. Duarte1, C. R. Marcondes1,2, frequent of Glu298Asp polymorphism of ENOS is associated with a 5 P. A. Vozzi1, R. B. Lôbo1, E. S. Ramos1; year lower mean age at ESRD in this subset of ADPKD patients. 1University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2Empresa Brasileira de Pes- quisa Agropecuária, Belem, Brazil. P0983. Glucocerebrosidase gene mutations are associated to Gestational hypertensive disorders are among the leading causes of Parkinson’s disease in a population from Southern Italy maternal death. Genomic imprinting has an important role in fetopla- E. V. De Marco, F. E. Rocca, P. Tarantino, G. Provenzano, D. Civitelli, S. Carri- cental development. Polymorphism of the imprinted IGF2 gene has deo, I. C. Cirò candiano, I. C. Cirò Candiano, F. Annesi, G. Nicoletti, G. Annesi; been associated with obesity and cardiovascular risk predisposition. Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), The maternally expressed H19 gene does not code for a protein, but Italy. the RNA has growth suppressing functions. In the present study, the Recent studies have reported clinical, neuropathological and genetic association among gestational hypertensive disorders, newborn birth associations between Parkinson’s disease PD) and Gaucher’s dis- weight (NBW) and maternal IGF2/ApaI and H19/RsaI genotypes were ease (GD), an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in investigated. Blood samples of 235 pregnant women [56 with pre- the GBA gene, coding for the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase. eclampsia or eclampsia (PE/E); 40 with gestational hypertension (GH); Screenings for GBA mutations in PD subjects belonging to different 34 with chronic arterial hypertension (CH); and 105 healthy controls] populations have suggested that heterozygosity may be a susceptibil- were obtained for DNA extraction, PCR and genotyping. Statistical ity factor predisposing to PD. analyses were performed by Qui-square, G, Kolmogorov-Smirnov and In order to elucidate the role of the GBA gene in PD in our population Kruskal-Wallis Nonparametric Tests. There was no influence of „skin we screened 401 PD patients coming from Calabria (Southern Italy) color”. Around 80% of the patients presented at least one copy of the for the two most frequent mutations, N370S and L444P. Forty-nine pa- alleles B (H19) and G (IGF2), concomitantly. Although the IGF2 and tients (12,2%) were familial. A control group consisting of 495 subjects H19 genotypes were not significantly associated with gestational hy- originating from the same geographical area of the patients was used pertensive disorders and/or NBW, a tendency for higher birth weight in to determine the mutation frequency in the general population. Geno- newborns of mothers with AA (IGF2) genotype [mean = 3176g versus typing was performed by using PCR amplification followed by restric- 2939g (AG) and 2772g (GG)] was observed. To our knowledge, this tion enzyme digestion with XhoI for the N370S substitution and NciI is the first study regarding the influence of H19/RsaI polymorphism in for the L444P substitution. Mutation frequencies in cases and controls hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. were compared using Fisher’s exact test. We found 11 patients (2.7%) carried a heterozygous mutant GBA al- P0981. GJB2 mutations in Croatian patients with non-syndromic lele: three of them had the N370S mutation and eight had the L444P hearing loss mutation. In the control group 1 subject (0.5%) carried a heterozy- I. Sansović1, I. Barišić1, J. Pavelić2; gous L444P mutation. These distributions are significantly different 1Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Department of Paediatrics, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Rud- (p=0.0018). jer Bošković Institute, Division of Molecular Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia. This study was performed on the most consistent PD group so far in- Mutations in GJB2 (connexin 26) gene represent a major cause of pre- vestigated for GBA mutations, revealing a significant association with lingual non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) worldwide. Among them, the disease. Our results thus contribute to identify genetic factors influ- 35delG mutation accounts for approximately 70% of all GJB2 mutant encing PD susceptibility in our population. alleles in most European populations. The aim of the study was to evaluate the frequency and type of muta- P0984. Growth hormone receptor codon 440 G/T polymorphism tions in the exon 2 of GJB2 gene and frequency of (GJB6-D13S1830)del is associated with first-year growth response in patients with in GJB6 gene in 48 patients with recessive NSHL from Croatia. GHD The coding region of the GJB2 gene was sequenced and the GJB6 F. Tsai1,2, L. Wan1, C. Tsai3, C. Lee4; deletion was analyzed by two specific PCR reactions. 1Department of Medical Genetics ,China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, A half (26/48 or 54%) of our patients presented with one or two muta- Taiwan, 2College of Chinese Medicine,China Medical University, Taichung, tions in the GJB2 gene. Among 50 mutated chromosomes found in Taiwan, 3Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Asia University, patient with NSHL, 41 (82%) carried 35delG mutation. Other common Taichung, Taiwan, 4Department of Neurology,China Medical University Hospital, mutations - L90P, 313del14, V37I and W24X, accounted for 3.1% - Taichung, Taiwan. 1.0% of analyzed chromosomes. We have also found a novel variant, Context: GH replacement is an effective therapy for GH deficient (GHD) -24A>C, reported here for the first time. GJB6 deletion was not found children. However, growth velocity post-GH replacement therapy var- in our tested subjects. The high mutation rate (50/96 or 52%) in the ies between individuals. coding region of the GJB2 gene indicates the importance of the GJB2 Objective: To investigate possible influences of gene polymorphisms gene testing in Croatian patients with recessive NSHL. on the growth response to GH in GHD children.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 22 Setting: The study was conducted at the China Medical University The aim of this study was to explore the role of variants of the AL- Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. OX5AP as possible susceptibility factors for coronary artery disease Design: A retrospective observational study. (CAD) and myocardial infarction (MI) in patients with or without angio- Patients: A total of 100 GHD children who underwent GH therapy for graphically proven CAD. A total of 1,431 patients with or without angio- one year were recruited. graphically documented CAD were examined simultaneously for sev- Interventions: PCR-RFLP (restriction fragment length polymorphism) en ALOX5AP SNPs, allowing reconstruction of the at-risk haplotypes and PCR experiments were carried out to detect single nucleotide (HapA and HapB) previously identified in the Icelandic and British pop- polymorphisms (SNPs) in the following genes: growth hormone recep- ulations (Nat Genet 2004;36:233-239; Am J Hum Genet 2005;76:505- tor (GHR), Janus-activated kinase 2 (JAK2), signal transducers and 509). Using a haplotype-based approach, HapA was not associated activators of transcription-5a (STAT-5a), STAT-5b, suppressor of cy- with either CAD or MI. On the other hand, HapB and another haplotype tokine signaling-2 (SOCS-2), Insulin Growth Factor-1 (IGF-1), insulin- within the same region (that we named HapC) were significantly more like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3), and acid-labile subunit represented in CAD versus CAD-free patients, and these associations (ALS). We then evaluated the correlations among these gene poly- remained significant after adjustment for traditional cardiovascular risk morphisms with various parameters (gender, age, bone age, parents’ factors by logistic regression (HapB: OR 1.67, 95% CI 1.04 to 2.67; heights, serum GH concentration, birth weight) on first year growth P=0.032; HapC: OR 2.41, 95% CI 1.09 to 5.32; P=0.030). No differ- velocity. ence in haplotype distributions was observed between CAD subjects Main Outcome Measure: Growth velocity was measured every two with or without a previously documented MI. This study points out a months for a total of 12 months. possible role of ALOX5AP in the development of the atheroma rather Results: GHR codon 440 G/T was the only polymorphism of the GHR than in its late thrombotic complications such as MI. gene which correlated with increased growth velocity. The G homozy- gote was associated with low growth velocity, the G/T heterozygote P0987. The genetic background of β+ IVSI-6: a primary step, corresponded with moderate growth velocity and the T homozygote in determining the origin and spread of β-globin mutations in correlated with high growth velocity. The GHR codon 440 T allele Romania. showed higher transcriptional activity and stronger Stat5 Tyr694 phos- L. Cherry1, C. Calo2, L. Dan1, R. Talmaci1,3, D. Coriu4, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apos- phorylation. tol1, M. Stavarachi1, D. Usurelu1, L. Zahed5, L. Gavrila1; Conclusion: The GHR codon 440 T allele is associated with the thera- 1University of Bucharest,, Bucharest, Romania, 2University of Cagliari, Monser- peutic efficacy of GH replacement therapy. rato, Italy, 3University of Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 4Fundeni Clinical Insti- tute, Bucharest, Romania, 5American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon. P0985. Exceptional mosaicism in grandpaternal haemophilia Romania belongs to a low-prevalence area of beta-thalassemia. In the patient in a family with isolated haemophilia A last few years we have identified the most frequent causative muta- C. Costa1,2, A. Frances3, S. Letourneau1, P. Comteville1, E. Girodon-Boulan- tions of beta-thalassemia in the Romanian population. To elucidate the det1,2, M. Goossens1,2; origin and the flow of these mutated alleles, we have started our work, 1AP-HP Groupe Henri-Mondor-Chenevier, Laboratoire de Génétique Molécu- by studying one of the most frequent mutations: the β+ IVSI-6 which laire, Créteil, France, 2INSERM U841, IMRB Dept Génétique, Créteil, France, has the highest frequency at homozygous state among the other mu- 3Hôpital Font-Pré, Génétique Médicale, Toulon, France. tations found in Romania. Seven restriction fragment polymorphisms About one third of cases of haemophilia have no family history of the (RFLP) haplotype have been determined in a sample including ho- disorder and 20% are thought to be due to a new mutation. A propor- mozygous IVSI-6 patients and carriers. Our study revealed a strong tion of such mutations occurs in a single germ cell but some, occurring linkage of IVSI-6 to haplotype VI (-++---+) 70%, relative to VII (+-----+) during early embryogenesis produce a germline or somatic mosaic. In 18% and V (+----+-) 12%. This result confirms what was found in the haemophilia somatic mosaicism is generally observed in women. Only Mediterranean countries regarding the association of β+-IVSI-6 muta- 3 cases have been reported in grandfathers. tion to haplotype VI, the presence of haplotype V seems to demon- We report here a case of somatic mosaicism in the asymptomatic strate the gene flow between Romania and Bulgaria. grandfather of a male patient with a severe haemophilia A. The mu- The diversity of the β+-IVSI-6 genetic backgrounds found in Romania tation identified in the proband was found in the mother and her sis- reinforces the picture of the β-globin gene cluster as highly dynamic. ter, suggesting the grandmother was a carrier. This mutation was not On the other hand this diversity highlighted the old age characterizing found in her leucocytes, buccal and uroepithelial cells, eliminating so- the β-thalassemia alleles. Furthermore this study should be continued matic mosaicism. Haplotypes analysis using intragenic and extragenic to examine normal individuals and all the thalassemia alleles to deter- markers allowed to identify the origin of the deleterious allele in the mine the relationships between Romanian and neighboring popula- grandfather. Analysis of his leucocytes, buccal and uroepithelial cells tions. by PCR-sequencing revealed the presence of the allele with a pro- Funding from the European Commission for the „eInfrastructure for portion estimated between 15-20%. Somatic mosaicism, varies from Thalassaemia Research Network“, Coordination Action - Contract no 0.2 to 25%, is not always detected with conventional methods. This 026539 - for which this study was partially funded is gratefully acknowl- requires mutation-enrichment procedures that are not used during edged. routine tests analysis. Analysis with denaturing-high-liquid-pressure- chromatography, which is now widely used, increases the proportion P0988. Mapping Genes Influencing Human Stature - Where are of allele in our patient. We? This report suggests that somatic mosaicism is probably underesti- S. Sammalisto1, M. Perola1,2, L. Peltonen1,2; mated and points to the need of using methods with higher sensitivity 1Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, in such sporadic cases and if necessary, to perform linkage analysis to Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Helsinki, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- identify the origin of the deleterious allele. ment of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland. Human stature is a highly heritable complex trait which is oligo- or P0986. Association study of ALOX5AP gene variants with the polygenic in nature. Despite many genome-wide efforts attempting to risk of coronary artery disease. localize genes influencing stature findings have been difficult to repli- E. Trabetti1, U. Cavallari1, G. Malerba1, M. Biscuola1, D. Girelli2, N. Martinelli2, cate and convincing evidence for quantitative trait loci (QTL) has been O. Olivieri2, F. Busti2, S. Friso2, F. Pizzolo2, R. Corrocher2, P. Pignatti1; sparse. 1Section of Biology and Genetics - Dept Mother & Child/Biol & Genet, Univ In order to facilitate the mapping of stature genes and prioritizing po- Verona, Italy, Verona, Italy, 2Dept Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Univ sitional candidate loci we have collected the results of the published Verona, Italy, Verona, Italy. genome-wide linkage studies on a publicly available web site www.ge- Leukotrienes are a group of proinflammatory lipid mediators that are nomeutwin.org/stature_gene_map.htm which is updated accordingly. implicated in the pathogenesis and progression of atherosclerosis. Ara- From these published results it seems likely there are multiple minor chidonate 5-Lipoxygenase-Activating Protein gene (ALOX5AP), which loci underlying the genetic background of human stature although con- encodes an essential regulator of the biosynthesis of the leukotriene verging evidence from multiple independent studies also suggests that A4, has been recently associated to the risk of thrombotic disease. some loci such as 3p, 6q, 7q and 9q probably harbour stature genes of Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 moderate to major effect. infection in Hong Kong Chinese population. We are coordinating two large multi-national collaborative stature gene Methods: We recruited 460 chronic HBV carriers and 87 individuals mapping efforts: 1) the GenomEUtwin and the 2) Marshfield Mamma- who had spontaneously recovered from HBV infection as evidenced lian Genotyping Service stature projects. Both studies include family by the presence of anti-HBs and anti-HBc antibodies. The SNP of IFN- data from multiple populations with genome-wide genotype data - the γ at +874 A/T at intron 1 at the 5’ end of a CA repeat microsatellite former containing 8.450 individuals from 3.817 families and the lat- sequence was detected using Genescan analysis. ter 11.149 individuals from 3.272 families. Using genome-wide link- Results: For the spontaneous recovered individuals, the genotype fre- age analyses we have localized multiple putative QTLs for stature on quencies were 54.0% for A/A, 39.1% for A/T and 6.9% for T/T. For the 2p, 2q, 3p, 3q, 8q, 9q, 10p, 11q, 20q and Xq25, some shared across chronic HBV carriers, the genotype frequencies were 72.8% for A/A, multiple populations. Data from further fine mapping analyses of these 24.6% for A/T and 2.6% for T/T. The A/A genotype was predominant in major loci will be presented. the chronic carriers (odd ratio=4.09, CI=1.35-12.4), and its frequency In line with analyses of other complex traits it has become obvious that was significantly higher than those with spontaneous recovery after these types of massive data sets are needed to provide solid evidence adjusting for age and gender (p<0.0001). for QTLs contributing to human stature. Conclusion: The polymorphism of IFN-γ gene at position +874 may confer susceptibility to persistent HBV infection. P0989. Modulation of HFE-hemochromatosis penetrance by the References: BMP2, BMP4 and HJV genes of the hepcidin regulation pathway 1. Rehermann B et al. (2005) Immunology of hepatitis B virus and J. Milet1,2, V. Dehais3, C. Bourgain1,2, A. M. Jouanolle3, M. Perrin4,5, J. Morcet5, hepatitis C virus infection. Nat Rev Immun. 5: 215-27 P. Brissot3,6, Y. Deugnier3,7, J. Mosser3,8; 2. Akpolat N et al. (2005) Relationship between serum cytokine lev- 1INSERM UMR_S535, Villejuif F-94817, France, 2Univ. Paris Sud, Villejuif els and histopathological changes of liver in patients with hepatitis B. F-94817, France, 3CHU, Rennes F-35033, France, 4Univ. Rennes 1, Rennes World J Gastroenterol. 11 (21):3260-3. F-35043, France, 5INSERM, CIC 0203, Rennes F-35033, France, 6INSERM, U522, Rennes F-35033, France, 7IFR 140, Rennes F-35033, France, 8CNRS, P0991. Detection of mutations in the C1 inhibitor gene: the UMR 6061, Rennes F-35043, France. confirmation by using different methods of molecular biology Most cases of genetic hemochromatosis (GH) are associated to the B. Ravcukova1, H. Grombirikova1, J. Nejedlik1, P. Kuklinek2, J. Litzman2, T. HFE C282Y/C282Y genotype in Caucasian populations. The biochem- Freiberger1; ical or clinical symptoms expressed by C282Y homozygotes are ex- 1Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic, tremely variable and only a few suffer from an overt disease. Several 2Dept. Clin Immunol. Allergol, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. studies have suggested that, in addition to environmental factors, a Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is an autosomal dominant disease with genetic component could explain a substantial part of this phenotypic incomplete penetrance that affects one in 10 000 -50 000 persons. It variation, though very few genetic factors have been identified so far. is characterised by quantitative or qualitative deficiency of C1 inhibitor The aim of the present study was to search for genes modifying hemo- (C1 inh) - the main control element of enzymatic activity of the first chromatosis penetrance in a large sample of C282Y homozygotes, us- component of complement cascade. Type I HAE (85% of all patients ing pre-therapeutic serum ferritin level as marker of hemochromatosis with HAE) is characterised by low antigenic and functional levels of C1 penetrance. We used a candidate gene approach and focused on 2 inh, type II HAE (15%) is defined by normal or elevated levels of C1 biologically relevant gene categories: genes involved in non HFE-GH inh with low functional activity. The C1 inhibitor (C1INH) gene maps (TfR2, Hamp, SLC40A1) and genes from the BMP hepcidin regulation to chromosome 11q12-q13.1. The large number of different mutations pathway (BMP 2, BMP4, HJV, Smad 1, Smad4 and Smad5). We also may have differential effects on HAE phenotype. However, most of considered the IL6 gene involved in the inflammation hepcidin regula- molecular defects causing low serum C1 inh level in type I HAE are tion pathway. poorly characterized. In this study, we focused on mutations causing A significant association between serum ferritin level and a SNP in the splicing defects which typically result in type I HAE. BMP2 genic region (rs235756, P=4.42 x 10-5) was detected. Mean Basically, we screened the C1INH gene for mutations by denaturing ferritin level adjusted for age and sex was 651.97 ng/ml among TT gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) in 33 unrelated patients. Maximal genotypes, 518.01 ng/ml in TC genotypes and 350.72 ng/ml in CC sensitivity was reached if different methods were used for detection genotypes. Testing the biologically relevant gene interactions along and confirmation of mutations, including sequencing and restriction the BMP regulation pathway, we detected a significant interactive ef- analysis. Using this approach, we detected four novel splice site mu- fect of BMP2 and HJV with a small additive effect of BMP4 on ferritin tations (g.14255g/a, g.4351-2a>g,g.4486delG, g.4487_4498del12) in level. flanking regions of exons 3, 4 and 7, respectively, in four families (12 All together, our results suggest that the HJV-BMP complex genes are %). Mutations that affect splice sites are supposed to reduce or abolish involved in the modulation of iron burden in C282Y homozygotes. normal splicing by either exon skipping or activation of cryptic splite sites. Inhibition of splicing was proved in one case. P0990. Association of Interferon-gamma (IFN-g) Polymorphisms Supported by grant IGA-MZ-CR #NR7921-3. with Susceptibility of Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) Infection in the Hong Kong Chinese P0992. Whole Genome Scan in a Maltese Family with a rare case W. Lee1, P. W. Lee1, W. H. Wong1, M. F. Yuen2, T. P. Poon3, Y. L. Lau1; of Hereditary Persistence of Fetal Hemoglobin 1Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Hong Kong Jockey Club J. Borg1, R. Galdies1,2, R. Schot3, A. Verkerk3, P. van der Spek3, P. Schembri Clinical Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Wismayer4, A. G. Fenech5, W. Cassar1,2, S. Bezzina Wettinger1,2, M. R. Carua- Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China, 2Department of Medicine, Hong na2, C. A. Scerri1,2, F. Grosveld6, S. Philipsen6, G. Patrinos6, A. E. Felice1,2; Kong Jockey Club Clinical Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China, 3Department of University of Malta, Msida, Malta, 2Thalassaemia and Molecular Genetics Clin- Surgery, Hong Kong Jockey Club Clinical Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Faculty ic, Division of Pathology, St’Lukes Hospital, Department of Health, G’Mangia, of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China. Malta, 3Erasmus Centre for Bioinformatics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Neth- Background: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is the most common erlands, 4Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Malta, Msida, cause of acute hepatitis and may progress to chronic liver disease, Malta, 5Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of including cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Host genetic Malta, Msida, Malta, 6Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The factors are important for this progression. Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) Netherlands. is a pro-inflammatory T-helper 1 (Th1) cytokine. It plays crucial roles Hereditary Persistence of Fetal Hemoglobin (HPFH) is an inherited in downregulation of HBV replication and its clearance.1 Serum IFN-γ condition resulting in high fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels in adults. levels were lower in the chronic hepatitis B patients than the normal Although this condition is caused by large deletions, removing large controls, supporting that IFN-γ is involved in the progression of HBV segments from the human β-globin cluster or point mutation within the infection.2 human γ-globin gene promoters, there have been few cases where the Objective: We aimed to determine whether a functional single nucleo- HbF-increasing genetic determinant is located outside the human β- tide polymorphism (SNP) of IFN-γ may affect the susceptibility of HBV globin locus, e.g. in chromosomes 6q22.3-q23.1, 8q and Xp22.2-22.3. Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 We here describe a Maltese family with high HbF levels and hetero- ily. The patient carried 47 repeats and onset was at age 44 years. cellular HbF distribution. The proband had 20% HbF [HbF/F-cells=9.9 Clinical manifestations included bradipsychism, mutism, dysarthrya, g/dL] and was homozygous for haplotype IX. Her two daughters had cognitive deterioration and coreic movements, as well as ataxic gait. 5.6% [HbF/F-cells=5.53 g/dL] and 8.8% [HbF/F-cells=6.13 g/dL] HbF He showed cortical atrophy. The likelihood of the patient’s ancestrallity respectively, and both bearing haplotypes III/IX, while all other family was estimated 97,4% European, 1,8 % Amerindian and 0,7% African. members carry normal HbF levels. Extensive molecular haplotyping We found also a CAG expansion (44 repeats) in the TBP gene in a and DNA sequencing across the β-globin locus excluded both point Portuguese patient with behavioural disturbances, epilepsy, aphasia, mutations and deletions associated with HPFH. The γ-globin chain ra- unbalance, and gait ataxia. tios of the family members with high HbF levels have been found to This work stresses the importance of performing the diagnosis of TBP be within the fetal ratio, i.e., 66/33. Whole genomic DNA of this family and HDL2 in patients with HD-like disease of various ethnical origins. has been done using the 250K Affymetrix GeneChip SNP Array and linkage analysis was performed using ALLEGRO software. Genomic P0995. Polymorphic variation at P2X receptor genes is regions with increased LOD scores will be subsequently analyzed by a associated with differences in blood pressure genomic scanning approach to narrow down on significant areas of the T. Rahman, J. P. Doza, P. J. Avery, B. Keavney; genome that are likely candidates for the HPFH phenotype. Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. Objectives: Large family based association study was performed to P0993. HPLC a new technology for trinucleotide diseases examine the association of genetic variation in P2X4, P2X6 and P2X7 analysis genes and hypertension. M. Skrzypczak, M. Mierzejewski, W. Heinritz, U. Froster; Background: Hypertension is one of the major risk factors for cardio- Institute of Human Genetics, Leipzig, Germany. vascular diseases. Blood pressure is a quantitative trait clustered in High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) has proved to be families with heritability estimated between 30-60%. However, identi- time saving and effective screening method for identifying point muta- fication of the genes responsible for this condition has proved difficult. tions and sequence variations. Trinucleotide expansions are an im- Purinergic receptors are ligand-gated ion channels activated by ATP. portant mutational form specifically in neurogenerative disorders. The They were analysed as candidate genes for hypertension due to their diagnostic is impaired by the dynamic character of mutation. Thus larg- broad range of expression and their implication in ion exchange, renal er expansions require specific and mostly time consuming methods function and neural impulse transmission. for identification, such fragments length analysis by electrophoresis Methods: 1428 individuals from 248 families ascertained via a proband or Southern blot. We tested the effectives and reliability of HPLC for with hypertension were studied. Blood pressure was measured using diagnosis in trinucleotide repeats disorder. Huntington Disease is an 24h ambulatory monitoring. 28 TagSNPs were selected for analysis autosomal dominantly inherited neuropsychiatric disorder caused by in the region of the gene and 15kb upstream and downstream us- an unstable expansion of CAG repeats. The number of CAG in normal ing the HapMap data for population of European decent ( r2>0.8 and individuals varies up to 35. In affected patients the expanded allele MAF≥0.5). SNPs were genotyped on a Sequenom MassArray platform contains 40 or more repeats. The exact determination of both alleles and PCR-RFLP. Genotypes were checked for errors and quantitative on the molecular level is very important for clinical diagnosis and prog- analysis was performed using QTDT software. nosis. We have analyzed 22 patients - clinically diagnosed with HD Results: Common haplotype frequencies obtained were similar to the - from the DNA bank of the Institute of Human Genetics, University of HapMap data. A highly significant association was observed between Leipzig. Following a novel PCR protocol, fragments enclosing the CAG genotypes at the rs591874 polymorphism and blood pressure. Other repeat region were sized using HPLC in comparison to a 20 bp DNA significant results are listed in the table. standard. In order to evaluate the HPLC against one of the classical Office Day Night Day Night Gene SNP methods, the lengths of fragments were determined using ABI Prism®. SystolicDiastolicPulseSystolicDiastolicPulseSystolicDiastolicPulse HR HR Our results indicated highest accuracy and consistency of the data rs591874 0.019 0.006 0.022 0.004 0.035 0.002 0.008 obtained with the HPLC method between 60-280 bp (± 2 CAG). We P2X7 conclude that HPLC can be used as a sensitive and efficient alterna- rs656612 0.007 tive diagnostic method to conventional techniques for fragment length P2X4 rs2303998 0.016 0.022 0.040 measuring in Huntington Disease. rs9625334 0.025 P0994. Huntington disease-like phenotype due to trinucleotide rs8141816 0.016 0.032 expansions in the /TBP/ (SCA17) and /JPH3/ (HDL2) genes in Caucasian patients P2X6 rs2255371 0.032 0.034 C. S. Santos1, P. Magalhães1, S. D. J. Pena2, L. Jardim3, J. Sequeiros1,4; rs2277838 0.04 0.02 1IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal, 2Departamento de Bioquímica e Imunologia, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo rs2541953 0.049 Horizonte, Brazil, 3Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4ICBAS-Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar, Porto, Portugal. Conclusions: The present results suggest that genetic variation at purinergic receptor Huntington disease (HD) (OMIM 143100) is an autosomal dominant genes may contribute to variations in blood pressure. disorder of the central nervous system. It is clinically characterized by involuntary choreic movements, progressive motor impairment, cogni- P0996. Association studies of obesity and high blood pressure tive decline and behavioural anomalies. HD is caused by the expan- to variants of the genes LEP, LEPR, ADRB2, PPARG, PLIN, sion of a (CAG) tract within the first exon of the HD gene (4p16.3). RETN, INSIG2, ACE, eNOS, GNB and AGT in afro-derived n This mutation accounts for 54,6% (124/227) of the cases received for Brazilian populations confirmation or exclusion of HD at our lab, in the last 3 years. C. B. Angeli1, L. Kimura1, M. B. M. Auricchio1, J. Vicente2, A. C. Pereira3, N. H. We selected 93 patients without HD mutation but presenting clinical Cotrim1, R. C. Mingroni-Netto1; features resembling HD (Huntington-like patients), and analysed them 1Instituto de Biociências - USP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Instituto da Criança FMUSP, for mutations on previously described HD-like genes: an extra octa- São Paulo, Brazil, 3Instituto do Coração - INCOR, São Paulo, Brazil. peptide repeat (192 bp) in the PRNP gene (HDL1); a CAG/CTG repeat Obesity and hypertension are common diseases determined by ge- in the Junctophilin-3 gene (HDL2); and CAG expansion in two domi- netic as well as environmental factors. Many genes have been inves- nant SCAs which may also have some overlapping symptoms with HD tigated as possible candidates to these conditions in different popula- (DRPLA and TBP/SCA17). Age at onset was 45,6 ±19,1 years, ranging tions, but studies in African-derived populations are rare. Quilombos from onset in childhood up to age 83 years. are rural Brazilian populations founded by runaway or abandoned Af- Expansion of CAG repeat in ATN1 gene (DRPLA), as well as, the oc- rican slaves. They have remained partially isolated until recently, thus tapeptide insertion on PRNP gene (HDL1) were excluded in all our representing an interesting model for the study of complex diseases. patients. We report the results we obtained in a sample of 528 adult individuals, We found a CAG/CTG expansion in the HDL2 locus in a Brazilian fam- living in remnants of Quilombos, in which we investigated the pos-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 sible association of obesity and hypertension with polymorphic mark- P0999. IL-23 receptor 3’UTR C2370A variant in inflammatory ers. Polymorphisms in the genes LEP, LEPR, ADRB2, PPARG, PLIN, bowel disease: differential profile in Crohn’s disease and RETN, INSIG2, ACE, eNOS, GNB3 and AGT were investigated in all ulcerative colitis subjects in order to assess their effect on BMI (Body Mass Index) and L. Magyari, B. Faragó, E. Sáfrány, V. Csöngei, K. Horvatovich, L. Járomi, C. blood pressure. Blood pressure and obesity related phenotypes were Sipeky, B. Melegh; analyzed both as dichotomous and continuous variables, adjusting for Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, other covariates such as age and gender. No significant associations Pécs, Hungary. were detected between these genetic polymorphisms and BMI. A sig- Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are two main clinical nificant association was found between homozygosis CC at the poly- presentations of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The pathogenesis morphism C825T in the GNB3 gene and hypertension in women (p < of IBD is complex and both environmental and genetic factors contrib- 0,001). Regression analyses showed that systolic blood pressure is ute to its etiology. The IL-23 receptor (IL23R) gene on chromosome significantly associated with the polymorphism in GNB3 among women 1q31 encodes a subunit of the receptor for the proinflammatory cyto- (p=0,030), and that diastolic blood pressure is significantly associated kine IL-23. In a genome-wide association study Duerr et al. (Science, with the polymorphism rs7566605 in the INSIG2 gene (p=0,027). 2006; 314:1461-1463) verified IL23R as an inflammatory bowel dis- ease associated gene. Amongst the identified SNPs, the C2370A vari- P0997. Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis: Mutations in ant (rs 10889677) in the 3’ UTR was found to confer risk for IBD in non- ichthyin associated with specific ultrastructural changes in the Jewish population. Our aim was to obtain quantitative data on preva- epidermis lence rates of IL23R 3’ UTR C2370A separately on CD or UC affected J. Dahlqvist1, J. Klar1, I. Hausser2, M. Hellström Pigg3, T. Gedde-Dahl Jr4, A. group of patients using another approach, a case-control study. A total Vahlquist3, N. Dahl1; of 330 patients with IBD (124 CD, 206 UC) and 235 controls were gen- 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, otyped for the SNP using PCR/RFLP method. The A allele frequency Germany, 3Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden, 4National Hospital, was 38.3% in the CD group, 32.0% in the UC group, and 30.0% in the Oslo, Norway. controls (p<0.05 vs CD). We found increased AA genotype frequency Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) is a heterogeneous in the CD group (15.3%), compared to the controls (5.5% p<0.05). A group of skin disorders. Several mutant genes are identified in ARCI statistically not significant trend to increase was found in the preva- but the association between genotype and phenotype is poorly un- lence of AA genotype in the UC group (9.2%), compared to the controls derstood. In search for genotype-phenotype correlations in ARCI (5.5%). Logistic regression analysis adjusted for age and gender con- we selected 27 patients from 18 families with specific ultrastructural firmed, that the AA genotype represent independent risk factor for CD features of the epidermis. The electron microscopy (EM) picture was (OR=3.090, 95% CI: 1.470-6.494, p=0.003), but not for UC. characterized by abnormal lamellar bodies and elongated membranes in stratum granulosum and was classified as ARCI EM-type III. DNA P1000. Methods to detect imprinting using linkage data: parent- samples from a subset of the affected individuals were screened for of-origin-based penetrance vs. independent male-female homozygous genomic regions and a candidate gene region was iden- recombination fractions tified on chromosome 5q33. The region coincides with the ichthyin M. Monti1,2, J. Zhang1, L. Strug1, B. Feenstra3, D. A. Greenberg1; gene, previously reported as mutant in ARCI. Mutation screening of 1Div Stat Genet, Dept Biostat, Columbia Univ, New York, NY, United States, ichthyin revealed missense or splice site mutations in 25 out of the 2Dept. of Applied Health Sciences, Pavia, Italy, 3Royal Vet & Agricult Univ, Dept 27 individuals (93%) with specific EM characteristics of type III. In a Natural Sci, C, Denmark. control group of 18 ARCI patients without EM findings consistent with Genes whose expression depends on the sex of the parent contrib- type III we found only one individual with a mutation in ichthyin. Our uting the gene, i.e., imprinting, are being recognized. We tested two findings indicate a strong association between ARCI caused by ich- methods for detecting imprinting using linkage data. thyin mutations and characteristic ultrastructural findings in epidermis. Maximizing the lod score: These results suggest that EM provides a specific diagnostic tool for a 1) over parent-of-origin penetrances (PP) subgroup of ARCI patients. 2) over independent male-female recombination fraction (RF). We simulated family data with and without imprinting, defined as pen- P0998. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (NOS) haplotype etrance in offspring dependent on the parent contributing the allele. is associated with diabetes type 1 and its microvascular We compared the max lod score assuming equal parameter values complications. from mothers and fathers to the global max over all combinations. N. V. Tarasenko1, E. I. Kondratieva1, V. P. Puzyrev2,1; We calculated the chi-squared for the null hypothesis of no imprinting 1Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2State Re- and the power to detect imprinting over a range of data set sizes. We search Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. tested the confounding effects of reduced penetrance, heterogeneity, Diabetes is a common, chronic disease that profoundly impacts health differential male-female penetrance and biased ascertainment, and and quality of life. Type 1 diabetes (IDDM) is an autoimmune disease studied the distribution of the nested likelihood ratio test statistic under with a complex polygenic inheritance. Polymorphism of NO-synthases the null hypothesis. genes could be one of the earliest marker of vascular damages in dia- Without heterogeneity and reduced penetrance, the PP method has betes. more power. Imprinting detection power actually increases for PP if To study contribution of NOS3 gene into IDDM and its microvascular reduced penetrance exists. If one sex had higher penetrance than the complications, a group of patients has been investigated (N=154 mean other, PP could falsely indicate imprinting, while RF was not fooled. age 13,56±2,67; 72 females, 82 males). Control group consisted of Neither method gave biased results because of parent-specific ascer- 241 healthy donors. tainment bias. C-691T, VNTR, C774T and G894T gene NOS3 polymorphisms were When there is no imprinting, without heterogeneity or reduced pen- analyzed by PCR-RFLP. Frequencies of haplotypes were estimated etrance in the generating model, the likelihood ratio test was conser- using the E-M approach and a more computationally-intensive Bayes- vative for both PP and RF, however the type I error rate is strongly af- ian approach as implemented in PHASE. fected by locus heterogeneity and the ascertainment criteria. Families The „C-B-C-G“ haplotype was more common in IDDM patients (51%) selected for having a high density of affected members also resulted in and group of patients with microvascular complications (51%) than in an increased Type I error rate. healthy controls (40%; p<0.05). In conclusion, the „C-B-C-G“ haplotype may have a negative influence P1001. A North African founding mutation causes male infertility in the pathogenesis IDDM and its microvascular complications. Fur- by disrupting meiotic cytokinesis ther studies should be conducted to address the molecular basis for P. Ray1,2, K. Dieterich1,2, R. Soto Rifo3,4, A. K. Faure1,2,5, S. Hennebicq1,2,5, B. such an effect. Ben Amar6, M. Zahi7, D. Martinez1,2, B. Sèle1,2,5, P. S. Jouk1,2, T. Ohlmann3,4, S. Rousseaux1,2,5, J. Lunardi1,2; 1CHU de Grenoble, Département de Génétique et Procréation, UF de biochimie génétique et moléculaire, Grenoble, France, 2Faculté de Médecine-Pharmacie, Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 Domaine de la Merci, Université Joseph Fourrier, Grenoble, France, 3Inserm, genotype in this group increased almost twice (44.4%, 21.1%, respec- U758, Lyon, France, 4Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Unité de Virologie tively, p=0.025). The association of 20CA allele with lower body weight Humaine, IFR 128, Lyon, France, 5Inserm U309, Institut Albert Bonniot, Greno- (Z=2.2, p=0.028) and reduced height in female newborns has been ble, France, 6Laboratoire d’analyse médicales, Rabat, Morocco, 7Centre privé registered. We suggest that increased number of CA repeats (more de Fécondation In vitro, Rabat, Morocco. than 20 CA) being responsible for low production of IGF-1 enzyme is An estimated 80 million people face reproductive difficulties worldwide. associated with longevity in man as well as with reduced body weight An important proportion of these cases is believed to be caused by and the height in female newborns. Allele 19 responsible for the high genetic defects, yet few genes have formally been associated with level of serum IGF-1 might be associated with longevity for women. infertility in the human. We performed a genome-wide microsatellite Our final finding was the correlation between 20 CA allele of IGF-1 and scan on 14 unrelated infertile men, all originating from North Africa and cataract (Z=2.4, p=0.018). There was no correlation between IGF-1 born from first degree cousin. All presented very characteristic sperm gene polymorphism and stroke, essential hypertension, coronary heart parameters with close to 100% abnormal spermatozoa with anomalies disease and Type 2 diabetes. of the head, several flagellae and polyploidy. A common homozygous region harboring the Aurora Kinase C gene (AURKC) known to be P1004. Interleukin-23 receptor (IL23R) gene C2370A highly expressed in the testis and involved in cytokinesis and mitosis/ polymorphism in scleroderma patients meiosis was detected in 10/14 patients. Sequence analysis of AURKC E. Sáfrány1, B. Faragó1, V. Csöngei1, L. Magyari1, A. Maász1, C. Sipeky1, L. coding sequence showed the presence of a homozygous single nu- Járomi1, K. Horvatovich1, J. Radics2, L. Czirják2, B. Melegh1; cleotide deletion in all 14 patients. This mutation results in premature 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, termination of translation thus yielding a truncated protein which lacks Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, University of its kinase domain. We conclude that the absence of AURKC leads Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. to male infertility due to the production of «large-headed multiflagella Scleroderma or systemic sclerosis is a chronic connective tissue spermatozoa». disease generally classified as one of the autoimmune rheumatic diseases. The cause of scleroderma is still unknown but there are P1002. The study of Insulin, Igf2 and NAIP mutations in several factors presumed: abnormal immune or inflammatory activ- romanian population ity stimulating the fibroblasts to produce too much collagen, as well L. Dumitrescu1, P. Apostol1, D. Cimponeriu1, M. Stavarachi1, M. Toma1, D. as not yet discovered genetic and enviromental factors. Interleukin- Cheta2, L. Gavrila1; 23 plays an important role in the Th17 mediated immune response. 1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Institute of Diabetes, Nutrition and The IL23R gene located on chromosome 1p31 encodes a subunit of Metabolic Diseases “Nicolae Paulescu”, Bucharest, Romania. the IL23-receptor. Recent investigations (Duerr et al, Science, 2006; The balance between proliferation and apoptotic processes is involved 314:1461-1463) identified several IL23R gene polymorphisms as risk in some pathologic phenotype, including type 1 diabetes mellitus factors for inflammatory bowel diseases. Theoretical considerations (T1DM), type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and obesity. The genetic also suggested possible association of these SNPs with other autoim- markers from IDDM2 region were associated with these phenotypes. mune diseases. Our aim was to test whether the 3’-UTR C2370A SNP Neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP, 5q) was found also to of the IL23R gene (rs10889677), one of the verified IBD susceptibility have anti-apoptotic effects in different cells and to be up-regulated dur- genes also confers risk for scleroderma. We performed genotyping ing adipocytes differentiation. using DNA samples collected from 244 patients with scleroderma and The aims of our study were to test the contribution of Insulin, IGF2 and 135 unrelated, healthy controls. The genotypes were analysed using NAIP polymorphisms to diabetes onset and obesity. PCR/RFLP-methods. We found no significant difference between the Clinical information and blood samples were collected from unrelated allele frequencies of the two groups (73% and 71% for the C allele obese T2DM subjects (n=70, BMI between 32,5-39 kg/m2), nonobese and 27% and 29% for the A allele in patients with scleroderma and in T1DM (n=70, BMI between 20-25kg/m2) and 150 controls (non obese, the control group, respectively). Our results show that eventhough the non-diabetic subjects). All samples were genotyped for Insulin -23Hph, C2370A polymorphism of IL23R can associate with selected autoim- Insulin +1127Pst1, IGF2Apa and NAIP exon 5 polymorphisms. mune diseases like the Crohn’s disease, but not with others, including We observed a higher frequency (4%) of NAIP exon 5 homozygous the scleroderma, thereby it is not an universal autoimmune disease deletion in control group compared with obese T2DM (2,85%) and associated susceptibility factor. T1DM (1,42%) patients. This value is also higher than in other popula- tions. Interesting, all subjects with homozygous absence of NAIP exon P1005. Interleukin-23 receptor 3‘-UTR C2370A SNP confers risk 5 have low BMI .The IGF2 AA genotype was more frequent in T2DM for rheumatoid arthritis comparing with T1DM and control subjects (OR=1,9) and polymor- B. Faragó1, L. Magyari1, V. Csöngei1, L. Járomi1, E. Sáfrány1, K. Horvatovich1, phisms from insulin region (OR-23Hph AA= 2,7, OR+1127Pst CC= C. Sipeky1, A. Maász1, J. Radics2, L. Czirják2, B. Melegh1; 2,0983) were more frequent in T1DM subjects. 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, Taken together, we found a high frequency of -23Hph AA and +1127Pst Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, University of CC in T1DM patients, of IGF2 AA in T2DM and of NAIP exon 5 homo- Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. zygous deletion in control group. INTRODUCTION: Interleukin-23 (IL23) is a proinflammatory cytokine that plays a crucial role in the development of chronic inflammation, P1003. Analysis of IGF1 gene polymorphism in newborn and being a master regulator of the IL17/23 molecular pathway. IL23-re- elderly people from North-West region of Russia ceptor gene (IL23R) on chromosome 1p31 encodes one subunit of S. V. Potulova1, O. S. Glotov2, V. G. Vakharlovsky2, O. N. Bespalova2, T. E. the IL23-receptor. Duerr et al. (Science, 2006; 314:1461-1463) using Ivaschenko2, V. S. Baranov2,1; genome-wide association study found association between Crohn’s 1Saint-Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s In- disease and the IL23R gene; amongst the reported SNPs the 3’-UTR stitute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. C2370A (rs10889677) conferred risk for Crohn’s disease in a non-Jew- The serum insulin growth factor IGF-1 level differs in various human ish population. Since the IL17/23 pathway is known to associate with ages. The individual variations in the level of this enzyme depend on experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, inflammatory bowel disease, the number of CA repeats in the promoter region of IGF-1 gene. In this multiple sclerosis, collagen-induced arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), study IGF-1 (CA repeats) gene polymorphism was analyzed by PCR and perhaps other autoimmune diseases, we theoretized that this SNP method in 102 newborns and also in 136 elderly people from North- described originally for Crohn’s disease might also have significance West Region of Russia. Increasing of the frequency of 20/- genotype in the development of RA. Therefore, the aim of the present study was in elderly people when compared to newborn group (26.7%, 44.1%, to test this hypothesis. METHODS: Genotyping was performed on 226 respectively, p=0.0034) with concomitant age-related decrease of well-characterized RA-patients and 135 age-and sex-matched con- 19/19 genotype frequency (51%, 27.9%, respectively, p=0.0001) were trols using a PCR-RFLP method. All RA-patients were characterized found. According our data 19/20 genotype in male newborns was twice for RF- and anti-CCP seropositivity. RESULTS: We observed a highly more frequent than in female ones (23.2%, 11.3%). The same ration increased prevalence of the homozygous AA genotype compared to remained constant in elderly people as well but the proportion of 19/20 the controls (15.0% vs. 4.44%; p<0.05). DISCUSSION: Our results Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 show that the AA genotype means a 4-fold risk for the development of P1008. Focal Idiopathic Torsion Dystonia: A new locus identified RA (χ2=8.55, p=0.003, OR=3.81, 95%CI: 1.55-9.33). The data of the in a Large French family. study reported here provide direct evidence first in the literature, that M. Y. Frederic1,2, C. Dhaenens3,4, C. Davin1,2, R. Mazzoleni5,6, A. Kreisler5,6, besides Crohn’s disease the IL23R 3’-UTR single nucleotide polymor- I. Vuillaume3,4, M. Martinez7, M. Claustres1,8, B. Sablonnière3,4, S. Tuffery-Gi- phism C2370A is an independent risk factor also for RA. raud1,2, G. Collod-Beroud1,2, and the INSERM National Dystonia Network and GIS Maladies Rares; P1006. Genetic Association of TAPBP, IKBL, and MIF 1INSERM U 827, Montpellier, France, 2Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, Polymorphisms with Juvenile Rheumatoid Arthritis in Mexican France, 3CHRU de Lille, Institut de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Lille, Population. France, 4INSERM U 837, Lille, France, 5CHRU Lille, Pôle de Neurologie, Lille, L. S. Orozco1,2, J. Ramirez1,2, R. Velazquez1, F. Espinoza3, G. Escamilla3, S. France, 6Faculté de Médecine, Institut de Médecine Prédictive et de Recher- Jimenez-Morales1, V. baca4; che, EA 2683, Lille, France, 7INSERM U 563, Toulouse, France, 8CHU Mont- 1Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Mexico, Mexico, 2Universidad pellier, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Autónoma de la Ciudad de Mexico, Mexico, Mexico, 3Instituto Nacional de Montpellier, France. Pediatria, Mexico, Mexico, 4Hospital de Pediatria, Centro Medico Nacional, S. Focal Idiopathic Torsion Dystonia (FITD) is a group of movement dis- XXI, Mexico, Mexico. orders, which is usually autosomal dominant with reduced penetrance. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) comprises the most common Commonly described forms of FITD include cervical dystonia, blepha- chronic autoimmune arthropathies of childhood. Strong evidence is rospasm, oromandibular dystonia, laryngeal dystonia and limb dysto- emerging to suggest that the disease likely involves multiple suscepti- nia. We studied a large French family presenting with varied symptoms bility genes, a feature common to many autoimmune disorders. Single of adult-onset FITD. The family is composed of 30 subjects (six defi- nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in some genes of system immune nitely affected and one asymptomatic obligate carrier). The average of like TAPBP 260 C/G, IKBL - 62 T/A and MIF - 173 G/C, have been onset is 43 +/- 20 years. The three loci known to be implicated in FITD: found associated with ARJ in different populations,. Our aim was to DYT6, DYT7 and DYT13 have been studied and excluded. Genome- identify whether TAPBP, IKBL, and MIF polymorphisms are associated wide linkage analyses have been performed with a parametric model with JRA in a sample of Mexican patients. We performed a case-control and incomplete age-dependant penetrance. This study identified a new association study in 133 pediatric patients with ARJ, and 350 unrelat- highly probable locus, DYTL, with several lod scores > +2 for contigu- ed, healthy Mexican controls. Allelic discrimination was carried out by ous markers and a maximum of 2.37 (maximum lod score estimated TaqMan assay. The genotypes and allele frequencies were compared in the family: 2.62) defining a 40 cM candidate region. Concurrently, between cases and controls by x2 test. Genotype frequencies were another project has been established in collaboration with practitioners in Hardy - Weinberg equilibrium. When genotype and allelic frequen- implicated in the follow up of dystonic patients in France and associa- cies were compared between cases and controls we observed that tions of patients to recruit other families presenting with FITD. Forty- the 260G TAPBP and - 173C MIF alleles ((p=0.01, OR 1.42, 95% CI three families presenting with intrafamilial heterogeneous phenotypes 1.06- 1.89 and p=0.03, OR 1.4, 95% CI, 1.02 - 1.84, respectively) were and corresponding to 170 affected patients have been identified and associated with susceptibility to JRA in Mexican population, while- 62 are in recruitment. The preliminary results of the DYTL analysis in 14 T/A IKBL (p= 0.01, OR 0.7, CI 95%, 0.52 - 0.93) was found associated families show possible segregation of this locus with the disease in ten with protection. families and exclusion in 4 families. This last result further illustrates the great genetic heterogeneity of FITD and is in favor of the existence P1007. Bone mass and genetic study of a 113 year-old man of more than one unassigned genes for this pathology. M. Bustamante1,2, L. Mellibovsky3, X. Nogues3, P. Lluch1, A. Diez-Perez3, D. Grinberg1,2, S. Balcells1,2; P1009. Association of VEGF gene variant with left ventricular 1Department of Genetics, UB, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, ISCIII, IBUB, Bar- hypertrophy in athletes celona, Spain, 3Hospital del Mar, URFOA, UAB, Barcelona, Spain. A. M. Hakimullina1, E. V. Linde2, I. I. Ahmetov1, I. V. Astratenkova1, V. A. Osteoporosis is a common disease that affects postmenopausal wom- Rogozkin1; en and elderly people. Aging induces loss of bone density and quality 1St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian resulting in a progressive incidence of fractures with significant mor- Federation, 2Combat Sports Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. bidity and mortality. The KLOTHO gene has been related to the ageing Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in endurance-oriented athletes is process. Klotho knock-out mice display multiple disorders that resem- generally understood to be a limiting factor for improving maximal ble human aging, including osteopenia. Furthermore, polymorphisms oxygen uptake (VO2max). Studies in related and unrelated individuals in KLOTHO have been associated with life span and bone mineral clearly demonstrate that a high proportion of interindividual variability density (BMD). On the other hand, the LRP5 gene has been related in left ventricular mass and risk of LVH is attributable to genetic fac- to variations in bone mass. In particular, the Gly171Val mutation has tors. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has been identified as been associated with a high bone mass phenotype (HBM). one of the key regulators of angiogenesis and, therefore, VO2max. Here we describe the bone mass and a limited exploratory genetic Several studies have shown that human VEGF gene polymorphisms study of a 113 year-old man and several first-degree relatives. No frac- are associated with VEGF gene expression and VO2max before and tures have been suffered by any of them and their BMD values are after aerobic exercise training. However, the influence of VEGF gene listed in Table 1. variants on cardiac growth of athletes has not been examined. The Regarding the KLOTHO gene, no mutation was detected in either the purpose of the study was to investigate the VEGF promoter G-634C index case or any of his relatives, with the exception of a previously polymorphism for association with LVH in athletes. Seventy one Rus- described polymorphic variant: one of the proband’s daughters pre- sian athletes (all-round speed skaters and rowers) of national competi- sented one copy of the KL-VS allele, which has been associated with tive standard (sub-elite and elite) were studied. VEGF gene G-634C longevity and increased bone mass. Finally, mutation Gly171Val of the polymorphism was determined by PCR-RLFP. Echocardiography was LRP5 was not present in any individual. These data rule out these po- performed for the measurement of left ventricular mass and function. tential genetic contributions. The identity of other longevity and/or high We found that left ventricular mass (LVM) and LVM index (LVMI) in bone mass genes or environmental factors remains to be defined. male sub-elite speed skaters was significantly greater in GG genotype Table 1 Values of bone mass in the index case and four relatives carriers than in heterozygotes (GC) (LVM: 333 (21) g vs. 254 (21) g, BMD T-Score Z-Score p=0.002; LVMI: 169 (10) g/m2 vs. 130 (18) g/m2; p=0.015). It has been Individual Age Femoral Total L2- Femoral Femoral shown previously that -634C allele is associated with increased VEGF L2-L4 UD L2-L4 neck hip L4 neck neck expression, and, therefore, can be considered to be protective against Index 1130.880 0.533 0.742 0.294-3.00 -4.10 -1.45 -1.01 LVH. Thus, VEGF G-634C polymorphism is associated with develop- case Daughter 77 1.033 0.768 0.914 0.335-1.40 -1.80 -1.4 0.9 ment of LVH in athletes. Daughter 81 0.939 0.731 0.853 0.251-2.20 -2.10 0.28 0.0 Nephew 85 1.227 0.839 1.004 0.565-0.10 -1.80 2.08 1.2 Brother 1011.163 0.922 1.043 0.440-0.60 -1.10 0.60 1.75 L2-L4: lumbar spine; UD: ultradistal radiusGenetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 P1010. Are common variants in leptin and leptin receptor P1012. Lipoedema associated with familial growth hormone genes associated with specific eating patterns in the Czech deficiency population? S. Mansour, G. Brice, S. Jeffery, S. Nussey, C. Carver, P. Ostergaard, P. S. M. Forejt1, J. A. Bienertova Vasku2, P. Bienert2, T. Prusa1, M. Vavrina2, J. Kudel- Mortimer, G. Bano; kova2, S. Cifkova1, M. Chmelikova1, Z. Brazdova1, A. Vasku2; St. George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom. 1Institute of Preventive Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, Lipoedema is a poorly understood condition that does not appear in 2Institute of Pathological Physiology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. the medical textbooks. It is frequently mistaken for lymphoedema but INTRODUCTION: Mutations in the leptin and the leptin receptor genes instead of fluid accumulating in the tissues there is heavy deposition of were previously reported to cause rare obese syndromes, however, fat. The cause is unknown but it leads to increased swelling, marked both leptin and leptin receptor play also an important role in common floppiness and looseness of the tissues, tenderness and sometimes multifactorial obesity. Therefore, increasing attention is being paid to pain and bruising. It is distinct from morbid obesity and apparently af- specific eating patterns as obesity determining traits that undoubtedly fects females only after puberty. No endocrine or hormonal abnormali- display a heritable component. In this study, we determinated whether ties have been identified. A family history is common, and it appears to genetic variations within the leptin and leptin receptor genes underlie be a sex limited condition even within families. specific eating patterns. We report a family of 4 generations presenting with short stature and METHODS: The case-control study comprised a total of 45 obese in- lipoedema. The proband, a 60 year old Caucasian lady, is 132cm and dividuals ((BMI>=30 ) and 38 healthy controls aged 18.6-68.2 y whose has suffered with gross lipoedema of her arms and legs since puberty. uptake of nutrients was determined by using 7-d food records; with Her mother and grandmother also exhibited short stature and lipoede- special attention paid to the use of excessive portion sizes or irregular- ma. Her son is short but has no lipoedema. Studies show that both ity in eating. They were genotyped for the LEP -2548G/A (5’UTR) and the proband and her son have growth hormone, TSH and prolactin LEPR Gln223Arg (exon 4) variants by means of PCR-based method- deficiency. ology. This pattern of combined pituitary deficiency is suggestive of mutations RESULTS: No statistically significant associations of both examined in the PIT1 (POU1F1) gene. We have found a mutation in PIT1 (P24L polymorphisms with age, BMI, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, in exon1), which acts in an autosomal dominant manner. The proline is history of sterility or infertility or waist-to-hip ratio were observed. in the transactivation domain of the protein, and is highly conserved. It Obese carriers of examined allelic variations in leptin or the leptin is previously described in one sporadic case with no clinical details. receptor gene did not express an increased risk to display extreme Growth hormone is associated with insulin regulation, which in turn is snacking behavior or to eat excessive portion sizes; however, the AG important in adipose formation and cardiovascular disease. This is the carriers of LEPR Gln223Arg tended significantly to prefer the low-fibre first gene associated with lipoedema. diet (p=0.03). DISCUSSION: These results do not provide evidence for a preferen- P1013. Sudden cardiac death in a Swiss family is potentially tial transmission of some alleles of the LEP of LEPR polymorphism caused by two distinct genetic elements in obesity, but support the hypothesis that LEPR Gln223Arg confers C. Rieubland1, N. Civic2, F. Fellmann1, H. Abriel3,4, J. Schläpfer3, J. S. Beck- susceptibility to specific eating patterns, such as low fibre diet. mann1,2, C. Rivolta2; 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Département P1011. Molecular analysis of the CAPN3 gene by both dHPLC, de Génétique Médicale, UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Service de Cardiologie, direct sequencing and cDNA analysis identify new mutations in CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Département de Pharmacologie et Toxicologie, LGMD2A patients UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland. M. Duno1, M. Sveen2, J. Vissing2, M. Schwartz1; Introduction: Congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is characterized by 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, 4062, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Neuromuscular a prolonged QT interval on the electrocardiogram, leading to syncope Research Unit, Universityhospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. or sudden death. Ten specific LQTS loci (LQT1-LQT10) have been Limb-Girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMD’s) are a group of neuromus- found. We identified a four-generation Swiss family with several cas- cular disorders presenting great clinical heterogeneity. Among these, es of sudden death and displaying two heart phenotypes: LQTS and LGMD-2A is the most prevalent and assumed to account for at least conduction defects of the cardiac electrical impulse (CD). These two 30% of LGMD’s, LGMD-2A is inherited recessively and caused by mu- anomalies were present as independent entities, since some individu- tations in the CAPN3 gene which encodes a skeletal-muscle-specific als exhibited only one of them, while others suffered from both. member of the calpain superfamily. Methods: Microsatellites linkage analysis was performed for three of We report here on the molecular analysis of the CAPN3 gene in 41 the most frequent LQT loci (LQT1, LQT2, LQT3), accounting for ~ 80% patients suspected for LGMD2A. of all LQTS cases. The KCNQ1 gene (LQT1) was screened by direct The CAPN3 gene of 18 patients were screened for mutations by dHPLC DNA sequencing. and/or direct sequencing of the entire coding and intron flanking se- Results: We found perfect co-segregation between LQTS and a spe- quence, whereas the remaining patients were investigated by RT-PCR cific LQT1 haplotype. Sequencing of KCNQ1 revealed the previously and CAPN3 cDNA sequencing. Seven of the patients in whom no mu- described mutation p.A344A (GCG>GCA) in all individuals with LQTS. tations were found by dHPLC/exon sequencing were also sequenced However, this mutation was absent in patients (one of whom died sud- for their CAPN3 cDNA. In total we identified 14 different mutations of denly) with CD and no LQTS. We then tested LQT2- and LQT3-asso- which 6 were previously unknown. In eight patients we identified both ciated markers for co-segregation with CD and could clearly exclude mutant alleles. In additional two of the patients only one mutation could these two loci as being responsible for this phenotype.Conclusion: The be identified on the genomic level, however CAPN3 cDNA analysis mutation identified in KCNQ1 is responsible for LQTS in this family, demonstrated that both patients only expressed the mutant allele, in- but cannot explain all cases of sudden death, nor the cardiac conduc- dicating that both harbor an unidentified allel that somehow compro- tion defects also present in some individuals. It is therefore likely that mise CAPN3 RNA maturation. In three of the remaining patients only another genetic cardiac anomaly, potentially lethal, segregates inde- one mutation could be identified. Interestingly, all three patients had a pendently in this family. We plan to fully genotype the members of this highly abnormal western blot for calpain-3 and clinical characteristics family, in hopes of identifying this second gene. of LGMD-2A, however the mutations were all clearly heterozygous on full-lengthCAPN3 cDNA. P1014. Haplotype analysis of G72/G30 genes polymorphisms in major depressive disorder T. G. Noskova1, D. A. Gaysina1, A. Asadullin2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Department of Psychiatry, Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Major depression disorder (MDD) is a common, severe, chronic, and often life-threatening illness. There is evidence that overlapping genes G72/G30 (13q32-33) are transcribed in brain and involved in the etiol-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 ogy of affective disorders. Interestingly, G72 protein interacts with the square=9.76, respectively). Haplogroup R1b3 frequency distribution gene for D-amino-acid oxidase on 12q24 to regulate glutaminergic sig- were found between control groups of Bashkir ind Tatar ethnic origins naling through the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor pathway, whereas (p=0.0005,chi-square=9.770). Haplogroup R1b3 found to be protec- the function of the G30 gene remained unclear. Recently, an association tive in spermatogenesis abnormality in males of Bashkir ethnic origin between the G72/G30 genes and bipolar disorder and schizophrenia (p=0.0024; chi-square=12.4419; OR=0.29).The analysis of gr/gr de- has been reported. The aim of the present study is to determine wheth- letions of AZFc locus was spent in 132 males with spermatogenesis er the G72/G30 genes are a susceptibility factor for major depressive abnormalities and in 300 control individuals. There were no statistically disorder. Three SNPs - rs2391191, rs3918342 of the G72 gene and significant differences in deletions frequency distribution, but we de- rs1341402 of the G30 gene - were investigated in a case-control study termined association of gr/gr deletions with N haplogroups of Y chro- included 108 individuals who had MDD and 244 healthy controls from mosome (p=0.0005, chi-square=63.115) both in patients and controls Russia. There were no statistical differences between MDD patients irrespective of ethnic origin of individuals.Thus, characteristic features and healthy controls in the genotypic and allelic distribution of the G72/ of Y chromosome haplogroups and gr/gr deletions of AZFc locus dis- G30 genes investigated polymorphisms. Maximum likelihood analysis tribution were revealed in 3 ethnic groups from the Volga-Ural region of haplotype distribution demonstrated the presence of linkage dis- and in patients with spermatogenesis abnormality. equilibrium between the two polymorphisms (rs2391191, rs1341402) both in control subjects (D’=0.999), and in cases (D’=0.35). Analysis of P1017. Distribution of the MAOA-VNTR polymorphism in groups distribution of the estimated haplotype frequencies revealed significant of elite athletes difference between depressive subjects and controls (χ2=14.54, df=3, J. Schegolkova, N. Maluchenko, A. Tonevitsky; p=0.0023). Further analysis showed overrepresentation of the haplo- Moscow State University, Biological Faculty, Department of Bioengeneering, type CA (χ2=20.13, p<0.001) in depressive group compared to control Moscow, Russian Federation. one. Our findings indicate the contribution of the G72/G30 genes to Monoamine oxydase (MAO), as a catabolic enzyme, regulates mono- susceptibility for MDD, but further research of these genes on case- amine transmitter levels in the central nervous system. The activity of control phenotypic groups is of high importance. this enzyme is genetically regulated. The gene encoding the A form of human monoamine oxidase enzyme (MAOA) is located on the short P1015. Common variation in the ABO glycosyltransferase is arm of X chromosome. One of the common polymorphisms is a 30 bp associated with susceptibility to severe Plasmodium falciparum functional VNTR polymorphism (MAOA-uVNTR). malaria. In this study, we examined distribution of the MAOA-uVNTR polymor- A. E. Fry1, S. Auburn1, M. Diakite1, J. T. Forton1, A. Green1, A. Richardson1, K. phism in groups of elite athletes of different specialization. 100 athletes A. Rockett1, J. Wilson1, M. Jallow2, F. Sisay-Joof2, M. Pinder2, M. J. Griffiths1,3, and 105 non-trained controls were genotyped. Analysis of this test N. Peshu3, T. N. Williams3,4, K. Marsh3,4, M. E. Molyneux5,6, T. E. Taylor7,8, D. P. reveals that the frequency of MAOA alleles differ between groups of Kwiatkowski1; complex-coordination, playing and endurance kind of sport. Frequency 1The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, of high active allele increases in groups of complex-coordination and 2MRC Laboratories, Fajara, Gambia, 3Kenya Medical Research Institute Centre endurance sportsmen. Frequency of low active allele decreases in for Geographical Medicine Research (Coast), Kilifi, Kenya, 4Nuffield Depart- groups of complex-coordination and playing sportsmen. ment of Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Malawi–Liverpool–Wellcome Trust Interrelation of MAOA genotype and athletic successfulness are dis- Programme of Clinical Tropical Research, Blantyre, Malawi, 6Liverpool School cussed. of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 7Blantyre Malaria Project, Blantyre, Malawi, 8Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, United States. P1018. Homozygosity mapping of primary microcephaly in A link between host ABO blood group and susceptibility to severe Iranian families revealed novel mutations and novel phenotype Plasmodium falciparum malaria has long been suspected. Previous S. Esmaeeli Nieh1, M. Ghani Kakhki2, M. Garshasbi1, K. Kahrizi3, F. Behjati3, S. serological studies have suggested that blood group O individuals are S. Abedini3, S. Ghasemi Firoozabadi3, M. Mohseni3, V. Hadavi4, R. Vazifehm- relatively protected from severe disease; however the association has and3, M. Falah3, A. Dehghan3, S. M. Seyfati3, P. Jamali3, D. Habibi3, A. W. often proved difficult to confirm. Using a combination of family- and Kuss1, H. H. Ropers1, H. Neizel2, H. Najmabadi3,4; population- based studies from three African populations (almost 10 1Max Planck Institue for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Institut fur thousand individuals) we tested the molecular genetic variation under- Humangenetik, Charite-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3University lying the ABO system. Our results confirm that the common frame-shift of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Genetics Research Center, mutation underlying blood group O is associated with protection from Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology and severe disease (Odds Ratio 0.8, p-value 2x10-7). The high frequency Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of the common ABO alleles means that even modest differences in Primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder susceptibility could significantly affect the health of millions of people showing an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance in the majority in malaria endemic regions. Using our genetic data, and additional of cases. Affected individuals present with head circumferences more resources from the International HapMap project, we went on to in- than 3 standard deviations below the age- and sex-matched popula- vestigate the evidence for a possible parent-of-origin effect related to tion mean, accompanied by mental retardation without further associ- ABO alleles, and the signals of balanced evolutionary selection at the ated malformations and with no manifest etiology. ABO locus. Six genomic loci have been identified so far (MCPH1-6) and for four of these, the underlying genes are known. P1016. Analysis of Y chromosome markers in patients with For this study we have ascertained patients with primary microceph- spermatogenesis abnormality. aly and additional family members from 30 consanguineous Iranian A. A. Islamova, R. I. Khusainova, I. A. Kutuev, E. K. Khusnutdinova; families. In addition to a thorough clinical characterisation, karyotype Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. analyses were performed for all patients. For linkage analyses, several AZF region microdeletions of Y chromosome are one the most frequent Microsatellite loci were selected for each known MCPH locus and used causes of spermatogenesis abnormality. We investigated 131 unrelat- for genotyping in all available family members. ed males with azoospermia and oligozoospermia. Microdeletions were Our investigation enabled us to detect linkage to the ASPM (MCPH5) revealed in 11.45%. The spectrum of microdeletions was the following: region in three families. Two families showed linkage to MCPH2 and AZFc - 5.34 %, AZFa+b+c - 1.5 %, AZFa+c, AZFb+c, AZFb - 0.76 %. one to MCPH1. For the remaining 24 families linkage to one of the six Haplogroups determination was carried out using 19 diallelic markers known loci could not be established. Subsequent sequencing revealed of Y chromosome in 117 patients of Russian, Tatar and Bashkir ethnic one novel mutation in MCPH1 and two in ASPM. It is interesting that origin with spermatogenesis abnormalities. The control group consists all carriers of ASPM mutations in this study also show short stature. of 300 fertile men of Tatar (100), Bashkir (100) and Russian (100) This has not been observed before in and thus widens the spectrum ethnic origin. The comparison of group of Bashkir and Russian eth- of clinical manifestations of sequence changes in ASPM. In addition to nic origin there were statistically significant differences in R1a, R1b3, that our results indicate that, in keeping with previous findings for other I, N3 haplogroup frequency distributions (p=0.013,chi-square=6.271; populations, ASPM mutations are the most common cause for primary p=0.005, chi-square=37.955; p=0.005,chi-square=8.482; p=0.003,chi- microcephaly in the Iranian population.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 20 P1019. Polymorphisms of the MDR1 gene in Hungarian Roma P1021. Association of HLA allele and level of streptococcus population samples mutans in saliva of normal and mentally retarded Egyptian V. Csöngei1, L. Járomi1, E. Sáfrány1, C. Sipeky1, A. Maász1, L. Magyari1, K. children Horvatovich1, B. Faragó1, I. Takács2, B. Melegh1; S. El Hadidi1, M. Abdel Razzak1, F. S. Bayoumi1, I. R. Hussein1, S. E. Taha2, H. 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, M. Abbas2, E. H. A. Abouel-Ezz1; Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Sem- 1National Research Center (NRC), Cairo, Egypt, 2Oral and Dental Medicine melweis Teaching Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary. - Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. The human multidrug resistance gene (MDR1) product P-glycoprotein Streptococcus Mutans (SM) is thought to play a major role in the (P-gp), a member of the ATP-binding cassette superfamily of trans- etiology of dental caries. The aim of this study was to evaluate the porters, plays crucial role in the bioavailability, absorption, distribution relationship between HLA DRB1*0701-DRB1*0702 and DRB1*1101- and excretion of various natural substrates and xenobiotics. Therefore DRB1*1104 loci and levels of SM in normal and some mentally re- its activity has significant pharmacokinetic and pharmacodinamic con- tarded (MR) Egyptian children. Subjects and methods: subjects were sequences. Among many SNPs of the MDR1 gene, C3435T in exon 68 normal and 58 MR children, their ages ranged between 6-14 years. 26 and G2677T/A in exon 21(Ala893Ser/Thr) are the most extensively Subjects were classified according to caries index into free (0 caries studied in relation to interindividual variability of P-gp expression and index), low ( 1-6 caries index) and high (>6 caries index). Results: activity, and show linkage disequilibrium with C1236T in exon 12. The in MR children high levels of SM (mean: 84±127) were positively as- aim of this study was to investigate the frequency of these three ma- sociated with absence of HLA DRB1*1101-DRB1*1104 alleles com- jor functional SNPs in the Hungarian Roma population: 251 unrelated pared to normal children were high level of SM (mean 107±129) were Hungarian Roma subjects and 139 controls of Caucasian origin were positively associated with absence of DRB1*0701-DRB1*0702 allele, examined. The genotypes of polymorphic positions C1236T, G2677T/ but not associated with DRB1*1101-DRB1*1104 alleles. A significant A and C3435T were determined by PCR-RFLP. No significant differ- association was observed between caries level and HLA DRB1*0701- ences were found in genotype distribution in exon 21 and 26 between DRB1*0702 in MR children. No significant association was observed the two groups. The observed allele frequencies were 48.6%, 1.4% between DRB1*1101-DRB1*1104 allele and caries level in both and 48.2% in the Roma population, and 43.8%, 0.40% and 51.8% in groups. In conclusion, these results support the hypothesis of an as- controls for the alleles 2677T, 2677A and 3435T, respectively. These sociation between HLA class II genetic profile and colonization of SM results were similar to that of other Caucasian populations in Europe. as pathogens for dental caries. However, further studies are needed to In exon 12 the Roma population had significantly higher frequency for evaluate other HLA alleles as genetics variants in dental caries. the 1236T allele (57.8%) and showed increased frequency of TT geno- type (34.3%) compared to controls (42.8% and 20.1%, respectively, P1022. SNP association analysis of adipokines and metabolic p<0.05). The differential profile can have consequences for choice of traits in obesity and hypertension treatment with drugs metabolising via this system. P. Fortina1, C. Specchia2, W. Mettil1, K. Scott1, H. Rydbeck3, M. Devoto3, B. Falkner4; P1020. Elucidating the molecular causes of autosomal recessive 1Kimmel Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2University of Brescia, mental retardation in a systematic fashion: a progress report Brescia, Italy, 3The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United H. H. Ropers1, K. Kahrizi2, A. Tzschach1, S. S. Abedini2, M. M. Motazacker1, M. States, 4Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States. Garshasbi1, L. Abbasi1, F. Behjati2, V. Hadavi3, S. Esmaeeli Nieh1, S. G. Firouz- Essential hypertension and obesity are multifactorial traits determined abadi2, N. Nikzat2, M. Falah2, S. Banihashemi2, M. Mohseni2, R. Vazifehmand2, by a complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors. Obesity is P. Jamali2, P. Nekoei2, A. Grüters4, A. W. Kuss1, H. Najmabadi2; frequently associated with elevated blood pressure (BP), insulin resis- 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Genetics Re- tance, dyslipidemia and abnormal glucose tolerance. However, many search Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Teh- individuals with comparable degrees of obesity and similar environ- ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics mental exposure have normal levels of BP, lipids and glucose toler- Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Paediatric Endocrinol- ance. This suggests the existence of underlying regulatory functions ogy, Otto Heubner Centre for Paediatrics, Berlin, Germany. which might confer protection from expression of inflammatory me- Mental retardation (MR) is a common disorder with severe socio-eco- diators and cardiovascular injury in the obesity/normal BP phenotype. nomic consequences. Most moderate and severe forms have genetic Adipokines are proteins produced by fat cells with pro or anti-inflam- causes. These include cytogenetically visible chromosomal rearrange- matory function. The purpose of this study was to determine if genes ments, submicroscopic deletions and duplications as well as X-linked involved in adipokines regulation are associated with metabolic phe- gene defects, which have recently received much attention. notypes in obesity and hypertension. A cohort of 275 African American There is reason to believe that autosomal recessive MR (ARMR) is far unrelated subjects was studied. The European admixture in this cohort more common than XLMR, but to date, no more than 3 ARMR genes was estimated between 12.7 and 13.6%. Metabolic traits quantified have been identified. In part, this is due to small family sizes and low included insulin sensitivity, lipids and urinary albumin. DNA was ex- consanguinity rates in industrialized societies, which has greatly ham- amined by DNA sequence analysis and TaqMan. SNPs of candidate pered gene mapping and identification. These constraints do not exist genes including pro-inflammatory PAI1 and IL6, and anti-inflammatory in most Arabic populations, nor in Iran or Pakistan. adiponectin (APMI), as well as Calpain-10 were studied. Statistical In 2003, we have set out to perform systematic clinical and molecular analyses were performed by regression of the trait phenotypes on the studies in large consanguineous Iranian families with several mentally groups defined by the SNP genotypes, adjusting for age, sex and BMI retarded children. Here we report on the results of SNP array-based as covariates when appropriate. SNP 712 of the APMI gene showed homozygosity in more than 120 families. So far we have identified significant association with insulin resistance (p=0.005). Despite the 12 novel loci for non-syndromic ARMR, 8 of which with a LOD score relatively small sample, our results indicate that genes that regulate above 3. None of these intervals show overlap with the 3 previously adipocyte function may have a regulatory role in the expression of known ARMR loci. Mutation screening has so far enabled us to identify metabolic traits in obesity associated hypertension. 2 novel genes. The recent introduction of novel high-throughput sequencing technol- P1023. Prevalence and heritability of the metabolic syndrome ogies and our access to hundreds of consanguineous families with and individual components in a Dutch isolate: the Erasmus ARMR should enable us to greatly expand our ongoing search for Rucphen Family study novel ARMR genes. This collaborative effort will shed more light on P. Henneman1, Y. Aulchenko2, R. R. Frants1, K. Willems van Dijk3, B. A. Oos- brain function and will improve the prospects for molecular diagnosis, tra2, C. van Duijn2; genetic counselling and eventually, therapy of mental retardation. 1LUMC Human Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Epidemiology & Biosta- tistics, Erasmus Medical Centre Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3LUMC Human Genetics and Internal Medicine, Leiden, The Netherlands. Objective: In western countries, the metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a growing cause of morbidity and mortality. The MetS includes both an environmental and genetic component. We aim to determine heritabil-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 21 ity and find novel loci for the MetS (IDF, 2003) and correlate inflamma- spans 7.2 cM and the affected subjects share two homozygous tracts. tion and visceral obesity with MetS, in a Dutch isolate. No recombination has been observed. Methods: The Erasmus Rucphen Family study (ERF) consists of some A further linkage analysis based on SNPs study was performed to bet- 3000 individuals that descend form a limited set of founders. Waist cir- ter define the locus limits. This study confirmed the homozygous tract cumference (WC), blood pressure, HDL-C, triglycerides and glucose but did not allow to narrow the interval of interest. These results rein- levels were obtained. Variance component analysis was applied to ex- force the hypotesis that the locus for hereditary microcytic anemia is tended family data to test for evidence of heritability (SOLAR). on chromosome 22q13. Results: The prevalence of MetS, according to the IDF definition, in The 7.2 cM critical region of chromosome has been completely se- the ERF cohort is 36.8% in males and 31.0% in females. Our results quenced and is available from published databases. A large number of indicate that HDL-C and WC are the main contributors to the MetS. genes have already been characterized in the region. Heritability of the MetS (as binary trait) was 14.3% (P < 0.0001). The heritability for the MetS corrected for household, decreased to 10.6% P1026. Exclusion of ADAMTS10 gene for the isolated (P = 0.012). Also the heritability of individual components of MetS were microspherophakia in a consanguineous multiplex Tunisian analyzed (as quantative traits). The highest heritability was obtained family for HDL-C (42.9%, P < 0.0001). F. Ouechtati1, S. Ben Yahia2, I. Chouchen1, S. Chakroun1, M. Kheirallah2, S. Discussion: The heritabilities of MetS in the ERF population are found Abdelhak1; to be highly significant. Moreover, our results indicate that the HDL-C 1UR26/04 Molecular investigation of genetic orphan diseases, Pasteur Institute component is a main contributor to the MetS and was found to have of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Fattouma Bourguiba the highest individual heritability. Our data on prevalence and herita- Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia. bility of the MetS, indicate that determining loci for MetS by linkage Microspherophakia (OMIM 251750) is an eye disease characterized analysis, with emphasis on the individual traits, is feasible. by a small and spherical crystalline lens with increased anteropos- terior thickness. Autosomal recessive Weill Marchesani Syndrome is P1024. Homozygous silencing of the T-box transcription factor due to mutations within ADAMTS10 gene. The locus responsible for TBR2/EOMES locus. Results in a microcephaly syndrome with the isolated form of microspherophakia is still unknown because the polymicrogyria and corpus callosum agenesis reported cases are rare and sporadic. A consanguineous family with L. Baala1,2, S. Briault3, H. C. Etchevers2, F. Laumonnier3, A. Natiq1, J. Amiel2, two patients affected with isolated microspherophakia has been identi- N. Boddaert4, C. Picard5, A. Sbiti1, A. Asermouh6, T. Attié-Bitach2,7, F. Encha- fied in Central Tunisia. In order to check if ADAMTS10 gene is involved Razavi2,7, A. Munnich2,7, A. Sefiani1, S. Lyonnet2,7; in microspherophakia in this family, a linkage analysis was performed 1Dép. Génétique Médicale, Institut National d’Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, using microsatellite markers flanking this gene. Genetic investigation 2INSERM U-781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris, France, showed an exclusion of linkage between ADAMTS10 gene and the 3INSERM U-619 Faculté de Médecine, Tours, France, 4Service de Radiologie disease locus in this family. This result suggests that isolated micro- Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris, France, 5Centre spherophakia is not an allelic disorder to Weill Marchesani Syndrome. d’étude des Déficits Immunitaires, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris, France, 6Hôpital d’Enfants Avicenne, Rabat, Morocco, 7Université René P1027. Mitochondrial mutations in maternally-inherited non- Descartes, Paris, France. syndromic deafness: whole-mitochondrial-genome screening Mechanisms regulating brain size during neurogenesis include the using a microarray resequencing mitochondrial DNA chip regulation of neural progenitor proliferation and migration. We report M. Leveque1, S. Marlin1, L. Jonard1, V. Procaccio2, P. Reynier3, S. Baulande4, an autosomal recessive microcephaly syndrome co-segregating with R. Couderc1, E. Garabedian1, C. Petit5, D. Feldmann1, F. Denoyelle1; a homozygous balanced translocation between chromosomes 3p and 1AP-HP, Trousseau, Paris, France, 2Université de Califormie, Irvine, CA, United 10q in a large inbred family. The translocation was found at the ho- States, 3INSERM U688, Angers, France, 4PartnerChip, Evry, France, 5INSERM mozygous status in all affected individuals (46,XY,t(3;10)(p24;q23)2x), U587, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. while unaffected parents were heterozygous. We established a physi- Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations have been implicated in non- cal and characterized the BACs that encompassed the breakpoints on syndromic hearing loss, with various degrees of penetrance. As only 3p24 and 10q23 (BAC RP11-9a14 and RP11-104H24). Interestingly, part of the mitochondrial genome is usually explored in deaf patients, neither of the two translocation breakpoints disrupted a known or pre- their prevalence is probably under-estimated. Among 1350 families dicted gene coding sequence. with sensorineural deafness collected through a French collaborative However, we showed that a position effect at the breakpoint on chro- network, we selected 29 large families with clear maternal inheritance mosome 3 silences the Tbox-brain2/Eomesodermin (TBR2/EOMES) and screened them for the known mtDNA mutations in 12S rRNA, transcript. Together with its expression pattern in the developing hu- tRNAser(UCN), and tRNAleu(UUN) genes. When no mutation could man brain, our data suggest an involvement of TBR2/EOMES in neu- be identified, a whole-mitochondrial genome screen was performed ronal division and/or migration. Thus, mutations in not only mitotic and using the MitoChip v2.0 microarray resequencing chip (Affymetrix, apoptotic proteins but also transcription factors may be responsible for Inc). Known mtDNA mutations were found in 9 of the 29 families: malformative microcephaly syndromes. A1555G in five, T7511C in two, 7472insC and A3243G in one each. In the remaining 20 families, the resequencing Mitochip detected 258 P1025. Identification of a gene involved in hereditary microcytic mitochondrial homoplasmic variants and 107 potentially heteroplasmic anemia due to defective iron absorption in a Sardinian family variants. The more likely pathogenic variants are displayed based on M. A. Melis1, M. Cau1, R. Congiu1, G. Sole2, A. Cao2, R. Galanello1; allelic frequency and conservation between species. The whole-ge- 1University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 2CNR, Cagliari, Italy. nome analysis elicited 5 additional families with a possibly pathogenic We report the study of a large sardinian family where five patients mitochondrial DNA variant: T669C, C1537T, G8078A, G12236A, and show iron deficiency resulting in microcytic hypochromic anemia, not G15077A. These results indicate that the new MitoChip platform is a responsive to oral treatment but partially responsive to parenteral treat- rapid and reliable tool for (the) identification of new mtDNA mutations, ment. Known causes of hereditary microcytic anemia such as thalas- whether in deafness or other mtDNA-related diseases. semia, hemorrages, gastrointestinal disorders have been excluded by specific tests. By the pedigree analysis it seems an autosomal reces- P1028. Multiple Ligation Probe Amplification analysis in the DMD sive disorder. Since clinical data suggest that it could be a defect of gene: hidden results iron metabolism, especially a defect of iron absorption and/or mobiliza- M. Rodriguez, J. Juan, L. Gonzalez-Quereda, S. Gutierrez, M. Baiget, P. Gal- tion of intracellular iron storage, initially we studied all the known gene lano; involved in iron metabolism (Tf, TfR, ZIRTL, HJV and DMT1). Linkage Genetics Dept, Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. analysis for these genes resulted negative, therefore we supposed Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD) are the that a different gene could be involved. Wide genome screening using most common form of dystrophinopathies, with a reported incidence of 300 microsatellite markers was performed and a chromosome 22q13 1:3500 and 1:18000 birth males repectively. region showing 5.6 multipoint LOD SCORE near marker D22S1177 About 65% of DMD/BMD cases are attributable to large deletions of and 5.4 multipoint LOD SCORE near marker D22S423. This region the DMD gene, whereas the remaining cases are caused by duplica-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 22 tions or point mutations of the gene. More than 98% of deletions of the the affected child. DMD gene are readily detectable in affected males by using a PCR Results: The amplification efficiency of the mutation was >90% in sin- reaction. We routenly use three multiplex PCR reactions to analyse gle leukocytes from the affected child but only 67% in the father, sug- 25 exons and the muscle and brain promoters. Recently, we started gesting somatic mosaicism for the mutation. Analysis of single haploid to use the Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) sperm cells from the father, using the same protocol, demonstrated 3 technique, with the two commercial dystrophin probe mixes (P034/ different sperm-cell populations: 1) sperm cells harboring the ELA2 P035 MRC Holland). This system allows the simultaneous hybridisa- mutation with the suspected allele, shared with the affected child, 2) tion and ligation of several probes, followed by PCR amplification and Sperm cells without the ELA2 mutation and the normal haplotype, and analysis by capillary electrophoresis. We analysed with this technique 3) sperm cells without the ELA2 mutation but with suspected allele, 200 affected males and 60 female relatives for deletions and duplica- shared with the affected child. tions detection. Conclusion: This was taken as evidence of somatic mosaicism for the An sporadic DMD patient, presenting absence of dystrophin in the im- ELA2 mutation in the father, explaining why he is asymptomatic. These munohystochemistry, was analyzed firstable with by multiplex PCR data were also taken into consideration when deciding which embryos and no deletion was observed. Subsequently a deletion of exon 12 to transfer. was observed with the P035 MLPA probe mix. The sequencing of exon 12 showed the c.1438G>T, p.Gly480X mutation. This mutation P1031. A novel locus for Autosomal Dominant Distal Motor changes the penultimate nucleotide of the ligation site sequence and Neuronopathy maps to chromosome 4q-ter consequently originates an apparent absence of exon 12. A. Magariello1, L. Citrigno1, L. Passamonti1, A. Patitucci1, F. L. Conforti1, A. L. In case of a single exon deletion pattern in MLPA reaction, it is manda- Gabriele1, R. Mazzei1, T. Sprovieri1, C. Ungaro1, M. Bellesi2, M. Muglia1; tory to perform the multiplex PCR and the sequencing of the exon in 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurologi- order to check a point mutation. cal Sciences, University Ancona, Ancona, Italy. Distal hereditary motor neuronopathy (dHMN), also known as distal P1029. High prevalence of GCK mutations and low prevalence of spinal muscular atrophy, is a rare genetically and clinically heteroge- HNF1A mutations in Italian MODY patients neous early-onset disorder, characterized by weakness and wasting of N. Calza1, V. Mantovani1,2, P. Garagnani1,3, M. Cenci2, D. Bastia1, S. Salardi4, C. distal limb muscles with possible pyramidal dysfunction, in absence of Monciotti5, D. Luiselli3, G. Romeo2; overt sensory abnormalities. To date nine and three loci for autosomal 1Centro Ricerca Biomedica Applicata Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, dominant dHMN and autosomal recessive dHMN have been described Italy, 2U.O. Genetica Medica Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 3An- respectively. We have previously reported a four generation kindred tropologia Molecolare Dip. Biologia Evoluzionistica Sperimentale UniversitÃ di characterized by atrophy and weakness of distal leg muscles asso- Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4U.O. Endocrinologia Pediatrica Policlinico S. Orsola- ciated with pyramidal features without sensory abnormalities. Link- Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 5Dip. Pediatria UniversitÃ di Padova, Padova, Italy. age analysis excluded association to all the known loci for autosomal Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically hetero- dominant dHMN suggesting further locus heterogeneity for dHMN. A geneous group of disorders characterised by early onset non-insulin- genome wide search was performed by using 206 microsatellite mark- dependent diabetes mellitus, autosomal dominant inheritance and pri- ers from the ABI PRISM Linkage Mapping Set LD 20. All genotyped mary defect in pancreatic beta cells function. Six genes have been as- markers generated negative or nonsignificant LOD scores at all re- sociated with different subtypes of the disease, but 15-20% of MODY combination fractions tested, except for markers on chromosome 4. A families do not exhibit any mutations in these genes. MODY2, caused maximum LOD score of 3.19 at marker D4S408 was obtained, provid- by glucokinase (GCK) mutations and MODY3, caused by hepatocytes ing evidence of linkage between the disease and this region. All af- nuclear factor (HNF1A) mutations, are the most common forms; while fected individuals in the family shared a commom haplotype between MODY1, 4, 5 and 6 are rare disorders. Aim of our study is to assess the D4S1552 and D4S426 ,which allowed the identification of a 20 cM relative prevalence of MODY2 and MODY3 in Italian patients. interval. The locus region contains many genes, including SNX25, a 96 unrelated probands fitting MODY criteria were screened for GCK member of the sortin nexin family. This gene was screened by using mutations and, when negative, for HNF1A mutations. The analysis DHPLC followed by sequencing of the variants. A nucleotide variation was performed by DHPLC and direct sequencing. Mutations in the was identified in the IVS13, but it was also present in the unaffected GCK gene were detected in 33 of 96 (34.3%) families. 7 mutations members of the family suggesting that it is a polymorphism. were previously undescribed: 3 missense ( E372D, C382X, H424Y), 2 deletions (Q106_M107 delinsL and G295fsdel CA), 1 splicing muta- P1032. Association of mtDNA polymorphism with hypertension tion (IVS7+2T>C) and a stop codon suppression (X465insQ465+1_ and its complications X+145). Mutations in HNF1A gene were detected in 3 (3,1%) pro- S. V. Buikin1, M. V. Golubenko1, V. V. Pogrebenkova1, K. V. Puzyrev2, I. V. bands, consisting in 2 new missense mutations (R159P and E508K) Tsymbalyuk3, V. P. Puzyrev1,3; and the known G31D. All mutations co-segregated with affected family 1State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, members, except for the de novo R159P mutation. 2State Research Institute of Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Siberian Our study indicates that defects in GCK/MODY2 gene are a very com- State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. mon cause of MODY in Italian population, whereas HNF1A/MODY3 Hypertension is among most frequent cardiovascular diseases. It has a lower prevalence. Our data broadens our knowledge of the natu- is known that failing of energetic processes in cardiomyocyte mito- rally occurring GCK and HNF1A mutations repertoire. chondira plays substantial role in pathogenesis of cardiological dis- eases. Mitochondrial DNA contains genes which encode subunits of P1030. Resolving a genetic paradox for Kostmann disease electron-transfer chain. Polymorphisms in these genes may influence through PGD cardiovascular system function. To evaluate associations of mtDNA M. Malcov, D. Ben-Yosef, I. Roitberg, T. Cohen, T. Frumkin, A. Amit, Y. Yaron; polymorphisms with development of arterial hypertension, we have Tel-Aviv Sourasky medical center, Tel Aviv, Israel. studied sample of 147 patients (51 females, 96 males) with hyper- Introduction: Kostmann disease is a congenital immunodeficiency tension and 137 healthy Russian individuals (81 females, 50 males). syndrome amenable to bone marrow transplantation. The family de- Mean age in the samples was 48,3+5,5 and 47,6+10,2 years, respec- scribed, has a son affected with this disease. Genetic analysis identi- tively. In the groups, ultrasound examination and 24-hours monitoring fied a known dominant mutation in the ELA2 gene in the affected child, of blood pressure was performed. Statistical analysis has shown that but also in the asymptomatic father. The parents requested preimplan- in the hypertensive patients, prevalence of polymorphisms in positions tation genetic diagnosis (PGD), coupled with HLA matching, to obtain 16292-16298 was revealed, so this locus might be designated as risk a healthy suitable donor for the affected child. factor for hypertension (OR=1,86; p=0,046). Frequencies of mitochon- Method: A PGD protocol was developed for the known mutation in drial polymorphisms were compared in the groups of patients with or the ELA2 gene. The protocol was based on multiplex nested PCR for without left ventricular hypertrophy. It has been found that haplogroup direct analysis of the mutation, flanking polymorphic markers in the H was more frequent in hypertensive patients without hypertrophy ELA2 gene locus and HLA typing. The protocol was calibrated and (OR=0,36; p=0,043) whereas haplogroup T was more frequent in the applied to single leukocytes isolated from the father, the mother and patients with hypertrophy (OR=9,33; p=0,018). The findings suggest Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 that carrying of particular mtDNA haplogroup may have some impact P1035. Sequencing: a time consuming but robust highway to on energetic processes and may be a predisposition factor for arterial multifactorial diseases associated polymorphisms hypertension and its complications. The work was supported by partial I. Cournu-Rebeix1, M. C. Babron2, E. Genin2, L. Guillot-Noël1, F. Clerget-Dar- support of Russian Foundation for Basic research (RFBR) grants 04- poux2, B. Fontaine1,3; 04-48792, 04-04-48732, 06-04-08326. 1INSERM UMRS546, Paris, France, 2INSERM UMRS535, Villejuif, France, 3Univ P et M Curie, Paris, France. P1033. Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome The HapMap project has characterized sets of Single Nucleotide poly- S. Seneca1, I. Liebaers1, L. Van Haute1, R. Van Coster2, J. Smet2, G. Van morphisms (SNPs) to be picked for disease association studies. How- Goethem3, A. Löfgren4, J. Jaeken5, M. Nassogne6, B. François7, L. Diogo8, W. ever, divergence of opinion still exists on how to optimise the selection Lissens1, A. Meulemans1, L. De Meirleir9; of markers to capture the genetic variation underlying complex traits. 1UZ Brussel, Center for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 2UGent, Pediatric Cytokine gene polymorphisms are known to influence susceptibility Neurology & Metabolism, Ghent, Belgium, 3University of Antwerp, Department and disease course of many autoimmune diseases. Interleukin 4 (IL4), of Neurology and Neuromuscular Reference Center, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Uni- Interleukin 13 (IL13) and their receptor (IL4R) have been partially in- versity of Antwerp, Department of Molecular Genetics-VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, vestigated as candidate genes for MS by linkage and association stud- 5University of Leuven, Department of Pediatrics, Leuven, Belgium, 6Saint-Luc ies with contradictory results. Academic Hospital, Departments of Pediatrics, Brussels, Belgium, 7Clinique de In order to perform an exhaustive investigation of Il4-IL13 cluster and l’Espérance, Pinocchio Centre, Montegnée, Belgium, 8Hospital Pediatrico, Uni- IL4R gene polymorphisms in susceptibility to MS we sequenced the dade de Doenças Metabolicas, Coimbra, Portugal, 9UZ Brussel, Department of complete region of each gene (promoter, exons and introns), in col- Pediatric Neurology, Brussels, Belgium. laboration with the National Center of Sequencing (Evry, France) in The mitochondrial genome (mt) is a small (16.5kb) DNA molecule that 128 MS trio families. is normally present in multiple copies in individual mitochondria. MtDNA Among the 145 SNPs within the IL13-IL4 cluster, 63 were newly identi- depletion syndrome (MDDS) is a recently recognized disorder involv- fied by our study. Note that 54 previously reported SNPs were mono- ing a quantitative defect of mtDNA, that is inherited in an autosomal- morphic in our sample. Using pairwise linkage disequilibrium (LD) we recessive mode. The patients are born after an uneventful pregnancy determined that 93 SNPs would need to be genotyped to represent and often normal at birth, but deteriorate in the neonatal period or early the 145 SNPs with r2=0.8. Concerning IL4R gene, 71 sites were newly childhood. There are two main clinical presentations : myopathic and identified, 44 previously reported are not polymorphic in our sample, hepatocerebral. In the first group children usually present with devast- leading to a total of 157 SNPs which can be tagged by 74 SNPs. ing myopathy and neurological abnormalities. In the second condition Comparison with the tags proposed by HapMap is in progress. Pre- patients suffer from early progressive hepatic failure with hypotonia, liminary results show that at least 10 of the 43 common SNPs of the hypoglycaemia, lactic acidosis and progressive neurodegeneration as IL13-IL4 cluster would not have been tagged if markers were selected described in Alpers syndrome. We used real-time PCR techniques to based on the HapMap CEU data. quantify the level of mtDNA in fibroblast, blood, and muscle or liver tis- sue of patients suspected clinically and on the basis of the biochemical P1036. Investigation of the IL4-IL13/IL4R pathway in French data. Of all patients clinical presentation of MDDS, mtDNA depletion Multiple Sclerosis patients was documented in ten. Molecular analysis of known nuclear mutant M. C. Babron1,2, E. Génin1,2, I. Cournu-Rebeix3,4, H. Perdry1,2, F. Clerget-Dar- genes was undertaken and the exons of the TK2, DGUOK and polG poux1,2, B. Fontaine3,5; genes were sequenced. In two patients DGUOK gene mutations were 1INSERM U535, Villejuif, France, 2Univ Paris Sud, Villejuif, France, 3INSERM revealed, while in four other patients recessive polG mutations were U546, Paris, France, 4Univ Pierre et Marie Curie 6, Paris, France, 5Fédération seen. It is known that mutations in these genes count only for a frac- de Neurologie- Hop de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. tion of MDDS cases. Recently mutations in two other nuclear genes, Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a multifactorial disease, in which genetic SUCLA and MPV17, segregating with mtDNA depletion were identified and environmental factors intervene. Apart from HLA, little is known in patients with MDDS. on the other genetic factors involved. Two genome scans [Broadley et al, 2001; Babron et al, 2004] suggested the presence of a risk factor in P1034. Myosin IXB: Initial evidence for association to multiple the chromosomal region 5q31. The location of the IL4 and IL13 genes, sclerosis in Finnish MS study sample coding for cytokines involved in the immune response, in this region A. Kemppinen1,2, M. Daly3, A. Palotie4, J. Saarela1,2, L. Peltonen1,2; makes them good candidates for susceptibility to MS. Previous stud- 1Dept of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, ies on type I diabetes, another autoimmune disease have suggested 2Research Program in Molecular Medicine at Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, interactions between IL4/IL13 and their receptor IL4R [Bugawan et al, Finland, 3Medical and Population Genetics Program, Broad Institute of MIT 2003]. and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Finnish Genome Center, Univ of We investigated the role of this pathway in a sample of 124 French Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. trios (an affected child and his two parents). Sequencing of all the in- Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease with a dis- dividuals allowed identification of a total of 249 SNPS. Among them, tinct autoimmune component affecting the myelin of CNS. Our group 14, 23 and 86 for IL13, IL4 and IL4R, respectively, had a minor allele has previously identified MS-associated allelic haplotypes of the gene frequency greater than 1%. None of these, taken individually, showed encoding protein kinase C alpha (PRKCA) in Finnish and Canadian significant association with MS. populations. In vitro evidence suggests that PRKCA is a downstream However, in multifactorial diseases such as MS, combinations of two target of RhoA in a pathway regulating blood brain barrier permeabil- or more variants in the same pathway may be involved. Thus, as pro- ity. In this pathway, RhoA is regulated by myosin IX class proteins, posed by Jannot et al [2003], we investigated combinations of two of which MYO9B was recently associated with two autoimmune dis- variants, one in IL4 or IL13 and one in IL4R. Among the 3219 combi- eases, celiac disease and inflammatory bowel disease. nations tested, 12 were significant at the nominal 1% level, and were We genotyped 21 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), covering more significant than each SNP analysed separately. These combina- the MYO9B gene, in the nationwide collection of 970 Finnish MS fami- tions will need to be tested in independent samples for replication. lies. Two SNPs (rs17533945 and rs12986130), located 22 kb apart We thank REFGENSEP for data sharing and ARSEP for funding. in introns 2 and 10, provided evidence for linkage (Pseudomarker, Linkage p-values 0,0004 and 0,001, respectively). rs12986130 also P1037. A Multiple Imputation approach to test the role of showed evidence for association assuming linkage in a set of fami- the CD28-CTLA4-ICOS gene cluster in Multiple Sclerosis lies stratified based on the PRKCA haplotype (Pseudomarker LD as- susceptibility suming Linkage p-value 0,001; Gamete competition p-value 0,002). P. Croiseau1,2, M. Alizadeh3, M. Babron2,1, F. Clerget-Darpoux2,1, G. Semana3, The results lend support to our hypotheses that PRKCA and MYO9B E. Génin2,1; may operate in the same biological pathway, potentially relevant for 1Univ Paris-Sud, UMR-S535, Villejuif, F-94817, France, 2INSERM, Villejuif, F- the disease pathogenesis of MS. The replication effort is ongoing in 94817, France, 3UPRES EA 1257, Faculté de médecine, Rennes, France. 217 MS trios and 3000 case-control samples from Denmark, Sweden Genes involved in Multiple Sclerosis (MS) are difficult to identify be- and Norway. cause of their small effect and their possible interaction with other Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 factors. This is well illustrated by the numerous studies of the role of used to monitor for linkage and association. Eight SNPs mapping to CTLA4 in MS, which showed an association with the CTLA4 gene in 6p21.1 provided some evidence for linkage, the highest LOD (2.51) three cohorts (France, Italy and Portugal) in the subset of patients car- observed with the SNP rs6923053 located 24 kb from TREM2 and rying the HLA-DRB1*1501 allele (Alizadeh et al, 2003) whereas this 8.5Mb from the MS associated HLA region. Polymorphic variations in association was not replicated in a British sample (Roxburgh et al, TYROBP region showed no evidence for linkage or association in MS 2006). However, since the CTLA4 gene is located close to two other families. We conclude that although the exceptionally low number of genes, CD28 and ICOS, also involved in the immune response, it is SNPs in both TYROBP and TREM2 prevent final conclusions, no obvi- possible that the former association detected reflects an association ous relation with the increased risk of MS for the carriers of specific with other polymorphism(s) in any of these three genes. To study this alleles of these demyelination-associated genes was observed in this hypothesis, 19 markers spanning this cluster were tested in a sample set of Finnish MS families. of 450 French MS cases-parent trios. Since these markers were not consistently genotyped among the different families, power to detect P1040. The association of single nucleotide E-selectin gene the association was not the same at the different markers and compar- polymorphism with Multiple Sclerosis ison was therefore very difficult. To help solve this problem, a multiple V. Andreoli1, P. Valentino2, F. Trecroci1, F. Condino1, A. La Russa1, F. Scionti1, imputation approach (Croiseau et al, 2006) has been used. After a R. Cittadella1; complete association study including a stepwise approach and tests of 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Pianolago di interaction, no marker other than the one previously reported in CTLA4 Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catan- showed significant association with MS. However, since only a few zaro, Italy. markers in this cluster have been investigated, it is difficult to rule out E-selectin (endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule; ELAM-1), a cell the possibility of their involvement in MS. surface glycoprotein expressed on endothelial cells, is an important We thank the REFGENSEP, coordinated by Bertrand Fontaine for data adhesion molecule involved in lymphocyte recruitment into the brain, sharing. which represents a crucial step in the pathogenesis of multiple scle- rosis (MS). Several polymorphisms have been described within the P1038. Searching for factors modifying disease expression: ELAM-1 gene. A single nucleotide polymorphism in the coding region Application to Multiple Sclerosis. of the gene (A561C) causes a conservative change of a serine with H. Perdry1,2, M. Babron1,2, F. Clerget-Darpoux1,2, REFGENSEP; an arginine at codon 128 (S128R). Previous study showed that the 1INSERM, UMR-S 535, Villejuif, F-94817, France, 2Univ. Paris Sud, Villejuif, presence of this variation confers not only an increased capability of F-94817, France. binding lymphocytes, but also a different specificity in their recruitment. A modifying locus is a polymorphic locus, distinct from the disease Thus, the S128R E-selectin molecules may be an important variable locus, which leads to differences in the disease phenotype, either by with regard to susceptibility to MS. Two hundred ninety-two patients modifying the penetrance of the disease allele, or by modifying the ex- were genotyped for the presence of this polymorphism in the ELAM-1 pression of the disease. The effect of such a locus is a clinical hetero- gene, through a case-control study involving Southern Italian patients geneity that can be reflected by the values of an appropriate covariate, (Calabria region) with definite MS, and 245 age and sex-matched such as the age of onset, the severity of the disease. healthy controls from the same geographical area. Our results showed We designe the Ordered Transmission Disequilibrium Test (OTDT) to no significant differences in the allele and genotype distribution of the test for a relation between the clinical heterogeneity, expressed by the ELAM-1 polymorphism between MS patients and controls. In addition, covariate, and marker genotypes of a candidate gene. The method in patients no difference was observed in the age of MS onset, accord- applies to trio families with one affected child and his parents. Each ing to ELAM-1 genotypes; furthermore, dividing patients according to family member is genotyped at a bi-allelic marker M of a candidate disease type, EDSS, or age and gender did not yield significant differ- gene. To each family is associated a covariate value; the families are ences for the examined polymorphism. The current findings demon- ordered on the values of this covariate. As the TDT (Spielman et al, strate that ELAM-1 gene is not a major susceptibility or modifying gene 1993), the OTDT is based on the observation of the transmission rate for MS in Southern Italian population. T of a given allele at M. The OTDT aims to detect whether T depends on the value of the covariate. P1041. Chromosome 19q13 and multiple sclerosis We illustrate this method on Multiple Sclerosis trio families ascertained A. Bonetti; by REFGENSEP (Réseau Français d‘Études Génétique sur la Sclérose Biomedicum-Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. En Plaques) which are genotyped for several candidate genes. The Previous studies have suggested a role of allelic variation on chromo- EDSS (Expanded Disability Status Scale) of 268 patients is used to some 19q13 in multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility. The object of the compute the MSSS (Multiple Sclerosis Severity Score)(Roxburgh et study was to test three subregions of 19q13 for association with MS al, 2005), which we use as a covariate. in 440 families using the transmission disequilibrium test. A marker in Acknowledgments: H Perdry is funded by ARSEP. the 19q13.1 area showed nominally significant association with MS. This marker resides at a suggestive linkage peak, and associated with P1039. A simple model for a complex disease: PLOSL and MS in a previous Italian study. Another association was found with an multiple sclerosis - are two demyelinating diseases related? APOE haplotype on 19q13.2, supported also by a separate case-con- A. Sulonen1, S. Kallio1, A. Palotie2, J. Saarela1, L. Peltonen1,3; trol analysis. Previous suggestions on ILT6 deficiency or association 1Dept of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, with D19S585 on 19q13.3-q13.4 were not replicated in this study. 2Finnish Genome Center, Univ of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Dept of Medical These results show that two subregions of chromosome 19q13 are Genetics, Univ of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. associated with MS warrating further studies on their implication with PLOSL is a recessively inherited disease characterised by demyelin- the disease . ation in the CNS and bone cysts. The causative mutation in Finnish patients is a 5.3 kb deletion in TYROBP on 19q13.12, while mutations P1042. NFATC4 gene variation is associated with muscle fiber in TREM2 on 6p21.1, encoding another molecule in a receptor com- composition of athletes plex with TYROBP, have been identified in PLOSL patients from other J. V. Shikhova1, I. I. Ahmetov1, E. V. Lyubaeva2, I. V. Astratenkova1, O. L. Vino- populations. Demyelination in the CNS and the role of TYROBP and gradova2, V. A. Rogozkin1; TREM2 in inflammatory cell activation makes PLOSL-genes potential 1St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian candidates behind demyelination in MS. Federation, 2SRC Institute for Biomedical Problems of the Russian Acad. Sci., Since all the Hapmap SNPs in TYROBP or TREM2 were not polymor- Moscow, Russian Federation. phic or had very low minor allele frequency among Finns, we re-se- There is strong relationship between muscle fiber type distribution and quenced parts of the TYROBP gene in 12 patients and identified four human physical performance. Studies reveal that skeletal muscle can novel SNPs. These SNPs and additional 24 polymorphic SNPs flank- exhibit a high or a low percentage of type I fibers. It has been shown ing the genes were genotyped in 970 Finnish MS families. To increase recently that the genetic variation component for the proportion of type the allelic information content, two flanking STS markers (D19S876 I fibers in human muscles is of the order of 40 to 50%. Calcium/calci- and D6S1575) were also genotyped. Pseudomarker program was neurin/NFAT pathway has been suggested to play a role in the regula-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 tion of several slow fiber-specific genes. To investigate the question dichotomous trait. However, after accounting for multiple testing, this of the influence of NFATC4 gene polymorphism on the proportion of result did not reach statistical significance. For the 3’UTR, no associa- fibers types of m. vastus lateralis, we have analyzed the muscle biop- tion was detected. sies obtained from 27 elite Russian athletes (all-round speed skaters). Conclusion: Our findings do not support the hypothesis that MYOC M. vastus lateralis was chosen for muscle biopsy because of great is a high myopia susceptibility gene in Caucasian subjects. However, individual variability of muscle fiber type composition (i.e. 5-90% for the pattern of allele transmissions was consistent with previous stu- type I fiber). The immunoperoxidase technique was employed for im- dies, and therefore it may be that our sample size was insufficient to munohistochemical identification of myosin isoforms. Fiber distribution disclose a real, yet small, relative risk at this locus. We are currently was expressed as a ratio of the number of fibers of each type in a sec- examining a larger sample to resolve whether MYOC polymorphisms tion to the total number of fibers. DNA was extracted from mouthwash impart an increased risk of high myopia in Caucasian subjects. samples. NFATC4 gene Gly160Ala polymorphism was determined by PCR-RLFP. NFATC4 Ala allele frequency in athletes was 48.1%. P1045. Intergenerational contraction of the CTG repeat in Mean percentages of type I fiber in Ala/Ala homozygotes were signifi- French-Canadian myotonic dystrophy (DM1) cantly higher than in NFATC4 Gly allele carriers (Ala/Ala - 74.2±2.8%, J. Puymirat1, J. Mathieu2; Gly/Ala+Gly/Gly - 63.1±2.3%; p=0.019). We speculate that Gly160Ala 1Unit of Human genetics, Sainte-Foy, PQ, Canada, 2Neuromuscular cllinics, substitution in NFATC4 is associated with increased transcript activ- Jonquiere, PQ, Canada. ity. Thus, NFATC4 Gly160Ala polymorphism is associated with muscle The aim of this study is to determine the occurence of intergeneration- fiber composition in athletes. al contraction of the CTG repeats and its recurrence among siblings in French-Canadian DM1 families. We examined 122 French-Canadian P1043. The -1159 A/C polymorphism of interleukin-12B DM1 families. The contraction of the CTG repeats occurred in 4 fami- gene in myocardial infarction in Russians and Tatars from lies (3,3 %) of paternal transmission while no contraction occurred in Bashkortostan cases of maternal transmission. In family 1, the number of the CTG G. Tulyakova1, T. Nasibullin1, A. Zakirova2, O. Mustafina1; repeats was 650 for the father and 250 for all 4 affected children. In 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir family 2, two brothers with 650 and 500 repeats had all DM1 offspring State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. with CTG repeat contractions (210 and 210 CTG repeats for the first Objective: Inflammation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of and, 160 and 350 CTG repeats for the second father). In family 3 and atherosclerosis. The aim of this study was to test whether the -1159 A/ 4, the fathers with 700 and 550 CTG repeats have DM1 offspring with C polymorphism of the interleukin-12B gene (IL12B) is associated with 230, 300 and 170 CTG repeats, respectively. In all cases, DM1 off- myocardial infarction (MI) in Russians and Tatars from Bashkortostan spring had a less severe phenotype than the father. We did not ob- region of Russia. serve a case with regression of CTG repeats and another with ex- Methods: The -1159 A/C polymorphism of IL12B gene was studied by pansion within the same sibship. These observations indicate that:1) polymerase chain reaction - restriction fragment length polymorphism the frequency of intergenerational contraction of the repeats in DM1 method in 306 male patients with MI and 245 healthy controls from French-Canadian population is lower than that previously reported Bashkortostan region of Russia. For comparison of genotype and al- (6,4%) in other populations; 2) the paternal transmission of DM1 and lele frequencies between the patients and the controls we used two- the presence of CTG repeats contraction in a child greatly increase tailed Fisher test and odds ratio (OR). the probability of CTG repeat contraction in the other affected sibs; 3) Results: Genotype frequencies for IL12B gene polymorphism in Rus- large contractions are associated with a less severe phenotype than sian controls: 55 A homozygotes (53.4%), 39 A/C heterozygotes the transmitting parent’s phenotype. It may exist a familial paternal fac- (37.86%), 9 C homozygotes (8.74%), and in Tatar controls 64 (60.95%), tor that restricts the expansion. 34 (32.38%) and 7 (6.67%), respectively, and were similar to those re- ported for Italian Caucasian healthy controls. In the MI patients, the P1046. Simple genetic protocol for detection of normal and genotype frequencies in Russians were 125 A/A (65.45%), 50 A/C expanded alleles in myotonic dystrophy type 2 (26.18%), 16 C/C (8.38%), and in Tatars 61 (53.04%), 44 (38.26%) J. Sertic1, Z. Mitrovic2, R. Zrinski Topic1, M. Zagar2, J. Vlasic Tanaskovic3; and 10 (8.70%), respectively. 1Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis, Zagreb University Hospital Center, No significant differences in the genotype and allele frequencies were Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Neurology, Zagreb University Hospital Center, found between the Tatar patients and the control group. In Russian Zagreb, Croatia, 3Medical Biochemistry Laboratory, Pula General Hospital, patients the frequencies of the A/A genotype were significantly higher Pula, Croatia. than in the control group (P=0.046, OR=1.65). Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is an autosomal dominant multisys- Conclusion: Our results suggest that IL12B gene polymorphism may temic disease which is caused by expansion of CCTG repeats in intron be a genetic risk factor for the development of MI in Russian patients. 1 of ZNF9 gene on chromosome 3q21. The range of expansion varies widely, starting from 75 up to 11000 repeats. Such expansions can P1044. A family-based test of association between alleles at the usually be detected by Southern blot after restriction enzyme digestion 5‘ UTR polymorphism of the myocilin (MYOC) gene and high of genomic DNA. However, this method is time consuming, requires myopia in subjects from the UK large amounts of genomic DNA and fails to detect approximately 20% T. Zayats1, J. A. Guggenheim1, R. Creer1, H. Williams2, G. Kirov2, M. J. Owen2; of affected individuals. Therefore, the aim was to introduce a simple 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Cardiff University, Neuropsycho- and non-radioactive method for molecular diagnosis of MD2. Our spe- logical Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom. cially designed PCR-based protocol allows amplification of normal Purpose: Mutations in the myocilin gene (MYOC) on chromosome 1 and very long repeat tracts that are visualized after oligonucleotide can cause juvenile-onset open-angle glaucoma and are associated hybridization. Very low amounts of genomic DNA (as little as 30 ng) with 2-4% of cases of primary open angle glaucoma in adults. Three are needed for this method which is simple, relatively fast and thus previous studies (Wu et al. (1999), Leung et al. (2000), Tang et al. reduces the cost of diagnostic laboratory processing of DM2 patients. (2004)) have tested for association between MYOC polymorphisms We tested 78 patients showing different symptoms related to myotonic and high myopia. For a dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the 5’UTR dystrophy but with negative test results for myotonic dystrophy type 1 (untranslated region), 2 of these studies reported a significant asso- (DM1) as part of molecular diagnosis of DM2 in Croatia. DNA analysis ciation. confirmed mutation of ZNF9 gene in 8 patients. This result indicates Methods: DNA was collected from 96 high myopes (≤-6.00 D) and that laboratories should establish a protocol for molecular genetic test- both their parents. The polymorphism in the 5’UTR and another in the ing of DM1 negative patients for a mutation causing DM2 due to their 3’UTR of MYOC were genotyped using standard techniques. Associa- overlapping clinical symptoms. tion was assessed using FBAT. Results: For the 5’UTR polymorphism, 3 common (13, 14 and 15- repeats) and 2 rare (12 and 16-repeats) alleles were found. FBAT showed weak evidence of decreased transmission of the 15-repeat allele (Z = -2.26, P = 0.02) when high myopia was considered as a Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 P1047. N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) gene polymorphisms Urology, Gaziantep, Turkey. in psoriasis and colon cancer patients from the Moscow Kidney stone formation is the result of cascade of events to mineralize population calcium salts in the urinary space causing pathological nephrolithiasis Z. M. Kozhekbaeva1, O. A. Gra2, A. S. Glotov3, I. V. Goldenkova-Pavlova1, S. condition. The mechanism of nephrolithiasis is unknown and usually A. Bruskin1, E. V. Markarova4, E. S. Piruzyan1, T. V. Nasedkina2; calcification and stone formation is associated with the bone specific 1Vavilov Institute of General Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, proteins. One of them is human matrix Gla protein (MGP). It is also 2Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, shown that calcium containing stone growth concurs with the increase 3Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian of MGP expression along with the other proteins. MGP gene is located Federation, 4Center of Theoretical Problems of Physical and Chemical Pharma- on chromosome 12p13.1 - p12.3, consists of 4 exons. Its promoter cology RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. region contains dense binding sites for variety of transcription factors. N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) is one of the key enzymes of a phase II In addition to T-138C and G-7A polymorphisms, primer design for the detoxification of xenobiotics, including carcinogens. The decrease in analysis of promoter sites has been achieved using Workbench Bi- activity of NAT2 enzyme may correlate with accumulation of harmful ology 3.2. Promoter screening and polimorphic analysis were done intermediate metabolites and influence on the risk to develop different by SSCP and PCR-RFLP methods using NcoI and BsrSI restriction multifactorial diseases. NAT2-biochip has been developed including enzymes. For this, 89 patients with familial and 111 patients with spo- 17 SNP in the NAT2 gene, most significant for European populations radic nephrolithiasis, totalling 200 neprolithiasis patients and 94 nor- (282C/T, 341T/C, 481C/T, 590G/A, 803A/G and 857G/A). The biochip mal subject DNAs from their peripheral blood samples were used. The has been tested on more than 450 clinical DNA samples of 166 pa- results showed that there is no significant difference between patient tients with psoriasis, 104 patients with rectal cancer, 84 patients with and control groups for T-138C and G-7A polymorphisms. Therefore, various dermatological diseases and 99 healthy individuals. We found no association can be attributed to T-138C and G-7A polymorphisms that patients with psoriasis and rectal cancer had the increased fre- in patients with nephrolithiasis. quency of mutation 282T comparing with population control (OR=1.3, p = 0.134 and OR = 1.58, p = 0.045, respectively). On the contrary, the P1050. No evidence of Neuregulin 1 plays a role in the mutation 481T had a reduced frequency in patients with psoriasis com- continuum model of psychosis paring with healthy controls (OR=0.89, p = 0.567). No differences have N. Unlu-Gursoy1, Z. Yuncu2, B. Akin3, M. Celik1, S. Kesebir4, S. Vahip5, A. been found in distribution of the same mutations in male and female. Ulusahin1, N. A. Akarsu3; Also patients with psoriasis and rectal cancer revealed the increase in 1Hacettepe University, Department of Psychiatry, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ege Uni- frequency of 590A mutation in comparison with control group (OR = versity, Department of Child Psychiatry, Izmir, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, 1.48, p = 0.055 and OR = 1.501, p = 0.0656, respectively). Thus, the Department of Pediatrics, Gene Mapping Laboratory, Ankara, Turkey, 4State data presented suggest association of separate polymorphic variants Hospital, Psychiatry Unit, Kirikkale, Turkey, 5Ege University, Department of of gene NAT2 with such multifactorial diseases as psoriasis and rectal Psychiatry, Izmir, Turkey. cancer. Although family and twin studies support independent transmission of The work has been particularly supported by a grant „Fundamental schizophrenia and bipolar disorder there are some evidence suggest- Science for Medicine“ from the Presidium of the Russian Academy of ing that schizophrenia may be genetically related to mood disorders Sciences. with regard to psychotic symptoms (continuum model of psychosis). In consensus with this model, we have previously reported an inbred P1048. A new substitution in Aqp2 gene in a family with history multigeneration family overloaded with distinct psychotic disorders of three affected children with Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus (schizophrenia, schizoaffective, bipolar and unipolar disorders with N. Almadani1, V. Hadavi1, F. Afroozan1, R. Kariminejad1, D. G. Bichet2, H. psychotic features) in 18 affected members of the pedigree (Prog. Najmabadi1; Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 2004, 28; 255- 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 266). Chromosome 8p12 region containing neurogulin 1 (NRG1) gene Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Universite de Montreal,Hopital du Sacre-Coeur de was excluded by both linkage and haplotype analysis for this particular Montreal, Montreal, PQ, Canada. family. A total of 134 parent-offspring trios with psychotic disorders (53 Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is characterized by inability to schizophrenia; 5 schizoaffective; 70 bipolar affective disorders with concentrate the urine, which results in polyuria (excessive urine pro- psychosis and 6 unspecified psychosis) were further genotyped with duction) and polydipsia (excessive thirst). NDI is most commonly in- the polymorphic DNA marker, D8S1810 located in the core at-risk hap- herited in an X-linked manner (~90% of individuals), but can also be lotype of the NRG1 gene. There was no evidence for overtransmis- inherited in an autosomal recessive manner (~9% of individuals) or in sion of a spesific allele of the DNA marker D8S1810 to affected off- an autosomal dominant manner (~1% of individuals). Autosomal NDI is spring using broad model including distict types of psychotic disorders caused by mutation in the gene encoding the aquaporin-2 water chan- . We have observed an overtransmission for 206 bp allele (allele 6) nel (Aqp2), which maps to chromosome 12q13.We report on a family of D8S1810 to affected offspring when we used a narrower (schizo- with history of two daughters and a son affected with Nephrogenic dia- phrenia and schizoaffective disorder only) model in the TDT analysis betes insipidus, who developed the clinical and biochemical features ( p= 0.0081 after correction p= 0.07). These preliminary results do not of metabolic acidosis and hypernatremic dehydration with generalized support the hypothesis that NRG1 also plays a role in influencing dist- hypotonia and moderate mental retardation in the first year of life. They ict types of psychotic disorders. (Supported by Hacettepe University suffered from unconsiousness spell, polyuria and polydypsia without Research Foundation: 06 01 101 020; NARSAD: 2003II) any ophthalmologic cystinosis. Laboratory tests indicated severe ane- mia, asotemia, thrombocytopenia and they died from the disease in P1051. The MLPA-dHPLC approach of the NF1 gene analysis: a the first 5 years of life.We determined by sequencing analysis that the french experience two parents were both heterozygote for the G175R mutation in Aqp2 S. Pinson1,2, C. Vallet1, S. Lefebvre1, P. Combemale3, B. Chambe1, A. Tous- gene. The mutation is already known but the base pair change is new. saint1, S. Giraud1, C. Bellané-Chantelot4, D. Vidaud4, C. De Toma5, P. Wolkens- It is thus likely that the deceased infants were homozygotes for this tein4, A. Calender1; mutation and suffered from repeated episodes of dehydration due to 1Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 2NF France, Lyon, France, 3HIA Des- non-linked Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. The prenatal diagnosis for genettes, Lyon, France, 4Assistance Publique de Paris, Paris, France, 5Centre this family revealed that the fetus was heterozygote for the same mu- Du Polymorphisme Humain, Paris, France. tation. The identification of mutations in the NF1 gene causing type 1 neuro- fibromatosis (NF1) is still presenting a considerable amount of work P1049. MGP gene T-138C and G-7A polymorphisms in patients mainly because of the large size of the gene (350 kb - 60 exons) and with nephrolithiasis. the restricted number of recurent mutations. The high frequency of A. Kizilyer1, A. Arslan1, B. Göğebakan1, M. İğci1, S. Erturhan2, Y. İğci1, S. NF1 which is affecting 1 in 3500 individuals made us choose two com- Oğuzkan1, E. A. Çakmak1, H. Şen2; plementary methods to perform NF1 gene analysis: 1Department Medical Biology and Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey, 2Department of - the multiplex ligation-dependant probe amplification (MLPA) for the large deletion and duplication detection (P081-P082)Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 - and the automated denaturing high performance liquid (dHPLC) identified a specific nucleotide substitution, c.2881C>T, in 2 FG fami- screening method. lies. This change results in a missense mutation, p.R961W. Subse- The MLPA method was validated by the detection of 18 known large quent analysis of an additional 119 patients with FG identified another NF1 gene deletions. The dHPLC was optimised for a rapid screening 7 patients with the same mutation, meaning 7.4% of the FG patients of the 60 exons and the splice junctions of the NF1 gene. The dHPLC tested had this mutation. The mutation was not observed in more than conditions were validated by the detection of 260 known variants lo- 1400 normal males. cated in two third of the NF1 exons. Independently, a systematic screen of 737 annotated Vega genes in The sensitivity was evaluated in a MLPA/dHPLC analysis of a panel of 250 XLMR probands, identified another base change, c.3020A>G in 100 unrelated french NF1 patients with at least two consensus diag- MED12 in the proband from the original Lujan family. This change seg- nostic criterias. regated in the family and was not observed in greater than 1400 nor- Four large deletions were detected by MLPA and mutations were iden- mal males. The c.3020A>G results in a missense mutation, p.N1007S. tified in 91 patients with a global mutation detection rate of 96%. The Subsequent studies of 111 FG and 40 Lujan patients found another mutations included 18 deletions, 10 insertions, 33 non sens mutations, family with the same mutation. The phenotype of the family, K9359, 11 missense mutations, 16 splice mutations and 3 complex rearrange- consisted of height in 80th - 90th centile range, weight at the 40th cen- ments. tile, normal head circumference, tall narrow face, high nasal root and Our results confirm that the association of the MLPA and dHPLC tech- behavior disturbances. This closely overlaps with Lujan syndrome: tall, niques provides an accurate and fast method for the identification of asthenic habitus, tall narrow face, high narrow palate, behavior abnor- NF1 mutations. malities. These findings in the original families with Opitz-Kaveggia (FG) and P1052. NOD2/CARD15 mutation analysis and genotype- Lujan syndromes, indicate these two XLMR syndromes are allelic, with phenotype correlation in Russian patients with Crohn‘s disease mutations in MED12. E. V. Stepanova1, O. A. Schagina2, I. D. Loranskaya1, A. V. Polyakov2; 1RMAPE, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research centre for medical genetics, P1054. A novel type of canine osteodysplasia resembling human Moscow, Russian Federation. Osteogenesis imperfecta Crohn’s disease (CD) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the gastro- M. K. Hytönen1, H. Lohi2, K. Sainio3; intestinal tract with variations in localization and behavior. Mutations in 1Institute of Biomedicine and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of the NOD2/CARD15 gene on chromosome 16q have been implicated Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, The Folkhälsan in the pathogenesis of the disease and three main sequence variants, Institute of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Institute of Bio- all single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We collected a cohort of medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. 78 CD patients and 54 population controls to determine the preva- Recently completed genetic analysis indicates that the dog genome lence of NOD2/CARD15 SNPs and their association with phenotypic holds a wealth of information that will benefit human health. Most of the expression of the disease. All patients and controls were genotyped for canine inherited diseases are shared with humans. Complex genetic Arg702Trp, Gly908Arg and Leu1007fsinsC. problems can be simplified in dogs since each pure breed represents At least one mutation was present in 21,7% of patients compared to a group of genetically similar animals that have descended from only 10.0% in controls (p=0,02), in patients with Crohn disease, the allelic a few ancestors. We have characterized a novel congenital disorder frequency of R702W, G908R, and L1007fs was 22%, 8.3%, and 1,3%, involving multiple skeletal defects among Brazilian Terriers. Affected respectively. Compound heterozygotes and homozygotes occurred in dogs have typical craniofacial features, growth retardation, joint hy- 26,9% of patients and in none of the controls. perlaxity and osteopenia based on radiographical examination. The The correlation of genotype-fenotype showed a significant association clinical symptoms are severe and dogs have failure to thrive within a with early onset in patients with R702W or G908R, but not in patients few weeks of life. The affected puppies have to be euthanized at an with L1007fs. There was not a significant association between this early age. Histological analyses reveal abnormalities in bone forma- SNPs carriership and inflammatory localization (p=0,08). Association tion including the thinning of cortical bones and reduced amount of between carriage of this allels and colonic complication (p=0,004) such cancellous bone. These pathological features of the canine osteodys- as stenosis, penetration and perianal exhibitings were revealed in our plasia resemble that of human osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). In hu- study. mans, most of the OI cases are caused either by dominant mutations In a Russian population SNPs of the NOD2/CARD15 gene were a in COL1A1 and COL1A2 or recessive mutations in the cartilage asso- marker of susceptibility to Crohn disease and were associated with co- ciated protein gene (CRTAP). We have excluded these three genes as lonic complication. Carriers of the R702W and G908R alleles showed candidates using microsatellite-based association analyses. Pedigree early onset of Crohn disease. analysis indicates a recessive mode of inheritance. A whole genome This work was pertly supported by Russian President‘s grant wide study with canine SNP chip arrays has been initiated to map the NSh5736.2006.7 causative gene for this novel type of canine osteodysplasia. P1053. Opitz-Kaveggia (FG) and Lujan syndromes are allelic P1055. Predictive value of cytokine gene polymorphisms for the having mutations in the MED12 gene development of osteonecrosis C. E. Schwartz1, P. S. Tarpey2, H. Risheg1, H. A. Lubs1, J. M. Opitz3, R. D. S. Samara1, C. Chassanidis1, A. Dimitroulias2, Z. Dailiana2, T. Koromila1, K. N. Clark4, M. M. May1, S. Briault5, J. M. Graham6, J. Fryns7, G. Piluso8, J. Chelly9, Malizos2, P. Kollia1; A. Verloes10, C. Skinner1, R. C. Rogers1, J. B. Moeschler11, S. M. Joseph1, J. 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics and Cytogenetics, School of Medicine, Univer- Jones1, J. Gecz12, F. L. Raymond13, M. Stratton2, M. J. Friez1, R. E. Stevenson1; sity of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School 1Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 2Wellcome Trust of Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece. Sanger Institute, Hinkton, United Kingdom, 3University of Utah Medical Center, Osteonecrosis of the femoral head is a disease of unknown etiology Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 4Loma Linda University Children’s Hospital, that usually progresses to hip joint destruction necessitating total hip Loma Linda, CA, United States, 5Centre Hospitalie Regional d’Orleans, Or- arthroplasty. Cytokines, other signaling molecules and angiogen- leans, France, 6Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, ic factors may lead to more rapid healing and filling of defects with 7Human Genome Laboratory, Leuven, Belgium, 8Seconda Universite degli Studi biomechanically competent and viable bone. Cytokine production is di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 9Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 10Robert Debre University determined by polymorphisms in the relevant genes. In this context, Hospital, Serurier, France, 11Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, we explored the hypothesis that these polymorphisms of the cytokine NH, United States, 12Women and Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, Australia, genes may be potential genetic susceptibility factors for the progres- 13Cambridge Institute of Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom. sion of osteonecrosis. The IL-1α(-899), IL-1β(-511), IL-4Ra(+1902), FG syndrome is an X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) syndrome first TGF-β (cd10), ΤΝF-α(-308/-238), IL-4(-1098/-590) and IL-10(-1082/- described by Opitz and Kaveggia in 1974. It is characterized by MR, 592) gene single nucleotide polymorphisms were studied in 30 healthy relative macrocephaly, hypotonia and constipation. Five different loci donors and 50 patients with osteonecrosis. Genotyping of the poly- have been reported for FG syndrome on the X chromosome. Analysis morphisms was detected by PCR followed by restriction fragment of a candidate gene, MED12, in 24 XLMR families linked to Xq13, length analysis. A significant association in the genotype distribution Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 of IL-1α(Τ/C), IL-1β(-511)(T/T) and TGF-β(cd10/25) (CG/TG) was P1058. Vitamin D receptor and osteocalcine HindIII gene observed when comparing the osteonecrosis group with the control polymorphism and bone mineral parameters in people, who group (p<0.05). A high percentage of the patients (30%) carried simul- lived in Blockaded Leningrad during 1941-1944. taneously either the genotypes T/C(IL-1α) and T/T(IL-1β) or T/C(IL-1α) M. M. Kostik1, M. A. Bogdanova1, A. N. Voitovich1, O. S. Romashkina1, S. I. and CG/TG(TGF-β) while only one patient carried all three polymor- Yagashkina2,3, O. N. Semenova2, V. I. Larionova1; phisms; in contrast in the controls 3 out of 30 (10%) were associated 1State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, with the polymorphisms IL-1α(T/C) and TGF-β(CG/TG). There was no 2Researche Center for People, who lived in Blockaded Leningrad, Saint-Pe- significant difference in IL-4Ra, TGF-β(cd10), ΤΝF-α, IL-4 and IL-10 tersburg, Russian Federation, 3Military Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, genotype and allele distributions between patients with osteonecrosis Russian Federation. and controls. These results imply that the genotypes (Τ/C), (T/T) and Osteoporosis is well-known phenomena in old population. Starvation (CG/TG) of IL-1α, IL-1β and TGFβ, respectively, are associated with of Leningrad children during blockade 1941-1944 resulted in total dys- increased risk for osteonecrosis and that the simultaneous carriage of trophy. Hungry children weren’t accumulate peak bone mass and they more than one may further increase the risk for osteonecrosis. have high risk of osteoporosis realisation. The mean age of 48 patients, included in our study was 8,64±5,12 P1056. Fine mapping by SNP linkage disequilibrium analysis of a years in 1941 was. Bone mineral parameters were detected by DEXA. candidate region in 1p36 for bone mineral density ApaI, TagI vitamin D receptor (VDR) and Hind III osteocalcine genes H. Zhang1, H. Rydbeck1, D. Stabley2, L. D. Spotila3, K. Sol-Church2, M. De- polymorphism were detected by PCR. voto1; Femur neck osteopenia people were elder in the end of blockade, 1The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, when people without OP (p=0,006). We have revealed differences in 2Nemours Children’s Clinic, Wilmington, DE, United States, 3ScienceScribe, TagI genotypes distribution between people with and without osteope- Haddonfield, NJ, United States. nia (OP) Wards zone (p=0,04), trochanter (p=0,05), L-L (p=0,01), and 1 4 Low bone mineral density (BMD) is one of the major risk factors for differences in ApaI genotypes distribution between males (p=0,05), all osteoporosis. Epidemiological studies support the hypothesis that a patients (p=0,03) with and without OP L-L. Males with t allele had sig- 1 4 large part of the variation in BMD is caused by genetic susceptibility nificant higher BMC femur neck, BMC, BMD, T Wards zone, BMD score factors. We performed a whole genome scan for linkage in a total of 40 trochanter, females had higher T Wards zone, BMC, T trochan- score score Caucasian families recruited through probands with low BMD. A region ter, BMC, BMD L-L Females with A allele had higher BMC, BMD 1 4. on 1p36 near marker D1S214 received support as a candidate locus L-L 1 4. for femoral neck BMD from both linkage (max LOD = 3.53) and link- Females with and without OP L-L had differences in HindIII genotype 1 4 age disequilibrium analysis (p < 0.01) with microsatellite markers. In (p=0,05) and alleles distribution (p=0,049). People with and without an attempt to better characterize the genetic risk factors for low BMD OP proximal part of femur had differences in genotype (p=0,03) distri- located in this genomic region, we have now genotyped the same bution. Females with H allele had significant higher BMC, BMD, Tscore group of families for 1095 SNPs across 11 Mb on chromosome 1p36 of femur neck, Wards zone, proximal part of femur (total), L-L. 1 4 at an average spacing of about 10 Kb in length. Linkage disequilibrium Conclusion: TT genotype and T allele of TagI, aa genotype ApaI VDR and association analysis have been carried out using the quantitative and h allele of HindIII osteocalcine gene polymorphism associated trait linkage disequilibrium (QTLD) test and transmission disequilib- with osteoporosis in people, who lived in Blockaded Leningrad during rium test (QTDT) implemented in SOLAR. We have identified several 1941-1944. SNPs potentially associated with BMD in our samples, with minimum p=0.00004 for femoral neck BMD, p=0.00001 for lumbar spine BMD, P1059. Research of MspI(a) and PvuII(a) polymorphism of PAH and p=0.00010 for trochanter BMD. Among the candidate genes in this gene in Kazakhstan region, it is suggested that association may exist for RPL22, SHREW1 G. S. Svyatova1, M. G. Orazgalieva1, V. L. Akhmetova2; and CAMTA1 with at least one of the BMD traits. 1THE REPUBLICAN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH CENTRE OF MOTHER AND CHILD HEALTH PROTECTION, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 2Institute of biochemistry P1057. The MTHFR c.677C>T polymorphism and osteoporotic and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. phenotypes in Spanish postmenopausal women We investigated the frequencies distribution of polymorphic MspI(a) lo- L. Agueda1,2, M. Bustamante1,2, S. Jurado3, X. Nogués3, L. Mellibovski3, A. cus in 8 intron and PvuII(a) locus in 2 intron of PAH gene. For research Díez-Pérez3, S. Balcells1,2, D. Grinberg1,2; we have taken DNA from blood of 100 not related representatives of 1Dept. Genetics University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, ISCIII, the Kazakh nation. In the Kazakh population the most often genotypes IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 3URFOA-IMIM Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain. were a MspI(à)*À/*à (0,58) and PvuII(a)*À1/*À2 (0,57). There were Osteoporosis is a multifactorial disease, with a genetic component. no deviation in distribution of frequencies of a MspI(à) and PvuII(a)- Several candidate genes have been proposed, among them MTHFR genotypes from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. In the Kazakh popula- (encoding methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase). This gene, associ- tions allele MspI(à)*À (frequency 0,57) and PvuII(a)*À2 (0,59) were ated with several diseases, has been hypothesised to play a role in most often. osteoporosis through interference of collagen maturation caused by We have done the comparative analysis of distribution of frequencies elevated homocysteine. Additionally, a QTL for bone mineral density MspI(a) and PvuII(a) alleles of a gene PAH. We have found out dis- (BMD) was mapped to Chr1, where MTHFR is located. In particular, tinctions in the MspI(a) alleles between sample of the Kazakhs and the c.677C>T polymorphism of this gene, is responsible for increased Russian (χ2=5,122, ð=0,034), French (χ2=5,785, ð=0,024), Udmurts, homocysteine plasma levels. Recently, an association of this polymor- Mordvins, Maris(χ2=5,122, ð=0,032) and Chinese (χ2 = 27,955, ð< phism with lower BMD and increased risk of fractures has been de- 0,001) [Daiger et al., 1989; Akhmetova V., 2001]. Observed hetero- scribed in several populations. Our aim was to replicate these findings zygosity was 0,57. This meaning was higher than in populations of in a Spanish postmenopausal cohort, performing association analy- Volga-Ural region of Russia (0,50). In the PvuII(a) alleles we have ses with femoral neck (FN), lumbar spine (LS) BMD and osteoporotic found out distinctions between sample of the Kazakhs and popula- fracture. Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP in 950 postmeno- tions of Germany (χ2=7,445, ð=0,01), Bulgaria(χ2=25,293, ð<0,001), pausal women (mean age 55.6 ± 8.7). The association analysis was Czechoslovakia(χ2=5,789, ð=0,024), China (χ2=11,524, ð=0,001) and performed by lineal regression for BMD and by logistic regression Japan (χ2=10,402, ð=0,001)[Daiger et al., 1989]. Observed heterozy- for fracture. The minor allele frequency in our population was 39.7% gosity was 0,57. and the distribution of genotypes was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p=0.521). No association was observed between the polymorphism P1060. Germline mutation analysis in patients with and either LS BMD (n=944, p=0.26 recessive model), or FN BMD nonsyndromic Pheochromocytoma or Paraganglioma (n=564, p= 0.49 recessive model). For the presence of osteoporotic S. Lefebvre1, A. Toussaint1, C. Bourdin1, N. Burnichon2, S. Pinson1, A. Calen- fracture, the results were also negative (n=835, p=0.20). In conclusion, der1, A. Gimenez-Roqueplo2, S. Giraud1; this polymorphism is not associated with these osteoporotic pheno- 1Service de génétique moléculaire et médicale, Hopital edouard Herriot, Hospi- types in our cohort. ces civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 2Département de génétique, Hopital européen Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 G. Pompidou, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, Paris, France. gressive movement disorder produces bradykinesia, tremor, rigidity, Paragangliomas and phaeochromocytomas are neuroendocrine tu- and impairment of postural reflexes. PD is characterized by a deple- mors derived from parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems. tion of dopamine in the striatum. Recently, several genes have been Three genes have been associated with non syndromic paraganglio- shown to result in PD phenotype. Mutations in these genes may lead mas: SDHB, SDHC and SDHD. to autosomal dominant (α-synuclein, LRRK2), autosomal recessive We studied the coding sequence of these genes by dHPLC (denatur- (parkin, PINK1, DJ1) or sporadic PD. In a recent paper, the frequency ing High Performance Liquid Chromatography) followed by sequenc- of the LRRK2 G2019S mutation has been shown to reach 41% in the ing of the shifted bands. We developed MP/LC (Multiplex PCR Liquid North-African population compared to 3% in the European population. Chromatography) for the detection of large genomic rearrangements. The aim of this study is to identify the frequency of the LRRK2 G2019S We analyzed 21 positive control cases and detected 100% of vari- mutation in Turkish patients with PD. The presence of the G2019S mu- ants: 20 variants by dHPLC and one deletion of the exon 1 of SDHB tation was analyzed in 72 Turkish PD patients and their 43 relatives by by MP/LC. direct sequencing of the LRRK2 gene (47 familial and 25 isolated cas- We studied 123 unrelated index cases presenting paraganglioma and/ es). Direct sequencing of exon 41 in 115 Turkish PD patients and their or phaeochromocytoma for which syndromic possibilities were exclud- relatives revealed a heterozygous G2019S mutation in a 69-years-old ed (negative sequencing of the genes RET and VHL). The sequenc- female patient, with disease onset at 62 years. The results obtained ing of abnormal profiles in dHPLC allowed identification of 38 different so far in 72 Turkish patients indicate that the frequency of the G2019S variants (including 11 unpublished in literature): 17 polymorphisms, 3 mutation is in accordance with the European populations. variants with unknown pathogenic caracteristics and 18 pathogenic mutations: 8 in SDHB, 4 in SDHC and 6 in SDHD (7 missense, 3 non- P1063. Mitochondrial DNA haplogroups and risk of Parkinson‘s sense, 7 frameshift and 1 splice site mutation). For 14 remaining nega- disease in patients of Tatar ethnic origin from the Volga-Ural tive patients we looked for large genomic rearrangements by MP/LC region of Russia but none variant of this type was highlighted. I. Gilyazova1, I. Khidiyatova1, O. Derbeneva2, E. Ruiz-Pesini2, R. Khusainova1, Genetic analysis with dHPLC and MP/LC allows us to systematically A. Baitimerov1, R. Magzhanov1, D. C. Wallace2, E. Khusnutdinova1; analyze SDHB, SDHC and SDHD for small mutations or large rear- 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics,Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian rangement in all our patients. We discuss genotype-phenotype cor- Federation, 2Center for Molecular and Mitochondrial Medicine and Genetics, relations about our patients. University of California, Irvine, CA, United States. We use complementary genetic technics to complete clinical studies There is the increasing evidence that genetic variants of mitochondrial of a patient and his family. This approach can be extended to whole DNA may be involved in Parkinson’s disease (PD) development. We genetic pathologies tested in diagnosis. analyzed mtDNA variation in 153 unrelated patients of Tatar ethnic ori- gin, aged 46-89 from the Volga-Ural region and 183 age- and ethnical- P1061. Parkin analysis in early onset Parkinson Disease ly-matched controls. Patients were clinically examined in Department F. Sironi1,2, P. Primignani1, M. Zini2, S. Ricca2,1, T. Brambilla1,2, C. Ruffmann2, S. of Neurology of Bashkir State Medical University and diagnosed PD. Tunesi3, A. Antonini2, A. Zecchinelli2, C. Mariani2, D. A. Coviello1, M. Travi1, G. In PD patients and control subjects all the examined Western Eur- Pezzoli2, S. Goldwurm2; asian and Eastern Eurasian mtDNA haplogroups were detected. There 1Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, was a highly significant difference in the overall haplogroup distribu- Milan, Italy, 2Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Parkinson Institute, Milan, Italy, tion between PD patients and control subjects. Haplogroup H was 3Institute of Medical Statistics and Biometry, Univerity of Milan, Milan, Italy. significantly overrepresented in PD patients and underrepresented in Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen- controls (χ2=15.56, p=0.0007, OR=2.69, CI=1.61-4.49) whereas UK erative disorder with a prevalence of 2% over 65 years of age. A strong haplogroup cluster was significantly overrepresented in controls and genetic component is present when the disorder begins before 40 underrepresented in patients (χ2=18.26, p=0.0005, OR=0.31, CI=0.17- years of age. The parkin gene (PARK2 - 6q25.2-27; OMIM: 602544) is 0.55). The frequency of haplogroups J, T, A, C, D, I, W, F didn’t differ the most common cause associate with autosomal recessive-juvenile significantly in the compared groups. The frequency of U and K hap- parkinsonism. logroups distribution between patients and controls, analyzed sepa- 146 PD patients (26.7% familial - 73.3% sporadic) with onset <40yy rately, showed highly significant results. The frequency of haplogroup have been analyzed in order to asses the frequency, nature and as- U in PD patients was 14.38%, whereas its frequency in control sub- sociated phenotypes of PARK2 mutations. The 12 exons of the gene jects was twice higher - 28.96% (χ2=9.39, P=0.003, OR=0.41, CI=0.23- were screened for point mutations by DHPLC and/or sequencing anal- 0.74). Haplogroup K was revealed in 1.31% of PD patients and 8.19% ysis and, when necessary, a gene-dosage assay has been done using of control individuals (χ2=6.86, P=0.009, OR=0.15, CI=0.02-0.69). So, RealTime PCR. individuals classified as haplogroup U and K demonstrated a signifi- A total of 17 patients were found to carry parkin mutations: 13 (9%) had cant decreased risk of PD versus individuals, belonging to haplogroup two parkin mutations, meanwhile single gene mutations were found H, confirming that the “uncoupled” European mtDNA haplogroups are in 4 probands (2%). Eleven point mutations were detected: 6 have strongly protective of PD while the “coupled” European haplogroups been previously reported (pR42P, pA82E, pM192L, pT240M, pR275W, are strongly predisposing to PD. pE409X) and 5 are novel variants (pC212_CfsX224, pA230T, pC238W, p.C253Y). Gene-dosage analysis identified deletions of exons 3, 3-4, P1064. A Common Haplotype in the Annexin A5 (ANXA5) Gene 3-5, 5-6, 6, 6-7, and duplications of exons 2 or 3 in homozygous or het- Promoter Is Associated with Recurrent Pregnancy Loss erozygous state. The parkin phenotype is similar to typical idiopathic N. Bogdanova1, J. Horst1, M. Chlystun2, P. J. P. Croucher3, A. Nebel4, A. PD: patients with 2 mutations were younger at onset and more likely Bohring1, A. Todorova5, S. Schreiber4, V. Gerke2, M. Krawczak3, A. Markoff2; with symmetric symptoms. According to previous European studies we 1Institut für Humangenetik, University of Muenster, Germany, 2Institue of Medi- found that the more frequent amino acid change is the pR275W. cal Biochemistry, ZMBE, University of Muenster, Germany, 3Institute of Medical Informatics and Statistics, University of Kiel, Germany, 4Institute of Clinical P1062. Molecular Analysis of the LRRK2 Gene in Familial and Molecular Biology, University of Kiel, Germany, 5Laboratory of Molecular Pthol- Isolated Turkish Parkinson‘s Disease Patients ogy, University of Sofia, Bulgaria. C. S. Pirkevi1, S. Lesage2, A. Brice2, S. Ertan3, A. Başak1; We sought to verify whether variation in the promoter of the placental 1Boğaziçi University, Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory, Istanbul, Turkey, anticoagulant protein annexin A5 (ANXA5) gene represents a risk fac- 2INSERM U679 Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 3Istanbul University, tor for recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL). Sequence analysis of 70 Ger- Cerrahpaşa School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. man RPL patients, all known to carry neither factor V Leiden nor a pro- Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen- thrombin mutation, revealed four consecutive nucleotide substitutions erative disorder in the Western world after Alzheimer’s disease. Every in the ANXA5 promoter that were transmitted as a joint haplotype (M2). year 16/ 100,000 people are diagnosed with PD. James Parkinson Reporter gene assays revealed that M2 reduces the in vitro activity was the first person in 1817 to describe six individuals with symptoms of the ANXA5 promoter to 37-42% of the normal level. The possible of “shaking palsy” but it was some 60 years later that Jean Martin relationship between M2 and RPL was evaluated by comparing RPL Charcot named the condition “Parkinson’s disease”. Typically, this pro- patients with two independent control groups recruited from the regis-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 20 try of the Institute of Human Genetics in Münster and the PopGen bio- P1067. Polymorphic genetic markers and birth weight bank in Kiel, respectively. Carriers of M2 were found to exhibit a more D. G. Melo1, M. C. T. Canas2, A. L. Pimentel2, A. L. Simões2; than two-fold higher RPL risk than non-carriers (odds ratio = 2.42, 1UFSCar, São Carlos, Brazil, 2USP, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. 95% confidence interval: 1.27 - 4.58) when using unselected controls This study aimed to evaluate a possible correlation between birth (PopGen), and an almost four-fold higher risk when using the Münster weight and four polymorphic genetic markers: ESD, GSTT1, GSTM1 ‘super-controls’, i.e. women with successful pregnancies and no previ- and the microsatelite promoter region of IGF1 gene. We studied blood ous history of pregnancy losses (odds ratio = 3.88, 95% confidence samples of mothers and their neonates from two maternities at Ri- interval: 1.98 - 7.54). This statistically significant association should beirão Preto, São Paulo state, Brazil. The first group was composed facilitate the development of improved prognostic algorithms for RPL, of 509 mothers and their neonates, born at University Clinical Hos- involving a more precise assessment of individual disease risks, and pital maternity (HC). The second group was composed of 339 moth- provide a guide to offering adequate therapies where relevant. ers and their neonates, born at Airport Complex maternity (Mater). In order to exclude factors that may or may not interfere in birth weight, P1065. Application of genetic markers for prognosis of physical all mother’s medical records were analyzed for: age, number of preg- performance of athletes nancies, miscarriages, previous deliveries, number of medical con- A. M. Druzhevskaya1, I. I. Ahmetov1, D. V. Popov2, I. V. Astratenkova1, S. S. sultations, smoking, alcohol consumption and morbidity during actual Missina2, O. L. Vinogradova2, V. A. Rogozkin1; pregnancy. Babies were analyzed for: sex, birth weight and length, 1St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian gestational age, APGAR score and congenital anomalies detected at Federation, 2SRC Institute for Biomedical Problems of the Russian Acad. Sci., birth. Birth weight was associated four molecular genetic markers us- Moscow, Russian Federation. ing the Generalized Linear Model. An association has not yet been The aim of the study was to investigate genotype and allele distribu- shown between ESD, GSTT1 and GSTM1 (maternal and fetal) phe- tion of ACE (I/D polymorphism), ACTN3 (R577X), NOS3 (5/4), UCP2 notypes and neonates´ birth weight. Some alleles in the IGF1 locus (Ala55Val) and UCP3 (-55C/T) genes in rowers (n=230) and controls showed correlation with birth weight and, in the group from Mater, a (n=855), and to find an association of genotypes with physiological strong association between IGF1*22/*22 homozygote neonates and parameters. Genotyping was performed by restriction fragment length lower birth weight was noticed (P=0,0008). The IGF1*20/*20 genotype polymorphism analysis. Physiological parameters were evaluated by was associated with higher birth weight (P=0,0445). This data strongly PM 3 Rower Ergometer and MetaMax 3B Gas Analyzer. The frequen- suggest that such markers may play a direct or indirect role in the cy of ACE II genotype (34.6% vs. 23.6%, p=0.017) was significantly modulation of birth weight. higher in elite rowers (n=107) than in controls. Amongst all athletes the frequency of unfavorable for speed and power qualities ACTN3 XX P1068. The influence of endothelin-A receptor polymorphism on genotype was two times less than in controls (6.2% vs. 12.8%, p=0.01). the progression of renal diseases Moreover, the frequencies of ACE I, ACTN3 R, UCP2 Val, UCP3 T al- J. Reiterova1, J. Štekrova2, D. Maixnerová1, M. Merta1; leles increased in athletes with the growth of skills. Furthermore, ACE 1Nephrology Dept. of 1st Medical Fac., Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of I (when maximal power production capacity was measured), NOS3 Biology and Human genetics of 1st. Medic Fac, Prague, Czech Republic. 5 (power at the anaerobic threshold data), UCP2 Val (VO data) and Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most 2 UCP3 T (power at the anaerobic and aerobic thresholds and VO common hereditary renal disease. IgA nephropathy (IGAN) is a me- 2 data) alleles were associated with high values of aerobic performance. sangial proliferative glomerulonephritis characterized by diffuse me- Thus, ACE I, ACTN3 R, NOS3 5, UCP2 Val and UCP3 T alleles can sangial deposition of immunoglobulin A. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) has been be considered as genetic markers associated with enhanced physical suggested to be a major disease promoting factor in renal diseases. performance, and can be included in the diagnostic complex for the The vasoconstrictor effect of ET-1 is mediated by ET-A receptor. We prognosis of human physical performance. have investigated influence of C/T polymorphism in exon 8 of ET-A receptor gene. P1066. The (TAAAA) microsatellite polymorphism in the SHBG A total number of 193 patients (pts) (87 males, 106 females) with AD- n gene influences serum SHBG levels in women with polycystic PKD entered into this study. Patients were divided into three groups: ovary syndrome 1. 47 pts with end stage renal disease (ESRD) later than in 63 years P. Ferk1, N. Teran2, K. Geršak2; (slow progressors), 2. 49 pts with ESRD before 45 (rapid progressors) 1University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2University and 3. 97 pts with ESRD between 45-63 years. Moreover, we exam- Medical Centre, Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. ined a group of 153 pts with histologically proven IGAN ( 116 males, 37 Hyperandrogenaemia and hyperandrogenism are common features females). Pts were divided into two groups: 1. 79 pts with ERSD during of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Since the sex hormone-bind- 5 years of the (rapid progressors) and 2. 74 patients with normal renal ing globulin (SHBG), a specific plasma transport glycoprotein for sex function (slow progressors). As a control group we used 200 geneti- steroid hormones, regulates the access of the hormones to their tar- cally unrelated healthy. get cells, the SHBG gene was proposed as being a PCOS candidate The distribution of C/T polymorphism did not significantly differ be- gene. We investigated a possible influence of the microsatellite poly- tween rapid and slow progressors of ADPKD and IGAN. The compari- morphism (TAAAA) in the SHBG gene on serum SHBG levels in 123 son of ESRD ages showed that CC females with ADPKD failed signifi- n PCOS patients (study group) and 110 age-matched healthy volunteers cantly later than CT heterozygotes: CC (57.4±8.1), CT (53.0±9.1) and (control group). Peripheral blood samples were obtained in the early TT (54.5±6.4) (t-test, p=0.018). follicular phase of the menstrual cycle or randomly in amenorrhoeic To conclude, CC genotype could be protective in ADPKD females. This patients. Genotyping of the polymorphism was performed and serum genotype was described to be associated with lower pulse pressure. SHBG and total testosterone (TT) levels were determined. The SHBG Supported by project MSMT 0021620806 alleles with 6-11 TAAAA repeats were found; however, none of the alleles or genotypes was characteristic for PCOS patients. Serum TT P1069. Combined effect of hemostatic gene polymorphisms levels were significantly elevated (P < 0.001), while serum SHBG lev- and the risk of myocardial infarction in patients with advanced els were significantly lower (P < 0.001) in PCOS patients compared coronary atherosclerosis. with controls. Moreover, serum SHBG levels were found to be strongly M. Biscuola1, E. Trabetti1, N. Martinelli2, U. Cavallari1, M. Pinotti3, O. Olivieri2, influenced by the (TAAAA) SHBG polymorphism, in both the PCOS S. Cheng4, M. Sandri2, S. Friso2, F. Pizzolo2, C. Bozzini2, P. Caruso3, F. Ber- n (55.3%) and the control (33.1%) group of patients. According to our nardi3, R. Corrocher2, D. Girelli2, P. Pignatti1; results, the (TAAAA) SHBG polymorphism might be an important pre- 1Section of Biology and Genetics - Dept Mother & Child/Biol & Genet, Univ n dictor for serum SHBG levels and, consequently, for hyperandrogen- Verona, Italy, Verona, Italy, 2Dept Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Univ aemic clinical presentation of PCOS. Verona, Italy, Verona, Italy, 3Dept Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Univ Ferrara, Italy, Ferrara, Italy, 4Dept Human Genetics, Roche Molecular Systems, Inc., Alameda, CA, United States. Relative little attention has devoted until now to the combined effects of gene polymorphisms of the hemostatic pathway as risk factors for Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 21 Myocardial Infarction (MI), the main thrombotic complication of Coro- Each subject was genotyped by a multiple polymerase chain reaction nary Artery Disease (CAD). We studied a total of 804 subjects, 490 followed by a SNaPshot® reaction. A random number of PCR ampli- of whom with angiographically proven severe CAD, with or without fied products were sequenced as a confirmational method. We deter- MI (n=306; n=184; respectively). An additive model considering ten mined TNF-a and Lt-a haplotypes by PHASE v2.1 software. common polymorphisms [Prothrombin 20210G>A, PAI-1 4G/5G, Fi- Alleles at the individual loci studied, both in the patient and control brinogen β -455G>A, FV Leiden and “R2”, FVII -402G>A and -323 group, were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The polymorphisms ana- del/ins, Platelet ADP Receptor P2Y12 -744T>C, Platelet Glycoproteins lyzed revealed no differences in the allele or haplotype distribution in Ia (873G>A), and IIIa (1565T>C)] was tested. The prevalence of MI patients compared to control subjects. increased linearly with an increasing number of unfavorable alleles (χ2 We conclude that the TNF-a and Lt-a gene polymorphisms analyzed for trend = 10.68; P = 0.001). In a multiple logistic regression model, are not major genetic risk factors for COPD at least for the studied the number of unfavorable alleles remained significantly associated population. with MI after adjustment for classical risk factors. As compared to sub- jects with 3-7 alleles, those with few (£2) alleles had a decreased MI P1072. Association of the FADS gene cluster with risk (OR 0.34, 95%CIs 0.13-0.93), while those with more (³8) alleles polyunsaturated fatty acids in serum and erythrocytes had an increased MI risk (OR 2.49, 95%CIs 1.03-6.01). The number of G. Malerba1, L. Schaeffer2, L. Xumerle1, N. Klopp2, E. Trabetti1, M. Biscuola1, U. procoagulant alleles correlated directly (r=0.49, P=0.006) with endog- Cavallari1, N. Martinelli3, D. Girelli3, O. Olivieri3, R. Corrocher3, J. Heinrich 2, P. enous thrombin potential. The combination of prothrombotic polymor- F. Pignatti1, T. Illig2; phisms may help to predict MI in patients with advanced CAD. 1DMIBG, Biology and Genetics, Univ. Verona, Verona, Italy, 2GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Munich, Germany, 3Department P1070. Frequency of C-1055T gene polymorphism in IL-13 in of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. Russian population and its association with asthma, IgE and Polymorphisms of the human delta-5 (FADS1) and delta-6 (FADS2) IL-13. desaturase genes have been recently described to be associated with S. A. Mazurina, V. A. Kaznacheev, Y. V. Gervaziev; the levels of several long-chain n-3 and n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids Mechnickov Research Institute for Vaccines and Sera RAMS, Moscow, Russian (PUFAs) in serum phospholipids in an East German population. We Federation. report a study in an Italian population that replicates the association, Bronchial asthma (BA) is a chronic disease associated with elevated extends it to erythrocyte cell membrane PUFAs, and to the FADS3 IgE levels. It was demonstrated that IL-13, as well as IL-4, plays a cru- gene as well. cial role in IgE production regulation. IgE - regulating effect of IL-13 is Thirteen polymorphisms located in FADS1-FADS2-FADS3 gene clus- confined to activation of IgE’s ε-chain gene transcription. ter (chromosome 11q12-13.1) were genotyped in 658 adults. The aim of our study was to reveal the association between C-1055T, The markers showed the presence of linkage disequilibrium (LD) and IL-13 gene polymorphic modifications and level of total IgE and IL-13 the LD-block structure of the gene cluster was determined. in BA patients. Polymorphisms and statistically inferred haplotypes showed stron- The C-1055T gene polymorphism in Il-13 was analyzed by the PCR- gest associations with the acid arachidonic acid (C20:4n-6) in serum RFLP, using restriction enzyme BstFNI in 136 asthma patients and 64 phospholipids and in erythrocyte cell membranes (rs174545 adjusted- healthy control subjects. Total IgE and IL-13 levels were measured by p-value=6.48x10-22 and adjusted-p=1.4x10-10, respectively). Other ELISA. significant associations were observed for eicosadienoic (C20:2n-6), The total serum IgE level was found to be elevated in BA patients linoleic (C18:2n-6), alpha-linolenic (C18:3n-3), stearidonic (C18:4n- group: 190(47,5;495)kE/l, and within normal range in the control group: 3) and eicosapentaenoic (C20:5n-3) acids. No significant association 25,5(19;100)kE/l. The levels of total IgE in BA patients and controls dif- was observed for docosahexaenoic acid (C22:6n-3). fer significantly, p<0,001. The serum IL-13 level was elevated in BA patients group: 165(22;320)kE/ P1073. Positive allelic and haplotype association of two 5q l, and normal in the control group: 70(15;130)kE/l. The levels of IL-13in markers with schizophrenia BA patients and controls differ significantly, p<0,001. L. Kapur1, L. Oruc2, N. Pojskic1, J. Ramic1, N. Lojo-Kadric1, R. Hadziselimovic1; The frequency of allele T was 40% in the BA patients group and 61% in 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and control group, this parameter differed significantly, (p=0,005). In spite Herzegovina, 2Psychiatric Clinic, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. of the high frequency of T allele, the number of homozygotes was less The study is based on literature data of genomewide linkage studies than 2% within the whole group. Therefore we failed to determine the in numerous families with schizophrenia during the period of 1997- association of C-1055T polymorphism with total IgE level and serum 2001 that identified putative schizophrenia locus at 5q region. Those IL-13 level. Thus in our study we didn’t revealed the association be- findings were supported with positive associations of chr 5 trisomy tween C-1055T and IL-13, total IgE levels and atopy. and schizophrenia occurence. However, limited number of population based association studies replicated positive result pinpointing to Ep- P1071. TNF-a and Lt-a gene polymorphisms and suceptibility to sin4, a plausible functional candidate gene in the 5q region. COPD in a spanish population In our study, total of 102 age and sex matched individuals donated E. Cordoba-Lanus, J. de Torres, A. Montejo de Garcini, L. Perez-Mendez, A. their blood specimens after their informed consent to participate. Pa- Aguirre-Jaime, C. Casanova; tients fulfiling DSM-IV and ICD-10 criteria for schizophrenia diagnosis Unidad de Investigación-Hospital Univ. N/S de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Te- were recruited. Healthy individuals were evaluated in the interview nerife, Spain. with psychiatric specialist for control grouping. DNA extraction, PCR Several cytoquines that contribute to airway inflammation, including tu- for D5S818 i CSF1PO markers and detection on automated DNA se- mor necrosis factor a (TNF-a), have implicated in the pathogenesis of quencer were performed using standard protocols. Data were ana- chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Some polymorphisms lyzed for allelic, genotype and haplotype association. of the TNF-a and Lt-a gene may be associated with COPD in different Case and control groups are in HWE for both analzyed markers ethnic populations. We investigated the importance of certain variants/ (P>0.05). Single locus allele case-control test based on Exact P-val- haplotypes of seven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of these ue (Nielsen and Weir 1999) showed statistical significance for both genes in the course of the disease or whether they predispose to a D5S818(P=0.01) and CSF1PO (P=0.013), but not for genotype level more severe form of COPD in a Spanish population. association (P=0.226 and 0.337, respectively). These results were Case-control study. We analyzed the SNPs: -857(C/T), -376(G/A), - also confirmed using allelic and genotypic association test based on 308(G/A), -238(G/A) and +489(G/A) of the TNF-a gene and +249(G/ χ2 test. Two locus haplotype trend regression (Zaykin et al. 2002) A) and +720(C/A) of the Lt-a gene in 323 Caucasian individuals. The showed significant association based on χ2 test in 1000 permutations study included 143 COPD patients (62 ± 10 years; 96 men and 47 (P=0.0097). women) with airflow obstruction (55%±20 media predicted (FEV)) re- 1 cruited from a outpatient pulmonary clinic and 180 control subjects without any respiratory disease included in a cohort of 15000 subjects of the Canary Islands.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 22 P1074. Polymorphism of nitric oxide synthases in preeclampsia County, Taiwan. G. S. Demin1,2, I. Bouba3, T. E. Ivashchenko1, V. S. Baranov1,2, I. A. Georgiou3; Primary cutaneous amyloidosis (PCA) is a relatively common skin 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, disorder in South America and Southeast Asia. The pathogenesis of 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Uni- PCA remains unclear. Most cases of PCA are sporadic but familial versity of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece. aggregation has been reported from South America and Taiwan. The Preeclampsia is multifactorial disease of third trimester of pregnancy different susceptibility among ethnic groups suggests that genetic fac- affecting up to 15% of women. The etiology of preeclampsia still re- tor may play an important role in its pathogenesis. In this study, we mains unknown. Pathological changes lead to generalized endothelial performed genome-wide linkage analysis using both single-nucleotide dysfunction in mother and further complications of pregnancy. Nitric polymorphisms (SNPs) and microsatellites (STRs) assays across nine oxide plays an important role in regulating vascular processes, act- families with familial primary cutaneous amyloidosis (FPCA) to map ing as a vasodilator and second messenger. Nitric oxide synthases the disease gene(s) for FPCA. (NOS) catalyze nitric oxide production. There are three types of NOS Multipoint linkage analysis of both SNPs and STRs assays identified encoded by three different genes (NOS1, 2 and 3). Polymorphism of significant lod scores (lod >3) with a peak lod score of 3.73 (NPL score these genes correlates with NO level and thus certain genetic alleles = 5.39, p-value = 0.000057) produced by the SNPs assay on chro- may predispose to preeclampsia. mosome 5q region. However, the critical region of FPCA was further DNA samples were obtained from the women with pure preeclampsia narrowed down from 7.25 cM to 2.37 cM by SNPs assay. The linkage (n=39) and control group of women without any gynecologic complica- peaks obtained by both SNPs and STRs sets had a high degree of tions and background disorders (n=98). Polymorphisms of NOS1 (AAT correspondence in general, with SNPs consistently producing higher repeats), NOS2 (CCTTT repeats) and NOS3 (894G>T and 4a/4b) lod scores. Additional lod > 1 regions were observed on chromosome were studied by PCR-RFLP assay. 2, 11, 15, and 16 with the SNPs set. There are 12 known genes in the The distribution of genotypes of all NOS genes was in agreement candidate region of chromosome 5 identified by SNP linkage mapping. with the HWE law (p>0.05). There was no significant difference in fre- Re-sequencing of some of these genes are underway to identify the quency of genotypes of NOS1, NOS2 and NOS3 (894G>T) genes be- possible disease gene of FPCA. tween studied groups (p>0.05). Although there were some tendencies We conclude that genome-wide linkage analysis by using high-density for certain alleles of NOS2 (protective affect of allele 15) and NOS3 SNP markers provided higher lod scores compared with the standard (894G) genes in patients but they were not significant. However the 10 cM microsatellite marker assays. frequency of 4b/4b genotype of NOS3 gene was significantly higher in preeclamptic women (79.5%) than in controls (59.8%, p<0.05). P1077. Proopiomelanocortin gene variability and chronic heart In conclusion it can be suggested that NOS1 polymorphism unlikely failure: no association so far affects preeclampsia and polymorphisms of NOS2 and NOS3 genes J. A. Bienertova Vasku1,2, L. Spinarova1,3, P. Bienert1,2, M. Forejt1,4, A. Vasku1,2; probably participate in pathogenesis of this disorder what needs veri- 1Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Pathological Physiolo- fication in further studies. gy, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 31st Department of Cardioangiol- ogy, Masaryk University affiliated Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Department P1075. Association studies of candidate genes for Premature of Preventive Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. Ovarian Failure (POF) Background: Chronic heart failure is characterized by persistent ac- S. Bione1,2, F. Rizzolio2, T. Corre2, C. Sala2, M. Testa2, R. Ricotti1, A. Marozzi3, tivation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis where proo- L. Persani3, O. Zuffardi4, D. Toniolo2; piomelanocortin (POMC) plays a crucial role. In this study, we there- 1IGM-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 2DIBIT-San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, fore aimed to investigate possible associations of the POMC RsaI 3University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. (rs3754860) and C1032G (rs1009388) variants in the non-coding re- Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is a disorder defined by cessation gions of proopiomelanocortin gene with chronic heart failure. of menses before 40-45 years of age and characterized by elevated Methods: The case-control study comprised a total of 374 patients of levels of gonadotropins. POF has an estimated frequency of 1-2% and caucasian origin with chronic heart failure (functional classes NYHA a relevant genetic component. Despite familial segregation of the con- II-IV, ejection fraction (EF) < 40%) and 202 age-matched healthy con- dition is a frequent finding, its genetic inheritance remains unclear and trols. They were genotyped for the POMC RsaI (5´-UTR) and C1032G heterogeneous. POF genes identified so far confirmed the heterogene- variants (intron 1) by means of PCR-based methodology. ity of the condition as they are responsible of an autosomal recessive Results: In univariable analyses, neither genotypes nor alleles of both form (i.e the FSHR gene) or X-linked dominant (i.e the BMP15 gene) examined polymorphisms were associated with BMI, older age, male but they can also contribute as risk-factors (i.e the FMR1 premutated sex, ejection fraction (EF), hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy allele) thus suggesting a multifactorial inheritance of POF. (LVH), diabetes mellitus (DM), and chronic kidney disease (CKD) To investigate the genetic basis of the condition we evaluated POF can- (P≥0.05 for each); no case-control differerences in genotype distribu- didate genes as risk-factors by analysing their association in case-con- tions or allele frequencies were observed. We also constructed POMC trol studies. To this aim a cohort of more than 500 Italian POF patients RsaI/1032 C/G haplotypes and have not found a significant associa- was established by collaboration with gynaecological and endocrino- tion with BMI, EF, LVH, DM or CKD. logical clinics. Controls were selected as women with normal age (>48) Conclusions: Our results do not clearly indicate that both the geno- at physiological menopause collected in the same geographic areas. types of alleles of RsaI and C1032G polymorphisms within the POMC Among a number of candidate genes for POF, we started analysing genes are associated with chronic heart failure in the Czech cauaca- genes involved by X/autosome balanced translocations. The analysis sian population. of the DIAPH2 gene gave us first evidence of its contribution as a susceptibility gene. Allelic frequencies at two polymorphic loci showed P1078. Novel associations of several polymorphisms and significant enrichment in the POF cohort and defined an associated haplotypes in -alpha-reductase gene (SRDA2) in Czech haplotype spanning the proximal portion of the gene. Replication of the prostate cancer patients association results and functional studies are in progress to evaluate M. Minarik1, A. Loukola2, L. Fantova1, M. Urban3, J. Heracek3, L. Benesova1; the prevalence of these variants in the etiology of POF. 1Genomac International, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Finnish Genome Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Urology clinic, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, P1076. Genome-wide linkage analysis for familial primary Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. cutaneous amyloidosis: a comparison between single- Introduction & Objectives: SRD5A2 is a key member of androgen nucleotide polymorphisms and microsatellites assays methabolic pathway converting testosterone to dihydrotestosterone M. Lin1,2, C. Lin1, Y. Su1, I. Chen1, D. Lee2, Y. Chang1,2, T. Liu1, C. Wong2, S. and has been suggested to play a role in the transformation of pros- Tsai1,3; tate cells. Several SRD5A2 SNPs have previously been desribed as 1National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Taipei Veterans General Hos- potential risk markers. The aim of this study was to evaluate potential pital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli SNP and haplotype association with prostate cancer. Material & Methods: The case-control study included 339 unrelated individuals with clinically verified prostate cancer and 231 unrelated Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 controls with clinically verified benign prostatic hyperplasia. DNA was found from conditional and sub-phenotype analyses. The disease extracted from venous blood and genotyping of a set of 17 SNPs at the genes were then used to infer a GeneMap that consists of a network SDR5A2 locus was carried out by PCR and cycling-gradient capillary of interacting disease genes and their biological pathways. The shown electrophoresis (CGCE), a technique based on heteroduplex analysis GeneMap reveals the genetic etiology of the disease and represents a in temperature gradient. Case-control association analyses were per- comprehensive tool toward personalized medicine. formed using PLINK (http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/~purcell/plink/data. shtml). P1081. Genetic refinement of PSORS4 and ATOD2 susceptibility Results: We have identified 5 SNPs showing significant allele frequency loci in Italian samples and genotype distribution differencies between cases and controls. The C. Sinibaldi1, N. Paolillo1, E. Giardina1, C. Peconi1, L. Chini2, V. Moschese2, P. SNP markers with their respective p values are: rs4952219 (p=0.0186), Rossi2,3, S. Chimenti4, S. Nisticò4, E. Galli5, G. Girolomoni6, G. Novelli1,5,7; rs413836 (p=0.0261), rs2300697 (p=0.0124), rs2208532 (p=0.0142) 1Department of Biopathology, Centre of Excellence for Genomic Risk Assess- and a novel marker assigned as SRD5A2_SNP4 (p=0,0358). In addi- ment in Multifactorial and Complex Diseases, School of Medicine, Tor Vergata tion we have identified 5 haplotypes showing strong association with p University, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, Tor Vergata University, values between 0,001 and 0,005. Rome, Italy, 3Division of Immunology and Infectious Disease, Department of Discussion: Many of the significant SNP markers are from noncoding Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital ‘Bambino Gesu, Rome, Italy, 4Department of regions, therefore the haplotype association may mostly be related to Dermatology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 5San Peter Hospital, Fate- alternate gene regulation. Haplotype analyses on a larger patient co- benefratelli, Rome, Italy, 6Department of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences, horts is desirable in order to evaluate potential of the identified SNPs Section of Dermatology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 7Department of and haplotypes for identification of risk groups. Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little This project was supported by Czech Ministry of Health grant no. rock, AR, United States. 8039-3. Psoriasis (PS) and atopic dermatitis (ATOD) are chronic inflammatory skin disorders triggered by both genetic and environmental factors. A P1079. Linkage to 13q in a novel autosomal dominant susceptibility locus mapped on chromosome 1q21 have been identi- pseudoarthrogryposis-like syndrome fied in both the diseases (PSORS4-ATOD2). Recently we refined the S. A. Ugur1, D. Gul2, A. Tolun1; PSORS4 and ATOD2 susceptibility loci by using a LD approach in two 1Bogazici University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, cohorts of 128 PS and 120 ATOD Italian trios. We showed that PS and Turkey, 2Gülhane Military Medical Academy and Medical Faculty, Department of ATOD shared a risk-haplotype defined by STRs markers MIDDLE and Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. ENDAL16. We failed to reveal evidence of association for LOR gene Distal Arthrogryposis (DA) Syndromes are characterized by nonpro- located within the risk-haplotype although a differential gene expres- gressive, congenital contractures of two or more different body areas sion has been observed in PS and ATOD. without primary neurological and/or muscle disease that affects limb In order to reveal the identity of the susceptibility factor of PSORS4 function. Features common to all DA syndromes include a consistent and ATOD2 we newly refined the risk haplotype and its surrounding pattern of distal joint involvement, limited proximal joint involvement, an chromosomal regions (650 Kb) by typing a selection of 31 SNPs in our autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, and widely variable expres- familial cohorts of trios. sivity. Mutations in genes encoding the fast skeletal muscle regulatory Preliminary statistical analysis identified three distinct associated hap- proteins troponin T, troponin I, and beta-tropomyosin have been shown lotypes within the selected region: the first, Hap1 (9.7 kb) generated to cause DA syndromes. Pseudoarthrogryposis-like syndrome (PAG- significant association in both the diseases (PS p-value 0.0229; ATOD L), a novel disorder, has been observed in a large Turkish kinship. p-value 0.0077), the second, Hap2 (8.8 kb) is associated in the only Manifesting multiple contractures in patients, and an autosomal domi- ATOD cohort (p-value 0.0257); the third, Hap3 (38.5 kb) generated nant mode of inheritance, the syndrome may be classified as a new significant p-value in the only PS cohort ( p-value= 0.0270). form of DA. However, PAG-L is progressive with a preadolescence age The weakness of association data reported could reflect the low pen- of onset, which makes it distinct from DA syndromes. A genome-wide etrance of PSORS4 and ATOD2 but need to be confirmed in additional scan has identified a locus on chromosome 13q suggestive for link- samples. Threfore, an independent set of sporadic psoriatic patients age. Further genotyping in the candidate locus with additional family (n=300) and further 60 ATOD trios are being typed at the moment. members is in progress. Acknowledgements: This work was supported by A.DI.PSO P1080. Genome-wide association studies for complex diseases P1082. Detection of large deletion of 4.5 Mb in PTCH region in a using samples from the Quebec founder population: examples Croatian Gorlin syndrome case by semi-quantitative fluorescent with psoriasis and ADHD multiplex PCR B. Paquin, J. Raelson, P. Van Eerdewegh, V. Bruat, P. Croteau, J. Segal, S. V. Musani1, A. Basta-Juzbašić2, P. Gorry3, S. Levanat1; Debrus, J. M. Vidal, M. Lapalme, S. Kebbache, J. W. Hooper, A. Belouchi, T. 1Department of molecular medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, 10000 Zagreb, Keith; Croatia, 2Department of Dermatovenerology, University School of Medicine, Genizon BioSciences, St. Laurent, PQ, Canada. University of Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, 3Laboratoire de Génétique, Dével- Genizon is involved in the discovery of disease susceptibility genes oppement & Cancer, Université V. Ségalen, Bordeaux, France. in more than 20 diseases using samples from the Quebec founder Gorlin syndrome or Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) population (QFP). We have successfully completed nine genome-wide is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by developmental association studies for complex diseases. To illustrate our process and abnormalities, cysts of the skin, jaws, and mesentery and cancer pre- the evolution of our strategy, examples from the psoriasis and ADHD disposition to basal cell carcinomas (BCC), medulloblastomas, menin- studies are shown. The psoriasis study was performed using 500 trios giomas, fibromas of the ovaries and heart. and a custom marker map of 80,654 SNPs spaced according to the The syndrome is caused by mutations in the human homolog of the variation in the extent of local LD across the genome in the QFP. The Drosophila patched gene, PTCH. PTCH is a tumor supressor gene, ADHD study was performed using 459 trios with an upgraded custom located at 9q22.3, and encodes a 12 transmembrane glycoprotein that marker map of 374,187 SNPs, consisting of the HAP300 chip from Il- acts as an antagonist in the Hedgehog signaling pathway. lumina supplemented by 56,683 SNPs, optimizing the SNP selection We present a Gorlin syndrome patient with typical phenothypical fea- to the QFP samples. For both studies, single-marker and haplotype tures of widespread basal cell carcinomas, jaw malformations, stra- association analyses were performed and genome-wide significance bismus and mental retardation, with family history that beside basal of the obtained P values was evaluated based on permutation tests. cell carcinomas includes lung cancer and gastrointestinal carcinomas. For both studies, regions with P-values that met the criteria of genome- Since we found no mutations in exons of PTCH gene with conventional wide significance were identified. We describe the identified regions methods of SSCP, dHPLC screening and direct sequencing, we de- and the encoded genes. Many regions contained a single, druggable veloped a new method of semi-quantitative fluorescent multiplex PCR gene representing immediate opportunities for drug development and with polymorphic markers surrounding PTCH gene. With this method genes with biologically relevant function. Genes in novel pathways we defined a deletion of 4.5 Mb in size between markers SHGC- were identified in both studies. Additional disease genes were also 110746 and SHGC-132418 (9q22.3-9q31.1).Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 Those results confirm previously reported findings that large deletions 2Engelgardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Cardi- in PTCH region may also cause Gorlin syndrome through haploinsufi- ology Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Bioinformatics Labora- ciency of PTCH gene. tory of GosNIIGenetika, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Academy, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation. P1083. Mutation analysis of the PVR and PVRL2 genes in The rennin-angiotensin-bradykinin system is regulated by the number patients with non-syndromic cleft lip/palate of genes and possesses crucial role in the development of cardiovas- M. A. Sözen1,2, J. C. Murray3, J. T. Hecht4, I. McIntosh5, M. M. Talarova6, R. A. cular diseases. However, interpretation of multi-gene associations Spritz2; usually encounters substantial problems in evaluation of particular 1Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, Afyonkarahisar Kocatepe gene polymorphism contribution in pathogenesis of the disease. So, University, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Human Medical Genetics Program, Uni- there is a clear cut necessity for the development of new approaches versity of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences Center, Aurora, CO, United for more objective evaluation of gene testing studies. States, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United Present work focuses on the different approaches based on stand- States, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School, Hous- art χ-test, the “score” analysis with using Mann-Whitney U test and ton, TX, United States, 5Institute of Genetic Medicine; Johns Hopkins Univer- Bayesian statistical approaches coupled to Markov chain Monte Carlo sity, Baltimore, MD, United States, 6Department of Orthodontics, University of (MCMC) techniques. Analysis of REN (I9-83G>A), AGT (M235T), ACE the Pacific, San Francisco, CA, United States. (I/D), AGTR1 (1166A>C), AGTR2 (3123C>A), BKR2 (-58T>C and I/D) Non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (nsCL/P, MIM genes in children with arterial hypertension was shown that application 119530) is one of the most common major birth defects. Genetic link- MCMC techniques with/or the “score” analysis can be used for studing age and association studies have implicated loci in the 19q13 in nsCL/ multi genes associations. P. Several candidate genes in the 19q13 region have been studied and allelic associations with nsCL/P reported. We carried out mutation P1086. Association study of IRF5 gene with Rheumatoid Arthritis analysis of the PVR and PVRL2 genes in this chromosomal region due in the TUNISIAN population to their close homology to PVRL1, a gene involved both in an auto- M. Ben Hamad1, E. Petit2, G. Chabchoub1, S. Barbet3, S. Marzouk4, Z. Ba- somal recessive CL/P syndrome, CLPED1, and in nsCL/P in patients hloul4, H. Ayadi1, F. Cornelis5, A. Maalej1; from northern Venezuela. We screened a total of 73 nsCL/P patients 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, sfax, Tunisia, 2Laboratoire de and 105 healthy controls from North America, and 94 patients and 94 Recherche Européen pour la polyarthrite Rhumatoïde, Evry, France, 3Labora- controls from Venezuela for sequence variants in PVR and PVRL2 as toire de Recherche Européen pour la polyarthrite Rhumatoïde,, Evry, France, candidate genes for nsCL/P. We detected a total of 10 variants in the 4Service de Médecine Interne CHU Hédi Chaker, sfax, Tunisia, 5Laboratoire de PVR gene and 2 variants in the PVRL2 gene; however, none of these Recherche Européen pour la polyarthrite Rhumatoïde, evry, France. showed individual significant association with nsCLP in cases versus Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune, systemic disease which controls. Indeed, only one non-synonymous PVR variant, A67T, was is characterized by inflammation of synovial tissues, leading to carti- more frequent in the nsCLP patients than in controls, though this differ- lage and bone destruction. It affects ~1% of the general population. ence was not significant. Altogether, no variants were significantly as- The susceptibility to RA involves genetic and environmental factors. In sociated with risk of nsCL/P in both populations. Together, these data the present study we have analysed the Interferon Regulatory Factor suggest that variants of PVR and PVRL2 genes are not major genetic 5 (IRF5) which is involved in the production of cytokines implicated in risk factors for nsCL/P, at least in the North American and Venezuelan RA pathophysiology, such as tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukine populations studied. 6 and type I Interferon. In order to search an association of IRF5 rs 2004640 T allele in Tunisian population, we have analysed 101 un- P1084. Gene dosage quantification by using multiplex related patients affected with RA with a mean age of 54 years and polymerase chain reaction and capillary electrophoresis a sex ratio (F/M) of 5.6/1 and 100 healthy controls. DNAs genotyp- C. C. Hung1, W. L. Lin1, Y. N. Su2,3; ing was carried out with a TaqMan 5’ allelic discrimination assay on 1Institute of Biomedical Engineering, College of Medicine and College of Engi- an ABI 7500 real time PCR machine (assay:C___9491614_10). Data neering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Graduate Institute of Clini- were analyzed by χ2-test, and Odds Ratio (OR) with 95% confidence cal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, interval (95% IC) was calculated. Our results showed that T/T gen- 3Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, otype was more frequent in RA patients compared to controls (44% Taiwan. vs 24.7%; p= 0.007) (OR = 0.68; IC = [0.46-1.01]). While in the RF Many genetic diseases are known caused by the presence of point positive subgroup the frequency of the T allele and T/T genotype were mutations, small insertions and deletions in respective genes; how- significantly increased compared with the controls (p=0.011; p= 0.003, ever, the number of diseases caused by deletions and duplications respectively) (OR = 0.57; IC = [0.36-0.88]). In conclusion, our results involving large DNA genomes are significantly increasing. It would support the involvement of IRF5 gene in the genetic susceptibility to lead to under-express or over-express according to changes in gene RA in the Tunisian population. dosage. In contrast, the methods for the detection of point mutations, small insertions or deletions are well established, but the detections of P1087. Evidence for Further Genetic Heterogeneity in Restless larger genomic deletions or duplications are more difficult. Due to the Legs Syndrome lack of efficient and in-house protocol for gene dosage quantification, E. B. Skehan, A. Manal, C. K. Hand, N. A. Parfrey; we hereby describe a diagnostic protocol employing a combination of University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. available methods. The efficient and accurate gene dosage quantifica- Introduction: Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a common neurologi- tion platform is combined the multiplex PCR with capillary electropho- cal disorder characterised by a distressing need or urge to move the resis (CE), and applied on several entities of genes, including SMN, legs, usually accompanied by an uncomfortable sensation in the legs PMP22 and alpha-globin genes. The reliability of the novel method- described as a crawling, muscle ache or tension. The symptoms follow ology demonstrated it is relative speed and low-cost procedure as a a circadian pattern with a significant increase during the evening or significant tool in genetic diagnosis. Its sensitivity and specificity for night which leads to nocturnal sleep disruption and daytime somno- identify the deletions and duplications genotypes are 100%. Moreover, lence. Molecular genetic approaches have identified five loci on chro- once we have established this powerful system, we will further apply mosomes 12q, 14q, 9p, 20p, and 2q, in RLS families from different this technique on rapid detection of trisomy syndromes and microde- populations. No disease-causing gene has yet been identified. letion syndromes, including trisomy 13, trisomy 21, Down syndrome, Aim: The goal of this research was to localise and identify the gene DiGeorge syndrome and others. responsible for the syndrome in a newly identified Irish autosomal dominant RLS family. P1085. New approaches for the estimation of renin-angiotensin- Method: Fourteen members of the new RLS3002 family participated in bradykinin system genes polymorphism the study; ten members are affected and four are unaffected. The five A. S. Glotov1,2, O. O. Favorova3, A. V. Favorov4, G. I. Obraztsova5, T. E. current RLS loci were examined for linkage. Ivaschenko1, T. V. Nasedkina2, V. S. Baranov1; Results: The results indicated exclusion of linkage to the five identified 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, RLS loci.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 Conclusion: The newly recruited Irish RLS pedigree is not linked to P1090. Copy Number Variations in 97 Schizophrenia Patients the currently described genetic loci. This provides evidence of further D. Gumus1, G. Kirov1, W. Chen2, N. Norton1, M. Sari2, L. Georgieva1, F. Erdo- genetic heterogeneity for RLS. A new unidentified RLS locus there- gan2, H. Ropers2, M. J. Owen1, R. Ullmann2; fore awaits identification. Future work includes a genome wide scan to 1Cardiff University Department of Psycological Medicine Neuropsychiatric Ge- identify the novel locus in this Irish family. netics Unit, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genet- ics, Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. P1088. Association study in the 5q31-32 linkage region for Genetic aberrations at the DNA copy number level are common causes schizophrenia using pooled DNA genotyping and family-based of human genetic disorders. We have undertaken a genome-wide controls analysis of copy number changes by Tiling Path BAC Array Compara- I. Zaharieva1, L. Georgieva2, G. Kirov2, D. Toncheva1; tive Genome Hybridisation in a cohort of 97 patients with schizophre- 1Medical Faculty, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. nia diagnosed according to DSM-IV criteria that were recruited in Bul- BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is a common disorder with high herita- garia. Patients’ DNA was hybridised against reference DNA consisting bility and increased risk for relatives of the affected probands. We have of sex-matched pools. DNA was available on all parents to test fpr chosen to study a strong region of linkage to schizophrenia: 5q31-32 de novo formation of chromosomal imbalances. Data were analysed in order to establish polymorphic markers associated with the disor- with the CGHPRO software that has been described previously (Chen der. METHODS: We have undertaken association analyses using 90 et.al, 2005). All data were normalised by subgrid lowess. The log2ratio microsatellites markers. We saturated the 14 Mbp area in 5q31-32 re- of test to reference intensity was calculated and copy number gains gion at 150 kb intervals. We genotyped the microsatellites markers in and losses were resolved by using a conservative threshold of 0.3 and three sets of DNA pools: a proband pool comprising 300 SZ patients, -0.3. Deviant signal intensity ratios involving three or more neighbour- a parents pool (N=600) and a control pool comprising 615 health indi- ing BAC clones were considered as genomic aberrations. To elimi- viduals, all of Bulgarian origin. RESULTS: Nine markers were selected nate polymorphic copy number variants, conspicuous findings were for individual genotyping (cut-off p<0.15). Individual genotyping in the compared to relevant databases and other cohorts, including several parent-proband trio sample confirmed the pooling results for two of the hundred healthy controls and patients with unrelated disorders. Aber- markers: D5S2017 (p=0.004) and IL9 (p=0.014) located neighbor to rations were validated with Affymetrix 250K SNP genotyping arrays. SPRY4 and IL9 genes. We are now planning detailed investigation of We identified 18 DNA copy number changes that satisfied the above these regions and fine mapping with a dense map of additional SNPs criteria. Their size ranged from 0.1 to 1.4Mb. Two of them are likely to markers. be pathogenic: one segregates with the illness in the family, and one because it is has arisen de novo and partially overlaps the Prader-Willi P1089. Association analysis of 22 SNPs in the DISC1 gene critical region. in schizophrenia and bipolar affective disorder in the Polish population P1091. Association study of 5‘ end of NRG1 gene P. M. Czerski1, A. Karpushova2, M. Wiłkość3, P. Kapelski1, B. Godlewska4, M. polymorphisms with schizophrenia in Ahwaz province of Iran Tomaszewska3, A. Leszczyńska-Rodziewicz1, J. Hauser1, J. Landowski4, A. S. Shariati1, M. Behmanesh1, A. Fathian2, H. Galehdari2; Borkowska3, M. Rietschel5, M. M. Nöthen2, S. Cichon2; 1Department of Genetics, School of Sciences,Tarbiat Modares University, Teh- 1Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Department of Psychiatry, Poznan, ran, P.O.Box 14115-175, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department Of Genetics, Poland, 2University of Bonn, Life & Brain Centre, Department of Genomics, School of Basic Sciences, Chamran University, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. Bonn, Germany, 3Nicolaus Copernicus University Torun, Collegium Medicum, Schizophrenia is a severe neuropsychiatry disorder with symptoms Clinical Neuropsychology Unit, Bydgoszcz, Poland, 4Medical University of such as hallucination, delusion and thought disorder. It is a complex Gdansk, Department of Psychiatry, Gdansk, Poland, 5Central Institute of Mental disorder, and genetic components may play a crucial role in its patho- Health, Division of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Mannheim, Germany. genesis. The heritability of schizophrenia has been estimated to be Linkage between schizophrenia and chromosome 1q42.2 markers has around 80%. Among candidate genes for schizophrenia, NRG1 is been reported independently in different populations worldwide. This one of the most significant which has been confirmed by several stud- region contains the gene Disrupted In Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) which ies. NRG1 is located on 8p a locus which shows a strong linkage to had been found to be disrupted by a balanced translocation and to co- schizophrenia. Also NRG1 plays an important role in central nervous segregate with schizophrenia in a large Scottish pedigree. Association system especially in signaling and neurotransmission which makes it a studies investigating DISC1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) plausible candidate gene for schizophrenia. Several polymorphisms of in a number of samples were promising but not yet compelling. In the NRG1 have been shown to be associated with schizophrenia in differ- present study, we aimed at investigating the possible contribution of ent population. However there isn’t any information from Iranian popu- DISC1 variants on the pathogenesis of schizophrenia and bipolar af- lation. We are investigating the association of NRG1polymorphisms fective disorder in the Polish population. with schizophrenic patients from Ahwaz province of Iran. To high ex- We investigated 22 DISC1 SNPs, chosen on the basis of previous tent this is an isolated population from south-western part of Iran which association findings, using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry-based makes it appropriate for association studies. Our study includes new SNP genotyping (Sequenom’s iPLEX technology). The study sample homogenous Asian population and might bring supportive evidence for comprised 501 DSM-IV diagnosed patients with schizophrenia, 418 the association of NRG1 with schizophrenia. DSM-IV diagnosed patients with bipolar affective disorder and 530 controls. All individuals participating in the study originated from the P1092. DNA pooling in myelin-related genes in schizophrenia Polish population. using whole-genome association scan with Affymetrix 500K When single marker analysis was performed, two DISC1 SNPs arrays (rs1000730 and rs1411776) showed association with bipolar affective L. Georgieva, N. Norton, M. J. Owen, M. O’Donovan, G. Kirov; disorder at the genotypic level (p=0.036, and p=0.018 respectively), Cardiff University, Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff, United King- and one DISC1 SNP (rs1000730) was associated with schizophrenia dom. (p=0.012). Allelic analysis gave significant result for rs1411776 in bipo- Abnormal myelination and oligodendrocyte abnormalities have been lar affective disorder only (p=0.009). implicated as pathogenic processes in schizophrenia (SZ) by a diverse Our results provide modest evidence for an involvement of rs1000730 range of experimental approaches including gene expression analy- in the predisposition to both schizophrenia and bipolar affective disor- sis, neuropathology, and neuroimaging. With the aim of establishing der, and for the contribution of rs1411776 to schizophrenia suscepti- whether such abnormalities are of primary aetiological relevance to bility. However, these results do not withstand correction for multiple schizophrenia pathogenesis, we performed a whole-genome associa- testing. More detailed analyses, including haplotype and phenotypic tion study using DNA pooling on Affymetrix GeneChip Mapping 500K subgroup analysis are currently underway and will be presented. SNP arrays (250K Sty / 250K Nsp). We constructed pools of ~648 SZ cases and ~712 age- and gender-matched controls. Depending on the quality of the hybridization we replicated each pool on between 8 and 11 arrays, which provided from 6 to 8 good replicates for analysis. We restricted the present analysis to 9985 SNPs within/around genes Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 relevant to myelination and oligodendrocyte function. In order to vali- verbal Kettel test. date the pooling predictions, we performed individual genotyping of According to the IQ scores examinees were divided into three groups: 54 SNPs from the top 100. This largely confirmed the predicted allele with a normal level of intellectual development (IQ within the limits of frequency differences. Twenty-two of the 54 SNPs showed nominally 90-110 points), high (above 110 points) and low (below 90 points). The significant levels for association with SZ (p<0.05). The correlation be- group with normal level IQ has served as control group for two others. tween the allele frequency differences predicted by pooling and those In order to characterize A1438G polymorphism, we performed PCR produced by individual genotyping was 0.88. This work demonstrated followed by digestion with restriction enzymes (MspI). the accuracy of our pooling method. Our results emphasize the fea- Genotypes *A/*A, *A/*G, *G/*G met frequency 1) 10 %, 2) 64.67 %, sibility of using genomic DNA pooling in whole genome association 3) 25.33 % in group of comparison, 1) 3.33 %, 2) 85 %, 3) 11.67 % in studies for the detection of association with complex diseases. group with high parameters IQ and 1) 0 %, 2) 77.78 %, 3) 22.22 % in group with low level IQ. The analysis of associations has shown sta- P1093. Sequencing and detection of novel single-nucleotide tistically significant distinctions in distribution of frequencies genotypes polymorphisms (SNPs) in the steroid 21-hydroxylase gene and of gene HTR2A between control group and group with high IQ scores association with the C4A/C4B copy number polymorphism in 96 (c2=11.925, P=0.003) via enhancement of frequency of genotype individuals HTR2A*A/*G (85 % against 64.67 % in group of comparison;P=0.021; B. Blasko1, Z. Bánlaki2, G. Gyapay3, M. Sasvari-Szekely4, G. Füst2; OR=1.315; 95%CI 1.087-1.) and diminution of frequency of geno- 1Research Group of Inflammation Biology and Immunogenomics, Budapest, type HTR2A*G/*G (11.67 % against 25.33 % in group of comparison; Hungary, 23rd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Buda- P=0.046; OR=2.172; 95%CI 1.012-5.166) in group of persons with pest, Hungary, 3Genoscope - Centre National de Séquençage, Evry, France, high parameters IQ. 4Institute of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry, Sem- melweis University, Budapest, Hungary. P1096. Serotonin Transporter gene (5-HTT): association analysis The steroid-21-hydroxylase gene plays a crucial role in the synthesis with Temporal Lobe Epilepsy. of steroid hormones. There are two 21-hydroxylase genes in man, A I. Manna1, A. Labate1,2, A. Gambardella1,2, P. Forabosco3,4, A. La Russa1, E. Le (inactive) and B (active), and these have been localized at the MHC III Piane5, G. Di Palma1, U. Aguglia5, A. Quattrone1,2; class region on chromosome 6, in a strongly linked haplotype block. 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council (CNR), Man- This block contains 4 genes: a kinase (RP), complement C4A or C4B, gone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Græcia, Catanzaro, 21-hydroxylase and tenascin-X. We found that the short term mortal- Italy, 3Istituto di Genetica delle Popolazioni- National Research Council, Alghero ity of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) patients was influenced by the (SS), Italy, 4Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King’s College copy number of the C4B genes. Carriers of low C4B gene number (0 or London School of Medicine at Guy’s, King’s College and St. Thomas’ Hospitals, 1) (C4B*Q0) were found to have significantly higher risk for short-term London, United Kingdom, 5Regional Epilepsy Centre, Hospital of Reggio Cal- mortality of AMI. The aim of the present study was to find a molecu- abria, Reggio Calabria, Italy. lar explanation for this observation. We assumed that C4B*Q0 carrier Two functional polymorphisms, a 44-base-pair insertion/deletion poly- state may result in impaired function of the neighboring CYP21B gene, morphism in the 5’ regulatory region and a variable number of tandem associated with inadequate mobilization of steroid hormones during repeat (VNTR) polymorphism in the second intron of the serotonin stress in critical situations. We have determined the number of C4A transporter gene (5-HTT), were previously identified and suggested to and C4B genes, and sequenced the 21-OH active gene from 96 ge- modulate transcription. The current study was designed to determine nomic samples. Sequences were compared to all other published 21- the contribution of these polymorphisms within the 5-HTT gene to sus- OH sequences. We found that both the +1106 (A) and +1113 (C) vari- ceptibility to temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE). Two hundred and seventy ant alleles of 21-OH gene were strongly linked to C4B*Q0 (p=0.015, six patients with TLE and 309 age- and sex- matched healthy con- p=0.006), respectively. This linkage was independent of the other trols from Calabria (Southern Italy) were studied. Patients and controls MHC class III gene variants. In addition, five novel polymorphisms were genotyped using the WAVE TM DNA Fragment Analysis System were found in the 3’-untranslated region for the 21-OH gene. for the insertion/deletion polymorphism in the promoter region (5-HT- This observation indicates that the association between AMI mortality TLPR) and GENESCAN TM System for the (VNTR) polymorphism and C4B*Q0 may be due to the strongly associated SNPs of the 21- in the second intron of the 5-HTT gene (5-HTTVNTR). The program OH gene. UNPHASED was used to compare genotype, allele and haplotype frequencies between cases and controls, including age and gender P1094. Integrating the BigDye® XTerminator™ Kit into Various as covariates in the model. No significant differences were observed Laboratory Workflows for 5-HTTLPR, but significant association was obtained for the 5-HT- G. Amparo, M. Harrold, D. Rodriguez, E. Foster, S. Pistacchi; TVNTR polymorphism, both modelling genotypes (P-value=0.0145) or Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. alleles (P-value=0.0086). Compared with controls, patients with TLE The BigDye® XTerminator™ Kit is a new single-tube method for purify- showed lower frequencies of the 10 repeat at 5-HTTVNTR (26.2% ing DNA sequencing reactions prior to electrophoretic analysis. The in patients vs. 40.8% in controls). A lower frequency of homozygous kit strives to not only ensure effective dye terminator removal, but also individuals for the 10 allele was observed among patients compared provides flexible protocols to fit into all types of workflows and accom- to controls (5.2% of patients were 10/10 vs. 18.8% of controls). Hap- modates low to high throughput levels. Advantages of this novel meth- lotype analysis did not increase the evidence for association. These od include a simple and rapid protocol, less hands-on time allowing re- results suggest, for the first time, that the serotonin transporter gene searchers more time to focus on their research, quick turn around time, may play a role in the aetiology of TLE. improved sample stability, and efficient desalting. BigDye XTerminator kit also has unique workflow advantages over conventional purification P1097. The most common mutation of SERPINA1 gene PIZ schemes such as ethanol precipitation or spin column purifications. molecular analysis in patients with cystic fibrosis. Automation issues will also be described. D. Pilans1, B. Lace1, A. Krumina1, I. Prane1, V. Svabe2; 1RSU scientific lab. of Molecular genetic, Riga, Latvia, 2RSU department of P1095. Association analysis of the A1438G polymorphism of pediatrics, Riga, Latvia. the serotonin receptor gene HTR2A with level of intellectual Cystic fibrosis (CF) and Alpha-1 antitripsin deficiency, are the most development (IQ) of the person common genetic diseases, and reason of mortality and decreased life O. V. Gumerova, E. V. Lecontsev, E. V. Vorobyova, T. J. Zaripova, O. V. Efre- quality in Caucasians. mova, V. J. Gorbunova; The aim of the study was to analyse PIZ mutation in SERPINA1 gene Bashkir State Pedagogical University it. M. Akmulla, Ufa, Russian Federation. and common polymorphism variants frequency in patients with Cystic Serotonin receptor gene HTR2A (13 q14-q21) is one of the basic Fibrosis. genes, which determine efficacy of serotoninergic neuromediators sys- Methods: Analysis was done on 28 CF patients and 111 persons as tem. We analyzed the associations between polymorphism A1438G control group. PIZ mutation analysis performed with artificial restric- located in promotor area of gene HTR2A and a level of intellectual tion site creation PCR method. Common polymorphism variants were development (IQ) of at 246 unrelated individuals (18-35 years) by non- detected by Maldi-Tof technique.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 Results: From 28 CF patients SERPINA1 gene mutation Z was de- and his father in heterozygous state. In the light of the repolarization tected in homozygote state in 1 person and heterozygote state in 2 abnormalities in the mother and the uneventful history of the father we persons. speculate that the mother may carry another, yet unknown molecular SNP g. 135575 in gene SERPINA1 exon III in control group was met variant. SNP T/T variant; 66,66%, C/T; 30,63% and C/C; 2,70%. This case exemplifies three lessons for the diagnostic and therapeutic From CF patients T/T; 60,71%, C/T; 35,71% and C/C; 3,57%. Obvi- management of LQT and SIDS: (a) A proportion of SIDS cases (es- ously, the distribution by SNP groups in both cases is rather similar and timated 5-10%) can be attributed to monogenic LQT-Syndrome. (b) SNP T/T is most common variant in both groups. Sequencing of LQT-disease genes is mandatory in a diagnostic SIDS Small sample size does not allow to make any definitive conclusions, workup. (c) In severe forms of LQT compound mutations (Westenkow that presence PIZ mutations in CF patients, does not affect severity et al., Circulation 2004) may be more common than generally recog- of disease. nized. P1098. Early influence of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 P1100. SimStudy: A simulation program to generate data for gene promoter polymorphism on the clinical course of sickle case-control and quantitative trait studies cell disease S. M. Leal1, X. Zhang1, D. W. Covarrubias2,1; R. Martins1, A. Morais2, A. Dias3, I. Soares4, C. Rolão2, B. Nunes1, I. Picanço1, 1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 2Rice University, S. Gomes1, A. Miranda1, T. Seixas1, F. Rego2, J. Ducla-Soares2, G. Olim5, J. Houston, TX, United States. Lavinha1, L. Romão1, P. Faustino1; The SimStudy program can generate population based data which 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Hospital is extremely beneficial in evaluating tagSNP selection, haplotype re- de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Hospital Fernando da Fonseca, Amadora, construction and population admixture/substructure. Additionally the Portugal, 4Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal, 5Instituto Português de program can be used to assess type I and type II errors of statistical Sangue, Lisboa, Portugal. methods used to detect gene main effects as well as gene x gene The accelerated erythrocyte destruction in sickle cell disease (SCD) and gene x environmental interactions. The SimStudy program can often leads to chronic hyperbilirubinaemia. The hepatic enzyme UDP- generate di-and multiallelic marker loci data which are in linkage equi- glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) mediates the conjugation of librium or disequilibrium for qualitative (case-control) or quantitative bilirubin into a water-soluble form. A di-nucleotide repeat polymor- trait data. Cases-control status is determined by penetrance models phism (TA) in the TATA box of UGT1A1 is associated with differential or genotypic relative risks under a specified genetic model (i.e. multi- 5-8 gene expression and enzyme level. plicative, additive, etc), or based upon threshold values for a quantita- The aim of this study was to determine whether this UGT1A1 activ- tive trait. Quantitative trait loci are generated based upon genotypic ity polymorphism could modify bilirubin metabolism in SCD, thereby means, variances and specified distributions (e.g. normal, log normal, influencing the development of cholelithiasis subsequently leading to exponential, etc). For both qualitative and quantitative traits it is pos- cholecystectomy. sible to model gene x gene (epsitatis) and gene x environmental in- We studied 161 SCD patients with an average of 10 years of age. UG- teractions as well as locus and allelic heterogeneity. Additionally class T1A1 promoter TA repeat number was assessed by PCR and GENE specific data can be generated based upon for example age, sex, or SCAN. Steady-state haemoglobin and total bilirubin levels, cholelithia- environmental exposures. Missing data and genotyping error may also sis and cholecystectomy were investigated. be incorporated in the generation of genotype data. The program can Several UGT1A1 genotypes were found, the most frequent being 5/6 quickly generate a large number of replicates for data sets with an (n=9), 6/6 (n=37), 6/7 (n=61) and 7/7 (n=29). These groups did not almost unlimited number of marker and trait susceptibility loci. For the significantly differ in age, sex and haemoglobin level. Total bilirubin simulated data, SimStudy can generate reports with pair-wise r2 and D’ levels were significantly different between groups (p=0.000) with an values between all marker and susceptibility loci. The SimStudy pro- increased TA repeat number being associated with higher hyperbili- gram is written in C and is available free of charge for Unix, Linux and rubinaemia. Cholelithiasis episodes (p=0.071) and cholecystectomy Windows platforms. (p=0.034) were both augmented with TA repetition, although the for- mer difference was not statistically significant. The odds ratio of having P1101. Carrier Frequency of Spinal Muscular Atrophy in the cholelithiasis for the genotypes 6/7 (OR=1.455; CI=0.578-3.666) and Iranian Population 7/7 (OR=2.057; CI=0.708-5.980) were increased when compared to M. Hasanzad1,2, B. Shoja Saffar1, A. Aghajani Refah1, Z. Keihanidoust3, K. 6/6. The same comparison for cholecystectomy revealed an increased Kahrizi1, E. F. Tizzano4, H. Najmabadi1; risk for genotype 7/7 only (OR=4.714; CI=0.869-25.581). 1Genetics Research Center (GRC), University of Social Welfare & Rehabilita- In conclusion, the UGT1A1 promoter polymorphism may represent an tion Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Science and Research Cam- important genetic modifier of SCD even at a young age. pus, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Imam Khomeini (Work partially supported by FCT grant IME/MGI/49853/2003). Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. P1099. Familial SIDS caused by LQT Syndrome INTRODUCTION: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the second most M. Akyol1, M. Hempel1, M. Hartig1, B. M. Beckmann2, C. Marschall3, M. F. Sin- frequent autosomal recessive disorder. The incidence of SMA is one ner2, S. Kääb2, P. Freisinger1, P. Dressel1, T. Meitinger1, A. Pfeufer1; per 10,000 live births with a carrier frequency of 1/50. The SMA deter- 1TU Munich, Munich, Germany, 2LMU Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Center of mining gene, called the survival motor neuron (SMN) gene, is pres- Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany. ent on 5q13 in two copies SMN1 (telomeric) and SMN2 (centromeric). On his 17th day of life the first born son of apparently healthy parents Homozygous deletions of exons 7 and 8 of SMN1 occur in >95% of suddenly experienced syncope, apnea and pulselessness. Resuscita- patients with SMA. tion was unsuccessful. Upon autopsy SIDS was diagnosed, no genetic MATERIAL & METHODS: DNA extraction was performed according to investigation was initiated. the standard protocol from 400 normal individuals from different ethnic A second son born three years later suddenly lost tone, turned pale groups of Iran as listed in the WHO report (Persian 51%, Azari 24%, and stopped breathing on the 27th day of his life. A physician noted Gilak & Mazandaran 8%, Kurd 7%, Arab 2%, Baluch 2%, and Turkmen bradycardic sinus rhythm (10/min), initiated CPR and epinephrin infu- 2%). Exon 7 of the SMN gene was analyzed using a PCR-based pro- sion and restored sinus rhythm (160/min). In hospital the child showed tocol followed by digestion using DraI restriction enzyme. A total of 40 repolarization disturbances characterized by QTc up to 500ms, multi- obligate carriers were studied to determine the telomeric centromeric ple T-waves with low amplitudes and severly reduced cardiac function, ratio for carrier detection. attributed to traumatization during CPR. The boy survived but suffers RESULTS & CONCLUSION: According to the T/C ratio, 52 (13%) indi- from severe ischemic brain damage. viduals are carriers, while the remaining are normal for the SMN gene A marginal prolongation of QTc was noted in the mother (450 ms) copy number. In conclusion, our results demonstrated a high frequen- while the father and the sister showed no abnormalities. Molecular di- cy of SMA carriers in the Iranian population, about five times higher agnostic testing for LQT-Syndrome revealed a novel nonsynonymous than that of the European population. D259N change in Exon 4 of the KCNH2 (LQT2) gene in our patient Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 P1102. A possible association between Bam H1 perlecan gene Lewy bodies, mainly constituted of alpha-synuclein. Mutations of the polymorphism and the risk of spinal muscular atrophy in alpha-synuclein gene have been linked to rare familial forms of PD, Romanian patients while association studies on the promoter polymorphisms have given M. F. Stavarachi1, P. Apostol1, D. Cimponeriu1, M. Toma1, N. Butoianu2, C. Bur- conflicting results in sporadic patients. In a previous study we did not loiu2, L. Dan1, L. Cherry1, S. Magureanu2, I. Radu1, L. Dumitrescu1, L. Gavrila1; find association between the Rep 1 polymorphism of the SNCA pro- 1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Alexandru Obregia Hospital, Bu- moter and PD in our population. Since haplotype analysis has proven charest, Romania. to be a more reliable method in association studies, in this work we Perlecan is a heparan sulfate proteoglycan with various biological analyzed a more extended region of the the SNCA promoter . We per- functions, including the neuromuscular one. Recent data have re- formed a case control study to investigate whether genetic variability vealed functional mutations of perlecan gene in disorders character- in the promoter of the alpha-synuclein gene could predispose to de- ized by severe myotonia. No correlation study between perlecan gene mentia in PD. A total of 114 demented patients and 114 non-demented polymorphisms and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) was performed patients with sporadic PD were included in the study. Six polymorphic before. loci (including the Rep1 microsatellite) in the promoter of the SNCA The aim of our study was to investigate the correlation between the gene were examined. Each marker, taken individually, did not show BamH1 perlecan gene polymorphism and the risk for spinal muscular association to dementia and no significant differences were observed atrophy in Romanian patients. in the inferred haplotype frequencies of demented and non-demented We investigated 63 spinal muscular atrophy patients and 100 normal patients (p=0.73). Our data suggest the lack of involvement of the control subjects. The SMA patients were diagnosed according to the SNCA promoter in the pathogenesis of dementia in PD. Further stud- SMA International Consortium and the informed consent was obtained ies in other populations are needed to confirm these results. for all the subjects. The Bam H1 perlecan gene polymorphism was detected using PCR-RFLP method. P1105. Further evidence for additional loci for split hand/foot The values obtained for the perlecan genotypes are shown in the malformation in chromosome regions 4q32-q35 and 6q16-q22 table. D. Niedrist, A. Schinzel; We performed the χ2 test for both lots, the results confirming that the Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzer- populations are in a Hardy - Weinberg equilibrium (χ2 = 2.73, DF =1, p land. = 0.05 for the SMA patients lot; χ2 = 3.62, DF=1, p = 0.05 for the control On the basis of the Human Cytogenetic Database (HCDB) we col- lot). For the risk genotype G/G we obtained an OR = 1.164. lected from the literature 102 cases with chromosomal aberrations and These are the preliminary results only. Therefore, in a future prospec- split hand/foot malformation or absent fingers/toes. Statistical analysis tive study, by increasing the subject number, we hope to establish a revealed highly significant association (p<0.001) between the malfor- more accurate correlation between BamH1 gene polymorphism and mation and the chromosomal bands 4q32-q35, 5q15, 6q16-q22 and the risk for SMA. 7q21-q22 (SHFM1). Considering these findings we suppose additional Genotypes SMA patients Control subjects SHFM loci on chromosome 4q, 6q and probably 5q. The regions 4q T/T 31 (49.2%) 53 (53%) and 6q have already been discussed in the literature as additional T/G 30 (47.6%) 34 (34%) SHFM loci. We now show further evidence. In the proposed regions G/G 2 (3.2%) 13 (13%) there are interesting candidate genes such as SNX3, GJA1, HEY1, HEY2, Tbx18, HAND2, FGF2, LEF1, BMPR1B, MSX2, FLT4, PTX1 P1103. Carrier Frequency of Spinal Muscular Atrophy in the and PDLIM7. Largest Island of Persian Gulf (Qeshm) B. Shoja Saffar1, M. Hasanzad1, R. Vazifemand1, A. Anousheh1, A. Nazeri1, K. P1106. Unravelling the genetic aetiology of stroke in Pakistan Kahrizi1, E. F. Tizzano2, H. Najmabadi1; P. M. Frossard1, D. Saleheen2, U. Ahmad3; 1Genetics Research Center (GRC), University of Social Welfare & Rehabilita- 1Medical College, Karachi, Pakistan, 2Cambridge University, Cambridge, United tion Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Hospital de Sant Pau, Barce- Kingdom, 3Department of Surgery, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United lona, Spain. States. INTRODUCTION: Spinal muscular atrophy is a neuromuscular disor- The incidence of stroke is on the rise in developing countries. In search der caused by the degeneration of α-motor neurons of the spinal cord of quantitative trait loci at candidate genes underlying the aetiology of anterior horns. It is an autosomal recessive disorder with an incidence ischaemic stroke (IS) in Pakistan, we designed an association study of 1/6000 to 1/10000 and a carrier frequency of 1/40 to 1/50. Qeshm with 210 IS cases and 350 disease-free controls. Associations of ge- the largest island of Persian Gulf has population of more than 100,000 netic dimorphisms with IS were tested by single-point and haplotype people. The main ethnic group is Persians with minorities of Arabs, analyses. The three following loci were directly associated with clinical Balouch, Indians, Portugese and African Blacks. The large size of IS diagnosis: Qeshm, its ethnic variety and tribal life style and relatively large popu- Phosphodiesterase 4D (PDE4D): amongst three PDE4D genetic lation, make this island a proper site for genetic study. MATERIAL & markers (SNP32, 83 and 87, see Gretarsdottir et al., Nat Genet. METHODS: One hundred seventy eight healthy individuals participat- 2003;35:131-138 ), TT genotypes of SNP83C>T conferred a significant ed in this study in order to find carrier frequency of SMA in this in this risk for IS on both univariate and multivariate analyses (P<0.005). Island. Exon 7 of the SMN gene was amplified, followed by PCR prod- Paraoxonase genes (PON1, 2 and 3): amongst eight markers, PON1 ucts digestion using DraI restriction enzyme. In our study, analysis of 192Q>R, PON2 148G>A and PON2 311C>S were associated with IS, the ratio of the telomeric to centromeric portion (T/C ratio) of the SMN and QAS haplotypes indicated a 1.87-fold increased risk of developing gene after enzyme digestion was performed using LabWork Software IS (P=0.01). in order to differentiate carriers, normal and affected individuals. ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 gene (ABCA1): we studied five RESULT & CONCLUSION: Our result shows 22 out of 178(16%) were intragenic markers, and first established that the RL haplotype (com- carriers while the remaining was normal. In conclusion our findings bination of R219K and V825L marker mutations) was strongly asso- indicate SMA carrier frequency in the Island Qeshm is six times higher ciated with decreased HDL-c levels (OR=8.33, P=0.001). We then than European and American population. found that allele 774P of mutation T774P showed the strongest di- rect association with IS (OR=4.06, P<10-7). We further demonstrated P1104. Alpha-synuclein promoter haplotypes and dementia in that a three-point VPL haplotype (combination of V771M, T774P and Parkinson’s disease V825L markers) was indicative of a very strong increased risk for IS S. Carrideo1, E. V. De Marco1, P. Tarantino1, F. E. Rocca1, G. Provenzano1, D. (OR=10.34, P<10-7). Civitelli1, F. Annesi1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, N. Romeo1, G. Nicoletti1, R. Marconi2, Upon applying an overall, single multivariate model, we established G. Annesi1; that two major gene effects (ABCA1 and PON) and one minor gene 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), effect (PDE4D) account for 65.3% of IS in the studied Pakistani popu- Italy, 2Department of Neurology, Misericordia Hospital, Grosseto, Italy. lation. Dementia is a common complication of Parkinson’s disease (PD). It correlates significantly with the presence of cortical, limbic or nigral Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 P1107. Association analysis of the triallelic polymorphism of the Medical Genetics, Rudbcek Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. serotonin transporter gene with suicide Background: Z. Khalilova, D. Gaysina, E. Khusnutdinova; Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune dis- Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. ease characterized by the dysfunction of immune cells, leading to hy- Serotonergic dysfunction has been implicated in the pathophysiology peractivity of B cells and over-production of autoantibodies and the of suicidality. The serotonin transporter (5-HTT) strongly modulates se- formation of immune complexes. rotonin function and is a major therapeutic target in several psychiat- The level of IFN-α, a type I interferon, is correlated with both SLE dis- ric diseases, including anxiety, depression, and suicide. 5-HTTLPR, a ease activity and severity, and is therefore suggested to be involved in functional polymorphism of the 5-flanking region of the 5-HTT gene has the pathogenesis of SLE. Activation of transcription factors, including been intensively studied for association with suicidal behaviour. Some, Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs) 3, 5 and 7 can modulate the ex- but not all, studies using biallelic S/L genotyping have demonstrated a pression of type I IFN genes. IRFs control inflammation, immunity and higher frequency of the low activity S allele and with suicidal behavior. apoptosis. Irf5 knockout mouse also shows reduction of pro-inflamma- A>G polymorphism (rs25531) has been detected within 5-HTTLPR: tory cytokines, including IL-6, IL-12 and TNF-a production. Recently L haplotype is equivalent to the lower expressing S allele. The aim several association studies in different populations have reported that G of our study was to examine the relationship of a triallelic 5-HTTLPR IRF5 gene is a susceptibility gene of SLE. polymorphism to suicidal behavior in a gender-specific manner. 231 Methods: suicide attempters (79 men, 152 women) and 264 healthy volunteers We hypothesized that polymorphisms of IRF5 may affect the suscep- (160 men, 104 women) without history of suicidal behaviour from the tibility and severity of SLE in the Hong Kong Chinese population. SNP general population of Russia were genotyped for the triallelic 5-HT- rs2004640 creates a 5’ donor splice site for alternate isoform of tran- TLPR polymorphism using PCR-RFLP technique. All individuals were script in exon 1, whereas rs10954213 creates a functional polyadenyl- considered as LL carriers (L L ), LS carriers (L S, L L ) or SS carriers ation site in 3’ UTR and affects the expression of transcript variants. A A A A G (SS, L S, L L ). The distribution of allelic and genotype frequencies The 2 SNPs were genotyped in 444 SLE patients and 410 healthy G G G were in accordance with the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. We revealed controls, using sequencing. no significant differences in allele and genotype distribution between Results: suicide and control groups. In women there was a tendency of a lower No association of IRF5 gene polymorphisms with SLE was found. How- frequency of the LS carriers in suicide group compared to that in con- ever, an overall difference in the distribution of the haplotype frequen- trol group (chi2=3.5; p=0.06; OR=0.62, 95%CI 0.38-1.02). Our findings cies between SLE patients and controls was detected. The haplotype indicate a possible contribution of the 5-HTT gene to susceptibility for TA was identified as a probable risk haplotypes associated with SLE. suicidal behaviour in females only. P1110. Association study of the GABA cluster on 15q11-13 with A P1108. Analysis of type I collagen α1 and α2 chains genes in Tourette Syndrome in the French Canadian population. patients with syringomyelia from Bashkortostan J. Riviere1, Y. Dion2, P. Lesperance1, G. Tellier3, F. Richer1, S. Chouinard1, G. T. N. Mirsaev1, D. V. Islamgulov2, E. K. Khusnutdinova2; A. Rouleau1; 1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Bio- 1CHUM Research Centre, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 2McGill University Health chemistry and Genetics of Ufa Scientific Center of RAS, Ufa, Russian Federa- Centre, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 3Sainte Justine Hospital, Montreal, PQ, Cana- tion. da. Syringomyelia is a rare disease of the spinal cord that causes neuro- Tourette Syndrome (TS) is a complex neuropsychiatric disorder mani- logical deficit. A mendelian transmission of syringomyelia (autosomal fested by motor and vocal tics and often associated with behavioral dominant or recessive) has been proposed in approximately 2% of abnormalities. Various neurotransmitters involved in the cortico-stria- reported cases. The association of syringomyelia with hereditary dis- tal-thalamo-cortical circuits have been implicated in TS, including the eases (Noonan’s syndrome, phacomatoses) has been mentioned fre- dopaminergic, glutamatergic, GABAergic, serotonergic, and noradren- quently in the literature. However the possible involvement of a genetic ergic systems. However, most of the genetic studies have focused on component in some cases of syringomyelia is debated. In Bashkorto- candidate genes implicated in dopamine neurotransmission. The goal stan republic syringomyelia rate is one of the highest around the world of this study was to investigate the genetic association between single (3.2 - 130 cases per 100 000 inhabitants). nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the cluster of GABA receptor A The aim of the present study was to test two polymorphisms in genes subunit genes on 15q11-13 and TS in the French Canadian (FC) popu- encoding proteins of α1 and α2 chains of collagen (A/MspI of the Co- lation. This region has been consistently implicated in several neuro- l1A1 gene, B/MspI of the Col1A2 gene) for association with syringomy- developmental disorders and behavioral abnormalities. elia in patients from Bashkortostan. 132 patients presented with mag- With an average spacing of 33 Kb, 26 SNPs spanning the GABA re- A netic resonance imaging (MRI)-proven syringomyelia and 196 controls ceptor subunit genes (GABRB3, GABRA5, GABRG3) were selected were typed for the above-mentioned gene variants using polymerase based on minor allele frequency >0.1, spacing and haplotype blocks. chain reaction technique. We performed a family-based association study by typing these SNPs Our data indicate the contribution of Col1A1*A (p=0.013, OR=1.28, in 212 FC trios with TS. Transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT) and 95%CI=1.07-1.99) and Col1A2*N (p=0.011, OR=1.37, 95%CI=1.12- haplotype analyses of various SNP-windows were performed using 2.03) alleles to susceptibility for syringomyelia in samples from the TDTPHASE program. Because these genes may be subject to Bashkortostan. Further analysis showed overrepresentation of the genomic imprinting, we also performed analyses of transmission by Col1A1*A/*A (p=0.023, OR=1.6, 95%CI=1.05-1.59) and Col1A2*N/*N parental sex. (p=0.007, OR=1.96, 95%CI=0.75-2.4) genotypes among patients TDT of individual markers and haplotype analyses did not provide compared to controls and these genotypes can be possible markers positive association results. When analyzed separately, paternal and of syringomyelia. maternal transmissions provided various p values < 0.05, but these Advances in knowledge about the genetic basis of syringomyelia offer results did not remain significant after correction for multiple testing. the prospect of developing new approaches to treatments of this disor- These data suggest that the GABA cluster on 15q11-13 is not a sus- A der.The work was supported by RSCI grant #05-06-06168a. ceptibility locus for TS. P1109. Association of Interferon Regulatory Factor 5 (IRF) P1111. Use of SNP array analyses for diagnosis of autosomal polymorphisms with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) recessive heterogeneous diseases : identification of the second H. Siu1, W. L. Yang1, C. S. Lau2, T. M. Chan2, H. S. Wong1, Y. L. Lau1, M. E. TRIM32 mutation in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2H Alarcon-Riquelme3; M. Cossée1,2, C. Lagier-Tourenne1,3, C. Tranchant4, C. Seguela1, F. Leturcq5, V. 1Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Biancalana1,6, N. Dondaine1, C. Stoetzel6, J. Chelly5, E. Flori7, H. Dollfus2,6, M. Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2Department of Paediatrics and Koenig1,3, J. Mandel1,3; Adolescent Medicine and Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hos- 1Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, pital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 3Department of Genetics and Pathology#, Unit of Strasbourg, France, 2Service de génétique médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3IGBMC (CNRS/INSERM/ULP), Illkirch, Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 20 France, 4Département de neurologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, P1113. Glucose tolerance test in the Turner syndrome families Strasbourg, France, 5Laboratoire de biochimie et génétique moléculaire, CHU L. Salomskienė, A. Sinkus, I. Andriuskeviciute, L. Jurkėnienė; Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 6Laboratoire de génétique médicale, EA3949, Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania. Faculté de Médecine, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, The chromosome diseases are polymorphic because a chromosome France, 7Laboratoire de cytogénétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, imbalance lowers the threshold of appearance in family pathology. The Strasbourg, France. decreased homeostatic buffering in developmental pathways leads to Molecular diagnosis of rare autosomal recessive diseases with genetic stronger phenotypical expression of multifactorially inherited traits. For heterogeneity represents a real challenge because clinical data do not our investigation were chosen the families with Turner syndrome (TS) always suggest a particular defective gene. Consanguinity is frequent patients since they show many extragenital pathology. Peroral glucose in such families. Genome-wide SNP array is a recent tool that allows, tolerance test (GTT) was made for them because glucose intolerance by searching for homozygous regions in such patients, to select few is typically multifactorial trait. candidate genes in which to search for mutations. We report the case GTT was performed for 37 TS patients, 42 their siblings (21 broth- of a 51 years old woman who presents a moderate limb-girdle mus- er and 21 sister) and 52 parents (32 mothers and 20 fathers). The cular dystrophy, diagnosed at the age of 37 years. We identified six average age of TS patients was 20.8 yrs (ranking from 5 to 46 yrs), homozygous regions by SNP array analysis (Affymetrix). One of the siblings 20.0 yrs (ranking interval 6-56 yrs), and in parents 48.1 yrs regions, on chromosome 9, contained the TRIM32 gene. This gene (ranking between 27 and 76 yrs). Glucose tolerance was found being was previously found mutated in families with limb-girdle muscular disturbed in 7 (19.0%) probands, in 4 (9.5%) siblings and in 9 (17.3%) dystrophy type 2H (LGMD2H), a mild autosomal recessive myopathy parents while in the control Lithuanian population these disturbances described in the Manitoba Hutterite population and in two non-Hutterite were found only in 1.7% of people at the age of 24-35 yrs and in 5.0% brothers from Germany with sarcotubular myopathy. A single muta- of those who are older than 35 yrs old. Therefore, the GTT shows tion was found in these patients, D487N, located in a conserved do- glucose intolerance level being much more higher for TS patients and main of the C-terminal part of the protein. Haplotype analysis showed their relatives than in general population. These results allow us to that Hutterite and German patients shared common ancestry. TRIM32 affirm that damages of homeostasis usually present in families with was also implicated in Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS11), again based chromosome diseases. The frequency of GTT disturbances in TS pa- on a single missense mutation (P130S, in the N-terminal part) found tients are twice more often than in their siblings. in a consanguineous Bedouin family, rising the possibility that either the LGMD or the BBS nucleotide change could be associated with P1114. Mutations of PEO1 gene encoding Twinkle helicase disease by linkage disequilibrium rather than being disease causing. causes mitochondrial DNA depletion Sequencing of TRIM32 in our patient revealed a frameshift mutation, E. Sarzi1, S. Goffart2, D. Chretien1, V. Serre1, A. Slama3, A. Munnich1, J. c.1753_1766dup14 (p.L589fs) in the C-terminal part. This second mu- Spelbrink2, A. Rötig4; tation firmly establishes the role of TRIM32 in LGMD. 1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2Institute of Medical Technology and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 3Hôpital du Kremlin Bicêtre, Paris, P1112. Tumor Necrosis Factor polymorphisms and asthma France, 4INSERM U781, PARIS, France. in two international population-based cohorts (ECRHS and Twinkle is a mitochondrial 5’-3’ DNA helicase is important for mitochon- SAPALDIA studies) drial DNA (mtDNA) maintenance. Twinkle dominant mutations have F. Castro-Giner1, R. F. de Cid2, M. Mächler3, M. Imboden3, M. Wjst4, D. Jarvis5, been reported in progressive external ophthalmoplegia with multiple M. Kogevinas1, N. M. Probst-Hensch2; mtDNA deletions (adPEO) whereas Twinkle recessive mutations are 1Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology, Barcelona, Spain, 2Cen- associated with infantile onset spinocerebellar ataxia (IOSCA). It has ter for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 3University of Zurich, been previously shown that Twinkle control mtDNA copy number ren- Zurich, Switzerland, 4GSF-National Research Center for Environmental Health, ders Twinkle gene (PEO1) a candidate gene for mtDNA depletion. We Munich, Germany, 5Imperial College, London, United Kingdom. selected a series of 10 patients born to consanguineous parents and Genetic association studies have associated the Tumor Necrosis Fac- presenting a severe mtDNA depletion of yet unknown origin. We then tor (TNF) 308G/A polymorphism with an increased asthma risk but, studied the segregation of microsatellite markers flanking PEO1 in overall, results are inconsistent. We assessed the prevalence of atopy these patients. Homozygosity of the microsatellite markers was found and asthma in adults with two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for two patients of the same family. They presented neonatal lactic aci- of the TNF and lymphotoxin α (LTA) genes. dosis, trunk hypotonia, seizures, cytolysis and cholestasis. A combined The European Community Respiratory Health Survey (ECRHS) and defect of complexes I, III and IV of the mitochondrial respiratory chain the Swiss Cohort Study on Air Pollution and Lung and Heart Disease was found in liver of both patients as well as severe mtDNA depletion in Adults (SAPALDIA) are two population based cohorts that have (8% of the normal mtDNA content). This prompted us to sequence used comparable protocols including the questionnaires for respira- PEO1 and to identify a homozygous mutation at a conserved position tory symptoms and exposures as well as lung function and atopy tests. of the protein (T457I). The similarity of Twinkle and GP4D helicase DNA samples from 10,736 participants from both cohorts were geno- from phage T7 prompted us to model the structure of this human heli- typed for TNF-308 and LTA+252. case using the X-ray coordinates of the homohexameric GP4D protein The prevalence of asthma symptoms was 6%. The TNF-308 polymor- as a tertiary template. Interestingly, the point mutation is located in the phism was associated with an increased asthma prevalence. The ad- interface between two monomers of the hexameric enzyme, and can justed odds ratio (OR) for A allele was 1.30 (95%CI 1.1-1.53) for com- probably induce a local conformational change. This work reports the bined sample, 1.49 (95%CI 1.22-1.81) for ECRHS and 0.94 (95%CI first description of a PEO1 mutation responsible for mtDNA depletion 0.69-1.29) for SAPALDIA study. Association pattern shows slight differ- in human. ences between countries. Similar risks were observed in groups strati- fied by sex, smoking and atopy. The LTA+252 SNP was not associated P1115. HLA B39 affects the type 1 diabetes predisposing effect with the prevalence of asthma symptoms or atopy. Haplotype analysis of DRB1*0404-DQB1*0302 haplotypes in the Finnish population of both SNPs didn’t show a combined effect, with an OR for LTA+252 K. Lipponen1, Z. Gombos1, A. P. Laine1, O. Simell2, M. Knip3,4, R. Hermann1,5, and TNF-308 rare alleles, 1.29 (95%CI 1.09-1.52). J. Ilonen1,6; CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that genetic variation in TNF may 1University of Turku, Immunogenetics Laboratory, Turku, Finland, 2University of contribute to a small extent to asthma risk but that this risk may differ Turku, Department of Paediatrics, Turku, Finland, 3Tampere University Hospital, between countries. Department of Paediatrics, Tampere, Finland, 4University of Helsinki, Hospital Funding: MaratoTV3, Catalonia, Spain; Genoma España; Swiss Na- for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki, Finland, 5Semmelweis University, Bu- tional Science Foundation, Switzerland; Lung League Zürich, Switzer- dapest, Hungary, 6University of Kuopio, Department of Clinical Microbiology, land Kuopio, Finland. An autoimmune attack against the insulin-producing β-cells of the pan- creas precedes the manifestation of clinical type 1 diabetes (T1D). The genetic factors regulating this process are poorly characterised. The main factors are DQB1-, DRB1- and DQA1-genes in human leuko-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 21 cyte antigen (HLA) Class II area. However, several studies support a restricted (without interaction) model. Interactions identified were the modifying role of HLA Class I variants. We aimed to characterize explored by stratification for gender. Class I modifiers of the DRB1*0404-DQB1*0302 haplotypes in relation Findings: For TetTox responses, an interaction p value <0.15 was to T1D risk and to emergence of humoral beta-cell autoimmunity. found for: IL-4 C-589T (p=0.01), IL-4 G2979T (p=0.12), IL-4Rα I50V We analysed 303 ICA-positive children who were identified in a popula- (p=0.04) and IL-10 C-592A (p=0.13). For DiphTox responses, the in- tion-based genetic screening. All individuals carried the DQB1*02/*0302 teraction term for IL4 C-589T was p=0.10. After stratification, we found or *0302/x (x≠*02, *0301, *0602) risk genotypes. Mean follow-up time associations with alleles associated with atopy. Boys with IL-4 -589T was 5.46 years. Study subjects were further tested for insulin, IA2 alleles (CT/TT) had increased DiphTox (p=0.011) and TetTox (p=0.042) and GAD autoantibodies and genotyped for HLA DRB1-DQA1-DQB1, responses compared with CC homozygotes and those with IL-4Rα HLA-B and for the insulin gene HphI promoter polymorphism. 50V alleles (IV/VV) had higher levels of DiphTox (p=0.039) and TetTox The DRB1*0404-DQB1*0302-HLA-B*39 and DRB1*0404-DQB1*0302- (p=0.077) responses compared with II homozygotes. Contrastingly, non-HLA-B*39 haplotypes conferred significantly different T1D risks, girls with IL10 -592C alleles (AC/CC) had significantly lower levels of the haplotype carrying HLA-B*39 being more predisposing (HR 7,08; DiphTox (p=0.028) and TetTox (p=0.018) responses compared with AA p<0,001). These haplotypes also had a differential effect on the ap- homozygotes. Overall, the most consistent pattern was a reduction in pearance of insulin autoantibodies (p=0,0001). This effect was inde- TetTox responses in girls with genotypes associated with atopy. pendent of the insulin gene polymorphism. The presence of HLA-B*39 Conclusion: Our findings support the interaction of primary genetic did not affect emergence of GADA and IA-2A. and modifying factors on vaccine responses, the importance of atopic For the first time we showed that B*39 allele on the DRB1*0404- genetics to vaccine responses and investigation for gender-specific DQB1*0302 haplotype affects appearance of diabetes-related auto- effects in genetic association studies. antibodies and progression to clinical disease. Importantly, its primary effect appears to be on insulin-specific autoimmunity. It is further in- P1118. The Vitamin D Receptor Gene Polymorphisms are vestigated whether the B*39 allele itself or a gene in the surrounding associated with diabetes mellitus in Romanian Population genomic region is responsible for this phenomenon. C. Serafinceanu1, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol2, D. Ungureanu3, C. Moldovan3, I. Radu2, A. Craciun1, C. Panaite1, A. Dragomir1, M. Apostol1, P. Cimponeriu1, L. P1116. Association of alleles at polymorphic sites in the Gavrila2, D. Cheta1; Osteopontin encoding gene in young Type 1 diabetic patients 1N Paulescu Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, R. Marciano1, G. D’Annunzio2, N. Minuto2, F. Giacopelli1, A. Santamaria1, M. Di Romania, 3Titu Maiorescu University, Bucharest, Romania. Duca3, R. Ravazzolo1, R. Lorini2; Vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms were associated with 1Molecular Genetics, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 2Pediatric Clinic of the development of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM) in some populations. University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 3Lab. Nephrology, G. Gaslini Institute, In addition vitamin D may influence insulin secretion and insulin sensi- Genova, Italy. tivity. Based on these observations the VDR gene polymorphisms are In the complex interplay of genes related to immune response and considered potential candidate for diabetes mellitus development. autoimmune process in Type 1 diabetes (T1D), several candidates can The aim of the present case-control study was to evaluate the impact be envisaged as susceptibility genes. We have studied polymorphisms of VDR polymorphisms to the T1DM in Romanian Caucasian popula- in the Osteopontin (OPN) encoding gene by comparison of genotype, tion. allele and haplotype frequencies between T1D cases and unaffected Clinical information and biological samples from 800 unrelated Roma- controls and immunological characteristics in T1D cases. We evalu- nian Caucasian subjects were collected. They were distributed into ated 238 T1D patients (130 male, 108 female), and 137 unaffected T1DM (n=200, men: women, 105:95), T2DM (n=200, men: women, control individuals (68 males and 69 females). All patients and controls 105:95), HC (n=400 healthy control) groups. These groups were were genotyped for three OPN intragenic variants: -156 (G/GG) and matched for age, gender and ethnicity. The VDR Apa, Taq, Fok poly- -66 (T/G) in the promoter region and a biallelic ins/del variant (TG/ morphisms were analyzed using PCR-RFLP method. The distribution TGTG) at +245 in the first intron of the gene. The results of the case/ of genotypes in all groups was in agreement with Hardy-Weinberg control association study indicated that the G allele at the -66 SNP had equilibrium. Differences in genotypes and alleles distribution between significantly higher frequency in controls than cases. Accordingly, the the groups were examined by chi-square test. We observed that the B haplotype combination, that includes the -66 G allele, showed signifi- VDR F, t and A alleles and FF, TT and AA genotypes are more fre- cantly higher frequency in controls than cases. Interestingly, case-con- quent in T1DM patients than in controls. The highest difference was trol comparison in male individuals showed no significant association, observed for VDR Fok (Chi-square =12,8961, p≤0.01). This polymor- whereas the association was confirmed in females. phism is also more frequent in T2DM than in control subjects, but the Considering patients with 1 b-cell autoantibody versus those having difference is less significant than in T1DM patients. two or more autoantibodies, the T allele at the -66 SNP showed a relative increase of genotypic frequency in T1D cases with high num- P1119. Polymorphism of the vitamin D receptor gene and ber of autoantibodies. This was also the case in patients with two or osteocalcin gene in insulin-dependent diabetic children with and more b-cell autoantibodies who were carriers of 4 HLA-DQ risk het- without osteopenia. erodimers. These results suggest that Osteopontin can play a role as O. S. Romashkina, L. V. Tirtova, D. N. Baranov, P. B. Glazkov, V. I. Larionova; susceptibility gene, possibly by a sex-specific mechanism acting in the St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Fed- autoimmune process. eration. Insulin-dependent diabetes is often associated with osteopenia. The P1117. Gender-Specific effects of cytokine genes on childhood mechanism of this association is not yet clear. Genetic factors play an vaccine responses important role in the pathogenesis of osteoporosis and osteopenia. G. S. Baynam1, G. Zhang1, S. Khoo1, P. Sly1, P. Holt1, J. Goldblatt2, P. Le Recent studies, aimed to identify the genes, involved in this process, Souef1; suggested several candidate genes, among them vitamin D receptor 1University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia, 2Genetic Services of Western gene (VDR) and osteocalcin gene. In this study we investigated the Australia, Perth, Australia. allele frequency of the VDR gene polymorphic loci, determined by the Background: The effects of cytokine genes on vaccine responses are presence or absence of the restriction sites to ApaI, TaqI and BsmI context dependent. Gender-specific genetic effects have been dem- ensimes and allele frequency of the osteocalcin gene polymorphic loci, onstrated on many phenotypes, however, their influence on vaccine determined by the presence or absence of the restriction site to HindIII response is unknown. endonuclease. The aim of this study was to compare the frequency of Objectives: To investigate gender-specific effects of cytokine gene these alleles in the group of children with insulin-dependent diabetes, polymorphisms on vaccine response. associated and not associated with osteopenia. Method: In 263 2 year-old subjects selected for parental history of ato- In total, 224 children ( 116 boys and 108 girls) with insulin-dependent py, we investigated gene-gender interaction effects on IgG responses diabetes wereincluded in our study. All the children were living in North- to diphtheria (DiphTox) and tetanus toxoids (TetTox) using a likeli- West region of Russia. Osteopenia was diagnosed in 38 subjects (28 hood-ratio test and comparing an unrestricted (with interaction) and boys and 10 girls). VDR and osteocalcin gene polymorphism were de-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 22 tected by PCR with restriction assay. macogenetic analysis of the S-warfarin metabolic enzyme CYP2C9 Osteopenia was detected significantly more often among boys with and S-warfarin target protein VKORC1 can help in individualized diabetes compared to girls (p=0,004). TaqI, BsmI polymorphism of the therapy. The aim of our work was to study the allelic frequencies of VDR gene and HindIII polymorphism of the osteocalcin gene did not two gene variants, CYP2C9*2 C3608T and VKORC1 G1639A, in a influence the frequency of the osteopenia among children with insulin- Hungarian Roma population in comparison with the average Hungar- dependent diabetes. The A allele of the ApaI polymorphic site of VDR ian Caucasian population. A total of 303 Gypsy cases and 181 Hun- gene tended to appear more often in the group of the osteopenic chil- garian controls were genotyped for the CYP2C9*2 C3608T SNP; and dren compared with subjects without osteopenia.(p=0,045). for the VKORC1 G1639A SNP 328 Gypsys and 193 Hungarians were tested. For genotyping PCR-RFLP assay and direct sequencing were P1120. The age of the founder effect for C598T mutation used. Our study revealed significant difference in the presence of mu- in the VHL gene in the patients with autosomal recessive tant genotype in case of CYP2C9*2 C3608T (p=0.021) and VKORC1 erythrocytosis in Chuvashia. G1639A (p=0.012) between the Hungarian Roma and Hungarian N. N. Vasserman, R. A. Zinchenko, A. V. Polyakov; general population. VKORC1 -1639A allele frequency was 28% in the Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Gypsy group, 41 % in controls, whereas the CYP2C9*2 3608T allele Familial congenital polycythemia (OMIM 263400) - is a rare autoso- was present in 12% of both studied groups. The allele frequencies of mal recessive disorder that is characterized by erythrocytosis, normal the Hungarian population of both studied SNPs were very similar to the leukocyte and platelet counts and usually increased erythropoietin pro- European Caucasian population (CYP2C9*2 C3608T 12%, VKORC1 duction. This disorder is rather frequent in a small region of Chuvashia G1639A 41%). Genotyping of VKORC1 G1639A SNP could be clini- (Russian Federation) with mostly peasant citizens. All patients are cally important for predicting anticoagulant responses to warfarin. Chuvashs by nationality and live in the northeastern part of Chuvashia. The results of our studies would provide new insights to the genetic This disorder is caused by mutation C598T in the VHL gene that leads variability, and their response to the drug metabolisation of the Roma to the substitution Arg200Trp. In 2004 Liu et al calculated the age of population in Central-Eastern Europe. this mutation in the world using 8 SNPs. They estimated the age of the founder effect as 14000-62000 years. P1123. Molecular genetic analysis of PRKAG2 in Tunisians We have examined data on six microsatellite markers flanking the VHL families with Wolff Parkinson White Syndrome gene to estimate the age of the founder effect in Chuvash population. S. Nouira1, C. Charfeddine1, F. Ouarda2, H. Ouragini1, F. Abid2, S. Abdelhak1; Mean value of the generations we estimated as 52,67±24,12 genera- 1molecular investigation of genetic orphan disease, Tunis-Belvedere, Tunisia, tions. The age of the one generation for Chuvash peasant citizens is 2Cardiology Department, Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia. 27.4 years. So the C598T mutation arose in Chuvash population 1445 The Wolff Parkinson White (WPW, MIM 194200) syndrome is an au- years ago. The mean year of the births of patients with autosomal re- tosomal dominant heart disease characterized by the presence of ac- cessive erythrocytosis that we are investigated is 1972. And mutation cessory pathway that arises from an aberrant conduction from atria C598T originated from single founder approximately in 527th year. to ventricles. This second pathway causes a premature ventricular This work was pertly supported by Russian President‘s grant preexcitation that manifests on the electrocardiography as a short PR NSh5736.2006.7 interval and anomalies of QRS complex. WPW affects 1 to 3 persons per 1000 population and is associated with high incidence of sudden P1121. A novel mutation in the VDR gene in an Iranian patient death in some affected families. with Vitamin D-dependent Rickets type II Several mutations within PRKAG2 gene have been shown to underlie V. Hadavi1, N. Almadani1, N. Mirhosseini2, M. H. Kariminejad1, E. Reyniers3, W. WPW. This gene encodes the gamma2 regulatory subunit of AMP-ac- Wuyts4, H. Najmabadi1; tivated protein kinase, which functions as a metabolic sensor in cells, 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, responding to cellular energy demands by regulating diverse ATP-us- Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Welfare Organization of Kerman Province, Kerman, ing pathways and ATP-generating pathways. Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University & Univer- We report here clinical and molecular investigation of 3 unrelated sity Hospital of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Tunisian families including 6 affected members. All patients were di- University & University Hospital of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. agnosed on the basis of clinical symptoms and electrophysiological The vitamin D receptor (VDR), is the mediator of all genomic actions of features of WPW. Families were genotyped with two polymorphic mic- vitamin D3 and it’s analogs. Mutations in VDR results in target organ rosatellite markers overlapping the PRKAG2 gene. resistance to 1alpha,25-dihydroxy vitamin D [1,25(OH)2D3], the active Haplotype analysis showed that this cases are likely linked to PRKAG2 form of vitamin D, and cause hereditary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D resis- gene. Two different haplotypes have been identified suggesting that tant rickets (HVDRR). This disease also called vitamin D-dependent there is no evidence for a founder effect to WPW in the studied fami- rickets type II and is transmitted in an autosomal recessive mode. lies and is suggestive of mutational heterogeneity of this conduction We report a 5 years old girl affected with type II vitamin D-dependent system disease. None of the previously reported mutations within Rickets, who appeared normal at birth but developed the clinical and PRKAG2 gene was observed in Tunisian patients. biochemical features of calciferol deficiency with hypocalcaemia and To our knowledge, this is the first report of a molecular study of WPW rickets in the first year of life. She suffered from total alopecia and in North Africa population. metaphyseal dysplasia in both hip joints and in pelvic. She was hospi- talized at the age of four due to Diabetes Mellitus. Sequence analysis P1124. The CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genotypes are possible factors of all coding exons of VDR gene was performed and revealed a single causing chemical induced abnormal liver function homozygous point mutation in exon 7 causing a premature termina- O. Kochetova, T. V. Viktorova; tion codon, Tyr295X. The Tyr295X mutation causes a truncation of the Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. VDR protein, thereby deleting a large portion of the steroid hormone- Hepthyle, ethylebenzene-styrene, benzene are hepatotoxic in humans. binding domain (amino acids 295-424). In vivo, these substances are metabolized by cytochromes P450 to form the electrophilic metabolites, which may either cause cell damage P1122. Polimorphisms of CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genes or be further metabolized and detoxified by glutathione S-transferases associated with the warfarin metabolism in Hungarian Roma (GSTs) and other enzymes. population. The aim of this study was to estimate the predisposition of influenc- C. Sipeky1, V. Csöngei1, B. Faragó1, K. Horvatovich1, L. Járomi1, L. Magyari1, E. ing possible factors causing chemical induced abnormal liver function Sáfrány1, I. Takács2, B. Melegh1; on the basis of studying the genotypes CYP1A1 and CYP1A2. For 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, this study, 330 workers from the petrochemical plant were enrolled. Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Sem- The genotypes CYP1A2 (-164C→A and -2464T→delT) and CYP1A1 melweis Teaching Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary. (A2455G and T3801C) were determined by polymerase chain reac- Warfarin is an oral anticoagulant drug for the prevention and treatment tion and restriction fragment length polymorphism on peripheral white of arterious and venous thromboembolic disorders. There is a great blood cell DNA from 73 incident cases of toxic hepatitis, 163 “groups interethnic and interindividual variability in the required dose. Phar- of risk” on development of a toxic hepatitis, 94 healthy workers and Genetic analysis, linkage, and association 2 335 controls. The activity of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate erozygous state for -α3.7 Kb deletion (-3.7α/α). The -α 3.7/-α 3.7 homozy- aminotransferase (AST) and bilirubin was used as the parameter of gotes had a frequency of 19.8%. liver function. Ten percent of the patients was --MED/αα heterozygotes and 9.1% was No significant association was found between all groups of petrochem- -α 20..5/α heterozygotes. ical workers among themselves. The α HphI mutation was found at the heterozygous state (αHphIα /αα ) in We found that the CYP1A1*2C were associated with a 2.09 -fold (95% 8.4% of the patients and 6.1% was αHphIα /αHphIα homozygotes. The -α CI: 1.1-4.21) increased AST and CYP1A2*1D were associated with 3.7/α HphI α genotype was found in 2.3% of the patients. a 8.5-fold (95% CI: 1.1-75.0) increased AST and a 1.6-fold bilirubin The values of Hb and RBC were statistically significant different be- (95% CI: 1.0-2.9). Gaplotype CYP1A2*1L had an OR (95% CI) of 14.5 tween the males and the females (p<0.01). Significant differences were (1.8-31.0), 13.1 (1.6-28.7), 44.4 (5.5-97.1) on abnormal bilirubin, AST found for the haematological parameters among subjects with different and ALT, respectively.Our results were shown that CYP1A2*1A is a genotype groups. Reductions of MCV and MCH were found in those protective variant (OR=0.17; 95% CI: 0.9-0.27). subjects with the following genotypes: -α 3.7/αα ; -α 3.7/-α 3.7 ; --MED /αα and - α 20.5 /αα . This reduction was more evident in both heterozygotes and P1125. Molecular characterization of α-thalassemia and homozygotes for αHphI mutation.The highest values of RBC were found phenotype-genotype correlation in Sicily (Italy). in the carriers of --MED/α, -α 3.7/αα and αHphIα /α HphIα genotypes. Hemo- C. Di Bella, M. La Rosa, B. Piraino, V. Procopio, C. Cuppari, K. Alessio, C. globin levels were reduced only in α HphI homozygous subjects. Salpietro, L. Rigoli; Our data underline that in Sicily populations, the molecular screening Department of Pediatrics, Medical School, Messina, Italy. of α-thalassemia is useful to better characterize the clinically asymp- We analyzed the α-thalassemia mutations and the genotype-to-pheno- tomatic subjects with a slightly reduced MCV and MCH and normal type correlations in 131 Sicilian subjects with reduced MCV and MCH, iron status. normal HbA and HbF, and normal serum iron. Six different genotypes 2 were detected, the most common (44,3% of the cases) being the het-Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 Po07. Normal variation, population for ADHD ranges from 5%-10%, and is found to be four times as preva- lent in males as in females. It is a familial condition with a complex genetics, genetic epidemiology pattern of inheritance. Thus far five genome-wide scans have been conducted worldwide P1126. Metabolic and physiological changes in muscles of and of these two were carried out in US study samples by our group. mice lacking alpha-actinin-3 explains the association between These screenings and subsequent fine-mapping yielded four signifi- a common null allele in the ACTN gene and human athletic cant linkage peaks on chromosomes 5p, 6q, 16p and 17p. Chromo- performance some 5p produced strong linkage also in two of the other genome-wide K. G. R. Quinlan1, D. G. MacArthur1,2, J. T. Seto1,2, J. M. Raftery1, N. Yang1, K. scans that were carried out in the European populations. Due to the N. North1,2; overwhelming evidence for this particular chromosome locus we have 1Institute for Neuromuscular Research, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, here screened 3200 SNPs in 170 ADHD trio families. The 15 Mb wide Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, fine-mapped chromosomal region had on average one SNP every 4.8 NSW, Australia. kb. In our preliminary analyses we found three SNPs with p-values < The protein α-actinin-3, encoded by the ACTN3 gene, is a highly con- 0.00008. An increased frequency of haplotypes resulting in p-values < served component of the contractile machinery in fast skeletal muscle 0.01 were found on chromosome 5q11.2, all subsiding in the ARL15 fibres. Intriguingly, homozygosity for a common nonsense variant in gene where also the most significant single SNP (p = 0.00001) was the human ACTN3 gene (R577X) results in complete deficiency of α- found. The function of this gene is largely unknown. actinin-3 in ~18% of the general population - more than one billion individuals worldwide. We and other groups have demonstrated that P1129. Partially isolated communities founded by Azoreans in the ACTN3 577XX null genotype is under-represented in elite sprinters the Santa Catarina Island, Southern Brazil and over-represented in endurance athletes, and is associated with Y. C. N. Muniz1, I. R. Souza2, A. L. Simões1; poorer muscle strength and sprint performance in non-athletes. The 1Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 2Universida- 577X allele also shows a strong genetic signature of recent positive de Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil. natural selection, suggesting that α-actinin-3 deficiency conferred an Costa da Lagoa (CLG) and São João do Rio Vermelho (SJRV) are adaptive benefit during the evolution of modern humans. communities located on Santa Catarina Island (Southern Brazil), set- To explore the mechanisms underlying the effect of R577X on muscle tled on the XVIII century by immigrants came from Azores Archipelago. function we have generated an Actn3 knockout (KO) mouse model of Demographic and genetic studies have also been indicated the pres- α-actinin-3 deficiency. We have shown that α-actinin-3 deficiency is ence of African and Amerindian components. CLG is considered genet- associated with increased mitochondrial density and altered activity ically isolated due to its localization and isolate breaking is occurring in of metabolic enzymes, consistent with a shift in muscle metabolism SJRV due to the increase migration to the local. Eight autosomal and towards the more efficient aerobic pathway. We have also demonstrat- five Y-linked STRs and YAP were analyzed in CLG (n=119) and SJRV ed a specific reduction in the diameter of fast muscle fibres, reduced (n=163) to verify the hypothesis of their different degrees of isolation. muscle bulk and grip strength and an increase in fatigue resistance Genotyping was performed by PCR/PAGE/Silver staining and statisti- in KO mice. These phenotypic differences provide a physiological ex- cal analysis by ARLEQUIN, DISPAN, GDA, PHYLIP and ADMIX. The planation for the differing ACTN3 genotype frequencies in sprint and Y-linked loci were unable to distinguish the communities (F =-0,001 ST endurance athletes, and may help to explain the adaptive benefit of the p>0,05), but were more effective on the differentiation between them 577X allele during the evolution of modern humans. and Amerindians and Africans (0,16>G >0,215). The communities ST showed more similarity in relation to Y haplotypes (F =0,007; p>0,05), ST P1127. Epidemiological study of progressive autosomal- what might indicate an interchange mainly male-mediated between dominant spinocerebellar ataxias in the Bashkortostan Republic them. The autosomal STRs were more effective on the differentiation E. Mingazova1, I. Khidiatova1, R. Magzhanov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; between these communities of recent and common origin (F =0,005, ST 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir p<0,01). Autosomal loci detected a major Portuguese/Azorean admix- State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. ture (CLG=93,5%, SJRV=80,6%), followed by an African (CLG=4,1%, Progressive autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (AD SCAs) SJRV=12,6%) and a low Amerindian. The Y-linked loci showed a pre- are genetically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative diseases, ponderantly Portuguese/Azorean (CLG=95,6%, SJRV=94,1%) and no clinical characteristic of which is the disturbance of motor coordination, Amerindian component. These data showed that these communities appearing as a result of the defeat of the cerebellum. There is sig- were genetically related to the Azores population. Thus, random genet- nificant population heterogeneity for the prevalence of AD SCAs and ic drift may have had an important effect on the CLG community, while the molecular- genetic reasons of the disease. We have analyzed the gene flow might be the predominant evolutionary factor on SJRV. prevalence of AD SCAs in the Bashkortostan Republic (Russia, territo- Financial support: CNPq-Brazil ry of South Ural). At present in the Bashkortostan Republic (population 4069784 people) 82 patients (45 males and 37 females) from 69 fami- P1130. Analysis of CYP1A1, CYP2D, GSTM1, GSTT1, NAT2, lies with AD SCAs were revealed. Irregular distribution of AD SCAs on CYP2C and CYP2C1 gene polymorphisms in newborn and the territory of the Bashkortostan Republic (2:100000 on average) is elderly people from North-West region of Russia noted. The disease is registered in 22 of 54 districts and in 12 of 21 O. S. Glotov1, A. S. Glotov1, G. S. Demin1,2, M. V. Moskalenko2, N. U. Shved1, towns. The prevalence of AD SCAs in different districts varies from 0, V. G. Vakharlovsky1, V. G. Vakharlovsky1, T. E. Ivashchenko1, T. E. Ivashchen- 63 to 17, 7 per 100000. The molecular- genetic study of AD SCAs in ko1, V. S. Baranov1,2; the Bashkortostan Republic has begun. We carried out the analysis of 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian the number of (CAG)n- repeats in the gene SCA1 in 19 unrelated fami- Federation, 2St-Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. lies since it is one of the most frequent types of AD SCAs in Russia. Using pharmacy biochip specially constructed for population stud- However, not a single of the examined families revealed the expansion ies, 13 polymorphisms of 7 genes: CYP1A1(C4887,A4889G,T6 of (CAG)n- repeats. Further conducting of studies is planned. 235C), CYP2D6(G1934A,DelA2637), GSTM1(del), GSTT1(del), NAT2(C481T,G590A,G857A), CYP2C9(C430T,A1075C) and P1128. Fine mapping of susceptibility locus for ADHD on CYP2D6(G681A) were investigated in 2 groups: 109 newborns chromosome 5p (Group1) and 148 unrelated individuals over 70 years (Group 2) from J. M. Ekholm1, M. Ogdie1, B. Merriman1, J. T. McCracken2, J. J. McGough2, S. North-West Region of Russia. Smalley2, S. F. Nelson1; Low frequency of null allele homozygotes for GSTT1 gene in Group1 1Department of Human Genetics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2De- (14%) and high frequency in Group2 (28%) were obtained. The fre- partment of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, quencies of GSTM10/0 genotype were significantly different for men United States. in Group1 and Group2 (30.4%, 53.6%, respectively, p=0.049). The fre- Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a behavioral diagno- quencies of deletion homozygotes (GSTT10/0, GSTM10/0) increased sis based on the presence of developmentally inappropriate levels of with aging from 6.5% in Group1 up to 21.4% in Group2 (p=0.058). impulsivity, overactivity, and inattentiveness. The disease prevalence The distribution of genotypes of NAT2 gene was significantly different Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 between groups (p=0.011). The frequency of N allele increased with Following running of the above system which is based on Capillary Ar- aging from 16.8% in Group1 to 28.6% in Group2 (p=0.008). The fre- ray and Fluorescent Labeled Primers, the frequency of different alleles quency of C allele (A1075C) of CYP2C9 gene significantly increased over different Iranian populations, determination of paternal relation- in female from Group1 compared to Group2 (13.7%, 4.8%, respec- ship, diagnosis as a consequence of natural catastrophes like flood, tively, p=0.009). earthquake as well as unnatural events like war. For estimation of combined effect of GSTM1, GSTT1 and NAT2 genes More over, studying Iranian populations will help approved research- we used “score method”. The carriers of 0/0(GSTM1), 0/0(GSTT1) and ers to develop new and better ways of preventing, diagnosing and N/N(NAT2) genotypes were given a score of 2, N/S carriers (NAT2)-a treating different illnesses. score of 1 and carriers of S/S(NAT2), n/n(GSTM1) and n/n(GSTT1)- zero score. Combined analysis revealed significant prevalence of P1133. Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs) in Amerindians from frequency of “score sum ≥3” in Group2 compared to Group1 (60.7%, Brazilian Amazon 19%, respectively, p=0.0009). M. Rizzatti Luizon1, C. Mendes-Junior2, S. De Oliveira3, A. Simões1; It might be speculated that people who have certain genotypes of 1Departamento de Genética, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Uni- GSTM1, GSTT1, NAT2 genes for men and GSTT1, CYP2C9, NAT2 versidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 2Departamento de Clínica genes for women have some metabolic advantages for their longer Médica, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, survival. Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 3Departamento de Genética e Morfologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil. P1131. Allele high-specific amplification for detection of LCT Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs) are genetic loci with large fre- C/T-13910 SNP associated with adult-type hypolactasia quency differences between the major ethnic groups and are very M. Sokolova, K. Ignatov, S. Borinskaya, V. Kramorov, N. Yankovsky; useful in admixture estimation. However, their frequencies are poorly Institute of General Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. known within South American indigenous populations, making it diffi- Adult-type hypolactasia limits the use of fresh milk due to lactase non- cult to use them in admixture studies with Latin American populations, persistence that causes lactose intolerance. As found recently, the CC such as the tri-hybrid Brazilian population. To minimize this problem, genotype of the DNA variant -13910 T/C upstream of the lactase (LCT) the frequencies of the AIMs FY-null, RB2300, LPL, AT3-I/D, Sb19.3, gene is associated with lactase non-persistence [Enattah et al., 2002]. APO and PV92 were determined via PCR and PCR-RFLP in four Frequency of hypolactasia varies from 2-3% in North West Europe to tribes (n=309) from Brazilian Amazon (Tikúna, Kashinawa, Baníwa more than 90% in East Asia. and Kanamarí), in order to evaluate their potential for discriminating The aim of this study was to evaluate the applicability of LCT C/T(- indigenous populations from Europeans and Africans, as well as dis- 13910) SNP detection as a diagnostic test for adult-type hypolactasia criminating each tribe from the others. Although capable of differentiat- in Russia and neighboring countries. ing tribes, as evidenced by the exact test of population differentiation, We used allele specific amplification for determination of allele and a neighbor-joining tree suggests that the AIMs are useless in obtaining genotype frequencies in populations of Russians, Ukrainians, Belo- reliable reconstructions of the biological relationships and evolutionary russians, Komi, Pamirs, Udmurt, Chukchi, Kazakh, Uigur, Buryat and history that characterize the villages and tribes studied. The mean al- Iranians. Thus, DNA diagnostics for carrying the C/C genotype of the lele frequencies from these AIMs were very similar to those observed locus C/T-13910 in individuals from populations of the European part for North American natives. They discriminated Amerindians from Af- of Russia can be considered a predictive test for development of the ricans, but not from Europeans. On the other hand, the neighbor-join- primary adult hypolactasia long before its phenotypic detection. ing dendrogram separated Africans and Europeans from Amerindians Allele specific amplification was performed by real-time PCR with Syb- with a high statistical support (bootstrap = 0.989). The relatively low rGree and SNPase DNA polymerase (“Bionem” Russia) which can diversity (G =0.042) among North American natives and Amerindians ST extend a perfectly matched primer only. The obtained results have from Brazilian Amazon agrees with the lack of intra-ethnic variation showed that the used enzyme (SNPase) provides allele high-specific previously reported for these markers. Despite genetic drift effects, the amplification and can be used for SNP genotyping. In future we pro- mean allelic frequencies herein presented could be used as Amerin- posed to use this high specific enzyme for large-scale high-throughput dian parental frequencies in admixture estimates in urban Brazilian SNP genotyping. populations. Application of the described method and enzyme for SNP diagnos- tics will be an important step toward development of the individualized P1134. Haplotypes in SLC24A5 gene as Ancestry Informative medicine in Russia. Markers in different populations I. Pietrangeli1, C. Martone1, I. M. Predazzi1, E. Giardina1, C. Martínez-Labar- P1132. Studying Alleles Frequencies of 16 Short Tandem ga2,3, F. De Angelis2, A. Spinella4, G. De Stefano2, O. Rickards2, G. Novelli1,5; Repeats (STRs) Zones in Iranian Population for the First Time 1Centre of Excellence for Genomic Risk Assessment in Multifactorial and M. A. Saremi1, M. Tavallaei (Ph.D.)1, M. Sajedifar2, S. Zeinali (Ph.D.)3; Complex Diseases, School of Medicine, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 1Imam Husein University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar Human 2Department of Biology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 3Centre of Molecu- Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Pasteur Institute, lar Anthropology for Ancient DNA Studies, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 4Direzione Centrale Anticrimine, Servizio di Polizia Scientifica, Rome, Italy, Using of molecular methods such as DNA typing has a special place 5Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of in studying populations and identification of anonymous people and Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States. corpses. Although it has been hypothesized that many genes contribute to Tandemly repeated DNA sequences, which are widespread through- produce different color shades in skin pigmentation, almost nothing out the human genome, are polymorphic in nature, making them im- is known about the biology of these genes. Recent work shows that portant genetic markers for mapping studies, disease diagnosis, popu- the SNP rs1426654 within the SLC24A5 gene encoding for a pro- lations consideration and human identity testing. Short tandem repeats tein belonging to the family of potassium-dependent sodium/calcium (STRs) contain repeat units that are 2-6 bp in length and can be readily exchangers varies in frequency among several population samples amplified with the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). STRs have be- according to skin pigmentation. Because of these observations, come popular in human genetic laboratories because low amounts of rs1426654 together with two additional intragenic markers (rs2555364 DNA, even in a degraded form, can be successfully typed. Sample and rs16960620) have been evaluated in 471 unrelated individuals mixtures can be more readily resolved with STR results than with pre- originating from three different continents (Africa, Asia and Europe), viously used DNA typing technologies. as Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs) for forensic and evolutionary We have used Genetic Analyzer device to determine STR profiling of purposes. 400 DNA samples from Iranian population of different ethnic origin. This study supports the role of human SLC24A5 gene in skin pigmen- For this subject, after DNA extraction from samples by selecting mo- tation suggesting that variations in SLC24A5 haplotypes can corre- lecular markers and using molecular methods such as PCR, specific late with human migration and ancestry. The most of haplotypes as places in DNA must be reproduced to obtain specific personal profile well as combined genotypes with unknown phase analyzed exhibited by examination and sequence determination. dissimilar frequencies between different populations. For example Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 samples homozygous for the allele 2 at the rs2555364, homozygous laboratory of welfare organization of Ahwaz were studied. This re- for the allele 1 at the rs1426654 and homozygous for the allele 1 at search had taken place at years of 2003 to 2005. The age of men and the rs16960620, on the basis of present data could unlikely have Afri- women were between 21 to 31 and 17 to 27 respectively and notice- can ancestry and show 9% and 91% of possibility to have Asian and able number of them had abnormal ranges for mentioned factors using Italian ancestry respectively. This analysis also revealed 8 combined statistical and logistic regression method for diagnosis probability of unphased genotypes selectively found in Asian populations represent- normal and abnormal individuals. Achieved data from normal peoples ing the 17.2% of the total. Haplotype analysis of SLC24A5 improved and liable individuals to βT show the MCV range for Iranian peoples is previous single allele results and can provide significant information lower than internationl standard suggestion and it is 77 . about ancestry of unknown samples. P1137. Improved beta-thalassemia genotyping by means of Acknowledgements population-specific reverse-hybridization teststrips This work was supported by EU FP6 projects NACBO (contract no. H. Puehringer1, H. Najmabadi2, W. Krugluger3, H. Y. Law4, V. Viprakasit5, C. NMP4-CT-2004-500804). Oberkanins1; 1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Genetics Research Center, P1135. Y chromosome analysis in subpopulations of Bashkirs Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic Republic from Russia of Iran, 3Department of Clinical Chemistry, Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Vienna, A. S. Lobov1, B. Marina1, K. Ildus1, K. Rita1, K. Irina1, R. Siiri2, U. Rinat3, K. Austria, 4Genetics Service, KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Singapore, Elza1, V. Richard4; Singapore, 5Dept. Paediatrics, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Estonian Thailand. Biocentre, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 33Institute of History Language Beta-thalassemia is among the most common inherited diseases and Literature, Ufa, Russian Federation, 42Estonian Biocentre, University of throughout the Mediterranean area, parts of Africa, the Middle East, Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. India and Southeast Asia. Mutations in the beta-globin gene may lead The Volga-Ural region which is located between Europe and Asia to structural abnormalities (e.g. Hb S, Hb E, Hb C) or to haemoglobin has been the arena of permanent genetic exchanges among Sibe- imbalance due to the reduced synthesis or complete absence of beta- rian, Central Asian, Eastern European populations. We have sampled globin chains. In each at-risk population beta-thalassemia results from seven Bashkir subpopulations from different parts of the Volga-Ural a limited number of common mutations and a larger, more variable region and neighboring areas of Russia: Orenburg (N=79), Perm number of rare mutations. (N=72), Samara and Saratov (N=51), and from Bashkortostan Re- We have improved an existing reverse-hybridization assay (Beta-Glo- public: Abzelilovskiy (N=152), Sterlibashevskiy (N=54), Baimakskiy bin StripAssay), originally designed for Mediterranean countries, to (N=95), and Burzaynskiy area (N=82). These samples are currently make it more globally applicable. Three separate teststrips, specific being analyzed using 24 diallelic markers of Y-chromosome (M89, for the most prevalent mutations in Southeast Asia, the Middle East M9, M20, M48, M73, M130, M170, M172, M175, M201, M207, M214, plus India and the Mediterranean region, have been designed. Each M217, M231, M253, M269, M306(M173), P15, P37, P43, SRY1532, teststrip comprises 22 variants and represents an allele coverage of Tat, 92R7(M74), 12f2). According to our preliminary findings Turkic- >90% in the respective area. Comprehensive beta-thalassemia geno- speaking Bashkirs are characterized by prevalence of R1b3 and R1a typing is achieved by a single multiplex DNA amplification reaction and lineages. Among all subpopulations, Perm and Baimakskiy area rep- subsequent hybridization to the adequate teststrip. The entire proce- resent with hight frequency (0.748 0.769,).It indicate there closeness dure from blood sampling to the identification of mutations requires with West European populations. Haplogroup R1a have frequency val- less than 6 hours, and hybridization/detection may be automated using ue 0.486 in Samara and Saratov’s Bashkirs and frequency value 0.370 robotic instrumentation. Proprietary software (StripAssay Evaluator) is Bashkirs from Sterlibashevskiy area. The N3 characterize for subpop- available to scan, interpret and electronically archive StripAssay re- ulation Bashkirs from Sterlibashevskiy area (0.537), Orenburg (0.342). sults. The test is simple and convenient, and requires only very small Bashkirs from Abzelilovskiy area have main frequency (0.474). These amounts of samples, which is of particular importance for prenatal di- differences possibly indicate that different subpopulations of Bashkirs agnosis. The broad range of beta-thalassemia mutations covered by have different origin. We found that Bashkirs from Perm district were the extended StripAssay should make it an attractive and globally use- characterized by relatively low genetic diversity, which could be ex- ful diagnostic tool. (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at) plained by founder effect. Bashkirs from Orenburg region which are anthropologically closer to Ugro-Finnic populations are characterized P1138. Admixture dynamics in Brazilian afro-derived populations by high frequency of N3 haplogroup. We will try to compare our results revealed by genetic and demographic data with archeologycal, historycal and anthropological data in discussed A. Luiz Simões1, M. Rizzatti Luizon1, I. Rainha de Souza2, A. L Barbosa3, K. about of origin of different groups Bashkir Abé-Sandes4, S. Sousa3; 1Departamento de Genética, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Uni- P1136. Studying unanimous role of MCH, MCV and HbA2 blood versidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 2Departamento de Biologia factors on the affecting possibility to beta thalassemia in south Celular, Embriologia e Genética, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, west of Iran. Florianópolis, Brazil, 3Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade G.H. Mohammadian1, H. Galehdari2, A.M. Foroughmand2, S. Kazemi-Nezhad2, Estadual do Sudoeste da Bahia, Jequié, Brazil, 4Departamento de Ciências da M. Oraki2, R. Hashemi3; Vida, Universidade do Estado da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. 1Welfare Organization, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shahid Chamran Uni- Brazilian remnant quilombo populations (Afro-derived) have hetero- versity, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Razi University, Kermanshah, Islamic geneous origins depending on their region and founding groups. The Republic of Iran. Northeast semi-isolated communities of Barra (BR) and São Gonçalo Thalassemia disease is the most common human disorder in the (SG) exhibit reduced migration rates and high frequency of consan- world, and controlled by one gene. Thalassemias are group of guineous marriages. The Southern isolated community of Valongo Hemoglobin(Hb) synthesis disorders. It is basal deficiency is in the (VAL), formed by only seven black and one white individual, exhibit reduction of β and α chains synthesis. β thalassemia (βT) as an auto- a high degree of intermarriage and a very low migration rate. Four somal recessive disorder increases in familial marriages. Today about AIMs (Ancestry Informative Markers; AT3-indel, Sb19.3-Alu, APO-Alu 220 different mutations that causes βT have been known this disorder and PV92-Alu) and the allele CYP1A1*2C were used to investigate the affect the blood indexes of defected people like CBC and Hb electro- histories of formation of BR (n=39), SG (n=28) and VAL (n=29). We phoresis factors and cause them to increase or decrease out of normal have also examined the urban population samples of Jequié (n=44) ranges. Some of the impressed factors are HbA2, MCV and MCH. In and Florianópolis (n=31), and indigenous tribes from Brazilian Amazon βT patients the mount of HbA2 factors are higher and MCV and MCH (n=300). Genotyping was performed by PCR, PCR-RFLP, PAGE 6% factors are lower than the limit. Khuzestan state in the south west of and silver staining. Statistical analysis were performed by GENEPOP, Iran close to Persian golf with about 4 million people has the fourth GDA and ADMIX. CYP1A1*2C was observed in Brazilian amerindi- degree in βT prevalence. In this study blood factors of 2000 people ans (95%), europeans (2,8-5,8%) and africans (1,3%). Associations (1000 couple) from who referred to the counseling centre and genetic between unlinked markers (p<0,05) indicate a recent admixture in Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 SG (African/European=79%/21%, R2=0.983) and BR (68%/32%, was no correlation found between Δ32 CCR5 and HH mutations. R2=0.989). These results are not in agreement to demographic history Conclusion. Among VHC patients Δ32 CCR5 is more frequent than in and previous studies showing tri-hybrid admixture, which may be ex- neighboring populations of Latvia, suggesting necessity to continue plained by the different nature of markers analyzed. On the other hand, study including clinical data and possible replay to antiviral therapy. those associations were not observed in VAL, probably due to its isola- Δ32 CCR5 and HH mutations are mutually independent worsening tion and no recent admixture. The coefficient of local inbreeding (Fis=- factors of VHC. 0,136, p<0,05) indicate endogamous marriages. Admixture estimates indicate an equal african/european contribution (50%, R2=0.997) and P1141. The need for a well characterised UK Control Population the absence of CYP1A1*2C indicates no Amerindian contribution. B. Winney1, I. Evseeva1, S. Tonks2, A. Boumertit1, X. Yang1, C. Echeta1, W. These results corroborate the demographic history of formation of the Bodmer1,2; VAL community. 1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Cancer Research UK, Oxford, United Kingdom. P1139. NOTCH3 mutations in Portuguese patients with Cerebral There have been many problems replicating significant associations Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts and between gene variation and complex diseases and population struc- Leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL): implications for diagnostic ture is widely considered to be the most significant reason. To address strategies this problem, there are statistical methods available that attempt to S. Ferreira1, M. Viana-Baptista2, P. Costa1, M. Venâncio3, S. Fernandes1, F. allow for the effect of population structure. However, these are not re- Carvalho1, J. Ferro4, J. Oliveira1, on behalf of the PORTYSTROKE Study Group; ally satisfactory and so the only suitable alternative is to design the 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Faculdade de Medicina, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço studies with greater care. A powerful approach may be to characterise de Neurologia, Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal, 3Serviço de Gené- genetically both the cases and controls. Individuals from the controls tica Médica, Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Serviço de can then be chosen to match the cases so as to minimise the stochas- Neurologia, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal. tic differences between the two populations. CADASIL is caused by mutations of the Notch3 gene, on chromosome We are assembling a UK control population as a resource for future 19p13. A cluster of mutations in exons 3 and 4 was originally reported studies. It will comprise 3,500 samples (1,700 collected so far), which and molecular analysis restricted to these exons has been suggested will have been carefully selected from throughout the UK. Rural re- for diagnostic purposes. We aimed to identify the spectrum of Notch3 gions are targeted to avoid the admixture observed in large urban envi- mutations in Portuguese patients with CADASIL and set up an algo- ronments and volunteers are sought who were born in the same place rithm for sequential exon analysis. as their parents and grandparents to ensure historical integrity. The One hundred consecutive patients with the clinical diagnosis of CADA- collection will be genotyped for around 3,000 markers, with the aim of SIL or, at least, one of its typical clinical or neuro-radiologic features, identifying about 200 ancestrally informative markers, which will then were included in this study. DNA was extracted from leukocytes and be used to match controls to cases. amplified by PCR according to standard methods. An initial pilot project on about 400-500 samples, using a variety of Based on published mutation data, sequence analysis of exons 3, 4, markers, indicates that this approach is valid. MC1R data suggest 5/6, 11, 18/19 and 22/23 was done in all patients and in exons 2, 8, structure differentiating the Celtic Fringe from Eastern England, whilst 14 and 20 only in negative cases with strong clinical suspicion of CA- NRY data show evidence of Norse incursions into Orkney. Preliminary DASIL. admixture analyses suggest that there is an east-west gradient of An- Ten pathogenic mutations were found in 27 patients of 16 different glo-Saxon ancestry across England. families: p.R141C, p.R153C, p.R169C, p.R207C (exon 4); p.G420C (exon 8); p.R558C, p.C568Y, p.R578C (exon 11); p.W1028C (exon P1142. Investigation of COX-2 polymorphisms among different 19); p.C1099Y (exon 20). Mutations p.R153C, p.R207C and p.R558C Iranian ethnic groups were found in more than one family. Mutations p.C568Y, p.W1028C M. Soltani, F. Biramijamal, M. Sanati, E. Nazari; and p.C1099Y have not been previously described. National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, About 80% of Notch3 mutations in Portuguese patients with CADASIL Islamic Republic of Iran. were found in exons 4, 11, 18/19, but these comprise only ~58% of Cyclooxygenases-2 enzyme (COX-2) converts arachidonic acid to mutations reported worldwide. Limited screening of exons 3 and 4 is prostaglandins. COX-2 plays an important role in inflammation and clearly not appropriate in CADASIL cases of Portuguese origin. The carcinogenesis. It is shown that COX-2 -765G > C promoter polymor- weak criteria for patient inclusion may explain the low rate of Notch3 phism have lower promoter activity and result in decreased COX-2 ex- mutations found. pression. Also, it is reported that this type of polymorphism may have important role in increased risk of several types of cancers. In addition, P1140. CC-Chemokine receptor CCR5 and Hereditary genetic polymorphisms of COX-2 gene could alter enzyme expression haemochromatosis mutations associations in viral hepatitis C and the response to Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). patients in Latvia. In this investigation, we assessed allele frequency of COX-2 poly- L. Piekuse1, M. Kreile1, B. Lace1, J. Keiss2, V. Sondore2, A. Krumina1; morphism among different Iranian populations. The genetic polymor- 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Riga Stradins University, Riga, phisms of COX-2 -765G > C promoter has not been reported among Latvia, 2Infectology Center of Latvia, Riga, Latvia. the Iranian population so far. We initiated a study to examine COX-2 Background. CC - chemokine receptor CCR5 has a critical role in reg- -765G > C promoter genotype in different Iranian ethnic groups. The ulating T cell functions by mediating recruitment, polarization, activa- samples were collected from healthy population from three different tion and differentiation of antiviral type 1 cytokine secreting T helper ethnicity groups (Fars, Turk and Rashti). We assessed the genotype and cytotoxic T cells. As this receptor is involved in T cell mediated im- patterns of COX-2 among Iranian Fars, Turk and Rashti ethnic groups mune response it could be involved in susceptibility of viral infections in five regions. The COX-2 -765G > C promoter genotypes were de- and later to modify organism response to antiviral therapy. Hereditary termined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length haemochromatosis (HH), which is characterized with abnormal body polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) analysis in 90 Iranian healthy individuals. iron storage, has been suggested to be one of VHC worsening factors. Allele frequency of COX-2 -765G > C promoter for above populations The most frequent mutations are C282Y, H63D. were similar and the G allele was significantly higher than C allele. Objectives. Detect frequency of Δ32 CCR5, C282Y, H63D mutations between VHC patients in Latvia and to compare its frequency in P1143. Genetic polymorphisms associated with cardiovascular healthy individuals of neighboring populations. disease in the Azorean population Subject and methods. This study included 63 individuals with chronic P. A. S. Sousa1, A. R. Couto1, S. Nemeth2, J. P. O. Pinheiro1, C. Oberkanins2, J. viral hepatitis C (VHC), which where discovered in Infectology Center Bruges-Armas1; of Latvia. Mutations were detected using PCR and RFLP. 1SEEBMO, Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal, 2ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vi- Results. The frequency of Δ32 CCR5 between VHC patients is 20 to enna, Austria. 100 alleles (in Lithuania 11.3 to 100 alleles, in Russia - 13.9 to 100 Background: Research on cardiovascular disease (CVD) has revealed alleles). C282Y frequency is 6 to 100 alleles, H63D is 7 to 100. There several candidate genes associated with the worlds first cause of dis-Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 ability and mortality. The global distribution of the genetic polymor- P1145. The frequency of CFTR mutations at patients from phisms associated with cardiovascular diseases has been widely in- Romania - a collaborative study vestigated and regional variations have been observed. The Azorean L. Pop1, L. Tamas2, I. Popa1, Z. Popa3, C. Samoila2, M. Motoc2, E. Seclaman2, I. population is known to be of heterogeneous origin and represents the M. Popa1, G. Benga4, L. Dracea5, S. Mosescu6, E. Tomescu7; Portuguese region with the highest mortality rate caused by CVD. 1Clinic II of Pediatrics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Roma- Based on this fact we have analysed allelic and genotypic frequencies nia, 2Biochemistry Department - University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timiso- in 10 candidate genes. ara, Romania, 3National Center of Cystic Fibrosis from Timisoara, Timisoara, Material and Methods: A representative sample of the population was Romania, 4Departament of Genetics and Molecular Biology – University of Medi- obtained by randomly recruiting 155 unrelated subjects from Terceira cine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania, 5Pediatric Clinic – Faculty of Medi- Island. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole peripheral blood by cine, Brasov, Romania, 6Children Emergency Hospital “Grigore Alexandrescu”, salting-out. Identification of genetic polymorphisms was performed by Bucharest, Romania, 7Hospital Children “Alfred Rusescu”, Bucharest, Romania. polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by reverse hybridization Objectives: The aim of this study was to estimate the frequency of (CVD StripAssay, ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH). Genotype distribu- cystic fibrosis mutations detected in patients from the National Center tions were tested for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Chi-square tests of Cystic Fibrosis from Timisoara (NCCFT). were used to evaluate statistical significant differences between our Method population and other Caucasian populations. Based on clinical findings and pathological sweat test values, 120 patients (240 alleles) were selected. DNA was isolated from biologi- Results: Allelic and genotypic frequencies are presented in table 1. cal samples (blood, amniotic fluid) and the genetic analysis was per- Genetic polymorphism Alleles % Genotypes % formed using the Elucigene CF29 kit, direct PCR products sequencing GA 1.94 and RFLP. 74 patients were investigated in collaboration with Royal FV G1691A (leiden) A 0.97 AA 0.0 Manchester Children’s Hospital - Genetic Unit (UK) and 46 patients by FV H1299R (R2) R 9.68 HR 18.06 our own laboratory (Biochemistry Department - UMF Timisoara) RR 0.65 Results GA 3.87 PTH G20210A A 1.94 AA 0.0 21 CFTR mutations (ΔF508, 2183 AA>G, W1282X, 1898+1G>A, I148T, VL 41.29 621+1G>T, G576X, 1717-2A>G, R553X, R735K, CFTRdel2,3(21kb), FactorXIII V34L V 75.48 VV 54.84 G542X, G817V, 3272-26A>G, 457TAT>G, 3849+10kbC>T, R1162X, FGB-455G-A A 18.06 GA 30.97 N1303K, 3849G>A, S1235R, R117H) and four polymorphic variants - AA 2.58 2694T/G, 2694T/C, IVS8-5T, IVS8-7T were identified (2 new mutations 4/5 43.23 PAI-1 4G/5G 4G 45.48 4/4 23.87 - R735K and 1717-2A>G). ab 28.39 Conclusions HPA-1a/b b 18.71 bb 4.52 The most frequent mutations in Romania are ΔF508 (51,66%), G542X MTHFR C677T T 30.97 CT 46.45 (2,91%), 621+1G>T (1,65%) and N1303K (1,25%). The rest of non- TT 7.74 ΔF508 mutations had a frequency lower than 1%. The results show AC 47.10 MTHFR A1298C C 32.58 a similarity with the situation from Western Europe and the rest of the CC 9.03 ID 53.55 world where the most frequent mutations are also ΔF508 and G542X. ACE I/D D 61.61 DD 34.84 However, the lower frequency for ΔF508 mutation and the great num- ApoB R3500Q Q 0 RQ 0 ber (30%) of the alleles who could not be identified (from heterozygous QQ 0 patients with one identified mutation) are probably due to the genetic 2/2 1.29 heterogeneity of Romanian population and to incomplete genetic anal- 2/3 9.03 E2 6.13 2/4 0.65 ysis for rare mutations. Apo E E3 81.29 3/3 65.81 (Study performed through Research Grants - CEEX 5855 and CNC- E4 12.58 3/4 21.94 SISA/1188/2004-2006) 4/4 1.29 Conclusion: We report the prevalence of various genetic CVD risk factors for the first P1146. Genetic variation at D3S1358, D5S818 and D13S317 loci time in the Azorean population. The frequencies obtained in our population are within in Russian Siberian population the range of frequencies reported on other European populations. The high frequency O. Odinokova; of cardiovascular disease may be possibly related with other genetic or environmental Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, Tomsk, Russian factors not evaluated in this report. Federation. STR loci represent a rich source of highly polymorphic markers for P1144. Carrier frequency of cystic fibrosis transmembrane medical, forensic and population studies. There are notable differ- conductance regulator gene mutations in the general Moroccan ences in allele frequencies and heterozygosities between population population groups. We present here characteristics of the allelic polymorphism for I. Rratbi1,2, M. Legendre3, A. Le Floch3, S. Deqaqi Cherkaoui1, C. Costa3, M. three STRs loci: D3S1358, D5S818 and D13S317 in Russians (Cau- Goossens3, A. Sefiani1, E. Girodon3; casians) living in South-West Siberia. 1department of medical genetic, rabat, Morocco, 2Service de Biochimie et Allele typing was performed using PCR and subsequent high-resolu- Génétique, AP-HP et INSERM U654, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Creteil, France, tion PAAG electrophoresis. We have analysed DNA samples from un- 3Service de Biochimie et Génétique, AP-HP et INSERM U654, Hôpital Henri- related subjects: 262 individuals were tested for D3S1358, D13S317 Mondor, creteil, France. STR-systems and 360 individuals were tested for D5S818. Eight al- OBJECTIVE: Epidemiology of cystic fibrosis (CF), the most common leles were identified in D3S1358 (13-20 repeats, 118-146 bp) and lethal genetic disease in the Caucasian population, is poorly known in D13S317 loci (8-15 repeats, 169-197 bp); and nine alleles were note North African populations. No data is available on the native Moroc- in D5S818 (7-15 repeats, 134-166 bp) locus. Genotype frequency can population. We aimed to identify possible CF carriers in a sample distributions were consistent with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for of the general Moroccan population. METHODS: Blood samples from every STR-systems. The level of observed heterozygosity was high: 150 unrelated healthy Moroccans with no symptoms of CF were tested 0,821 (D13S317), 0,782 (D3S1358), and 0,769 (D5S818). Polymor- for 33 frequent CF mutations and the intron 8 polyT variant using a phism information content (PIC) and discrimination power (pD) were: commercial assay. RESULTS: Two subjects were found to be carriers PIC=0,76, pD=0,923 for D13S317; PIC=0,74, pD=0,913 for D3S1358; for the F508del mutation and eight others were heterozygous for the and PIC=0,70, pD=0,891 for D5S818; power of exclusion (W) and (T)5 variant of intron 8. CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that marching probability (pM) - 0,638 and 0,077 in D13S317; 0,567 and the Moroccan population is at risk for CF and related diseases. The 0,087 in D3S1358; 0,544 and 0,109 in D5S818, consequently. CF incidence could be in the range of that found in European popula- The frequency data obtained can be used for comparison to other pop- tions. Larger studies are necessary to identify the clinical pattern and ulations. Forensic efficiency data suggest that investigated markers accurately determine the incidence and the molecular basis of CF in D3S1358, D5S818 and D13S317 are very discriminating in Russian Morocco. Siberian population.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 P1147. Social aspects of deafness in the Republic Altai (south The method of “internal comparison” made it possible to study epide- Siberia, Russia) miological parameters in dependence with the documented exposure O. L. Posukh; doses for 17 thousand liquidators. The cytogenetic examinations of Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. 500 liquidators were carried out. The dose dependence of MF fre- Hereditary hearing impairment is a heterogeneous disability with dif- quency was studied with the application of piecewise-linear splines ferent pattern of inheritance. The GJB2 (Cx26) mutations account for and hypothesis about the equality of two probabilities on the basis of more than a half of recessive deafness in many populations. Preva- the statistical criterion 2S. lence of particular GJB2 mutations depends on ethnic origin, specific Tendency toward reduction in the frequency of MF with increase of structure and history of population. Specific social traditions, e.g. the the dose in the interval of 1-85 cGy for both the age groups (younger assortative marriage rates among deaf people, have been suggested and older than 40 years) was observed. Probability of random event to influence frequency of Cx26 deafness. Previously, we revealed the when the liquidators with MF were exposed to dose in the ranges from GJB2 mutational diversity in Altai Republic which population (~200,000) 1 to 3 cGy or from 3 to 5 cGy statistically significantly exceeds the includes three major ethnicities: indigenous Altaians (~60,000), Rus- appropriate probability for the whole cohort . Statistically significant dif- sians (~120,000), and Kazakhs (~12,000). Mutations c.35delG and ferences in the probabilities for other classes of diseases within dose c.235delC were found to be causative factors among Russian and ranges were not observed. In spite of the promote terms of cytogenetic Altaian patients, respectively. Cx26 deafness was detected in consid- analysis and partial elimination of dicentric chromosomes from blood erable proportion of affected Russian families whereas many Altaian „dose- effect“ dependence for aberrations remains in the group of liq- multiplex families were found to be Cx26-negative. High carrier rate of uidators with MF. c.235delC was detected in Altaian hearing controls. This study firstly Our cytogenetic investigations revealed the tendency to increasing of evaluates the marriage patterns in deaf and hard hearing population MF frequency in group of liquidators exposed to low doses. The reten- in Altai Republic. Informative data was obtained on 112 adults with tion of „dose- effect“ dependence for the dicentrics in lymphocytes of early onset of hearing impairment equally represented citizens (57) liquidators with MF within promote postradiation periods was estab- and villagers (55). Rural people constitute 3/4 of total Republic Altai lished. population whereas the others live in the capital Gorno-Altaisk, the only city in the Republic. We revealed assortative mating rate of 0.45 in P1150. Allele frequencies for the fifteen short tandem repeat loci rural sample, much lower as compared to 0.84 in urban sample. Ethnic in Croatian population diversity, traditional Altaian marriage pattern reducing consanguinity V. Skaro1, P. Projic1, N. Pojskic2, A. Durmic2, L. Kovacevic2, S. Haveric2, D. rate, and social differences between urban and rural population could Primorac3, D. Marjanovic1,2; influence the prevalence of deafness in Republic Altai. 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Molecular Diagnostics, Cell and Gene Thera- This work is supported by the Russian Foundation for Humanitarian py, “Rudjer Boskovic” Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Institute for Genetic Engineer- Research (07- 06-00765a). ing and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 3Medical School at Osijek University, Osijek, Croatia. P1148. Case-Control Study of Libyan and Maltese Patients with We have analyzed the distribution of allele frequencies at fifteen auto- Type II Diabetes Mellitus somal short tandem repeats loci in the representative sample of Croa- A. A. Al Ashtar1, J. Azzopardi2, S. Bezzina Wettinger1, J. Borg1, W. Cassar1, R. tians. A total of 110 unrelated individuals (Caucasians) born in Croatia Galdies1, C. A. Scerri1,3, J. Vassallo2, A. E. Felice1,3; have been sampled for the analysis. All of them have been voluntary 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Msida, Malta, 2Diabetes Clinic, St Luke’s donors. Buccal swab have been used as the DNA source. Specimens Hospital, G’Mangia, Malta, 3Thalassaemia Clinic, Div. of Pathology, St Luke’s were air-dried, placed in 1,5 ml tubes, and immediately transported to Hospital, G’Mangia, Malta. the laboratory. The samples have been stored at -20oC until beginning Type II Diabetes Mellitus (DMTypeII) is a common disease with onset of DNA analysis. The Qiagen DnaeasyTM Tissue Kit was used for DNA in middle-aged individuals, caused by an imbalance between insulin extraction. The AmpFlSTR® Identifiler® (ABI, Foster City, CA) has been production and action. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and used to simultaneously amplify by PCR 15 STR loci. The STR loci are: mutations in different genes may be implicated in developing DMTyp- D3S1358, TH01, D21S11, D18S51, D2S1338, D5S818, D13S317, eII. In this study we analyzed 9 such genes that include IPF, MTHFR, D7S820, D16S539, CSF1PO, D19S433, vWA, D8S1179, TPOX, and mitochondrial tRNA, Resistin, PPP1R3, ADRABbeta2, MIF, PTPN1 FGA. Similar amount of DNA (approx. 1 ng) was used in all PCR re- and TLR4. SNPs were chosen from each gene according to stringent actions. Total reaction volume was 12,5 μl. The PCR amplification criteria based on developing DMTypeII in other populations. SNPs has been carried out in PE Gene Amp PCR System Thermal Cycler were genotyped in the Libyan and Maltese patients and compared (ABI, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer’s recommenda- with healthy Maltese citizens. DNA was extracted from whole blood, tions. Electrophoresis of the amplification products was preformed on and genotyping of each gene determined by PCR-RFLP. Concurrently, an ABI PRISM 3130 genetic analyzer Raw data have been compiled, pools of DNA from random Maltese newborn were carried out using analyzed and numerical allele designations of the profiles were ob- fluorometry for accurate quantification. All genes were in Hardy-Wein- tained by using the accessory software: ABI PRISM® Data Collection berg Equilibrium and statistical analysis was carried out by SPSS (stu- Software v3.0 and GeneMapperΤΜ ID Software v3.1. Deviation from dent package 12). Chi square analysis of all data in between popula- Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, observed and expected heterozygosity, tions and across populations revealed a significant association of the power of discrimination and power of exclusion were calculated. Also, ADRABbeta2 gene of both Libyan and Maltese DMTypeII patients with we have compared our data with data obtained from geographically healthy Maltese controls (p < 0.05 for both). There is no difference be- neighboring European populations. tween Libyan and Maltese Diabetics (p=0.07) indicating that this gene has a common predisposition to both populations. On the other hand, P1151. Gene expression variation of HSA21 genes in normal and IPF gene was only associated with the Libyan DMTypeII and not with Down syndrome (DS) individuals: understanding phenotypic the Maltese population (p < 0.05). All other genes were not statistically variability in DS patients. significant associated with DMTypeII. The results show a strong as- P. Prandini1, S. Deutsch1, R. Lyle2, M. Gagnebin1, C. Delucinge Vivier3, M. sociation of the ADRABbeta2 (Arg16Gly) and IPF (missense mutation Delorenzi4,5, C. Gehrig1, P. Descombes3, S. Sherman6, F. Bricarelli7, C. Baldo7, Cys18Arg) genes with DMTypeII. A. Novelli8, B. Dallapiccola8, S. E. Antonarakis1; 1University of Geneva, Geneva 4, Switzerland, 2Department of Medical Genet- P1149. Cytogenetic and cancerogenic effects of low dose ics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3NCCR Frontiers in Genetics, radiation among liquidators in the Chernobyl accident area Genomic Platform, Geneva 4, Switzerland, 4Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics E. Dyomina; (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Swiss Institute of Experimental Cancer Re- R.E. Kavetsky Institute of Experimental Pathology, Oncology and Radiobiology search (ISREC), Epalinges, Switzerland, 6Emory University School of Medicine, , Kyiv, Ukraine. Atlanta, GA, United States, 7E.O. Ospedali Galliera di Genova, Genova, Italy, The purpose of the presented study was to estimate influence of the 8University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy. absorbed dose values on the cytogenetic effects and risk of malignant Down Syndrome (DS) individuals display considerable phenotypic formation (MF) in group of liquidators. variability. Since DS is a disease caused by alterations of gene dos-Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 20 age, gene expression variation of human chromosome 21 (HSA21) The aim of this study was to determine G894T genotype in 467 healthy genes in DS is likely to have a substantial impact on the penetrance children 15 years old and investigate a possible influence of this poly- of DS phenotypes. morphism on blood pressure, BMI and serum lipid level. G894T poly- We studied gene expression variation in 14 lymphoblastoid (LCLs) and morphism was genotyped by PCR amplification of specific fragment of 17 fibroblast cell lines from DS individuals and an equal number of genomic DNA followed by digestion with the Mbo I restriction enzyme. age, sex and ethnic matched controls. Gene expression was assayed The mean values of blood pressure (systolic and diastolic), BMI and using Taqman qRT-PCR on a total of 100 and 106 HSA21 and on 26 serum lipid level (LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol and triglycerides) non-HSA21 genes in LCLs and fibroblasts respectively. between different genotypes were compared by analysis of variance Around 42% and 62% of genes in LCLs and fibroblasts were signifi- (ANOVA). We detected wild type GG genotype in 186 (39, 9%), hetero- cantly overexpressed in the DS population (KW, p<0.005). Accord- zygous GT in 210 (45,0%) and homozygous mutant TT in 71 (15,1%) ing to the degree of overlap in the distribution of expression values children. Multiple comparisons showed significant difference (p < 0,05) between euploid and trisomic individuals, we could broadly classify of diastolic blood pressure between TT and GG or GT group of children genes in three categories: (a) genes with non-overlapping distributions (74,1+8,42 mmHg, 72,9+8,42 mmHg and 71,6+8,4 mmHg respective- (b) genes with partially overlapping distributions (c) genes with largely ly) . Also, TT genotype was associated with significantly lower HDL overlapping distributions. We hypothesize that genes in category (a) cholesterol (F= 4,759, p<0, 009) and triglyceride (F= 3,380, p< 0,035) are the most sensitive to the extra copy of HSA21 and thus probably level. We did not find significant association between the mutant TT involved in the constant features of trisomy 21, those in category (b) genotype and systolic blood pressure or BMI in our group. might be involved in the determination of variable DS traits, whereas those in category (c) are not dosage sensitive and are less likely to be P1154. Investigation of the eotaxin gene -426 C>T, -384 A>G involved in DS pathology. AND 67 G>A SNPs and atopic dermatitis in Italian children using This study provides the first extensive data set on HSA21 gene ex- family-based association methods. pression variation in DS and addresses its potential role in underlying L. Rigoli, C. Salpietro, C. Di Bella, V. Procopio, L. Caminiti, C. Cuppari, G. phenotypic variability observed in this disorder. Barberio, G. Pajno; Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, MESSINA, Italy. P1152. Birth of child with numerical chromosomal aberrations To learn whether eotaxin gene single nucleotide polymorphisms as a possible consequence of irradiation of vulnerable stages of (SNPs) are associated with the atopic dermatitis, we investigated the human oogenesis genotype and allelic frequencies of -426 C>T, -384 A>G, and 67 G>A I. O. Zatsepin1, P. Verger2, E. Robert-Gnansia3, B. Gagnière4, M. Tirmarche5, R. SNPs in 130 Italian families. D. Khmel1, I. L. Babicheva1, G. I. Lazjuk6; From these families, we recruited 130 Italian children suffering from 1Belarusian Research and Healthcare Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belar- either allergic extrinsic form of atopic dermatitis (EAD) or intrinsic non- us, 2Southeastern Health Regional Observatory, Marseilles, France, 3REMERA allergic form of atopic dermatitis (IAD). Genotyping was performed us- Faculté RTH Laennec, Lyon, France, 4Cellule Inter Régionale d’Épidémiologie ing the PCR-RFLP method and automatic sequencing. Ouest, Rennes, France, 5Institute for Radioprotection and Nuclear Safety, Fon- A significant difference was observed in the genotype frequency of tenay aux Roses Cedex, France, 6Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, -426 C>T SNP between EAD and IAD children (p=0.01); and between Belarus. EAD and controls (p= 0.01). The frequency of this SNP was no different Surveillance of Down syndrome (DS) prevalence at birth has been between the IAD children and the control group (p=0.52 ). In the EAD performed in Belarus since 1981 using a population-based registry of children, the frequency of -426 C>T SNP was no different between the congenital malformations. A significant cluster was observed in Janu- groups of mild, moderate and severe SCORAD Index (p=N.S.). ary of 1987, 9 months after the Chernobyl accident (31 cases versus The -426 C>T polymorphism was significantly associated with the re- 13.2 expected, P<10-3). The registered increase was highest in Gomel lapse of the disease (p<0.01) in the EAD children. No significant as- oblast, the mostly contaminated region (8 cases versus 2.4 expected, sociation was observed between the -384 A>G and 67 G>A SNPs and P<0.05). The period of birth of the cases fits with an estimated time of the two groups of extrinsic and intrinsic atopic dermatitis children in conception within the first two weeks after Chernobyl accident, period respect to control group. In 48 trios selected from 68 EAD families, the of highest radiation dose rates (1-3 orders of magnitude over the natu- transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) showed a preferentially trans- ral background level). mission of -426 T allele from the parents to affected offspring. The stochastic nature of the cluster cannot be completely excluded. In our Italian children, the -426 C>T of the eotaxin gene was associ- However, experimental data provide evidence that the “diakinesis” ated with extrinsic atopic dermatitis. Therefore, the eotaxin gene might stage of mammal oogenesis immediately presiding conception is a contribute to a characteristic “signature” for the two types of AD. period a high sensitivity to ionizing radiation. Several epidemiological studies have detected enhanced prevalence rates among newborns P1155. The load of Mendelian pathology in the Siberian conceived within the periods of increased radioactivity i.e. after atmo- indigenous populations spheric nuclear weapon tests and Chenrnobyl accident. L. P. Nazarenko, O. A. Salyukova, L. I. Minaycheva, S. V. Fadyushina; Thus, enhanced risk of giving birth to aneuploid child by woman ex- State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. posed around the time of conception could be suspected. Therefore Summarized data of medical genetic study of some Siberian indige- it seems reasonable for women planning a pregnancy to restrict con- nous populations (tuvinians, altayans and khakasians) are presented. tacts with sources of ionizing radiation at least in the middle of ovarian Uniformity of the methodical principles of investigation allows compar- cycle as well as to recommend to postpone conception in case of ex- ing the load of hereditary diseases between the populations. The load posure of the lower part of abdomen and organs located in small pelvis of diseases with autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X- within the given time period. Highly efficient multi-parametric prenatal linked inheritance is, respectively, 0.58, 0.92 per 1000 people and 0.49 screening programs might be recommended to women at supposed per 1000 men in tuvinian; 0.75, 1.22 per 1000 people and 0.11 per high risk. 1000 men in altayans; 1.09, 0.81 per 1000 people and 0.65 per 1000 men in khakasians. Rare genetics syndromes are observed in each P1153. The G894T polymorphism of the eNOS gene and population. However, familiar cases of microtia with meatal atresia and atherosclerosis precursors in Serbian child population conductive deafness are accomulated predominantly in the tuvinians T. M. Damnjanovic, I. Novakovic, V. Bunjevacki, S. Nedeljkovic, M. Vukotic, S. and altayans. Factors that play a role in the unequal distribution of Simeunovic, L. Lukovic; hereditary diseases in Siberian indigenous populations are under way Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia. of investigation. As it is known, nitric oxide play an important role in physiological reg- ulation of vascular tone and blood pressure. Endothelial nitric oxide P1156. STR markers in ethnic admixture studies synthase (eNOS) is the key enzyme responsible for basal vascular R. G. M. Ferreira1, M. M. Moura2, R. C. Pagotto2, L. M. A. Camargo1, B. wall production of nitric oxide. Some data suggest eNOS role in serum Beiguelman1, H. Krieger1; lipide level also. The G894T polymorphism at exon 7 in the gene en- 1Departmento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade coding for eNOS is associated with altered plasma nitric oxide levels. de São Paulo, Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Universidade Federal de Rondônia, Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 21 Porto Velho, Brazil. P1158. STRs (introns 13 and 22) of Factor VIII gene in Brazilian A small riverine community, Portuchuelo (8o37’S, 63o49’W) in the populations: allele and haplotypic frequencies and forensic State of Rondônia, Brazil, was studied with the aim to ascertain its parameters health conditions and the causes of the variability of some infectious J. D. Massaro, A. L. Simões; diseases. Almost all individuals (181) of Portuchuelo were included Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. in the sample. Data on 11 STRs markers along different autossomes Hemophilia A is a X-linked bleeding disorder caused by a defect in (UNISTS: 19943; 21182; 67015; 74530; 67557; 53216; 81816; 14863; Factor VIII protein. Direct analysis of Factor VIII gene (FVIII) mutations 82795; 45947; 63378) were used to determine its ethnic composition. is difficult due its great number and heterogeneity. Therefore, most of The contributions of Amerindian, African and European genes to the the tests for the detection of the carrier and prenatal diagnosis use ethnic composition of the studied population are shown bellow, as well the study of DNA polymorphisms linking with FVIII locus. We char- as those estimates based on classic markers (Ferreira et al., 2002). acterize here the distribution of allele and haplotypic frequencies of Although the ethnic proportion estimates are apparently different they introns 13 and 22 STRs of FVIII gene in samples of unrelated indi- do not show statistical significance. The face values of the standard er- viduals of São Paulo (SP), Rio Grande do Sul (RS) and Pernambuco rors of the ethnic proportion estimates are higher than those based on (PE) states. Genotyping was performed by PCR, denaturing PAGE classical ones, as well as some goodness of fit tests of the genotype 12% and 11,25% and silver staining. The Intron 13 distribution in the frequency distribution. Therefore, due to poorly studied ancestral gene three samples studied here is centered in allele Intron 13*20, differing frequencies, higher mutation rates and heterogeneity among systems, from Chinese and a sample of São Paulo city. Intron 22 distribution is classical markers seems to provide better estimates of ethnic compo- centered in allele Intron 22*26, also differing from Asians and that São sition of tri-hybrid populations. Paulo city. The more frequent haplotype based in Introns 13 and 22 for both populations are the 20/26. The haplotypes composed by alleles Ethnic composition of Portuchuelo, Brazil, 24/25 and 21/24, respectively, do not occur in RS and SP samples, based on STR and classical markers data. opposed to what it would be expected by the frequency of them in the Ancestry STR (P ± s.e.) Classical (P ± s.e.) t p other samples. The forensic parameters indicate that both the mark- Ameridian 0.317 ± 0.087 0.444 ± 0.064 1.182 0.240 ers are significantly informative and can be used in forensic situations African 0.118 ± 0.059 0.210 ± 0.046 1.224 0.224 where the genetic identification is necessary, respecting the character- European 0.565 ± 0.106 0.346 ± 0.069 1.732 0.086 istics of being on to chromosome X and considering the use of markers Supported by CNPq, FAPESP genetically linked. P1157. How old is the Val30Met mutation in transthyretin familial P1159. Detection of gene-environment interaction: a new test amyloid neuropathy? based on sibling recurrence risks C. Zaros1, E. Genin2, U. Hermann3, M. Saporta4, L. Languille5, M. Waddington- R. Kazma1,2, C. Bonaïti-Pellié2,1, J. M. Norris3, E. Génin2,1; Cruz4, O. Suhr3, M. Misrahi6, V. Plante-Bordeneuve1; 1Univ Paris-Sud, UMR-S 535, Villejuif, 94817, France, 2INSERM, UMR-S 535, 1Department of Neurology, UMR U788, CHU Bicêtre, Assistance Publique Hôpi- Villejuif, 94817, France, 3Department of Preventive Medicine and Biometrics, taux de Paris, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 2INSERM UMR-S 535, University University of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO, Paris Sud, Villejuif, France, 3Department of Internal Medicine, University hospi- United States. tal of Umeå, Umeå, Sweden, 4Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Gene-environment interactions may play important roles in complex Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 5Department of Neurology, UMR U788, disease susceptibility but their detection is often difficult. Here we CHU Bicêtre, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, show how gene-environment interactions can be detected by inves- France, 6Department of Molecular Biology, CHU Bicêtre, Assistance Publique tigating the degree of familial aggregation according to the exposure Hôpitaux de Paris, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. of the probands. In case of gene-environment interaction, the distribu- Transthyretin familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is a severe au- tion of genotypes of affected individuals, and consequently the risk in tosomal dominant neuropathy of adulthood, linked to the pathogenic relatives, depends on their exposure. We developed a test compar- TTR-Val30Met variant. This mutation is the only one identified in Por- ing the risks in sibs according to the proband exposure. To evaluate tugal where the affection was initially described and in Sweden the the properties of this new test, we derived the formulas for calculating second most important area of FAP in Europe. The hypothesis of a the expected risks in sibs according to the exposure of probands for common ancestor for Val30Met kindred has been debated for years. various values of exposure frequency, relative risk due to exposure This study analyzed such hypothesis in Val30Met carriers from Por- alone, frequencies of latent susceptibility genotypes, genetic relative tugal, Brazil and Sweden and estimated the occurrence of the most risks and interaction coefficients. We find that the ratio of risks when recent common ancestor (MRCA) in each population. the proband is exposed and not exposed is a good indicator of the Individuals from 18 Portuguese and 15 Swedish families along with 28 interaction effect. We evaluate the power of the test for various sample unrelated probands (15 from Sweden, 13 from Brazil) and 66 controls sizes of affected individuals. We conclude that this test is valuable for were studied. Eleven microsatellites were genotyped, 13 Mb around diseases with moderate familial aggregation, only when the role of the TTR gene. To estimate the age of the MRCA, we performed haplotype exposure has been clearly evidenced. Since a correlation for exposure reconstructions and applied a previously described likelihood based among sibs might lead to a difference in risks among sibs in the dif- method. In Portuguese, the longest common haplotype was 237-143- ferent proband exposure strata, we also add an exposure correlation 271-291-311-202, between markers L1 and D18S47 (700 kb). The Bra- coefficient in the model. Interestingly, we find that when this correlation zilian shared the same alleles encompassing a shorter distance (215 is correctly accounted for, the power of the test is not decreased and kb) and bounded by microsatellites L1 and L9. In contrast, Swedish might even be significantly increased. An application to type 2 diabetes presented different alleles and a common haplotype between mark- will be presented. ers D18S49 and D18S47 (1500 kb). The length of the shared regions provided age estimates of 750, 350 and 650 years for Portuguese, P1160. Genetic epidemiology of the Trypamosoma cruzi Swedish and Brazilian Val30Met mutation, respectively. infection Our work strengthens the hypothesis of two different founders in Por- C. E. M. Kawamata1, M. F. Feitosa2, R. G. M. Ferreira1, A. La Luna1, H. Krieg- tuguese and Swedish Val30Met carriers and suggested a Portuguese er1; origin of the Brazilian mutation. Moreover, it allows estimate the age of 1Instituto de Ciencias Biomedicas, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Washington University of the FAP-Val30Met variant in these populations. Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO, United States. At least 100 million people are living in risk areas of Trypanosoma cruzi infection, around 3 million of them are living in Brazilian risk areas. It is estimated that 17 million are infected by T. cruzi infection. Usually, the areas of the T. cruzi infection are linked to poverty and poor housing conditions. The present sample comprised 4697 individuals belonging to 886 nuclear families originated mostly from the Northeastern Brazil at the ancient “Hospedaria de Imigrantes do Departamento de Imigra-Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 22 ção e Colonização do Estado de São Paulo” in the early 70´s of the Europe evidences Y-chromosomal diversity in form of clines, primarily last century. From the collected data, information on gender, familial influenced by geography (Rosser et al., 2000). While genetic differ- relationship, housing conditions, age and serological diagnostics were entiation has been accounted between major European populations used. Statistical analyses were performed using some lab made pro- (Ploski et al., 2002), along present-day political borders (Kayser et al., grams, as well as SPSS and POINTER programs. Multiple regression 2005) or even between micro-geographic regions (Brion et al., 2004), analyses showed that gender have no influence on T. cruzi infection, Germany is regarded as quite homogeneous. Small but statistically while age and housing conditions presented significant effects. Cor- significant differences were detected between Eastern and Western relation of related pairs of individuals, showed consistent positive and Germany (Kayser, 2005). significant values, indicating familial aggregation. Complex segrega- German genetic landscapes of Y-chromosome are assessed. A ge- tion analysis, suggested that the best model is the dominant one, but netic geographical Information system (GenGIS) was built. Y-chromo- the environmental influence cannot be excluded. The current study somal geographical patterns were portrayed examining 7 STR (3070 provides evidence of a major gene for T. cruzi infection, suggesting samples, recruited along 12 German locations; http://www.yhrd.org). that it is an appropriate trait for further genetic analysis on the causal Following the stepwise mutation model (SMM), thus taking haplotype factors acting on the variability of Chagas disease. molecular distance into account, haplotype groups were defined. First, Model d t q H τ1 τ2 τ3 -2 ln L χ2 P test ep AIC most frequent haplotypes were identified, and then nearest neigh- 1.Mixed* 1.0002.0960.6050.421[1][0.5][0]672.40 - - - 4 680.397 bours, in terms of mutation steps, were clustered. Genetic landscapes 2.Sporadic [0] [0] [0] [0] - - - 838.63166.2380.0002vs1 0 838.635 were built based on spatial interpolation of haplotype and haplotype- 3.No major effect** [0] [0] [0] 0.995[1][0.5][0]696.37 23.974 0.0003vs1 1 698.372 group frequencies with GRASS GIS. Regional patterns are analyzed. The relatively genetic homogeneity attributed to German population 4.No multifatorial 0.0973.2500.296 [0] [1][0.5][0]712.27 39.869 0.0004vs1 3 718.266 5.Recessive (d=0) [0] 2.3890.3830.279[1][0.5][0]682.78 10.381 0.0015vs1 3 688.778 may be interpreted as a product of superimposed genetic landscapes. 6.Aditive (d=0.5) [0.5] 2.7820.4540.019[1][0.5][0]674.09 1.688 0.1946vs1 3 680.085 GenGIS assessment of genetic landscapes provides an insight into the spatial composition of extant, highly admixed German population. 7.Dominant (d=1) [1] 2.0960.6050.421[1][0.5][0]672.40 0.000 1.0007vs1 3 678.397 References * „d“ value was set to upper limit. **Model estimated by lower „-2 ln L“. Brion et al., Gene. 2004;329:17-25. Supported by CNPq, FAPESP. Kayser et al., Hum Genet. 2005;117(5):428-43. Ploski et al. Hum Genet. 2002;110(6):592-600. P1161. Genetic-epidemiology study of reported number of Rosser et al., Am J Hum Genet. 2000;67(6):1526-43. malaria episodes in a sample from Monte Negro, RO, Brazil. A. La Luna1, R. G. M. Ferreira1, C. E. M. Kawamata1, M. M. Moura2, L. M. A. P1163. Genetic polymorphism of Y chromosome short tandems Camargo1, H. Krieger1; repeats (Y-STRs) in the Latvian population 1Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Universidade Federal de L. Pliss1, A. Puzuka2, L. Timsa1, I. Pelnena1, V. Baumanis1, A. Krumina2; Rondonia, Porto Velho, Brazil. 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga Stradins Malaria is one of the main human infectious disease that affects 300 University, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Riga, Latvia. to 500 million people per year, causing the death of 1.5 to 2.7 million Biallelic loci and short tandem repeats (STRs) positioned in the non- people in Africa, Asia and the Americas. In Brazil around 70% of the recombining part of Y chromosome and paternal inheritance make it a cases are due to Plasmodium vivax infection. The reported number powerful tool for studying population genetics and evolution. of malaria episodes was studied on a sample of 924 individuals from The aim of the present study was to evaluate Y-STRs variation in two Monte Negro/RO, Brazil (malaria hypo-endemic region) in order to test haplogroups, I and R1a1 that form 46.6% from the total Latvian sam- previous reports on a riverine population from the Western Amazonian ple. Region (Portuchuelo, RO). The effects of gender, inbreeding, age were A sample of 74 paternally unrelated Latvians belonging to haplogroups evaluated before a correlation study of pairs of relative was conducted. (hgs) I and R1a1 were analyzed at 12 Y-STR loci. One trinucleotide All estimates were relatively high and statistically significant showing STR (DYS392) and 11 tetranucleotide STRs (DYS19, DYS385a, a significant familial aggregation. It could be observed that the great- DYS385b, DYS389I, DYS389II, DYS390, DYS391, DYS393, DYS437, est number of malaria episodes occurs in male individuals with more DYS438, and DYS439) were determined using PowerPlex® Y System than 45 years of age, probably due to a longer exposition to the causal (Promega, USA). Haplotype diversity was calculated using the Arle- agent. Complex segregation analysis was applied to the data, and al- quin 2.0 package. though the free τs model showed the best fit, with somewhat non-men- Y-STR analyses of Latvian hg I lineages revealed 12 different hap- delian τs values, the action of a heritable multifactorial component has lotypes (haplotype diversity: 0.957±0.016), 14-13-14-12-28-22-10-11- to be present in order to explain the familial aggregation. The results 13-16-10-11 (defined by DYS19-385a-385b-389I-389II-390-391-392- are the same whether Duffy negative individuals are excluded from the 393-437-438-439) of which occurred more frequently (25%). Among sample or not. Further linkage studies are being conducted in order to hg I Y-STRs two microsatellites were less diverse and only one allele identify probable genetic mechanisms associated to this treat. for each of them was found (DYS392 locus-11 repeats, DYS438-10 re- Model D t q H τ τ τ -2 ln L χ 2 P test AIC peats). In contrast to hg I, the haplotype diversity of haplogroup R1a1 1 2 3 1.Mixed 1.0001.5130.2300.065 [1] [0.5] [0] 1179.38 1187.380 was 0.986±0.003, where 51 distinct haplotypes were detected and six of them were found in more than one individual, comprising 11.8% of 3.No major effect [0] [0] [0] 0.435 [1] [0.5] [0] 1229.74 50.360 0.0003 vs. 11231.740 hg R1a1 Y chromosomes in Latvian males. We have detected two pre- 4.No multifactorial 0.0921.5100.623 [0] [1] [0.5] [0] 1201.29 21.910 0.0004 vs. 11207.290 dominant alleles at DYS392 and DYS 393 loci (11 and 12) that make up 94% of the total microsatellite variation in the Latvian population. 5.Recessive (d=0) [0] 3.0650.2110.259 [1] [0.5] [0] 1170.99 8.390 0.0045 vs.1 1176.990 The analysis of associated Y-STRs revealed differences between mi- 7. Dominant (d=1) [1] 1.5150.2300.065 [1] [0.5] [0] 1179.48 0.100 0.7527 vs. 11185.480 crosatellite diversity within two distinct phylogenetic branches, hap- logroups R1a1 and I, in the Latvian population. 8.Free τs 1.0001.3320.3010.4471.0001.0000.000 962.30 208.6900.0008 vs 5 976.300 Supported by CNPq, FAPESP P1164. The association of gene variants with physical performance in middle school-age children P1162. Uncovering German genetic landscapes of Y- I. V. Astratenkova, I. I. Ahmetov, D. N. Gavrilov, A. M. Druzhevskaya, A. V. chromosome Malinin, E. E. Romanova, V. A. Rogozkin; A. N. Diaz Lacava; St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics, and Epidemiology, University of Federation. Bonn, Bonn, Germany. The aim of the study was to determine the association between ACE Widespread population data on Y-chromosomal short tandem re- I/D, ACTN3 R577X and PPARA intron 7 G/C gene variants and anthro- peats (STR) haplotypes are public available. World-wide as well as pometrical and performance-related traits in 457 middle school-age continent-wide studies of Y-STR haplotypes confirm its applicability to children. The assessment of physical performance and anthropom- quantification of population genetic differentiation. etry was conducted with a number of physical and physiological tests. Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 Gene variants were determined by PCR. The discovered correlations 6.47% (Vis, Affy) and 1.13% (CEPH, Affy). The proportion of homozy- concerned primarily sprint performance traits, being in agreement with gous genotypes in the whole dataset was 65.79% (Vis, Illu), 64.88% the generally accepted data: the ACE D, ACTN3 R and PPARA C al- (CEPH, Illu), 72.99% (Vis, Affy) and 69.31% (CEPH, Affy). leles and their different combinations were associated with the maxi- Conclusion. The genetic distance between CEPH and this isolated mal values of height, weight, BMI, standing long-jump and handgrip Croatian island population is small, given the F estimates obtained ST strength, increased resting heart rate (RHR) and systolic blood pres- with the two different arrays. However, the significant effects of genetic sure (SBP), whereas the ACE I and PPARA G alleles correlated with drift in isolated populations can be noted as increase in proportion of decreased RHR and SBP. In conclusion, ACE, ACTN3 and PPARA markers with minor allele frequency approaching 0%. The Illumina ar- gene variants are strongly associated with several anthropometrical ray provides a higher proportion of informative markers for genetic as- and performance-related traits in physically active middle school-age sociation studies. children. P1167. A recurrent mutation in Italian Gitelman patients is linked P1165. Investigating human genome-wide heterozygosity and its to a specific haplotype, suggesting a founder effect effects on health-related quantitative traits using dense genome- M. Syrén1,2, N. Borsa1, C. Radaelli1, C. Melotti1, A. Orrico3, D. Coviello1, S. Te- wide scans deschi1; O. Polasek1, A. Carothers2, A. Vorko-Jovic1, Z. Biloglav1, I. Kolcic1, L. Zgaga1, 1Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, N. Hastie3, C. Hayward3, A. Wright3, H. Campbell2, I. Rudan2; Milan, Italy, 2Dept. of Pediatrics and Neonatology, University of Milan, Milan, 1Faculty of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Edinburgh, United Italy, 3Dept. of Molecular Medicine, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. Kingdom, 3MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Gitelman’s syndrome (GS) is one of the hereditary renal tubulopathies, Aim. To investigate concordance of different measures of human het- characterised by hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, erozygosity (internal relatedness, multilocus heterozygosity - MLH) us- hypocalciuria, hypermagnesiuria, and hyperreninemia with normal or ing genome wide scans of 800 STR and 317.000 SNP genetic mark- somewhat lower blood pressure. GS is caused by inactivating muta- ers; to study patterns of heterozygosity in the human genome and tions in the SLC12A3 gene localised to chromosome 16. It encodes investigate effects on health-related traits. the thiazide-sensitive NaCl-cotransporter. Materials and methods. A sample of 1026 examinees from isolated In our cohort of Italian patients with a clinical and molecular diagnosis island of Vis, Croatia, with high prevalence of consanguinity was stud- of GS we found 66 mutations distributed between missense, nonsense, ied. Genome-wide scan using 800 STR markers was performed in all insertions and deletion mutations. They were spread along the gene examinees, and using 317.000 SNP markers in a subset of examin- without any hot spot. Especially one mutation, c.1202_1203ins7bp in ees. A set of 31 health-related quantitative phenotypes was measured exon 10 (p.Ala401Alafs>X1), was relatively frequent: it was found in (e.g. blood pressure, anthropometric measurements, spirometry and ten apparently unrelated alleles (~15%). biochemical parameters). The subjects that carried the c.1202_1203ins7bp mutation were char- Results. The average MLH (standard deviation) in 1026 examinees acterised, except one which was not available, by extensive genotyp- was 0.754 (±0.020) using STR markers (range 0.693 - 0.810), and ing with seven intragenic polymorphic markers/SNPs flanking exon 0.343 (±0.006) using SNP markers (0.317 - 0.352). The correlation 10. A multiallelic polymorphism in intron 8 of the gene revealed 100% between genealogical and marker-based (STR, SNP) estimates of in- segregation of the 258 bp allele with the mutation even though this dividual genome-wide heterozygosity was statistically significant in all allele was found to be linked with wild type as well. Furthermore, a cases, but generally weaker than expected. The coefficient of correla- specific haplotype in linkage to the mutation was demonstrated in all tion between residuals of estimates based on STR and SNP markers the patients and parents carrying the insertion. from the linear fit was r=0.434 (p<0.0001). Of all measured quantitative Our centre receives samples from all over Italy and also from abroad traits, the strongest correlation with MLH (after correction for potential but the geographic distribution of patients carrying p.Ala401Alafs>X1 confounding factors) was observed for biceps, triceps, subscapular is, at the moment, circumscribed to the northern regions of Italy. and suprailiac skinfolds (p-values all <0.01), and hip, waist and bra- We hypothesize that this mutation might be the result of a founder ef- chial circumference (p-values <0.05). fect that originated in a common ancestor in the north of Italy. Conclusions. Patterns of individual genome-wide heterozygosity in the human genome differ substantially when measured using STR ver- P1168. T8T and other GJB2 unclassified or controversial sus SNP marker sets, and with varying density of genome scans. Ge- sequence variants identified in Portuguese families nome-wide heterozygosity is associated with levels of certain human A. Rodrigues1, G. Fialho1, H. Caria1,2; quantitative traits. 1CGBM, Lisbon, Portugal, 2College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, Setubal, Portugal. P1166. Applicability of commercially available dense genome- Mutations in GJB2 are the most common cause of nonsyndromic sen- wide scans for genetic association studies: a comparison of sorineural hearing loss (NSSHL), being recessive cases by far more CEPH and Croatian island founders frequent than dominant ones. To date, more than 100 mutations, poly- L. Zgaga1, P. Navarro2, C. Hayward3, D. Juricic1, I. Rudan4, A. Wright3, H. morphisms and unclassified variants have been reported in GJB2. The Campbell4, N. Hastie3, S. Knott2; identification of known mutations in this gene allows definitive etiologi- 1Faculty of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Institute of Evolutionary Biology, Edin- cal diagnosis of GJB2-based hearing loss and improves the precision burgh, United Kingdom, 3MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United King- of genetic counselling and risk assessment for patients and families. dom, 4Faculty of Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. The identification of novel or unclassified variants, or controversial Aim. To investigate the performance of two commercially available variants with unclear pathogenicity, complicates the interpretation of dense genome-wide genotyping arrays (Illumina BeadChip ~317.000 DNA tests results and require further analysis of this variants among SNP markers and Affymetrix GeneChip ~250.000 SNP markers) in a different populations. population sample from the Croatian Island of Vis. The present study represents a new contribution for the characteriza- Materials and methods. We genotyped 63 individuals who were care- tion of hereditary hearing loss in the Portuguese population. DNA- fully chosen to be unrelated and to represent the founders of the pres- based sequencing of GJB2 coding region was utilized in the molecular ent island population. In addition, genotypes were obtained for 60 un- diagnostic of 50 patients with NSSHL, from 40 different affected fami- related CEPH individuals. lies being analysed for the first time. Results. The proportions of loci that were polymorphic among all mark- The results obtained provided relevant information. They therefore er loci were 99.74% (Vis, Illu), 99.93% (CEPH, Illu),85.36% (Vis, Affy) contribute for a better characterization of the GJB2 variation spec- and 85.85% (CEPH, Affy). The proportion of markers with a minor allele trum, including the novel T8T and the nt-34 C>T variants, both found frequency below 5% was 5.77% (Vis, Illu), 0.38% (CEPH, Illu), 28.75% in heterozigosity, in two different families. The role of these and other (Vis, Affy) and 24.74% (CEPH, Affy). Estimated F values between unclassified or controversial variants is discussed according to geno- ST the two population were 0.012 (Illu) and 0.015 (Affy). The proportion of type/phenotype analysis, their frequency in the Portuguese impaired marker loci showing departure from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium at the and control population, and comparison with other populations. significance level of p<0.01 was 2.66% (Vis, Illu), 0.43% (CEPH, Illu), These new data support and extend prior studies of the association Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 between GJB2 and NSSHL in Portuguese families. They also contrib- P1171. High Frequency of 35delG GJB2 mutation and absence ute for a more precise risk prediction and genetic counselling. of del(GJB-D1S10) in Greek Cypriot patients with non- syndromic hearing loss P1169. Glutathione S-transferase polymorphisms in Russian V. Neocleous1, A. Aspris2, V. Shahpenterian3, V. Nicolaou3, C. Panagi4, I. Ioan- populations of European part of Russia nou3, Y. Kyamides2, V. Anastasiadou5,6, L. A. Phylactou1; A. V. Khrunin, S. A. Limborska; 1Department of Molecular Genetics C, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Institute of Molecular Genetics of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Nicosia General Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Limas- Russian Federation. sol General Hospital, Limassol, Cyprus, 4Larnaca General Hospital, Larnaca, Cytosolic or soluble glutathione S-transferases (GST) - are a super- Cyprus, 5Department of Pediatrics, Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 6De- family of multifunctional proteins with fundamental roles in the cellular partment of Clinical Genetics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, detoxification of a wide range of exogenous and endogenous com- Nicosia, Cyprus. pounds. Like many other genes, genes for GSTs display polymor- Mutations in the GJB2 (Connexin 26) gene are responsible for more phisms which, as have been shown can contribute to interindividual than half of all cases of pre-lingual recessive inherited non-syndromic differences in responses to xenobiotics. The allele distribution for deafness in Europe. some of frequently tested in association studies GST polymorphisms This work presents a mutation analysis of the GJB2 and GJB6 (Con- (SNPs at codons 105 and 114 for GSTP1, -69 C/T polymorphism for nexin 30) genes in thirty six Greek Cypriot patients with sensorineural GSTA1, three nucleotide deletion for GSTM3 and gene deletions for non-syndromic hearing loss compatible with recessive inheritance. GSTM1 and GSTT1) were studied in seven geographically different Fourteen of the patients (38.9 %) had the 35delG mutation in the GJB2 Russian populations (from Tver, Smolensk, Kursk, Ivanovo and Arch- gene. Moreover, eleven of these were homozygous for the 35delG mu- angelsk regions) and in one Yakut population. Yakuts were used as a tation, whereas two patients were in the compound heterozygous state reference population. The analysis of GSTP1 polymorphisms did not with the L90P missense mutation and one with the E47X nonsense demonstrate any statistically significant differences in allele/haplotype mutation. Another patient with severe sensorineural hearing loss was distribution among the most of Russian populations. At the same time heterozygous for the V153I missense mutation. Finally, no GJB6 muta- all Russian populations significantly differed from Yakut population. tions or the known del(GJB6-D13S1830) were identified in any of the Similar results were for GSTM3, GSTA1 and GSTM1 polymorphisms, investigated Greek Cypriot non-syndromic hearing loss patients. This but not for GSTT1. The frequency of GSTT1 null genotypes was sub- work confirms that the GJB2 35delG mutation is an important patho- stantively lower in Archangelsk population (9%) compared with other genic mutation for hearing loss in the Greek Cypriot population and the Russians (16-24%). The significance of this difference was verified findings will be used towards the effective diagnosis of non-syndromic with the test for homogeneity of Russian samples (we had p = 0.035 for hearing loss, improve genetic counselling and used as a potential ther- all Russian populations tested and p = 0.64 when Archangelsk sam- apeutic platform in the future for the affected patients in Cyprus. ples were excluded from the total Russian pull). Based on previously published data one may suppose that the lower frequency of GSTT1 P1172. The monogenic pathology in rural districs of Buryatia 0/0 homozygotes is an attribute for the Russian people of Archangelsk Republic region. L. Minaycheva1, L. Nazarenko1, O. Salyukova1, S. Fadyushina1, E. Eremina2, V. Cyrenova2, V. Ayushina2, B. Tugdumov2, E. Batuev2, N. Sanzhizhapov2, V. P1170. Cis-Trans Interplay at the β Globin Locus using β Globin Cybicova2; Gene Models from the Maltese Population 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Buryat Branch of A. E. Felice1,2, J. Borg1, R. Galdies1,2, W. Cassar1,2, S. Bezzina Wettinger1,2, M. Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk Research Centre, Siberian Divi- R. Caruana2, C. A. Scerri1,2; sion, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Ulan-Uda, Russian Federation. 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, The medical genetic study of the population of four districts (Okinsky, University of Malta, Msida, Malta, 2Thalassemia and Molecular Genetics Clinic, Kyakhtinsky, Eravnensky, Kizhinginsky) of Buryatia Republic (Russia) Division of Pathology, St. Luke’s Hospital, Department of Health, G’Mangia, was performed, totally there live 85.01 thousand people. Most of the Malta. natives in these districts are Buryats. The quantification of normal and abnormal globins of HbF-Malta-I Buryatia Republic is situated in the southern part of East Siberia. To- [Gγ117(G19)His→Arg] heterozygotes which are in tight linkage disequi- tal population is 974.3 thousand people. The most numerous ethnic librium with Hb Valletta [β87(F3)Thr→Pro], together with haplotyping groups are Russians (67.8%), Buryats (27.8%), Ukrainians (0.98%), of homozygotes and heterozygotes including the XmnI dimorphism in Tatars (0.83%) and Germans (0.16%). the Gγ promoter and the (AT) T polymorphism 5’ to the β globin genes As a result of the study the 96 patients from 66 families with mono- X Y had suggested that the XmnI dimorphism was largely inactive in the genic hereditary diseases were revealed. Thus, the 57 patients from normal newborn whilst the HbF levels and the proportion of Gγ globin 37 families were found with autosomal dominant diseases; the 15 in anemic adult β-thalassemia homozygotes and compound hetero- patients from 14 families had autosomal recessive pathology; the 24 zygotes differed significantly. Here, we document the occurrence of patients from 15 families were revealed with X-linked forms. The 74 eight newborns who were heterozygous at three globin loci permitting patients from 47 families were Buryats, the 22 patients from 19 families quantification by RP-HPLC of the six globin products in the context of were Russians. The group of hereditary syndromes predominated in genotypic variation at the XmnI and (AT) T sequences. Results were the structure of autosomal recessive and X-linked pathology (37.5% X Y compared with newborn HbF-Malta-I-Hb-Valletta heterozygotes and and 50% respectively). The group of skeletal and connective tissue anemic adult β-thalassemia homozygotes/compound heterozygotes. disorders (35.3%) was more often among autosomal dominant pathol- The globin quantification together with haplotype data were analysed ogy. The inborn metabolism defects (37.5%) were the most prevalent using the general linear model by SPSS V.12. The data excluded sig- among autosomal recessive diseases. nificant effect of the XmnI dimorphism alone on relative γ/β globin gene The X-linked diseases predominated in Okinsky district, the 16 pa- expression in the newborn. Conversely, the (AT) T with BP1 binding tients from 9 families were revealed with this pathology. The diagnosis X Y sites of 19 (AT)T, 21 (AT)T, 23 (AT)T, or 25 (AT) T nucleotides of X-linked ichthyosis was made in 8 families. The founder effect can- 7 5 7 7 9 5 11 3 in trans supersede XmnI. In contrast, it is the XmnI dimorphism that not be excluded in these cases. over-rides the (AT)xTy diversity in the anemic adult β-thalassemia ho- The studies of the structure of hereditary diseases in Buryatia Republic mozygotes or compound heterozygotes. The GγFMalta-I/Gγ0 ratio of are continued. the newborn heterozygotes with HbF-Malta-I and the AγT/AγI ratio of the newborn heterozygotes with HbF-Malta-I and HbF-Sardinia suggested P1173. The medical genetic study of inherited pathology in that the developmental regulation of the XmnI site may be subject to Khakasia Republic cis/trans interplay with the (AT) T sequences. O. Salyukova1, L. Minaycheva1, L. Nazarenko1, S. Fadyushina1, O. Togocha- X Y kova2, A. Dergunova2, S. Kokova2, E. Kozhevnikova2; 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Khakas Republican Centre of Family Planning and Reproduction, Abakan, Russian Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 Federation. presenting the project and receiving their written informed consent. To Khakasia Republic is situated in the centre of South Siberia; the to- guarantee individual ancestral origin, the blood was preferably taken tal population is 542.7 thousand people (the urban population - 336 from individuals whose parents were born in the same island. Never- thousand, the rural population - 206.7 thousand). The most numer- theless, the bank includes DNA samples from 69 individuals whose ous ethnic groups are Russians (79.5%) and Khakasses (11.1%). The parents were born in different archipelago islands, 58 individuals with epidemiological study of congenital malformations among newborns only one Azorean parent and finally 59 individuals with no Azorean during 19-years period in Khakasia was performed (1986-2004). Total parents. spectrum of congenital malformations was registered. The overall rate In regards to the genetic characterization of the Azorean population of all birth defects was 32.72‰ and varied from 17.22 to 57.98‰ in project, the bank is composed of 1370 DNA samples from individuals some years. The structure of congenital malformations was revealed, (whose parents were born in the same island) with an average age of the defects of musculoskeletal, urogenital and cardiovascular system 42 years old (18 - 88 y), mostly men (71%). Up to the present moment, were more prevalent. The frequency of Down syndrome and multiple the bank includes a populational representativity between 0.2% (Ter- congenital malformations was 1.42 and 2.46‰, respectively. ceira Island) and 7% (Corvo Island; Census 2001 - INE). The load Mendelian pathology with different types of heredity was de- This DNA bank was used for Azorean genetic diversity studies (based termined for each ethnic group, taking into account the territorial dis- on Y, Alu and STRs polymorphisms) and represents an essential re- tribution: town, village. In the urban population, the load of autosomal source for the analysis of genes responsible for diseases, as well as dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked pathology were: Russians - for the development of forensic and farmacogenomic studies. 0.51; 0.23 per 1000 individuals respectively, and 0.13 per 1000 male; Khakasses - 1.22; 0.87; per 1000 individuals respectively. No one case P1176. Ibreeding depression in the Spanish kings of the Austrian of X - linked pathology was found in Khakasses. In the rural population, Dynasty the load of autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked pathol- F. C. Ceballos, G. Alvarez; ogy were: Russians: 0.65; 0.27 per 1000 individuals respectively, and University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. 0.04 per 1000 male; Khakasses - 0.97, 0.76 individuals respectively, Even though inbreeding in the Spanish-Austrian dynasty (That extends and 0.65 per 1000 male. The load and the prevalence of hereditary since 1550 till 1700, when the last Spanish-Austrian king, Charles II, pathology in Khakasia Republic were described for the first time. died without descendents) has been considered by historians as one of the causes of the disappearance of such, no genetic analysis of the P1174. HLA haplotypes associated with HFE C282Y mutation in Spanish-Austrian dynasty, to calculate the inbreeding coefficients and São Miguel Island population (Azores) to detect its possible effects, has been carried out. C. T. Gomes1, P. R. Pacheco1,2, M. São-Bento1, R. Cabral1,2, C. C. Branco1,2, L. To estimate the inbreeding coefficients of the kings of the Spanish- Mota-Vieira1,2; Austrian dynasty two approaches have been followed: on the one 1Mol Genetics & Pathology Unit of the Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta hand, a 16 generations, 153 individual pedigree of the descents of Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. the Spanish-Austrian kings and queens has been reproduced. On the Hereditary Hemocromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive disor- other, a 2300 individuals of the different European dynasties, database der of the iron metabolism. In the majority of HH cases, the defect is has been created. Data of the family relationships extracted from these a single missense mutation, cystein replaced by tyrosine at the 282 two approaches was processed with the Fast Inbreeding Computa- position, in the HFE gene. Generally, the C282Y mutation lies within tion Software FSpeed 2. Consanguinity of Spanish-Austrian kings is a celtic ancestral HLA-A*03-B*07 haplotype. In addition, other haplo- between F = 0,024 (Philip I) and F = 0,25 (Charles II).Table 1 for some types associated with HH have been found. results. Here, we infer the HLA haplotypes associated with the HFE C282Y The effects of the inbreeding in the dynasty of the Spanish-Austrians mutation in São Miguel Island population. All samples were genotyped have been studied by analyzing the pre-reproductive survival of the for HLA-A and -B by PCR-SSP and for HFE mutations (C282Y, H63D descendents of the royal families, until they were 10 years old. This and S65C) by PCR-RFLP. Allele and haplotype frequencies were esti- quantitative character has been used to detect an inbreeding depres- mated by Arlequin 3.1 version software. sion in the Spanish Austrian dynasty. By applying different regression The sample was composed of 88 individuals divided into two groups: models a significant negative regression between the survival of the 47 were homozygous and carriers for the HFE C282Y mutation, while infants and its inbreeding coefficients has been found. 41 had no mutations. The data show that alleles HLA-A*03, HLA-A*29, Inbreeding Coefficient HLA-B*37 and HLA-B*45 are in higher frequency in the C282Y patients and carriers group (p<0.01), whereas alleles HLA-A*30, HLA-A*32, HLA-B*08 and HLA-B*44 are the most frequent in the control subjects Philip I (1478-1506) 0,024 (p<0.01). Moreover, results demonstrate that haplotypes HLA-A*29- Joana I (1479-1555) 0,034 B*45 (7.5%) and HLA-A*02-B*58 (5.3%) are detected only in individu- als with the C282Y mutation (p<0.001). The ancestral haplotype HLA- A*03-B*07 is present in both groups, but at a higher frequency (5.3%) Charles I (V of Germany) (1530-1558) 0,035 in the C282Y patients and carriers group (p<0.01). Taken together, the Isabella of Portugal (1503-1593) 0,095 data suggest that these three haplotypes are associated with the HFE C282Y mutation, indicative of a multiple founder effect responsible for HH in the São Miguel Island population. Philip II (1527-1598) 0,120 Mary of Portugal (1527-1545) 0,120 P1175. Establishment of a Human DNA Bank: the case of the Elisabeth of Valois (1545-1568) 0,001 Azorean population Anna of Austria (1549-1580) 0,105 M. São Bento1, P. R. Pacheco1,2, R. Cabral1,2, C. T. Gomes1, C. C. Branco1,2, L. Mota Vieira1,2; Philip III (1578-1621) 0,216 1Molecular Genetics and Pathology Unit – Hospital of Divino Espírito Santo Margaret of Austria (1584-1661) 0,138 (Ponta Delgada), Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. In order to characterize the genetic background of the Azorean popula- Philip IV (1605-1665) 0,115 tion, a human anonymized DNA bank was built. Initiated in 2002, this Elisabeth of Bourbon (1603-1644) 0,005 DNA bank consists in 1556 DNA samples from individuals that inhabit Mariana of Austria (1634-1696) 0,154 the nine islands of the Azorean archipelago. The strategy used consisted of blood collection from healthy, not fam- Charles II “The Bewitched” (1661-1700) 0,025 ily-related, individuals in the Hematology Department of the Divino Espirito Santo’s Hospital (for the São Miguel Island) or in the Health Centres of their residence (concerning the other eight islands), after Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 P1177. Retrospective study of Clinical and histological P1179. Variability in inflammatory immune response genes in manifestations of IP in Adults human populations of North Eurasia S. Hadj-Rabia1, A. Rimella1, S. Fraitag2, Y. de Prost1, A. Smahi3, C. Bodemer4; V. A. Stepanov1, S. Khoo2, J. Bizzintino2, C. McLean2, H. Clifford2, I. Laing2,3, C. 1Dermatology, Necker-Enfants malades Hospital, France, 2Dermatopathology, Hayden2, P. Candelaria2, J. Goldblatt2, A. Bittles4, M. Black4, V. Puzyrev1, P. N. Necker-Enfants malades Hospital, France, 3INSERM-U781, Necker-Enfants LeSouef2,3; malades Hospital, France, 4Dermatology, Centre Maladies Genetiques à Ex- 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2School of Paediat- pression Cutanée, Necker-Enfants malades Hospital, France. rics and Child Health, University of Western Australia, Princess Margaret Hos- pital, Perth, Australia, 3Institute for Child Health Research, Subiaco, Australia, Introduction. Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a rare X dominant genoder- 4Centre for Comparative Genomics, Murdoch University, Perth, Australia. matosis related to mutations of NEMO gene. It affects mostly female Inflammatory immune responses play a crucial role in the interaction patients and is usually lethal for males in utero. The skin lesions may of humans with the environment, and genes which mediate immunity occur in 4 classically successive diagnostic stages: erythema and ve- in humans are a possible target for natural selection during human sicles, (stage 1); verrucous (stage 2); linear hyperpigmentation (stage evolution and migrations. The aim of this study was to estimate the ge- 3); and pallor and scarring (stage 4).In adults, manifestations are skin netic diversity of immune response-related genes in populations living involvement (stage 4) and teeth and nail anomalies. under either moderate or Arctic climatic conditions in North Eurasia. Patients and Methods Ten populations, 3 Eastern European (2 Russian, 1 Komis), 2 Central 25 adults patients with molecular diagnosis of IP, were enrolled for Asian (Kirghiz), 5 Siberian (2 Buryat, 2 Altay, 1 Khant) were genotyped clinical examination. Skin, ocular, neurological and stomatological ma- for SNPs in genes involved in Th2 response (CD14 C-159T, SCGB1A1 nifestations were recorded using a standard form. Skin biopsy was A38G, CMA1 A-1903G, ADRB2 Arg16Gly, ADRB2 Glu27Gln). performed. Allele frequencies of the CD14 and CMA1 genes showed significant Results. 25 patients fulfilled the criteria : the diagnosis was made in departure from selective neutrality expectations in most of study popu- adulthood in 52%of the patients. Stage 4 was constant (100%) stage lations. A high total level of genetic diversity in inflammatory immune 3 and 2 were found in 11 and 1 patients respectively. Other manifesta- response genes was found in the North Eurasian populations. Irre- tions were: woolly hair (44%), nails (84%), teeth (92%), ocular (48%), spective of ethnic and linguistic affiliation and geographical location, mammary (28%) and neurological (12%) anomalies. Histology shows 9 of the 10 populations were characterized by high average expected apoptotic kératinocytes, absence of follicles and sweat glands (stages heterozygosity (0.45-0.49). The degree of genetic differentiation of 3 and 4), hypopigmentation and atrophic epidermis (stage 4). North Eurasian populations exhibited by Th2-related genes was rela- Discussion. Diagnosis of IP was delayed in 52% of the patient and tively low (Fst=2.4%) compared to ‘neutral’ markers (autosomal Alu based on the constant association of stage 4 lesions and teeth anoma- Fst=6%, Y-chromosome Fst=18%). The patterns of genetic relation- lies. Interestingly, apoptosis persists in adulthood and was associated ships between populations revealed by phylogenetic analysis seemed to absence of both sweat glands and follicles. Dermatological exami- not to correspond with those obtained for ‘neutral’ genetic systems nation of patients with several miscarriages may be helpful to detect IP (Alus, Y-chromosome, mtDNA). In general, a significant correlation of as a rare cause of spontaneous abortion. Moreover, histology confirms ‘proinflammatory’ allele frequency and total genetic diversity with ge- clinical suspicion of the disease and should be include in IP criteria. ography and climate was revealed. P1178. The role of Toll-like Receptor 4 polymorphisms and P1180. Analysis of Interleukin 10 -1082 gene polymorphism in CARD15/NOD2 mutations in the susceptibility and phenotype hemodialysis patients in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: reports of a survey in Southern N. Maksimovic1, I. Novakovic1, B. Jekic1, L. Lukovic1, V. Lezajic2, S. Simic- Italy population. Ogrizovic1; L. Rigoli1, C. Romano1, C. Di Bella1, V. Procopio1, M. Amorini1, G. Lo Giudice1, 1Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia D. Magnoli1, C. Salpietro1, W. Fries2; and Montenegro, 2Institute of Nephrology, CCS, Belgrade, Serbia and Monte- 1Department of Pediatrics, Medical School, University of Messina, Messina, negro. Italy, 2Department of Medicine, Medical School, University of Messina, Messina, Introduction: Interleukin 10 (Il-10) is an important constituent of im- Italy. mune response and has regulatory function on inflammatory and cell Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the Toll-like Receptor 4 (TLR4) mediated immunological mechanisms. and CARD15/NOD2 genes have recently been shown to be associ- Production of Il-10 is under strong genetic influence. One of the most ated with Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD), but whether this suscep- studied regulatory DNA sequences is single nucleotide polymorphism tibility extends to all ethnic groups remains unknown. The aim of our A/G at position -1082 from the Il-10 gene transcriptional start site. study was to evaluate the CARD15/NOD2 and TLR4 gene mutations Studies of Il-10 and its genetics are of particular interest in hemodaly- in a Southern Italy population. sis (HD) patients due to the possible role of this cytokine in the patho- Thirty two ulcerative colitis (UC) patients (mean age, 47 yrs), 79 Crohn’s genesis of disorders associated with chronic HD such as atheroscle- disease (CD) patients (mean age, 46 yrs) and 103 healthy ethnically rosis and depression. matched controls were genotyped for three CARD15/NOD2 variants Aim: The aim of our study was determination of Il-10 -1082 genotype (R702W, G908R, and L1007finsC) and for TLR4 gene polymorphisms and its correlation with Il-10 serum level in a group of hemodialysis (D299G and T399I). The allele frequency of the different genotypes (HD) patients. was compared and genotype-phenotype correlation was performed. Methods: We assessed 70 patients on chronic HD due to the end stage Comparison of the frequency between patients and controls and the renal disease. IL-10 -1082 genotyping was performed by PCR method association to the phenotype was performed by chi-square test or followed by digestion with Mnl1 restriction enzyme. Il-10 serum level Fisher’s exact test where appropriate. was determined by immuno assay. No significant association of the two TLR4 gene mutations with UC or Results: DNA analysis showed that 31/70 (44.29%) patients were with CD was observed (allele frequency: D299G- controls 3.5%, UC 3.6%, AA genotype, 28/70 (40.0%) with AG genotype and 11/70 (15.71%) CD 3.3%; T399I- controls 2.9%, UC 2.8%, CD 2.9%). The frequency of with GG genotype at position -1082 of the Il-10 gene. There is no differ- the frameshift mutation L1007finsC of the CARD15/NOD2 gene was ence between genotype frequencies in HD patients and control group significantly higher in CD patients (9.3%; p=0.0001) compared with of healthy subjects. HD patients with GG genotype had higher mean controls (2.9%) or patients with UC (2.7%). In CD patients the fre- Il-10 level compared to both AG and AA group of patients, but without quency of R702W mutation was significantly higher (8.3%; p<0.001) statistical significance. than in controls (3.4%) and in UC (3.7%). No significant association of Conclusion: Further investigations will show weather Il-10 -1082 geno- the CARD15/NOD2 gene G908R mutation was found in UC. type and Il-10 serum level could be used in prevention of disorders Our preliminary results implicate the CARD15/NOD2 gene in suscepti- affecting life quality in HD patients. bility to Crohn’s disease also in a cohort of patients of Southern Italy.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 P1181. Disease frequency of Inborn Errors of Metabolism in the of the action potential in the heart, which leads to a prolonged QT Irish Traveller Community interval and to a cardiac disease known as long QT syndrome (LQTS), A. Murphy1,2, S. Lynch1, A. Monavari2, P. Mayne2, E. P. Treacy2; associated or not to severe congenital bilateral hearing loss. 1National centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick children, In the present study we report a novel heterozygous 127G>A muta- Crumlin Dublin 12, Dublin, Ireland, 2National Centre for Inherited Metabolic tion in KCNE1 gene. This variant was detected in a healthy individual Disorders, Dublin, Ireland. of our control population by direct sequencing in both directions. The mutation results in an acid to basic amino acid substitution in the extra The frequency of Inherited Metabolic Disorders (IEMs) varies between cellular domain of the protein at codon 43 (E43K), a position highly ethnic groups, reflecting founder effect, genetic isolation, and the po- conserved among MinK proteins of different vertebrates. tential effects of consanguinity. These disorders are a major cause of Recent findings suggest that common variants located in the KCNQ1, morbidity and mortality in “Irish Travellers“, an endogamous group of KCNE1, KCNH2 and SCN5A genes might influence the QT interval in nomads. healthy individuals and might also represent risk factors for arrhyth- We aimed to compare the birth prevalence of IEMs in Traveller with mias or cardiac sudden death. We have thus investigated whether non-Traveller children attending a tertiary level metabolic centre and to variant E43K could influence, by itself or in association with other vari- examine possible genetic factors contributing to observed differences. ants, the channel function and, as a consequence, the length of the QT A retrospective review of diagnoses in Travellers was performed for 5 interval, leading to LQTS expression. years (2002-2006). Mean birth prevalence was calculated and com- pared with overall figures for IEMs in the total population. P1184. Genetic susceptibility to legionnaires‘ disease Travellers constitute 9% of the total patient group, but only 0.6% of the V. Romano-Spica1, F. Impagnatiello1, G. Gianfranceschi1, A. Bargellini2, L. Irish population. 15 IEMs were noted, Galactosaemia, MPS 1, Mito- Cauteruccio2, P. Borella2; chondrial cytopathies, Glutaric Aciduria Type 1(GA1),GSD Type 111a, 1University of Rome - IUSM, Rome, Italy, 2University of Modena and Reggio, Mucolipidosis Type 11, Hyperprolinemia Type 11 being the common- Modena, Italy. est. The birth prevalence of IEMs in the Traveller group for this pe- Legionnaires’ disease is a bacterial pneumonia due to Legionella riod was estimated to be 1/80,Whereas that for the total population for pneumophyla. Given the reported wide exposure to this pathogen, 2006 approximates 1/500. Carrier frequency for the common galacto- behavioural, microbial and environmental risk factors might not fully saemia mutation (Q188R) is 1/11. The W402X homozygous mutation explain the limited known number of pathological cases thus suggest- explains all cases of MPS 1. All GA1 patients are homozygous for the ing the involvement of differences in host susceptibility. E365K mutation. Hyperprolinemia Type 11 is caused by one mutation With the aim of addressing the potential role of genetic polymorphisms, (G521fs(+1)) in an extended pedigree. a case-control study was recently realised within the nationwide re- We propose that the high incidence of IEMs in Irish Travellers may search network. Candidate genes included interleukins and respective reflect initial founder effects and the increased rate of consanguinity. receptors. Herein we report on the analysis of genetic polymorphisms at CCR P1182. Mosaic imprinting aberrations at H19, SNRPN and and TLR. Specifically, patients (n=96), exposed subjects (n=106) and KvDMR1 are not common after in vitro fertilisation. controls (n=320) were recruited based on stringent inclusion criteria. V. F. Oliver1, W. S. Cutfield2, H. L. Miles2, P. L. Hofman2, I. M. Morison1; Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood cells and mutation 1University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, 2Liggins Institute, University of detection by polymerase chain reaction. We report a significant (<0.05) Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. association for CCR264I, a Single Nucleotide polynorphism where a In vitro fertilisation (IVF) potentially provides a profoundly abnormal G is substituted by an A in the Chemokine Receptor-2 gene. Our 190 190 environment for an embryo. Studies with mice, sheep and cattle have data together with available epidemiological and clinical evidences indicated that the culture environment of the embryo can affect the support the potential role for this specific polymorphism in the suscep- imprinting of genes and the phenotype of the animal. Recent studies tibility to legionnaires’ disease. Additional in vitro studies indicate that have suggested that IVF causes a small but increased risk of imprint- macrophage phagocytosis, chemokine production as well as cytotox- ing aberrations such as Angelman syndrome and Beckwith-Wiede- icity may play a role . Another SNP (CCR5D32) also resulted associ- mann syndrome. Given that mosaicism for the imprinting defect has ated to bacterial pneuomonia but it was not specific to legionnaires’ been observed in Angelman syndrome and Beckwith-Wiedemann syn- disease. Genetic polymorphisms may open up new perspectives for drome, we hypothesised that low-level, mosaic imprinting defects may preventive medicine approaches in high risk human subjects exposed be present in phenotypically normal individuals conceived using IVF. to Legionella pneumophyla. DNA samples from peripheral blood were obtained from 70 IVF-con- ceived pre-pubertal children and 70 matched controls. DNA methyla- P1185. Parametric linkage analysis of large complex pedigrees tion of CpG sites within the H19, SNRPN and KvDMR1 loci was accu- T. I. Axenovich, I. V. Zorkoltseva; rately quantified using methylation-sensitive restriction digest followed Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. by real-time quantitative PCR (MSQ-PCR). Global DNA methylation Due to computational limitations, it is impossible to perform exact para- was also examined by using MSQ-PCR on the Satellite 2 repeat re- metric linkage analysis in large pedigrees with multiple loops. Usu- gion. No differences in the percentage of methylation between the IVF- ally, a pedigree is split to multiple small fragments. This enables ex- conceived and control children were observed at the examined CpG act likelihood calculations using Lander-Green algorithm. Alternative sites. method is to break all loops and apply Elston-Stewart algorithm for We concluded that low-level imprinting errors are not a common occur- approximate likelihood calculation. We compared the linkage power of rence in children conceived using IVF. Our data provides reassurance two approaches using a large complex human pedigree with multiple that IVF-associated imprinting errors are sporadic and rare. loops. Two pedigree structures were derived from the initial pedigree: 1) single pedigree constructed by breaking loops and 2) a set of the P1183. A novel variant E43K found in KCNE1 gene non-overlapping fragments of limited size. Quantitative trait and geno- N. Correia1, H. Caria1,2, G. Fialho1; types for the set of five-allelic markers were simulated based on initial 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University pedigree and ascribed to the corresponding individuals in two derived of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 2College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of pedigree structures. We performed multipoint linkage analysis for each Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal. of two structures. For the linked markers the average values of Lod KCNE1 gene encodes a K+ channel ß-subunit (mink or KCNE1) that score were significantly higher for the first pedigree structure. How- modulates voltage-gated potassium channels in various organs, ever, it is known that simplification of pedigree structure may increase namely heart and cochlea. A functional K+ channel requires coexpres- type 1 error (false positives) of linkage analysis. This may lead to an sion of this transmembrane protein and a α-subunit, usually KCNQ1, overestimation of power, when tabulated threshold values are used. coded by gene KCNQ1. In the inner ear, the KCNE1/KCNQ1 channels To test for this possibility we simulated unlinked markers. Empirical play a key role in ensuring K+ homeostasis. Loss of functional channels threshold level was lower for the first pedigree structure, than for the leads to a reduction of endolymph potencial, which can originate hear- second one. This means that increase of power observed in analysis ing loss. Mutations in KCNE1 are also responsible for the prolongation of pedigrees with broken loops compared to analysis of pedigree frag-Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 ments is determined by higher portion of linkage information remaining 5ICBAS, Porto, Portugal. in the former structure but not by a higher increase in type I error. Migraine is a highly prevalent disease, reducing quality of life of mi- graineurs and their relatives. In a previous study, we found evidence of P1186. Human pigmentation genes and genetic susceptibility to familial aggregation in a sample of Portuguese families. Proband’s age melanoma. of onset has also been associated with familial aggregation in other L. P. Fernandez1, R. L. Milne1, J. A. Aviles2, M. I. Longo2, P. Lazaro2, J. studies. Benitez1, G. Ribas1; Our aim was to evaluate if proband’s age of onset, relative’s age at 1Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital contact and gender were predictive factors of migraine. Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain. We analyzed a sample of 133 Portuguese families (a total of 492 first- The aetiology of malignant melanoma (MM) remains unclear but it is degree relatives of probands with migraine, from which 317 were af- known that both genetic and environmental factors influence the de- fected and 175 were healthy). velopment of sporadic disease. The main reason for the increasing in- Similarly to what was described, proband’s age of onset was dichoto- cidence of MM is greater sun exposure. Epidemiologic studies confirm mized (<16, 16+ years). Relatives were divided in two groups accord- that ultraviolet B radiation is the main factor involved in the pathogen- ing to their age at contact (<40, 40+ years) and were also separated by esis of the disease. Among phenotypic factors, fair pigmentation and gender, since this is an age and gender-dependent trait. low tanning ability are the most important risk factors. MM predisposi- We performed a logistic regression analysis to evaluate if any of these tion is highest in fair skinned, blond or red haired individuals who never variables could predict relative’s affection status. tan and always burn. After adjusting for the remaining variables, while gender was found Human pigmentation and consequently sun sensitivity are complex to be a risk factor for migraine (OR=2.74; 95% CI= 1.87- 4.01), with characteristics. In humans there is a long list of genes known to be females being more affected than males, proband’s age of onset and involved in rare pigmentary disorders such as albinism. These genes relative’s age at contact were not. No significant interactions were contribute most of the variation in pigmentation phenotypes seen in found between these variables. human populations, and they do this by regulating the level of synthe- Our findings showed that, as expected, females had a higher risk of sis, chemical composition, packaging and distribution of melanin. migraine than men. Unlike previous descriptions, however, variation in This case-control study included 120 consecutive Spanish MM pa- age of onset was not a predictive factor of migraine. tients from the Dermatology Unit of the Gregorio Marañón Hospital and 240 control subjects frequency matched for sex and age. Phenotypic P1189. Analyzing of mitochondrial polymorphisms in southwest information was colleted using a standardized questionnaire. ethnics of Iran Forty-five SNPs in seven genes belonging to the pigmentation path- H. A. Hosseini1, A. Foroughmand2, M. Hooshmand3, H. galehdari4, E. way (MC1R, OCA2, ASIP, TYR, TYRP1, SLC45A2 and SILV) were Davoodi4; genotyped. The selection of the candidate SNPs was carried out us- 1Jondishapoor university of medical science, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, ing a gene-based approach. We are able to identify several individual 2Shahid chamran University, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National institue SNPs associated with MM. Possible interactions among them will be of genetic engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, discussed. 4Shahid chamran university, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. These results confirm the contribution of pigmentation genes to ge- Mitochondrial polymorphisms are useful tool for investigations involv- netic predisposition to MM in Spain. ing in the genetic structure and the history of human populations. mtD- NA characteristics such as maternal inheritance, high mutation rate, P1187. Low density microarrays for forensic DNA analysis. high copy number and lack of recombination, produce it as a good tool O. N. Mityaeva1, D. O. Fesenko2, T. V. Nasedkina2; to this propose. The highest degree of polymorphism in mtDNA lies 1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russian Federation, in two hyper variable non-coding region, HV-I and HV-II that can be 2Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation. amplified and sequence separately. We suggest to use SNP analysis on microarrays for forensic studies In this study, three ethnical subgroups of southwest of Iran have been of DNA. Microarray for SNP-analysis of three loci (HLA-DQA1 (6p21), analyzed at HV-I sequence of mtDNA. Populations of this study were ABO(9q34), AMEL(Xp22)(Yp11)) has been developed. The microar- 48 cases of unrelated individuals in three groups of Arab, Bakhtiyary ray allows the detection of nine groups of alleles of HLA-DQA1 gene and Persian. Based on 59 variable positions, 44 different haplotypes (group 1 -0101XX, 0104XX, 0105, 0107 alleles; group 2 - 0102XX; were founded. The genetic diversity in Persian, Arab and Bakhtiyary group 3- 0103; group 4 - 0106; group 5 - 0201; group 6 - 03XXXX, were 0.918, 0.930 and 0.945 respectively. Haplotype diversity in all group 7 - 04XXXX; group 8 - 05XXXX; group 9 - 06XXXX), five groups three populations was high and probably this is because of historical of alleles ABO gene (A, B, O1, O1V and O2 groups) and 2 alleles role of this area as a common population immigrant place to many of of AMEL gene (AMELX and AMELY), thus we are able to divide all tribes and ethnics. Surprisingly, in this study we found four new vari- people in to 1350 groups. The procedure take about 24 hours and ations that have not been reported in this region (HV-I) at mitomap includes multiplex two-stage PCR with fluorescently labeled primers previously. These variations are insertion of one G after 16336, one and hybridization with oligonucleotide microarray. The fluorescent sig- (C) after 16188 and two transversion (A to C) in 16258 and 16318 nals are analyzed using a chip-reader equipped with CCD-camera. positions. The microarray has been tested with DNA samples isolated from fresh blood and saliva. The sensitivity of the method is about 25-100 pg per P1190. Mitochondrial DNA coding and control region reaction. We tested the microarray with degraded DNA isolated from polymorphisms associated with a prolonged life span in the spots of blood from dead body, spots of saliva from cigarette end and Latvian population glass. Allele frequencies and population genetic parameters for HLA- A. Krumina1, L. Pliss2, A. Zeltina1, V. Baumanis2; DQA1 and ABO loci were obtained. The presented microarray could 1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2Latvian Biomedical Research and be applied in forensic study to confine the number of suspects. It could Study Centre, Riga, Latvia. replace blood group serological test which may give mistakes when There is evidence that some mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) coding degraded samples are studied. Probability of identification could be region and control region HVSI polymorphisms are associated with increased by adding other loci located on the different chromosomes. longevity in humans. These findings allowed to suggest that the asso- ciation of mtDNA variability with longevity may be population specific, P1188. Predictive factors of migraine in a sample of Portuguese depending on both genetic and environmental background. Studies of families the control region HVSII polymorphism in association with longevity so C. Lemos1, M. J. Castro1, I. Alonso2, J. Barros3, J. Sequeiros1, J. Pereira-Mon- far are very limited. teiro4, D. Mendonça5, A. Sousa1; The aim was to verify if there is any association between mtDNA cod- 1IBMC and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 2IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 3Dept. Neurology, ing and control region polymorphisms and longevity in the Latvian HGSA, Porto, Portugal, 4Dept. Neurology, HGSA and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, population. Objects were 351 healthy unrelated Latvians 18 - 40 years old and 98 aged 74 - 89 years. MtDNA haplogroups were determined by PCR Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 2 - RFLP analysis. Control regions HVSI and HVSII were analysed by by the Sanger method. The nuclear vWA31A Microsatellite polymor- direct sequencing. phisms and the Amelogenin gene sequences were demonstrated on The frequency of haplogroup J was significantly higher in the older PAA gel, Ag-stained. age group (13.3%) than in younger individuals (6.6%). Subhaplogroup We have compared the mtDNA sequences of 50 old Thracian individu- J2b in particular was more frequent in older individuals (3.1%) than als with mtDNA sequences of the present-day Romanian population in the younger age group (0.3%). Statistically significant differences and other European, Asian and African modern and old populations. were found for mutation frequencies in HVSII at sites 150 (more fre- The frequencies of vWA31A Microsatellite were compared with similar quent among the older individuals and in haplogroups H and U4, less genetic data of other modern populations from all over the world. frequent - in the haplogroup J), 152 (more frequent among the older Our results suggest that the old Thracian populations might have made individuals in haplogroups T and U4, less frequent - in the haplogroup an important contribution to the foundation of the modern genetic Ro- U2), 195 (more frequent among the older individuals in the haplogroup manian pool and also reflect an evident genetic similarity between the T, less frequent - in haplogroups J and U4). old Thracian populations and other modern populations from South- Our results support hypothesis that certain inherited mtDNA polymor- East Europe. phisms via interaction with other loci in mtDNA may promote human longevity. P1193. Analyses of mitochondrial and Y-chromosomal lineages in modern Hungarian, Szekler and ancient Hungarian P1191. Analysis of mitochondrial DNA polymorphism in four populations Siberian ethnic groups B. Csányi1, G. Tömöry2, E. Bogácsi-Szabó1, Á. Czibula1, K. Priskin1, M. M. V. Golubenko1, S. V. Buikin1, E. R. Eremina2, N. R. Maximova3, V. N. Tadi- Mórocz1, A. Szécsényi1, A. Csősz2, B. Mende2, P. Langó2, K. Csete3, A. Zsol- nova4, V. P. Puzyrev1; nai4, I. Raskó1; 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Buryat Branch of 1Institute of Genetics,Biological Research Center, Hungarian Academy of Sci- the Institute of Medical Genetics, Ulan-Ude, Russian Federation, 3Yakut Scien- ences, Szeged, Hungary, 2Archaeological Institute, Hungarian Academy of tific Center of RAMS and Sakha Republic, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 4Altay Sciences, Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Forensic Medicine, University of Republic Children’s Hospital, Gornoaltaysk, Russian Federation. Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 4Research Institute for Animal Breeding and Nutri- Mitochondrial DNA polymorphism was studied in 1130 individuals from tion, Herceghalom, Hungary. 12 populations of the most numerous Siberian peoples - Altaians (4 Hungarian population belongs linguistically to the Finno-Ugric branch populations), Tivinians (3 populations), Yakuts (2 populations) and of the Uralic language family. Buryats (3 populations). 308 different HVS1 haplotypes were revealed High-resolution mtDNA analysis of 27 ancient samples (10th-11th cen- in total which belong to 34 different mtDNA haplogroups, mainly of turies), 101 modern Hungarian, and 76 modern Hungarian-speaking East-Eurasian origin. Portion of “West-Eurasian” mtDNA haplogroups Szekler samples was performed. Only two of 27 ancient Hungarian was the highest in Altaians (up to 46%) and Buryats (up to 20%). samples are unambiguously Asian: the rest belong to one of the west- AMOVA analysis has shown that 95,78% of HVSI variation was within ern Eurasian haplogroups. Statistical analyses, including 57 European populations, 2.09% could be explained by inter-population differentia- and Asian populations, revealed that some Asian affinities and the tion and 2.09% was variability between ethnic groups. Test on differen- genetic effect of populations who came into contact with ancient Hun- tiation of polymorphism in population pairs has shown that in all cases garians during their migrations are seen. Though strong differences except the pair of Yakut samples the differentiation was significant. appear when the ancient Hungarian samples are analyzed according AMOVA analysis for separate ethnic groups revealed the highest de- to apparent social status, as judged by grave goods. mtDNA results gree of intraethnic differentiation for Altaians (3.78%), followed by Tu- demonstrate that significant genetic differences exist between the an- vinians (2.61%) and then Buryats (0.43%). Comparison of spectrum of cient and recent Hungarian-speaking populations. haplogroups and individual haplotypes in the populations under inves- The Y-chromosomal base substitution ”Tat”, proved to be a valuable tigation also shows significant differentiation of native Siberian popula- marker in the Finno-Ugric context. The Tat C allele is widespread in tions. Only two haplotypes from haplogroup C and one haplotype from many Uralic-speaking populations, while it is virtually absent in recent D could be considered as common for all four ethnicities. One more Hungarians. haplotype from C was abundant in Tuvinians, Yakuts and Buryats but To further elucidate this finding we studied this polymorphism on 100 rare in Altaians. Substantial number of haplotypes was population-spe- modern Hungarian, 97 Szekler and 4 ancient Hungarian samples. Our cific. Analysis of migrations and interethnic marriages revealed vari- data revealed that only one Szekler men carries the C allele among ous effects of these factors depending both on ethnicity and particular the modern individuals, whereas out of the four skeletal remains two population. The results suggest considerable ethnic differentiation in possess the mutation. the studied Siberian peoples, as well as geographic differentiation. Furthermore we examined 22 Y-chromosomal binary markers to ana- The study was supported by RFBR grant 04-04-48792. lyze the paternal genetic diversity of the two recent populations. Our results show that Hungarians and Szeklers share basically the P1192. Paleomolecular genetic analyses (mitochondrial and same genetic components found in other European populations, ge- nuclear DNA polymorphisms) on some Thracian populations netically closely related and close to other populations from Central from Romania, dating from the Bronze and Iron Age Europe and the Balkan. G. M. Cardos1,2, N. Miritoiu3, A. Soficaru3, A. Kroll4, A. Rodewald4; 1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2Faculty of Biology, P1194. Polymorphisms in the methylenetetrahydrofolate University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 3Institute of Anthropology, Bu- reductase gene and methotrexate efficacy and toxicity in charest, Romania, 4Department of Human Biology, Univ. Hamburg, Hamburg, rheumatoid arthritis Germany. L. Lukovic1, M. Stefanovic1, V. Milic2, B. Jekic1, T. Damnjanovic1, V. Bunje- We have performed this study on the skeletal remains of some old vacki1, N. Damjanov2, J. Milasin3, M. Krajinovic4; Thracian populations from Romania, dating from the Bronze and Iron 1Institute of biology and human genetics, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, Age. Therefore, within our research we analysed mtDNA (HVR I and 2Institute of Rheumatology, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute of biology and human HVR II regions) and nuclear DNA (vWA31A Microsatellite) polymor- genetics, School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Research Center of St-Justine phisms in order to show the degree of their genetic kinship with other Hospital, University of Montreal, Montreal, PQ, Canada. old and modern European populations, especially with nowadays Ro- Polymorphisms of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) manian population. We also amplified the Amelogenin gene to identify gene can influence the methotrexate (MTX)-related metabolic path- the genetic sex of old individuals. We have used three methods for ways. The aim of this study was to determine a possible relationship DNA-extraction from human fossils and adapted them on the degrada- between polymorphisms C677T and A1289C of the MTHFR gene and tion state of the biological material: the phenol-chloroform DNA extrac- toxicity and efficacy of MTX in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. A total tion method, the DNA extraction method with guanidine-tiocianate and of 47 patients fulfilling American College of Rheumatology criteria and silica-particles, and the DNA-extraction method with Invisorb Forensic on MTX therapy (7,5-15 mg/week), were evaluated. Clinical efficacy Kit I. was assessed using the Disease Activity Score in 28 joints (DAS 28) at After amplifying by PCR, the mtDNA sequences were sequenced day 0 and 6 months after initiation of therapy. Drug toxicity was evalu-Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 00 ated by blood count, liver and renal function tests. Genotype analysis Weinberg equilibrium. of C677T and A1289C mutations of the MTHFR gene was investigated 38 SNPs were not polymorphic in the studied group. The genotype by PCR and restriction analysis of DNA extracted from the patients’ frequencies of SNPs of APOA5, ADRB2, LGALS2, GP1BA, ITGB3, lymphocytes. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version PDE4D, GNG12, GPX4 and NFKB1 genes deviated significantly from 11.5 (ANOVA, χ2 test). 17% of patients had genotype T/T, 47% C/T and those predicted by the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p<0,05). The small 36% C/C for the C677T polymorphism. For the polymorphism A1289C sample size could cause this deviation. The estimated allele frequen- the findings were as follows: 38% AA, 48% AC and 14% CC. We did cies of tested SNPs were similar to those detected in other European not find significant difference in relative DAS28 decrease between populations. In conclusion 112 SNPs were selected to be informative genotype groups 6 months after initiation of MTX therapy. MTX-re- for further association studies. lated toxicity was identified in 17 patients. According our findings the A1289C polymorphism rendered patients sensitive to MTX toxicity. P1197. How a mutation associated with Myotonic Dystrophy The polymorphisms in MTHFR were not associated with any differ- Type 1 migrates in Bashkortostan (Russia) ence in efficacy parameters during methotrexate treatment. Further L. Akhmadeeva1, B. Veytsman2, C. Derevyanko1; prospective studies including new genetic polymorphisms and larger 1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2George Mason group of patients will be necessary in order to precisely assess drug University, Fairfax, VA, United States. efficacy and its toxicity. Myotonic Dystrophy is a disorder with an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Anticipation phenomenon is well known in families with P1195. Mutation patterns of mtDNA: empirical inferences for the Myotonic Dystrophy type1 (DM1). This means that a half of the offspring coding region of an affected parent could get this mutation and have more chances C. Santos1, R. Montiel1, A. Arruda1, L. Alvarez2, M. Aluja2, M. Lima1; to suffer from a more severe clinical condition than their parents. Pre- 1Department of Biology/CIRN, University of the Azores, Ponta Delgada, Por- natal testing for DM1 is still not available in Bashkortostan (Russia) as tugal, 2Department BABVE, Faculty of Sciences, Autonomous University of a routine procedure. The territory of Bashkortostan is 143.600 square Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. kilometers and the population is over 4 million people. We were in- Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has been extensively used in terested to find out how population (and their genes) migrates within population and evolutionary genetics studies. Thus, a valid estimate of our Republic and to predict the mean distance for migration of DM1 human mtDNA evolutionary rate is important in many research fields. mutation per generation. We performed a study of places of birth of We analysed a portion of the coding region of mtDNA between posi- inhabitants of Bashkortostan for calculating the coefficient of diffusion. tions 3230 and 4331 (tRNALeu, ND1 and tRNAIle genes), using individu- We analyzed 875 births in our Republic and calculated the distances als belonging to extended families from the Azores Islands (Portugal) between places of birth of parents and their children. Our mathemati- with the main aim of providing empirical estimations of the mutation cal model shows that mutation associated with DM1 in Bashkortostan rate of the coding region of mtDNA under different assumptions, and migrates for 120 km per generation. hence to better understand the mtDNA evolutionary process. Hetero- This research was supported by the grant for young scientists from the plasmy was detected in 6.5% (3/46) of the families analysed. In all of President of Russian Federation MD-4245.2006.7 the families the presence of mtDNA heteroplasmy resulted from three new point mutations, and no cases of insertions or deletions were P1198. Genetic Variation Controlling Cellular Traits related to identified. Major differences were found in the proportion and type of Down Syndrome: Reactive Oxygen Species heteroplasmy found in the genes studied when compared to those ob- H. Attar1, K. Bedard2, H. Prokisch3, T. Meitinger3, E. Wichmann4, D. Mehta5, E. tained in a previous report for the D-loop. Our empirical estimation of T. Dermitzakis6, K. H. Krause2, S. E. Antonarakis1; mtDNA coding region mutation rate, calculated taking into consider- 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva ation the sex of individuals carrying new mutations, the probability of Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Biology of Aging Laboratory, University intra-individual fixation of mutations present in heteroplasmy and, to Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland, 3GSF National Research Center, Institute of Hu- the possible extent, the effect of selection, is similar to that obtained man Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Institute of Epidemiology, GSF National using phylogenetic approaches. Based on our results, the discrepancy Research Center, Neuherberg, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, GSF previously reported between the human mtDNA coding region muta- National Research Center, Neuherberg, Germany, 6Population and Compara- tion rates observed along evolutionary timescales and estimations ob- tive Genomics, The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome tained using family pedigrees can be resolved when correcting for the Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. previously cited factors. Understanding the genetic basis of susceptibility to complex disorders is one of the major aims in medical genetics today. The availability of P1196. Allele frequencies for 150 genetic markers of oxidative the genome sequence and variation allows now to study quantitative stress and myocardial infarction in Lithuania cellular phenotypes closely related to clinical manifestations. Produc- K. Končiūtė1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2, R. Janavičius1,2, Z. A. Kučinskienė3, A. Timins- tion of reactive oxygen species (ROS) may be involved in a number of kas4; human disorders including Down Syndrome (DS). We measure ROS 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius production with an enzymatic assay in lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2The Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius Univer- from several human populations, either as families or unrelated indi- sity Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Department of Physiology, viduals, to assess the genetic architecture of this trait. Biochemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, There was substantial inter-individual variation in cell lines from un- Vilnius, Lithuania, 4Institute of Biotechnology, Vilnius, Lithuania. related CEPH individuals and heritability estimates were 45% as as- Myocardial infarction is a complex multifactorial and polygenic disor- sessed with 10 CEPH families. Genome-wide linkage analysis on der, therefore large scale association studies that examine many poly- these families showed 2 significant linkage signals on Hsa12 and morphisms simultaneously are required to allow reliable prediction of Hsa15. In a genome-wide association analysis, we measured ROS the genetic risk for myocardial infarction (MI). production in Caucasian HapMap individuals (N=58) and associated After the large scale analysis of literature and bioinformatic databases this trait to 2.2 million SNPs from HapMap. Results confirmed previ- 150 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 89 candidate genes, ously detected linkage signals; in addition 8 new significantly asso- mostly involved in oxidative stress regulation and oxidative homeosta- ciated loci were detected. We repeated a genome-wide association sis, were selected to develop a microarray for arrayed primer exten- analysis in an independent population of LCL of healthy German indi- sion (APEX) resequencing technology (Asper Biotech, Estonia). Most viduals (KORA project). Preliminary analysis of the first 87 individuals of the selected SNPs were in promoter regions or exons that might be confirmed the locus on Hsa15 and replicated two previously associ- expected to cause changes in the function or level of expression of the ated loci on Hsa4 and Hsa6. The comparison of ROS production of DS encoded protein. individuals (N=34) to either HapMap or KORA populations revealed a The group of 49 persons from Lithuania having offspring(s) with myo- significant ROS decrease. cardial infarction were initially analyzed to detect the allele frequen- Cellular phenotypes could be used as proxies for complex disorders, cies for the SNPs of the candidate genes in MI. Chi square analysis and the approach described here may contribute to the genetic dissec- was carried out to test deviations of genotype frequencies from Hardy- tion of these traits.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 01 P1199. Epidemiology of oculo-aruiculo-vertebral spectrum to use model free Lod score for linkage analysis. The statistical proper- (OAVS): a registry-based study on European population ties of different parametric linkage tests have been compared for small I. Barisic1, V. Tokic1, M. Loane2, F. Bianchi3, E. Calzolari4, E. Garne5, D. Welles- pedigrees, but remain unknown for large extended pedigrees. ley6, H. Dolk2; We compared model based and model free Lod score statistics for 1Childrens Univ. Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2EUROCAT Central Reg- multipoint linkage analysis in a large complex human pedigree with istry, University of Ulster, Newtonabbey, Co Antrim, Northern Ireland, United multiple loops. We simulated quantitative traits with dominant, addi- Kingdom, 3Unit of Epidemiology, CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, Pisa, tive or recessive major gene effect and genotypes for a set of five-al- Italy, 4Department of Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, Division of Medi- lelic markers. Three linkage statistics were compared: Lod, using true cal Genetics, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 5Epidemiology, University of underlying QTL model parameters; PLod, based on the estimations Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 6Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, of model parameters coming from complex segregation analysis and Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom. MFLod, estimating model parameters and the QTL position simultane- Oculoariculovertebral spectrum (OAVS) is a phenotypically and ge- ously. We used approximate likelihood calculation based on the loop netically heterogenous disorder grouping together different conditions breaking (Stricker et al., 1995). thought to be caused by impaired development of the first and second For all analyzed models average values of the test statistics and the branchial arches including Goldenhar syndrome, facioauriculoverte- portion of experiments in which the test was >3, were highest for bral syndrome, hemifacial microsomia, and otomandibular dysostosis. MFLod and lowest for the PLod. However, it is known that the dis- We present the results of the population-based epidemiological study tribution of multipoint Lod score under H depends on frequencies of 0 on the severe end of OAV spectrum. alleles, mode of inheritance, and so on. We analyzed type I errors for The data were extracted from the database of EUROCAT (European used linkage statistics and demonstrated that they are similar for Lod Surveillance of Congenital Anomalies), a large European network of and PLod, but higher for MFLod. Nevertheless linkage power calcu- birth defect registries that use the same epidemiological methodolo- lated on the base of empirical threshold level was higher for MFLod gies. Based on data collected during the 1980-2004 period, we found than for Plod or Lod. the prevalence of the severe OAVS cases to be 2.63/100 000 births or 1/38022. The most frequently associated congenital malforma- P1202. Combinatorial genetic analysis of physical performance tions were major ear malformations that accounted for 30% of cases in athletes (68/224). Vertebral anomalies were reported in 30% of cases (67/224), I. I. Ahmetov, I. V. Astratenkova, A. M. Druzhevskaya, V. A. Rogozkin; and cardiac defects were present in 25% of cases (57/224). Severe St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian central nervous system involvement was rare (17/224 - 8%). Prenatal Federation. ultrasound examination in the period 2000-2004 detected abnormali- It has been shown physiologically that for rowing at least 70% of the ties in 15% (16/111) of cases. Live born infants with OAVS have a high energy requirement comes from aerobic metabolism; the remainder first week survival (98.5%). Maternal and paternal ages do not seem comes from anaerobic sources. Accumulating evidence suggests that to be risk factors for OAVS. Almost 35% of patients, born after the 37th polymorphisms of ACE, ACTN3 and PPARA genes are strongly influ- week of gestation, weighed less than 2500 g. Among 272 patients, ence human physical performance. ACE I and PPARA G alleles are consanguinity of parents was registered in 5 cases. OAVS among sibs supposed to be favorable for endurance-oriented athletes, whilst ACE was found in 4 cases, while family history for OAVS was positive in ad- D, PPARA C and ACTN3 R alleles are thought to enhance power per- ditional 10 cases. No evidence of exposure to consistent teratogenic formance. The purpose of this study was to determine genotype and agents including maternal diabetes was noted. allele frequencies of ACE I/D, ACTN3 R577X and PPARA G/C poly- morphisms in rowers and to detect genotype combinations that are P1200. Bone mineral density variation related to islet amyloid prevalent in elite, sub-elite and non-elite rowers compared to controls. polypeptide (amylin) haplotypes in young and elderly women in 173 male and female Russian elite, sub-elite and non-elite rowers and Southern Sweden 842 controls were recruited for the study. Genotyping was carried out S. Gebre-Medhin1, P. Gerdhem2, M. Callreus2, K. Åkesson2, H. Luthman3; by RLFP. We found that frequencies of ACE D and PPARA C alleles 1Dept Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Or- were the lowest in elite level rowers compared to other rowers and con- thopedics, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden, 3Dept of Endocrinology, trols. ACTN3 X allele frequency tended to decrease with athletes’ im- Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden. provement of elite status. When all endurance-associated alleles were BACKGROUND AND AIM: The candidate hormone islet amyloid poly- combined, we determined common endurance alleles frequencies in peptide (IAPP or amylin) is predominantly expressed by the pancreatic different groups. The highest value of endurance alleles frequency was beta cells and cosecreted with insulin in response to food intake. Sev- observed in male elite (72.2%) and female sub-elite rowers (70.5%), eral studies have implied a physiological role for IAPP in bone remod- compared to male (66.0%) and female controls (66.1%), respectively. eling. For example, IAPP knockout mice exhibit increased numbers The prevalent combination of genotypes in all groups was ID-RX-GG. of bone-resorbing osteoclasts and develop an osteporosis-like pheno- The frequency of this combination was highest in elite rowers (28.6%); type in adulthood. However, the importance of IAPP in bone remodel- the lowest was found in controls (17.3%). ing in humans is not clear. In the present work we have investigated whether different IAPP haplotypes are associated with bone mineral P1203. POLG disease mutations in Europe, Australia, New density (BMD) in young women at peak bone mass and elderly wom- Zealand, and the USA explained by single ancient European en at high risk of fracture. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 1005 young founders women from the Malmö Peak-study (age 25±0.1 yrs, BMI 23.0±3.7 A. H. Hakonen1, G. Davidzon2, R. Salemi3, L. A. Bindoff4, G. Van Goethem5,6, kg/cm2) and 1044 elderly women (Malmö OPRA-study; age 75±0.1 S. DiMauro2, D. R. Thorburn3, A. Suomalainen1,7; yrs, BMI 26.2±4.2 kg/cm2) were recruited. The primary phenotype was 1Research Program of Molecular Neurology, Biomedicum-Helsinki, University BMD assessed by DXA. Body composition data, calcaneus ultrasound of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Neurology, Columbia University estimates and fracture data (OPRA-study) were also available. Short Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, 3Murdoch Children’s Research nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the vicinity of the IAPP gene Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital and Department of Paediatrics, University of were retrieved from the International HapMap Genotype Database and Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 4Department of Neurology, Institute of Clinical genotyped by PCR using the ABI SNP genotyping assay. RESULTS Medicine, University of Bergen & Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Nor- AND DISCUSSION: Obtained data and an update of this study will be way, 5Division of Neurology and the Neuromuscular Reference Center, Univer- presented. sity Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 6Department of Molecular Genetics, Neurogenetics group, VIB and University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 7De- P1201. Model free Lods for linkage analysis of large complex partment of Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. pedigrees Mutations in the catalytic subunit of the mitochondrial DNA polymerase I. V. Zorkoltseva, T. I. Axenovich; gamma (POLG) have been found to be an important cause of neu- Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. rological disease. We and collaborators have identified the POLG Parametric linkage analysis is a powerful tool for mapping genes for W748S mutation as the underlying cause of mitochondrial recessive complex traits. When mode of inheritance is unknown, it was suggested ataxia syndrome (MIRAS) and found it to be among the most common Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 02 genetic causes of inherited ataxia in Finland - with a carrier frequency Nomura S, Shouzu A, Omoto S et al. Genetic analysis of HLA, NA and in the general population of 1:125. The characteristic clinical features HPA typing in type 2 diabetes and ASO. Int J Immun. 2006, 33:117. in our patients included ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, dysarthria, mild myocardial infarction. Cardiovasc J S Afr. 2005, 16, 5:266. cognitive impairment, involuntary movements, psychiatric symptoms, Vinik AI, Erbas T, Park TS et al. Platelet dysfunction in type 2 diabetes. and epileptic seizures. Here, we show that the W748S mutation has Diabetes Care. 2001, 24, 8:1476. a common ancient founder for all the disease chromosomes in Aus- tralia, New Zealand, Finland, Norway, United Kingdom, and Belgium. P1206. ACTN and ACE genotypes in Greek elite athletes Furthermore, we show that a second common POLG mutation, A467T, I. D. Papadimitriou, C. Papadopoulos, A. Kouvatsi, C. Triantaphyllidis; also shows common European ancestry: patients from Australia, New Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece. Zealand, and the United States share a common haplotype with Eu- Only a few attempts have been made to shed light upon the influence ropean patients. These data of ancestral haplotypes indicate that the of genes in making an Olympic champion. The aim of our study is to POLG locus is quite stable and that the recessive W748S and A467T elucidate the genetic differences among a group of 101 elite Greek mutations have occurred once in history. They have effectively spread power-oriented track and field athletes and a random representative to populations of European descent with carrier frequencies up to 1% sample (181) of the Greek population by analyzing ACTN3 and ACE in several populations. Our data predict that these mutations are com- genotypes. Athletes were defined as elite and included to the sample mon causes of ataxia and Alpers disease in the Western world. if they had represented Greece at the international level. Standard molecular genetic methodologies were followed. Genotype and allele P1204. The analysis of the nuclear genes polymorphism’s in frequencies were compared between elite athletes and controls by the Kazakhs Chi-squared test using the statistical package GENEPOP V. 3.4. Pre- G. M. Berezina, G. S. Svyatova; liminary results for ACE locus indicated that the gene frequencies in Scientific Center of the obstetrics, gynecology and perinatology, Ministry of the Greek elite athletes are similar to other northern European popula- Public health care of Kazakhstan Republic, Almaty, Kazakhstan. tions. Furthermore, concerning the ACTN3 locus, it was showed that The polymorphic nuclear locus in human genome are the objective ge- ACTN3 genotype and allele frequencies in the top power-oriented ath- netic markers for the analysis of hereditary polymorphism of the mod- letes were statistically significantly different from those in the random ern human populations and evolution. A total of 324 unrelated healthy sample of the Greek population: the frequency of the RR ACTN3 geno- Kazakh people were studied. A portion of ACE, TPA25, PV92, eNOS3, type in power-oriented athletes vs. the general population was 47.94% APOA1, YaNBC148, YaNBC27 genes and deletion 32 b.p. of CCR5 vs. 25.97%. The difference was even more prominent for comparison gene from genomic DNA was amplified by PCR and analyzed on a 6% of the subgroup of sprinters to controls. The results suggest an overall polyacrylamide gel. Each fragment was classified according to geno- strong association between the presence of the RR genotype and elite types. Genotypes and allelic frequencies were revealed: for ACE gene power performance. Therefore, the ACTN3 gene might be used as a - 27,2% (II), 21,3% (DD), 51,5% (ID), 52,9% (I), 47,1% (D); for TRA25 molecular genetic marker to at least partially predict an athlete’s ability gene - 22,8% (II), 26,9% (DD), 50,3% (ID), 47,8% (I), 52,2% (D); for to achieve peak power and sprinting performance. PV92 - 26,2% (II), 23,5 (DD), 50,3% (ID), 51,4% (I), 48,6% (D); for eNOS3 gene - 1,9% (AA), 18,2% (AB), 79,9% (BB), 11,0% (A), 89,0% P1207. Patterns of genetic diversity of populations of the (B); for APOA1 gene - 58,6% (II), 14,8% (DD), 26,5% (ID), 71,9% (I), Caucasus, Volga-Ural, Central Asia, and Siberia 28,1% (D); for YaNBC148 gene - 8,3% (II), 46,9% (DD), 44,8% (ID), I. Kutuev, R. Khusainova, V. Akhmetova, E. Khusnutdinova; 30,6% (I), 69,4% (D); for YaNBC27 gene - 9,9% (II), 53,4% (DD), Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. 36,7% (ID), 28,2% (I), 71,8% (D); for CCR5 gene - 0,62% (D/DEL), A total of 1049 individuals from Volga-Ural region of Russia (Turkic 92,3%(N/N), 7,1% (N/DEL), 4,2% (D), 95,8% (N). The distribution of speaking Bashkirs, Tatars, and Finno-Ugric speaking Komis, Maris, the empirical genotypes and allelic frequencies and the indexes of het- Mordvins, and Udmurts), Central Asia (Turkic-speaking Kazakhs, erozygosity of all genes were completely conformed to theoretical de- Uzbeks, and Uighurs), the North Caucasus (Turkic speaking Kara- viation of Hardy-Weinberg (p>0,05), except for APOA1 gene (χ2=37,2; chays, Kumyks, Kuban Nogays, and Karanogays), and Siberia (Turkic p<0,001). speaking Yakuts, Tungusic speaking Evenks, and Mongolic speak- ing Kalmyks) were analyzed using eight Alu loci (ACE, ApoA1, PV92, P1205. Association between platelet GPIIb-IIIa polymorphism TPA25, NBC27, NBC102, NBC148, and NBC182). Genetic differen- (PlA1/A2) and atherosclerosis obliterans in diabetes mellitus tiation in various regions of the world was fairly substantial. Basing type 2 on 8 Alu loci data Gst value for the world dataset was 0.089. Geo- L. Pina-Cabral, V. Carvalhais, B. Mesquita, L. Avidos, M. Portela, A. Almeida- graphic divide between Europe and Asia, e.g. the Ural Mountains and Dias, B. Criado; the Caspian Sea, can also be considered as a genetic boundary. The CESPU, Vila Nova de Famalicão, Portugal. North Caucasus populations demonstrated genetic pattern which is Epidemiologic studies show that thromboembolic diseases are the re- very close to Near East populations. European populations reflect nei- sult of complex interactions between genetic factors and the chronic ther geographic nor linguistic relationships. The data indicates that the influence of the environment. Diseases like diabetes may worsen this populations of the two boundary regions between Europe and Asia, picture and enhance the appearance of thromboembolic diseases. the Volga-Ural region of Russia, and populations of the North Cauca- Thus, isquemic events like atherosclerosis obliterans are among the sus are more similar to European than to Asian populations. Siberian major causes of morbidity and mortality in patients with diabetes mel- and Central Asian populations are genetically closely related to each litus type 2. Recent studies suggest that platelet polymorphisms may other. The fact that populations of the four regions analyzed fit the act like risk factors for the development of such events. genetic variation throughout Eurasia attests that they were involved The aim of this work is to study the association between platelet GPIIb- in the same major demographic processes that took place within the IIIa polymorphism PlA1/A2 and atherosclerosis obliterans in patients continent no matter what genetic differences or similarities the popula- with diabetes mellitus, type 2. tions demonstrate. Allelic frequencies will be studied in 3 different groups. 1 group of pa- tients with diabetes that suffer isquemic events, 1 group of patients P1208. Regional differences in the genetic variability of Finno- with diabetes that did not suffer isquemic events and 1 normal group. Ugric speaking Komi populations Relationship between allelic frequencies and clinicopathologic vari- D. A. Verbenko, A. V. Khrunin, S. A. Limborska; ables will also be studied. Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. Results and discussion of the results aren’t available yet. However, The Komi (Komi-Zyryan) people are one of the most numerous ethnic results of, at least, 20 samples for each group will be accessible at the groups belonging to the Finno-Ugric linguistic community. They occupy time of the congress. an extensive territory in north Russia to the west of the Ural Mountains, Mikkelsson J, Pérola M, Laippala P et al. Glycoprotein IIIa PI(A) poly- in the northeast of the East European Plain. This is an area of long-term morphism and sudden cardiac death. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000, 36:13. interactions between Europeans and North Asians. Genetic variability Nolan RD, Vinik AI. Pathogenesis of platelet dysfunction in diabetes. was evaluated in two geographically distinct populations, the Izhemski Eds. Philadelphia, Lippincott-Raven. 1996, 832. and Priluzski Komi. We searched for polymorphisms of the TP53 gene Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 0 (a 16-bp duplication in intron 3 and three RFLPs: for Bsh1236I at co- selling and prenatal testing which is regularly demanded by Danish don 72, for MspI in intron 6 and for BamHI in the 3´ flanking region) and XLRP carriers. The proportion of RP2-mediated XLRP in the Danish for variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphisms of locus population is higher and the proportion of RPGR-ORF15 is lower than D1S80 and of the 3´ untranslated region of the gene for apolipoprotein reported in other studies. Thus, strategies for diagnostic procedures B (ApoB). Some data from our previous studies of TP53, 3´ApoB and should take into account the population-specific mutation spectrum. D1S80 variability were involved in the comparison of Komi with other Eastern European populations. Multidimensional scaling analysis of P1211. Genomic sequence analysis reveals a complex genetic distances was used for the evaluation of genetic relationships segmental duplication superstructure on human chromosome between populations. The results revealed some affinity between Pri- 17q arm luzski Komi and Eastern Slavonic populations, and significant segre- V. Leppä1,2, D. Chen3, T. Miettinen2, A. Palotie2,4, L. Peltonen1,4, J. Saarela1; gation of Izhemski Komi from other ethnic groups studied. The unique 1National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2Finnish Genome Center, genetic features of Izhemski Komi may have been determined by their University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Human Genetics, David ethnogenesis or the pressure of environmental factors, such as special Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4The nutrition and adaptation to extreme climatic conditions. Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States. Human chromosome 17 is associated with several types of cancer and P1209. Mapping quantitative trait loci (QTL): Is it worth investing genetic diseases, such as neurofibromatosis and breast cancer. Chro- in repeated phenotype measurements to improve genotype- mosomal instability is one underlying cause of these disease mani- phenotype correlations? festations. A major mechanism resulting in chromosomal instability is I. Kolcic1, O. Polasek1, A. Vorko-Jovic1, Z. Biloglav1, L. Zgaga1, I. Rudan2; the non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR). It has been shown 1Faculty of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Edinburgh, United that the chromosome 17 is enriched with inter- and intra-chromosomal Kingdom. segmental duplications. Aim. In any attempt to identify alleles associated with human quantita- We conducted a genome-wide sequence alignment using expressed tive traits (QT), the investigators will use measurements of phenotype transcripts mapping within the previously identified duplicated do- of interest in the recruited set of examinees and their individual geno- mains to determine the full extent and architecture of the duplicated types. The power of any association study to detect human QTL will segments on chromosome 17q. This analysis identified a duplication rapidly diminish if initial phenotype measurements are not accurate superstructure (SDS) on 17q arm, consisting of 13 discrete domains, and repeatable. which share sequence homology. A similar structure was found on the Materials and methods. We investigated the 14 QT’s in a sample of syntenic chimpanzee chromosome. people from an isolated population of Croatian island of Vis. The mea- Analysis of the genomic sequences of the duplication domains re- surements were performed by the same field crew using the same vealed the most highly copied sequences to be retrotransposable methods in February 2002 and May 2003, in total of 74 examinees. sequence elements. Twelve retrotransposable mRNAs and their se- Phenotypic measurements were analyzed with paired parametric or quence copies were found almost exclusively within the SDS, both non-parametric statistical tests, depending on the data distributions. in the human 17q and the chimpanzee 19q. The highest numbers of Results. Most traits exhibited significant differences between two sequence alignments were observed with two transcripts, AK125814 measurements: urate (P=0.004; paired t-test), systolic blood pressure and AK125932. Interestingly, the AK125814 transcript was found to be (P<0.001), diastolic blood pressure (P=0.001), creatinine (P=0.001), expressed in 5/6 healthy human and two chimpanzee PBMC samples. cholesterol (P<0.001), triglycerides (P=0.018), HDL (P=0.039), LDL Sequencing of the rt-PCR products showed that AK125814 was pref- (P<0.001), and glucose (P=0.002; all Wilcoxon). Only three traits did erentially expressed from one of the duplicated locations, which varied not exhibit significant differences; height (P=0.319), weight (P=0.055), between individuals. and body mass index (P=0.784; all paired t-test). The complex duplication architecture on 17q may predispose to chro- Conclusion. Despite of assumed reduced genotypic and environmen- mosomal instability via NAHR and possibly lead to disease causing tal variance in an isolated island population, measuring a single phe- copy number variation. The potential functional role of the actively notypic value does not seem to be very reliable method for mapping transcribed, SDS-associated retrotransposable elements is an intrigu- QTLs. This study raises the issue of whether increasing sample size or ing question. repeating (some) phenotypic measurements is better research option in budget-restrained settings. P1212. Segregation patterns of CAG repeats in the MJD locus: a study in normal families from the Azores Islands (Portugal) P1210. A population-based epidemiological and genetic study of C. Bettencourt1, R. N. Fialho2, R. Montiel1, C. Santos1, P. Maciel3, J. Bruges- X-linked retinitis pigmentosa Armas2, M. Lima1; H. Prokisch1,2, M. Hartig1, R. Hellinger1, T. Meitinger1,2, T. Rosenberg3; 1Department of Biology/CIRN, University of the Azores, Ponta Delgada - 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich, München, Ger- Azores, Portugal, 2Specialized Service of Epidemiology and Molecular Biology many, 2Institute of Human Genetics, GSF-National Research Center, Munich, (SEEBMO), Hospital of Santo Espirito, Angra do Heroismo - Azores, Portugal, Germany, 3Gordon Norrie Centre for Genetic Eye Diseases, National Eye Clinic 3Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sci- for the Visually Impaired, Hellerup, Denmark. ences, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal. PURPOSE: To perform a nation-wide elucidation of the prevalence Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is an autosomal dominant neurode- and the mutation spectrum in X-linked Retinitis pigmentosa (XLRP), generative disorder of late onset, caused by an expansion of a CAG and to make genotype-phenotype comparisons. repeat motif in the coding region of ATXN3 gene. In the Azores, MJD METHODS: Our study comprised 96 affected males and 150 female reaches the highest worldwide prevalence (1/103). Previous studies carriers from 42 families representing all identified XLRP individuals in devoted to segregation ratio distortion (SRD) in the MJD locus are the Danish population (5.4 million inhabitants). RPGR and RP2 were controversial both in patients and in normal individuals. The aim of screened for mutations, and the medical files of the patients were scru- this work is to investigate the existence of SRD upon transmission of tinised and phenotype data extracted. wild-type MJD alleles, in order to contribute for the understanding of RESULTS: Prevalence of affected males was estimated to be 1:24.500 the dynamics of triplet repeat loci. The number of the CAG repeats at and 1:18.000 of female carriers. Cumulated life-risks for developing the ATXN3 gene was determined for 69 normal Azorean sibships (total XLRP between 0.22 and 0.59 per 10,000 males were calculated. Mo- of 364 transmissions). Sixteen allelic variants were observed, varying lecular analysis of RP2 and RPGR uncovered 28 different mutations in between 14 and 39 repeats. Alleles with 23 and 14 repeats were the 33 of 34 index cases analysed. 12 patients carried a mutation in RP2, most frequent, in agreement with previous population studies. From 12 in exons 1-14 and 9 in ORF15 of RPGR. Males with RP2 mutations segregation analysis, our data suggest the occurrence of SRD, with tended to have higher degrees of myopia, lower visual acuities, and distortion towards the transmission of the smaller alleles in paternal better preserved visual fields than males with RPGR mutations at the (p=0.037), but not in maternal transmissions. Furthermore, the differ- same age. ence in the number of repeats between the two alleles that constitute CONCLUSIONS: A very high mutation detection rate in familial cases the transmitters’ genotype (A-A ), seems to have an effect on this dis- L S makes genetic testing a highly valuable clinical tool for genetic coun- tortion. With the exception of cases with A-A =1 or A-A ≤2, the ten- L S L SNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 0 dency is for preferential transmission of the smaller allele or absence M35) except of African L2a haplogroup (2.1 %), with the most frequent of preference. Excluding such cases, SRD becomes significant in both haplogroups M (24.4 %), H (22.3 %), and I1 (16.6 %). For Y-chromo- paternal and maternal transmissions. This evidence suggests that the somal DNA analysis haplogroup H1 of Indian origin has been found as transmitters’ genotypic composition may act as a confounding factor in most common (35.8 %). Other common haplogroups included E3b1 studies of SRD for wild-type MJD alleles. (13.7 %), J2 (18.9 %), R1a (13.2 %), and I (10 %), less frequent hap- logroups were R1b3, R2, J1, G, and N. Variability of haplogroups and P1213. Analysis of the population heterogeneity in East Slovakia diversity found were lower comparing to European populations. Co- using fifteen STR markers. alescence times calculated using HVS1 and 17 Y-chromosomal STR J. Bernasovská, I. Bernasovský, I. Boroňová, E. Petrejčíková; loci for paternal (H1 - 3035 ± 1115 YBP), and maternal (M5 - 3100 ± Institute of Biology, FHPV, University of Presov, Presov, Slovakia. 1400 YBP) lineages of probable south-Asian origin indicated earlier The presented study has shown that population analyses in East Slo- isolation within indigenous inhabitants of Indian subcontinent. AMOVA vakia can be of great importance from the viewpoint of the examination using haplogroup frequencies of analyzed European Romanies popu- of population differentiation. This study provides additional population lations suggested recent gene flow and low differentiation of Roma genetic data of the four East Slovakian populations (Slovak Cauca- subpopulations. sians, Romanies from region Spiš, Olachian Romanies and Romanies Supported by grant VEGA 1/3245/06. called Labances) on the thirteen CODIS core STR loci with the highest proportion in the case of the Slovak population-Romanies Labances P1216. DHCR7 mutation carrier rates in Europeans - Significance pair (all analysed 15 loci) and with the lowest portion in the Romanies for the Prevalence of the Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome from the Spiš region-Romanies Labances pair (4 out of 15 loci). In ad- M. Witsch-Baumgartner1, J. Bertranpetit2, E. Bieth3, X. Estivill4, P. Gasparini5, dition, considerable heterogeneity was detected between the Romany M. Krajewska-Walasek6, D. Schönitzer7, E. Seemanova8, K. Sperling9, M. Syr- populations where ten out of fifteen STR markers showed significant rou10, P. Talmud11, G. Utermann1, B. Wollnik12; differences in the allele frequency distributions. The high F values 1Dep for Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck, ST detected between ethnic groups with different origin or between iso- Austria, 2Biologia Evolutiva, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, lated populations can be explained the diverse genetic history and the 3Hopital Purpan, Service de Génétique médicale, Toulouse, France, 4Genes isolation of the Slovakian subpopulations. and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 5Unit of Medical Genetics, Department of Reproductive Science and Development, P1214. A case control study: no association between SLC6A3 Instituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico-Burlo Garofalo, University (DAT1) with schizophrenia of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Children’s Memorial A. M. Foroughmand, H. Galehdari, A. Fathian, B. Andashti, H. A. Hosseini; Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 7Central Institute for Blood Transfusion and Shahid chamran university, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. Immunological Department, General Hospital and University Clinics Innsbruck, According to the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia‘ schizophrenia Innsbruck, Austria, 8Oddeleni klinicke genetiky Ustavu biologie a lekarske ge- is associated with increased activity in dopaminergic neurons. Dys- netiky 2. LF UK, Prague, Czech Republic, 9Institut fur Humangenetik, Charite, function of central dopaminergic neurotransmission has been suggest- Universitatsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 10Genetics Unit, Department of General ed to play an important role in the etiology of schizophrenia. Biology, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 11Division of Cardiovascular The Na+_Cl- dependent dopamine transporter (DAT1) is a central regu- Genetics, Department of Medicine, Royal Free and University College Medical lator of the time and course and synaptic concentration of released School, London, United Kingdom, 12Center for Molecular medicine Cologne, dopamine by rapid reuptake of dopamine into synaptic terminals and Institute of Human genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. mediating synaptic re accumulation of dopamine. In this study we Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome (SLOS, MIM270400) is a mental retarda- thought to determine the possible association between the SLC6A3 tion and malformation syndrome with variable clinical severity. SLOS gene (DAT1) core promoter diallelic polymorphic site -67 A/T and is caused by mutations in the delta7sterol-reductase gene (DHCR7, schizophrenia in western south of Iran.We use the case control study E.C.1.3.1.21), which impairs cholesterol biosynthesis. to determine possible association between -67A/T SNP and schizo- The prevalence of SLOS has been estimated to range from 1:20.000 phrenia. Fifty unrelated male patient affected with schizophrenia were to 1:60.000 in European populations. Mutational spectra analysed in recruited for the study from golestsn and salamat hospitals in Ahwaz. SLOS patients were different across populations with frequency maxi- Also fifty unrelated male controls were randomly selected as control ma of common mutations in East-Europe (p.W151X, p.V326L), North- group. Subsequently the allele and genotype frequencies of the poly- West-Europe (g.IVS8-1G>C), and South-Europe (p.T93M). morphism in two groups were studied. The genotype frequencies in In order to compare prevalence and incidence of SLOS we estimated the patient group were as follows: AA 68%, AT 24% and TT 8% versus carrier frequencies of most common DHCR7 mutations in European the genotype frequencies in the control group were AA 78%, AT 10% Populations. and TT 12%. Based on this data alleiic frequency were 83% for A, 17% Nearly 8.000 chromosomes of Austrian, British, Czech, French, Ger- for T in control group and 80% for A, 20% in patient group. Accord- man, Greek, Italian, Polish, Spanish and Turkish origin were screened ing to this data and x2 test there is no association between DAT1 and for the frequencies of the common mutations c.IVS8-1G>C, p.W151X, schizophrenia. and p.T93M. For the null mutations c.IVS8-1G>C and p.W151X a carrier frequency P1215. Tracing the Origins of Romanies in Central Europe: of about 1:60 was found, varying from 1:30 (Turkey) to 1:200 (Spain). preliminary mitochondrial and Y chromosomal data of Romani These two null mutations plus the missense mutation p.T93M yield a populations in Slovakia carrier rate of 1 in 54 in Europeans. This results in an expected inci- M. Baldovic1, A. Ficek1, G. Minarik1, H. Polakova2, E. Ferakova1, T. Kivisild3, E. dence for SLOS of 1:2.940 Europeans, varying from 1:1500 (Austria) Metspalu3, V. Ferak1, R. Villems3, L. Kadasi1,2; to 1:9217 (Spain). 1Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius Uni- The discrepancy between the expected incidence and the prevalence versity, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, is most likely due to neonatal and infancy death of the most severely SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of Evolutionary Biology, University of affected children with SLOS and ascertainment bias of mild and atypi- Tartu and Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. cal cases. SLOS syndrome may be responsible for a high number of Since many linguistic and genetic studies placed origin of Romanies to miscarriages. Indian subcontinent, some attempts have been made to characterize Thanks to all collaborators for population DNAs. mitochondrial and Y-chromosomal DNA variability, date exodus from homeland, trace migration routes, and estimate source and extent of P1217. Frequencies of spinocerebellar ataxia subtypes support non-Indian component within Roma populations. In order to contribute admixture with Indian population in Thailand completing the outlined picture we analyzed 193 samples from Slovak T. Sura1, J. Eu-ahsunthornwattana1, S. Youngcharoen1, M. Busabaratana1, D. Romani individuals for mitochondrial control and coding region mark- Dejsuphong1, O. Trachoo1, S. Theerasasawat1, C. Noparutchanodom2, S. Tuly- ers as well as for Y-chromosomal SNP and STR markers. The mtDNA adachanon1; haplotypes detected in this sample fall into the common Eurasian 1Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand, 2Ratchaburi Hospital, Ratchaburi, mitochondrial haplogroups (H, U, K, J1, X, I, W, HV, T, C, M5, and Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 0 Thailand. from a common stock in the remote past. However, this intriguing as- Background: While there are strong genetic evidences linking the pect of genetic relationship between the Tibeto-Burman and Austro- population in the Indochina peninsula with the Chinese, this was not Asiatic speaking populations of India is little investigated and warrants the case with the Indians despite the proximity of the region to both further discussion through molecular genetics. populations. Using the heterogeneity of the spinocerebellar ataxias, In this regard, we analyzed 38 biallelic and 20 short tandem repeat a group of neurological disorders with different subtype frequencies polymorphisms on the Y-chromosome in 293 male individuals of 22 among different populations, we looked for the evidence supporting different populations belonging to Tibeto-Burman (12) and Austro- relationship between the Thai population and both the Chinese and Asiatic (10) linguistic families, inhabiting northeastern, eastern and Indian populations. central regions. Among the 14 haplogroups observed, subclades of Methods: We searched for spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) type 1, SCA3 haplogroup O were predominant (~83.96%) of which O2a, showing the and SCA6 mutations in 340 patients from 182 families, in which at least highest frequency of ~ 55%, was the major common subclade present one person had a clinical diagnosis of SCA, using GeneScan analysis. in both Tibeto-Burman (41.3%) and in Austro-Asiatic (73%) popula- We analysed the relative frequencies of SCAs subtypes on a family tions. AMOVA results indicated a higher degree of genetic differentia- basis, and compared these to the data in the related populations. tion (31.95%) among populations within the two linguistic groups than Results: SCA3 was the commonest, with a relative frequency of 17.0% among the two groups (13.10%). The neighbor-joining tree and the (Agresti-Coull 95% C.I.: 12.2%-23.2%), followed by SCA1 at 10.4% PCA plot shows clustering of some Austro-Asiatic populations (mainly (6.7%-15.8%). SCA6 was found in three families, with a relative fre- from Jharkhand) with few Tibeto- Burman populations from Arunachal quency of 1.6% (0.3%-5.0%). When compared to the related popula- Pradesh and Mizoram suggesting possible shared common ancestry tions, the Thai SCA3 frequency was less than that of the Chinese while of some Tibeto-Burman with a few of the Austro-Asiatic populations. higher than that in most of the Indian studies. The reverse is true for STRUCTURE analysis is also in congruence with the genetic com- the SCA1. A similar study in Singapore, where the pattern of popula- monality between the studied linguistic groups. To get further insight tion admixture was clear, also showed somewhat similar results, al- into the issue, a median-joining network was constructed based on the though more inclined toward the Indians. haplotypes that fall into haplogroup O2a and the time of divergence for Conclusion: Our results supported some degree of admixture with the the haplogroup was also estimated. Indians in Thai population, and should encourage further study in the area. P1220. Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) pharmacogenetics: genotype-phenotype comparison and P1218. Population study at fifteen short tandem repeat loci in haplotype analysis in Estonian population the representative sample of Bosnia and Herzegovina residents R. Tamm1, K. Oselin2, K. Kallassalu1, K. Anier2, R. Magi1, A. Metspalu3; - contemporary data 1IMCB, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pharmacology, Tartu, Estonia, D. Marjanovic1,2, A. Durmic-Pasic1, N. Pjanic1, N. Bakal1, L. Kovacevic1, V. 3IMCB,EBC, Tartu, Estonia. Skaro2, P. Projic2, S. Haveric1, K. Bajrovic1, R. Hadziselimovic1, D. Primorac3, Thiopurine methyltrasferase (TPMT) is a cytoplasmic enzyme catalys- N. Pojskic1; ing the S - methylation of thiopurine drugs. Thiopurines exert cytotox- 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and icity after metabolism to thioguanine nucleotides and they are turned Herzegovina, 2Center for Integrative Genomics, Molecular Diagnostics, Cell and into inactive metabolites by TPMT. To date, at least 23 single nucleo- Gene Therapy, “Rudjer Boskovic” Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Medical School at tide polymorphisms/mutations have been reported in TPMT gene, 22 Osijek University, Osijek, Croatia. of them are or may be associated with low enzyme activity. In our previous population studies of B&H human population, we used The aim of the present study was to measure erythrocyte TPMT ac- 17 autosomal and 12 Y-chromosomal STR loci, as well as 28 NRY tivity in Estonian population, to genotype Estonian population using bi-allelic markers to generate referent database. Wishing to test our PCR-RFLP method for known alleles (TPMT*2, *3A, *3B, *3C, *3D, database in order to obtain specific results in various DNA analysis, we *8) and to sequence the whole coding region of TPMT (exons 3-10) have decided to analysis additional individuals, firstly at fifteen autoso- to find novel sequence variants. Of 253 healthy subjects, 15 were het- mal STR loci (D3S1358, TH01, D21S11, D18S51, Penta E, D5S818, erozygous for TPMT*1/*3A (3%), two for TPMT*1/*3C (0.4%) and two D13S317, D7S820, D16S539, CSF1PO, Penta D, vWA, D8S1179, for TPMT*1/*2 (0.4%). No subjects were detected with TPMT*3B, *3D TPOX, FGA). Therefore, we have tested additional group of 100 un- and *8. Several others previously described intronic and exon muta- related healthy individuals born in B&H. Qiagen DnaeasyTM Tissue Kit tions/polymorphisms were found via sequencing. Three novel muta- was used for DNA extraction from buccal swabs and bloodstains and tions T30A in exon 3, A10G in intron 3 and A145G in intron 10 were PowerPlex 16® System for amplification and detection. The total vol- detected. Association and haplotype analysis was carried out to find ume of PCR reaction was 5μl and PCR amplifications were carried SNP differences between low (enzyme activity £58.8 ng/ml/h), inter- out in PE GeneAmp PCR System Thermal Cycler. Electrophoresis of mediate and high (enzyme activity ³130 ng/ml/h) metabolizers. Four the amplification products was preformed on an ABI PRISM 310 ge- SNPs were present together (T114A, T94A, G460A, A719G) and were netic analyzer. The raw data were compiled and analyzed using Gen- more significantly (P < 0.001) represented in low metabolizers com- emapper® v3.2. Deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, observed pared to intermediate and high ones. and expected heterozygosity, power of discrimination and power of According to our study several markers predict low enzyme activity, but exclusion were calculated. Statistical differences between the new any specific markers were not correlated with high enzyme activity. set of data and the data at same loci published earlier (based on 100 tested individuals) indicated the advantage of using recently obtained P1221. Analysis of three Microsatellite Markers (vWA31A, frequencies, especially as it pertains to the forensic-genetic statistical CSF1PO and TPOX) of two Romanian population groups and analysis. In addition, we compared B&H data with the data obtained their genetic relationships to European populations from geographically closer European populations. The results of this A. Rodewald1, A. Kroll1, S. Mueler-Scholtz1, A. Lungeanu2, G. Cardos2,3, D. study will be used as guidelines in additional improving of investigation Banica4; of recent B&H human populations, initiated in our previous studies. 1Department of Human Biology, Univ. Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 2”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 3Faculty of Biology, University P1219. Possible common origin for the Tibeto-Burman and of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 4”Marius Nasta” Institute of Pulmonary Dis- Austro-Asiatic speaking populations of India: a Y-chromosome eases, Bucharest, Romania. study In this research 3 different DNA-polymorphisms (Microsatellites: S. Krithika1, A. Singh2, S. Sahoo2, R. Trivedi2, V. K. Kashyap3, T. S. Vasulu1; vWA31A, CSF1PO and TPOX) have been detected and analysed in a 1Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India, 2National DNA Analysis Centre, sample of 110 individuals from Prahova Valley (Carpathian Mountains) Central Forensic Science Laboratory, Kolkata, India, 3National Institute of Bio- as well as in a sample of 200 individuals from the Romanian capital, logicals, Noida, India. Bucharest. Further, we investigated the extent of genetic influences of The geographic contiguity and the morphological similarity of the Ti- European neighbour populations on the Romanian genetic pool. beto-Burman speaking populations with the Austro-Asiatic speaking The results reveal that there were not any significant differences in groups of India provide hints for the origin of the two linguistic families the allele frequencies in the three Microsatellite markers from the pan-Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 0 mictic population of Bucharest and the partial isolated population from tion G→A at position -190 5’ to the β-globin gene and a previously Prahova Valley. described β0-thalassemia allele frame shift codon 6 (-A). The novel Genetic distance analysis showed a close genetic relationship with mutation was found to be associated with the Mediterranean β haplo- Italian population as well as with Greek population groups. type IX [- + - + + + +]. Historically this could be the result of intense trading activities of Thra- The mother, who has the -190 G→A mutation as the sole abnormality cian tribal groups and Greek population groups who established trad- of the β-globin gene, had normal hemoglobin, red blood cell indices ing colonies at the west coast of the Black Sea (actually East-Romania) and HbA levels. Thus the -190 G→A mutation is silent. 2 during the 7th- 8th century. The most of the Italian influence is thought The possibility that the novel -190 G→A substitution is a simple poly- to be the result of the occupation of the Danube region during the time morphism in the β-globin gene was considered, but is unlikely given its of the Romanian Empire. A small Slavic influence was also found. The presence in a region (-50 to -300) where other promoter elements im- genetic distance between Romanian and German, Croatian, as well as portant for differential control of gene expression have been described Hungarian populations were more significant. and the absence of this substitution in 80 other normal chromosomes. The results can also be used for paternity and forensic analyses in the Although functional tests of the cloned gene in suitable expression as- Romanian population. says will be needed to prove that the change at position -190 is a muta- tion rather than a simple polymorphism. P1222. Beta Thalassemia in Iran: Genetic admixture, new theories for origin and migration of some mutations P1224. Allele frequencies of two novel tandem repeat M. M. Banoei, M. Houshmand, M. Shafa Sharait Panahi; polymorphism of the 5’-untranslate region of the human CYP2E1 National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic gene Republic of Iran. C. Gräbsch, O. Herbarth, H. E. Wichmann, U. Krämer, M. Bauer, the LISA Background: Iran as one of the Middle East country consists of mul- study group; tiethnic groups that have been influenced by various invasions and Helmoltz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Department for Human migration throughout history. In the eastern Mediterranean region, Iran Exposure Research and Epidemiology, Leipzig, Germany. is one of the major centers for the prevalence of β- Thalassemia. This The ethanol inducible human cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1) plays review is an attempt to study the origin of β- Thalassemia mutations in a key role in the metabolic activation of procarcinogens like aniline, different parts of Iran. vinyl chloride as well as acryl amide. CYP2E1 activity depends on Methods: Through review and discussion of research literature and inter-individual genetic polymorphisms as well as on interactions at referred patients to our center, we compared the frequencies of β - translational level. Homozygotes for CYP2E1*1D allele have got an globin mutations in different regions of Iran with those derived from increased enzyme activity compared to the CYP2E1*1C allele. neighboring countries. In order to examine the relationship between pollutant -induced clinical Results: The analysis provided evidence of new theories about the outcomes and genetic polymorphisms 1003 Caucasians of the LISA origin and migration of some mutations like -25bp del, CD36/37, CD30 epidemiological study were genotyped for enzymes of biotransforma- and introduction of IVSI-5 to outside, as well as, the remarkable ge- tion. Regarding CYP2E1, a repeat in the 5’-untranslated region at -2178 netic classification of the Iranian people and ethnic groups. to -1945 bp has been analyzed in more detail by allele specific PCR. Conclusions: This review represents reflection of historic events due Besides the expected alleles CYP2E1*1A (5 repeats), CYP2E1*1C (6 to genetic admixture and roles of invasions and migrations in this phe- repeats, wt) and CYP2E1*1D (8 repeats) with a frequency of 0.4%, nomenon. Also distribution of β- globin gene mutations in Iran showed 97.4% and 2.1%, two novel alleles could be described by the present high heterogeneity among the population in comparison with other work. population that this heterogeneity has been derived originally from a The first novel allele (Acc-No. AM503355) contains 7 repeats and ap- population with an ethnic Aryan background. pears with a frequency of 0.05%. This allele is heterozygous expressed with the CYP2E1*1C. P1223. A Novel β-thalassemia mutation in the distal promoter of The second novel allele contains 8 repeats and exclusively appears the β-globin gene concomitantly with the CYP2E1*1D allele (frequency 2.1%), which is I. Agouti1, C. Badens2, F. Sayah1, A. Barrakat1, M. Bennani1; heterozygous expressed mainly with the CYP2E1*1C or rarely with 1laboratoire de Biologie Appliquée, Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, Tan- the CYP2E1*1A allele. At the moment it is not clear whether the novel ger, Morocco, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital de d’Enfant de la polymorphisms of the 5’-flanking region alter the CYP2E1 expression. Timone, Marseille, France. A patient with β-thalassemia intermedia of Moroccan descent was found to be compound heterozygous for a novel β-thalassemia muta-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 Po08. Genomics, technology, bioinformatics results. AssociationDB allows interactive graphical exploration of the results integrating related gene information, tissue-specific expression P1225. Human APP overexpression causes neurodegeneration and microRNAs. Association results can be imported from other pro- and synaptic loss in neural cells in transgenic Drosophila. grams or get calculated within the database. S. Sarantseva1, O. Bolshakova1, S. Timoshenko1, M. Vitek2, A. Schwarzman1,3; Automated collection and integration of gene information from multiple 1Petersburg Institute of Nuclear Physics Russian Academy of Sciences, Gatchi- databases: The user can enter a region of interest or a list of genes. na, Russian Federation, 2Division of Neurology, Duke University Medical Cen- OMIM reports, expression, SNPs etc. are displayed for all candidate ter, Durham, NC, United States, 3Institute for Experimental Medicine, Russian genes at once on a single HTML page or PDF. Results are ready to be Academy of Medical Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. read and discussed with a cup of coffee. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder character- Automated generation of primer sequences for in situ probes: This pro- ized by the loss of neocortical and hippocampal synapses that pre- gram creates primers for either transcript-specific or universal probes cedes amyloidosis and neurodegeneration and closely correlates with and checks specificity by BLAST. memory impairment. Mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) cause familial AD and result in the increased production of amyloid-β- P1228. “VALAPODYN: Validated Predictive Dynamic Model protein (Aβ). However, it is not still clear how Aβ contributes to synaptic of Complex Intracellular Pathways Related to Cell Death and abnormalities in AD. Survival.” In our study, transgenic Drosophila melanogaster was established as A. Depaulis1, E. Vafiadaki2, P. Jackers3, D. A. Arvanitis2, O. Kel-Margoulis4, E. a model to analyze AD pathology caused by APP and Aβ. Drosophila Wingender4, T. Vujasinovic5, D. Greenberg6, H. Soreq6, E. De Pauw3, J. B. Du- has α- and γ-secretases and does not have activity of β-secretase mas Milne Edwards5, D. Sanoudou2; (BACE). Therefore, flies do not generate Aβ. We expected that overex- 1Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale, Grenoble, France, pression of human APP in neural tissues could induces specific effects 2Foundation for Biomedical Research, Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, of APP independently from Aβ secretion. In contrary, double transgenic 3University of Liege, Liege, Belgium, 4Biobase, GmbH, Wolfenbuettel, Germany, flies expressing human APP and BACE should generate Aβ and Aβ- 5HELIOS, Paris, France, 6Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. specific phenotypes. To induce expression of APP in neural cells, we VALAPODYN is a research network funded by the European Commis- used elav-GAL4c155 driver and UAS-APP695 expressing system. As sion (6th Framework Program) which is developing an original systems expected, only BACE-containing lines displayed Aβ. Orexpression of biology approach focused on the development of multidisciplinary APP resulted in morphological changes and formation of abnormal be- functional genomics related to complex biological processes and cel- havioral fly phenotypes independently from Aβ generation . Most these lular networks. The aim is to generate an innovative approach to model phenotypes has been characterized by progressive neurodegenera- the dynamics of molecular interaction networks (MIN) in relation to cell tion with numerous vacuoles in the cortex and neuropil and loss of death and survival to detect new therapeutic targets to treat human synaptic density detected by decreased accumulation of presynaptic brain diseases. The project consists of fundamental genomics re- protein synaptotagmin in mushroom bodies. Thus, we observed a search which is integrating statistical data analysis with real biological classical AD pathology in the absence of Aβ. We suggest that impair- data in order to functionally annotate genes and proteins. Specialized ment of cellular functions of APP and secretion of neurotoxic forms of genomics and proteomics databases for MIN modeling are being used Aβ may independently contribute to the pathogenesis of AD. along with leading microarray and proteomics platform systems to in- vestigate protein-protein interactions and regulation networks. This will P1226. Performance Comparison of BigDye® XTerminator™ Kit & help to identify and validate biological targets in complex intracellular Conventional DNA Sequencing Purification Methods pathways to cure multifactorial diseases. Dynamic modeling specifi- S. Pistacchi, G. Amparo, A. Wilson, K. Vashi, M. Harrold; cally addresses the systems biology of complex cellular pathways and Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. transcriptional networks. The novel dynamic models will be validated BigDye® XTerminator™ is a new post-DNA sequencing reaction pu- by testing the selected drug targets on innovative in vivo and in vitro rification kit that removes unincorporated dye-labeled terminators models of CNS pathologies. and salts from completed DNA sequencing reactions prior to electro- As opposed to most current biological data analysis methods, VAL- phoretic analysis. Adequate removal of these components is crucial APODYN develops a dynamic and quantitative analysis method for in maximizing high-quality basecalls and useable data. Compared to new therapeutic targets through MIN dynamic models. It will provide conventional purification methods such as ethanol precipitation or spin a cutting-edge highly accurate in silico tool for identifying novel and columns, DNA sequencing reactions purified with BigDye XTerminator effective therapeutic targets in a much faster, more efficient and more exhibit very few artifacts from residual dye-labeled terminators (dye economical way than it is possible today. (www.valapodyn.eu). blobs). Read lengths using the BigDye XTerminator kit are also com- parable. Here, the performance of BigDye XTerminator will be com- P1229. Evaluation and introduction of new techniques in the pared to that of other purification techniques across a wide variety of genetic testing service by EuroGentest Unit 5. DNA sequencing reactions. N. van der Stoep1, C. D. M. Paridon2, M. Macek3, G. Matthijs4, B. Bakker1; 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics (EuroGentest), Leiden, The Neth- P1227. Easy-to-use bioinformatic tools for individualized erlands, 2Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, analyses and data mining in disease gene identification 3Department of Molecular Genetics and National Cystic Fibrosis Centre (Euro- D. Seelow1, T. H. Lindner2, S. Mundlos1,3, K. Hoffmann1,3; Gentest), Prague, Czech Republic, 4Center for Human Genetics (EuroGentest), 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Charite University Medicine, Berlin, Germany, Leuven, Belgium. 2Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University of Erlangen-Nurem- At present, the field of genetics is witnessing a fast expansion of new berg, Nuremberg, Germany, 3Department Development and Disease, Max technologies that could have a strong potential for application in ge- Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. netic testing. Unfortunately, implementation of these novel technolo- Our aim is to create comfortable tools for performing and interpreting gies is often hampered by the lack of complete evaluation of their linkage and association analyses, for data mining and expression stud- technical performance in a diagnostic setting. EuroGenTest (EUGT) is ies. Steps that are repeated in several projects are (semi)automated a European Network of Excellence aiming at harmonizing genetic test- so that they can be performed by the biologist, student or technician ing services throughout Europe. One key objective is to bridge the gap in charge. observed in the chain of new technology-transfer from research into Automated single-/multipoint linkage analysis for microsatellites and implementation and ultimate accreditation in genetic diagnostics. large-scale SNP data: easyLINKAGE Plus is an interface for auto- EGT-Unit 5 is specifically involved with the coordination and guidance mated setup and performance of linkage analyses. We implemented of activities required for complete technical evaluation, validation and Allegro, Merlin, SimWalk, GeneHunter, SuperLink, FastSLink, and ver- subsequent implementation of emerging technologies into diagnostic sions for several species. Results are given as text files and graphical application. outputs. In this respect we recruit new techniques in genetic testing at our Web-based exploration of genomic association: Genome-wide asso- EUGT-Unit 5 Website with our “call for technology” and present them ciation studies are a challenge to graphically display and interpret the at our Satellite-meeting during the ESHG-conference. As a follow up Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 several new approaches in genetic testing are selected for further eval- P1232. The human CDK5R1 3‘UTR contains distinct subregions uation and validation in collaboration with their manufacturers and in- affecting transcript stability ventors.Currently we are evaluating several new techniques including S. Moncini1, M. Venturin1, A. Bevilacqua2, A. Ratti3,4, A. Nicolin2, P. Riva1; High-Resolution Melting-Curve Analysis (HR-MCA) and Conformation 1Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Milan, Sensitive Capillary Electrophoresis (CSCE), two fluorescent hetero- Milan, Italy, 2Department of Pharmacology, Chemotherapy and Medical Toxicol- duplex-based mutation scanning-methods in collaboration with Idaho ogy, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Neurological Sciences, Technologies and NGRL-Wessex together with Applied Biosystems re- University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Neuroscience, `Dino Ferrari’ spectively and Pyrophosphorolysis Activated Polymerization (PAP), a Centre, University of Milan-IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino very sensitive detection method for the presence of low mutation levels (MI), Italy. in the presence of excess wt-allele, in collaboration ServiceXS. More Human CDK5R1 encodes for p35, a neurone-specific activator of details on ongoing and new evaluation projects will be shown also at CDK5, which is involved in neuronal migration and differentiation the EUGT-Unit 5 Satellite-meeting during this conference. during CNS development. CDK5R1 has been implicated in neurode- generative disorders and proposed as a candidate gene for mental P1230. Comprehensive human genetic analysis using 454 retardation. The remarkable size of CDK5R1 3’UTR suggests a role Sequencing™ technology of this region in the control of CDK5R1 expression by post-transcrip- B. Taillon; tional regulatory elements modulating mRNA stability or translation ef- 454 Life Sciences Corporation, Branford, CT, United States. ficiency. Bioinformatic analysis showed a high conservation degree in 454 Life Sciences has developed a revolutionary technology that can mammals and predicted several AU-Rich Elements (AREs). CDK5R1 produce up to 100 megabases of sequence data on a single instru- 3’UTR was cloned in pGL4.71 at the 3’ end of the Renilla luciferase re- ment. Many biologically meaningful and complex regions of the human porter gene to perform Dual Luciferase assays: the construct showed genome can now be analyzed with this system without the time or cost a decreased luciferase activity in six transfected cell lines. The quan- constraints of conventional DNA sequencing methods. titative analysis of luciferase mRNA suggests that CDK5R1 3’UTR af- We will demonstrate how this technology can be applied to the study of fects mRNA stability. We identified five 3’UTR subregions reducing the the cancer genome through ultra-deep sequencing of genes involved luciferase activity in some instance with a cell line-dependent way. A in oncogenesis. The technology also allows researchers to conduct region showed a significantly low halflife, suggesting an accelerated studies of human genetic variation (SNPs, indels and rearrangements) mRNA degradation. We also identified, by deletion analysis, a type I from a complex population. We will also discuss applications in the ARE displaying a stabilizing effect in two neuroblastoma cell lines. Our study of gene regulation through sequencing of microRNA, transcrip- findings evince the presence of both destabilizing and stabilizing regu- tome and gene copy numbers. latory elements in CDK5R1 3’UTR. We are now attempting to identify, The large sequencing capacity of the 454 Life Sciences technology by REMSA and immunoprecipitation assays, stabilizing neuronal pro- platform, combined with the flexibility and versatility of sample han- teins that specifically bind the type I ARE, with the final aim of verifying dling and data output makes it a method of choice for human molecular the functionality of this element. The fine tuning of CDK5R1 expression genetics. by 3’UTR may play a role in CNS development and functioning, with potential implications in neurodegenerative and cognitive disorders. P1231. Characterization of a human fetal cartilage EST library focussing on transcription factors P1233. Cells to Ct: Direct gene expression analysis from cell P. Hermanns1, C. Stelzer2, J. Busch2, A. Imm1, S. Schlaubitz2,3, B. Lee3,4, B. U. lysate Zabel1; J. F. Stevens1, S. Dong1, C. Liu1, R. Fekete2, A. Nguyen2, L. Chapman2; 1Centre for Youth and Adolescence Medicine, Freiburg, Germany, 2Children’s 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems, Hospital of the University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 3Baylor College of Medi- Austin, TX, United States. cine, Houston, TX, United States, 4Howard Huges Medical Institute, Houston, Real-Time reverse transcription (RT)-PCR is a robust, simple and TX, United States. quantitative method for gene expression analysis in biological sam- Skeletogenesis in part takes place in the growth plate where chon- ples. Traditionally, RNA has been isolated from the sample to remove drocytes undergo a coordinated and highly regulated process of cell genomic DNA, RNases, and reverse transcriptase inhibitors before be- proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis at which stage vascular in- ing used as substrate for RT-PCR. RNA isolation is fairly time-consum- vasion brings osteoblasts that replace the cartilage extra cellular ma- ing and it can lead to loss of RNA in flow-through or incomplete elution trix with trabecular bone. Disruptions to these extremely coordinated with small samples. Direct cell-to-Ct gene expression analysis enables processes result in a group of genetic bone diseases. These highly reverse transcription and real-time PCR analysis of RNA from 10-105 diverse groups of disorders have a complex aetiology. Some of the cultured cells without RNA isolation or purification. By eliminating the involved signalling pathways and gene interactions are known but RNA isolation step, gene expression analysis of cultured cell line is many molecular mechanisms that might explain the pathophysiology substantially expedited and simplified. The unique Cells-to Ct lysis pro- of numerous skeletal dysplasias that result from mutations in genes cedure allows the concurrent preparation of cell lysate and removal of important for normal bone development still remain unknown. While genomic DNA in less than ten minute. The lysis procedure takes place the sequence of the human genome has been completed, many genes at room temperature, allowing simple scale-up to robotic platforms for are still uncharacterized. Despite the huge number of ESTs in the pub- high-throughput applications. lic domain, there are still genes to be identified in rare tissues that are under-represented. To find cartilage-specific genes a human cartilage P1234. Theoretical and functional analysis of expressing region cDNA library was generated and 5000 ESTs are sequenced, compu- of ceruloplasmin pseudogene tationally characterized. We and others have already characterized S. Klotchenko1, N. Tsymbalenko1, N. Platonova1, L. Puchkova2; novel and tissue specific genes. Based on in silico motif searches 49 1Research Institute for Experimental Medicine, St. Petersburg, Russian Fed- putative transcription factors have been identified. The temporal and eration, 2St. Petersburg State Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, Russian spatial expression patterns of these transcription factors will be de- Federation. termined via in situ hybridization. Those transcription factors that are Previously using computer analysis we showed that human (NG_ predominantly expressed in developing cartilage will be further charac- 001106) and chimpanzee (XM_516813) pseudogene of ceruloplasmin terized to elucidate their role during cartilage and bone development. (pCp) contain region encoded Cp-like protein. The MitoProt program This way we hope to identify new genes that are important for bone predicted that putative protein consists from N-terminus (66 aa) cor- development and deregulation of those genes might be responsible for responding to signal peptide for mitochondrial protein import (SPMPI). causing skeletal dysplasias. Remaining region corresponds to domains 5 and 6 of blood Cp. In HepG2 and HuTu80 cells, pCp transcripts were detected by RT-PCR. pCp polypeptide was found in mitochondrial matrix by Western-blot. To check the biological significance of predicted SPMPI-sequence it was cloned in vectors pEGFP-N3. HEK293 cells were transfected with pEGFP-N3-pCpSPMPI construct. The confocal microscopy data Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 showed that GFP was localized in the same intracellular compartments data with SNP data, we demonstrate that departures from diploidy can as Mito-dsRed. Also HepG2 cells were transfected with this construct. cause apparent genotyping failure and give inaccurate genotyping. The cells were collected and subcellular fractions were isolated by dif- ferential centrifugation. Western-blot analysis with antibodies to GFP P1237. A computational method to test for genetic relatedness in revealed GFP in mitochondria. Population comparative analysis of unrelated individuals Cp gene 5’-UTR and translated pCp region in DNA isolated from 117 L. Xumerle, G. Malerba, P. F. Pignatti; human blood samples by PCR with following PRLF analysis using of Biology and Genetics, Verona, Italy. restriction enzymes set was carried out. The insertions or deletions as Discovering susceptibility loci in complex disease requires a large well as mutations in restriction sites in pCp gene amplicons were not number of individuals characterized by several thousand markers. An found. At the same time a lot of changes were detected in Cp gene association between gene and disease may be incorrectly estimated promoter. These data suggest conservatism of pCP region. In rat, ex- if the allele frequencies differ among cases and controls depending on pression of mitochondrial Cp has tissue specific pattern, not expresses factors other than gene-phenotype correlation, i.e. inbreeding, geno- in newborn and adult animals with copper deficiency, induced by Ag- typing errors, unrecognized population stratification, etc. feed. The biological role of putative protein product of pCp in copper We present a computational method - available in the Jenoware library metabolism is discussed. (http://medgen.univr.it/jenoware/) - designed to compute the probabili- ty of genetic relatedness in pairs of individuals. The program computes P1235. Functional interactions of conserved non-coding the likelihood of a pair of individuals to be unrelated over the likeli- (CNCs) sequences with other CNCs using circular chromosome hood to be relatives of I, or II degree respectively, conditional to the conformation capture (4C) genotype. The program works with microsatellites and/or SNPs. False D. Robyr, G. Duriaux-Sail, S. Polti, C. Wyss, S. Deutsch, S. E. Antonarakis; positive rate and power were assessed by simulation in unrelated in- University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. dividuals and in pedigrees. E.g. in order to estimate the support for I The comparison of human chromosome 21 (Hsa21) with the mouse degree relatedness (power 80%, and false positive 5%), 10 microsat- syntenic regions led to the identification of roughly 3500 regions dis- ellites having heterozygosity >= 70% or 25 SNP having heterozygosity playing an identity of >70% over a length of a least 100 nucleotides >= 15% are needed. We are extending the method to associated DNA of ungaped alignment. About 65% (~ 2300) of these are conserved markers that can be included as inferred haplotypes in the models to non-coding sequences (CNCs). Very little is known about the function be tested. of most CNCs. We speculated that a functional CNC would interact with its genomic target (i.e. an enhancer would bind to it’s cognate P1238. Genome-wide analysis of copy number variations gene promoter). Thus, the identification of any part of the genome that in patients with mental retardation by single nucleotide interacts directly with a CNC could provide clues on the function of the polymorphism arrays latter. We have generated libraries of CNC-interacting DpnII fragments J. Wagenstaller1, S. Spranger2, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, B. Kazmierczak2, M. by circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) whose identity is Nathrath3, D. Wahl4, B. Heye5, D. Gläser6, V. Liebscher7, T. Meitinger1,5, T. M. determined by subsequent sequencing. We have generated initial re- Strom1,5; sults concerning crosslinking of 18 Hsa21 CNCs with DNA fragments 1GSF - National Research Center, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Ger- mapping hundreds of kilobases away from the “bait” on the same many, 2Praxis für Humangenetik, Bremen, Germany, 3Technical University, chromosome, or with fragments on other chromosomes. A total of 87 Department of Pediatrics, Munich, Germany, 4Praxis für humangenetische Be- such potentially interacting DpnII DNA fragments have been identified. ratung, Augsburg, Germany, 5Technical University, Institute of Human Genetics, Interestingly, the median distance from the cloned DpnII fragments to Munich, Germany, 6Zentrum für Humangenetik, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 7University the nearest conserved region is 661bp with a pvalue < 0.0003 when of Greifswald, Institute of Mathematics, Munich, Germany. compared to the distribution of the median of the distances of 3000 We investigated 67 children with unexplained mental retardation who random samples of 87 fragments. These results provide initial evi- had additional, but often mild symptoms. All children had inconspicu- dence that the function of CNCs is mediated by their interaction with ous high resolution banding analysis. The DNAs were analyzed using other conserved regions. the Affymetrix GeneChip 100K arrays. Data analysis was performed with median normalization and genotype-specific dosage calculation P1236. EM algorithm for gene copy number estimation using using R-scripts and revealed 12 copy number variations (CNVs), 9 TaqMan® Assays deletions and 3 duplications, that are most likely causative for men- C. Barbacioru, K. Li, R. Samaha, K. Lazaruk; tal retardation because they either arose de novo or are larger than Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. known polymorphisms. One of those was a maternally inherited 1.4 Recently, multiple studies have discovered an abundance of copy Mb duplication in Xp22.31 in a male patient which includes the STS number variation of DNA segments ranging from kilobases (kb) to gene. The chromosome carrying the duplication was non-randomly megabases (Mb) in size. Copy number variations can cause disease, inactivated in the mother. Two of the CNVs were de novo deletions as in microdeletion or microduplication disorders, or confer risk to com- affecting only a single gene. All CNVs were confirmed by quantitative plex disease traits such as HIV-1 infection and glomerulonephritis. PCR. They varied in size from 200 kb to 8 Mb. Five of the CNVs were TaqMan® gene copy number assays have been developed for ac- flanked by low-copy number repeats. Three of them were known mi- curate detection of genetic variation at gene level using primers and crodeletion syndromes. The fourth one is a deletion on chromosome probes designed for genomic DNA. Each well is duplexed with two 15q25.2 that was not described before. The fifth one is the duplication assays, a FAM™ dye-based assay designed to detect the genes-of- in Xp22.31. We compared different array types. The signal-to-noise interest and a VIC® dye-based assay for reference gene. In this study, ratio (SNR) of the 500K Affymetrix array was lower than the SNR of we present an algorithm for gene copy number estimation based on the 100K Affymetrix array. The SNR of the 300K Illumina arrays was EM algorithm for mixtures of normal distributions. The algorithm finds in between. The increase of the number of features and a new design maximum likelihood estimates of parameters in probabilistic models, should improve the resolution and allow the reliable detection of gain where the model depends on unobserved samples copy number of and losses of single genes. the gene-of-interest. Under current protocols, we are capable of dis- tinguishing up to 8 copies of the gene of interest with at least 95% P1239. Multiplex Amplicon Quantification, a novel method for confidence. PCR based, high-throughput copy number variation analysis. To evaluate this algorithm, we present experimental results for 5 im- D. Goossens1,2, P. De Rijk1,2, L. Heyrman1,2, B. Harding3,2, W. Glassee3,2, J. portant drug metabolism genes (CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP2A6, GSTM1 Del-Favero1,2; and GSTT1) on 270 individual samples from International HAPMAP 1Applied Molecular Genomics Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB, Project representing 4 different populations. Copy number analysis for Antwerp, Belgium, 2University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of these genes shows perfect consistency for sample duplicates. Copy Molecular Genetics, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium. number variations are observed for these genes, with significant dif- Recently, a striking abundance of copy number variation (CNV) was ferences between these populations. Furthermore, combining this discovered throughout the human genome. Although it has been sug-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 10 gested that CNVs contribute significantly to the occurrence of disease microduplication syndrome screening, more quantitative technologies phenotypes, analysis of CNVs has been hampered so far by the lack of with higher sample throughput are required to validate newly identified suitable methods. Indeed, none of the currently available methods for CNVs and to detect deletions/duplications for a large sample size in quantitative DNA analysis combines flexible assay design, user friend- candidate regions/genes. To meet these challenges and demands, Ap- liness and high throughput with robustness and cost effectiveness. plied Biosystems has developed TaqMan® based real-time quantitative Here we present such a method, designated Multiplex Amplicon Quan- copy number assays. Here, we report the development of the TaqMan® tification (MAQ), that essentially consists of the simultaneous PCR copy number assay design pipeline and validation of TaqMan® copy amplification of fluorescently labeled target and control amplicons number assays. We used this proprietary pipeline to design assays in a ‘one step, closed tube’ reaction, followed by fragment analysis. targeting the chromosomal regions associated with genomic disorders The PCR primers for MAQ assays are designed straightforwardly us- and CNV-associated OMIM genes. The assays were tested with DNA ing proprietary software allowing a very high (> 40) multiplexing de- sets for validation, HAPMAP DNA collection as well as samples with gree. The resulting amplification products, covering genomic regions, known deletions/duplications. The TaqMan® copy number assay is a genes or exons of interest, are subsequently analysed using standard duplex reaction with a FAM™-assay targeting the gene of interest and fragment analysis equipment. The comparison of normalized frag- a VIC®-assay targeting the reference gene (two copies per diploid ge- ment peak areas obtained from test individuals and from reference nome) in the same well. The copy number is determined by relative individuals results in a dosage quotient indicating the copy number quantification using a reference sample known to have two copies of of the target amplicon. To automate the analysis step we developed the gene of interest. Our validation data demonstrate a high success a program for straigthforward data analysis, MAQs, which calculates rate of assay design and excellent assay performance. TaqMan® copy and visualizes the dosage quotients of each amplicon starting from the number assays are quantitative and robust, with high reproducibility, chromatogram files. specificity, and sample throughput. The combination of fast assay development, quick experimental pro- cedure and data analysis, sensitivity and robustness makes the MAQ P1242. In silico search for cRSS near exon/intron borders of technology the method of choice for large scale, high thoughput analy- human genes sis of any discovered or hypothesized CNV, either for diagnostic or for A. Y. Gubsky1, V. G. Zinkovsky2; research purposes. 1Odessa National I.I. Mechnikov University, Odessa, Ukraine, 2University of Opole, Opole, Poland. P1240. Determination of copy number changes in the MHC gene The recombination signal sequences (12RSS, 23RSS) are unique region and in genes associated with drug metabolizing enzymes structures of Ig, TCR genes of jawed vertebrates. They are located using multiplexed oligonucleotide ligation assays on the borders of V, D, J segments and are target-sites of RAG1/2 M. Wenz1, R. Koehler1, F. Hyland1, J. Briggs1, K. Li1, T. Karlsen2, A. Franke3, F. proteins of the V(D)J recombination system. Nowadays, there is wide- De La Vega1; spread that RSSs were derived from terminal inverted repeats of an- 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Rikshospital et University cient transposons (Transib, etc) which were accidentally inserted into Hospital, Institute of Immunology, Oslo, Norway, 3Christian-Albrechts-University, a gene ancestral to Ig and TCR.Our research of human genome in Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel, Germany. silico shows that structures which can be possible targets of RAG1/2 Genome copy number variations (CNVs) are far more frequent than proteins (cRSSs) are very widespread near exons (±5 bp from 3’ originally expected, and many of them affect gene copy numbers. It and/or 5’ boarders) of proteincoding genes. In the structure of 11 % has been suggested that CNVs could have functional significance in genes (2586), we have revealed 1949 12cRSS and 1393 23cRSS. 483 complex disease, however because of technical limitations, the ex- genes have cRSSs flanking different exones from 2 to 7, which can tent to which such contribute to phenotypic variations is only slowly theoretically participate in the formation of intragenic deletions (using coming into focus. We previously developed the SNPlex™ Genotyp- 12/23-bp spacer rule) in 29 of such genes. Only 2 % cRSSs are the ing System to address the need for accurate genotyping data, high structural elements of repetitive DNA sequences. Having compared sample throughput, study design flexibility, and cost efficiency. The the experimental data to the results of theoretical research, we have system uses oligonucleotide ligation/polymerase chain reaction (OLA/ reached a conclusion that cRSSs in the considered intragenic areas PCR) and capillary electrophoresis (CE) to analyze single nucleotide were derived from random nucleotide combinations. Consequently, we polymorphism (SNP) genotypes. We have extended this system to can suppose that RSSs of Ig and TCR genes weren’t derived from ter- permit the analysis of CNVs by comparing the intensity of signal ra- minal inverted repeats of ancient transposons. The original RSS-like tios encoded through the ligation reaction between test and reference sequences in the precursor of Ig and TCR genes are more than likely regions. This allows us to simultaneously address at least 72 loci in a to have appeared at random long before the appearance of RAG1/2 single multiplex assay and to ensure high quality data normalization genes themselves. and assay controls are included. Here, we demonstrate feasibility of this method by addressing CNVs within the MHC region. By analyzing P1243. Investigating human disease using mouse mutant cell line derived DNAs with known copy numbers, CNV genotypes are phenotypes in the Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) Database determined for the RCCX module. Additionally the assay was able to M. Tomczuk, A. Anagnostopoulos, R. Babiuk, S. M. Bello, D. L. Burkart, H. detect differences in copy numbers between the highly homologous Dene, I. Lu, H. Onda, B. Richards-Smith, C. L. Smith, M. A. Updegraff, L. L. C4A and C4B genes. We also analyzed copy number variations in Washburn, J. T. Eppig; drug metabolizing enzyme (DME) encoding genes that have been pre- The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States. viously shown to affect phenotype. Here we will show correlation in ob- Mammalian models of human disease are critical to increasing our served copy number variations between the multiplex OLA/PCR assay understanding of disease mechanisms and discovering potential new and single tube real-time PCR assays with TaqMan® probes. therapies. The laboratory mouse is an exceptional model of disease processes in humans due to the wealth of available genetic tools. The P1241. Copy Number Variation Analysis Using Quantitative Mouse Genome Informatics Database (MGI, http://www.informatics. TaqMan® Copy Number Assays jax.org) is a free resource that provides integrated access to data on K. Li1, A. J. Broomer1, Y. Wang1, C. Xiao1, C. Barbacioru1, I. R. Casuga1, A. J. the genomics, genetics, gene expression, phenotype, and biology of Sharp2, E. E. Eichler2, C. Chen1; the laboratory mouse. Via this extensive mutant data set, MGI be- 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Howard Hughes Medical comes a natural tool for comparative phenotyping. Mining of MGI data Institute, University of Washington School, Seattle, WA, United States. in the context of human disease can reveal new or suggestive caus- Recent whole-genome studies have identified 1447 CNV regions ative mutations for testing in each species. (CNVRs) that cover about 12% of the human genome. Some of CNVR In MGI, models of a disease are annotated to the Online Mendelian may contain disease loci/genes, whose copy number changes could Inheritance in Man (OMIM) term for that disease. Additionally, a de- impact gene activity and disease susceptibility. Copy number changes tailed phenotypic description of the model is entered using the Mam- are also detected in microdeletion/microduplication syndromes, which malian Phenotype ontology, a vocabulary of phenotypic traits. These are associated with genomic disorders. Although array-based technol- human disease relationships can be searched by phenotypic or OMIM ogies are powerful for large-scale CNV discoveries and microdeletion/ disease terms or by browsing the vocabularies. Information on mouse Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 11 models includes genes involved, their function, site and timing of ex- cost-effective and applicable for archiving of DNA for future research pression and sequence data. Over 1,900 mutant phenotypes currently using large-scale genetic analysis technology. are associated with human disease phenotypes, representing ap- proximately 12% of OMIM terms with one or more associated mouse P1247. CpG islet methylation in the human genome models. These data and new mouse model data that continue to ac- N. C. Wong, M. Qazag, P. Canham, J. M. Craig, K. A. Choo, R. Saffery; cumulate provide fertile ground for selecting appropriate experimental The Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital, Mel- mice, as well as identifying potential mouse targets that may be used bourne, Australia. to explore new models. DNA methylation of CpG islands is widely studied in higher eukary- Supported by NIH grant HG000330. otes and has been found to regulate gene expression, imprinting and cancer progression. Yet within the human genome, only 8% of all CpG P1244. Specific features of dermatoglyphics problems in dinucleotides reside within a CpG island. As DNA methylation is the different diseases addition of a methyl moiety to cytosine residues within a CpG dinu- D. Noje, I. Tomulescu, E. Laslo, C. Pusta; cleotide, a large pool of genomic methylation resides outside of CpG University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania. islands and remains uncharacterised. CpG islets have the same DNA This paper is an application of the concept of a Genetic Algorithm, sequence characteristics as CpG islands in terms of GC-content, but modified to approximate certain functions. The classical problem of are shorter in length and are thus more abundant within the genome the dermathogliphic recognition has a settlement in different modes (Wong et al, 2006). We have recently shown that methylation of these existing at this time very strong real time applications. islets can vary in association with modified chromatin states, however What we want to bring something new in this article is a possible solu- the extent to which CpG islet methylation plays a role in other epigen- tion of the dermatoglyphic recognition even if they are damaged by etic phenonmenon such as gene regulation or X-inactivation has yet to some typical diseases or lightly damaged by will. be determined. To start to address this, we are investigating the rela- The application has been built on a certain method of recognition of tionship between the methylation status of CpG islets associated with some essential items in the symbolism of the human dermatoglyphics known genes and expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and gene expres- those through genetic approximation techniques we complete those if sion level. Preliminary results implicate CpG islet methylation in the there is the case and that follows a search in the data base to identify regulation of some gene regulation, thereby suggesting an essential the owner. role for CpG islets within the mammalian genome. P1245. Development of TaqMan® SNP and DME Genotyping P1248. Detection and mapping of partial trisomy and partial Assays on TaqMan® Low Density Arrays monosomy of HSA21 using BAC tiling arrays T. Hartshorne, R. Padilla, J. Au-Young, T. Ceccardi, J. Ziegle; R. Lyle1, F. Bena2, C. Gehrig2, G. Lopez2, S. Gagos2, J. M. Delabar3, A. Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. Schinzel4, J. Lespinasse5, A. Bottani2, S. Dahoun2, L. Taine6, M. Doco-Fenzy7, Applied Biosystems’ TaqMan® Low Density Arrays (TLDAs) are 384- P. Cornillet-Lefebvre8, A. Pellet9, A. Toutain10, L. Colleaux9, J. Horst11, I. Ken- well micro fluidic cards that provide a convenient low- to medium- nerknecht11, L. Florentin12, S. Kitsiou13, E. Graison14, M. Costantine3, P. Sinet14, throughput platform for TaqMan® Gene Expression Assay panels. S. E. Antonarakis2; TLDAs are pre-loaded with assays, which greatly reduces experiment 1Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2University of Geneva Medical preparation time and eliminates the need for liquid-handling robots or School, Geneva, Switzerland, 3EA 3508 University Paris Denis Diderot, Paris, multi-channel pipettors. Towards the goal of providing TaqMan® DME France, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 5Cy- Genotyping Assay panels on TLDAs, we conducted benchmark tests togenetic Laboratory, General Hospital, Chambery, France, 6Department of to compare the performance of genotyping assays run on TLDAs and Genetics, CHU Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 7Department of Genetics, IFR53, on conventional 384-well plates. TLDA cards contained 8 x 48 distinct Reims, France, 8Department of Hematology, Reims Hospital, Reims, France, TaqMan® Validated SNP and Drug Metabolism (DME) Assays, which 9INSERM U781 Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 10CHU Hôpital Breton- were previously validated on sample sets including 45 Caucasian and neau, Tours, France, 11Institute of Human Genetics, University of MÃ¼nster, 45 African American Coriell genomic DNAs. These same sample sets MÃ¼nster, Germany, 12AlfaLAB Molecular Biology and Cytogenetics Center, were run on the TLDAs and the resulting genotyping data were com- Athens, Greece, 13Department of Medical Genetics, Aghia Sophia Children’s pared to data from the 384-well plate assay validation studies. Assay Hospital, Athens, Greece, 14CNRS UMR7637, Paris, France. performance was found to be equivalent between platforms: all as- Down syndrome (DS) is one of the most frequent congenital birth de- says performed successfully on TLDAs (100% pass rate), call rate was fects, and the most common genetic cause of mental retardation. Af- greater than 99.0%, and accuracy was greater than 99.6%. Experi- fected individuals share certain clinical features such as mental retar- ments are underway to define the lower limit number of DNA samples dation, congenital heart disease and characteristic facial and physical required for sample clustering and accurate genotyping in the absence apparance. In most cases, DS results from the presence of an extra or presence of control DNA samples. An interactive data analysis soft- copy of chromosome 21. A major goal of understanding the molecular ware tool, Autocaller™ software, is also in development. This software pathology of DS is the identification of HSA21 genes or other function- tool enables overlaying and viewing cluster plots from multiple plates al genomics elements that contribute to specific aspects of the pheno- or cards and is used to facilitate analysis of genotyping data from TLDA type. Rare cases of partial trisomy 21 could identify genomic regions cards. Genotyping DME SNPs using TLDAs will streamline studies of associated with specific DS phenotypes. drug metabolism and response variation among patients. In order to establish high resolution mapping of pathogenic partial an- euploidies and unbalanced translocations involving HSA21, we con- P1246. Fast, reliable and very cost-effective method for DNA structed a BAC microarray covering 21q. The array consists of 411 extraction from bioptic specimen HSA21 BACs with a mean overlap of 85 kb giving an approximatively J. Ramic, L. Kapur, N. Lojo, D. Macic, N. Pojskic, A. Durmic-Pasic, K. Bajrovic; 2-fold tiling path. Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Our study includes identification and mapping of 45 pathogenic chro- Herzegovina. mosomal aberrations of chromosome 21 including 8 complete HSA21 Procedure of DNA isolation is a basic step for molecular-genetics re- trisomy and 32 partial aneuploidies for different segments of HSA21. search as well as for archiving for future reference. Therefore, the pro- In each case, the size of the segmental aneuploidy has been esti- tocols that guarantee optimum quality and quantity should be used in mated and in 20 cases confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR. The order to ensure long-term storage of DNA samples. breakpoints have been mapped to within 200kb on average. We also Three diferent protocols for DNA extraction from tumor tissue speci- tested 5 cases with a normal karyotype on the basis of clinical find- men obtained in biopsy, have been compared trough evaluation of ings indicative of a Down syndrome phenotype. Correlations of par- following parameters: time-consumption, feasibility, DNA quality and tial 21q duplication and monosomies with phenotypic features will be quantity and cost of procedure. presented and contribute in the understanding of genotype-phenotype Protocol for DNA isolation using salting out method by Miller et al. correlations in Down syndrome physiopathology. (1987) that was modified in our lab showed to be the fast, reliable in terms of DNA quality, quantity and long-term stability as well as highly Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 12 P1249. Impact of Histone Modifications on Gene Expression and nome Laboratory, VIB, Dept. Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven., Leuven, Belgium. Differentiation The aim of this study was to design and produce a specialized and novel J. F. Fischer1, J. Toedling2, T. Krueger1, M. Schueler1, W. Huber2, S. Sperling1; chromosome X exon-specific oligonucleotide microarray for screening 1Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 2European Bioin- of all X-chromosomal genes and detection of copy number changes. formatics Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Identification of genetic alterations is extremely important for research Histones together with DNA form the nucleosome that provides the and clinical purposes. Recent studies have indicated that microdele- scaffold for the compaction of DNA. Histone tails are susceptible to tions and microduplications occur at a high frequency in the human a wide variety of modifications and the type of histone modification genome, while advances in high-density oligonucleotide arrays have contributes to the degree of DNA accessibility and gene transcription. paved the way with unparalleled resolution. The new “chromosome However, it is not clear whether histone modification marks are primary X exon-specific array” contains about 22,000 60mer oligonucleotides or secondary to transcription, whether histone modifications act syn- covering more than 92% of all chromosome X exons and miRNA re- ergistically to form a histone code and to what extent they function as gions, as well as control regions from other chromosomes. Two known signaling marks for the recruitment of effectors. abnormal control samples, one with a well-characterized isochromo- We investigated the relationship between transcript levels and four his- some X and another with a Xp22.2 duplication were interrogated on tone modifications (H4ac, H3ac, H3K4me2, H3K4me3). We performed the array to test its efficiency and identify probes that do not perform ChIP-chip and expression array analysis in two independent mouse efficiently. Modifications were carried out and the final “chromosome cell lines (C2C12, HL-1), and C2C12 in two differentiation stages. X exon-specific array” was used for screening of 20 XLMR families Our results revise previous findings, based on univariate data, which from the EURO-MRX Consortium. One out of the twenty families was had led to the belief that all of these modification marks are associated identified by array-CGH as having a 1.78-kb deletion involving all ex- with elevated expression levels. The apparent positive effect of his- ons of one gene and a second family was found to carry a 27-kb dele- tone-3-lysin-4-dimethylation is caused by its correlated co-occurrence, tion involving all exons of two contiguous genes. The above genetic and an effect that disappears when it is present by itself. Our results changes were confirmed with PCR. The “chromosome X exon-specific suggest that histone modifications form a code, as their combinato- array” could be utilized to detect genetic changes in X-linked disorders rial composition is associated with distinct read-outs. We show that and other chromosome X abnormalities. The “chromosome X exon- modifications are highly dynamic during differentiation. Upregulation of specific array” will become available from “Oxford Gene Technology” transcripts is associated with a gain of histone-4-acetylation, but many (OGT) biotechnology company within the next months. modification conversions occur without a change of transcript levels. This indicates that histone modifications precede transcription, rather P1252. Validation of a commercially available PCR kit for than being a consequence of it, and primarily function as signalling diagnostic testing for Fragile X CGG repeat marks for specific effectors, but are not by themselves a sufficient driv- P. A. van Bunderen, M. M. Weiss, E. Bakker; ing force for transcription. Laboratory for Diagnostic Genome Analysis, Leiden, The Netherlands. Almost all cases of Fragile X syndrome are caused by an expansion P1250. DS5: Biological storage and retrieval: Bringing e-Science of a CGG repeat in the 5’ UTR of the FMR1 gene to more than 200 re- to embryo bioinformatics resources. peats. Molecular testing is usually performed by both PCR of the CGG M. K. Scott1, J. van Hemert2, Y. Chen2, X. Wang1, S. Lisgo1, S. Lindsay1, M. repeat (up until 100 repeats) and Southern blot analysis. Atkinson2, R. A. Baldock3; We are currently validating a new kit from Abbott. With this kit it should 1Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2National be possible to detect large expanded CGG repeats. By calculating a e-Science Centre, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3MRC Human Genetics Unit, peakheight ratio of the CGG repeat and of a control X fragment, in- Edinburgh, United Kingdom. formation is gained about the status “heterozygous or homozygous” The current technologies for storage, accession and manipulation of in female samples. We tested 39 known samples (13 female and 26 biological data have focused on efficient management, curation and male) including full expanded alleles, homozygous normal females, analysis of data in terms of a centralised resource, by enabling large- and premutations. scale data-download for analysis. Bio-resources that require a more Of the 13 females analysed, two homozygous and two full mutations distributed approach (e.g. for shared material, inter-institute collabora- were confirmed. Of the 26 males, one showed a full mutation and two tion or large volume data-analysis) are currently unacceptably low in had premutations. Of the 3 full mutations, 2 were visible in raw data. power for the tasks required, or suffer limitations affecting usability and Using the Abbott kit in Fragile X diagnostic testing is fast and only a usefulness. These types of requirements are a central concern of de- small amount of DNA is necessary. There are no discrepancies in all velopment in e-Science and therefore, as part of the FP6 funded DGE- 39 samples. Two of three full mutations were visible in the raw data. Map (Developmental Gene Expression Map) project we are assessing However, interpretation of peak ratios is sometimes difficult because the current architectures to improve on restrictions experienced. This the reliability of the ratios is dependent on the size of the normal allel. is a collaborative effort between the e-Science Institute, the Institute of At this moment the size standard is not suitable for full mutation sizing, Human Genetics and the MRC-Wellcome Trust Human Developmen- so checking the raw data is necessary. tal Biology Resource. The three main areas of focus have been: a) a database for the storage and access of internal experimental details, P1253. A PCR-based assay detecting pre- and full mutations of specimen records and users details, with an emphasis on upgrading the FMR1 gene the current technology to utilise web portal access, b) 3D mapping M. Pomponi, R. Pietrobono, E. Tabolacci, G. Neri; and visualisation software to increase accuracy and automation for Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Roma, Italy. data mapping, including inter-stage and inter-species analysis, and c) We evaluated the Fragile X PCR Assay (Abbott Molecular, Inc.) ef- establishing a web presence equipped with search, analysis and data- fectiveness in distinguishing the size of FMR1 alleles. The assay is mining tools, for the dissemination of data to the wider community. based on fluorescent multiplex PCR where the CGG repeat sequence is co-amplified with undisclosed gender-specific targets. We tested P1251. Development and validation of the “chromosome X 122 samples, whose FMR1 status had been ascertained by South- exon-specific array” that enables identification of copy number ern blotting (HindIII/EagI digestion , hybridization with probe Ox1.9). changes in genes of the X chromosome The samples included 93 females (31 wt homozygotes, 24 wt hetero- L. K. Kousoulidou1, S. Bashiardes1, H. van Bokhoven2, H. Ropers3, J. Chelly4, zygotes, 20 premutations, 18 full mutations) and 29 males (10 wt, 7 C. Moraine5, A. de Brouwer2, H. Van Esch6, G. Froyen7, P. C. Patsalis1; premutations, 3 full mutations, 2 mosaics wt/full mutation, 8 mosaics 1Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department of premutation/full mutation). Results obtained with the PCR assay coin- human genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre., Nijmegen, The cided with those obtained by Southern blotting. The determination of Netherlands, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Human Molecular female zygosity was done through the calculation of the TR/X ratio, Genetics Department, Berlin, Germany, 4INSERM U129-ICGM, Faculte de comparing the height of the peak corresponding to the CGG sequence Medecine Cochin., Paris, France, 5Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Tours, with that of the gender-specific target. A ratio>1 indicates wt homozy- Service de Genetique, Hospital Bretoneau., Tours, France, 6Centre for Human gosity. Of 31 homozygous females, 23 (74%) had TR/X>1, 7 (23%) Genetics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg., Leuven, Belgium, 7Human Ge- TR/X<1 and 1 (3%) TR/X 0.9-1 (intermediate zone). Therefore TR/X Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 1 ratio does not appear to be entirely reliable and needs refinement. P1256. Ultra-Deep Digital Analysis of the Transcriptome However, in all cases with expanded alleles a peak was visible after I. Khrebtukova, S. Luo, L. Zhang, J. Yan, E. Vermaas, V. Quijano, T. Kerelska, capillary electrophoresis. The largest allele amplified was about 300 G. P. Schroth; CGGs, although the resulting peak was small and difficult to interpret. Illumina, Inc., Hayward, CA, United States. The amplification products could also be separated on a 2% agarose We have used the Illumina Genome Analysis System, based on Solexa gel. In conclusion, although some cases will require Southern analysis sequencing technology, to study very deep digital profiles of messen- (e.g. very large expansions and methylation mosaics), this PCR assay ger RNA in a variety of biological samples. This approach allows us to is capable of resolving most cases referred to the laboratory. study the transcriptome with unparallel depth, specificity, and sensitiv- Partially supported by Abbott Molecular, Inc. ity. For instance we show examples in human brain and the Universal Human Reference (UHR) RNA where more than 30 million sequence P1254. EURExpress, a web-based transcriptome atlas of the tags have been analyzed in a single experiment. Our approach can be developing mouse embryo used as a quantitative profiling tool, and also as a powerful discovery G. Diez Roux, and the EURExpress consortium; tool to find evidence of novel transcription. Unlike microarrays, the digi- Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy. tal approach does not require a priori knowledge of the genome, so it Genome-wide expression analyses have a crucial role in functional can be used to study complete expression in any organism. genomics. RNA in situ hybridization (ISH) provides an accurate spa- tio-temporal description of the distribution of transcripts at cellular P1257. Genetic Algorithm in anthropological pattern recognition resolution. The EU-funded EURExpress consortium is generating a E. Laslo, D. Noje, I. Tomulescu, C. Pusta; transcriptome-wide acquisition of expression patterns by means of University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania. ISH with non-radioactive probes and using this data to establish a In this paper we have proposed to build a connection among the fields web-linked, interactive digital transcriptome atlas (www.eurexpress. of bioinformatics, anthropology and artificial intelligence on the base org). The goal of EURExpress is to generate the expression data of of our research in this area. We have created a pattern that gives the > 20,000 genes on sagittal sections from E14.5 wild type murine em- possibility to extend a Genetic Algorithm like an optimization method bryos. EURExpress has generated over 9000 expression patterns, in- and to turn it into an approximation method. cluding the entire set of ENCODE genes, which have been thoroughly The program constructed on the base of these concepts gives an annotated using a special interface for high-throughput annotation. optimization of the anthropological human structures making a char- This interface includes 1420 anatomical structures and correlative acteristic function for every individual or community partly. Having at trees regarding ontological (embryological) and topological relations our disposition an extended database that contains the characteristics allowing advanced queries. The analysis of the data produced so far of every individual of the stock community we can determine a few has determined that 30-40% of genes show a specific/regional pattern characteristics of a new individual. The application is to support the of expression at E14.5. Interestingly, 20% of these are unknown genes anthropological research through the intelligent interrogation of some of which a large percentage show restricted expression patterns in individual-data versus a database-community to interpret more and single tissues such specific structures of the CNS, eye, skin, liver, skel- more efficiently the appartenance of those data. etal muscle and salivary glands. The potential impact on these data on A special feature of this application is the construction in the back- the study of human development and disease is enormous allowing to ground of a neuronal network for the continual learning and upgrade identify tissue specific markers to characterize disease phenotype, to of the database. evaluate disease prognosis, to measure therapeutic benefits and to Key words: genetic algorithm, pattern recognition. help identifying genes whose mutations lead to disease phenotypes. Future plans include studying other developmental stages and analyz- P1258. The Serbian National Mutation frequency database ing the mutant mice resources generated by the mutagenesis projects D. Radojkovic1, S. Pavlovic1, S. van Baal2, G. P. Patrinos2; in USA and Europe. 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. P1255. Gene expression changes in rat brain under the action of The National and Ethnic Mutation databases (NEMDBs) are continu- peptide drug “Semax”, an analogue of ACTH(4-10) ously updated mutation depositories, which contain extensive infor- P. A. Slominsky, T. Agapova, M. Shadrina, J. Agniullin, S. Shram; mation over the described genetic heterogeneity of a population or Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. ethnic group. These resources have recently emerged, mostly driven The heptapeptide “Semax”, an analogue of the N-terminal adrenocor- from the need to document the varying mutation spectrum observed ticotropic hormone fragment (4-10) (ACTH4-10), has been shown to for any gene (or multiple genes), associated with a genetic disorder, exert a number of neuroprotective effects. There are some investiga- between different population and ethnic groups. We report the con- tions that connected these effects with the increase of neurotrophin struction of the Serbian National Mutation frequency database (http:// NGF and BDNF gene expression under the peptide drug application www.goldenhelix.org/serbian), derived from an academic effort to in neuronal and glial cell cultures and in rat brain in vivo. In this work, provide high quality and up-to-date information on the underlying ge- we examined the action of “Semax” on rapid gene expression of 84 netic heterogeneity of inherited disorders in the Serbian population. key gene, representative of 18 different signal transduction pathways. The Serbian NEMDB Database contains brief summaries of the vari- Male Wistar rats were treated for one hour with “Semax” (50 µg/kg, ous genetic disorders prevalent in Serbia and studied for the Serbian single intranasal application) and gene expression in rat brain hip- population, namely beta-thalassemia, cystic fibrosis, phenylketonuria, pocampus was analyzed by RT Profiler PCR Array Rat Signal Trans- thrombophilia, hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin and Y-linkled duction PathwayFinder. It was found that under “Semax” treatment a spermatogenic failure. Database core engine has been built and main- significant (at least two-fold) changes in gene expression observe for tained online using the specialized ETHNOS software (Patrinos et al., twenty seven genes from sixteen signal pathways. Nine genes was up- Hum Mutat, 2005; 25:327-333, Kleanthous et al., Hum Mutat 2006; regulated and eighteen was down-regulated. Most significant changes 598-599). An easy-to-use query interface provides instant access to was found in Wnt pathway (down-regulation of peroxisome proliferator the list and frequencies of the different mutations responsible for the activated receptor gamma, vascular endothelial growth factor. cyclin inherited disorders in the Serbian population. Furthermore, numerous D1, cadherin 1 genes), JAK-STAT pathway (up-regulation inducible links to the respective Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) NO synthase and Cxcl9 chemokine ligand genes and down-regulation entries fruitfully integrate the database’s content into a single web of matrix metallopeptidase 10 gene). Also significant (almost five-fold) site. This database can serve as a valuable online tool for molecular up-regulation was found for heat shock 27kDa protein. Thus, “Semax” genetic testing of inherited disorders in Serbia and could potentially induces rapid and wide changes in expression of key genes of some motivate further investigations of yet unknown genetic diseases in the signal transduction pathways and it may be related to neuroprotective Serbian population. effects of “Semax”.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 1 P1259. Estimating the predictive value of genomic profiling in and vestibule may be responsible for some of the differences in the modeling studies: a proof of principle cochlear and vestibular transcriptomes and functions. MiRNAs with A. C. J. W. Janssens, C. M. van Duijn; expression levels that changed over time or were different in cochleae Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. and vestibules were selected for further study, including localization by Genomic profiling is anticipated to improve prediction of complex dis- in situ hybridization and a search for their targets, using bioinformatics eases and lead to personalized medicine, in which preventive and tools and mRNA microarray expression data. therapeutic interventions are targeted to the individuals´ genetic risk profiles. Whether profiling can yield the required predictive value is P1262. Mutation scanning using high-resolution melting on the to be investigated in clinical-based empirical studies. We developed LightCycler® 480 Real-Time PCR System a modeling approach that estimates the predictive value based on lit- J. Hurlebaus, C. Weilke, M. Hoffmann; erature data (Janssens et al. Genet Med 2006). Our simulation model Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Penzberg, Germany. constructs a dataset based on epidemiological information about the Established methods for PCR-based genotyping using dye-labeled frequencies and effects of single genotypes and the population risk of probes only allow the detection of expected sequence variations. To disease, and calculates measures of predictive value in this dataset. screen for unknown mutations across DNA amplicons, sequencing is We investigated the validity of the model by replicating two published state of the art. Since sequencing is still expensive and not well-suited empirical studies on the discriminative accuracy of genomic profiling. for high throughput analysis, other methods (e.g., dHPLC, DGGE) Discriminative accuracy is the degree to which genomic profiles can have been established for pre-screening samples in order to identify discriminate between subjects who will and who will not develop dis- those that contain sequence variants. ease, assessed as the area-under-the-receiver-operating-characteris- We describe a novel, homogeneous post-PCR method based on high tic-curve (AUC). resolution melting (HRM) of amplicons that enables pre-screening. The first study was a large case-control study in type 2 diabetes report- Prerequisites to use this method are: ing that the combined AUC of PPARG, TCF7L2 and KCNJ11 was 0.55 • a high-end realtime PCR instrument (e.g., the LightCycler® 480 Sys- (Weedon et al. PLoS Med 2006). Our model estimated a similar AUC tem) of 0.56. The other investigated IL-6, ICAM1 and SELE for the predic- • a target-specific pair of PCR primers tion of myocardial infarction after cardiac surgery and found an AUC of • PCR reagents containing an optimized intercalating dye 0.695 (Podgoreanu et al. Circulation 2006), compared to 0.691 using • a special software for HRM data analysis. the modeling approach. Our findings suggest that the discriminative After PCR, sample-derived amplicons (up to 600 bp) are subjected to accuracy of genomic profiling may well be estimated in simulated data. high resolution melting. For amplicons with sequence variations the Estimating the predictive value of genomic profiling prior to data-col- melting curves differ in shape. A specific software algorithm analyzes lection could guide translational research in promising directions. these small differences and groups samples of similar curve shape. Using samples with known sequence as standards, other samples in P1260. A GPCR brain map using Taqman Low Density Arrays the same group can be assigned to this sequence. D. Keys, C. Barbacioru, F. Chan, R. Samaha; The new method thus enables detection of any sequence variation in Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. the amplified DNA section. It is cost-effective, needs little optimization The G Protein-Coupled Receptors (GPCRs) are a broad class of trans- and hands-on time, and allows for high throughput screening (96/384 membrane proteins. A large percentage of successful small molecule samples). drugs specifically target proteins in this class. Our study is designed to The LightCycler® 480 System now offers PCR and HRM-based mu- generate an expression map of 368 GPCR genes in the human brain. tation scanning on an integrated platform in multiwell plates. It also We used the Applied Biosystems Human GPCR Panel Taqman® Low provides a master mix containing a novel fluorescent HRM dye. Density Array (TLDA) and RNA samples from 29 different regions of the brain to generate this map. A total of 62 TLDA cards, 23,808 individual P1263. High resolution melting curve analysis for CFTR alleles qRT-PCR reactions, were run in this study. To make it possible to run using the LightCycler©480 instrument this large number of qRT-PCR assays from limited starting samples, S. Beck-Woedl, P. Bauer; we used a multiplex preamplification strategy (Taqman® PreAmp Mas- Department of Medical Genetics, Tübingen, Germany. ter Mix & TLDA matched oligos). We present a performance analysis High resolution melting curve analysis (HRM) is a fast method to de- for the GPCR TLDA and preamplification methodology as well as the tect sequence variants in human genomic DNA. GPCR brain map. Several genes show interesting tissue distributions In order to asses the feasibility of HRM screening in CFTR genotyping, constituting potentially interesting drug targets. we have set up PCR protocols for CFTR exons 4, 7, 10, 11, 14b, 19, 20, and 21 allowing the analysis of the most prevalent CFTR mutations P1261. MicroRNAs in the developing inner ear in Germany. L. M. Friedman1, G. Toren1, R. Hertzano1, M. Irmler2, J. Beckers2, E. Hornstein3, While heterozygous CFTR mutations (R347P, F508del, I507del, K. B. Avraham1; G542X, R553X, G551D, 1717-1G>A, 2789+5G>A, W1282X, N1303K) 1Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2GSF-National Research Center for En- could easily be detected by standard PCR conditions, homozygosity vironment and Health, GmbH, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Weizmann Institute of for F508del and heterozygous R117H alleles escaped detection. Science, Rehovot, Israel. Therefore we decided to spike our PCR assays with “unlabeled MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 17-23 nt double-strand RNAs that can in- probes”, short oligonucleotides complementary to the R117H and the hibit the translation of target mRNAs and affect, directly or indirectly, F508del loci, respectively. This greatly enhanced the sensitivity of the the expression of a large part of the protein-coding genes. miRNAs PCR-melting system and allowed unequivocal calls of all pathological are expressed differentially in different tissues. During the last years, CFTR alleles tested so far. miRNAs have been discovered as having important roles in develop- In conclusion, we can demonstrate that HRM on the new LightCy- ment and disease of plants and animals. The vertebrate ear expresses cler©480 instrument is a fast and accurate method to screen for the specific miRNAs, as was suggested by recent studies in zebrafish and most prevalent CFTR mutations in Germany. Analysis time could be mice. Our goal is to identify miRNAs that contribute to the development reduced to less than 2 hours (PCR amplification and melting curves). and function of the mouse inner ear and may be involved in hearing and deafness in mammals, as well as their target mRNAs. P1264. Embryonic expression of OTX2 and DMBX1 in human We have used bioinformatics and other prediction tools to identify po- brain tential miRNAs that may control inner ear development or function. C. Ramos, D. Vouyiouklis, M. Scott, A. Andras, S. Lindsay; Using expression microarrays and real time qRT-PCR to profile the Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. miRNAs of the mouse inner ear, we deciphered the expression of Genes of the homeobox superfamily encode a common 60 amino- miRNAs in cochleae and vestibules at various ages. Although most of acid homeodomain motif. Most homeobox genes act as transcription the inner ear-specific miRNAs are expressed similarly in the cochlea factors, regulating gene expression during development. Mutations and vestibule from the same age, some miRNAs have a different ex- can lead to severe alterations in the genetic programmes of a wide pression pattern. The differential expression of miRNAs in the cochlea range of organisms, including humans. Among homeobox genes, the Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 1 orthodenticle group comprise the Drosophila orthodenticle (Otd) and sure. the vertebrate Otx1 and Otx2 genes. These play major roles in the We conclude that we confirmed overexpression of 11 out of 12 genes specification and regionalization of the anterior neuromeres. The Otx2 of the proposed HD biomarker set, however the differences in expres- expression domain includes the forebrain and midbrain neuroecto- sion were too small to reach an acceptable diagnostic performance. derm, and marks a sharp boundary at the midbrain-hindbrain junc- Table : Performance measures of the kNN algorithm. tion. This constitutes a cardinal signalling centre for brain patterning. In concordance with their expression pattern, inactivation of Otd and Sensitivity Specificity F-measure Otx2 in Drosophila and mouse embryos, respectively, leads to total HD group (N=61) .71 .77 .72 loss of the anterior part of the brain. Furthermore, experimental mouse PD group (N=24) .75 .88 .67 models show that the Otd and Otx2 proteins are functionally equiva- CVI group (N=10) .70 .98 .74 lent, in spite of the different CNS architectures between Drosophila Control Group (N=30) .60 .90 .62 and mouse. However, this equivalence is still subject to differential transcriptional and translational control. In vertebrates, Otx gene du- [1] Borovecki F, Lovrecic L, Zhou J, Jeong H, Then F, Rosas HD, et al. Genome-wide plication and corresponding modification in genetic control may have expression profiling of human blood reveals biomarkers for Huntington‘s disease. Proc resulted in novel morphogenetic pathways, including the modification Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Aug 2;102(31):11023-8. in shape and size of different brain areas. The analysis of the devel- opmental expression of OTX genes in human embryos may therefore P1267. Evaluation of in silico splice tools for decision-making in reveal possible innovative roles in brain organogenesis and potential molecular diagnostic links with neurological disorders. This may be particularly relevant in C. Dehainault1, D. Michaux1, V. Caux-Moncoutier1, S. Pagès-Berhouet1, C. the cases of OTX2 and DMBX1, the latter of which functions as a tran- Mattler1, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,2, M. Gauthier-Villars1, C. Houdayer1,3; scriptional repressor. 1Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2INSERM U509, Paris, France, 3UMR INSERM 745, Paris, France. P1265. The importance of bioinformatics and DNA Banks for It appears that all type of genomic nucleotide variation can be deleteri- Human Genetics ous by affecting normal pre-mRNA splicing via disruption/creation of M. A. Saremi1, M. Tavallaei (Ph.D. )1, M. Saremi2; splice site consensus sequences. Since it is neither pertinent nor re- 1Imam Hussein University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Reference Labora- alistic to perform functional testing for all these variants, it is important tories of Iran - Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. to find out which ones could lead to a splice defect in order to restrict Over the past few decades, major advances in the field of molecu- transcript analyses to the appropriate cases. Web-based tools aiming lar biology, coupled with advances in genomic technologies, have led at providing such predictions are available. We evaluated the perfor- to an explosive growth in the biological information generated by the mance of 5 of them (Splice Site Prediction by Neural Network, Splice scientific community. This deluge of genomic information has, in turn Site Finder, MaxEntScan, ESE Finder and RESCUE-ESE) using 36 led to an absolute requirement for computerized databases to store, unrelated retinoblastoma patients without a clear deleterious mutation organize and index the data, and for specialized tools to view and ana- but carrying different RB1 variants (28 intronic and 8 exonic). These lyze the data. patients were screened for abnormal splicing using puromycin-treated Bioinformatics is a new scientific discipline that combines biology, cell lines and the results were compared to the predictions. computer science, mathematics, and statistics into a broad-based field As expected, 18 variants impacting canonical AG/GT splice sites were that will have profound impacts on all fields of biology. correctly predicted as deleterious. Eighteen variations occurring at bioinformatics presents mathematical models along with biological loosely defined positions (+/- 60 nucleotides from an AG/GT site) lead problems and computer science tools necessary to cope with data. to a splice defect in 16 cases and 13 of them were classified as delete- bioinformatics applications in genomics and proteomics and later-gen- rious by at least one tool. In other words, 3 variants escaped detection eration techniques, etc are important, which attempts at linking genetic and the remaining 2 were correctly predicted as neutral. information with structure and function of molecules, metabolic pro- Overall our results suggest that a combination of complementary in cesses and whole cells. silico tools is necessary to take the most appropriate decision (bal- DNA bank is a global life sciences centre that creates and develops ance between the time and cost needed by RNA analysis and the risk innovative product-driven biotechnology ventures. of missing a deleterious mutation) because the weaknesses of one in Moreover, Establishment of DNA banks will help approved researchers silico tool may be overcome by another one. to develop new and better ways of preventing, diagnosing and treating different illnesses. P1268. Protein profile analyses indicate possible implication of The establishment of DNA banks and the development of bioinformat- terfenadine in Ca++ channel inhibition ics are the most Important strategies for the future of Human Genetics. S. Kim1, H. Jeong1, H. Lee2, J. Kim1, H. Chung1; It should be said that different DNA banks have now been established 1National Institute of Toxicological Research, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2Col- in our country. We have established a human genomic DNA bank for lege of Medicine University of Ulsan, Seoul, Republic of Korea. working on human genetic diseases. In the context of this human ge- Drug safety prediction with biomarker is essential in drug evaluation nomic DNA bank, we further developed new bioinformatics software in as well as drug development. Terfenadine, a nonsedating histamine H 1 Imam Hussein University. receptor blocker, cause a well-known adverse effect related in cardiac arrhythmia by prolonged QT interval, unlikely fexofenadine, its meta- P1266. Genomic biomarkers for Huntington‘s disease bolic derivative. We found that terfenadine suppressed calcium chan- L. Lovrecic1, A. Kastrin1, J. Kobal2, B. Peterlin1; nel current upto 90% at 3uM as well as delayed rectifier potassium 1Division of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, channel. In contrast, fexofenadine was almost 100 times less effective Slovenia, 2Department of Neurology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Lju- in suppressing channel currents by conventional electro-physiology bljana, Slovenia. study. Cardiomyocytes were treated with 0.5, 1, 5, 10, 50uM of terfena- The aim of our study was to validate previously published [1] gene dine and fexofenadine for 24hrs. Then, each cell lysate was subjected expression signatures in blood as a biomarker set for Huntington’s to 2-DE analysis to detect markers for the adverse effect caused by disease (HD) and to test its potential clinical utility. By QRT-PCR we terfenadine using fexofenadine as a control. The proteins with more tested 61 Slovenian patients and 30 healthy controls and showed that than 3 times up/down expression in each drug concentration were su- 11 out of 12 candidate genes were significantly overexpressed in HD jected to peptide ID. The expression of proteins involved in the calcium samples (p<.05) with a fold change ranging from 1.40 to 1.91. transporting/signaling were mainly changed by terfenadine treatment, Additionally, 24 patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) and 10 patients on the other hand, the expression of proteins involved in the potas- with fresh cerebrovascular insult (CVI) were included in the study. To sium transporting were changed by fexofenadine treatment. According estimate diagnostic performance of the 12 genes biomarker set we to our results, terfernadine treatment has major effect on the expres- used k-nearest neighbor (kNN) classifier. The validation of the model sions of calcium channel-related protein rather than potassium chan- was done using 10-fold cross-validation. Table 1 presents the perfor- nel-related protein whereas fexofenadine affected mostly potassium mances of the experiment in terms of sensitivity, specificity and F-mea- channel-related protein expressions. This observation might shed light Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 1 on the inhibitory effect of terfernadine on calcium channel, besides P1271. 3D modelling and gene expression mapping in the its well-known effect on HERG channel. Further investigation on the developing human brain inhibitory effect of terfenadine might help elucidating the mechanism of A. Andras1, J. Kerwin1, M. Scott1, S. Lindsay1, R. Baldock2, D. Vouyiouklis1; cardiac adverse effect caused by some antihistamine drugs. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. P1269. Impact of arachidonic acid and moderate and high Human brain architecture and function are linked, and defined by dis- docosahexaenoic acid formulas on hepatic gene expression tinct classes of neurons and support cells. Embryonic brain develop- profiles in baboon neonates ment is characterized by dramatic changes in shape and size. Detec- K. S. D. Kothapalli1, J. C. Anthony2, B. S. Pan1, A. T. Hsieh1, P. W. Nathan- tion methodologies such as in situ hybridisation (ISH) and computer- ielsz3, J. T. Brenna1; based image manipulation help define the gene expression patterns 1Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States, 2Mead Johnson and Company, underlying these tremendous changes. A set of three-dimensional Evansville, IN, United States, 3University of Texas Health Science Center, San (3D) models have been generated using optical projection topography Antonio, TX, United States. (OPT), which serve as the framework onto which expression patterns Long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFA), DHA and ARA, are mapped with custom designed software (MAPaint). are recent dietary components in infant milk formula but vary in con- In order to visualise and interpret developmental changes, the expres- centration because optimal levels have not yet been established. In sion patterns of two genes WNT1 and FGF8, were compared at Carn- this study, we utilized high-density Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays egie stage 15 (CS15; 33 days post conception). WNT1 and FGF8 are (“U133 plus 2.0” with >54,000 probesets) to monitor changes in he- key signalling components of the isthmic organiser, and are involved in patic mRNA expression levels in baboon neonates, supplemented for structural differentiation, patterning and organogenesis. WNT1 is ex- twelve weeks with DHA at two levels (0.33% and 1.0%) and ARA at pressed in the midbrain and the midbrain/hindbrain/ boundary. FGF8 one level (0.67%). Twelve baboon neonates were randomized into is expressed in the isthmus (the hindbrain/ midbrain boundary) and the three groups (n=4 per group): Control (C, no DHA-ARA); 1 x DHA apical ectodermal ridge of the fore and hind limbs. Physical sections (L, 0.33% DHA-0.67% ARA); 3 x DHA (L3, 1.00% DHA-0.67% ARA). stained by ISH for WNT1 and FGF8 were mapped against digital sec- Significance analysis (P<0.05), identified differential changes in gene tions of the CS15 OPT model. Gene expression patterns, and selected expression among 1726 probe sets (ps). Gene ontology annotations structures or boundaries, could be visualised either independently or in assigned differentially expressed ps to a broad spectrum of biological combination.The 3D models and the application of complex software processes, including lipid metabolism and transport, cell proliferation, proved an invaluable tool in the visualisation of gene expression pat- signal transduction and development. Genes associated with PUFA terns during early human brain development. These techniques can metabolism, namely SCD1 and FADS1, were significantly downregu- be applied further, in order to study gene expression during different lated. Most significantly upregulated was TOB1, a novel multifunctional developmental stages, or the development of other complex structures protein which acts as a tumor suppressor in the liver. Transcripts (PPA- such as the heart. RA, FABP1, ACACA and ACSL3) regulating lipid metabolism, transport and oxidation were subtly downregulated, whereas, PPARD is upregu- P1272. Identification of altered promoter methylation in non- lated. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) identified six highly significant small cell lung cancer transcriptional networks associated with functions implicated in cellular N. Tõnisson1,2, K. Fellenberg2, R. Kuner2, M. Meister3, Y. Riazalhosseini2, T. growth and proliferation, tissue development, tissue morphology, cell Vooder4, K. Välk1, K. Kirotar1, V. Beier2, A. Metspalu1, J. D. Hoheisel2; to cell signaling, cancer and gene expression. Dietary DHA and ARA 1IMCB, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2German Cancer Research Center within normal ranges found in human and baboon breastmilk altered (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 3Thorax Clinic, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Lung mRNA expression of a wide array of genes, including many genes as- Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia. sociated with PUFA metabolism. Aberrant promoter methylation of tumour-related genes is a rela- tively common and stable finding in various malignancies, including P1270. The UMD Central system: a tool to address genetic non-small cell lung cancer. It is believed that some of the methylation heterogeneity from LSDB changes, altering gene expression, occur already before the cancer D. Hamroun1,2, G. Collod-Béroud1,3, M. Claustres1,2, C. Béroud1,2; may be clinically found. This makes methylation an attractive biomark- 1INSERM, U 827, Montpellier, F-34000, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Hôpital er for early detection. Arnaud de Villeneuve, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, F- We have performed the retrospective analysis of 48 genes in 60 surgi- 34000, France, 3Université Montpellier1, UFR Médecine, Montpellier, F-34000, cally treated lung adeno- and squamous cell carcinoma patients, us- France. ing oligonucleotide microarrays as the screening platform. The lung Recent progress in molecular genetics led to the identification of thou- cancer samples were analysed for promoter methylation, as well as sands of mutations associated with human genetic diseases. To ana- the corresponding gene expression changes. The analysis included lyze this flow of information, Locus Specific Databases (LSDB) have known and putative tumour suppressor genes controlling cell growth been created. They are maintained by curators (experts of a specific and differentiation, antiangiogenetic factors, genes participating in cell gene or disease), who perform a meticulous annotation of genotype to cell and cell to extracellular matrix connections and metabolic de- and phenotype associated with each mutant. Today, hundreds of LS- toxication processes. DBs have been created worldwide and generic softwares have been During the setup and validation of microarrays, series of in vitro gen- designed to set up LSDBs and standardize the information description. erated methylated and unmethylated sequences were used for the One of these, the UMD software (http://www.umd.be), is widely used. selection and calibration of oligonucleotide probes. A panel of tumour- LSDB are frequently referred as ‘inch wide and mile deep’ as they free lung tissue was used as the negative control to distinguish the deal only with a single gene in opposition to Central databases ‘mile tumour-related methylation changes from the possible tissue-specific wide and inch deep’, which collect mutations for almost all the genes methylation. but with minimal annotation for each mutant. To fill the gap between The study will be further expanded to include a larger patient group these two approaches, we developed the UMD central system (http:// from a different clinical centre. www.umd.be:2200). This tool is able to query simultaneously various UMD-LSDBs and to display a summary of any relevant information P1273. Mutation screening in the human β-globin gene using a from these various databases. This is particularly useful to address the flow-through microarray platform genetic heterogeneity (one disease - several alternative genes). The M. Mommersteeg1, Y. Wu1, R. van Beuningen1, T. Piskackova2, P. Kollia3, C. L. user can select one or more symptoms and one or more genes and Harteveld4, P. Giordano4, G. P. Patrinos5; UMD-central will display for each gene, the number of mutants associ- 1PamGene BV, ‘s-Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands, 2Charles University, Uni- ated with these phenotypes. This tool can also be used for mutation versity Hospital Motol and 2nd School of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, distribution analysis, mutational events studies or insertions deletions 3Department of Biology, School of Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, and splice mutations analysis. This tool should be very useful for dis- Greece, 4Leiden University Medical Center, Hemoglobinopathies Laboratory, eases involving different genes such as myopathies, breast cancers, cardiovascular diseases...Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 1 Leiden, The Netherlands, 5Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. small RNA species like miRNA, siRNA, t-RNA etc, in the range from The panoply of human globin gene mutation detection methods has be- 10 to 150nt. Purified or enriched small RNA fractions, as well as total come significantly enriched with the advent of microarray-based geno- RNA samples with miRNA concentrations down to 50 pg/µl can be typing platforms. So far, a handful of microarray-based methods have analyzed. been described for mutation screening in the human globin genes re- Verification of quality and quantity of miRNA after extraction protocols gion, namely a microelectronic array, arrayed primer extension-based is a major application for this Assay. Capability for separation and ef- (APEX) systems and microarrays involving tagged single-base exten- ficient detection of both single- and double strand nucleic acids widens sion (SBE) with hybridization to universal glass microarrays. We report the range for sensitive analysis with this On-Chip assay. here a new flow-through microarray for human β-globin gene mutation detection. This microarray has a porous surface and uses AlO as P1276. Functional assessment of DNA loop repair in human 2 3 a solid support, which allows not only diffusion-independent binding nuclear extracts kinetics, but also monitoring of hybridization of the extended primers S. Jaroudi, J. C. Harper, S. B. SenGupta; in real-time by repeated cycling of the sample through the array. The University College London, London, United Kingdom. hybridization process is therefore fully reaction-rate limited and com- Introduction: Mismatch repair (MMR) corrects small base mismatches pleted within a few minutes. The microarray is read by a dedicated and insertion/deletion loops that arise within microsatellite repeats. instrument (PamStationTM), while data are analyzed using specialized Current repair assays predominantly rely on cloning techniques. We software. The microarray is being developed to screen for both caus- have designed an alternative functional assay for MMR. ative β-globin gene mutations leading to β-thalassemia and associ- Methods: Heteroduplex DNA molecules containing an insertion loop ated SNPs for haplotype analysis. For this reason, 20 different β-globin were created by hybridisation of purified complementary single strands gene mutations and 15 SNPs located in the human β-globin locus can of DNA from PCR products of the DMPK1 trinucleotide repeat locus be currently addressed using this platform (Phase I) with the ultimate from separate homozygous samples. A nick was introduced 5’ to the goal to expand the microarray’s capacity to screen for a total of 108 heterology to direct the repair to a specific strand. Heteroduplex con- causative mutations and 30 SNPs (Phase II). Taken together the low structs were exposed to nuclear extracts from HeLa (MMR efficient) analysis costs (i.e. 50-70€ per patient), this platform might develop into and LoVo (MSH2 deficient) cells to repair the insertion loop. Using an option for numerous potential applications from human molecular semi-quantitative fluorescence analysis, the ratio of fluorescence from diagnostics to pre-implantation genetic diagnosis and non-invasive the nicked strand and the complementary un-nicked strand could be prenatal diagnosis of hemoglobinopathies. determined (R-value). Repair efficiency was assessed by comparing R-values before and after exposure to nuclear extracts. P1274. Microarray analysis of bone metabolism genes in Results: Exposure of heteroduplexes to HeLa nuclear extracts result- patients with osteoporosis ed in change in the R-value, indicative of repair. Repair was indepen- D. N. Ghorab1, M. V. Moskalenko1, A. S. Glotov2, E. S. Vashukova2, L. B. Po- dent of loop size (2, 21 and 24-bases) and nick directed. Little or no lushkina2, T. E. Ivaschenko2, M. V. Assev2, V. G. Pinelis3, V. S. Baranov2; repair was detected for 2-base loops in absence of a 5’-nick, however, 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s for larger loops repair was nick independent. Change in the R-value Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa- was proportional to the duration of exposure to nuclear extracts. LoVo tion, 3Scientific Center of Children Health RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. nuclear extracts showed little repair for large loops and no repair was Osteoporosis is a complex desease with a strong genetic component. detected for the 2-base loops. Various genes encoding bone associated proteins, cytokines and re- Conclusion: This construct is easily generated and modified to vary the ceptors, have been shown to contribute to genetic basis of the disease. size of the insertion loop. The same approach can be used to assess For analysis following loci were selected: Col1a1 (-1997 G/T, 1245 G/ repair of base-base mismatches. T), BGP (-198 C/T), IL-6 (-174 C/T), TNFα (-308 G/A), VDR (-3731 A/G, 61968 C/T), ER (36627 C/T, 36673 A/G) and GR (N363S A/G). P1277. The mitochondrial DNA content per cell in human cord These loci feature significant genetic polymorphism, and are thought blood leukocytes gradually decreases during gestation to be associated with genetic predisposition to osteoporosis. A genetic M. Pejznochova, M. Tesarova, T. Honzik, H. Hansikova, M. Magner, J. Zeman; study of predisposition to the osteoporosis is believed to extend our Dept. of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech knowledge about the disease and to determine the optimal terms for Republic. antiosteoporotic therapies. Most diseases in premature neonates are secondary to immaturity of We have started to introduce in practice a new molecular approach, various organ systems. In addition, the inadequate capacity of mito- developed with using of multiplex PCR followed by allele-specific hy- chondrial energy production may play an important role in the neonatal bridization on biochip for SNPs detection. Amplified DNA with fluores- morbidity. Isolated human cord blood leukocytes (HCBL) contribute cent labels was hybridized with oligonucleotide DNA probes immobi- very little to the overall metabolic turnover, but they may serve as eas- lized in gel pads on a biochip. The efficiency of the protocol was tested ily available marker cells for studying the changes of mtDNA amount in our laboratory. The results showed 100% concordance between the during fetal development. Therefore the aim of our study was to ana- biochip-based approach and the established PCR protocol. lyze the amount of mitochondrial DNA in HCBL during the gestation. The genotyping procedure, which is faster, reliable and can be used for HCBL were isolated from blood samples of 107 neonates born be- rapid screening on the biochip is suggested for the analysis of genetic tween 25th and 41st week of gestation. Blood samples were obtained predisposition to multifactorial diseases, including osteoporosis. after the delivery from placental part of umbilical cord. The mtDNA amount was analyzed by the real-time PCR method on the instrument P1275. A new method for separation and characterization of Chromo4 (Bio-Rad) using SybrGreen I. small RNA by On-Chip Electrophoresis The significant negative correlations were found between the relative R. Salowsky1, C. Tissot1, M. Valer2, Y. Filaudeau3; mtDNA amount in HCBL and gestational age (r = - 0,54; p < 0,01) and 1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa birth weight (r = - 0,43; p < 0,01), respectively. Clara, CA, United States, 3Agilent Technologies, Nice, France. The results revealed that the mtDNA content per cell decreases in MicroRNAs have just been recognized to play important roles in regu- HCBL with onward fetal development. This may be explained by grad- lation in the genomes of animals and plants. To understand and de- ual shift of the hematopoiesis from fetal liver to bone marrow during the scribe their functional roles many questions still have to be answered. second half of pregnancy presumably accompanied by decreasing cell A major drawback for current experiments is the lack of adequate ana- volume of HCBL as it was shown similarly in red blood cells. lytical methods for the analysis of small RNA samples and understand- This work was supported by grant GACR 303/03/H065. ing on how RNA integrity and different purification protocols affect its qualitative and quantitative analysis. Here we describe a novel Microfluidic assay that is able to perform very sensitive high resolution analyses of small RNA samples on a commercial lab-on-a-chip platform commonly used for RNA QC analy- sis. The assay delivers information about size and concentration of Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 1 P1278. Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification se, Tunisia, 3Service de Psychiatrie. Hôpital Fattouma Bourguiba, Monastir, (MLPA), a new assay for the molecular diagnosis of Duchenne Tunisia. and Becker muscular dystrophies Angelman Syndrome (AS) is a complex neurobehavioral disorder as- L. Adala1, M. Gribaa1, H. Elghezal1, J. Bouguila2, H. Ajina3, A. Saad1; sociated with loss of function of differentially expressed imprinted gene 1Cytogenetics, Molecular genetics and human Reproduction Biology labora- at the region 15q11-q13. It is a rare disorder. It occurs in one of 20 tory Farhat HACHED Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Pediatric department Farhat 000 live births. It is due either to a microdeletion in the 15q11 locus HACHED Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Pediatric department Sahloul Hospital, (65-75%), or to uniparental disomy (5%), or to UBE3a gene mutations Sousse, Tunisia. (10%), or to an anomaly of printing center (5%). In the 10% remainders Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is one of the most common and cases, the cause still unknown. severe inherited neuromuscular diseases, affecting 1 in 3500 live born The molecular study of the patients appear with a great importance males. with an aim of being able to conclude about the parental origin and, Both of the DMD and BMD (Becker muscular dystrophy), a milder and therefore, about the disease. less prevalent form of the disease, are X-linked recessive disorders In this work, we developed an experimental protocol able to ensure caused by mutations of the dystrophin gene located at Xp21. the molecular detection of this pathology. It is based on the MS-MLPA Mutation detection in the DMD gene defective in these diseases is a technique (Methylation Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe problematical trial complicated by the large size of the gene, which Amplification), which is able to detect abnormal methylation of imprint- consists of 79 exons and 8 promoters spread over 2,2 Mb of genomic ed genes as well as deletion occurring at 15q11-q13 locus. The study DNA. Hence, a molecular diagnosis should be proposed to the fami- of STRs markers of chromosome 15 allowed us to distinguish between lies in order to detect the carrier women and to suggest an antenatal uniparental disomy and microdeletion when abnormal methylation was diagnosis. detected. On this aim, we developed a protocol which is based on the semi- These two complementary techniques allowed us to study 8 suspected quantitative technique of diagnosis; the MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-de- AS patients. Only one of them showed a deletion in the 15q11-q13 pendent Probe Amplification) and the linkage analysis by tripled prim- region. This anomaly was confirmed with FISH (Fluorescent In Situ ers PCR (Reaction of polymerization in chain). These 2 techniques al- Hybridysation). lowed us to study 13 cases including 7 clinically suspected DMD/BMD The combination of these two techniques, in the diagnosis of AS, patients, 4 antenatal diagnoses and 2 girls suspected to be carrier. represents a very good strategy to find more than 85% of causative The results showed that 5 of these cases have dystrophin’s anoma- anomalies. It can easily be used in the majority of laboratories because lies (38,4%); in four of them it is a deletion and only one is carrying of its low price and simplicity. duplication. The maternal profile was studied in 9 cases. Three of them showed P1281. Evidence for a degenerating X chromosome in the rodent heterozygous deletions and only one, showed duplication. species Ellobius lutescens This protocol allowed us the identification of homozygous and het- A. Süß1, J. Högel1, I. Bakloushinskaya2, W. Just1; erozygous deletions and duplications of dystrophin gene in only one 1Inst. of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2Koltzov Inst. of Developmental Biol- step. ogy Russ. Acad. Sci, Moscow, Russian Federation. The mole vole Ellobius lutescens is an exceptional mammal with an P1279. Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) odd karyotype of 2n = 17,X with a single X chromosome in both sexes. - an interlaboratory collaborative validation study We postulate that the single X of E. lutescens will degenerate in conse- T. Janssens, A. Corveleyn, F. Le Calvez, E. Dequeker, G. Matthijs; quence of its lacking partner for recombination. In analogy to the fate Center for Human Genetics, EuroGentest, Leuven, Belgium. of the Y chromosome of male mammals we suggest an accumulation The EU Network of Excellence EuroGentest aims to improve and har- and fixation of non-deleterious mutations that will finally lead to the monize the overall quality of genetic services throughout Europe. The inactivation of X-chromosomal genes. This proceeding accumulation thorough validation of new methods is one of many contributions to of mutations may cause the extinction of the species E. lutescens. accomplish this, and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification To test this hypothesis we compared sequences of essential (Zfx, Atrx, (MLPA) is the first technology to be validated in this context. Flna) and non-essential (Opn1mw, Nr0b1, Xist, Mecp2) X-chromo- MLPA is a relatively new method to determine the copy number of somal genes to orthologous sequences of other mammals; as con- nucleic acid sequences by hybridisation of specific MLPA probe pairs trol for the mutation rate of recombining chromosomes we analysed that bind to adjacent sites and are joined by a ligation reaction before regions of the autosomal genes Sfrs3 (essential) and App (non-es- PCR. sential). We compared the ratio of accumulated mutations in essential A plethora of popular MLPA kits for different genetic diseases are avail- versus non-essential X-chromosomal genes to the ratio of autosomal able from the manufacturer. But even if their performance was already essential versus non-essential genes. established in different molecular diagnostic laboratories, so far no The results confirmed our hypothesis of a degenerating X chromo- major nor interlaboratory collaborative programs have been under- some. A comparison of the sequence conservation of the studied es- taken to fully validate MLPA. sential X-chromosomal genes between E. lutescens and E. fuscocapil- Therefore, a validation study was set up, including 13 international lus showed a highly significant accumulation of mutations in non-es- diagnostic laboratories. Questionnaires were answered by the par- sential X-chromosomal genes (p = 1.95 · 10-9) whereas the analysis of ticipants to evaluate the variability concerning MLPA protocols and autosomal genes did not show significant accumulation of mutations (p analysis tools, with the remarkable outcome that the majority had = 0.73). So we expect a progressive decay of the single X chromosome adapted the original protocol. Furthermore, the P002 BRCA1 MLPA kit and as a consequence the extinction of the species E. lutescens. (MRC-Holland) was used on 10 wildtype DNA samples and 3 deletion or duplication samples to evaluate the performance and the precision P1282. Identification of primate-specific non-coding RNAs at of the method itself. Finally, a data set of 89 MLPA files for DMD was human chromosome 15q11.2 analysed by different software tools for the evaluation of performance C. Cerrato Rivera1, M. Ogorelkova1, X. Estivill1,2; and internal quality control. 1Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain, 2Spanish Nacional Ge- We will present an analytical and diagnostic validation report and a notyping Center, Barcelona, Spain. generic standard operating procedure (SOP), and propose guidelines Non-coding RNAs play important roles in many cellular processes for diagnostic laboratories to successfully implement MLPA. rather than serving as templates for protein synthesis. Computational and experimental approaches have predicted thousands of ncRNAs in P1280. MS-MLPA (Methylation Specific Multiplex Ligation- human genome, but most of them are yet unknown and only a small dependent Probe Amplification) in the diagnosis of Angeman fraction have been partially characterised in terms of function or ex- Syndrome pression pattern. We observed that the chromosomal region 15q11.2 M. Gribaa1, S. Kacem1, H. Elghezal1, M. Yaacoub2, N. Gaddour3, A. Saad1; share characteristics with other regions containing ncRNAs: repetitive 1Service de Cytogénétique et de Biologie de la Reproduction. Hôpital Farhat elements in tandem, imprinted locus, and signals of instability. We Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service de Pédiatrie. Hôpital Farhat Hached, Sous- have performed a computational analysis of the target one-megabase Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 1 sequence searching for putative ncRNAs at this region. Among 86 formation on its performance, such as sensitivity and specificity, or the stable hairpin candidates, of 100 nucleotides and not overlapping with completeness of its data coverage. A survey of laboratories found that repeats, we selected 30 to check their expression by northern blot and most tools used are either for particular pieces of equipment or are da- primer extension and we identified 21 primate-specific new ncRNAs. tabases. It also showed that quality assessment is often missing or un- Two correspond to new microRNAs and 19 to a new class and fam- structured. Furthermore, there is no trustworthy source to validate the ily of ncRNAs. Computational analysis based on conservation of the quality of the clinically most critical features of the tools. We propose secondary structure supports that 15 of them are real ncRNAs. Most that tools can be categorised according to their purpose, with a spe- predicted genes targeted by these two miRNAs were common to both, cific list of features developed for each category. Assessment of per- and 11% of the targets encode proteins that participate in the devel- formance requires standardised tests for parameters specific to each opment of the central nervous system, suggesting a role of 15q11.2 tool category. Expert groups for each tool type are needed to propose miRNAs in neurological functions and disorders and review the features and performance measures. One important category of tool that we found in laboratories was sequence analysis P1283. High throughput genomics using Applied Biosystem’s tools. We have used previous work to propose a list of specific features SOLiD™ System and performance measures for these tools. We have investigated pre- M. D. Rhodes, G. Costa, J. Ichikawa, J. Malek, A. Sheridan, L. Apone, C. Hen- sentation of this data using a ‘wiki’, i.e. a web site editable by its users. drickson, H. Peckham, S. Ranade, J. Sorenson, K. McKernan, A. Blanchard; This allows groups of experts to be formed for the particular tool cat- Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. egory and to collaboratively enter and review data about the tool. Massively parallel sequencing systems are making genetic analysis cheaper and enabling experiments capable of answering increasingly P1286. In search of tissue specific regulators in periodontium - a complex biological questions. The SOLiD™ system, is a new platform bioinformatic approach. using either fragment or mate paired libraries to generate >1-2 GB of A. M. Lichanska, N. Pham; data/run with >99.99% consensus accuracy. We will present a sum- School of Dentistry, Brisbane, Australia. mary of the current chemistry of the SOLiD™ system together with Tissue specific gene expression can be regulated by tissue specific data generated to demonstrate sequence quality and coverage of a promoters, enhancers, silencers, transcription factors, differential number of increasingly complex targets, including bacteria, yeast, C. methylation, tissue specific alternative splicing, as well as other tran- elegans and mammals. The SOLiD™ chemistry and instrumentation scriptional and post-transcriptional factors. The methods used for can be readily adapted to a number of applications by modification of studying the regulatory elements are multiple, however, they are most- the ways in which the input nucleic acids are prepared and the output ly useful in cases where some information about the promoters active data is analyzed. Some of the applications under development with in a given tissue is available. collaborators will be presented as well as data demonstrating the utility While the tooth development is well described, the regulation of gene of the system expression in the tissues maturing after the tooth development is complete is unclear. Periodontal ligament tissue (PDL) is essential for P1284. Next generation sequencing - Opportunities and structural support of the teeth (attaches root to the bone). The under- constraints in pooling and quantitative sequencing standing of what makes it so special is essential for the development F. M. De La Vega1, F. C. L. Hyland1, J. Sorenson1, E. Cuppen2, K. McKernan3; of regenerative treatments of this tissue. 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Hubretch Lab, Utrecht, Expression profiling data of the primary cell cultures of periodontal The Netherlands, 3Applied Biosystems, Beverly, MA, United States. ligament tissue and outer gum tissue (gingiva) was performed using Next generation sequencing promises to address a range of applica- Affymetrix HU133A arrays. The analysis has identified 333 genes dif- tions including: identification of somatic mutation profiles, gene ex- ferentially regulated in these tissues. This set of genes was then sub- pression by tag counting, and measurement of allele frequencies in jected to promoter analysis to identify the CpG islands and promoter pooled samples of cases and controls in association studies. We de- binding sites. We have used a number of tools, such as Promoter-Ex- veloped a model to simulate digital sequencing with pooled samples, press, TRES, TFSEARCH, PAINT, CpGProD, CpG islands searcher, in the presence of error. We discover that for pooling and quantitative Methylator and MethCGI to generate an overview of the promoters of sequencing, the number of samples that can be pooled and the minor the differentially regulated genes. As a result we identified signature allele frequency of variants that can be detected is critically dependant promoter features of these differentially expressed genes. on the threshold for SNP calling, which in turn is strongly influenced by Currently, we are analyzing the role of the differential methylation be- the measurement error rate. As next generation sequencing platforms tween the two tissues and the role of some selected transcription fac- typically produce short reads (25-35bp), coverage needs to increase tors identified in this screen. over 20x to compensate. Increasing the coverage improves the esti- mate of the error rate, but cannot overcome problems with detecting P1287. Direct Sequencing Quality Control: a Novel Software very low frequency variants with large numbers of pooled samples. We Approach to Reducing Variant Review Time and Labor validated this model through empirical sequencing by oligonucleotide S. Jankowski, E. Vennemeyer, K. Hunkapiller, P. Shah; ligation and detection (Applied Biosystems SOLiD(TM) system) of 81 Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. PCR amplicons from exons of EMS-mutagenized C. elegans worms With the completion of the Human Genome Project, the shift from de encompassing ca. 25kb of sequence with over 1500x coverage. Am- novo sequencing to direct sequencing (resequencing) has created the plicons were pooled down to a 1:100 ratio (1:200 ratio for alleles). The need for more accurate variant detection for medical research and clin- results were compared with di-deoxy sequencing data carried out in- ical diagnostics. The bottleneck in the workflow (from DNA extraction dependently. Our results suggest that even if coverage needs to in- to result data analysis) has been cited as taking up to 70% of research- crease significantly when using short reads as compared with di-deoxy er’s time per project, due to manual review of individual nucleotide sequencing, low platform error rate is the most critical factor for detect- bases. This review has been required due to the necessity of having ing allele variants in pooled samples or mixtures by next generation confidence in the variant result. sequencing platforms. Increasing confidence can come from applying diligent quality control metrics, including use of Quality Values for DNA trace value and confi- P1285. Measuring the quality of computer tools used in dence values for variant validity. Based on Applied Biosystems experi- diagnostic genetic testing ence, this system will filter out low quality data. The software will then A. Devereau1,2, N. Walker2; direct users to review only low confidence variants. 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Uni- A flexible workflow based system is being built to enable researchers versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. to obtain their high confidence results in less time. Methods for filter- As part of the EuroGentest project (www.eurogentest.org) we investi- ing low quality data based on optimal settings and quality visualiza- gated quality measurement of computer tools used within diagnostic tion tools will be integrated into the system along with simpler variant laboratories. A literature survey highlighted the need to provide specific review and reporting tools to allow researchers to quickly analyze their information, such as what the tool does, who it is for, etc.; information data. about data used by the tool; information about tool operation; and in-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 20 P1288. RNA Integrity database: A web repository for RNA sample processing we have developed two chemically treated devices isolations which are useful for dried clinical sample collection, sample archiving M. Valer1, M. Kim1, C. Caruso1, H. Brunnert2, M. Greiner2, R. Salowsky2; and, most importantly, DNA preparation for amplification. Nucleic acid 1Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2Agilent Technolo- preparation from samples collected on a treated matrix is simple, rapid gies, Waldbronn, Germany. and automatable. Blood and buccal cell samples collected on FTA®, Lab-on-a-Chip devices are broadly used for RNA integrity analysis on a surfactant modified matrix, and FTA® Elute, a chaotropic salt modi- gene expression analysis. This creates the need and opportunity for fied matrix, can be stored for over 10 years under ambient conditions users to screen and validate RNA traces for relevance and trouble- as demonstrated by STR analysis. We have demonstrated the use of shooting. Here we describe the design of the backbone as well as DNA from these samples for genetic identification, real time PCR, DNA examples of use for a new RNA profile web database. The database sequencing, and allele specific hybridization methods. aims to host a large variety of sample types spanning different ge- Increasing demand for nucleic acids from archived samples dictates nus, tissues and sample treatments, although the database is initially that systems and devices should be able to support whole genomic limited to contain bioanalyzer traces. Each electropherogram is an- amplification. We have examined the recovery of DNA from samples notated with sample source details as well as analytical data like UV, archived on treated matrices and evaluated its’ suitability for whole Ribosomal ratios, RIN and more. They also include details on the RNA genomic amplification. We have also measured the inter-sample vari- extraction and the downstream experiment. ability and correlated this with nucleated cell counts, hematocrit and By design the database is open to the scientific community: free query- sample age. It is clear that blood and buccal samples dried on chemi- ing and curated contributions for individuals as well as large batch up- cally modified matrices are stable and provide an excellent source of loads from core labs. Individuals are able to compare their own results nucleic acids for future studies. with those of others with similar samples and protocols. Advanced fil- tering also allows comparison of alternative RNA isolation methods P1292. Computational prediction of SNPs of schizophrenia based on its resulting electrophoretic traces or other criteria. candidate genes that interfere with normal function of ESE M. Behmanesh, S. Shariati, E. Aslankoohi; P1289. Easily obtain high quality RNA from human blood Department of Genetics, School of Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University,, Teh- samples for gene expression analysis: Tempus™ blood RNA ran, P.O.Box 14115-175, Islamic Republic of Iran. tubes and RNA isolation systems Despite the ability of genetic association studies in assigning schizo- J. Yen1, L. Montesclaros1, M. Goldrick2, J. Gonzales2, N. Harris2, A. Lemire2, P. phrenia susceptibility genes, results have been quite spurious. SNPs Whitley2; (single nucleotide polymorphisms) are the most common genetic vari- 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Ambion, Austin, TX, ation in schizophrenia association studies. Most of these variations are United States. located in noncoding part of genome, previously thought to have no When blood is drawn into standard evacuated collection tubes, the particular function. In recent years regulatory function of these SNPs expression profile of gene targets can continue to change. Applied Bio- has attracted much attention. SNPs which are located on regulatory systems has designed Tempus™ Blood RNA Tubes for the collection elements might interfere with mechanisms that regulate gene expres- of human whole blood samples and the stabilization of RNA expres- sion such as splicing. Exonic Splicing Enhancers (ESEs) are one of sion profile. After the sample collections, researchers can then choose the most important splicing regulatory elements which can stimulate from two streamlined protocols to isolate RNA. Recent real-time PCR splicing and seem to be particularly relevant for regulating alternative and microarray data using the RNA isolated from the Tempus™ Blood splicing. ESEs appear to be very prevalent and may be present in most RNA Tubes and the Tempus™ Blood RNA Isolation Kits have shown exons, if not all. We have computationally analyzed SNPs of 16 can- the gene expression profile is stable for up to five days when the tubes didate genes for schizophrenia, to find whether they interfere with the are situated at room temperature or for up to seven days at 4°C. normal function of ESE. In total, 9335 SNPs were analyzed by S/R rich protein binding site prediction algorithm. 1.12% of SNPs can poten- P1290. A rapid and sensitive method for RNA quality tially interfere with ESE function. These SNPs might have regulatory determination on capillary electrophoresis systems. function thus are interesting candidates for schizophrenia association A. B. Shah1, S. Karudapuram1, L. K. Joe1, J. Hauser1, A. T. Huynh1, S. Pothini1, study. Following table shows the results of this study. S. Samsani1, S. Ramachandra1, E. S. Vennemeyer1, J. Briggs1, H. M. Wenz1, C. Number of SNPs after Number of SNPs All analyzed SNPs Analyzes Genes A. Waldron1, C. Carver2, S. Bass2, P. Baumgartner2; Genetic Footprinting Located at ESE 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Gene Logic, Inc., Gaith- 18 19 257 COMT 0 5 363 DTNBP1 ersburg, MD, United States. 2 9 638 NRG1 RNA quality is directly correlated to the success of various applica- 5 5 29 RGS4 tions, such as microarray or real time qPCR-based gene expression 2 2 559 GRM3 analyses, cDNA library construction, Northern analyses, and RNAse 0 8 1367 DISC1 protection assays, which utilize RNA samples from various organisms, 0 1 120 DAOA 2 2 87 DAAO tissues, cell lines, and precious biological samples. We present a novel 5 5 283 PPP3CC method for examining RNA integrity and purity using capillary electro- 11 11 287 PRODH2 phoresis that is more cost-effective and scalable than current standard 8 8 125 Akt1 methods. This highly sensitive method uses less material, uncovers 2 3 296 MUTED impurities following RNA purification, and detects degradation result- 3 4 597 MRDS1 6 6 3923 ERBB4 ing from nuclease contamination. Total RNA and cRNA, derived from 15 15 173 GAD1 various tissues and cell lines, were stained with the dye YOYO-1 and 3 3 231 FEZ1 run through a custom polymer formulation on a capillary electrophore- 82 106 9335 Sum sis platform. Using downstream analysis software, we resolved RNA species and their relative quality based on parameters such as size, P1293. Low Volume Dispensing for DNA Sequencing at the profile, peak area, and peak height. Our results highlight the potential Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center, University of California for high-throughput capillary electrophoresis as a much more discrimi- San Francisco natory and cost-saving method in evaluating RNA quality. A. M. Gallagher1, D. Donnelly1, M. Robertson2, R. Chui3; 1Deerac Fluidics, Dublin, Ireland, 2Ernest Gallo Clinic and Reserach Center, P1291. Collection, storage and processing of clinical samples University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, 3Ernest Gallo Clinic for molecular analysis. and Research Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United M. A. Harvey, B. O. Parker; States. Whatman Inc, Sanford, ME, United States. The Ernest Gallo Clinic & Research Center (EGCRC), a part of the The collection and preparation of clinical samples for molecular analy- Neurology Department of the University of California San Francisco sis is important for expanding applications in genetic identification, drug (UCSF), studies basic neuroscience and the effects of alcohol on the discovery, predictive medicine and pharmacogenomics. To simplify brain. The Genome Center at the EGCRC is involved in a large re-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 21 sequencing project that consists of sequencing candidate genes for as targets for exonic missense or even nonsense mutations. alcoholism from a set of approximately 1000 people, identifying rare The identification of these last motifs was mainly based on bioinfor- variants of interest and tracking those variants through extended fami- matics and functional analyses. Therefore, many matrices are today lies. The genomics facility produces about one million sequences per available to predict these auxiliary-splicing sequences and to evaluate year utilizing two 3730xl instruments, (Applied Biosystems, Foster City the pathogenic impact of mutations. CA), two Biomek FX robots and one Equator GX8 (Deerac Fluidics). We designed the SSF software as a single resource that includes the Miniaturization of sequencing reactions was undertaken to save in re- various bioinformatics algorithms necessary for an exhaustive evalu- agent costs by reducing volumes and to save in consumables by re- ation of the various splicing elements. We also developed a new al- moving the need for expensive disposable tips. The genome sequenc- gorithm to identify BP sequences. It was confronted to all mutations ing community uses quality metrics based on PHRED scores with known to involve a BP sequence and was found reliable in all cases. 20 being the base line for regular sequencing. In the Gallo genome The SSF tool could give valuable information for molecular diagnostic core, heterozygous variant detection especially for very rare variants laboratories to evaluate the pathogenicity of a mutation. It can also requires that sequences must yield a PHRED score of 30 before pro- be used to identify potential targets for antisens oligonucleotides to ceeding to analysis. It was essential to keep these quality metrics while silence ESE or BP and therefore lead to exon skipping. at the same time reducing volume. Here, the miniaturization process is described, along with the integra- P1296. Interactome of the Sushi-Repeat protein SRPX2 that tion of the Equator GX8 into the sequencing pipeline resulting in a high causes brain disorders of the speech areas level of data integrity and a significant reduction in operating costs. B. Royer1, P. Roll1, G. Rudolf2, C. Leveque3, D. C. Soares4, I. E. Scheffer5, R. Vincentelli6, N. Roeckel-Trevisiol1, H. Gara1, A. Massacrier1, A. Robaglia-Sch- P1294. Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) analysis in XX lupp1, P. N. Barlow4, P. Pontarotti7, E. Hirsch2, C. Cambillau6, S. F. Berkovic8, M. and XY sex reversal Lathrop9, P. Cau1, P. Szepetowski1; G. Queipo1,2, N. Najera1,2, L. Zepeda1, J. Berumen1,2, S. Kofmanm3; 1Inserm UMR491, Marseille, France, 2Departement de Neurologie, Stras- 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Facultad de Medicina bourg, France, 3Inserm UMR641, Marseille, France, 4Biomolecular NMR Unit, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico, 3Hospital Edimburgh, United Kingdom, 5Department of medicine, Melbourne, Australia, General de Mexico-Facultad de Medicina Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 6AFMB-UMR CNRS 6098, Marseille, France, 7EA3781, Universite de Provence, México, Mexico City, Mexico. Marseille, France, 8Department of Medicine, Melbourne, Australia, 9Centre Introduction: The sex determining genes SRY and SOX9 are required National de Genotypage, Evry, France. to initiate/maintain testicular development. However, the genetic inter- The rolandic and perisylvian brain areas are responsible for speech actions controlling the earliest steps in gonadal development remain production and association of rolandic epilepsy (RE) with oral and poorly understood. Molecular abnormalities underlying a high pro- speech dyspraxia (OSD) is well known. portion of human XY gonadal dysgenesis, XX maleness and XX true We have identified the first gene, SRPX2 (Sushi Repeat Protein, X- hermaphroditism remain undiscovered. The use of high density SNP linked 2) that is mutated either in RE with OSD, or in RE with bilat- array in sex reversal patients could be useful to characterize the etiol- eral perisylvian polymicrogyria*. More recently, evolutionary study on ogy of the abnormal gonadal development and provide new molecular SRPX2 identified only one human-specific mutation (p.R75K) that has insights into the normal regulatory network in the testis and ovary de- appeared since the human-chimpanzee split. Three-dimensional mod- velopment. eling of the first SRPX2 sushi domain located K75 in the same critical Aim: Evaluate gene dosage effect in 8 XY females and 8 SRY-negative loop as where the pathogenic mutation p.Y72S has also occurred. XX males using a Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) chip. Sushi domains have been shown to sustain protein-protein interac- Methods: Affimetrix 500,000 SNP array for screening over 80% of the tions and are frequently found in complement control proteins and in genome within 10Kb of a SNP and a median inter-marker distance of the selectin family of adhesion proteins. However, the actual function of 3.3 Kb was used. SRPX2 remains unknown. We have undertaken a systematic SRPX2- Results: Seven XY patients have been studied. The hybridization con- interactome strategy in order to understand the role(s) of SRPX2 ditions were optimal obtaining a call rate around 95%, data analysis through the protein(s) it interacts with, and to identify novel candidate was performed with Affymetrix gene chip software. We finished the genes. The actual interactions of SRPX2 with its 18 putative partners analysis in 3 XY females, showing the presence of duplicated and as identified by yeast two-hybrid experiments, is currently being as- deleted SNPs in all the cases. We found 3 shared regions in all the sessed using in-cell co-transfection followed by co-immunoprecipita- cases, in chromosome 2 and 14, where two and one possible candi- tion experiments, and on-chip (BIAcore) experiments. A first SRPX2 date genes were present. In the meeting we will present the analysis interactor has now been firmly identified, providing exciting insights on of the rest of XY population and the preliminary results in XX-SRY the possible molecular mechanisms driven by SRPX2. negative males. Generally, SRPX2 represents a first key point towards the identifica- Conclusions: These results suggest that gene dosage participates in tion of molecular pathways associated with the functioning and the gonadal development, where threshold levels of expression control development of the brain speech areas, in both pathological and physi- entry into the male or female pathway. ological conditions. *Roll et al., Hum. Mol. Genet. 2006 P1295. Splicing Sequences Finder: a bioinformatics resource to identify sequences involved in splicing P1297. GENIUS: A New Universal Stripassay Analyzer Software C. Béroud1,2, D. Hamroun1,2, S. Tuffery-Giraud1,3, O. Leroy1,3, G. Collod- H. Onay1, B. Onay2, C. Oksuz2, E. Uslu2, A. Ekmekci1, E. Karaca1, F. Ozkinay1; Béroud1,3, M. Claustres1,2; 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, 1INSERM, U 827, Montpellier, F-34000, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Hôpital Arn- Turkey, 2IDEA Teknoloji Cozumleri Company, Istanbul, Turkey. aud de Villeneuve, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, F-34000, Molecular genetic diagnostic applications have been widely used France, 3Université Montpellier1, UFR Médecine, Montpellier, F-34000, France. worldwide. Reverse hybridization based stripassays helped dissemi- Today thousands of intronic or exonic variations potentially resulting nation of these applications. Evaluation of the stripassays is a subjec- in splicing defects are identified yearly in molecular diagnostic labo- tive process and reporting of the results is not easy unless there is a ratories. To assess the pathogenicity of these mutations, we develop medical genetic specialist who can interpret the results. An automated the Splicing Sequences Finder (SSF) tool (http://www.umd.be/SSF), system which can scan, evaluate and archive stripassays and give a which allows the identification of the various splicing elements from a standardized report is essential for accurate reporting. crude sequence. These elements include: There was not an automation system in the market for different type - The impact on the well-characterized acceptor and donor splice sites of stripassays produced by different vendors. GENIUS was developed motifs. to automate analysis, comment and reporting steps of the stripassay - The identification of branch point sequences (BP) whose key role in usage. Today GENIUS can analyze over 20 different stripassays from splicing can also explain the pathogenicity of some intronic mutations. different vendors. Some of these tests are CVD (Cardio Vascular Dis- - The ESE and ESS (exonic splicing enhancer or silencer), ISE and eases Susceptibility), Cystic Fibrosis, FMF (Familial Mediterranean ISS (intronic splicing enhancer or silencer), which are now recognized Fever), Thalassemia, Haemochromatosis, Gaucher, etc.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 22 Application has a very strong image processing mechanism and flex- findings identify genetic factors associated with olanzapine- treatment ible database architecture. Medical staff puts tests into scanner and response in female schizophrenic patients. GENIUS gets image from device. Then application checks the test type. After the identification of test, it searches mutation areas and P1300. Gene expression signature in peripheral blood detects other critical check points on the stripassay. By using analysis results, thoracic aortic aneurysm GENIUS refers to database and generates comments about the re- Y. Wang1, C. Barbacioru1, F. Chan1, J. Blake1, D. Schiffman2, O. Iakoubova2, S. sults. Adding a new test to system takes approximately 2-4 hours de- Balasubramanian3, K. Poulter1, M. Tranquilli4, G. Albornoz4, J. Elefteriades4, R. pending on the number of mutations on the stripassay. So it is very Samaha1; easy to adapt GENIUS for different markets which use different stri- 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Celera Diagnostics, Al- passays. ameda, CA, United States, 3Pharmacyclics, Inc, Sunnyvale, CA, United States, Oracle 10g is the database of the GENIUS. Addition to this Oracle BI 4Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States. EE is being used for analytic reporting. Thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) is usually asymptomatic and associat- ed with high mortality. Adverse clinical outcome of TAA is preventable P1298. Comparison of two fluorescent dsDNA binding dyes by elective surgical repair; however, identifying at-risk individuals is SYBR Green I and EvaGreen for Melting Curve Analysis difficult. We hypothesized that gene expression patterns in peripheral J. Radvansky1, G. Minarik1, A. Ficek1,2, P. Resko1, L. Kadasi1,2; blood cells may correlate with TAA disease status. 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2SAS, Gene expression profiles of peripheral blood samples collected from Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia. 58 individuals diagnosed with TAA and 36 normal individuals (controls) One of the basic detection systems for real-time PCR is based on ds- were analyzed in this study. Significance Analysis of Microarray (SAM) DNA binding fluorescent dyes, from which SYBR Green I is the best analysis identified potential signature genes characterizing TAA vs. known. However, the SYBR Green I is not the only dye for these appli- normal, ascending vs. descending TAA, as well as sporadic vs. familial cations. Because of their unique feature (enhanced fluorescence when TAA. A 41-gene classification model for detecting TAA was constructed bound to the dsDNA) SLDs (SYBR Green Like Dyes) are frequently using a training set containing 36 TAA patients and 25 controls. Testing used in detection of specific PCR products by melting curve analy- this classification model on an independent testing set containing 22 sis (MCA). Recently, a new fluorescent dye EvaGreen has appeared TAA samples and 11 controls yielded an overall classification accuracy which shows (by the manufacturer’s information) better properties for of 78%. These 41 classifier genes were further validated by TaqMan® real-time PCR than SYBR Green I. To investigate the more appropriate real-time PCR assays. Classification on the 30 testing samples based dye for our MCA applications we decided to compare some properties on the TaqMan data resulted in similar classification accuracy (80%) of these two dyes such as photostability, detection limit with diverse as that from microarray data. range of dye concentration and PCR product concentration and some This study generated a distinct molecular signature in peripheral blood parameters of the final peak in MCA. Since the molar concentration cells that can detect TAA patients from normal individuals. Validated of each dye is different in the 1x working solution our measurements by TaqMan® real-time PCR assays, the classifier genes identified in were done by the basic working concentrations and by equal molar this study define a set of promising potential diagnostic markers, set- concentrations too. We also compared the accuracy of the Tm values ting the stage for a blood-based gene expression test to facilitate early obtained from a larger set of each sample. In our study we used 4 detection of TAA disease. PCR products (for the detection of the 35delG, W24X, R127H mu- tations and a polymorphism GJB2-SNP1 in GJB2 gene). According P1301. Universal array-based multiplexed test for polymorphism to our findings EvaGreen has better properties (the peaks obtained detection of genes associated with inherited thrombophilia from MCA by EvaGreen are generally higher and sharper and the Tm E. S. Vashukova1, A. S. Glotov1, T. V. Nasedkina2, T. E. Ivaschenko1, M. S. values are more accurate) however it shows lower photostability than Zainulina1, V. S. Baranov1; SYBR Green I. Detailed results will be presented on our poster. 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Rus- sian Federation, 2Engelgardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian P1299. Association study of therapeutic response and SERT, Federation. MDR1 and 5-HT2c gene polymorphisms in female schizophrenic Thrombophilia refers to disorders, which are associated with a persis- patients tent hypercoagulable state and a tendency towards thrombosis. They N. Bozina1, J. Sertic1, V. Medved2, M. Rojnic Kuzman2, L. Hotujac2; may be inherited, acquired or complex, when genetic factors interact 1Center for Functional Genomics and Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis, with environmental influences. Besides acquired risk factors, such as Zagreb University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Psychiatry, hyperhomocysteinemia and high levels of factor VIII, there are single Zagreb University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia. nucleotide polymorphisms in the prothrombin (20210G> A), MTHFR Interindividual differences in treatment response to second generation (677C> T), factor V Leiden (1691FVG> A), PAI-1 (5G> 4G), GPIIIA antipsychotics point out that genetic factor may be relevant. The aim (196C> T), fibrinogene (455G> A) genes which result in hereditary of this study was to investigate the relationships between variants of thrombophilia. We have developed the fast and easily adapted meth- serotonin transporter gene (SERTPR and SERTin2), serotonine re- od of detection mutations associated with thrombophilia, suitable for ceptor (5-HT2c-759C/T) and multidrug resistant gene (MDR1-2667G/ technological process at any standart molecular diagnostic laboratory. T, 3435C/T), and initial symptomatology and treatment response in This convenient and reliable detection of mutations is based on mul- 106 female schizophrenic patients treated with olanzapine for up to tiplex PCR with subsequent hybridization on the biochip. Use of this 3 months. Afterwards, we compared allele, genotype and haplotype technique open new opportunities for carrying out large-scale popula- distributions between those patients and 108 control female subjects. tion researches of genetic predisposition to thrombophilia. The practi- Methods: Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP, and real-time cal recommendations have been developed for the choice of therapy PCR methods. To assess and evaluate therapeutic response, all pa- strategy in case of investigated mutations detection. tients were rated using PANSS. Overall, the presence of SERTPR-S allelic variant and SS genotype was associated with significantly more P1302. A homogeneous high-throughput assay for the primary weight gain in subjects who were non-obese at the time of admission screening of type 1 diabetes related HLA-DQB1 alleles (p= 0.02). The presence of SERTPR-L variant was associated with sig- M. Kiviniemi1, J. Nurmi2, J. Ilonen1,3, T. Lövgren4; nificantly better treatment response measured with total PANSS and 1Immunogenetics Laboratory, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Abacus Di- general PANSS subscale (p<0.04), while the presence of SERTin2-l agnostica Oy, Turku, Finland, 3Department of Clinical Microbiology, University variant determined better treatment response only in several items. of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland, 4Department of Biotechnology, University of Turku, We found significant associations with lower initial PANSS, and MDR1- Turku, Finland. 2667G/T genotype. 2677T allele and TT genotype were associated We have developed a homogeneous genotyping system allowing with significantly worse treatment response. Also overrepresentation simple, low-cost and rapid genotyping of thousands of samples. The of G2677/3435T haplotype in schizophrenic female patients compared method utilizing an asymmetric PCR and subsequent hybridization of to controls was significant (p=0.025). Test result for linkage disequi- allele specific probes with LNA additions for the genotyping of HLA- librium between two MDR1 loci was found to be significant. These DQB1 alleles *02, *0302 and *05/6 can be used as the primary screen-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 2 ing step in large-scale projects where subjects at high genetic risk for enriched for K4-dimethyl modification, out of which half are also en- development of type 1 diabetes are identified. The method was vali- riched for K4-trimethyl. Many of these enrichments are present in all dated by typing a set of 50 known samples. To promote simplicity in cell types, suggesting these modifications could be constitutive. These handling and storage the sample material of choice was blood dried on enrichments appear to be specific to UCE regions as they were not sample collection cards. found in control regions. A very limited number of UCEs show a re- The developed homogeneous assay platform allows the typing of hun- pressed chromatin conformation. Our results provide a framework for dreds of samples within one working day; an assay can be run in ap- further understanding the potential functions of UCEs in the regulation proximately 4 hours with sample number limited only by the number of of developmentally essential genes. thermal cyclers available. The homogeneous assay gave correct ge- notyping result for 100 % of the samples used to validate the method. P1304. Analysis of USF1 and USF2 by chromatin The costs of the assay are minimal and the reductions in hands-on immunoprecipitation and whole genome tiling arrays identifies time provide considerable improvements compared to the heteroge- candidate genes for familial combined hyperlipidemia neous genotyping methods comprising of separate PCR and hybrid- C. Wadelius1, A. Rada-Iglesias1, A. Ameur2, P. Kapranov3, S. Enroth2, J. Ko- ization steps. morowski2, T. R. Gingeras3; The presented assay system provides a functional approach to the 1Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformatics, rapid screening of thousands of samples at low cost, a general starting Uppsala, Sweden, 3Affymetrix Inc, Santa Clara, CA, United States. point for large scale screening studies. USF1 is a transcription factor associated with familial combined hy- perlipidemia (FCHL) and it binds as a heterodimer with USF2. Binding P1303. The chromatin state of ultraconserved non-coding sites for USF1, USF2 and regions of histone H3 acetylation (H3ac) elements were mapped across the whole genome in HepG2 cells using ChIP U. Choudhury1, F. Parisi2, F. Naef2, S. E. Antonarakis1; and tiling arrays. Regions with signal significantly higher than negative 1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Ecole Polytech- controls were identified and subsequent Q-PCR in 48 such regions nique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. showed <1% false positives for each factor. Regions bound by USF1, Vertebrate comparative genomics has proven to be an effective ap- USF2 and H3ac were characterized against a range of annotated proach for uncovering functional elements in the human genome. Ul- genomic features. H3ac signal was found at 10.900 regions, 50% of traconserved elements (UCEs) show extreme conservation in mam- them <1kb from transcription start sites (TSS) of protein coding genes mals and are defined by a perfect sequence identity between human, (PCG). The footprint of this signal showed a bimodal pattern with a ma- mouse and rat over at least 200 bp. Most UCEs map in the vicinity of jor peak downstream of TSS at +600-800bp and a smaller peak sym- genes that are key regulators of vertebrate development. A number of metrically located upstream of the TSS. The ChIP-chip signals were UCEs have been reported to possess enhancer activity and they are compared to the expression pattern of 18 000 genes and the height of thought to be involved in the regulation these genes. the downstream peak was positively correlated with gene expression. To further uncover the functions and mechanisms of action of UCEs USF1 and USF2 preferentially bound -300 to -100bp i.e. upstream of we assessed their chromatin state in various human cell types (lym- TSS of PCG. In bidirectional promoters USF1 and USF2 bind between phoblastoid, fetal lung and neuroblastoid). We performed ChIP-on- the two TSS and the peak of H3ac is downstream of each TSS. USF1 chip experiments using antibodies against histone H3 modifications and USF2 signal was found in promoters of over 1000 genes. Genes that mark active (K4-dimethyl,trimethyl) or repressed chromatin con- with promoters bound by USFs were analyzed using gene ontology formations (K27-trimethyl and K9-dimethyl). Custom tiling microarrays classification and three biological pathways were identified that con- were designed to contain the sequences of 287 non-coding UCEs, as tained genes that are excellent candidates for FCHL. well as the 5’ regions of the nearby genes. Preliminary results show that ~20% of the UCE regions are strongly Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 2 Po09. Genetic counselling, education, risk factors interplay. Several certified tests for prediction of AD are commercially available genetic services, and public policy enabling publically accessible genetic testing. Its certainty is compli- cated by inability to assess all possible potent risk factors. Additionally, P1305. EuroGentest Survey and Database of Quality Assurance genetically based prediction of AD onset is questioned due to general in European genetic laboratories ethical and social issues, concerning benefits but also potential harm. N. Nagels1,2, A. Corveleyn1,2, L. Desmet1,2, C. Gaudebout1,3, B. Urbero1,3, S. However little is known about public standpoints towards predictive Aymé1,3, E. Dequeker1,2, M. A. Morris1,4; genetic testing in neuropsychiatric disorders as AD. This presenta- 1EuroGentest, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department for Human Genetics, University tion argues main issues related to predictive genetic testing for com- of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Orphanet, Paris, France, 4Molecular Diagnostic plex disorders supplemented with data from Bosnia and Herzegovina Laboratory, Service of Genetic Medicine, Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, based on 1000 individual attitudes toward AD predictive genetic testing Switzerland. collected using pre-designed questionnaire. The statistical sample is Although a number of public websites provide lists of medical genetic representative for BH general population in terms of age, sex, social testing laboratories and of available, reliable public information about and demographic structure. Results are differentiated and structured Quality Assurance (QAu) is sparse or even intentionally absent. To among group of medical workers (familial with this issues) stratified remedy this, EuroGentest has performed a long-term survey of QAu in by education level and general population subsample. There is a cor- European genetics laboratories, in collaboration with Orphanet. Over relation between affirmative attitude and level of education, medical 1000 laboratories in Europe offering some form of genetic testing were branch and urbanization. The most important obstruction in this type of identified and received an online survey, and approximately 350 labs survey is incomplete knowledge on methodology of genetic testing of have replied to date, from 32 countries. AD and potential risk of its inadequate interpretation. To ensure the highest possible quality of the data, which might vary according to the identity of the respondent in a laboratory, replies were P1308. Assessment of a selection of patient information peer-reviewed and validated by comparison with EQA providers and materials discussing genetic testing from across Europe accreditation bodies, prior to dissemination via the European QAu da- C. Lewis, P. Mehta, A. J. Kent; tabase. Genetic Interest Group, Islington, United Kingdom. Based on the evaluation of the QAu data for 2004-2005, half of di- AIM: To assess the quality of written information for patients and fami- agnostic providers have a designated quality manager. Only 15% of lies about genetic testing, from a range of European countries. METH- laboratories are fully accredited and approximately 50% of laboratories OD: Written information relating to genetic testing for 5 conditions was participate in EQA schemes, distributed by 21 different providers. With gathered from genetic departments across 7 European countries. 50 the collaboration of the latter, we were able to confirm about 90% of pieces in total were randomly chosen and assessed for the inclusion EQA participation declared by laboratories. or omission of 14 key issues. These had been identified by pre existing With the new awareness of the central role of QAu, making this infor- tools as being important for inclusion when developing or assessing mation available will benefit consumers, by facilitating informed choice material relating to genetic testing. RESULTS: Whilst the majority of of laboratory partners for performing tests, and genetics services, by information discussed issues relating to the condition including back- facilitating selection of reliable partners for referral of tests which can- ground and effect (n=48, 96%), treatment and management (n=37, not be performed locally and by valorizing their efforts and investment 74%) and heredity and risk (n=49, 98%), less than half the informa- in QAu. This study provides the first overview of the status of QAu in tion discussed issues related to patient rights (n=12, 42%) and a dis- European genetics laboratories. cussion of benefits as well as potential risks of genetic testing (n=22, 44%). Only half discussed where to get additional information and P1306. On the necessity of adult medical genetics services in support from (n=25, 50%). Benefits were more likely to be included developing countries (n=41, 82%) than any risks involved (n=24, 48%). The issue discussed P. Phowthongkum; least frequently was the possible psychological and social effects of Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand. genetic testing (n=9, 18%). Pre-written leaflets provided a far more Medical genetics service is often percieved as expensive, luxorious comprehensive discussion of the key issues than personal letters did. and unnecessary in public health in most developing countries. The Information relating to hereditary breast cancer scored far better than situation is worse among adult medical genetic services that are al- information on the other conditions. DISCUSSION: It is important that most completely neglected and limited to academic interest only. I patients and families receive good quality written information about performed a retrospective review of adult patients chart admitted at genetic testing. The development and translation of quality assessed Chulalongkorn Hospital, a university-based hospital of Thailand to find prewritten information leaflets is one way to ensure this. the prevalence of genetic diseases and management. The main re- sult is that the prevalence of genetic diseases in in-hospital patients is P1309. Regulating expression: the governance of human about 0.6% and the three main diagnoses are hypertrophic cardiomy- developmental genetics. opathy, thalassemia and familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome. K. Taylor, S. Woods; This is still an underestimate because nearly all patients are not seen PEALS, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. by medical geneticist and only obvious genetic disorders are recorded. In this poster we will present the findings from recent empirical re- This data is the first in our country to demonstrate the problem of adult- search undertaken as part of the Developmental Gene Expression Map onset genetic disorders. The fact that the prevalence isn this study is (DGEMap) design study. This EU funded project aims to establish the lower than in western countries, especially in pediatric wards, indicates foundations of a pan-European infrastructure, integrating a currently that more comprehensive prospective records of in-hospital patients fragmented research effort. Our role within DGEMap has been to re- and community-based should be done to increase the awareness of port on the ethical, legal and social aspects of this area of research, genetic diseases, and thereby change national policy in the future. which arise particularly from its requirement for tissue taken from em- bryos donated following legal elective termination of pregnancy. P1307. Predictive genetic testing of Alzheimer disease - A public The first results we report are from an e-mail survey of scientists, con- perspective ducted during 2006, that included members of the ESHG. In our survey N. Pojskic1, L. Oruc2, A. Memic2, L. Kapur1; respondents were asked to offer their views on a range of issues con- 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and cerning research using human embryos including; ethical oversight, Herzegovina, 2Psychiatric Clinic KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. ethics training and legislation at local, national and EU levels. One key Alzheimer disease (AD) is the common cause of adult-onset progres- finding was a strong desire for ethics training for scientists at all career sive degenerative dementia and complex in its etiology. Genetic fac- stages. Detailed results will be presented and the potential implica- tors have a key contribution to development of AD. Although several tions for a common research governance framework explored. vulnerability genes are identified and well characterized, some familial Secondly, we will present the findings of a symposium of invited ex- cases of this disease are due to rare mutation in other genes. The risk perts that was held in Newcastle in February 2007. The aim of the of AD appears to be heterogeneous in its nature with additional genetic event was to highlight the range of concerns and considerations for Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 2 the governance of developmental genetics research in as diverse an Executive, the ministerial body for health issues, has taken the lead entity as the EU. The plurality of views on the status of the human in providing guidelines for genetic counselling, testing and screening embryo and the resulting implications for collaborative science will be of individuals at risk of colorectal (CRC) and breast/ ovarian cancer explored. (BOC). Referrals to the Scottish genetics centres are ever increasing, but questions remain whether individuals most at risk are adequately P1310. Principles of Bioethics in the Universal Declaration on accessing the service provided. We therefore investigated the refer- the Human Genome and Human Rights ral and attendance patterns of 4178 individuals from CRC and BOC F. Emam, F. Mirzajani; families at the South-East Scotland Clinical Genetics Centre between National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Re- 2000 - 2006 with a particular emphasis on age, sex and social depriva- public of Iran. tion indices. Patients from CRC and BOC families attending the genet- Looking at the bioethical discussions from management perspective, ics service had lower deprivation indices than the general population. it could be observed that those discussions are based on three policy Lower deprivation indices were more marked in the CRC group than principles put forward in the provisions of the above Declaration: inher- in the BOC group (p<0.001). Effective education and communication ent dignity of human beings , their fundmental unity and respecting strategies targeted at patients of all educational and socio-economic their human rights and freedoms. Strategical principles of bioethics aim backgrounds need to be developed to address these inequalities in at the best interests of human beings and protection of public health uptake of genetic services. while respecting common genetical heritage of humanity. To achieve the above objectives, independent, multidisciplinary and pluralist eth- P1313. The first demonstration of genetic predisposition in all ics committees must be established in order to first assess the ethical, cancers using model of early onset breast cancer in Poland legal and social issues raised by research on the human genome and J. Lubinski1, S. Narod2, B. Gorski1, C. Cybulski1, T. Debniak1, A. Jakubowska1, its application and second, to identify the practices that could be con- J. Matyjasik1, D. Wokolorczyk1, E. Grabowska1, K. Medrek1, T. Huzarski1, T. trary to human dignity, such as germ-line interventions. Byrski1, J. Gronwald1, B. Masojc1, P. Serrano-Fernandez1; Putting forward a comparative (Islamic-International) analysis of the 1Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 2Centre for Research in above principles, our paper tries to show the possible directions that Women’s Health, Toronto, ON, Canada. bioethics system of Iran can take. The paper finishes with proposals on Aim. Search for combinations of cancer susceptibility markers detect- how to guide the system towards the best possible direction. ing with 100% sensitivity early onset breast cancer patients. Patients. 473 unselected Polish patients affected by breast cancers P1311. The twilight zone between health and sickness: A under age of 51 years and paired controls from families without can- qualitative exploration with asymptomatic BRCA1/2 mutation cers among first and second degree relatives matched for age and carriers sex. E. Dagan1,2, S. Gil3, R. Gershoni-Baruch1,4; Methods. Frequency of all possible combinations between genomic 1Institute of Human Genetics, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2Depart- markers identified as associated with cancer susceptibility in Poland ment of Nursing, The Faculty of Social Welfare and Health Sciences, University have been composed between cases and controls. of Haifa, Israel, 3School of Social Work, The Faculty of Social Welfare and Results. 17 combinations of 26 mutations or polymorphisms within 14 Health Sciences, University of Haifa, Israel, 4Faculty of Medicine, Technion-In- genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, p16, XPD, MC1R, CYP1B1 and oth- stitute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. ers) have been found to cover all of breast cancer cases. The same Harboring a germ-line mutation in BRCA1/2 genes increases the life- genomic patterns were present only in 84.22% of controls. time risk for breast-ovarian cancer. Within the Ashkenazi population, Conclusions three predominant mutations were identified in 2.5% of this popula- Hypothesis: tion, resulting in the increased prevalence of hereditary breast-ovarian 1. All of cancers occur on the basis of increased genetic susceptibility. cancer to 20% and 40%, respectively. The current study is aimed at 2. Less than 50% of population has any risk of cancer of particular exploring the way in which healthy women at high-risk for developing site. breast-ovarian cancer experience and give meaning to the dialectic Acknowledgments: Authors thank Ms Gibaszek R. and Putresza E. for between being healthy and being at high risk. excellent support in collection and analysis of registry data. Seventeen in-depth interviews with asymptomatic BRCA1/2 mutation carriers were conducted. Analyzing the narratives revealed several P1314. Baseline situation in Turkey about genetic consultancy themes constructed around: Fears in Conflict - the continuous conflict for women who have risk of breast cancer between the threat inherent in being a BRCA1/2 carrier and the fear P. C. Unalan1, I. A. Güney2, S. S. Çifçili1; accompanying the prospect of a prophylactic surgeries in the absence 1Marmara University Medical Faculty Department of Family Medicine, Istanbul, of clinical findings; Family Clock - the definition of personal risk in ac- Turkey, 2Marmara University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, cordance with the age of onset of their mother’s cancer “I hope that Istanbul, Turkey. nothing happens to me by the age my mother got sick.”; Illusion of BACKGROUND:Breast cancer is the most common cancer among Control - the sense that knowledge is power: “I have always known Turkish women. The BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes ex- that I am a carrier. At least now, there is something I can do.”; The plain most of the disease in families. Consequently, there is a growing Inner Mother - the way in which the women’s mothers coped with the demand for genetic assessment services including provision of genetic cancer shaped their own story of coping. risk information and genetic counselling with possible presymptomatic With growing knowledge about the contribution of molecular genetics testing. to multi-factorial diseases, these findings provide insight into individu- AIM:This study reports prospective baseline data about the multidis- als whose lives hang in the balance between health and sickness, and ciplinary genetic and surgical assessment and counselling of familial suggest ways in which geneticists can integrate family context into breast cancer cases and their women relatives who have a risk. their counseling practice. METHOD:State University Hospitals are included in this cross-sec- tional descriptive study as they are accepted role models for the health P1312. Cancer in the Family - see your Geneticist! Who will go service system. Data is collected by the same researcher with a struc- and who won‘t. tured questionnaire during face to face interviews with the head of the B. Bernhard, S. M. Holloway, J. Campbell, M. E. Porteous; related clinics. Department of Clinical Genetics, Lothian University Hospitals NHS Trust, Edin- RESULTS:Among 58 Turkish State Universities, 36 have medical fac- burgh, United Kingdom. ulties and research hospitals. In 18 of the university hospitals there are The National Health Service (NHS) Scotland prides itself of a health “Outpatient Clinics for Breast Diseases”. If there are at least 2 different care system that is free for all at the point of delivery and aims to disciplines working together on the issue is accepted as a multisci- offer equal access to health provisions regardless of age, employ- plinary clinic. Twelve of the outpatient clinics are multidisciplinary (2/3), ment status or socio-economic class. There are four regional genetic 9 of them (3/4) declared that they have links with psychiatry depart- centres in Scotland serving a population of 5 million and delivering ment members but not as a continuous team member. Only in 4 of the an integrated clinical and laboratory genetic service. The Scottish clinics, genetic counselling or consultancy to the patients with familial Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 2 risk is given on standard algorithms. fessionals outside specialist genetics services, how should these ac- CONCLUSION:Cancer clinics that deal with familial cancers will in- tivities be carried out and how can we ensure a high quality service clude genetic assessment programs. It must be remembered that pa- for patients? tients have rights to receive breast cancer risk information and genetic In the UK, the NHS National Genetics Education and Development testing consultancy before and after genetic testing . Centre collaborated with Skills for Health (the statutory body responsi- ble for healthcare competences) to develop “competences for genetics P1315. Preconceptional CF and HbP carrier screening in the in clinical practice for non-genetics healthcare staff”. Appropriate ge- Netherlands: First results of a trial in a multi-ethnic society netic activities were identified by a large group of healthcare staff from P. Lakeman, L. Henneman, P. D. Bezemer, M. C. Cornel, L. P. ten Kate; many different professions. They identified nine activities which cover VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. the pathway for patients with or at risk of a genetic disorder. For each Objective: The reaction of couples planning a pregnancy was studied activity, the health professionals described how the activity should be to a combined offer of ancestry dependent cystic fibrosis (CF) and carried out - so that for the first time, a set of competences with perfor- haemoglobinopathies (HbPs) carrier screening. mance criteria and underpinning knowledge and understanding have Methods: 9453 people (20-35 years) were offered CF and/or HbP car- been defined for genetic activities for non-specialists. rier screening at their general practitioner’s (GP) office by either their The competences cover widely applicable activities - such as under- GP (n=4720) or the Municipal Health Service (MHS) (n=4733). The tar- standing genetics relevant to your practice, recognising possible ge- get group was defined as having a partner and planning a pregnancy. netic implications, taking an appropriate family history and referring Its size was estimated by means of a reply form (=respondents) and a patients - and more specialised activities such as assessing genetic telephone survey among a sample of non-respondents (n=201). risk or understanding genetic testing. Few health professionals will Results: 14% (1365/9453) responded. The target group was estimated need all the competences, only those relevant to an individual’s clini- to be 33%: 490/1365 respondents and 66/201 out of the 8088 non-re- cal role should be selected. spondents. Thirty-four percent intended to participate in carrier screen- The competences can be used in job descriptions where genetic ac- ing (166/490). Only 87 actually had a carrier test done together with tivities are part of a professional’s role; in developing services or new their partner: 29% (25/87) and 71% (62/87) were invited by the MHS roles; for assessing individuals’ learning needs; and to inform the de- and their GP, respectively. The proportion participating non-Western velopment of education and training courses. immigrants (31%) was less than the proportion invited (50-60%), and people with lower education were underrepresented (only 10% of par- P1318. Social support in the context of genetic testing of late- ticipants). The participation rate was ~ 3%. “Lack of time” (37%) was onset neurological disorders the main reason for non-participation. The majority supported offering N. M. Oliveira, J. Sequeiros; CF and HbPs carrier screening to all couples planning a pregnancy: Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, PORTO, Portugal. 77% and 71% of participants and non-participants, respectively. Conclusion: Immigrants and people with lower education reacted dif- Introduction: In genetic counselling, the evaluation of the social worker ferently to the offer of preconceptional CF and HbPs carrier screening. has the aim to value if the individuals at-risk, when informed about Furthermore, MHS’ sending the invitations seems to be a barrier. Both their probability of being or not a career of the gene of neurological lead to challenges for the implementation process. hereditary late-onset disease (Huntington disease, Machado-Joseph disease, familial amiloyd polineuropaty (FAP) ATTR V30M and CA- P1316. Genetic Assessment of a Clinical Case of Congenita DASIL , are able to give an appropriate healthy answer (they dispose Myotonica of resilient capacity) or an unsuitable answer not healthy, being this M. Dehghanmanshadi, T. Majidi Zadeh, M. Rostami, M. Ebrahimi, K. Bani- damaging for the individuals. hashemi, S. Saber, M. Houshmand; In our protocol of the genetic counselling for PST, the social worker National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is- values two groups of risk factors : (1) The vulnerability centered in lamic Republic of Iran. the subject (the genetic predisposition, resources of the personality, In clinical practice there would be some cases of myotonia with clinical cognitive resources, etc.) (2) The vulnerability connected with the ina- symptoms other than muscular ones who have been associated with dequacy of the environment in which the individual is inserted (fami- mutations in the muscle chloride channel gene. Most cases reported liar unsuitable structure, the separation of the parents, death of the to date show a recessive inheritance pattern, with loss of function of parents, chronic disease, economical fragility and / or poverty, social the corresponding protein. isolation, etc.) Myotonia congenita is inherited both in an autosomal recessive type The Social Intervention is carried out through: (1) Exchanges that hold namely Becker disease and also in an autosomal dominant manner emotional positive attitudes (Sluzki, 1996: 16); (2) The counselling (for- which has been called Thomsen disease; the same mutation may oc- mal or informal) which allow the establishment of interactions that have cur in families with both types of inheritance. In the autosomal domi- the aim of sharing informations on the disease in question; (3) Material nant type of the disaese, the proportion of cases caused by de novo or instrumental support; (4) Technical support or of services; (5) The mutations is unknown. Perhaps each child of an individual with auto- access to new contacts. somal dominant myotonia congenita has a 50% chance of inheriting Conclusions :Contribution of the development, psycodynamics, cogni- the mutation. tive and social models (strategies of resolution of problems, psychothe- Here we report clinical and molecular findings on family members from rapy, stress and coping, personalities, and attitudes) add an important the central region of Iran with dominantly inherited myotonia congenita value to the program of genetic counselling fo PST as the two brothers in the family show characterized clinical picture of sustained contraction of the skeletal muscles which identified in P1319. Inheritance patterns in coronary heart disease Thomsen‘s myotonia. In genotype/phenotype correlations investiga- S. Seyedhassani1,2, M. Rafiee1, M. Nemayandeh1, R. Hemayati1, F. Ghasemi1, tion these patients showed the typical EMG patterns of the dominant S. Sadr1, M. Hushmand2; type resulted in a mild tendency for a discharge of repetitive action po- 1Medical science university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National institute tentials to occur in response to electrical and mechanical stimulation. for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Introduction: Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of P1317. Genetics in clinical practice: Competences for non- death in developed countries. The prevalence of CHD is rising rapidly genetics healthcare staff in the world due to increased exposure to CHD risk factors. CHD is the C. L. Bennett1, S. Kaur1, E. Tonkin1, J. Haydon2, A. Daly1, L. Gough3, A. Eaton3, most common heart disease that is believed to be caused by multiple P. Farndon1; genetic factors, environmental factors, and interactions among these 1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, factors. United Kingdom, 2Centre for Education in Medical Genetics, Birmingham, Material and method: 366 consecutive cases were studied by geneti- United Kingdom, 3Skills for Health, Bristol, United Kingdom. cal analysis. Genetic counselling, pedigree analysis, clinical and Para Genetics impacts on the patient care provided by many different health clinical studies were done for patients. professionals. What genetic activities are appropriate for health pro- Results: There were 282 male (77%) and 84 female (23%). Mean age Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 2 was 55.13±11.20. History of diabetes, hyperlipidemia, hypertension P1322. Technical validation of a system for cystic fibrosis and obesity were seen in 22.4%, 51.9%, 32.1% and 42.3% respec- newborn screening tively. Familial marriage was seen in 66 patients (18.03%). There was M. J. Somerville1, S. L. Bleoo1, L. Podemski1, R. Kelln1, B. G. Elyas1, L. M. early onset CHD (diagnosis at less than 50 year of age) in 156 cases Vicen1, C. Revers1, F. J. Bamforth1, P. J. Bridge2, M. E. Lyon2; (42.6%). 82% of them had positive familial pedigree in the different 1University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 2University of Calgary, Calgary, familial patterns. 25.6% of cases with early onset CHD and 12.4% of AB, Canada. cases with late onset CHD were born from consanguineous marriage Newborn screening for cystic fibrosis has recently been implemented (P=001). for the province of Alberta, Canada. We were assigned the task of de- Discussion: This study can assist physicians and genetic counsellors veloping a comprehensive cystic fibrosis screening system for the ap- to realize the contribution of positive familial pedigree and inheritance proximately 42,000 births per year in this province. We assessed the pattern to cases with CHD. Identification of familial patterns and other effectiveness of a process designed to maximize diagnostic sensitivity risk factors will provide valuable information for prevention and control and specificity. Initial immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) measurement of CHD. These results can be used for next molecular analysis. was carried out with the top 2% as a cutoff for cystic fibrosis transmem- brane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene mutation analysis. Valida- P1320. Female triple heterozygous CF allele delF508, MTHFR tion of four DNA extraction methods from dried blood spots on new- C/T, MTRR A/G with fetus 69,XXX born screen requisitions was followed by assessment of three CFTR I. J. Vasilieva1, M. O. Mkheidze2; mutation detection protocols. These mutation detection protocols were 1Municipal Centre of Medical Genetics, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, validated by analysis of 45 genotype controls and a test set of 5,000 2Medical Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- newborn blood spot samples, 2,000 of which were screened in parallel tion. at two sites, prior to initiation of the newborn screening program. From Genetic counseling claimed by the healthy couples is very rare process these assessments, a system has been developed that incorporates in St.Petersburg and in all places of Russia. The couple consulted con- standardized extraction and targeted analysis of common mutations siders they are healthy. Proband female 27-yr-old is Ukrainian descent as a primary screen. Clinical assessment of mutation-positive cases and her husband 34-yr-old is Lezghian. Proband has occupational includes confirmatory testing, as well as full CFTR coding sequence hazard (contact with mineral dyes). Our clients are intensive smokers. screening for point mutations and intragenic rearrangements. Proband’s gynecological history is advantageous. The couple denies congenital and inherited pathology among their relatives. The results P1323. Professional accounts of inheritance in Type 2 Diabetes of laboratory investigations are the following: couple karyotype 46,XX and Coronary Artery Disease involving ethnic minority groups and 46,XY,21stk+; DNA investigation: PKU allele R408W is absent; A. J. Clarke, S. Sarangi, M. Bekkers, U. Raisanen, P. Boddington; proband is heterozygous for cystic fibrosis allele delF508, MTHFR C/T Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom. and MTRR A/G. She had higher level of blood homocystine (17.4 mi- The incidence of common, complex disorders such as diabetes type cromole/l vs. 5-15micromole/l). After medication during 3 months with 2 (T2D) and coronary artery disease (CAD) is known to vary between Elevit (folic acid, VitB1 and VitB12) the level of blood homocystine was populations. We have examined the published literature and con- decreased to 8,9 micromole/l. Proband broke off medicine intake. She ducted interviews with a range of professionals - clinicians, laboratory got pregnant soon after that. At 11th weeks of gestation oedema of scientists and public health specialists - to assemble and compare the fetus generalized, particularly of the back region of neck, was revealed explanations put forward to account for the higher incidence of these with US investigation. The fetal material was obtained by biopsy of the conditions among UK South Asians and aboriginal groups in Australia. chorionic villi. The fetus karyotype was found to be 69,XXX and this There are potentially important consequences for health and social pregnancy was interrupted. We continue our genetic support of this policy of the different explanations proposed, as well as implications couple. for responsibility and blame at individual, family and community lev- els. In this presentation, we analyse interview data (from researchers, P1321. Cross-cultural Communication in Genetic Services: health professionals and support group representatives in the UK) us- Bridging the gap ing the methodology of rhetorical discourse analysis, by paying par- V. Anastasiadou1,2, T. Delikurt1, K. Theochari1, A. Kotti2, E. Spanou1; ticular attention to how explanations of `inheritance’ are framed and 1Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Archbishop justified in these accounts. Our findings suggest that `inheritance’ is Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. articulated in multiple senses to include genetic, cultural and familial The two major communities (Greek and Turkish Cypriot) in Cyprus meanings, while allusion is made to lifestyle choices. This nuanced were separated by a border since 1974. The sharing of healthcare notion of inheritance is explored further by linking our analysis to no- services, between the two communities became very difficult. Recently tions of `agency’, `responsibility’ and `blame’. We also report patterns efforts of bringing the two communities together have been underway. of difference across and within the professionals’ accounts. Ethnic background and differences should not interfere with healthcare. Cross-cultural gaps and communication problems are often obstacles P1324. The reproductive choices made by South African in the provision of healthcare services. Furthermore, the importance mothers who have children with Down syndrome of a `multidisciplinary` team is known to be essential for the best care J. C. Lampret1, A. L. Christianson2; of patients with rare disorders as are genetic conditions. Communica- 1National Health Laboratory Service and University of the Witwatersrand, Jo- tion between healthcare professionals, therapists and patients within hannesburg, South Africa, 2National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg, such a team is fundamental. The multicultural composition of Cyprus South Africa. creates need for a network to establish new and expand the existing Down syndrome is the commonest cause of congenital developmental channels of communication between such professionals. disability in industrialized countries, where it occurs in approximately Attempt to create a network in the care and referral of patients, living 1.4 per 1000 live births. In South Africa, the birth prevalence of Down with or at risk of genetic or inherited conditions in both communities syndrome was documented as 1.8 and 2.09 per 1000 live births in in Cyprus officially began in December 2006 although was in design urban and rural populations, respectively. since May 2006. Through this network, professionals will be able to The aim of this study was to determine the reproductive choices of collaborate, exchange ideas and assist each other with the common women with a child with Down syndrome, aged 1 year or older. The goal of assuring efficient and sustainable patient care. Also the pa- survey was conducted using a structured questionnaire. The sample tients are invited to share problems, experiences and hopes while consisted of 50 women; 36 African, 4 Asian and 10 Caucasian. The contributing in building a network for better communication and multi- questionnaire assessed the mothers’ knowledge of Down syndrome disciplinary care. prior to diagnosis, what counselling was received and how this knowl- The first steps of networking and bridging the gap will be presented as edge was utilised. Information was obtained on the use of family plan- a poster. Furthermore the problems (practical, cross-cultural and oth- ning, the knowledge and use of prenatal medical genetic screening and ers) we encountered as the professionals who originated this network diagnosis, and decisions for future pregnancies. None of the mothers and partnership will be discussed. had prenatal diagnosis in their pregnancy with their Down syndrome child, but 76% (38) would want prenatal diagnosis in future pregnan-Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 2 cies. Of the 50 mothers, 21 (42%) would terminate a pregnancy if of a EU-level exam (e.g., similar to that already in action for labora- Down syndrome was detected, 26 (52%) would not, and 3 (6%) were tory chemists) is necessary. Such certification should enable including unsure what they would have done if faced with this decision. Of the the non-MD medical geneticist into the EU Registry of clinical/labo- Caucasian women, 40% (4) would opt for termination of pregnancy, ratory geneticists (more exactly, a special section corresponding to 40% (4) would not and 20% (2) were unsure. Of the African and Asian the above-stated specialisation). Registered specialist should be able women, 52.8% (19) and 75% (3) respectively would not terminate an to work in any clinical/medical genetics laboratory across EU. At the affected fetus. The information gained has helped provide a more ef- same time EU-level certification would be an official document con- fective genetic counselling service. firming specialist’s qualification in his/her native country. P1325. DYSCERNE - A European Network of Centres of P1327. Genetic Education: Adapting Strategies for Secondary Reference for Dysmorphology Schools J. Clayton-Smith1, P. M. Griffiths1,2, D. Donnai1,2, H. Brunner3, B. Dallapiccola4, R. P. Leite, P. Botelho, C. Diniz, M. Souto, B. Carvalho, E. Ribeiro; K. Devriendt5, M. Krajewska-Walasek6, N. Philip7, J. Taylor8,2, K. Strong1,2, B. Dept. Genetics, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Real-Peso da Régua, E.P.E, Vila Kerr1; Real, Portugal. 1Central Manchester and Manchester Children’s Hospitals NHS Trust, Man- The Genetics Service participates in an initiative of the National Agen- chester, United Kingdom, 2Nowgen, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Universitair cy for the Scientific Culture, witch allows Secondary School students Medisch Centrum Sint Radboud, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Istituto Mendel, to do an internship integrated in the assistance work of a Health Ser- San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 5Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, vice, where the study of the genetic diseases and prenatal diagnosis 6Instytut Pomnik-Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka, Warsaw, Poland, 7Assistance Pub- allow them to apply and to deepen the knowledge acquired in school, lique - Hospitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France, 8University of Manchester, qualifying them for the active life, not neglecting the exercise of the Manchester, United Kingdom. citizenship. Over 2,500 rare and difficult to diagnose conditions presenting with The name of this internship project is „Genetics Seen by the Young patterns of birth defects have been identified. The rarity of these dys- People“. It has the duration of 1 week and was already attended by morphic conditions means that even in Centres of Reference, experi- 66 students. ence may be limited and a diagnosis might be delayed or not made at This internship is essentially practical but is strongly based in the ge- all. Making a correct diagnosis is the cornerstone of patient manage- netic principles lectured in Biology Course. 80% of internship time ment, enabling clinicians to locate other patients with the same condi- is spent in laboratorial activities and the remaining 20% is spent in tion, share clinical experience, and increase individual and collective the Prenatal Diagnosis, Dismorphology and Preconception consulta- knowledge about rare conditions. For patients and their families, the tion, always with previous authorization by the patients. Then, all the importance of having a diagnosis cannot be over emphasised. It can students that worked as interns in the service since 2001 reply to an help them come to terms with the condition, reassure them that they inquiry that had several goals, namely the importance of the intern- are receiving appropriate care, and may facilitate making contact with ship in the professional choice. The students unanimously affirmed other affected individuals and families for support and advice. that this internship had enormous importance in the acquisition of new DYSCERNE aims to raise current standards for the diagnosis, man- knowledge and in the opening of other work perspectives that they agement, and information dissemination of rare dysmorphic syn- only imagined possible with a Medical Degree. dromes. The Network is funded by the European Commission, Direc- Our conclusion is positive and encouraging, and it suggests that a torate General for Health and Consumer Protection, and comprises six strong interconnection between the school and the business world designated Centres of Reference for Dysmorphology (UK, Belgium, can be the instrument that lacks, increasing the satisfaction and the France, Italy, The Netherlands and Poland). The lead partner, Man- self-esteem of the students, reducing deviant behaviours and school chester University, UK, will be the coordinating and managing centre abandonment. for the Network. To facilitate the project aims, a web-based electronic dysmorphology P1328. Methodology analysing decision making for diagnostic system will be established, enabling clinicians to submit dif- multidisciplinary staff before antenatal diagnosis. ficult to diagnose cases electronically for expert review. Project mem- P. Malzac1,2, S. Sigaudy2,3, R. Bernard2, N. Philip2,3, M. Gamerre3, L. Despinoy1, bers will also develop guidelines for selected multi-system disorders P. Le Coz1; which will be piloted and disseminated widely throughout the clinical 1Espace Ethique Méditerranéen, Marseille, France, 2Département de génétique genetics community. DYSCERNE will also serve as a demonstration médicale, Marseille, France, 3Centre de diagnostic prénatal, Marseille, France. project for future EU Networks. We introduce a methodology analysing decision making in clinical ethics. It enables to assess the various reasons health professionnals refer P1326. Training non-MD medical geneticists: suggestions from to, without being clearly conscious of it, when a difficult decision has Lithuania to be made. J. Kasnauskiene, V. Kučinskas, D. Steponavičiūtė; The issue is : Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. - To define the ethical aspect in the decision through worldwide ac- Translation of the achievements in human genetics and genomics into knowledged principles: autonomy, beneficience and non-maleficience clinical practice results in increasing introduction of new diagnostic ge- ( 1) netic tests and growing demand for highly qualified non-MD specialists - To work on the basic idea that emotions have to be used which we (medical geneticists) performing such tests, interpreting and communi- consider crucial in order to become aware of the ethical aspect of the cating their results. Nevertheless, adequate system for their training is decision still absent in a number of EU countries including Lithuania. Thus we believe such worldwide valued concepts become clear to A three stage system for training non-MD clinical/laboratory geneticists health professionnals through some emotional experiences (2). We are is under development in Lithuania (introduction is expected in 2008). speaking here of respect, compassion and fear. Practitioners discover 1st stage: undergraduate (bachelor) studies programme ensuring back- through these emotions how much they value these principles. ground education. 2nd stage: graduate (master) studies programme Feeling of respect reveals how much they value the principle of au- ensuring basic knowledge in the disciplines essential for clinical/labo- tonomy, feeling of compassion how much they value the principle of ratory geneticists (molecular genetics, cytogenetics, biochemical ge- beneficience and feeling of fear the principle of non-maleficience. netics, genetic counselling, bioinformatics). 3rd stage: post-graduate To make our point clear, we will show how our methodology works studies programme (comparable to a residency studies programme in a difficult decision making situation : a request for termination of for medical specialties) ensuring a high level knowledge and expertise pregnancy after a Turner syndrome chromosomal anomality has been in one of the basic specialisations: molecular genetics, cytogenetics, revealed on the fetal caryotype. or biochemical genetics. Specialists graduating from the 3rd stage stud- 1. T.L Beauchamp et J. Childress. Principles of Biomedical Ethics, Ox- ies programme will be able to apply for certification by the Lithuanian ford University Press, New-York/Oxford, 1994. Society of Human Genetics. 2. Livet P., Emotions et rationalité morale, PUF, coll. « Sociologie », A system for non-MD medical geneticists’ certification on the basis Paris, 2002.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 2 P1329. Glucose metabolism, lipid profile and inflammatory P1331. From legislation to societal learning. A new policy markers in healthy subjects in relation to family history of type 2 paradigm for genetics and insurance. diabetes mellitus I. Van Hoyweghen, K. Horstman, R. Vos; E. Kurvinen1,2, K. Aasvee2; Health Philosophy and Ethics, University of Maastricht, The Netherlands. 1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2National Institute for Health De- Over the past years, one of the most contentious topics in policy de- velopment, Tallinn, Estonia. bates on genetics has been the use of genetic testing in insurance. In Population studies have shown that family history to type 2 diabetes the rush to confront concerns about potential abuses of genetic infor- mellitus (T2DM) is a risk factor for developing the disease, but also mation in insurance, most countries throughout Europe have enacted for T2DM predictors, including anthropometric and metabolic modifica- genetics-specific legislation while the Genetic Information Nondiscrim- tions. ination Act (GINA) is currently pending in the US Congress. In this Our study aimed to compare anthropometric data, lipid and glucose presentation we want to reflect on the adequacy of genetics-specific metabolism and inflammatory factors in healthy subjects with positive legislation. We will give two main arguments why we consider this family history [Fam(+)] and negative family history [Fam(-)] of T2DM. approach not to be viable in the long run. First, these laws reflect a Subjects and Methods. A total of 139 healthy subjects were studied, “genetic exceptionalism”, overemphasizing the role of genes and en- the subjects whose first degree relatives suffered from T2DM were hancing the reduction of our identity and life chances to genes. New compared with those without T2DM among close relatives. developments in genomics therefore do not fit legal concepts. This Weight, height, waist and hip circumference were determined, body means that there is a growing gap between legal relatively stable defi- mass index and waist-to-hip ratio were calculated. Fasting serum glu- nitions and dynamic genomics practice. Secondly, genetics-specific cose and insulin were measured and used for calculation of insulin legislation creates some unintended effects. By giving exclusive legal resistance index by homeostasis model assessment (HOMA IR). Se- protection to the group of genetic risks, other non-genetic risk groups rum TC, TG and HDLC levels were determined enzymatically, apoli- are unintendedly being under-protected. Given these drawbacks, we poproteins A-I and B by Laurell’s electrophoresis, C-reactive protein argue that it is time for a new policy paradigm, which stresses investing by a highly sensitive immunoprecipitation test and fibrinogen by the in social learning processes more than in introducing defensive legal method of Clauss. walls. While genetics-specific legislation reifies a momentary relation Results. Anthropometrical data as well as mean values of lipoprotein between science and society, a social learning approach enables more parameters, fasting serum glucose, insulin, HOMA IR, C-reactive pro- continuous interaction between science and society. Just as genomics tein and fibrinogen did not differ between the groups of positive vs. is enabling medicine to take a more prospective approach, policy mak- negative family history to T2DM. Conclusion. Positive family history of ing will similarly need to experiment with the genome sciences as they T2DM was not associated with impaired glucose and lipid metabolism affect science, health and society. in our cohort of healthy subjects. P1332. Exploring of medical staffs’ attitudes in genetic services P1330. Offering carrier screening for fragile X syndrome to non- provided to international spouses in Taiwan pregnant women - a pilot study S. J. Lin, M. R. Wang, M. C. Huang, Y. H. Wang; S. A. Metcalfe1, A. Archibald1, J. Cohen2, V. Collins3, A. Henry3, A. Jaques3, K. National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. McNamee4, L. Sheffield1,5, H. Slater6, S. Wake5; Global migration have challenge the health services in Taiwan. In re- 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Dept Paediatrics, University of cent 3 years, every one out of five newly married couples are interna- Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 2Fragile X Alliance, Melbourne, Australia, tional marriage. With this increased ethnic diversity, health profession- 3Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 4Family Planning als require more culturally competent approach especially in genetic Victoria, Melbourne, Australia, 5Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, counseling. The purpose of this study was to explore attitudes and Australia, 6Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Victorian Clinical Genet- needs among medical staffs who provide reproductive care and ge- ics Services, Melbourne, Australia. netic services to international spouses. Population-based carrier testing for fragile X syndrome (FXS) remains In this survey, an assessment checklist with 5 scaled score consisted controversial despite fulfilling many of the WHO criteria. Health profes- of 18 questions related to cultural competent care was used in the sionals’ concerns relate to perceived difficulties in community under- questionnaire. Of the 470 participants, 374(79.6%) responded. We standing of the complexities of this condition. found that (1) Lack of language appropriate information materials: For To inform policy around genetic screening, we conducted a three- example, 90.2% staffs agreed that education materials displayed had phase pilot study to assess acceptability and feasibility of offering FXS to reflect cultural backgrounds of counselees; however, only 34% com- carrier screening to non-pregnant women in an Australian family plan- plied in practice. (2) In direct communication styles: 93.6% subjects ning clinic. considered themselves as unable to communicate directly with inter- In Phase 1, clinic staff and female patients attended an FXS infor- national spouse due to limited time during clinical encounter. (3) Ste- mation session and participated in focus groups. Their understanding, reotype found in attitudes: For example, 81.5% participants concerned views, interest and concerns about offering FXS carrier screening were that international spouses could not make their own reproductive deci- discussed. Overall, women and staff were positive towards screening. sions and had difficulties in caring of their children. These qualitative data informed production of a brochure, two ques- Conclusion: We found that there exist gap between concepts and tionnaires and testing protocols, which underwent validation. Ques- practice during encounter with international spouses. Health profes- tionnaires included demographics, awareness and knowledge of FXS, sionals need to improve cultural competency to deliver appropriate attitudes towards carrier screening, decision-making, and anxiety. In trans-cultural genetic services. Phase 2, larger number of women were recruited, completed a ques- tionnaire, and were also offered FXS screening. The second question- P1333. Improving communication skills in genetic counseling naire was completed one month later. A small number of women who - simulation based national project had completed both questionnaires took part in follow-up interviews M. Berkenstadt1,2, H. Bet-Or2, A. Harari-Shacham2, R. Nissani2, S. Kohan3, Y. (Phase 3) about their experiences in participation Yaron3, D. Lev3, H. Berkenstadt4, A. Ziv4, B. Goldman1; Of the 338 women recruited, 96% completed Q1, 54% completed Q2, 1Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Ramat Gan, Israel, 2The Israel to date, and 30 have been interviewed. Of the 20% (n=63) of women Society of Genetic Counselours, Ramat Gan, Israel, 3The Israeli Society of who were tested, three grey-zones and one pre-mutation were found. Medical Genetics, Ramat Gan, Israel, 4The Israel Center for Medical Simula- Preliminary analysis indicates that women were overwhelmingly in fa- tion, Ramat Gan, Israel. vour of the availability of FXS screening to all women, although fewer Background: Simulated patients (SPs) using play rolling actors are had screening for a variety of reasons. Women’s understanding of FXS widely used for training and evaluation of health care professionals. In was reasonably good. this study SPs based course aiming to improve communication skills in genetic counseling was developed and validated. Methods: Based on authentic clinical situations rising important coun- seling dilemmas 8 SPs based scenarios were developed. Each sce- nario included - description of the clinical situation and detailed script Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 0 to the actors on the answers and behaviors involved in the counsel- cluded: those whose referral reason is related to prenatal diagnostic ing process. Following actors training, the scenarios were evaluated tests, and those whose referral reason was other than prenatal diagno- during the training of experts in human genetics becoming later the sis. In the first group the most common referral reason was advanced trainers in this program. 36 human geneticists (7 genetic counseling maternal age (45.01%), which is followed by high risk result on triple students, 20 genetic counselors, 4 fellows and 5 experts in human ge- test (22.99%), previous child with congenital malformations or single netics) participated in 3 training days. Each participant was performing gene disorder (9.57%), abnormal ultrasound finding (5.35%), parental 2-3 scenarios as active participant in the “hot seat” and observed 3-4 anxiety (4.81%), genetic disease in the family members (4.22%), the other scenarios. Training was videotaped for debriefing and additional presence of thalassemia trait in the parents (2.74%) and the others feedback was given by the actors. (5.31%). In the second group the most common reason for referral was Feedback: According to participants’ feedback questionnaires (using recurrent miscarriages (32.99%), which is followed by previous child 1-4 Likert scale) most participants indicated that - the scenarios rep- with congenital malformations or single gene disorder (25.76%), infer- resented realistic clinical cases (96%), training improved their under- tility (13.59%), unidentified genetic condition (9.82%), genetic disease standing the counselees’ needs (78%), improved their ability to give in the family members (6.13%), amenorrhea (5.89%), consanguinity information (63%), and increased the awareness to ethical issues between couples (3.69%) and the presence of thalassemia trait in the (58%). All participants recommended the use of SPs for further train- parents (2.13%). ing in genetic counseling. Conclusions: In this study SPs based training scheme in genetic coun- P1336. A qualitative investigation of the impact of DMD on South seling was developed and implemented. Feedback questionnaires African families supported the content validity of the scenarios and the potential contri- K. Loggenberg, M. Futter, J. Greenberg; bution of such project in improving communication skills in this field. Division of Human Genetics, Cape Town, South Africa. South African parents who have a son with Duchenne Muscular Dys- P1334. Genetic counselling network in the Islamic Republic of trophy (DMD) are confronted with unique circumstances and barriers, Iran(1997-2007) including poverty and minimal access to resources. The aim of this S. M. Mirzamani, Z. Noparast, S. Akbaroghli, S. Farshidi; study was to investigate the level of genetic knowledge of parents and Deputy for cultural affairs and Prevention of welfare organization, Tehran, Is- the impact of DMD on the family. lamic Republic of Iran. A qualitative approach was selected as it aims to portray the richness Introduction & Aims: The importance of genetic and congenital factors and complexity of real-life events from the participants’ perspective. which causes many diseases & disabilities is obvious with a glance Ten semi-structured qualitative interviews were conducted with par- at the facts and figures in the world. In Iran certain factors exist that ents who had sons with DMD between the age of 8 and 15 years, worsen the situation, such as: lived in the Cape Town metropolitan area and attended Red Cross War High percentage of consanguinous marriages & etc. This comprehen- Memorial Children’s Hospital (RCWMCH). sive program is planned with the aim of implementation of a genetic The level of understanding of the genetics of DMD was generally in- counselling network. The General Goal is to decrease the incidence adequate; this was related to socioeconomic status, level of education and prevalence of genetic and congenital disabilities. and influenced by cultural beliefs. Financial problems, difficulties with Material& Methods: For implementing this program the network public transport, lifting, inappropriate wheelchairs and home care of has gradually expanded with about 125 genetic counselling centers the affected boy were among the most frequently mentioned problems throughout the country. of the participants. Emotional problems related to having a son with The first level are counseling centers in smaller cities(The staff are DMD were also mentioned. a general physician along with a professional nurse, midwife or ge- The findings of this study will help healthcare professionals involved neticist); the intermediate level are counselling centers in the capital of in the care of boys with DMD to better understand some of the barri- each province(The staff are a specialist, a general physician, and one ers that South African parents face. Education and information are an professional nurse, midwife, or geneticist). important form of support. Therefore, the service at RCWMCH may be The highest level is the „State Commission of Genetics“ in Tehran (The improved by having a dedicated genetic counsellor as a member of staff are about 10 specialists). the inter-disciplinary team involved with families in which a diagnosis The referral centers (The head of six Regional Offices) are located in of DMD is made, to facilitate information giving and assist in providing the capital of six provinces(The staff in the provincial referral center psychosocial support. are at least 2 specialists and 2 - 3 general physicians, with years of experience). P1337. Prenatal genetic counselling from the women‘s point of Results: The network has gradually expanded since the year 1997, view and now we have 125 governmental and private genetic counselling A. Baroncini1, L. Borghi1,2, S. Rosato1,3, P. Battaglia1, O. Calabrese3, S. Zucchi- centers.These centers have been offering services to approximately ni4, M. A. Nicoli5, E. Calzolari3; 220,000 clients until now. 1U.O.Genetica medica, AUSL di Imola, Italy, 2Dip.di Psicologia, Università di Conclusion: The genetic counselling network offers good quality, low Parma, Italy, 3U.O.Genetica medica, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di cost and easily available services to population at risk. Ferrara, Italy, 4U.O. Ostetricia e Ginecologia, Ausl di Bologna, Italy, 5Agenzia Sanitaria Regionale, Bologna, Italy. P1335. The evaluation of referral reasons for genetic counseling In Italy prenatal genetic counselling and diagnosis are part of the rou- and prenatal diagnosis at a tertiary genetic center: a Turkish tine antenatal care offered to women at increased risk of fetal chromo- experience somal anomalies. However, counseling methods (individual, in group, O. Cogulu1, A. Alpman1, B. Durmaz1, E. Pariltay2, M. Akgul2, O. Kirbiyik2, E. use of a decision aid) and involved providers (medical geneticists, Ataman2, H. Akin2, F. Ozkinay1, C. Ozkinay2; obstetricians, nurse/midwives) vary widely among centres. The aim 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, of this study was to explore the pregnant women’s genetic counsel- 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey. ling experience and to compare the relative efficacy of different ap- Genetic counseling is the process which assists individuals in under- proaches to genetic counseling. Interviewed participants, all women standing the nature of the genetic disorder, the probability of develop- of advanced maternal age (>= 35 years), can be divided in two main ing or transmitting it and the ways how to deal with the condition. With groups according to ethnic origin: Italian and immigrants mainly from the advancements in human health field and particularly in genetics, Middle-East and Eastern-Europe. Overall, participants showed satis- it has been possible for the scientists and for the public to be aware faction with the content of genetic counseling, while knowledge, coping of the mechanisms underlying genetic diseases. To what extend the and state anxiety vary according to counseling methods and patients’ scientific and communal evolution affected the genetic counseling ses- demographic and socio-economic variables. Most women expressed sions is the aim of this retrospective study. a preference to be counselled by a nurse/midwive than by a “more We evaluated 5549 files of a tertiary genetic counseling and prenatal technical” medical geneticist. Increased anxiety levels were reported diagnosis center retrospectively throughout 1998-2006 years in Tur- by women experiencing a counselling approach with the administra- key. Among the subjects provided genetic counseling, the groups in- tion of a pre-counselling genetic questionnaire.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 1 P1338. Results of Genetic Counselling and molecular genetic preimplantation diagnoses are not allowed to all the hereditary predis- testing of severe monogenic disorders in Hungary between 1993 positions to cancer. and 2006. Genetic counsellors have newly been introduced in France. Before L. Tímár1, Á. Herczegfalvi2, J. Balog3, H. Pikó3, K. Hajdu4, A. Tóth4, V. Karcagi3; 2004, genetic counselling was only done by specialized physicians. 1National Institute of Child Health, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 2Bethesda Children’s Now that genetic counsellors have been introduced to the field, their Hospital, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 3Dept. of Molecular Genetics, Natl. Institute missions have yet to be defined. of Environmental Health, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 4National Institute of Health, This work presents different propositions about how genetic counsel- BUDAPEST, Hungary. lors could afford a comprehensive support through adapted consul- During the genetic counselling of the severe monogenic genetic dis- tations to couple with one partner affected by a dominantly inherited eases it is very important to establish the exact etiological diagnosis. cancer. Their missions could be mainly focused on accompanying The molecular genetic examinations play outstanding role in this diag- couples from the first consultation of genetic through their questions nostic procedure. Molecular genetic diagnosis provides effective pos- about having a baby, taking the risk of transmission or not, all the way sibility for prevention of serious genetic disorders by prenatal diagno- to the birth, the renouncement, the prenatal diagnosis or the preim- sis and possible termination of pregnancy whenever treatment of the plantation diagnosis. diseases is unavailable. Moreover, genetic results provide accurate differential diagnosis and proper medical care for the patients. P1341. “Coping first, genetics second”: A qualitative study Molecular genetic examinations on the following severe genetic dis- exploring family communication of genetic information. orders have been performed in our laboratory during last 13 years: M. Aitken1,2, M. B. Delatycki1,3, L. Skene2, L. E. Forrest1,2; Spinal Muscular Atrophy -in 78 families with 98 prenatal diagno- 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2University of Mel- sis; FRAXA - in 38 families with 2 prenatal diagnosis; Charcot-Marie- bourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, Tooth disease type 1A - in 14 families; Ducenne/Becker Muscular Dys- Australia. trophy - in 12 families; Congenital Myasthenic Syndrome - in 1 family; Communicating genetic information in families can be problematic. Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy - in 2 families; Limb Girdle Often important information about a person’s own health or their re- Muscular Dystrophy - in 2 families; Angelman syndrome - in 5 families. productive health (or both) is not transmitted to all at risk relatives. The detailed results will be reported in our presentation. Guidelines from peak bodies are general and fail to address how ge- By performing the molecular genetic analysis effective diagnosis and netic health professionals should facilitate communication to at-risk correct genetic counselling was established in our genetic unit. relatives. The authors are investigating families’ experiences of com- municating genetic information and whether there is a greater role for P1339. The perspectives and experiences of genetic counsellors genetic health professionals within this experience. Qualitative inter- and linkworkers (interpreters) working together in clinical view data from consultands and focus groups with genetic health pro- genetic consultations fessionals has revealed: T. Clancy1, G. Matta1,2; 1) Consultands feel overwhelmed with information after genetic coun- 1Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, Manches- selling and their priority is to manage the health and social aspects ter, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Great Ormond Street of the genetic condition, relegating telling family members to a lower Hospital, London, United Kingdom. priority. Language, ethnicity and culture affect many aspects of genetic coun- 2) Consultands usually communicate with first degree relatives, how- selling, and there is a need for contextually appropriate and accurate ever often pass responsibility to their parents to tell other siblings and communication. Britain is a multicultural and multifaith society, and second and third degree relatives. Further decisions are made about English is not the patient’s first language in a proportion of consulta- whom to tell based on social bonds and a feeling of moral obligation. tions. This research provides an insight into the experiences and per- Hence communication occurs in an ad hoc manner, over time. spectives of genetic counsellors and linkworkers (interpreters) when 3) The accuracy of information and the message may be lost. they work together. The study was based on convenience sampling 4) Both health professionals and families want assistance in facilitation at one centre in the UK. Six genetic counsellors and five linkwork- of communication in families. ers participated. Exploratory semi-structured interviews were taped These data demonstrate the need for further evidence to inform best and transcribed, and the transcripts were analysed thematically. Both practice for genetic health professionals dealing with communication groups identified the following issues as having an important impact on of genetic information in families. joint consultations: differences in their professional roles and respon- sibilities; developing a working relationship; the language of genetics; P1342. Should Individuals be Informed about their Salt and, training and support needs. All participants agreed that a partner- Sensitivity Status? First Indications of the Value of Counseling ship between the two professional groups is key to achieving the best on Genetic Predisposition to Low-Risk Conditions outcome for patients. However, they also commented that minimal (if C. M. R. Smerecnik1, I. Mesters1, H. Van Keulen1, I. Scheffers2, E. Beeks2, P. any) training is provided to enable them to work together effectively. W. De Leeuw2, N. K. De Vries1, H. De Vries1; Relationships are ad-hoc, and there is little opportunity to prepare for 1University Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2University Hospital Maas- consultations together. This small study has identified some ways to tricht and Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht, improve the service offered to patients, including: training for genetic The Netherlands. counsellors and linkworkers to raise awareness of each other’s roles The present study examined the possible pathways for positive effects and to learn how to work together; the development of a common and of genetic testing for relatively ‘low-risk’ conditions by (1) exploring the consistent lexicon of key genetic counselling terms and concepts for impact of being tested for one’s genetic predisposition on intention and translation into minority ethnic languages; and, ensuring there is time (2) exploring and comparing the determinants of the intention to re- for pre- and post- consultation briefings to occur. strict salt intake with and without a genetic predisposition to being salt- sensitive. In a cross-sectional within-subjects design, patients being P1340. Prenatal and preimplantation diagnonis in Cancer tested for genetic predispositions to salt sensitivity reported higher in- Genetic: what’s the role of Genetic Counsellors? tentions to restrict their salt intake in case their blood pressure should E. Haquet1, A. Combes1, P. Pujol1, J. Duffour2, I. Coupier1; prove to be salt-sensitive, confirming the value of genetic testing for 1CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 2CRLC Val D’Aurelle, Montpellier, low-risk conditions. In case the blood pressure should prove to be salt- France. sensitive, intention was observed to be significantly associated with In cancer genetic, most syndromes are dominantly inherited - which general health, perceived severity, and self-efficacy, whereas the in- leads to a risk of transmission of 50%. tention in case no salt-sensitivity was predicted by perceived severity, Prenatal and preimplantation diagnoses are options frequently chosen self-efficacy, and current stage of change. Overall, the results suggest by affected patients who do not want to have a child with the same dis- that genetic testing for low-risk conditions has a positive impact on ease. They do not wish their children to go through the same suffering. the motivation to engage in preventive behavior. Furthermore, genetic In France, those medical interventions depend on ethical laws which counselors should primarily focus on the severity of the genetic predis- request a “particularly severe and not curable affection”. Prenatal and position and the feasibility of the recommended preventive behavior.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 2 P1343. Developing family route maps - A tool to help access stitutions, national health associations, regulating and research fund- information and services for families with genetic conditions ing agencies, professional organizations, civic and ethics bodies, phar- A. Allford, M. C. Winter; maceutical and insurance industry. Genetic Interest Group (patient organisation), London, United Kingdom. Definitions ranged from being strictly synonymous to DNA-based test- AIM: To explore information and services currently available to families ing, to any source that can provide unambiguous genetic information. with six rare genetic disorders as the first stage in the development of They may or not bridge different applications, contexts, mutations and Family Route Maps designed to signpost information and guide pa- material analysed. Pharmacogenetics, somatic mutations, population tients, families and carers through the available appropriate services screening, or even carrier testing and caryotyping were included only within the UK. sometimes; while non-medical or research applications, identity testing METHODS: Focus Groups and supplemental interviews with patients and sources other than genetic material (other tests, physical exam, belonging to Support Groups as well as interviews with health profes- family history) are seldom covered. Some trends could be found when sionals who specialise in these conditions. An online patient question- comparing different professional organizations or among countries naire is also available to widen patient participation. and cultures (geneticists vs. pathologists, insurers vs. human rights SUMMARY: Common themes were identified and seven clear catego- and patient interest-groups, ethical bodies vs. commercial labs, Eu- ries emerged: Information;Communication; Education of Healthcare rope vs. USA). E.g., the ASHG definition covers only tests in DNA and professionals; Diagnosis of rare genetic disorders; Empowering pa- specific gene-products, while the ESHG includes also caryotyping and tients and parents/carers; Ethical, Legal and Social issues; and, Treat- all sources of genetic information. ment & Surveillance of patients and families with rare genetic disor- We conclude that a consensus definition that could be globally devel- ders. opped and applicable is probably impossible, and that there should be In addition to providing future practical guidance to people with the instead several context-dependent and/or working definitions, accord- named disorders, the project has: Produced a generic Route Map tem- ing to the purposes aimed. While methodology is irrelevant, informa- plate which can be used for other genetic conditions; Identified sev- tion content (genetic information) and/or the genetic material analysed eral themes common to all the groups involved; Highlighted the real (DNA-based and cytogenetic testing) may serve different motivations needs and concerns expressed by patients and their families; Raised for genetic testing. This has practical implications in the scope and awareness amongst clinicians of the necessity for clear care pathways competences among different professionals, for oncogenetics, phar- to help patients living with rare and sometimes life-threatening condi- macogenetics and forensic genetics, regulation of health activities, pri- tions, with the aim of a protocol for support, monitoring and treatment. vate labs, health economics and policies, insurance, reimbursement DISCUSSION: The themes have far-reaching implications for health of costs and anti-discrimination policies. All this, in turn, will reflect on service provision for people with genetic disorders, sharing the find- national and international legislation, either in practice or to be devel- ings with health care professionals as well as patients is essential. oped. P1344. The Italian External Quality Control (I-EQC) Programme P1346. Patient’s and doctor’s attitude to genetic testing for for Beta Thalassemia molecular diagnosis: five years of activity common disease predisposition F. Tosto, V. Falbo, M. Salvatore, G. Floridia, F. Censi, D. Taruscio; V. V. Pogrebenkova, O. A. Makeeva, L. I. Minaicheva, V. P. Puzyrev; Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. Tomsk Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. β-Thalassemia (βT) is one of the most common single gene disorders Developing tools in genetic testing for common diseases demand and is prevalent in the Mediterranean region, the Middle East, the In- for careful examination of what people and health care professionals dian subcontinent and East Asia. Frequency of the disease may vary know and expect from new technologies. widely, depending on the ethnic population. The highest incidences are 100 doctors and 100randomly selected people from general rural reported in Cyprus (14%) and Sardinia (12%) (1). population (Tomsk,Russia) were studied in respect to their attitude Approximately 200 different molecular defects affecting the β--globin to genetic testing for diseases predisposition with the help of special gene (HBB, 11p15.5 - OMIM 141900) have been reported. questionnaires. Molecular genetic testing of HBB is available and may be useful for It was revealed that 78% of respondents would like to determine prediction of the clinical phenotype, presymptomatic diagnosis of at- the risk for diseases with genetic predisposition. The main reasons risk family members and prenatal diagnosis. to undergo such investigation were people’s concern about their The I-EQC Programme for βT is performed within the National Project health(43%), doctor’s recommendation(21%), and curiosity(20%). If for the standardization and quality assurance of genetic tests (2). the elevated risk for any of common diseases would be diagnosed Five trials have been performed from 2001 to 2006 (one per year); than 88% of people would change their habits and only 12% would 11/12, 14/14, 16/16, 16/16 and 18/18 are the respondent versus en- not change anything. The desire of people to evaluate their own risk of rolled public laboratories (75% of Italian public laboratories) (3). probable diseases did not depend from the level of education, but last Genotyping results indicate a general good level of quality; 900 alleles seriously affected the people’s awareness about new genetic tools. were analysed in five years. About 98.8% of them was correctly as- Positive attitude to a suggestion to undergo genetic testing for disease signed; 0.6% was wrongly genotyped. predisposition can be influenced by current patient’s health status - Methods predominantly used to detect mutations were RDB, ARMS, most of people(75-80%) whom self-reported health was “excellent”, DGGE and sequencing of DNA. “good” or “normal”would like to be tested whereas in a group who de- Reporting of results is still inadequate although a new form for the writ- fined their health status as “unsatisfactory” only 50% expressed their ten reports was introduced in 2004. wish to be tested genetically. Funded by: “Progetto nazionale per la standardizzazione e l’assicura- 93%of doctors considered future opportunities with genetic testing to zione di qualità dei test genetici”, Ministry of Health (Rome). be useful for the purpose of prophylaxis-33%, more accurate defini- 1. Cao and Galanello, N Engl J Med 347(15), 2002; tion of patient’s diagnoses(47%), and in adjusting patient’s manage- 2. Taruscio et. al., CCLM, 42(8):915-21 2004; ment(17%). 95% of responded doctors were sure that results of ge- 3. Dallapiccola et al., Analysis, 2006 netic testing would be useful to persuade their patients to change life style with the aim of prophylaxis. P1345. Definitions of Genetic Testing vary widely among The results of that study have shown the considerable interest of both international institutions and professional and other patients and doctors for arising new genetic technologies in the sphere organizations (EuroGentest WP3.4) on common disease predisposition testing, positive attitude of both J. Sequeiros1,2; groups as well as the need of education in that sphere. 1IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Porto, Portugal. This work resulted from the very first of the EC Expert Group “25 Rec- P1347. Information on genetic testing in Europe : successes and ommendations on the Ethical, Legal and Social Implications of Genetic difficulties testing”. It aimed at contributing towards the discussion of a consensus C. Gaudebout1, V. Thibaudeau1, M. A. Morris2, E. Dequeker3, A. Corveleyn3, definition and its global applicability. B. Dallapiccola4, R. Mingarelli4, J. Schmidtke5, K. Rommel6, D. Donnai7, E. Gil- We collected 153 documents, from 77 European and international in- laspy7, B. Urbero1, S. Aymé1; Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  1Inserm sc11, Paris, France, 2Service of genetic medicine, University hospital, that the patient benefits from using genetics services could be sum- Geneva, Switzerland, 3EuroGenTest, Leuven, Belgium, 4CSS-Mendel Institute, marised by a new concept of empowerment. Empowerment includes Rome, Italy, 5Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 6Med- dimensions of decision-making, knowledge and understanding, future- izinische Hochschule, Hannover, Germany, 7Academic Unit of Medical Genet- orientation and instrumentality. Empowerment is a similar concept to ics, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. that of perceived personal control (PPC), and a measure of PPC has Genetic tests are now offered internationally, through both public and been developed for use in evaluating clinical genetics services. How- private sector genetic testing services. The physicians prescribing ever, empowerment includes some benefits not captured by PPC relat- these test and the biologists receiving the samples need to know which ing to the empowerment of other at-risk relatives, and future genera- tests are available, where they are offered and whether the identified tions. The present study also identified what genetics services can do laboratories meet quality standards. To meet this need, www.orpha. to empower patients and their families, such as providing information net started ten years ago to set up a database of clinical laboratories and counselling, and better guidance through the health and social in the field of rare diseases. The data collection covered 1 country in care systems. Aspects of service process identified as contributing to 1997, 7 in 2001, 15 in 2003, and 22 in 2006. It will cover 35 countries empowerment included providing time to talk, open access and yearly in the coming two years. This major effort was made possible thanks follow-up. These findings will contribute to identifying a core set of out- to the support of the EuroGenTest NoE, with additional resources from come measures for clinical genetics services. the EC DG for public health. Currently, the database includes data from 1,166 laboratories offering 14,451 tests for 1,318 diseases. The P1350. Decision models evaluating genetic testing in data collection is done mainly at the country level through partner- haemochromatosis: a multidisciplinary collaboration. ships with key leaders in the field. The laboratories are requested to C. Patch1,2, J. Bryant3, K. Cooper3, J. Picot3, P. Roderick2, W. Rosenberg2, A. fill-in an extensive questionnaire (either online or by more traditional Clegg3; means). The response rate is about 80% after three reminders. All the 1Guys and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, information is updated yearly through an online questionnaire already 2University of Southampton Medical School, Southampton, United Kingdom, containing the existing information, in order to minimize the workload 3Southampton Health Technologies Assessment Centre, Southampton, United for the laboratory. One of the identified problems is the large number Kingdom. of requests that laboratories receive to complete surveys. This infor- It’s recognised that evaluation of genetic technologies requires collab- mation is widely used by our website visitors. Orphanet is accessed orations between geneticists, health service researchers, public health daily by over 20,000 users, of which 20% are looking for information and health economics. We present the methods used in a Health on genetic testing. Technology Assessment examining the clinical utility of DNA testing in haemochromatosis (HHC). The aim being to evaluate the use of DNA P1348. Justice in delivering genetics: assessing the role of tests for detecting HHC in subgroups of patients suspected of having intellectual property law the disorder on the basis of clinical presentation and disturbed iron L. Bernier; parameters, and in family members of those diagnosed with haemo- University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, PQ, Canada. chromatosis. A clear distinction is drawn between diagnostic strategies While it is believed that genetics could offer numerous opportunities for in those suspected of having haemochromatosis and testing strategies global health improvement and play an important role in meeting the in family members. UN Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), there is also a fear that Objectives and Methods: To determine the clinical validity of DNA tests existing global health inequalities will be amplified by the evolution of to diagnose HHC. genetics. There are a plethora of normative, socio-economic and politi- To summarise the evidence on the clinical utility of diagnostic strate- cal obstacles to more equitable distribution of health and genetic re- gies using DNA tests to detect cases for treatment or monitoring in lated benefits that will be addressed in the course of this presentation terms of clinical- and cost effectiveness. to get a better understanding of how public policy should be designed. To compare costs and consequences by decision analytic modeling of This evaluation is vital to ensure that legal regimes and adequate pub- diagnostic algorithms for HHC and family testing strategies with and lic policy assist in ensuring that this promising field develops in a way without DNA testing in terms of cost per case detected. that improves people’s health without leaving the most vulnerable out- The structure and data inputs of all the decision trees are informed by side of the process. systematic literature reviews, the results of systematic searches and My paper attempts to determine how and if a justice theory of distribu- discussion with experts. Costs will be derived from primary data from tion translates into positive law. I chose to assess the patent system in previous studies, and national and local NHS unit costs. The outcome referring to the standard of access through different lenses and to how will be reported as cost per case detected. underlying politics and economics matter. This leads me to realise that Results: The structure of the decision models will be presented and the the application of strong patent rights in genetics is more compatible results of the reviews used to provide data to populate the models. with the reduction of the public commons, the creation of health gaps associated with people’s capacity to pay, and with an international ba- P1351. Two years Belgian experience in molecular diagnosis of sic structure established by a few powerful stakeholders. This evalu- Haemophilia. ation is vital to ensure that public policy can assist in ensuring that N. Lannoy1, I. Abinet1, A. Bosmans1, C. Verellen1, C. Vermylen2, C. Hermans3, genetics develops in a way that improves health without leaving the K. Dahan1; most vulnerable outside of the process. 1Centre for Human Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Paediatric, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brus- P1349. Patient Empowerment In Clinical Genetics Services: A sels, Belgium, 3Department of Haematology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, New Model Developed from Qualitative Research Brussels, Belgium. M. McAllister1,2,3, K. Payne1,3, S. Nicholls1, R. McLeod1,2,3, D. Donnai1,2,3, L. Deficiency or dysfunction of blood coagulation Factor VIII (F8) or factor Davies4; IX (F9) causes Haemophilia A and B, the two most common bleeding 1Nowgen, The North West Genetics Knowledge Park, Manchester, United King- disorders affecting one in 5000 or in 30000 males respectively. Clini- dom, 2North West Regional Clinical Genetics Department, St Mary’s Hospital, cally, the classification as mild, moderate or severe depends on the Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Academic Unit of Medical Genetics, University level of clotting factor which is strongly linked to the nature of genetic of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Health Economics Unit, Univer- defect. The two responsible genes F8 and F9 are located on Xq28 and sity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. respectively encode a mature protein of 2332 and 415 amino acids. Measuring the benefits to patients from using clinical genetics services Since 2005, we performed mutational testing on 103 haemophilia A is problematic, with little agreement about appropriate outcome do- (61 severe, 42 moderate/mild) and 21 haemophilia B (9 severe, 12 mains. The aim in this qualitative grounded theory study was to devel- moderate/mild) unrelated individuals from the Haemophilia Centre op a theoretical framework describing how patients and their families in the Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc. In the severe haemophilia benefit from using clinical genetics services. Seven focus groups and A group, using a multistep strategy including mutation targeted PCR, 19 interviews were conducted with patients, representatives from pa- Southern blot and gene dosage by MLPA technology (MRC-Holland), tient support organisations, and health professionals. Results suggest we observed one inversion of intron 1 (1%), 24 inversions of intron Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  22 (40%), 4 deletions and 1 duplication (8%). F8 sequencing showed control group. 68 additional mutations distributed throughout the coding exons. Of • The thinks that their current health is better than the control group the 68 mutations, 17 (28%) predicted premature truncation in the se- and, more than this one, try to continue their life even when feeling vere group while the others are amino acid substitutions in both severe ill; the group at-risk see themselves healthier and feeling well-being (11/61, 18%) and moderate/mild group (40/42, 95%). F9 sequencing longer than the control group. The group at-risk is more reserved when allowed the detection of all mutations (17 missense, 2 small deletions, feeling ill and is more worried with their health than the control group. 1 small insertion and 1 large deletion). In conclusion: 90 distinct muta- • The control group avoids that illness interferes in their lives, more tions including 25 novel changes unreported so far were found in Bel- than the group at-risk. The control group has more expectations about gian haemophilia individuals underlying the interest of genetic testing having a healthier life and suffered less delayed diseases. for carrier detection and prediction of antibodies production. P1354. The North West Genetics Knowledge Park (Nowgen): the P1352. Development of molecular biology laboratory training first five years courses for health care professionals at the North West Genetics H. R. Middleton-Price1,2, P. Finegold1,2, Z. Talks1,3, J. Dobson1,3, D. Donnai1,2; Knowledge Park in the UK 1North West Genetics Knowledge Park, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Uni- M. J. Leech1,2, F. Salway3, F. Jury3, P. Day3, D. Carthy3, K. Mathieson1,2, P. Fine- versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Central Manchester and gold1,2, D. Donnai1,2, H. Middleton-Price1,2; Manchester Children’s University Hospitals NHS Trust, Manchester, United 1North West Genetics Knowledge Park, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Uni- Kingdom. versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Centre for Integrated Nowgen was set up as one of six Genetics Knowledge Parks (GKPs) Genomic Medical Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, United in the UK, funded by the Department of Health for five years in 2002. Kingdom. The vision for Nowgen was to build on the achievements of one of the Techniques for analysing genetic variants related to disease and treat- most comprehensive genetics services in the UK, to create multidisci- ment are constantly advancing allowing more sophisticated and rapid plinary work programmes. This was served by the award of €6 million analysis of patient samples. The consequence of greater access to to build The Nowgen Centre in Manchester, providing a focus for all these techniques is that many clinical disciplines have to embrace the Nowgen’s activities, including networking events to create links with new technology. industry, aimed at increasing innovation. The North West Genetics Knowledge Park is developing a programme Nowgen has created a multidisciplinary health services research pro- of training courses for health professionals in response to the ex- gramme to improve delivery of genetic medicine whilst considering pressed need for training in practical molecular genetics laboratory priorities for patients. Our innovative approach comprises: evaluation techniques. The first of these training courses - a national, recurrent of clinical genetics services; economic evaluation of new services and two-day course for clinical cytogeneticists, accredited by The Royal technologies; an academic research programme on ethical and so- College of Pathologists - was run in January 2007 with successful cial dimensions; projects mainstreaming genetics into the NHS; a pro- training outcomes. Course evaluation has provided useful insights and gramme of professional education. protocols for future development: it is intended that the developmen- We place public engagement at the core of our activity, since we con- tal process for this pilot course could be replicated with other health sider that informed choices about priorities in healthcare will be critical professionals. to the integration of genetics into mainstream medicine. Through its An opinion canvassing exercise was initiated within the cytogenetics Public Programmes, Nowgen is highly regarded for its work in educa- profession. A questionnaire was sent to the leads of UK clinical cytoge- tion and dialogue, empowering people to make decisions about health netics laboratories via the Association of Clinical Cytogeneticists, to as- management. sess the need for a laboratory-based training course. Questions were Nowgen has established a coherent programme (of health services re- asked about the optimum length of a course and the key laboratory search, professional training, commercial events, and public engage- techniques they would want to see included. The initial course content ment and education), strategic relationships and clear commercial was based on this consultation. Techniques in the intensive two-day opportunities for the future. As we reflect on achievements to date, course included the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), Quantitative we are revising our strategy to impact health and science policy and Florescence (QF) PCR, Multiplex Ligation Dependent Probe Amplifica- practice over the next five years. tion (MLPA) and microarrays. Further, specific training courses are being developed for profession- P1355. Study on causes of hearing loss and patterns of als working in other clinical disciplines including general pathology inheritance of genetic deafness in Iran laboratory staff, using the successful protocol used for cytogenetics N. Mehran, C. Azimi; professionals. Cancer Institute,Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Repub- lic of Iran. P1353. Health Perception in individuals requesting pre- Hearing loss is one of the most frequent anomalies in some parts of symptomatic testing for late-onset neurological diseases the world. A deaf person suffers many problems such as social rela- Â. M. T. Leite, J. Sequeiros, C. Paul; tionships, information acquisition from his/her environment, increased Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal. anger, and treatment costs.Through genetic counseling, we may de- Health perceptions are personal beliefs and assessments of general crease the chance of birth of deaf people.To do so, we need an ac- health and show us how people see themselves as being well or not. curate statistical data of causes of hearing loss and patterns of inheri- Health perceptions are a subjective concept and may reflect more in- tance in genetic deafness in every population. dividual feelings and beliefs than their current health state. Individual The aim of this study was to find out the causes of hearing loss and perceptions about their own health are very important for counseling patterns of inheritance of genetic deafness among our referred pa- in late-onset diseases (Huntington’s disease, Machado-Joseph’s dis- tients. ease and familial amyloid neuropathy). We studied all the 7092 pedigrees of patients which referred to us Our aim is to evaluate the health perception of the individuals that for genetic counseling during the years 2001-2004. From 7092 pedi- come for pre-symptomatic testing and compare them with healthy grees, 335 had hearing loss. Among these 335 pedigrees, 616 cases people, not at risk for genetic disease. of hearing loss were found.Therefore, these 616 cases were studied HYPOTHESIS Individuals at-risk that come for pre-symptomatic test- according to the causes of hearing loss, patterns of inheritance, con- ing may present a worst health perception and show more adverse sanguineous and non-consanguineous marriages, and sex by using indicators regarding their health, once they are pressed by the doubt of SPSS software. Our study showed that genetic causes was the main being or not being a carrier for an incapacitating disease. etiology of hearing loss (67.8%).The most frequent pattern of inheri- RESULTS tance was autosomal recessive (86.7%),after that autosomal dominant • There are significant differences regarding factor “current health”. (11.2%) and the last pattern was X-linked(2.1%). The group at-risk presents a more positive perception about their cur- In consanguineous marriages, the most frequent cause of hearing loss rent health. was genetic causes while in non-consanguineous marriages the most • The group at-risk shows higher health perception indicators than the frequent cause was acquired and unknown causes. The pattern of Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  autosomal dominant was more frequent in non-consanguineous mar- and there are approximately 1125 risk individuals. Empirically, most of riages than consanguineous marriages. Our study also showed that these are aware of their increased risk. We present nationwide data of there was no relation between sex and cause of hearing loss and pat- presymptomatic tests in Norway since 1990. terns of inheritance. HD was mapped to chromosome 4p in 1983 and the HD-gene was iso- lated in 1993. Direct PCR-analysis of the gene has been available in P1356. Intention towards ethnicity-based carrier screening Norway since then. Presymptomatic testing started at Ullevål Univer- referral for hereditary hemoglobinopathies among primary sity Hospital in Oslo in 1990 and at Haukeland University Hospital in health care providers in the Netherlands Bergen in 2003. A standardized test procedure following the IHA/WFA S. S. Weinreich1,2, E. S. M. de Lange-de Klerk3, F. Rijmen3, M. C. Cornel1,2, M. guidelines has been used. In addition, there has been a possibility of de Kinderen4, A. M. C. Plass1,2; an individual follow-up consultation in the department of medical ge- 1VU University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Section Com- netics or follow-up in group sessions. munity Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2VU University Medical Center, In the years 1990-93, 54 risk individuals underwent linkage analysis Institute for Research in Extramural Medicine (EMGO), Amsterdam, The Neth- and in the years 1994-99, 108 risk individuals were tested directly. erlands, 3VU University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Epidemiology In the period 2000-06 180 risk individuals have been tested. Based and Biostatistics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Erfocentrum, Soestdijk, The on this number, we estimate that 16 % of Norwegian risk individuals Netherlands. chose presymptomatic testing in recent years. Of these risk individu- In the Netherlands, carriership risks for hereditary haemoglobinopa- als, 80 (44 %) were HD gene carriers. Up to 2006, a total number of thies are particularly high in (descendants of) of immigrants from Su- 342 persons have completed presymptomatic testing for HD. rinam, the Antilles, Turkey, Morocco and western Africa, but general Conclusion: Sixteen percent of Norwegian HD risk individuals choose practitioners and midwives have no formal guidelines for informing presymptomatic testing. This is in line with other Western European their patients about carrier screening for these diseases. Patients too countries. may be unaware of options for testing. The aim of this pilot was to explore attitudes and intentions towards haemoglobinopathy carrier P1359. Time trends in incidence of cystic fibrosis in two screening on the basis of ethnicity, in primary health care providers. European regions: Data from two newborn screening Intention to refer patients for carrier screening was measured using programmes. structured questionnaires based on the theory of planned behaviour. V. Scotet1,2, B. M. Assael3, I. Duguépéroux1,2, M. P. Audrézet1,4, C. Férec1,4, C. Surveys were collected from 191 primary health care providers. At- Castellani3; titude towards patient-education programmes about the subject was 1Inserm U 613, Brest, France, 2Université, Brest, France, 3Cystic Fibrosis Cen- positive, but they showed no clear intention to refer patients for carrier ter, Verona, Italy, 4CHU Brest, Hôpital Morvan, Brest, France. screening solely on the basis of ethnicity (on 7-point scales, general This study aimed to determine the incidence of cystic fibrosis (CF) and practitioners and midwives had respective median scores of 5.0 and its time trends over a 16-year period (1990-2005) in two European 5.7 for attitude and 4.0 and 4.5 for intention). Regression analysis regions which have a long practice of newborn screening for CF: Brit- showed that social norm explained 43% of intention to refer for carrier tany (western France) and Veneto/Trentino Alto-Adige (northeastern screening. Colleagues’ (supposed) opinions are thus a strong influ- Italy). The birth incidence of CF was 1/3153 in Brittany and 1/3540 ence. Both professional groups do take ethnicity into account when in Veneto/Trentino, what did not differ significantly (p=0.2450). Time diagnosing anaemic patients, as prescribed by existing guidelines. trends analysis using Poisson regression revealed that the birth in- Primary health care providers were also invited to attend an informa- cidence decreased significantly in the Italian area over the 16-year tional session about screening and testing for hereditary hemoglobin- period (average annual percent change (AAPC): -4.7% - 95% CI: [- opathies. Attendees of such sessions (N=33) did not score differently 7.3; -2.0] - p=0.0008), whereas this trend was not observed in Brittany than persons surveyed beforehand (N=166), on any of the psychologi- (AAPC: -0.6% - 95% CI: [-3.7; 2.5] - p=0.6909). The uptake of prenatal cal parameters. Thus, new measures are needed to change behaviour diagnosis (PD) appeared more common in Brittany. By incorporating in carrier screening referral. in the calculations all the terminations of CF-affected fetuses made over the same period (79 for Brittany and 31 for Veneto/Trentino), the P1357. Molecular Characterization of the Diseases B- adjusted incidence of CF would be 1/2191 in Brittany and 1/3116 in Thalassemia & Hemophilia-A amongst the people of Jammu & Veneto/Trentino. This would correspond to a change in the incidence Kashmir State rates of 30.5% for the first region (highly significant - p=0.0002) and S. C. Gupta, T. R. Raina, P. Kumar, V. Dogra, W. K. Balwan; of 12.0% for the second one (not significant - p=0.1600). As the mo- Human Genetic Research cum Counselling Centre, University of Jammu, tive of each PD was registered (previous affected child, family testing, Jammu, India. prenatal screening, echogenic bowel), the impact on the incidence of The present study on the Molecular Characterization of the Diseases the various public health policies could easily be measured. This study B-Thalassemia & Hemophilia-A affecting the people of J&K State, illustrates how the incidence of a disease evolves according the region India,has been carried out with an aim to characterize the types of characteristics, the public health strategies implemented and the cul- mutations affecting populations of J&K State and also to identify the tural attitudes towards PD. carriers amongst these populations. During this study the primers we used had already been used by the people in the adjoining states. P1360. A comprehensive and practical model to integrate Present study helped in detecting the common mutations and this has Genomic Services in Iranian Primary Health Care (PHC) system, successfully been been used for the purpose of Genetic Counselling in a pilot survey the Human Genetic Research cum Counselling Centre, in Jammu. De- V. R. Yassaee1, H. Malekafzali2, B. Malekafzali3, F. Yassaee4; tails of the Primers used in the present study and the results obtained 1Genomic Research Center, Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Sci- shall be discussed. ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Deputy for Research, Iranian Ministry of Health, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic AZAD Medical University, P1358. Presymptomatic testing for Huntingtons disease in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dept. of Gynecology, Shaheed Beheshti Uni- Norway versity of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. K. Bjørgo1, M. Fannemel1, K. Eiklid1, E. Blinkenberg2, O. Solberg3, J. Apold2, A. Background: Over the last 25 years, promotion level of public educa- Heiberg4, L. Retterstol1; tion along with a high range of health services in both rural and urban 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Ulleval University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Dept. of areas of Iran has lead to a remarkable improvement of health indices. Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 3Center for In the meantime, a national screening program for thalassemia has Rare Diseases, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Center, Oslo, Norway, also been set up in Primary Health Care (PHC), resulted in a 70% 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Center, reduction in the expected annual birth rate of affected infants (Sama- Oslo, Norway. vat A. et. al. 2004). In this survey, we are seeking a practical model to Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenera- implement a wide range of genomic services in the PHC of Iran. tive disease caused by an expanded number of CAG repeats in the Method: There are different genomic testing strategies worldwide. HD-gene. The number of HD patients in Norway is estimated to 225 Some are offered publicly such as in the UK and some are offered Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  privately such as in the USA, for instance. P1363. Sequencing and MLPA under diagnostic rules Since 2004, a screening program has been set up in a well-defined D. du Sart; population of Tehran, Iran’s capital. Based on our experiments earned Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, from referral/follow-up system within PHC, we designed 2 distinctive Victoria, Australia. and comprehensive programs for the urban and rural areas. The field of molecular genetics is innovative and dynamic, resulting in We therefore proposed following 3 phases: continual upgrading or improvement of technology. Molecular genetic 1-Mobilizing and organizing the community to active participation; diagnostics therefore needs to be responsive to this to bring new or 2-Implementation, improved technology into clinical management of patients and fami- 3-Assessment the program. lies, but in the context of strict regulation and control. In Australia, the Conclusion: As a general condition of Iran, population of 68 millions, National Pathology Accreditation Advisory Council (NPAAC), the body population age distribution mean which is 23 years, high rate of con- responsible for setting guidelines and standards for medical labora- sanguinity, strength of national PHC, general public demand, and the tory accreditation, have released standards for validation of in-house human rights may direct us to offer a national extraordinary health ser- developed assays for use in diagnostic testing. The detailed require- vices including genomic services. ments include full documentation of the design phase, the production This pilot survey may lead us to achieve valuable results; however, phase, the technical validation phase and the monitoring phase. further studies are required to reach a comprehensive model. The design phase includes literature review and /or peer consultation process to identify alternatives and the experience of other as well as P1361. Implementation of the Swiss Federal Law of Human the clinical usefulness of the proposed assay. The production phase Genetic Analysis includes conforming to safety principals for patients and laboratory M. C. Rebsamen1, I. Filges1, C. Benedetti2, M. A. Morris1; staff as well as assessment of the analytical performance and the clini- 1Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Service of Genetic Medicine, Geneva Uni- cal performance of the assay. The technical validation phase includes versity Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Federal Office of Public Health, Berne, assessment of the assay sensitivity and specificity, measurement of Switzerland. uncertainty if applicable and medically relevant criteria. The monitoring The new Swiss Federal Law of Human Genetic Analysis (LAGH), phase includes assessment of the assay performance in internal QC, applicable from April 2007, fixes the legal framework for prescribing external QAP or sample exchanges with other laboratories. The pre- and performing non-research genetic tests in humans. In the era of sentation will encapsulate the above phases of validation for molecular constantly-increasing genetic knowledge and of rapidly progressing genetic testing in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), laboratory techniques, the LAGH is designed to protect human dignity, using a capillary sequencing assay to detect unknown sequence prevent abuses and ensure a high standard of testing. changes and the MLPA assay (multiplex ligation-dependent probe am- We will focus principally on the medical application of the Law, which plification) to detect intragenic or whole gene deletion mutations. also encompasses testing in legal, workplace and insurance contexts including DNA profiling for investigating parentage and for identifica- P1364. Myotonic Dystrophy in Yakuts (Russian Federation) tion purposes in civil and administrative proceedings. A. L. Sukhomyasova1, N. R. Maximova2; Non-directive genetic counselling and respect of the patient’s right to 1Republican Hospital No. 1 - National Center of Medicine, Yakutsk, Russian autodetermination is required and the conditions are described in de- Federation, 2Yakutsk Science Center of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences tail in the text of the Law. and the Government of the RS(Y), Yakutsk, Russian Federation. Informed consent is required before performing any genetic testing, In the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) among Yakuts (430 thousand peo- and must be obtained in writing before tests for presymptomatic, pre- ple) we have documented a high prevalence of DM1, that is is 21,3 per natal and “family planning” (reproductive choice) purposes. 100 thousand. Prescription of genetic tests is restricted to medical doctors and, in pre- The purpose of this research was studying distribution among different natal or presymptomatic settings, to those with specific competence in ethinc groups, the clinical presentations of myotonic dystrophy and the genetic counselling. distribution of the CTG-repeat in the indiginous populations of Yakutia. Licensing to perform molecular or cytogenetic testing is obligatory. Two regions of accumulation of DM1 are established in the territories The accompanying Ordinance on Human Genetic Analysis defines of Viluiskii and the Central group of uluses. In 35 Yakut families the the criteria for the minimum acceptable standard of quality manage- classical form of myotonic dystrophy prevails (81,5 %), but we also ment, including the competence of the laboratory director and person- encountered congenital and early childhood forms of the disease. The nel, EQA and quality assurance requirements comparable to the ISO median age of patients with DM1 was 31,4±1,5 years, and the average 15189 standard. age of onset was 16,8±1,1 years. The most common clinical presenta- The obligations defined by the LAGH are closely based on pre-existing tions were, progressive muscular weakness, cardiovascular and endo- national and international standards and practices, yet Switzerland is crinological symptoms. Family studies revealed clinical variability and one of the first countries in the World to transfer these into law. anticipation. We analysed the distribution of CTG-repeat alleles in the normal Yakut population(Federova et al., 2003) in the two main ethnic P1362. Medical genetic service of Leningrad province: 2003-2005 groups groups (Viluiskii, Central, Northern Yakuts - 192 individuals). years We found 18 different allelic variants from 5 up to 29 CTG-repeats. The I. A. Ivanov1,2, M. O. Mkheidze2; most common alleles had 12 and 13 repeats (combined prevalence 1District Children Hospital, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical Acad- 79 %). We found a low frequency (3-6 %) of unstable alleles with > 19 emy for postgraduate studying, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. CTG repeats. Medical genetics service is stationed at District Children Hospital. It We suggest that one of the reasons for the accumulation of DM1 in works in close co-operation with the Department of Medical Genet- the Yakut population is a founder effect of these unstable alleles. This ics of the MAPS, Municipal Centre of Medical Genetics etc. Genetic needs to be confirmed in further studies. A method of preventive main- service realized neonatal screening for PKU and CH, cytogenetic in- tenance of DM1 in Yakuts is to provide effective medical-genetic con- vestigations for making diagnosis of chromosomal pathology (2840 sultation with prenatal DNA-diagnostics. samples), second trimester prenatal screening for congenital defects, double-test, (18000 pregnant women); confirmation of hereditary di- P1365. Implementing Personal Health Records for agnosis, medical care, long term inpatient and outpatient care, dietary Neurofibromatosis Type 1 - Patients‘ and Health Care management, genetic counseling. 36589 of newborns(98,65%) were Professionals‘ Views and Experiences examined through neonatal screening. Five cases of PKU and five P. M. Griffiths1, S. Huson1, R. Abbott1,2, E. Howard1, J. Clayton-Smith1, K. Met- cases of CH were diagnosed. Cohort of children with PKU (23 cases) calfe1, G. Evans1, S. Harrison1, M. Kenney1, S. Collitt1, K. Strong1, B. Kerr1; and with CH (46 cases) has special dietary and medicinal treatment. 1Central Manchester and Manchester Children’s Hospitals NHS Trust, Man- Ultrasound investigation was performed for pregnant women (25821of chester, United Kingdom, 2The Neurofibromatosis Association, Kingston upon examinations). 225 of the fetuses were found to have congenital mal- Thames, United Kingdom. formations. 160 of pregnancies were interrupted owing to congenital Personal health records (PHRs) are client held records. As part of our malformations or chromosomal diseases of the fetuses. Service Development Project, we have developed a PHR for children Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  and adults with Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (Nf1). a descriptive analysis and a text mining search were performed (SAS Nf1 is a relatively common autosomal dominant condition characterised software). Search retrieved 7,140 manuscripts, distributed per interval by wide variability in its clinical expression. Birth incidence is about 1 in period (1950-2006) per each DB as follows: OI 48%, CPA 52%. Eng- 3,000 which means there are approximately 164,000 affected individu- lish is the leading language of publication: OI 70%, CPA 93%. For both als in the EU. The course of the disease is unpredictable and affected DBs, top Countries of publication are USA and UK. An overlapping individuals carry a lifelong risk of developing serious complications. area exists between OI & CPA: 70 manuscripts representing the 1% of Fortunately, most people affected with Nf1 will have skin signs only, the whole (1969-2006), written in English (84%) and published in the but there is still a need for vigilance particularly during the first five US and UK (45% and 29%). Further results on text mining search will years, and also during adolescence, when the risks of developing spe- follow. Results obtained show that English-written papers predominate cific types of complications are greater. Because of this, regular clinical and understanding English results fundamental to update oneself. The reviews and targeted screenings are important in the management of overlapping area is nearly absent despite the strong correlation of the these patients, and it is hoped that the PHR will facilitate this, particu- two issues, it means that bibliographic search on CPA/differential di- larly where there is a high disease burden and patients are under the agnosis could be easily biased retrieving incomplete results, with the care of several specialists. continuous risk of falling in a bibliographic cul-de-sac. Nearly 200 PHRs have been issued to Nf1 patients attending clinics in Manchester, Liverpool and Newcastle. An evaluation exercise is un- P1368. Psychological effects of parenting stress on parents of derway which will look at the effectiveness of PHRs as clinical tools, Down Syndrome children and explore patients’ and health care professionals’ experiences using A. Alpman1, T. Cankaya1, B. Durmaz1, A. Vahabi2, C. Gunduz3, O. Cogulu1, F. the records. This submission will present the results from this evalua- Ozkinay1; tion and will include feedback from a patient satisfaction survey, audit 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, data regarding record use, and feedback from a questionnaire given 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, to health care professionals working in a variety of roles and clinical Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, specialities. Izmir, Turkey. Down syndrome (DS) occuring in one out of 800 live births is the most P1366. Exploring existing and deliberated community frequent genetic cause of mental retardation and associated medical perspectives of newborn screening in Australia to inform policy problems. Having a child with DS is an unexpected and stressful ex- standards in newborn screening and the storage and use of perience for most parents but they are the ones who have a key role dried blood spots to play in determining the extent of their child’s handicap. In addition K. K. Barlow-Stewart; to this, cultural and social aspects play a great role in determining the Centre for Genetics Education, NSW Health, Sydney, Australia. behaviors of the mother and the father; usually differ in a great va- Since the 1960s newborn screening (NBS) for several rare and serious riety. The aim of the study is to evaluate the social, economical and disorders has been in place across Australia and testing now enables individual problems of the parents who have a child with DS by using the early detection of over 30 conditions. Policies across Australian a questionnaire designed by our group. The questionnaire consisted States have diverged in some aspects of NBS, especially in the reten- of 18 questions assessing the families’ characteristics, their relations tion and further use of the dried blood spots collected as part of the with each other and the other people and their attitudes towards the screening. To date there has been limited empirical evidence of wider DS child. We found out that DS children mostly spent their time by their community attitudes to inform the deliberations of health professionals mothers, and mothers reported higher levels of stress than fathers and policy makers towards national consistency. (p<0.05). Most of the parents tried to solve their problems by helping Methodologies: Nine moderated small group discussions were held each other, however the rate of mothers who reported higher possibili- with 40 participants including young adults, recent parents and old- ties to divorce was significantly higher than the fathers (p<0.05). We er parents. The groups were reconvened one week later for further focused on the effect of having a child with Down syndrome on the discussion enabling considered deliberation of the issues raised and parents, factors causing problems on the family and the characteristics prompted by the stimulus materials provided. of a family with Down syndrome children. In conclusion genetic coun- Results: The findings suggest that there is limited community aware- seling and follow-up visits of those families need more specified and ness of the public health importance of NBS and that resulting bio- professional approach. logical samples are stored for varying periods in different Australian States. Members of the wider community presented with opportunities P1369. Are DNA patents hampering genetic testing? - An to consider current procedures and policies surrounding consent, stor- empirical study age and further use of the dried blood spots appear reassured and to N. Berthels1,2, B. Verbeure1, G. Matthijs2, G. Van Overwalle1; have high levels of trust. However there are clearly some groups who 1Centre for Intellectual Property Rights, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, have concerns with the storage of dried blood spot specimens and Belgium, 2Department of Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, perceive that these may be abused. Leuven, Belgium. Conclusions: The findings are important for improving current com- In the debate about DNA patenting and its impact on public health ser- munications about NBS, developing policies, maintaining public confi- vices and access thereto, empirical data are essential to demonstrate dence and the development of State and National initiatives in genetic whether patents are hindering access to diagnostic testing or not. We health. provide a patent landscape analysis i.e. a quantitative and qualitative patent analysis related to hereditary diseases. We focus on patents re- P1367. The overlapping area between Osteogenesis Imperfecta lated to human genes or their use in diagnostic testing in Europe. They and child physical abuse: a bibliometric analysis. include the most frequently tested hereditary diseases like hereditary C. Ranzato1, M. Rosa Rizzotto1, E. Lenzini2, P. Facchin1; breast and ovarian cancer, hereditary colon cancer, cystic fibrosis and 1Epidemiology & Community Medicine Unit - Paediatric Department, Padova, Fragile X syndrome. Italy, 2Molecular Cytogenetic Lab - Paediatric Department, Padova, Italy. Quantitatively, the amount of patent applications and patents granted Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a hereditary connective tissue disor- by the EPO and the USPTO were mapped. This is primarily based der. Its manifestations are fragile bones, multiple bone fractures, bone on internet searches of patent databases using specifically developed deformities with a history of minimal or no trauma. This clinical picture search algorithms. Qualitatively, the claims of relevant DNA patents may be observed in Child Physical Abuse (CPA). CPA is a relevant were exhaustively analysed and classified according to their subject differential diagnosis when a child presents unexplained fractures. Aim matter. In general, the data extracted from the DNA patents provide in- is to quantify the weight and the trends of the worldwide literature on sight into several areas including the scope of patent protection sought OI and CPA, in order to measure if and how the 2 topics overlap and or obtained, the identification of closely related patents, trends in DNA are studied together. A retrospective bibliometric analysis was carried patenting for diagnostics, identity and activity of competitors active in out. Through PubMed, literature was explored and 2 quoted phras- the field, etc. es Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI), Child Physical Abuse (CPA) were The outcome of this empirical study is an overview of DNA patents searched in all available manuscripts. Starting from retrieved papers, covering diagnostic practice. On this basis, it will become possible to Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  test to what extent the claim that a ‘patent thicket’ is emerging in the P1372. Using a new package for drawing pedigrees for teaching genetics field is valid and that patents are indeed hindering access. medical genetics This study could contribute to policy formation in the field of DNA pat- L. Akhmadeeva; enting and development of new licensing strategies. Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Recently we published a paper about our newly created package for P1370. Patient experiences and preferences of receiving genetic drawing pedigrees (B.Veytsman, L.Akhmadeeva, The PracTeX Jour- information. nal, Nov, 2006). This software suite could be useful for teaching medi- S. Burke1,2, C. Bennett2, J. Bedward1, P. Farndon2; cal genetics at the Universities. Every medical student has to get a 1Centre for Research in Medical and Dental Education, Birmingham, United skill of making pedigrees. Pedigrees are very helpful in confirming Kingdom, 2NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Bir- diagnosis and in estimating prognosis for people in the family. Using mingham, United Kingdom. our new package could help students to draw beautiful genealogic In 2006 we conducted a qualitative study of 27 people (with or at risk trees. It makes them learn more about different symbols of a pedigree of genetic conditions or parents of children affected by a genetic condi- and about methodology, it saves much time which is precious during tion) to explore their experiences and preferences of receiving genetic classes, it gives a chance to save all the versions and to add new fam- information. Telephone interviews focused on provision of information ily members easily. by healthcare professionals outside specialist genetics services and explored how and from where patients initially received information P1373. Brazilian’s case-study of Poverty and Deficiency about the genetic basis of the condition and their views and prefer- A. S. N. Marinho1, F. G. Cavalcante2; ences on such information provision. 1FUNLAR - RIO, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2CLAVES/FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, The results indicate a perceived need for greater awareness of genetic Brazil. aspects of conditions amongst healthcare professionals. Patients ac- Recent demographic studies are related to the growth of the relation- knowledged that healthcare professionals cannot have detailed knowl- ship between poverty and the risk for deficiency (Fujiura & Yamaki, edge about all genetic conditions, but felt that identifying and referring 2000; Kaye et al, 1996) which can be described as a “new morbid- patients appropriately was important. Whilst they recognised the value ity” (Baumeister, Kupstas, 1996). The present study discuss the “co- of information from specialist genetic services, some would prefer their prevalence” of poverty in a Social Rehabilitation Program based in specialty consultant, with whom they had established a rapport, to be Community (PRC), from Francisco de Paula Municipal Foundation, in more involved in the provision of genetic information. Family practitio- Rio de Janeiro/ Brazil (FUNLAR-RIO), specially focusing families with ners were viewed as the best group to provide ongoing support and children and teenager from 0 to 24 years old. A qualitative research co-ordination of information. related to maltreatment and human rights of people with disabilities Patients stressed the need for healthcare professionals providing ge- was done through 24 case-studies in profundity, using a triangulation netic information to do so in a non-judgemental manner; be mindful of method of case-discussions with team work, reflexive groups with their use of terminology; tailor the information provided to the prefer- families, interview with local leaderships and participant-observation ences of individuals; and inform people where they can access further with the financial support of Faperj and CNPq (2005-2006). Working information. Awareness of the emotional impact of genetic information with people in extreme social exclusion, PRC make the registration of for individuals and the wider family was also considered important. the disabled people they encounter in different favelas, make an evalu- These results have implications for the education of healthcare profes- ation of their needs and try to create a network of different sources sionals if patient expectations are to be met. according to family needs and their disabled son or daughter (health promotion, education inclusion, social benefits for poor families, etc). P1371. Retrospective evaluation of the referral reasons of Domestic Violence is another problem to be faced with protective solu- patients at a tertiary paediatric genetic center in Izmir, Turkey tions involving Brazilian social polices. In this study we can evaluate B. Durmaz1, E. Pariltay2, M. Akgul2, A. Alpman1, E. Ataman2, O. Kirbiyik2, O. the impact of actions to promote human right and violence prevention Cogulu1, F. Ozkinay1; with families of disabled children. We could describe changes in health 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division of conditions, work and school inclusion, leisure and recreational activi- Genetics and Teratology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, ties, physical and social environment and the importance of Brazilian Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey. social politics to protect their poor population. Genetic counseling is a service to help individuals and the other fam- ily members translate scientific knowledge into practical information P1374. Provision and quality assurance of preimplantation which is possible before conception, during pregnancy, after birth, dur- genetic diagnosis in Europe ing childhood, or even in adulthood. Particularly families seek genetic A. Corveleyn1,2, M. A. Morris3,2, E. Dequeker1,2, K. Sermon4, J. Lawford Da- counseling when their children have features suggestive of a genetic vies5,6, G. Antiñolo7,8, A. Schmutzler9, J. Vanecek10, N. Nagels1,2, E. Zika11, F. disorder. Our study aimed to review and evaluate the distribution of Palau7,12, D. Ibarreta11; the referral reasons during the past eight years. A total of 2342 pa- 1Department of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2EuroGentest, Leuven, Bel- tients were referred to our outpatient clinic. The referral reasons in- gium, 3Service of Genetic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Centre for Medical cluded genetic disorders comprising mental retardation-multiple Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle, United congenital anomaly and isolated anomalies in 1472 cases (62.85%), Kingdom, 6Bevan Brittan LLP, London, United Kingdom, 7Centre for Biomedical syndromes which may be associated with cytogenetic abnormalities Research on Rare Diseases, Valencia, Spain, 8Unidad Clinica de Genetica y in 634 (27.07%), suspected single gene disorders in 134 (5.72%), Reproduccion, Seville, Spain, 9Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel, Ger- suspected microdeletion syndromes in 48 (2.05%) and the others in many, 10Technology Centre of the Academy of Sciences CR, Prague, Czech 54 (2.31%). Among the 1472 cases with genetic disorders comprising Republic, 11European Commission, Joint Research Center, Seville, Spain, 12In- mental retardation-multiple congenital anomaly and isolated anoma- stitut de Biomedicina de València – CSIC, Valencia, Spain. lies, dysmorphological facial features were detected in 821, isolated Although PGD is now a well-established treatment, no current, com- anomalies in 374, mental retardation in 351 and growth retardation prehensive independent data exist about the practice and provision in 244. In this study it was determined that 494 cases (21.09%) were of PGD in Europe. In response to this, a survey was developed in referred because of clinical suspicion of Down syndrome, 124 (5.29%) collaboration with EuroGentest and ESHRE, to assess the provision Turner syndrome, 50 (2.13%) metabolic storage diseases, 38 (1.62%) of PGD services in Europe, access by patients and the current state of neuromuscular disorders, 33 (1.41%) ambiguous genitalia. In conclu- quality assurance. Additionally, expert opinions were obtained through sion, genetic disorders such as Down syndrome and Turner syndrome interviews conducted with professionals in specific countries. still account a considerable number of the referrals in our outpatient The survey identified 53 centres offering PGD in 17 European coun- service. Although complex diseases are very common in the popula- tries, performing a total of 2-3000 cycles in 2005 (excluding PGS). The tion, cases with those diseases were not referred as much as expected most widely-available testing was for familial chromosomal anomalies, to the genetic counseling sessions. followed by monogenic diseases, and HLA typing. Quality assurance of PGD testing was evaluated by several criteria. While half of the cen- tres have designated quality managers, just 33% have or are prepar-Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  ing for accreditation or certification. Two-thirds of centres responded 3. As genetic medicine makes a greater impact on people’s lives there are more demands on other professionals, such as school that they did not participate in EQA, a problem exacerbated by a lack teachers, lawyers, journalists and ethicists, to understand the of PGD-specific schemes. Approximately 19% of the centres do not latest developments in genetic medicine. We have supported a keep data on accuracy; 9% do not even follow up until birth. Genetic diverse group of non-healthcare professionals through training counselling is provided and informed consent obtained in 94% of cen- events, to increase awareness of genetic medicine in society. tres but follow-up after testing is very limited. PGD is an expanding activity with an increasing international flow. We We shall continue this integrated programme, which will address the identified a potential need for improvement in the overall quality sys- professional, public and policy implications of genetic medicine and tem of providers. In this respect, development of PGD-specific EQA is ensure greater links between all stakeholders, essential for future of particular importance. There is also a need to improve monitoring of delivery of modern health services. PGD, especially long-term follow-up, through increased public funding and international co-operation. P1377. An invasive prenatal diagnosis and termination for P1375. The role of genetic counseling on women′s informed abnormal cytogenetic findings. Psychological experience for decision making for invasive prenatal testing pregnant women following O. Miljanovic1,2, S. Teofilova3; S. M. Brankovic Niksic, Pilic Radivojevic G., Jelisavcic M., Milutinovic M., and 1Center for Medical Genetics and Immunology & Institute for Children’s Dis- Mitrovic T.; eases - Clinical Center of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro, 2Medical Institute of Mental Health, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. Faculty – University of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro, 3Center for Medi- Background. The invasive prenatal diagnosis includes the applica- cal Genetics and Immunology - Clinical Center of Montenegro, Podgorica, tion of early amniocentesis (16-18 gestational week) or cordocente- Montenegro. sis (22-25 week of gestation) in a pregnancy with certain indications. Genetic counseling is a unique psycho-educational process centered Abnormal cytogenetic finding results in interrupting of a pregnancy. on providing very special genetic information, with the goal to facilitate That causes one of the greatest psychological traumas that have its clients′ knowledge and ability for optimal decision making for invasive characteristics. prenatal testing: understanding relevant information, informed choos- Purpose. Study analyzed the kind of psychological problems, somatic ing a course of action consistent with one′s attitudes and resulting in problems, the influence on marriage and the duration of these prob- minimal decisional conflict, guilt or regret. lems in women whose pregnancy was interrupted depending on the This study was aimed to assess whether a special genetic counseling method of prenatal diagnosis that was used. and decision aid, when compared to a leaflet or referral MD information, Methods. Based on the research carried out at the Institute of Mental improve women′s informed decision making and diminish uncertainty Health, Department of Medical Genetics from 1999-2003, 146 preg- in the context of prenatal invasive testing. Pregnant women at 15-18 nancies were interrupted because of the abnormal cytogenetic find- weeks gestation, referred for prenatal invasive testing, were asked ings. The interruptions were performed in 20-27 gestational week. to fill our questionnaire, before testing. They where divided into two After pregnancy interruption women were filling form that tested the groups: first group has been provided with special genetic counseling, kind of problem that appeared (psychological, somatic or combined), and second group was provided with pamphlet or referral MD informa- divorce and the duration of psychological problem. Statistical method tion. Knowledge, understanding relevant information, informed choice, that was used was Chi square test. and anxiety and decision conflicts were measured. Satisfactory level of Results. 83% of all pregnant women describe psychological problem knowledge was found significantly more frequent in decision aid group (most frequently in 55% - emotional problem that persisted during the compared with the leaflet group. Decision aid group was more than period of two years (38%)). Divorce was the less frequent (1%). twice better eligible for informed choice. Depression, worry and anxiety Conclusion. Statistically significant difference was not proven that attitudes to the pregnancy/fetus were found more frequently in leaflet there is correlation between the kind of the problem and the method group. Decisional conflict was found very low in both groups. used for prenatal diagnosis. Nevertheless, certain specificities exist Appliance of specify genetic counseling resource can produce an im- and they will be discussed in the presentation. provement in women′s knowledge about the complexities of prenatal genetic testing. This resource can potentially play an important role in P1378. Synthetic quality controls for Cystic Fibrosis testing, are improving women′s informed decision making. they useful for a diagnostic laboratory? S. Berwouts1,2, J. T. Gordon3, C. A. Rundell3, D. E. Barton4,2, E. Dequeker1,2; P1376. An integrated programme of professional development in 1University of Leuven, Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Eu- genetic medicine at the North West Genetics Knowledge Park roGentest, Leuven, Belgium, 3Maine Molecular Quality Controls, Inc, Scar- K. Mathieson1,2, P. Finegold1,2, M. Leech1,2, D. Donnai1,2, H. Middleton-Price1,2; borough, ME, United States, 4National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, 1The North West Genetics Knowledge Park, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2The Ireland. University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. One of the necessities for laboratories to assure high quality in mo- It is widely recognised that there is a need for training in genetic medi- lecular genetic testing, is the use of appropriate positive quality control cine for people working in many medical disciplines. It is also vital that (QC) materials. the general public is both informed and involved in decision-making Laboratories mainly use patient samples as QC, which of course in- about how genetic technologies are used within health services. clude a maximum of two mutations per sample. Bearing in mind that At Nowgen, the UK’s North West Genetics Knowledge Park, we have some assays can test for more than 100 mutations, multiplex QC ma- exploited our position at the interface between clinical genetics, pa- terials could save valuable time and reagents. tients and the public, and our links with national professional develop- The European Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Network enclosed a synthetic ment initiatives, to devise a comprehensive training programme that multiplex QC developed by MMQCI as an additional sample in two addresses these important issues. This comprises three main ele- consecutive CF External Quality Assessment schemes. For 2005, ments: the sample included R553X, I507del, R117H, 394delTT, 2183AA>G, R347H and 5T all in homozygote state. In 2006, again a synthetic sam- 1. A comprehensive programme of training for health profession- ple was distributed, with partly the same variants: 3876delA, R553X, als, in order to ease the integration of genetics into mainstream 394delTT, R117H, I507del, W1282X, 3905insT, F508C, 5T and 7T all health services, which will ensure that over 5000 training hours in heterozygote state. are delivered this year. Attendees are drawn from specialties 133 laboratories returned their results on the analysis of the synthetic such as cardiology, midwifery, paediatrics and oncology. blood sample in 2005. The multiplex QC material performed well in the 2. We have developed and delivered a programme of communi- majority of assays and laboratories. The most common error was the cation workshops, to help geneticists to communicate with non- inability to find all mutations (20%). Seven laboratories encountered specialist audiences. detection problems and five laboratories reported extraction failure. Mutations not present in the QC material were reported by 14 out of 83 laboratories. Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 00 For the scheme of 2006, results were submitted early 2007. A compari- tries have participated in the first five workshops and 16 laboratories son will be made between the two trials. Furthermore, the evaluation participated more than once. Tangible outcomes have included criteria will determine if there is any improvement for laboratories who partici- for selecting an appropriate IT programme to support QM systems, a pated in the trial twice. list of companies providing such software, and a concrete interpreta- tion of all phases of an internal audit. P1379. Quality Management and accreditation of genetic testing services P1381. Collaborative Experience of the Romanian Prader Willi R. J. Hastings1, D. Barton2, S. Berwouts3, C. Brady2, P. Corbisier4, A. Corve- Association with Medical Specialists leyn3, R. Elles5, B. Fowler6, D. Gancberg4, P. Litynski6, M. Macek Jr7, U. Mal- M. Puiu1, D. Dan2, C. Skrypnyk3; burg8, G. Matthijs3, M. Morris9, C. Mueller8, N. Nagels3, B. Quellhorst-Pawley1, 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2Romanian Prader A. Stambergova7, J. Vermeesch3, K. Vickers5, E. Dequeker3; Willi Association, Zalau, Romania, 3Medical Faculty, Oradea, Romania. 1John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Our Lady’s Children’s Hos- Introduction In the absence of a national governmental strategy for pital, Dublin, Ireland, 3KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4European Commission, Rare Diseases (RD), an EU priority for Romania, the collaboration of Geel, Belgium, 5St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6University local and national NGOs and medical specialists is essential. The aim Children’s Hospital, Basel, Switzerland, 7Charles University, Prague, Czech of our paper is to focus on the encouragement of a collaborative effort Republic, 8Universitaet Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 9CMU, Geneva, between Higher Education Medical Universities, medical specialists, Switzerland. and NGOs serving beneficiaries in the RD sector through a multidisci- The EuroGentest network aims to improve and harmonize the qual- plinary approach. ity of the genetic services in Europe. The network encompasses Bio- Results Families of children with RD have interacted with medical spe- chemical, Clinical, Cyto- and Molecular Genetics. The EuroGentest cialists and benefited by becoming more assertive and by achieving Quality Management group is aiming to improve the organization and more developmental milestones. APWR has established contacts with harmonization of External Quality Assessment (EQA) schemes, facili- a Genetic Lab and renewed the contact with Mauro Baschirotto, Insti- tate the development of guidelines and disseminate Quality assurance tute for Rare Diseases and established new relationships with genet- (QAu) information through a databaseas well as assisting laborato- ics specialist which helped us to diagnosed the patients in important ries in attaining and maintaining accreditation. In addition, this group genetics Institute and laboratories: Institute of Medical Genetics from is reviewing suitable quality control materials (QCMs) and providing Zurich, Institute of Human Genetics- Wurzburg, Institute of Clinical documentation/SOPs on new technologies. Genetics, Olgahospital-Stuttgart, Genetic Lab. Organized a training Since January 2005, the group has disseminated information on ac- course for parents, genetic evaluating for children, a training course in creditation through five international workshops. A database on the genetics for family doctors, under auspicious of the Medical University, current status of QAu in European genetic testing services will soon Timisoara. be publicly available. On the website, laboratories can find the EQA Conclusions The health of people with disability and the social integra- scheme most appropriate to their needs through discipline specific tion can be improved if they have every opportunity to enjoy family life, registers of schemes in Europe. All three laboratory disciplines have education, friendship, access to public facilities and freedom of move- expanded their repertoire of EQA including a pilot European cytoge- ment. Action should be aimed at collaboration between medical spe- netics scheme, CEQA. Minimum quality guidelines have been pub- cialists, families, and NGOs. Developing awareness about the needs lished for cytogenetics and some biochemical analytes. Draft guide- of children with RD and engaging public in a shared strategy for the lines for microarrays will be published later this year. In collaboration development of genetic services, will ensure a collaborative interna- with EMQN, best practice meetings will be organised in 2007 for Famil- tional approach in sharing of expertise and experience. ial Breast Cancer, Spinocerebellar Ataxias and Maturity Onset Diabe- tes of the Young to generate consensus guidelines. Finally QCMs for P1382. Recurrent spontaneous abortion and consanguinity Prader-Willi/Angelman syndromes are being developed and validation N. Ghasemi1, M. Mosaddegh2, M. Abdoli1; of MLPA, diagnostic CF-testing kits and DNA extraction methods are in 1Infertility Research and Clinical Centre, Yazd Shahid Sadoughi Medical Sci- progress through a core group of accredited laboratories with reports ences University, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Yazd Shahid Sadoughi Medi- due this year. cal Sciences University, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. An expected 15% of clinically established pregnancies abort sponta- P1380. Improving the quality system in our laboratories by neously. When all known causes of fetal losses are ruled out, there sharing experiences remains a population of women (0.5-1.0%) who have recurrent fetal E. Dequeker1,2, S. Berwouts1,2, M. Gielis3,2, A. Wynants3,2, M. A. Morris4,2; losses of unknown etiology. A important part of these recurrent spon- 1KULeuven Centre for Molecular Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2EuroGentest, taneous abortions may be due to primarily genetic causes. The sig- Leuven, Belgium, 3MCR, Leuven, Belgium, 4Medical Genetics, Geneva Univer- nificant characteristic of couples experiencing such fetal losses is the sity Hospitals, Genevea, Switzerland. sharing of alleles between husband and wife. The suggestion devel- Genetic services have considerably increased their activity in the past oped here states that the sharing of recessive lethal genes could be few years and quality assurance (QAu) is now essential in order to caused by consanguinity. These recessive lethal alleles could not act minimize potential errors and deficiencies. The introduction of quality alone to cause problem, but they could act with lethal alleles on other standards in laboratories, and the growing interest in and requirement sister chromosome. This means both husband and wife were normal for accreditation, has made better understanding of quality manage- and usually their family did not have any genetic disorder, but these ment (QM) and QAu a priority. Consequently the EU project Euro- fetuses could not live with these alleles. Gentest aims to improve and harmonize the overall quality of genetic Present study reports the result of genetic counseling for couples with services. recurrent spontaneous abortion in Yazd Infertility Research and Clini- In a focus on training and education, key parameters in improving cal Centre. The results showed the coefficient of inbreeding of 4% of quality, a series of workshops has been held in 2005 and 2006 to aid these couples was 1/8. In 25% it was 1/16 and in 14% was 1/32. laboratories in their processes of developing QM systems and working Karyotype was normal in 99% and remain 1% had inversion especially towards accreditation. The subjects varied from living with quality sys- in chromosome 9. tems and comparing the different norms for accreditation, to specific Finding the lethal genes in most of these couples was not possible or topics like internal audit and IT support for QM. very expensive, because no abnormalities were found in their pedi- An interactive approach combining brief expert presentations, case gree. Abortion causes important psychosomatic problem for mothers, studies of concrete situations related to quality and group debates to therefore using assisted reproductive technique such as egg or em- exchange experiences and opinions form the basis of the workshops. bryo donation were recommended in most of these couples especially A specialist in the “human side of change processes” participated ac- after 5 or 6 abortion. tively in these workshops, helping to overcome the aspect of moti- vation and change, which is inevitable when implementing a quality system. Approximately 60 different genetic laboratories from 20 different coun-Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 11 P1383. EuroGentest: Reference Systems for Genetic Testing history was unremarkable. D. E. Barton1, D. Gancberg2, P. Corbisier2, C. Brady1; We found 502C>T nonsense mutation in MeCP2. Genetic analysis 1National Centre for Medical Genetics, University College Dublin, Our Lady’s in parents showed no genetic alteration in wild type MeCP2. As the Children’s Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland, 2European Commission, Joint mother was pregnant, PND was performed and sequence analysis in Research Centre, Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements, Geel, CVS DNA showed no alteration. Belgium. Due to familial cases and germinal musaicism reported in some fami- The lack of well-characterised reference materials (RMs) for most ge- lies, genetic counseling must include mutation detection in mother and netic tests causes difficulties in validating and developing new assays PND if requested by parents. As mutations in MeCP2 can be expressed and results in tests being run without proper quality controls. EuroGen- by a spectrum of atypical phenotypes genetic analysis might be pro- test is addressing this issue by defining the present and future needs posed in many cases which are not presented as classical RTT. for RMs, setting priorities for and supporting the development of new Recently mutations of CDKL5 and NTNG1 have been found in patients RMs and building an enduring network involving all stakeholders in with RTT features. Further studies are needed to define clinical guide- RM development. lines for their analysis in a MeCP2 unrelated Rett syndrome. Two International Symposia on Reference Materials for Genetic Test- ing have been organised, involving health care professionals, scien- P1386. Risk Perception of Developing Inherited Diseases tists, regulatory and industry representatives. The symposia led to in- Â. M. T. Leite, J. Sequeiros, C. Paul; ternational collaborations, enabled the development of a prioritization Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal. list of RMs needed, and gave an update and better awareness of the Huntington’s disease, Machado-Joseph’s disease and familial amyloi- international situation. dal neuropathy are progressive neuropsychiatric disorders which are In direct support for the development of RMs for genetic testing, field inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. They are late onset diseases trials for new candidate RMs have been organised, research on the op- with symptomatic treatments but no cure. These three diseases result timal stability conditions of DNA-based candidate RMs was performed, in different levels of disability, which may cause different risk percep- and NIBSC was awarded a sub-contract to develop RMs for Prader- tions. Although the risk of developing the disease decreases gradu- Willi and Angelman syndromes. Furthermore, a guidance document on ally with age, at-risk individuals are never entirely sure that they have the use of RMs in genetic testing and the availability of new RMs for escaped the disease. genetic testing on the market has been drafted. Some at risk subjects who have not been tested are aware of their Meetings have also been organised in order to clarify the role and 50% risk, but some are not. interpretation of the IVD Directive 98/79/EC in the fields of genetic test- We studied 213 individuals who are at risk for late-onset genetic dis- ing and RMs by bringing together regulatory authorities, industry and eases, specifically with a 50% genetic risk for three diseases. These stakeholders in genetic testing. individuals were asymptomatic, aged 18 year or older and they had not These activities have raised awareness of the importance of properly- been tested for the respective disease. characterised RMs and reference methods in genetic testing, and will From a total number of 213 subjects, 193 answered the question re- lead to availability of additional RMs in this field. garding whether or not they were informed regarding their risk. Among the 193 subjects, 116 (54,5%) were aware of the 50% risk condition, P1384. Prenatal diagnosis - evaluation of attitude, experience and 77 (36,2%) were not. and choice of counseled families The value of the subjective risk is greater (52, 41%) and closer to 50% A. V. Shopova, S. Shopova, E. Simeonov; when the subjects were aware of their 50% risk than when they were Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. not (44, 79%). The aim of this study was focused on the influence of prenatal diagno- There are significant statistical differences between the subjective risk sis on the emotional state of patients and the significance of medical of the subjects that were aware of their 50% risk and those who were and informational factors on the reproductive decision of the coun- not (F (1,191) = 4.143, p<.050). seled families. The subjects who were aware of their 50% risk had a higher level A total of 120 pregnant women: 30 after ultra-sonographic screening, of education (F (4,188) = 4,918, p<.010) than the subjects who were 30 with family history for hereditary diseases, 30 in advanced maternal not. age and 30 healthy controls underwent an information interview, an Sex, age, disease and education level did not influence the choice of anxiety questionnaire and a grief scale. the risk perception value. Most of the women have received information by obstetrician or clinical geneticist. Women with previous reproductive failure and those who P1387. Professor Svetlana K. Klueva, founder of the Department had higher educational level proved to be well informed. High propor- of Medical Genetics of SPbMAPS tion of the participants considers reliable the diagnostic and prognostic M. O. Mkheidze; potential of the prenatal diagnosis. The type of the diagnostic proce- Medical Academy for postgraduate studying, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- dure influences insignificantly the reproductive decision. tion. On the base of this study we concluded: The reproductive decision In memoriam of Professor Svetlana Kliment’evna Klueva (1931- depends on the quality of genetic counseling. The level of anxiety is 2005). determined by the kind of procedure and reproductive history. Age, In Russia medical education has some specific features. It provides previous reproductive failure and its type are decisive factors for cop- periodical training for certificated physicians at the institutes of ad- ing with the loss. vanced medical studies like MAPS, the oldest one, to improve their professional skills. Over a long period of time in the USSR genetics P1385. Rett syndrome molecular diagnosis and implications in and medical genetics were prohibited and a lot of physician genera- genetic counseling: report of a case tions were not able to study human genetics. Now it is impossible to M. Noruzinia1, M. T. Akbari1,2; be successful physicians without knowledge of medical genetics and 1Tarbiat Modares University, Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic molecular medicine. Professor Svetlana Klueva was the founder of Republic of Iran, 2Akbari Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Re- the Department of Medical genetics in SPbMAPS. She was obliged public of Iran. to carry on a longtime and exhausting struggle with officialdom to or- Rett syndrome is a rare genetic disease with X linked dominant inheri- ganize this department. It was formed in 1989 and its staff included 5 tance. RTT is one of the most frequent causes of mental retardation in physicians certificated and highly skilled in medical genetics (a clinical females. We report a case of Rett syndrome in a 4 years old girl with geneticist highly skilled in human genetics and complex diseases, a hypotonia and hypotrophia. Stereotypic hand movements like clapping clinical geneticist-pediatrician, a clinical geneticist highly skilled in bio- and tapping, upper limb spastisity, absence of object grabbing and eye chemical genetics and inborn errors of metabolism, a clinical geneti- contact were evident. She couldn’t sit or walk. Deep Tendon Reflexes cist-neurologist and a clinical cytogeneticist. Two principal trends were were diminished. Eye fundoscopy was normal. The parents had the based by S. Klueva: 1) training physicians for practical genetic service impression that the infant had not been normal even in the first days of and 2) teaching medical genetics for all doctors with basic clinical spe- life. MRI showed a mild cerebral atrophy at 15 months of age. Familial cializations. The principal goal of S.K.Klueva’s activities was forming Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 22 genetic thinking in the physicians independently of their specialization. P1390. The delay between pregnancy confirmation in primary Professor S. Klueva with her colleagues provided possibility to acquire care and antenatal sickle cell and thalassaemia screening: a knowledge of human genetics for more than 5000 physicians. The De- population-based cohort study partment of Medical Genetics organized by Professor Svetlana Klueva T. M. Marteau, E. Dormandy, E. Reid, K. Brown, M. Gulliford; is her “monumentum aere perennius”. King’s College London, London, United Kingdom. Background: Antenatal sickle cell and thalassaemia (SCT) screening P1388. Genetic screening criteria in the age of Genomics programmes aim to facilitate timely informed choice for couples. In the M. C. Cornel1, C. van El2, L. Krijgsman1, T. Pieters2; UK, for example, the target for screening is ten weeks gestation. The 1Clinical Genetics/EMGO Institute, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, objective that screening should be implemented early in pregnancy The Netherlands, 2Medical Humanities, VU University Medical Center, Amster- may be compromised if there is any delay between pregnancy confir- dam, The Netherlands. mation in primary care and implementation of screening. In the domain of genetic screening insight in screening criteria is need- Objective: To determine the time between confirmation of pregnancy in ed. They help weighing pros and cons when preparing decisions on primary care and antenatal SCT screening. new possibilities for screening generated by Genomics. Some genetic Design and setting: Cohort study of all pregnancies reported in 25 gen- screening programs in the Netherlands have developed rapidly, such eral practices in two UK inner city Primary Care Trusts with universal as cascade screening for familial hypercholesterolaemia, while others screening policies. were introduced many years after implementation in other countries, Participants: Anonymised data on all pregnancies reported to the par- such as prenatal Down syndrome screening. ticipating general practices for a minimum of six months. We investigated long term developments in Dutch genetic screening Main Outcome: Time from pregnancy confirmation in primary care to policy by the means of a witness seminar. Most of the key players antenatal SCT screening. involved in decision making on genetic screening since 1970 attended Results: There were 1,496 eligible women whose SCT carrier status the seminar. In addition we set up focus group meetings to explore at- was not known and who intended to proceed with the pregnancy. The titudes and choices of potential users regarding genetic testing. median (interquartile range) gestational age at pregnancy confirma- The witness seminar showed a remarkable confusion of tongues on tion was 7.6 weeks (6.0-10.7 weeks). The median gestational age at terms like “prevention”, “responsible parenthood” and “population screening was 15.3 weeks (IQR 12.6-18.0 weeks), with only 4.4% be- screening” as part of the Dutch screening debate in the 1970s and ing screened by 10 weeks. The median delay between pregnancy con- 1980s. Moreover there were frequent misunderstandings among policy firmation and screening was 6.9 weeks (4.7-9.3 weeks). After allowing makers and scientists on the ins and outs of informed decision making for practice-level variation, there was no association between delay in the domain of reproductive screening. Screening was sometimes times and maternal age, parity and ethnic group. understood as obligatory, where informed decision making was in- Conclusion: Reducing the considerable delay between pregnancy tended. Policy aims to “protect citizens against the dangers of screen- confirmation in primary care and antenatal SCT screening requires ing”. Hence, screening for disorders for which no treatment is available development and evaluation of methods of organising and delivering (including prenatal screening) is deemed problematic. However, focus antenatal care that facilitate earlier SCT screening. group participants stated that they want to be able to make a personal choice as independent citizens, based on adequate information. P1391. Language skills and narrative production in individuals Governmental responsibility for quality control suits citizens present- with Smith-Magenis syndrome day expectations better. M. T. Le Normand1, H. de Leersnyder2, K. Hernandez2, A. Verloes2; 1INSERM, PARIS, France, 2Department Genetics, PARIS, France. P1389. Supporting policy development for population-based Smith-Magenis syndrome is a rare genetic disorder in which language genetic screening abilities are dependant on different factors: mental retardation, speech I. R. Blancquaert1,2, A. Andermann1,3, S. Beauchamp1, I. Costea1,2, V. Déry1,2; delay, severe behavioral difficulties. 1Agence d’évaluation des technologies et des modes d’intervention en santé, Language impairment and delayed language onset have been de- Montréal, PQ, Canada, 2Université de Montréal, Montréal, PQ, Canada, 3McGill scribed, although not investigated in detail, in children with Smith-Ma- University, Montreal, PQ, Canada. genis (17p.12 deletion syndrome). Jurisdictions around the world face complex decisions regarding the The aim of the study is to investigate different areas of language: abil- introduction or expansion of population-based genetic screening pro- ity to tell a narrative, phonology, syntax and receptive vocabulary in a grams. Over 50 sets of criteria have been proposed to support deci- group of six girls and eight boys, aged 8 to 28 years, with 17p12 dele- sion-making. tion syndrome. The mean range full-scale IQ was below 40 to 70 for OBJECTIVES: 1) to propose a systematic approach to genetic screen- children and 44 to 64 for young adults (see Table 1) ing policy-making which enables more balanced and informed deci- Four different language tasks were used: (1) a narrative task (Frog sions and integrates multiple issues, types of evidence and perspec- Story) (2) a repetition task including all 36 French phonemes in differ- tives; and 2) to initiate consensus-building among stakeholders around ent positions (3) a picture vocabulary task and (4) a receptive syntactic the decision-making criteria and process. task METHODS: A series of literature reviews and consultations were used Results revealed dramatically significant improvements in articulation to draw upon existing criteria and to analyse the decision-making pro- tasks especially in young SMS. Young adults still made phonetic and cess. Focus groups were conducted with geneticists, public health spe- syntactic errors and provide ambiguous references in the story. Their cialists, social scientists and citizens to explore the utility and accept- language performance was better in lexicon than in other components ability of core criteria derived from the literature review. Discussions of language. Such findings suggest slow and asynchronous develop- within a knowledge network and consultations with policy-makers and ment in language and communicative skills. An implication of these international experts contributed to refining the decision-guide. results is the need for continuing speech and language intervention in RESULTS: The decision-guide consists of general principles, three de- individuals with Smith-Magenis Syndrome cision-nodes, criteria for each node, and types of evidence to consider Table 1. Demographic details for SMS for each criterion. The logic of the decision-making process is reflected Children Young Adults in the decision nodes addressing 1) the utility of the screening strat- n = 10 n = 4 egy for individuals and families, 2) the relevance of implementing the Sex screening program for a particular target population, 3) and the judi- Males 5 3 cious allocation of resources at the societal level. Females 5 1 DISCUSSION: The decision-guide makes explicit the reasoning and Age (years.months) the information upon which policy decisions are based and presents a Mean (SD) 9.7 (2.4) 22.10 (3.7) number of innovations over existing criteria, by clarifying the iterative Range 8-14.11 20.11-28 nature of decision-making, balancing perspectives, comparing alterna- IQ tives, considering context, and promoting the documentation of knowl- Mean (SD) 43 (10.7) 55 (13.4) edge gaps and trade-offs. Range below 40 to 70 44 to 64Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  P1392. Neuropsychological and Behavioural profile in gesting a large unmet need. adolescents and young adults with Smih-Magenis syndrome In order to determine the optimum method of increasing appropriate K. Hernandez1, M. T. Le Normand2, H. de Leersnyder1, A. Verloes1; referrals to Clinical Genetics, a two year service development project 1Department Genetics, PARIS, France, 2INSERM, PARIS, France. was designed looking at three different referral methods, across the Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is a multiple congenital anomalies three cardiac tertiary centres in the North-West. and mental retardation syndrome associated with an interstitial dele- Findings: The project has demonstrated that the most effective way of tion of chromosome 17 band p11.2. Six adolescents (3 boys and 3 increasing appropriate referrals has been the presence of the cardiac girls aged 12 to 15 years) and 4 adults (3 boys and 1 girl aged 19 to liaison nurse in cardiology clinics and on the wards. This has resulted 22 years) with SMS were administered a cognitive battery including in a 454% increase in referrals to 109 in the first year of the project. An a neuropsychiatric and a behavioural scale for measuring Intellectual audit of 61 referrals has shown an average of 5 surviving first degree efficiency (PEP-R, EDEI-R, WAIS) Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI), relatives per pro band. The project has therefore identified approxi- Social maturity and Autonomy (Vineland Adaptative Behaviour Scale). mately 545 at risk relatives. The results demonstrate a mild-to-moderate range of mental retarda- The nurse has also been able to identify barriers to referrals and ways tion of all patients, (IQ for young adults ranged from 44 to 64), without of overcoming them. any discrepancy between verbal and performance scales. Conclusion: Increasing appropriate referrals to clinical genetics has en- Adolescents show impulsive and unstable behaviors with agitation/ abled the identification of family members at risk of a SCD syndrome. mood instability, auto and hetero-aggressivity which interfered with This has facilitated the provision of genetic counselling, genetic testing learning and social variables. Intellectual efficiency is underestimated. and cardiac assessment of these family members, thereby reducing Sociocultural level is a strong factor to understand the pattern of their the risk of Sudden Cardiac Death. cognitive profile. Scores on logical reasoning and working memory are poor. Moreover, speed of information processing is very impaired. P1395. Partnering to develop orphan drugs : evaluation of Adults were so impulsive that they could not inhibit a contrary action. OrphanXchange services Concerning sexual behavior, desinhibition is very frequently reported V. Thibaudeau1, J. McGregor2, C. Holef2, A. Dubosq2, B. Urbero2, S. Aymé2; by the families. 1Inserm sc11, paris, France, 2Inserm sc11, Paris, France. Motor instability remained important but the mood instability was more The OrphanXchange project started in the context of a FP6 European adaptive. 3 out of 4 young adults have episodes of fabulation but none contract called OrphanPlatform. One of the aims of this project was the have any depression. development of information tools to allow a comprehensive and inte- Such results show evidence that stimulations for speaking and learn- grated approach for addressing the set of factors that currently affects ing are crucial in adolescents and young adults with SMS and should translational research in the field of rare diseases and orphan drugs. A be carried on. Their needs are still educational and have strong impli- database of ongoing research projects was set up in the context of Or- cations for their cognitive abilities and autonomy. phanet and a specific website, www.orphanxchange.org, was created to facilitate the formation of partnership activities between academic P1393. Molecular diagnosis of Egyptian patients with spinal scientists and industry. The website provides free access to research muscular atrophy projects that scientists wish to develop in partnership with industry. For M. L. Essawi, G. M. M. Al-ettribi, A. A. El-Haroni, L. Effat, K. S. Amr, S. Ismail, industry, it is a database of business opportunities. Although minimal Y. Z. Gad; information is provided freely, more detailed information is only acces- National Research Center, cairo, Egypt. sible after registration, which allows identification of the customers. Childhood spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is one of the most com- Customers only have access to the scientist’s details if they make a mon autosomal recessive disorders. It is characterized by symmetrical contact request. Currently, the database includes 129 projects. The muscle weakness and atrophy of limbs and trunk. It has an estimated site is visited 500 times per month. Half of the 213 registered users are incidence on 1:6000 live births and a carrier frequency of 1:50 individu- from industry (biotech, big pharmas, consultants, investors), and the als. Childhood SMA is classified into 3 types (I, II and III) according to other half are from academia. These members are from 31 countries, the age of onset and the clinical severity. the largest number of users coming from France, Japan, the USA, This study aimed to characterize the molecular basis of SMA among and Sweden. In two years, 113 requests to make contact with a re- Egyptian patients. searcher were received. Three partnership projects were successfully Eighty two Egyptian patients were clinically diagnosed as SMA, they developed thanks to the service. The plan is to extend this service to were classified into 32 type I, 36 type II and 14 type III cases. Detection cover requests for partnership between academic teams, and between of homozygous absence of exons 7 and 8 of SMN1 gene was carried industry teams (for example, small SMe and big pharma). out using the PCR-restriction digestion method, whereas, deletion of NAIP exon 5 was detected through multiplex PCR. P1396. A procedure for validation, verification and follow-up of Homozygous absence of SMN1 gene exon 7 and 8 or exon 7 only was methods in an accredited genetics laboratory found in 69.4% of all patients. Of these patients, exon 5 of NAIP gene I. Bouchardy, I. Moix, C. Hinard, M. A. Morris; was deleted in 78% of type I, 34.3% of type II, and 28.6% of type III. Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland. The molecular basis of SMA in Egyptian is almost similar to that re- Test validation, defined as “confirmation, through the provision of ob- ported by other ethnic groups. The PCR-restriction digestion method jective evidence, that the requirements for a specific intended use or is fast, accurate and reliable for direct diagnosis of SMA and it could be application have been fulfilled” is a necessary element of quality assur- used efficiently for genetic counseling. Studying the presence of com- ance and a requirement for laboratory accreditation. pound heterozygous and homozygous point mutations in SMN1 gene Both new methods and modifications that may influence the quality is recommended in the non-deleted SMA patients (approx. one third). of the results must be validated before diagnostic use. For practical reasons, the intensity of validation must be adapted for different pro- P1394. Cardiac genetic services - Ascertaining individuals at risk cedures - laboratories should define for each test the elements to vali- of a sudden cardiac death syndrome date that are necessary and sufficient. S. J. Collitt1, B. Kerr1, W. Newman1, J. Clayton-Smith1, K. Strong2, P. Griffiths1, Validation, the more thorough procedure, requires test-based confir- K. Metcalfe1; mation of precision (repeatability and reproducibility), sensitivity, speci- 1Central Manchester & Manchester Children’s University Hospitals NHS Trust, ficity and ruggedness. It is applied for example to new technologies, or Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Nowgen, Manchester, United Kingdom. in case of major technical modifications to existing methods, or when Purpose: An audit of referrals to the North West Regional Genetic Ser- the performance of installed methods is insufficient. vice (population 4.3 million) in 2004, showed that 24 patients had been Verification (or “implantation validation”) is a less intensive procedure, referred to Clinical Genetics with a personal or family history of a Sud- typically employed in case of minor technical modifications or addi- den Cardiac Death (SCD) syndrome e.g. long QT syndrome, Brugada tions, or when implanting a diagnostic kit that has been validated by an syndrome or a cardiomyopathy. Statistically there are approximately external company or laboratory. Examples include changing a primer 12,000 patients in Greater Manchester alone with these conditions. sequence in a PCR reaction or an enzyme for digestion, or adding an Clearly this patient group is under-represented in genetic services sug- additional exon to an existing sequence-based test.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  Even when the new test is applicable, validation is never finished: it is ited laboratory and a new approach to IQC which reveals a continuous essential to define appropriate internal quality control (IQC) to follow improvement in the ruggedness of our methods since accreditation. the performance of the test and detect possible problems. We present detailed examples of validation/verification in our accred-Therapy for genetic disease  Po10. Therapy for genetic disease P1399. Bioethics, Human Cloning: Aspect of Theologians, Physicians and Geneticists in Iran P1397. Neonatal lentiviral gene transfer in a knock-out mouse M. Saniei1, S. Amina2, A. Melati Rad3, S. Shahraz3, E. Jafari Mehr3, L. Zahedi3, model for afibrinogenemia A. Shekarchi4, M. Zali3; A. Fort1, V. Dung1, T. H. Nguyen2, L. Palumbo1, J. Degen3, M. Neerman-Ar- 1UMC St Radboud, Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands Antilles, 2The York bez1,4; Management School, University of York, York, United Kingdom, 3Research 1Dpt Medecine Genetic and Development, University Medical Center, Geneva, Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shaheed Beheshti University Switzerland, 2INSERM, CHU Hotel-Dieu, Nantes, France, 3Children’s Hospital of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Sociology Department, Research Foundation, Cincinatti, OH, United States, 4Division of Angiology and Shaheed Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Haemostasis, University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland. Introduction: It appears that the nature and extent of public information Congenital afibrinogenemia is a rare autosomal recessive coagulation and debate on cloning and its potential advantages and disadvantages disorder characterized by the complete absence of plasma fibrinogen. in the area of human health vary around the world.Furthermore an The fact that afibrinogenemia is caused by mutations in a single small oriental trend has shown in this field.The research team thinks that gene, in most cases the fibrinogen alpha-chain gene (FGA), combined scholars are among the most powerful effectors that shape attitudes with the existence of a knock-out mouse model, encouraged us to de- towards human cloning.This study illuminates how Iranian scholars in sign a gene therapy approach to correct the coagulation deficiency. the field of medicine,genetic and theology think about the most impor- The C57BL/6J Fga knock-out mice used in this study develop abdomi- tant ethical consequences. nal hemorrhagic events during the neonatal period. We observed an Methods: Ethical issues that arise in human cloning are discussed important variability in the severity of the bleeding phenotype and the along with reasons susceptibility data may be offered to participants survival rates in homozygous Fga -/- mice. Certain characteristic pat- in the future.To develop a questionnaire,a series of the most important terns of bleeding, notably navel bleeding, allow us to select candidates, ethical considerations of human cloning were grouped under the four before genotyping is possible, with good chances of survival post-in- bioethical principles;autonomy,beneficence,nonmaleficence and jus- jection. HIV-1-derived lentiviral vectors expressing GFP, human FGA tice. The method of filling that was face to face interview. or murine Fga cDNAs under the control of a ubiquitous or hepatocyte Results: One hundred and two physicians,34 geneticists and 65 theo- specific promoter have been produced in the laboratory. Considering logians responded to the survey for a response rate of 75%.The over- the early onset and the severity of the phenotype, we opted for neona- all main attitude of physicians and geneticists towards human cloning tal gene transfer by injection of lentiviral vectors in the temporal vein. and stem cell research was 3.11 and the main attitude of theologians Injections of lentiviral vectors expressing GFP revealed that newborn towards these issues was 3.21 out of 5.Age,sex and literacy grade fibrinogen deficient mice survive the intra-temporal vein injection, with has no significant effect on the attitude in different groups of profes- the efficiency of hepatic transduction estimated by immunohistochem- sionals. istry at approximately 20%. Analysis of one knock-out mouse injected Conclusions: Biomedical and theological scientists in this study with lentiviral vectors expressing murine Fga revealed the presence of showed weak positive attitude towards the issues.Knowing many limi- fully assembled fibrinogen hexamers in plasma. Investigations are on- tations we faced like lack of previous comparable method,possible going to define the minimum therapeutic vector dose, and to evaluate selection bias,and intuitive nature of many conclusions,no generaliza- the efficiency of correction of the bleeding phenotype, both short-term tion is wise and further research efforts especially qualitative ones are and long-term. indispensable for unmasking the realities and making new theories in this respect. P1398. The role of c-myc in the pathogenesis of Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease Type 2 P1400. Antisense-mediated exon 51 skipping restores local P. Koupepidou1, K. N. Felekkis1, E. Kastanos1, L. Tsiokas2, N. Gretz3, C. Del- dystrophin expression in muscle of Duchenne muscular tas1; dystrophy patients 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department of Cell Biology, University G. B. van Ommen1, A. A. M. Janson1, A. Aartsma-Rus1, G. Platenburg2, J. J. G. of Oklahoma, Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma, OK, United States, 3Medical M. Verschuuren1, J. C. T. van Deutekom2,1; Research Center, Klinikum Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Prosensa BV, Germany. Leiden, The Netherlands. Autosomal Dominant Polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is one of the Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) patients suffer from a progres- most frequent genetic diseases in humans and results from mutations sive, severe muscle-wasting disease due to frame-disrupting mutations in the PKD1 or PKD2 gene. Some of the pathogenic features of PKD in the dystrophin gene and a complete loss of functional dystrophin. are dysregulated epithelial cell proliferation, apoptosis and differentia- By contrast, mutations that maintain the open reading frame give rise tion. to internally deleted, partially functional dystrophins and are found in Although the genes mutated are known, the mechanism by which the less severe Becker muscular dystrophy patients (BMD). Antisense cysts are formed remains unclear. Many proteins and pathways are oligonucleotide compounds (AONs) have recently shown therapeutic dysregulated in polycystic kidneys. One of these is the proto-oncop- promise for DMD patients. By inducing specific exon skipping during rotein c-myc, found to be overexpressed in kidney epithelial cells in mRNA splicing AONs have been successful in repairing the open read- animal models and tissues from human patients. In addition, a c-myc ing frame and thus restoring dystrophin expression in cultured muscle transgenic mouse developed a PKD phenotype suggesting that c-myc cells from patients, as well as in the mdx mouse model. As an es- contributes in the pathogenesis of PKD. sential step towards broad clinical studies and future applications, we The purpose of this study is to determine whether c-myc plays a role in here evaluated efficacy of a single, intramuscular dose of DMD AON the PKD2-induced abnormal proliferation observed in epithelial cells. PRO051. Four DMD patients with different mutations were included on We generated stable clones overexpressing mutated PKD2 in HEK293 basis of eligible mutation, adequate condition of the target muscle, and cells, to examine whether c-myc expression was altered in this system. positive in vitro PRO051 skip-response. A dose of 0.8 mg PRO051, Overexpression of WT or mutant PKD2 does not alter cellular prolif- without any excipient, was injected into the tibialis anterior muscle and eration or c-myc levels. As a result, we assumed that the increased a biopsy was taken after 4 weeks. In each of the individual biopsies expression of c-myc may be a secondary effect and is produced by the specific exon 51 skipping was observed on RNA level. This resulted in dysregulation of other pathways in the cells. abundant dystrophin protein expression at the membrane, as demon- Using a transgenic rat model generated by overexpression of mutated strated by immunohistochemical and western blot analyses. PRO051 PKD2 (1-703), we isolated kidney tubular epithelial cells and showed was well tolerated and did not provoke serious adverse events in any augmented levels of PCNA, accompanied by an increase in c-myc of the patients: local treatment with PRO051 was safe and highly ef- expression compared with WT tubular epithelial cells. Therefore, we ficient. Our results provide strong basis for subsequent studies on sys- decided to use this model to study whether downregulation of c-myc at temic treatment of DMD patients. the cellular level reverts the abnormal proliferation phenotype.Therapy for genetic disease  P1401. Enzyme replacement therapy in 4 patients with velopment of various technologies, which are able to induce an exon mucopolysaccharidoses type-6 skipping at the pre-mRNA level in order to restore an open reading S. Başaran Yılmaz, E. Karaca, B. Tüysüz; frame. Because the DMD gene contains 79 exons, thousands of po- Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Medical Genetics, İstanbul, tential transcripts could be produced by exon skipping and should be Turkey. investigated. The mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) are a heterogeneous group of By using UMD algorithms, we predicted that an optimal multi-exon lysosomal storage disorders caused by the deficiency of enzymes in- skipping leading to the del45-55 artificial dystrophin (c.6439_8217del) volved in degradation of glycosaminoglycans. Mucopolysaccharidosis could transform DMD phenotype into asymptomatic or mild BMD phe- type-6 is characterised by osseous, corneal and visceral changes with- notype. This multiple-exon skipping could theoretically rescue up to out intelligence impairment. 63% of DMD patients with a deletion while the optimal mono-skipping We started to enzyme replacement therapy in four patients with MPS of exon 51 would rescue only 16% of patients. type-6 on November 2006 with Naglazyme (Galsulfase). Our patients are a girl-7.5 years old and 3 boys-3.5, 6 and 9 years old. All patients P1403. Recovery of female Fanconi anemia fertility after have coarse facies, joint stiffness, corneal clouding, hearing loss, val- chemotherapy, irradiation and bone marrow allograft/further vular heart dissease, dysostosis multiplex, hepatosplenomegaly and evidence against oocyte regeneration by bone arrow-derived normal intelligence. One patient has also glaucoma, and one has ad- germline stem cells enoid vegetation. M. S. Fellous1, V. Reiner1, G. Eliane2, S. Jean2; These patients were diagnosed clinically and definitive diagnosis were 1Institut Cochin FDPM,, Paris, France, 2Hopital Saint Louis, Service de greffe made by enzyme analyses. Deficiency of Arylsulphatase B enzyme de Moelle Osseuse, Paris, France. was found in all patients. Mammalian oocytes are formed before or shortly after birth. However, We assayed the patients with clinical examination,vital signs, 6 min- recent controversial papers cast doubts on this paradigm by claiming utes walking test, echocardiography, measures of joint ranges, pulmo- that new ovarian follicles can be generated in the mouse by germline nary function tests, ophtalmologic and hearing examinations before stem cells (GSCs) supplied by the bone marrow (BM). Here we con- the therapy. sider an issue related to the potential existence of GCSs : the genetic All patients received weekly intravenous infusions with 1 mg/kg Galsul- origin of offspring after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplanta- fase. Because of the potentiallity of infusion reactions patients received tion in humans. To clarify this issue, we have examined a rare clinical antihistamines and antipyretics before the infusions. They hadn’t any situation in which a woman with Fanconi Anemia (FA) gave birth to complication except two patient had vomits for two times.We aimed to a child after allogeneic BM transplantation. We have genotyped the treat the somatic symptoms of patients. When 3 months of the therapy mother (patient), the daughter, and the donor; several informative poly- were completed we reassay the patients clinically. Their complaints morphic microsatellites demonstrated the genetic relationship between about sleep apnea and difficulties of daily activities were reduced. the other and the daughter. The rare clinical situation described here is reminiscent of the observations described in the controversial papers. P1402. Multi-exon skipping removing exons 45 through 55 of the However, it leads to an alternative explanation. Our data show that DMD transcript could rescue up to 63% of Duchenne Muscular recovery of fertility after BM transplantation can result from incomplete Dystrophy patients depletion of the ovarian follicular pool and not from its replacement by C. Béroud1,2, S. Tuffery-Giraud1,3, M. Matsuo4, D. Hamroun1,2, V. Humbert- donor BM-derived GSCs. claude1,2, N. Monnier5,6, M. Moizard7, M. Voelckel8, L. Michel Calemard9, P. Boisseau10,11, M. Blayau12, C. Philippe13, M. Cossée14, M. Pagès15, F. Rivier16, O. P1404. The pharmacological chaperone AT1001 increases levels Danos17, L. Garcia17, M. Claustres1,2; of mutant alpha-galactosidase A in Fabry patient cell lines and 1INSERM U 827, Montpellier, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Hôpital Arnaud de Vil- reduces GL-3 levels in a mouse model of Fabry disease leneuve, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, France, 3Université E. R. Benjamin1, R. Khanna1, H. H. Chang1, R. Soska1, A. Schilling1, C. Pine1, Montpellier 1, UFR Médecine, Montpellier, France, 4Department of Pediatrics, B. A. Wustman1, R. J. Desnick2, D. J. Lockhart1, K. J. Valenzano1; Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan, 5Laboratoire de 1Amicus Therapeutics, Cranbury, NJ, United States, 2Mount Sinai School of Biochimie Génétique et Moleculaire, CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France, Medicine, New York, NY, United States. 6INSERM U607, Grenoble, France, 7INSERM U 619, CHU Bretonneau, Tours, Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by de- France, 8Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Département de Génétique ficient α-galactosidase A (GLA) activity and accumulation of globotrio- Médicale, Hôpital d’Enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 9Laboratoire de sylceramide (GL-3) and related glycolipids. Over 400 Fabry mutations Biochimie, Hôpital Debrousse, Lyon, France, 10INSERM U 533, Nantes, France, have been reported; ~60% are missense. Previously, the pharmaco- 11Université de Nantes, Nantes, France, 12Laboratoire de Génétique Molécu- logical chaperone, AT1001 (migalastat hydrochloride), was shown to laire, Rennes, France, 13Laboratoire de Génétique, EA 3441, CHU Brabois, increase R301Q GLA activity in vitro and in vivo. To evaluate the re- Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France, 14Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpi- sponse of other Fabry GLA mutations, male patient lymphoid cell lines taux Universitaires de Strasbourg et Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France, representing more than 50 different missense mutations were incubat- 15Département de Neurologie, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 16Ser- ed with AT1001 (5 nM to 1 mM) for 5 days, and effects on GLA activity vice de Neuropédiatrie, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 17Genethon & were determined. Basal enzyme activity ranged from 0% to 35% of CNRS UMR 8115, Evry, France. wild type (WT). Significantly increased GLA activity was observed in To collect and analyze mutation information, we developed a generic over 34 cell lines (1.5- to 20-fold; post-treatment GLA activities ranged software called Universal Mutation Databases (UMD). This software from 2.4% to 110% WT), with varying EC values: from 600 nM to 50 includes a large set of analysis tools primarily created for molecular >1 mM. Next, the effect of AT1001 was tested in GLA knockout mice epidemiology studies and subsequently to address more complex top- that express a human R301Q transgene (R301Q Tg/KO). Daily oral ics such as genotype-phenotype correlations. With the development of gavage of AT1001 (30 mg/kg PO; 4 weeks) to male R301Q Tg/KO innovative therapies for patients suffering from rare genetic diseases, mice resulted in significantly increased GLA activity (p<0.05; n=6-7) it appeared that bioinformatics and LSDBs could play an important and significantly reduced GL-3 levels in skin and heart (p<0.05; n=6- role. 7). In kidney, GL-3 levels were reduced but did not reach statistical Thus, we created specific routines to help researchers to design significance. In conclusion, GLA activity is increased in patient-derived therapeutic strategies such as exon skipping whose archetype is the cell lines after incubation with AT1001 for many mutant forms of the DMD gene associated with Duchenne (DMD) and Becker dystrophies enzyme. Increased enzyme activity is also seen after oral delivery of (BMD). AT1001 to Fabry transgenic mice, with a concomitant decrease in tis- Approximately two-third of DMD patients show intragenic deletions sue GL-3 levels. from one to several exons of the DMD gene leading to a premature stop codon. Other deletions that maintain the translational reading frame result in BMD. The opportunity to transform a DMD phenotype into a BMD phenotype appeared as a treatment strategy with the de-Therapy for genetic disease  P1405. Safety of agalsidase alfa enzyme replacement therapy in (n=11), N370S/R163X, N370S/Y212H, L444P/del 136T, L444P/F216Y, a cohort of 1329 patients in FOS - the Fabry Outcome Survey L444P/L174F, G202R/R463C, and K79N/complex B exon 9/10 (type G. Sunder-Plassmann1, M. Beck2, J. Clarke3, A. Linhart4, A. Mehta, on behalf III GD). of the FOS Investigators5; 1Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Vienna, Austria, 2University of Mainz, P1407. Hyperbranched polylysines as vehicles for gene delivery Mainz, Germany, 3Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Charles into eucaryotic cells University, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Royal Free Hospital, London, United A. A. Egorova1, A. V. Kiselev2,1, P. L. Il’ina1, V. Y. Aksenova1, A. N. Baranov2, V. Kingdom. S. Baranov2; Background: FOS was established in 2001 to monitor the long-term 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s efficacy and safety of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with agalsi- Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. dase alfa in patients with Fabry disease. This is a rare X-linked lyso- Efficient gene delivery into eucaryotic cells is an extremely critical step somal storage disorder that results in progressive accumulation of the in gene therapy. Development of new non-viral DNA vectors seems to enzyme substrate globotriaosylceramide in cells throughout the body, be a perspective approach for effective gene delivery into cells. This leading to organ failure and premature death. The FOS database has study was confined to the groups of hyperbranched polylysine vehi- recently been expanded to include patients from non-European coun- cles (spLLs). Hyperbranched polylysine with its arginine or histidine tries. The present analysis provides demographic and safety data from surface modified derivatives was studied. Surface lysine/arginine or a total cohort of 1329 patients enrolled in FOS as of January 2007. histidine ratio was 1/1 or 9/1. All vehicles were studied for their capac- Methods: The FOS database was analysed in terms of patient demog- ity to bind DNA and provide protection of plasmid DNA from nucle- raphy and safety of ERT. ase degradation. Beta-galactosidase gene expression in HeLa cells Results: The 1329 patients in FOS have been recruited from 109 cen- indicated transfectional capacity of tested vehicles. All spLLs proved tres in 19 countries. Of those enrolled, 828 (62%) are receiving ERT. their capacity to condense and protect plasmid DNA. Transfectional Approximately equal numbers of males and females are on treatment, capacity of arginine-modified spLLs had no distinguishable difference and 154 (18.6%) are receiving treatment at home. More than 25 men from that of unmodified hyperbranched polylysine. Histidine-modified have been given agalsidase alfa for at least 6 years, and > 50% of the polylysine compounds showed 7-20-fold increase of transfectional ac- 200 children in FOS are receiving ERT. Mild infusion reactions are the tivity in comparison with unmodified vehicle. Transfectional activity of most common drug-related adverse events, reported in 11% of males histidine-modified polylysines was not affected by glycerol treatment. and 4% of females and representing < 1% of the infusions given. Most Thus histidine-modified spLLs were found out to provide more effec- reactions occurred between 3 and 6 months after the start of treat- tive DNA delivery into cells, compared to arginine-modified spLLs. We ment and then declined in frequency. No IgE antibodies have been suggest that modification of polylysine surface with histidine results detected. in increase of endosomolytic ability and augmented transfectional Conclusion: Long-term safety data from a large cohort of male, female activity. Inclusion of endosomolytic peptide JTS-1 into DNA/histidine- and paediatric patients in FOS confirm that ERT with agalsidase alfa modified spLLs complexes resulted in 4-fold increase of transfection is very well tolerated. efficiency. The level of transfectional activity was comparable to that of PAMAM-dendrimer Polyfect. The results demonstrate that polymer P1406. A Gaucher disease ex vivo response study: the surface modification with histidine might be perspective for develop- pharmacological chaperone AT2101 increases levels of ment of new effective gene delivery vehicles on the basis of hyper- glucocerebrosidase in patient-derived cells branched polylysines. This work was supported with grants of CRDF C. W. Pine1, B. E. Ranes1, F. Insinga1, K. Ludwig1, G. A. Grabowski2, N. J. (ST-012) and RFBR (06-04-08338). Weinreb3, G. M. Pastores4, D. Gruskin5, P. Kaplan6, H. Do1, D. J. Lockhart1, B. A. Wustman1; P1408. Miglustat in Gaucher Disease Type 3 1Amicus Therapeutics, Cranbury, NJ, United States, 2Division of Human Ge- A. Vellodi1, C. Harris2, C. DeVile3, E. Davies1, E. Fitzgibbon3, L. Abel4, P. Camp- netics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United bell2, N. van Schaik5, W. Benko3, M. Timmons3, R. Schiffmann3; States, 3University Research Foundation for Lysosomal Storage Diseases Inc, 1Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children, London, United Kingdom, Northwest Oncology Hematology Associates, Coral Springs, FL, United States, 2University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 3National Institutes of 4Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, New York University School of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 5Departments of Human Genetics and Australia, 5Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States, Thirty patients (29 on ERT, one BMT) were randomized 2:1 to receive 6Section of Metabolic Diseases, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, University for 12 months either miglustat 200 mg t.i.d. or no treatment. All enrolled of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States. patients in the 12-month extension phase received miglustat. Gaucher disease (GD) is caused by a deficiency of lysosomal glucocer- Of the 30 patients who completed the first year of treatment, 28 en- ebrosidase (GCase). Deficient GCase activity leads to symptoms such tered the extension study. Mean age (SD) was 10.2 (4.8) years (60% as anemia, thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, bone necrosis, female). The median exposure to miglustat was 729 days (6-802 days). infarcts and osteoporosis, and in some cases, neuropathic disease. The prevalence and severity of the clinical manifestations were hetero- To evaluate the effects of a pharmacological chaperone, AT2101, on geneous. Comparison of 24 months versus 12 months of treatment did mutant GCase levels, we conducted an ex vivo response study using not show a significant difference in vertical saccadic eye movement macrophages and EBV-transformed lymphoblasts derived from pe- velocity changes, the primary endpoint. Organ volumes and haema- ripheral leukocytes. Plasma was also screened for potential biomark- tological parameters were stable. A decrease in chitotriosidase levels ers associated with inflammation, bone metabolism, multiple myeloma and an increase in pulmonary FVC were observed in some patients. and neurodegeneration. An interim analysis was conducted on sam- The most frequently reported adverse events (AEs) were diarrhoea ples from 40 patients enrolled at 5 sites in the United States. Results: (72%), tremor (38%) and abdominal pain (34%). Diarrhoea was mild The study included 21 males and 18 females with type I GD, and one and its frequency decreased over time. None of the previous AEs led male with type III GD. Patients ranged in age from 7 to 83 years, 38 to study discontinuation. One patient had a confirmed polyneuropa- of 40 patients were receiving enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) and thy and withdrew from the study and 3 had sub-clinical neuropathy (1 blood was drawn prior to ERT infusion. Analysis of 40 potential mark- poly- and 2 mono-neuropathy); one of the latter was included in the no ers in plasma showed elevated TRACP 5b, PARC, IL-8, IL-17, VEGF, treatment group. There were no deaths. MIP-1α and α-synuclein and reduced bone-specific alkaline phospha- This 24-month miglustat trial in GD3 patients did not show an effect tase levels in most patients. Macrophages were successfully derived on the neurological endpoints assessed, but some effects on systemic from 34 of 40 patients, of which 32 demonstrated a dose-dependent disease parameters and lung function were observed. The tolerability increase in GCase levels (average = 2.8-fold, range = 1.5- to 6.5-fold) profile of miglustat at 200 mg t.i.d. was comparable to that reported when treated with AT2101 (5 days). Similar results were observed for with the approved dose for GD1 (100 mg t.i.d.). 5 additional patient-derived lymphoblast cell lines. AT2101 significantly increased GCase levels in cells from patients with different genotypes including N370S/N370S (n=11), N370S/L444P (n=8), N370S/84insG Therapy for genetic disease  P1409. The Hunter Outcome Survey (HOS): clinical ment in most cases. Here, we tested whether bezafibrate, a drug act- characteristics of patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type II ing as a Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptor (PPAR) agonist, J. E. Wraith1, M. Beck2, R. Giugliani3, B. K. Burton4, L. DeMeirleir5, J. Zeman6, could induce a stimulation of RC residual capacities in four patient cell on behalf of the HOS investigators; lines carrying mutations in the Fp (flavoprotein, complex II, CII), or 1Royal Manchester Children’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Chil- BCS1 (complex III, CIII), or SURF1 (complex IV, CIV), or COX10 (CIV) dren’s Hospital University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 3Hospital de Clinicas de genes. Exposure to bezafibrate (400µM, 72h) was found to increase Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4Children’s Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL, (+38 to +50%) the CII, CIII and CIV activities in control fibroblasts, United States, 5University Hospital of the Vrije Unversiteit Brussel, Brussels, and immunoblots showed parallel increases (+82 to +150%) in Fp, Belgium, 6Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. Core 2, SURF1, COX2 and COX4 protein levels. A similar treatment Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II; Hunter syndrome) is a rare, by bezafibrate improved RC capacities in BCS1- and COX10-deficient progressive, X-linked disorder of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) metabo- fibroblasts, as indicated by the stimulation of CIII (+133%) and CIV lism caused by a deficiency of the enzyme iduronate-2-sulfatase. This (+71%) enzyme activity, and by the higher expression of represen- results in progressive GAG accumulation within multiple tissues and tative proteins. This was related to a drug-induced augmentation in organs. In 2006, a global survey of MPS II patients - the Hunter Out- the mRNA abundance of the mutated BCS1 or COX 10 gene. Fp and come Survey (HOS) - was established to enhance our understanding SURF1 mRNA were also induced by bezafibrate, but without changes of the natural history of MPS II, monitor the safety and efficacy of en- in RC residual capacities due to the mutated protein instability. The zyme replacement therapy, and provide the basis for the development molecular mechanisms underlying these effects likely involved PPARδ of clinical management guidelines. As of October 2006, 100 patients and the co-activator PGC1α that could induce the expression of genes had enrolled in HOS at centres in 11 countries. The median ages at en- encoding structural subunits or ancillary proteins of the OXPHOS ap- rolment, onset of symptoms and diagnosis of MPS II were 11.3 years, paratus, leading to stimulate the activity and protein levels of RC com- 1.5 years and 3.5 years, respectively. The prevalence of clinical fea- plex. These effects could find applications for the correction of some tures at the time of enrolment into HOS was variable; nasal obstruc- moderate RC disorders due to mutations in nuclear genes. tion was reported in 28% of patients, enlarged tonsils or adenoids in 68%, enlarged liver or spleen in 88%, joint stiffness in 87% and facial P1412. Growth Hormone is Effective in Treatment of Short dysmorphia by 98%. Cardiovascular manifestations of MPS II were Stature Associated with SHOX Deficiency: Two-year Results of a found in approximately 75% of patients. These included murmur in Randomized, Controlled, Multi-Center Trial 77%, valve disease in 69%, and cardiomyopathy in 12% of patients. W. F. Blum1, B. J. Crowe1, C. A. Quigley2, H. Jung3, D. Cao2, J. L. Ross4, L. Life-table analyses indicated that by age 7 years, approximately 50% Braun2, G. Rappold3; of patients with Hunter syndrome display some cardiovascular abnor- 1Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, Bad Homburg, Germany, malities, increasing to 95% by age 15 years. As enrolment increases, 2Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, United HOS will improve our understanding of MPS II, advance the assess- States, 3Department of Molecular Human Genetics, Institute of Human Genet- ment of the long-term impact of ERT, and allow the development of ics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics, evidence-based clinical management guidelines. Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States. SHOX encodes a homeodomain transcription factor responsible for a P1410. Oxidative stress in Peroxisomal disorders significant proportion of long-bone growth. Patients with mutations or H. T. El-Bassyouni; deletions of SHOX, including those with Turner syndrome [TS] who are National Research Center, Guiza, Egypt. haploinsufficient for SHOX, have variable degrees of growth impair- Peroxisomal disorders are subdivided into peroxisome biogenesis ment, with or without a spectrum of skeletal anomalies consistent with disorders (PBDs) and single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies. Many dyschondrosteosis. peroxisomal diseases exhibit excessive oxidative stress leading to Fifty-two prepubertal subjects (24 male, 28 female; age 3.0-12.3 neurological alterations and dysfunction. This study aimed to inves- years) with a molecularly-proven SHOX gene defect and height below tigate whether oxidative stress is involved in the pathogenesis of per- the 3rd percentile for age and gender were randomized to either a oxisomal disorders by estimating various oxidative stress parameters growth hormone (GH)-treatment group (n=27) or an untreated control in cases suffering from peroxisomal disorders. group (n=25) for 2 years. To compare the GH treatment effect between A total of twenty patients with peroxisomal disorders, their ages ranged subjects with SHOX-deficiency (SHOX-D) and those with TS, a third from 6 months to 13 years (mean 5.9 ±3.2) were compared to four- study group, comprised 26 pts with TS aged 4.5-11.8 years, who also teen healthy controls. All individuals were subjected to full history tak- received GH. Between-group comparisons of height velocity, height ing including three-generation pedigree analysis concerning parental standard deviation score (SDS) and height gain (cm) were performed consanguinity and similarly affected members in the family with me- using analysis of covariance accounting for diagnosis, sex and base- ticulous clinical examination to detect any malformation or anomaly. line age. VLCFAs and phytanic acid estimation was done to verify the diagnosis. The GH-treated SHOX-D group had a significantly greater first-year Other investigations including brain magnetic resonant image (MRI), height velocity than the untreated control group (p<0.001) and similar electric encephalogram (EEG), visual evoked potential (VEP), auditory first-year height velocity to GH-treated subjects with TS (8.9±0.4 cm/y, potential and plain X- rays were done to asses the pathological condi- p=0.592). GH-treated subjects also had significantly greater second- tion of the patients. Oxidative stress parameters including nitric oxide year height velocity (p<0.001), second-year height SDS (-2.1±0.2 vs. - (NO), malondialdehyde (MDA) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) were 3.0±0.2, p<0.001) and second-year height gain (16.4±0.4 vs. 10.5±0.4 estimated in both patients and controls. cm, p<0.001) than untreated subjects. This study showed significant increase of both MDA and NO in PBDs. In summary the efficacy of GH treatment in subjects with SHOX-D was It was also demonstrated that SOD was significantly low in PDB more equivalent to that seen in subjects with TS. We conclude that GH is than controls. effective in improving the linear growth of patients with various forms Conclusion: Lacking functional peroxisomes leads to generalized in- of SHOX-D. crease in oxidative stress confirming the important role of peroxisomes in homeostasis of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the implications P1413. Treatment of SMA cell line using 5-NENI-amiloride of its disturbances in cell pathology. The study recommends supple- J. G. Chang1, H. H. Lin1, A. Chang1, C. Y. Yuo1, W. K. Yang2; mentation with antioxidants besides other lines of treatments. 1Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 2China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. P1411. Activation of PPAR pathway stimulates mitochondrial Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common inherited neuromuscular oxidative phosphorylation and is a potential therapy in disorder caused by homozygous loss of the survival motor neuron 1 respiratory chain defects. (SMN1) gene. All SMA patients carry at least one copy of a nearly iden- J. Bastin1, F. Aubey1, A. Munnich2, F. Djouadi1; tical SMN2 gene. However, a critical nucleotide change in the exon 7 1CNRS UPR 9078, Paris, France, 2INSERM U781, Paris, France. of SMN2 results in alternative RNA splicing and exclusion of exon 7 in The mitochondrial Respiratory Chain (RC) disorders are the largest the majority of SMN2 mRNA, thus producing a low level of functional group of inborn errors of metabolism and still remain without treat- SMN protein. Increasing SMN protein production by promoting SMN2 Therapy for genetic disease  exon 7 inclusion and/or SMN2 gene transcription, therefore, could be amiloride increases the number of nuclear gems in SMA cells. We fur- a therapeutic approach for SMA. It has been shown that cellular pH ther explored the underlying mechanism and our results suggest that microenvironment can modulate pre-mRNA alternative splicing in vivo. NENI-amiloride may promote SMN2 exon 7 inclusion through up-regu- In this study, we tested whether inhibitors of the NA+/H+ exchanger can lation of the splicing factor SRp20 in the nucleus. In conclusion, our modulate the exon 7 splicing of SMN2 mRNA. We found that treatment finding that NENI-amiloride, an inhibitor of the NA+/H+ exchanger, can with a NA+/H+ exchanger inhibitor, 5-(N-ethy1-N-isopropy1)-amiloride increase SMN protein production in SMA cells provides a new direction (NENI-amiloride), significantly enhances SMN2 exon 7 inclusion for the development of drugs for SMA treatment. as well as SMN protein production in SMA cells. In addition, NENI-