Plenary Lectures  PL1.1 were observed. Genetic epidemiology of lipid-associated disorders The highest rate of chromosome abnormality was observed in the cat- F. Kronenberg; egory of embryos showing combined (>2)localized defects, and the Division of Genetic Epidemiology; Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular lowest in morphologically normal embryos. and Clinical Pharmacology; Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria. Conclusions: The detection of a specific defect in an embryo with Lipids are essential for many biological processes such as the building normal chromosomes can be essential. It will confront investigators of membranes, energy substrates, hormones and biological signals. with factors usually not considered to be etiologically related to early A well-controlled balance of lipid demand and supply under changing pregnancy loss. Our data indicate that malformations of first-trimester nutritional conditions with storage in various cells in form of lipid drop- intrauterine deaths with normal chromosomes are etiologically hetero- lets is therefore important. The Austrian Genome Project “GOLD” (Ge- geneous. An accurate description of these specimens is essential as it nomics of Lipid-associated Disorders) aims to discover genes, gene can help to identify the specific mechanism leading to the observed de- products and metabolites required for the generation, structural integ- velopmental defects and might assist investigators in answering spe- rity and catabolism of lipid droplets. Genetic epidemiology is one of cific questions from parents concerning the probable cause of death thirteen research teams of this multidisciplinary consortium and aims and the risk of recurrence in a subsequent pregnancy. to identify genetic variation of genes involved in these processes by two approaches: an hypothesis-free approach with genome-wide as- PL1.3 sociation studies on quantitative lipids traits and a hypothesis-driven immunology approach with association studies on genes which might be involved J. Penninger; in lipid-related phenotypes. The genome-wide association studies re- IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology GmbH, Vienna, Austria. vealed not only yet unknown gene regions influencing lipid levels but No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. also demonstrated that regions far upstream or downstream of the org/eshg2009 for updates. gene have a strong impact on lipid levels. In the hypothesis-driven ap- proach genetic variation within the newly discovered adipose triglycer- PL2.1 ide lipase (ATGL) which hydrolyzes the first ester bond of triglycerides Genetics meets metabolomics: a genome-wide association was found to have a strong impact on free fatty acid and triglyceride study of metabolite profiles in human serum concentrations. Furthermore, ATGL was found to have a large number C. Gieger1, L. Geistlinger1, E. Altmaier2,3, M. Hrabé de Angelis4,5, F. Kronen- of rare and very rare variants which are subject of investigation. Finally, berg6, T. Meitinger7,8, H. Mewes2,9, H. Wichmann1,10, K. M. Weinberger11, J. adiponutrin, a protein structurally related to ATGL was recently identi- Adamski4,5, T. Illig1, K. Suhre2,3; fied to be associated with hepatic fat content and liver enzyme levels. 1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Research Center for Using five different studies we clearly demonstrated a strong impact of Environmental Health, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Bioinformat- variants within adiponutrin with total and non-HDL cholesterol levels. ics and Systems Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany, 3Faculty of PL1.2 Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany, 4Institute of Ex- Clinical significance of embryoscopy for early intrauterine perimental Genetics, Genome Analysis Center, Helmholtz Zentrum München, deaths German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg/Munich, T. Philipp1, E.R.Separovic2, S. Sladek3, P. Hofmeister3, A. Reiner 3; Germany, 5Institute of Experimental Genetics, Life and Food Science Center 1 Department Obstetrics and Gynecology ,Danube Hospital, Vienna, Austria, Weihenstephan, Technische Universität München, Freising-Weihenstephan, 2Cytogenetic Laboratory ,Department of Pathology, B. C. Children’s Hospital, Germany, 6Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics, Vancouver B.C, Canada, 3 Department of Pathology ,Cytogenetic Laboratory, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Danube Hospital, Vienna, Austria. Austria, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Introduction: About 20 % of clinically recognized pregnancies are Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany, aborted, the majority of these being early spontaneous pregnancy 8Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität losses before twelve gestational weeks. Pathological examination of München, Munich, Germany, 9Department of Genome-oriented Bioinformat- first trimester losses is difficult because the embryo/fetus is only rarely ics, Life and Food Science Center Weihenstephan, Technische Universität retrieved unaffected by the damage caused by either instrumental München, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany, 10Institute of Medical Informatics, evacuation or spontaneous passage. Transcervical embryoscopy prior Biometry and Epidemiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany, to dilatation and curettage in cases of missed abortion enabled us to 11Biocrates Life Sciences AG, Innsbruck, Austria. study the external features of the embryo detected in first trimester The rapidly evolving field of metabolomics aims at a comprehensive missed abortions. The importance of accurate descriptions of the dead measurement of ideally all endogenous metabolites in a cell or body embryo /fetus to answer specific questions of parents as to the prob- fluid. It thereby provides a functional readout of the physiological state able cause of death and the future risk of recurrence of abortion or an of the human body. Genetic variants that associate with changes in abnormal infant is discussed. the homeostasis of key lipids, carbohydrates or amino acids are not Material and Method: Prior instrumental evacuation of the uterus a rig- only expected to display much larger effect sizes due to their direct in- id hysteroscope (12-degree angle of view with both biopsy and irriga- volvement in metabolite conversion modification, but should also pro- tion working channel, Circon Ch 25-8 mm) was inserted transcervically vide access to the biochemical context of such variations, in particular into the uterine cavity. The amnion was opened with microscissors (CH when enzyme coding genes are concerned. 7-2mm) to obtain a detailed view of the embryo. After evacuation of To test this hypothesis we conducted the first GWAS with metabolo- the uterus chorionic villi were analysed cytogenetically, using either mics, based on the quantitative measurement of 363 metabolites in standard G-banding cytogenetic techniques or comparative genomic serum of 284 male participants of the KORA study. We found associa- hybridization in combination with flow cytometry. tions of frequent single nucleotide polymorphisms with considerable Results: The embryo or early fetus was visualized in over 800 first differences in the metabolic homeostasis of the human body, explain- trimester missed abortions in this ongoing study and a high rate of ing up to 12% of the observed variance. Using ratios of certain me- developmental defects could be found. tabolite concentrations as a proxy for enzymatic activity, up to 28% Localized developmental defects , usually represented by the combi- of the variance can be explained (p-values 10^-16 to 10^-21). We nation of several external developmental defects included neural tube identified four genetic variants in genes coding for enzymes (FADS1, defects (spina bifida, encephalocele, anencephalus), holoprosenceph- LIPC, SCAD, MCAD) where the corresponding metabolic phenotype aly ,microcephaly, facial dysplasia, various forms of cleft lip , fused (metabotype) matches the biochemical pathways in which these en- mouth, limb abnormalities(syndactyly, polydactyly, cleft hand, limb re- zymes are active. duction defect ), gastroschisis and omphalocele, amniotic adhaesions Our results suggest that common genetic polymorphisms induce ma- and duplication anomalies(thoracophagus, acardius anceps). jor differentiations in the metabolic make-up of the human population. Chromosomal abnormalities included mostly numerical aberrations These genetically determined metabotypes may subscribe the risk for such as monosomy X; trisomy of chromosomes ; triploidy; tetraploidy. a certain medical phenotype, the response to a given drug treatment, or Trisomies for all chromosomes with the exception of chromosomes 1 the reaction to a nutritional intervention or environmental challenge.Plenary Lectures  PL2.2 PL2.4 massive parallel sequencing of ataxia genes after array-based Duplication of conserved non-coding sequence elements enrichment - a novel mechanism in the pathogenesis of congenital A. Hoischen1, C. Gilissen1, W. van der Vliet1, P. Arts1, N. Wieskamp1, S. Ver- malformations meer1, R. Meijer1, M. Buckley1, B. Kremer2, N. van Slobbe-Knoers1, J. Veltman1, E. Klopocki1, K. Dathe1, A. Brehm2, K. W. Kjaer3, C. Ott1, I. Kurth4, S. Mund- H. Scheffer1; los1,5; 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen- 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Charite Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Ger- tre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, Radboud University many, 2Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 3Wilhelm Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Institute of Cellular and Targeting multiple disease genes by massively parallel sequencing has Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Insti- tremendous diagnostic potential but requires new ‘front-end’ methods tute of Human Genetics, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, to enrich templates to be sequenced. Here we validated the array- Germany, 5Max-Planck Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany. based sequence capture method for medical sequencing approaches Two thirds of the sequence conserved among mammals is not protein in heterogeneous genetic disorders. As a model disease we chose coding. The precise function of such non-coding sequence elements autosomal recessive ataxia and selected 4 patients with known muta- (CNEs) is unknown but they have been proposed to regulate time and tions in ataxia genes. Genomic sequences of all known disease genes, tissue specific gene expression over distances as great as 1Mb. Using including all intronic sequences and 5kb up- and downstream of each high-resolution array CGH we detected CNE-containing duplications gene, as well as a novel ataxia candidate locus were represented on a in patients with congenital malformations. We identified duplications of single oligonucleotide array, comprising 2.5 Mb of genomic sequence 1) a regulatory sequence 1Mb upstream of SHH (ZRS) in triphalangeal in total. After enrichment each of the patients DNA was analyzed by thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome and in 2) Laurin-Sandrow syndrome, one quarter of a Roche GS FLX Titanium sequencing run, resulting 3) a 5kb regulatory element 110kb downstream of BMP2 in brachydac- in approximately 100 Mb of genomic sequence per patient. This was tyly type A2, 4) 2Mb containing several CNEs upstream of SOX9 in sufficient to reach an average per base coverage of 34-fold in all tar- Cooks syndrome, and 5) 1.7Mb 5’ of MSX2 in a condition resembling geted regions. Enrichment showed high specificity, as up to 88% of all cleidocranial dysplasia. In all cases the duplications are arranged in reads mapped uniquely to the targeted regions. Very few single reads tandem. We show that the CNE contained in the duplication at the mapped to non-targeted regions, interestingly mainly to chr.9_random, BMP2 locus is an enhancer regulating BMP2 expression exclusively which might indicate that this region represents a minor allele in the in the limbs, thus, functioning as cis-regulatory element. We postulate existing human genome assembly. Importantly, this approach enabled that duplications of cis-regulatory elements cause selective deregula- an unbiased detection of all known mutations in our 4 patients, dele- tion of the target gene resulting in disturbance of dosage-dependent tions and point mutations, as well as known SNP variants (hetero- and signalling pathways only in those areas and/or time points that cor- homozygous). These results show that massive parallel sequencing of respond to the CNE’s regulatory potential. Our data provide the mo- enriched samples enables tailor-made genetic diagnosis of heteroge- lecular cause for so far genetically unresolved conditions (Laurin-San- neous disorders. drow, Cooks syndrome) and show genetic heterogeneity for others. Furthermore, duplications of CNEs can be considered a novel genetic PL2.3 mechanism for developmental defects. Given the importance of tem- the sLc29A3 gene is mutated in Pigmented Hypertrichosis with poral-spatial gene regulation during embryonic development it is to be insulin Dependent Diabetes mellitus syndrome and interacts expected that a large number of developmental defects are caused by with the insulin signalling pathway mutations affecting such distant enhancers/repressors. S. T. Cliffe1, J. M. Kramer2, K. Hussain3, J. H. Robben2, E. K. de Jong2, A. P. de Brouwer2, E. Nibbeling2, E. Kamsteeg2, M. Wong4, J. Prendiville5, C. James3, PL2.5 R. Padidela3, C. Becknell6, H. van Bokhoven2, P. M. T. Deen2, R. C. M. Hen- mitosis updated - PicH and the anaphase threads nekam3, R. Lindeman1, A. Schenck2, T. Roscioli2,7, M. F. Buckley2,1; T. Schwarzbraun1, L. Wang2, P. Ulz1, E. A. Nigg2, M. R. Speicher1; 1South Eastern Area Laboratory Services, Sydney, Australia, 2Nijmegen Centre 1Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Max-Planck Institute of Biochem- for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Institute for Child istry, Martinsried, Germany. Health, London, United Kingdom, 4Children’s Hospital, Westmead, Sydney, The process of mitosis has been illustrated in more or less unchanged Australia, 5British Columbia’s Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, ways in textbooks for decades and still resembles the original observa- 6Dermatology Associates of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States, 7Sydney tions made by Flemming back in 1882. However, PICH (Plk1-interact- South West Integrated Genetics Service, Sydney, Australia. ing checkpoint helicase) was recently identified as an essential com- Pigmented hypertrichotic dermatosis with insulin dependent diabetes ponent of the spindle assembly checkpoint and shown to localize to (PHID) syndrome is a recently described autosomal recessive disor- kinetochores, inner centromeres, and most interestingly, it decorates der associated with predominantly antibody negative, insulin-depen- thin threads connecting separating sister-chromatids even until late dent diabetes mellitus. In order to identify the genetic basis of PHID anaphase. PICH-positive threads evolve from inner centromeres as and study its relationship with glucose metabolism we performed ho- they stretch in response to tension reaching up to 15 µm in length. mozygosity mapping in five unrelated families followed by candidate With the discovery of DNA threads connecting sister-chromatids until gene sequencing. Five loss of function mutations were identified in the late anaphase a new level of cell cycle regulation seems likely. The SLC29A3 gene which encodes a member of a highly conserved pro- properties of the PICH protein lead to the hypothesis that it associ- tein family that transports nucleosides, nucleobases and nucleoside ates with catenated centromeric DNA, where it may act as a tension analogue drugs, hENT3. We show that PHID is allelic with a related sensor to monitor the bipolar attachment of sister kinetochores and syndrome without diabetes mellitus, H syndrome. The interaction of thus ensuring accurate chromosome segregation. Indeed, we could SLC29A3 gene with insulin signaling pathways was then studied using recently demonstrate that these threads are in fact mainly constituted an established model in Drosophila melanogaster. Ubiquitous knock- of stretched alphoid centromeric DNA and that topoisomerase activ- down of the Drosophila ortholog of hENT3, dENT1 is lethal under strin- ity is required during anaphase for the resolution of PICH-positive gent conditions whereas milder knockdown induced scutellar bristle threads. Additionally, knock-down as well as over-expression of the phenotypes similar to those previously reported in knockdown of the PICH protein result in severe chromosomal mis-segregation. These Drosophila ortholog of the Islet gene. A cellular growth assay showed data indicate that the complete separation of sister chromatids occurs a reduction of cell size/number which could be rescued or enhanced later than previously assumed as well as that PICH and the alphoid by manipulation of the Drosophila insulin receptor and its downstream centromeric DNA repeats are part of an additional mechanism to safe- signaling effectors, dPI3K and dAkt. In summary, inactivating muta- guard the genomic integrity. tions in SLC29A3 cause a syndromic form of insulin dependent dia- betes in humans and in Drosophila profoundly affect cell size/number through interactions with the insulin signaling pathway. These data suggest that the further investigation of the role of SLC29A3 in glucose metabolism is a priority for diabetes research.Plenary Lectures  PL2.6 For example, honeybee workers labor their whole life without repro- Genome-wide association reveals master eQtL regulators of ducing, birds make alarm calls, and humans often help one another. microRNA expression variation in human fibroblasts This fundamental question has received considerable attention over C. Borel, S. Deutsch, A. Letourneau, M. Gagnebin, C. Gehrig, E. Falconnet, Y. the last 50 years with the development of the field of sociobiology. Dupré, S. E. Antonarakis; This has resulted in a solid base of theory, centered on principles like Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medi- inclusive-fitness, and a myriad of empirical tests. It is now widely ac- cal School, CH, Geneva, Switzerland. cepted that cooperative behaviors evolve because they directly help MicroRNAs (miRNA) have emerged as new class of regulatory non- the actor alongside any recipients, or they help individuals who share coding RNAs modulating the processing of over a third of human more alleles with the actor than predicted by chance (genetic related- transcripts. Inter-individual variation of miRNA levels is likely to influ- ness), or both. One major group that remains relatively unexplored, ence expression of their target genes, and may therefore contribute to however, is the microbes, whose full spectrum of sociality only recently phenotypic differences, including susceptibility to common disorders. came to light. My group studies how social environment and related- Nothing is known at present regarding the genetic control of microRNA ness affects microbial behavior in a number of model systems, includ- expression levels. In this study, we have performed a whole-genome, ing biofilm-forming bacteria, slime molds and budding yeast. We find quantitative association study of 365 microRNA expression pheno- that microbes are extremely sensitive to social context - both in real types in 180 primary fibroblasts from Caucasian newborns of the Gen- time and over evolutionary time - and use them to better understand Cord project, genotyped with the Illumina HumanHap550 array. We the genetic and genomics of social traits; a pursuit that is difficult in the find extensive variation in microRNA expression levels and estimate more classical model organisms for social behavior. that 33% of microRNAs are differentially expressed. For 121 selected expressed microRNAs, GWAS yielded highly significant cis- (9%) and PL3.3 trans- (11%) associations. Furthermore, we characterized genomic Language as Kluge regions containing master regulators that influence the expression of G. Marcus; multiple miRNAs, thus providing a previously unknown mechanism New York University, NY, United States. suggesting co-regulation of miRNA expression. In fields ranging from reasoning to linguistics, the idea of humans as This is the first attempt to characterize the genetic regulation of miRNA perfect, rational, optimal creatures is making a comeback – but should expression levels. Loci identified through this approach are likely to be it be? Hamlet’s musings that the mind was “noble in reason ...infinite important determinants of human phenotypes. in faculty” have their counterparts in recent scholarly claims that the C.B and S.D contributed equally to this work. mind consists of an “accumulation of superlatively well- engineered designs” shaped by the process of natural selection (Tooby and Cos- PL3.1 mides, 1995), and the 2006 suggestions of Bayesian cognitive scien- Weird animal genomes, sex and dumb design tists Chater, Tenenbaum and Yuille that “it seems increasingly plau- J. Graves; sible that human cognition may be explicable in rational probabilistic The University of Melbourne, Department of Zoology, Melbourne, Australia. terms and that, in core domains, human cognition approaches an opti- No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. mal level of performance”, as well as in Chomsky’s recent suggestions org/eshg2009 for updates. that language is close “to what some super-engineer would construct, given the conditions that the language faculty must satisfy”. PL3.2 In this talk, I will I argue that this resurgent enthusiasm for rational- Genetics and sociobiology of microbes ity (in cognition) and optimality (in language) is misplaced, and that K. Foster; the assumption that evolution tends creatures towards“superlative ad- Center for Systems Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States. aptation” ought to be considerably tempered by recognition of what “If it could be proved that any part of the structure of any one species Stephen Jay Gould called “remnants of history”, or what I call evolu- had been formed for the exclusive good of another species, it would tionary inertia. The thrust of my argument is that the mind in general, annihilate my theory, for such could not have been produced through and language in particular, might be better seen as what engineers call natural selection.” Darwin (1859) a kluge: clumsy and inelegant, yet remarkably effective. Since Darwin, evolutionary biologists have been troubled by coopera- tive behavior. Why do organisms frequently evolve social behaviors that promote others at an apparent cost to their own reproduction?Concurrent Symposia  s01.1 and glioblastoma, a minor cell population with stem cell-like properties Genome variation, gene regulation, and human disease has been identified and these cells have been termed cancer stem S. McCarrol; cells. Here we report the miRNA expression profile of glioblastoma Broad Institute , Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Cambridge, MA, stem cells. We find that both miR-9 as well as its corresponding miR- United States. 9* are highly abundant in cancer stem cell-containing cell populations. No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. Inhibition of both miRNAs leads to reduced tumor growth in vitro and org/eshg2009 for updates. in nude mice. We further find that inhibition of miR-9/9* leads to en- hanced neuronal differentiation and therefore miR-9/9* inhibit differen- s01.2 tiation of glioblastoma stem cells and maintain their ‘stemness’. Since New methods for detecting rare variants associations tumor stem cells are difficult to target and very often survive therapy, A. Kong; our findings could be the basis for novel therapeutic strategies. deCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. s02.3 org/eshg2009 for updates. mRNA splicing and disease U. Fischer; s01.3 Department of Biochemistry at the Biocentre, University of Würzburg, Würz- Rare and common variants in human disease burg, Germany. D. Goldstein; Mutations that affect pre-mRNA processing are the cause for many Duke University, Center for Human Genome Variation, Durham, NC, United genetic diseases. Most such mutations target cis-acting regulatory States. sequences in a given transcript, thus preventing its proper matura- There are now several confirmed common variants that influence tion. Only recently however, mutations in trans-acting factors involved common diseases, responses to infection, and responses to drugs. in pre-mRNA processing have likewise been linked to disease. One For most common diseases however all common variants identified prominent example is spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) a monogenic, explain only a few percent of the known heritability, and many of the neuromuscular disorder caused by reduced levels of functional sur- signals emerging from genome wide association studies have yet to be vival motor neuron (SMN) protein. This ubiquitous factor is part of a tracked to single common variants, raising the possibility that in some complex that mediates the formation of spliceosomal snRNPs. The de- cases the signals emerge from associated sets of rare variants. Here tailed biochemical investigation of SMN under normal conditions and I argue that progress in identifying the so called ‘missing heritability’ in SMA has provided clues of how mutations in factors with general for many human traits will be facilitated using an extreme phenotype functions elicit tissue specific phenotypes. whole-genome sequencing paradigm. I illustrate the basic structure and motivation for this approach using examples from our work on host s03.1 determinants of control of HIV-1 Predictive Genetic testing for cardiovascular Diseases: impact on carrier children. s02.1 E. M. A. Smets1, T. M. Meulenkamp1, M. M. H. Stam1, A. Tibben2, E. D. Mol- Non-coding antisense RNAs epigenetically regulate lema3, I. M. van Langen3, A. Wiegman4, G. M. de Wert5, I. D. de Beaufort6, A. A. transcription in human cells M. Wilde7; K. V. Morris; 1Medical Psychology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Institute, La Jolla, CA, United States. Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Clinical Genetics, Small RNA targeting of promoters in human cells has been shown to Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Neth- modulate transcriptional gene silencing. While the mechanism involved erlands, 4Pediatric Lipid Clinic, Emma’s Children Hospital, Academic Medical in transcriptional gene silencing has been shown to require Argonaute Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 5Health Ethics 1 (Ago-1), Histone Deactylase 1 (HDAC-1), and DNA methyltransfer- and Philosophy, Faculty of Medicine, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The ase 3a (DNMT3a), the endogenous RNA trigger directing these pro- Netherlands, 6Health care ethics at the Erasmus Medical Center of Erasmus teins to targeted promoters in human cells had remained unknown. We University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 7Cardiology, Academic Medical Cen- present evidence here suggesting that non-coding antisense RNAs ter/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. function in human cells as effector molecules driving transcriptional Familial Hypercholesterolemia, Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy and gene silencing. The antisense non-coding RNAs guide epigenetic re- Long QT Syndrome are genetic cardiovascular conditions which may modeling complexes to target promoters in an Ago-1 mediated man- lead to sudden cardiac death at a young age. Preventive measures ner. When these regulatory antisense non-coding RNAs are degraded include lifestyle modifications, medications and/or cardiac devices. using RNA interference there is a concomitant activation of the sense/ Identification of carrier children can protect them for the potentially life mRNA promoter which is under the regulatory control of the particular threatening consequences at a young age, but may at the same time antisense RNA. The data presented here suggests that in human cells, have negative consequences. bidirectional transcription is an endogenous gene regulatory mecha- Our study aimed to explore a) the manner in which children perceive nism whereby antisense non-coding RNAs direct epigenetic regulatory their carrier status, b) the impact on their daily lives and c) the strate- complexes to the corresponding sense promoters, resulting in RNA gies used to cope with these consequences and d) how their quality of directed epigenetic gene regulation. These observations support the life compares to the quality of life of other children their age. notion that epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes may be the Children (aged 8-18) who tested positive for LQTS (n=11), HCM (n=6) result of an imbalance in bidirectional transcription levels. This imbal- or FH (n=16) and their parents participated in semi-structured audio- ance allows the unchecked antisense RNA to direct silent state epi- taped interviews. Children’s health-related quality of life was assessed genetic marks to the sense promoter, resulting in stable transcriptional with a children and parent version self-report questionnaire. gene silencing. The children were overall quite articulate about the disease they were tested for, including its mode of inheritance. They expressed positive s02.2 future health perceptions, but feelings of controllability varied. Adher- the role of microRNAs in brain tumors ence and side-effects were significant themes with regard to medica- D. Beier1, J. Y. Zhu2, A. Eichner2, C. Beier1, G. Meister2; tion-use. Refraining from activities and maintaining a non-fat diet were 1Neurologische Universitätsklinik im Bezirksklinikum, Regensburg, Germany, themes concerning lifestyle modifications. Some children spontane- 2Center for integrated protein Sciences Munich (CIPSM), Laboratory of RNA ously reported worries about the possibility of dying and frustration Biology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany. about being different from peers. Children coped with these worries by MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are fundamental regulators of gene expression expressing faith in the effectiveness of medication, trying to be similar that direct processes as diverse as cell metabolism, lineage specifica- to peers or, in contrast, emphasizing their ‘being different’. Children tion or cell differentiation. Consistently, miRNAs are frequently mis- generally appeared effective in the way they coped with their carrier expressed in cancer. In several cancer types including breast cancer status and its implications. However, children who tested positive forConcurrent Symposia  LQTS seemed most vulnerable. No significant differences in quality s03.4 of life scores were found between carrier children and the reference Peer support: A critical Resource group of Dutch children. A. Cox; Nevertheless, dealing with the daily implications of their condition re- CRY, Unit 7 Epsom Downs Metro Centre, Waterfield, Tadworth, Surrey, United mains difficult in some situations, warranting continued availability of Kingdom. psychosocial support. In the UK there has been a gap between what the National Health Service has provided and what individuals affected by young sudden s03.2 cardiac death and inherited cardiovascular diseases require. Founded Uptake of genetic counselling and predictive DNA testing in in 1995, the charity Cardiac Risk in the Young (CRY) has developed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy two unique services to address this disparity; the Bereavement Sup- I. Christiaans; port Network and the Surgery Supporters Network. Both aim to be fast, Academic Medical Centre, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, The expert and individual. Netherlands. CRY’s Bereavement Support Network is designed to facilitate “talking Introduction: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a common autosomal out” personal grief. It is based around a network of bereavement sup- dominant disease, associated with heart failure and arrhythmias pre- porters who have each been affected by a young sudden cardiac death disposing to sudden cardiac death. After the detection of the causal and subsequently completed a 2 year BAC accredited skills and theory mutation in the proband predictive DNA testing of relatives is possible course. Bereaved families can also attend an Annual Family Medical (cascade screening). Prevention of sudden cardiac death in patients Conference in London and a series of Regional Bereavement Sup- with a high risk by means of an implantable cardioverter defibrillator port Days around the UK. Furthermore, to facilitate the understanding is effective. of the potential genetic risks to other family members, CRY provides Methods and results: In 97 hypertrophic cardiomyopathy families with a specialist cardiac information and funds expert cardiac pathology - en- sarcomere gene mutation we retrospectively determined uptake of ge- suring uncertainty and time delays are minimised. netic counselling and predictive DNA testing in relatives within one year The CRY Surgery Supporters Network is designed for young people after the detection of the causal mutation in the proband. Uptake of ge- (aged 35 and under) who have had, or are about to confront, poten- netic counselling was 39% and did not differ significantly by proband’s tially life-saving surgery and want to talk to others who have been or relative’s gender, nor by young age of the relative (<18 years) or a through a similar experience. These experiences include the fitting of family history positive for sudden cardiac death. In second degree rela- pacemakers and implantable defibrillators, and ablation surgery. It was tives, eligible for predictive DNA testing when the first degree relative developed as a support system that increases effective coping and had died, uptake was 27.5% (p=0.047). Uptake of predictive DNA test- decreases social isolation for young implant recipients, whilst also of- ing was 39%; conditional uptake of predictive DNA testing was 99%. fering support to others in a similar situation. Group meetings include; Conclusions: Uptake of genetic counselling in hypertrophic cardiomy- ‘Question and Answer’ sessions with a specialist cardiologist; group opathy is comparable to uptake in oncogenetics. Conditional uptake counselling; and opportunities to socialise. of predictive DNA testing, however, is much higher. Because sudden It is important that the implementation of counselling for the specific cardiac death can be prevented uptake of genetic counselling in hyper- psychological needs of those affected by inherited cardiovascular con- trophic cardiomyopathy should be as high as possible. To achieve this ditions are carefully considered. Counselling is only a luxury for those research into the determinants of uptake is needed. that do not need it. s03.3 s04.1 Genetic testing in familial cardiomyopathies: the cardiologists targeted treatment of tuberous sclerosis using mtOR inhibitors view J. R. Sampson; J. van Cleemput; Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, University of Leuven, Faculty of Medicine, Cardiovascular Research, Leuven, United Kingdom. Belgium. Inactivating mutations of TSC1 or TSC2 cause the inherited disorder Cardiomyopathies (CMs) are primary disorders of the myocardium. tuberous sclerosis. They lead to loss of GAP activity of the TSC1/2 The most common subtypes, hypertrophic (HCM) and dilated (DCM) complex for the small GTPase Rheb and thereby to inappropriate ac- cardiomyopathy, are characterized by an abnormal thickening of the tivity of mTOR signalling that appears critical to the pathogenesis of left ventricular wall with a preserved systolic function (HCM) and an many disease manifestations. mTOR inhibitors represent clear can- enlarged left ventricular cavity with a reduced systolic function (DCM). didate therapies targeted to the molecular pathology of tuberous scle- HCM’s and familial forms of DCM are monogenic heritable diseases. rosis and they have been used in a number of pre-clinical an early Mutations in 11 different genes encoding for contractile proteins have phase clinical trials. These have demonstrated reduction in size of been identified and can be detected in 30 to 60% of the patients with TSC-associated renal tumours (angiomyolipomas) and improvement HCM. Fortunately 3 genes (MYBC-3, MYH-7 and TNNT-2) account for in lung function in patients with lung manifestations (lymphangioleio- more than 60% of the known mutations. myomatosis, LAM). A case-series of TSC-associated brain tumours In patients with familial DCM mutations are equally dispersed over 20 (sub-ependymal giant cell astrocytomas) were also reported to shrink genes. This heterogeneity seriously hampers the feasibility of genetic during rapamycin therapy. An important though variable feature of the screening. The only exception are patients with familial DCM with con- tuberous sclerosis phenotype is learning difficulty. Recent studies in duction system disease, in whom defects in the gene encoding for mouse models carrying heterozygous TSC2 mutations demonstrated lamin A/C are found in 30 to 50%. improvement in learning deficits following treatment with the mTOR The clinical relevance of genetic testing in familial CMs is currently inhibitor rapamycin. These promising pre-clinical and early-phase hu- confined to 3 areas. 1) Lifestyle advice (sports, profession,…) in as- man trials have led to development of larger scale randomised control ymptomatic children and adolescents, 2) guiding prophylactic implan- trials of mTOR inhibitors for the treatment of the renal, lung, and brain tation of an implantable cardioverter defibrillator in patients with a fami- manifestations of TSC-associated disease. ly history of premature sudden death and 3) pre-implantation diagnosis in families with highly symptomatic forms of CM. s04.2 A promising area, almost unexplored today, is that of prophylactic Genetic aetiology defines optimal treatment in monogenic “heart failure” therapy in asymptomatic carriers of DCM. diabetes So far we have no human studies exploring how to influence the natu- S. Ellard; ral history of HCM, but it is clear that the relevance of early genetic Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, diagnosis will explode once we understand how to modify disease United Kingdom. progression. In the pre-genetics era there were two types of diabetes; type 1 which As genetic testing can transform a healthy person into a patient, the required insulin and type 2, usually treated with oral hypoglycaemic role of dedicated clinical geneticists and psychologists in the treatment agents. Mutations in 8 genes are now known to cause isolated dia- of these people cannot be overestimated. betes and there are at least 15 syndromes which include diabetes.Concurrent Symposia  Monogenic diabetes accounts for 1-2% of diabetes with an estimated s05.3 prevalence of up to 1/1000 in Europe. For some patients, defining the mitotic recombination in leukaemia genetic aetiology of their diabetes may lead to improved treatment. B. D. Young, M. Raghavan, M. Gupta; Mild fasting hyperglycaemia resulting from heterozygous inactivating Cancer Research UK , Barts and Royal London School of Medicine, Medical GCK mutations does not usually require pharmacological treatment Oncology Unit, Cancer Genomics Group, London, United Kingdom. and children misdiagnosed as having type 1 diabetes have been able The introduction of array-based analysis of single nucleotide polymor- to stop insulin injections without a deterioration in glycaemic control. phisms (SNPs) allows the rapid determination of many thousands of Those patients with HNF1A or HNF4A mutations are sensitive to low allelotypes in a human DNA sample. This technology is particularly dose oral sulphonylureas but may later progress to insulin. suited to the study of changes that take place during the development Heterozygous activating mutations in the KCNJ11 and ABCC8 genes of cancer. For example, regions of tumour-associated loss of hetero- encoding the Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits of the beta-cell ATP sensitive zygosity (LOH) can be detected as by comparison with germline DNA potassium (K ) channel account for around 50% of patients with per- from the same individual. Since this approach also yields copy number ATP manent neonatal diabetes (PNDM) diagnosed in the first 6 months of information it is possible to determine the probable source of LOH. life. This discovery of the underlying genetic aetiology has dramatically The application of SNP genotype arrays to acute myeloid leukaemia improved treatment since most patients achieve improved glycaemic (AML) unexpectedly uncovered large regions of acquired homozygos- control upon transfer from insulin to high dose oral sulphonylureas. ity which were not associated with copy number gain or loss and which The challenge now is to educate health care professionals to recog- cannot be detected by conventional cytogenetics. This phenomenon, nise monogenic subtypes of diabetes in order to maximise the benefits which often continues to the telomere, has been termed acquired uni- of a pharmacogenetic approach to treating diabetes. parental disomy (aUPD) and is the consequence of a mitotic recom- bination event occurring during the evolution of the cancer. In a large s04.3 study we have demonstrated that there is a distinct pattern of aUPD microRNAs: Functions in metabolism and therapeutic in approximately 17% of AML with certain regions being preferentially opportunities affected. Furthermore we have shown that certain gene mutations are M. Stoffel; being rendered homozygous by the mitotic recombination event, in- Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, cluding FLT3, WT1and CEBPA. These data strongly suggest that the ETH Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland. mutation precedes mitotic recombination [1]. No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. A relatively large proportion of AML patients will relapse with resist- org/eshg2009 for updates. ant disease. Recently we have applied SNP array analysis to serial leukaemia samples including both presentation and relapse material s05.1 in order to determine whether mitotic recombination could have a role structural genomic variation in disease evolution. It was observed that up to 40% of AML at relapse C. Lee; should evidence of aUPD frequently affecting chromosome 13q and Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, EBRC 404A, Bos- involving mutations to FLT3. This suggests that mitotic recombination ton, MA, United States. events could have an important role in the evolution of AML [2] No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. References org/eshg2009 for updates. 1. Gupta, M., Raghavan, M., Gale, R.E., Chelala, C., Allen, C., Mol- loy, G., Chaplin, T., Linch, D.C., Cazier, J.B., and Young, B.D., Novel s05.2 regions of acquired uniparental disomy discovered in acute myeloid Array-cGH in clinical practice: Fascination and frustration. leukemia. Genes Chromosomes Cancer, 2008. 47(9): p. 729-39. K. Devriendt; 2. Raghavan, M., Smith, L.L., Lillington, D.M., Chaplin, T., Kakkas, Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. I., Molloy, G., Chelala, C., Cazier, J.B., Cavenagh, J.D., Fitzgibbon, Array-CGH gradually is being integrated into the routine clinical prac- J., Lister, T.A., and Young, B.D., Segmental uniparental disomy is a tice to detect submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances. The first ex- commonly acquired genetic event in relapsed acute myeloid leukemia. perience is one of fascination. In about 15% of cases with a “chro- Blood, 2008. 112(3): p. 814-21. mosomal” phenotype, an etiological diagnosis can now be reached. Mosaicism can be detected more easily, and chromosomal aberrations s06.1 are characterized precisely. Improved genotype-phenotype correla- Genetics of human autoimmune disease tions not only facilitates counselling and guidance, but also has lead to D. Hafler; the elucidation of the genetic cause of several clinical disorder such as Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Division of CHARGE and Pitt-Hopkins syndromes. More surprisingly, the field of Molecular Immunology,Center for Neurologic Diseases, Boston, MA, United reverse phenotyping has emerged, where phenotyping of individuals States. sharing a similar imbalance has resulted in the delineation of novel No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. recognisable entities. org/eshg2009 for updates. Now that the major technical issues of array-CGH have been solved, its application in clinical practice faces several challenges. In an at- s06.2 tempt to decipher the large number of remaining unexplained cases, Genome-wide association studies of obesity and height: What higher resolution arrays were applied, but met with limited success. have we learned? It appears that many smaller imbalances cause a monogenic disor- J. Hirschhorn1,2, for the GIANT Consortium; der, which had not been recognized clinically. The high number of rare 1Department of Genetics, Children’s Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, variants poses major difficulties in the interpretation of found imbal- MA, United States, 2Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States. ances. Traditional cytogenetic criteria of pathogenicity such as size or Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have been used to map loci de novo occurrence do not longer apply. Also, the distinction between at which common genetic variants are associated with polygenic traits pathogenic and polymorphic becomes blurred even further since many and diseases. However, the modest effects of these common variants CNV’s act as susceptibility loci and in addition, the associated pheno- has meant that mapping and validating associated loci requires large types vary in an unexplained way. Also, as a result of genome wide numbers of samples and collaborations. We have taken a collabora- screening, the clinician will be confronted with unexpected results that tive approach and are using GWA studies representing over 100,000 may have important implications for the person and his family. These individuals to identify common variants associated with anthropometric issues will have to be considered before one can apply array-CGH in traits, including height and measures of obesity. Earlier iterations of prenatal diagnosis. these efforts, involving studies of up to 30,000 samples, successfully identified 10 loci for body mass index and over 40 loci for height. These results have implicated both expected and novel biological pathways, and have highlighted the role of central nervous system in regulating body weight as well as several distinct pathways in the regulation ofConcurrent Symposia  height. These studies have moved us closer to our primary goal, which verely debilitating and life threatening. Although primarily neuromuscu- is to shed light on the underlying biology of the regulation of height and lar, the precise array of symptoms observed in any one patient varies weight in human populations. dramatically. Myotonic dystrophy type 1 is caused by the expansion Thus far, the associated variants we have identified explain only a of an unstable CTG repeat with patients typically inheriting from 50 to small fraction of the expected contribution of genetic factors to popula- several thousand copies of the repeat. In general, longer alleles are tion variation. Clearly, many of the causal loci and even causal vari- associated with more severe symptoms and an earlier age of onset. ants at known loci remain to be discovered. Thus, further efforts and However, explanations for the additional symptomatic variability not analyses will likely uncover additional genetic determinants, although accounted for by repeat length have remained enigmatic. In order to the relative contributions to trait variation of common and rare variants, try and understand symptomatic variation in myotonic dystrophy we and discovered vs undiscovered loci, remains to be seen. These ef- have been analysing an unusual family in which the typical myotonic forts will include expansion of GWA studies both in sample size and dystrophy symptoms are accompanied by an intermediate Charcot- in the number and types of variants that can be assayed, studies of Marie-Tooth peripheral neuropathy, acute encephalopathic attacks individuals samples from the extremes of trait distributions, compre- and deafness. We have determined that in addition to the typical CTG hensive and deep sequencing of known loci, more complex analyses, repeat expansion, this family has a complex repeat expansion at the and, eventually, comprehensive sequencing of the genome in large 3’ end of the array comprised of CGG, CCG and CTG repeats These numbers of individuals. variant repeats presumably mediate the additional symptoms by an RNA gain of function analogous to that observed in fragile-X associ- s06.3 ated tremor ataxia syndrome. We have also determined that similar Low-penetrance genes for colorectal cancer predisposition such variant repeats are observed in other myotonic dystrophy families I. Tomlinson; and appear to be associated with decreased genetic instability and University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. less severe symptoms. Notably, variant repeats are clustered at the 3’ Recent large-scale screens have shown that the common disease- end of the array and have not been detected at the 5’ end of the array. common variant genetic model is correct for the major cancers. Sev- More bizarrely, variant repeats in some families appear to have arisen eral SNPs have now been associated with a differential risk of breast, de novo. The occurrence of such de novo base substitutions reveals colorectal and prostate carcinomas, and evidence for similar predis- a mutation frequency several orders of magnitude greater than previ- position to other tumour types is accumulating. There appear to be ously observed at any human loci and further extends our knowledge several different mechanisms of raising cancer risk, but some prime of the unusual sequence properties of expanded repeats. candidate genes, such as those involved in DNA repair, are strikingly absent to date. The relative risks associated with cancer susceptibility s08.1 SNPs are modest (typically up to 1.3-fold) and the variants detected REt as a diagnostic and therapeutic target in mEN2 to date can account for a small proportioin of the familial clustering of R. M. W. Hofstra; cancer. The remaining risk may be explained by other types of genetic Universital Medical Centre Groningen (UMCG), Department of Genetics, Gron- variant, including copy number polymorphisms and rare (or “private”) ingen, The Netherlands. alleles with modest effects on disease risk. The RET gene encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase that is expressed in neural crest-derived cell lineages. The RET receptor plays a crucial s07.1 role in regulating cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, and sur- silencing of the FmR1 gene in human embryonic stem cells vival through embryogenesis. generated from fragile X blastocysts Activating mutations in RET lead to the development of several inher- N. Benvenisty; ited and noninherited diseases. Germline point mutations are found The Life Sciences Institute, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel. in the cancer syndromes multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2, No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. including MEN 2A and 2B, and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma. org/eshg2009 for updates. These syndromes are autosomal dominantly inherited. The identifica- tion of mutations associated with these syndromes has led to genetic s07.2 testing to identify patients at risk for MEN 2 and familial medullary thy- trinucleotide instability and DNA repair roid carcinoma and subsequent implementation of prophylactic thy- C. E. Pearson; roidectomy in mutation carriers. The Hospital for Sick Children, Department of Genetics, Toronto, ON, Canada. The RET mutations induce oncogenic activation of the RET tyrosine No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. kinase domain via different mechanisms, making RET an excellent org/eshg2009 for updates. candidate for the design of molecular targeted therapy. Recently, vari- ous kinds of therapeutic approaches, such as tyrosine kinase inhibition s07.3 have been developed and tested. myotonic dystrophy: complex repeats in a complex disorder C. Braida1, J. Couto1, F. Morales1,2, P. Cuenca2, T. Ashizawa3, A. Wilcox4, D. s08.2 E. Wilcox4, J. Mandel5, H. Radvanyi6, F. Niel7, M. Koening5, C. Lagier-Touren5, Li Fraumeni syndrome: the role of DNA copy number variation C. Faber8, H. J. M. Smeets9, P. A. Hofman10, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders11, F. in cancer susceptibility Spaans8, D. G. Monckton12; D. Malkin; 1University of Glasgow, Faculty of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Glasgow, Genetics & Genomic Biology Program, Research Institute; Division of Hematol- United Kingdom, 2Instituto de Investigaciones en Salud, Universidad de Costa ogy/Oncology , The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Rica, San José, Costa Rica, 3Department of Neurology, University of Texas ON, Canada. Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, United States, 4Scottish Muscle Network, Fer- DNA copy number variations (CNVs) are a significant form of inter- guson-Smith Center for Clinical Genetics, Yorkhill Hospital, Glasgow, United individual genetic variation. The size and plasticity of CNV regions Kingdom, 5Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Stras- makes them particularly intriguing to the study of cancer. Li-Fraumeni bourg, France, 6Laboratoire de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant disorder, frequently asso- Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France, 7CHU Bordeaux, Fédération des Neurosci- ciated with germline mutations of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene. ences Cliniques, Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 8Department of Clinical LFS is clinically and genetically heterogeneous and TP53 mutational Neurophysiology, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, status alone does not explain the cancer phenotype in these families. 9Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The genetic events that determine specific cancers in each family are The Netherlands, 10Department of Radiology, University Hospital Maastricht, unknown. Further, many LFS families do not have detectable TP53 Maastricht, The Netherlands, 11Department of Clinical Genetics, University missense mutations. We conducted a genome-wide profile of CNVs in Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 12Faculty of Biomedical and DNA of peripheral blood lymphocytes of LFS families (Shlien A, et al Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. 2008). Using the Affymetrix 500K array, we previously examined ge- Myotonic dystrophy is an extremely variable disorder. Ages of onset nomic DNA from a large healthy population (n=770) and an LFS cohort vary from birth to old age and the symptoms range from mild to se- (n=53) and showed that the number of CNVs per genome is largelyConcurrent Symposia  invariable in the healthy populations, but increased in these cancer- ing work has recently been published that suggests that cff DNA and prone individuals (p=0.01). Expanding on the initial analysis and using RNA in maternal plasma can facilitate noninvasive prenatal diagnosis multiple algorithms and a replication cohort of LFS DNA (n=22) hybrid- of trisomies 18 and 21, using ratios of single nucleotide polymorphisms ized on Affymetrix 6.0GW high resolution arrays we now demonstrate (SNPs) or using a shotgun sequencing approach. In our laboratory that: 1) CNV deletions are more frequent than duplications in mutation we are performing comparison gene expression microarray analyses carriers (p=3.28 x 105); 2) the overall number of CNVs exceeds 300 between the pregnant woman and her newborn to detect fetal gene in carriers (154 in controls); and 3) the difference in CNVs persists in sequences that are indicative of normal and abnormal fetal develop- these individuals’ tumors. We have also recently uncovered rare CNV ment in the second and third trimesters (Maron et al. J Clin Invest deletions at 17p13.1 in LFS patients (n=4) and in patients with multiple 2007; 117:3007-3019). Amniotic fluid supernatant is also a rich source congenital abnormalities but no cancer phenotype (n=4). This led us of cell-free fetal DNA and RNA; it can provide novel information about to posit that structural features of specific CNVs in the region may gene expression and functional development in the living human fetus. play a role in distinguishing a cancer from a non-cancer phenotype. We have generated preliminary data on fetal gene expression from The CNVs at 17p13.1 all include TP53 but range in size from 4.236 cell free mRNA in amniotic fluid. This has led to the identification of to 2Mbp. The large deletions, causing happloinsufficiency of nearly 40 novel differentially-regulated genes, and disrupted biologic pathways genes, are associated with a broad phenotype that includes multiple in various fetal pathologies such as twin to twin transfusion syndrome, congenital abnormalities, while smaller focal TP53 deletions (from ex- fetal hydrops, and trisomy 21. Functional genomic analysis of second ons 2 to 11) are associated with cancer susceptibility. Using qPCR and trimester fetuses with trisomy 21 suggests that oxidative stress, ion long-range PCR, we continue to fine map these deletions with the goal transport, and G-protein signaling are important. Most recently, we of finding the sequence features and mechanisms which cause these have used the Connectivity Map to generate testable hypotheses re- large genomic events (e.g. LCR-mediated NAHR). Our results suggest garding fetal treatment with small molecule drugs. The Connectivity an important role of DNA structural variation in cancer susceptibility, Map “connects” disease states, biological systems disruption (as mea- and these models will be discussed during this presentation. sured by pathway analysis), and pharmaceutical compounds to treat the disease. This allows a true translation from bench to bedside, and s08.3 suggests a possible continuum between prenatal diagnosis and fetal Familial gastric cancer therapy. Supported by National Institutes of Health R01 HD42053-06. C. Caldas; Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Dep.of Oncology, Func- s09.3 tional Breast Cancer Genomics Lab, Cambridge, United Kingdom. the challenge of prenatal and preimplantation genetic diagnosis No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. of mitochondrial disorders org/eshg2009 for updates. C. de Die-Smulders, H. Smeets; University Hospital Maastricht, Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, The s09.1 Netherlands. molecular karyotyping: From postnatal to preimplantation Mitochondrial diseases are caused by defects in the oxidative phos- genetic diagnosis? phorylation. They can be caused by mutations in nuclear or mito- J. Vermeesch; chondrial DNA (mtDNA) encoded genes. Mutation analysis of nuclear Department of Human Genetics, Afdeling CME-UZ, Leuven, Belgium. genes in prenatal (PND) or preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is Molecular karyotyping or genome wide array CGH has been imple- routine. Pitfalls do occur in biochemical analysis in PND. Mutations in mented in postnatal diagnosis of patients with idiopathic mental re- the mtDNA lead to a wide spectrum of diseases with very variable clini- tardation and congenital anomalies and is challenging conventional cal expression. They are transmitted exclusively maternally and are karyotyping as the prime diagnostic tool. Despite its successes, inter- usually heteroplasmic. Severity of symptoms is partially determined by pretation of the results coming from arrays with ever increasing resolu- mutation load. PND or PGD for mtDNA mutations is complex and ex- tion is becoming the main challenge. I will demonstrate how “Mende- perience is limited. Prerequisites for reliable PND of mtDNA mutations lian copy number variants” - apparently benign CNVs that can cause a have been formulated by Poulton and Turnbull (2000) and include: 1. disease phenotype dependent on copy number state, sex and genetic a close correlation between mutation load and disease manifestation or environmental background - require large scale collaborative efforts 2. no significant time-dependent changes in mutation load 3. a uniform to collect sufficient data and the development of expert systems to distribution of mutation load in different tissues. These criteria also ap- provide accurate diagnosis. The technology has, more recently, been ply for PGD. applied in a prenatal diagnostic setting. I will illustrate how the technol- For genetic counseling one may subdivide the mitochondrial muta- ogy helps prenatal diagnosis, but also demonstrate the potential risks tions in 5 categories: 1 de novo mutations. Recurrence risk is low and of using this technology. Finally, we developed a novel tool to genome PND or PGD can be offered for reassurance. 2. Inherited stable muta- wide screen CNV and SNP-genotype single cells. When applied to tions, such as the m.8993T>G/C mutations (leading to NARP/Leigh cleavage stage embryos from young fertile couples we discovered, syndrome). Outcome is favourable for this mutation when the mutation unexpectedly, an extremely high incidence of chromosomal instability, load is < 60%, while mutation load >90% is associated with a bad a hallmark of tumorigenesis. Not only mosaicisms for whole chromo- prognosis. Prediction of severity in the grey zone (60-90%) is difficult, some aneuploidies and uniparental disomies but also frequent seg- but a tendency for percentages at the extremes has been observed mental deletions, duplications and amplifications that were reciprocal in oocytes, which would favour conclusive results. PND was offered in sister blastomeres were detected in most cleavage stage embryos more than 10 times. PGD for the m.8993T>G mutation has been re- implying the occurrence of breakage-fusion-bridge cycles. As a con- ported once. 3. Inherited unstable mutations. The classical example sequence, PGD-AS will not improve the selection of genetically nor- is the m.3243A>G (MELAS) mutation. There is a certain correlation mal embryos. This not only explains the low human fecundity but also between mutation load and clinical severity but individual exceptions identifies postzygotic chromosomal instability as a leading cause of exist. It is impossible to define a completely safe lower threshold. A constitutional chromosomal disorders. limited number of PNDs have been carried out. Mutant load was found to be fairly stable in CVS and amniotic cells. Oocytes and foetuses of s09.2 carrier women can be without mutant load, the number dependent on Prenatal diagnosis and fetal treatment using fetal RNA in the mutation load of the carrier. PGD for the 3243A>G mutation was maternal body fluids carried out by our group (unpublished results). Mutation load showed D. Bianchi; a broad range between embryos, but was equal in the blastocysts of Tufts Medical Center, Genetics, Boston, MA, United States. one embryo. Some embryos had a fairly low mutation load. 4. Rare Cell-free fetal (cff) DNA in maternal plasma provides a noninvasive mutations with unknown outcome. Insufficient information is available source of fetal genetic material. Cff DNA is elevated in preeclampsia, for reliable predictions. 5. Homoplastic mutations. PND or PGD is use- placental abnormalities, and fetal aneuploidy. Qualitative analysis of less as 100% of the mtDNA is mutated. cff DNA in maternal plasma is already in clinical use worldwide for In conclusion, assessment of mtDNA mutation load in chorionic villi, noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of Rhesus D and fetal gender. Excit- amniotic cells or blastocysts is quite accurate nowadays and prelimi-Concurrent Symposia 0 nary data show that the mutation percentage is stable at different time 13 per 100,000) of ALS are remarkably similar across European and points in pregnancy or in different cells of one embryo. However, PND North American populations. About half of patients die within 3 years of for mitochondrial mutations is complicated by interpretation of test re- symptom onset, usually because of respiratory failure. The only thera- sults, particularly in case of intermediate results. PGD is probably a peutic strategy to slow the disease is currently riluzole, which delays more acceptable option to exclude or reduce the risk of a severely progression by 3-6 months. affected child, but experience is still very limited. In epidemiological studies 1-13% of ALS patients are claimed to have a familial disposition for the syndrome (FALS), most commonly with a s10.1 Mendelian dominant mode of inheritance. Linkage analysis in 18 fa- Alzheimer disease milial ALS pedigrees associated the gene encoding Cu/Zn superoxide P. St.George Hyslop; dismutase (SOD1) on chromosome 21 to the syndrome. Mutational University of Toronto, Faculty of Medicine, Centre for Research in Neurodegen- analysis revealed point-mutations in the SOD1 gene to co-segregate erative Diseases, Toronto, ON, Canada. with the disease in these pedigrees. Subsequent studies have identi- No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. fied over 140 different SOD1 mutations in ALS patients. Mutations in org/eshg2009 for updates. SOD1 can be identified in approximately 12 - 23 % of the patients diagnosed with FALS and in 1 - 4 % of patients diagnosed with SALS s10.2 patients. Other genes linked to 1-3% of familial ALS are ANG, ALS2, Pathways to Parkinsonism VAPB, TARDBP and FUS. M. R. Cookson; In the remaining 90 % of ALS patients where there is no family his- Laboratory of Neurogenetics, NIA, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, tory and the disease is considered to be sporadic (denoted as SALS). United States. Although the genetic contribution to sporadic ALS appears to be con- Parkinson disease (PD) was regarded as the archetypal non-genetic siderable with an estimated heritability ranging 0.35-0.85, the genetics disease for many years but discoveries over the past decade have of this disease remain largely unknown. Candidate gene studies have shown that this is not true. There are two genes that cause autosomal identified potential risk factors, but replication of these associations dominant PD, LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) and SNCA. The has proven to be difficult. Several genome-wide association (GWA) latter gene is interesting because the protein product, α-synuclein, is studies have now been performed in sporadic ALS and have high- deposited in Lewy bodies, the characteristic pathological inclusion of lighted three novel candidate genes (ITPR2, FGGY and DPP6).3-9 Two PD and a related disease, dementia with Lewy bodies. LRRK2 cases independent studies found nominal p-values < 0.05 for DPP6,6,10 but also usually have Lewy bodies, suggesting that these two genes might recent genome-wide efforts could not confirm this association.7,9 The be related to one another. The mechanistic basis of this relationship GWA studies in ALS have been relatively small and as a result of lim- is currently unclear, but both LRRK2 and α-synuclein are reported to ited power may have generated potentially spurious results. In order have roles in neuronal function. LRRK2 has attracted a great deal of to identify truly associated genetic risk factors for ALS, we recently interest as a possible drug target as it has been shown that the kinase performed a two-stage GWA study encompassing 19,838 subjects. activity is required for pathogenic gain of function effects, at least in cell An initial genome-wide screen with 2,323 cases and 9,013 controls culture models. LRRK2 is also a relatively common cause of inherited was followed by a replication experiment of all SNPs with a p-value < disease in several populations, although the decreased penetrance of 1.0x10-4 in an independent cohort of 2,532 cases and 5,940 controls. many mutations has probably contributed to an underestimation of the Genotyping experiments were performed using Illumina BeadChips genetic contribution to PD in prior studies. and KASPAr genotyping technology. Two new candidate loci were Three genes have been reported to cause autosomal recessive par- identified and will be presented. kinsonism, a milder phenotype with earlier onset than typical PD where Lewy bodies are not always present. Recent data suggests that the s11.1 oxidative stress sensor DJ-1, the mitochondrial kinase PINK1 and the Novel insights and challenges from the inborn errors of vitamin E3 protein ubiquitin ligase parkin all play roles in cellular responses B12 metabolism to oxidative stress and possibly by influencing mitochondrial function. D. S. Rosenblatt; This indicates that recessive parkinsonism genes are probably found McGill University, Department of Human Genetics, Montreal, QC, Canada. in a common pathway, although whether this is related to the domi- Over the last few years the discovery of the MMACHC, MMADHC, nant PD pathway is uncertain. There are a number of additional genes and LMBRD1 genes responsible for the cblC, cblD, and cblF inborn (PANK2, PLA2G6, ATP13A2, FBX07, TAF1, and PRKRA) that cause errors of vitamin B metabolism has shed more light on the early steps 12 parkinsonism/dystonia with or without Lewy bodies, whose relation- of intracellular handling of this vitamin. The LMBRD1 gene product is ship to ‘PD’ is also unclear. responsible for the transport of cobalamin out of the lysososome. The As well as mendelian genes, several robust associations between PD MMACHC gene product binds cobalamin, and has been suggested and common genetic variants have been reported. These are currently to play a role in reduction of cob(III)alamin to cob(II)alamin, removal being supplemented by data from genome-wide association studies. of the upper axial ligand and production of the base-off conformation. Although the effect size of most common polymorphisms are quite Epigenetic modification of the MMACHC promoter is associated with a modest, with odds ratios in the range of 1.2-1.4, they suggest that malignant phenotype in a human melanoma cell line. Mmachc knock- even sporadic PD has a partial genetic basis. In this talk, the identity out mice do not survive to term and embryos show neurological ab- of the most robust associations will be discussed as they indicate that normalities consistent with the proposed requirement for vitamin B to 12 the genetic determinants for PD are more likely related to dominant PD prevent neural tube defects. The MMADHC gene product appears to genes, with some interesting additions that are more often thought of play a role in directing cobalamin to the mitochondria or the cytoplasm. as being associated with other neurodegenerative disorders. Overall, Mutations affecting different domains of the MMADHC gene product this data is painting a complex picture of genetic contributions to an ap- may result in decreased synthesis of AdoCbl alone, of MeCbl alone, or parently simple non-genetic disease that leads to a rethinking of views of both cobalamin coenzyme derivatives. about etiology and pathology in PD. The recent expansion of newborn screening has resulted in a number of surprising findings. These include mothers newly diagnosed with an s10.3 inborn error of cobalamin metabolism on the basis of a positive screen- Amyotrophic Lateral sclerosis ing test in their newborn, infants with cobalamin deficiency on the basis L. H. van den Berg; of subclinical cobalamin deficiency in their breast-feeding mothers, in- University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands. fants with a positive newborn screening test who carry mutations previ- Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder ously shown to cause adult onset disease, and a newborn with the first characterized by progressive wasting and weakness of limb, bulbar, mutation in the gene for the transcobalamin receptor. and respiratory muscles. The disease is caused by loss of motor neu- rons in the spinal cord, brainstem, and motor cortex and can occur at any time in adulthood, with a median age of onset in the mid fifties. The incidence (around 1-2 per 100,000 person-years) and prevalence (4-Concurrent Symposia  s11.2 chromosome probes. In this patient, the crypts of the small and large clinical, biochemical and genetic aspects of the methylmalonic intestine were clonal, showing that each was derived at some stage acidaemias from a single cells. However, at least 76 percent of the microadenomas M. R. Baumgartner; were polyclonal in origin (Science 272:1187-90). Previously studies Division of Metabolism, University Children’s Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland. using X-linked genes such as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase Methylmalonic acidurias (MMAurias) are a heterogeneous group of have been handicapped by the need to destroy the tissues to study the inborn errors of metabolism biochemically characterized by the ac- haplotypes of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, but we were able cumulation of methylmalonic acid (MMA) in body fluids and tissues. to directly visualize X-inactivation patches in human females hetero- They result from deficiency of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase apoenzyme zygous for the G6PD Mediterranean mutation (563 C-T). The results (MCM) or by a defect in the synthesis of its cofactor adenosylcobala- showed again that crypts were clonal but crypts formed large families min (AdoCbl). MCM catalizes the conversion of L-methylmalonyl-CoA (Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 3311-3314) to succinyl-CoA thus linking the final catabolic pathways of L-isoleu- We now describe a technique for detecting the expansion of a single cine, L-valine, L-methionine, L-threonine, odd-chain fatty acids, and cell’s progeny that contain clonal mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) muta- cholesterol side chains to the tricarboxylic acid cycle. tions affecting the expression of mtDNA-encoded cytochrome c oxi- Several mutant genetic classes that cause isolated MMAuria are dase (COX). Since such mutations take up to 40 years to become known, based on biochemical, enzymatic and genetic complementa- phenotypically apparent, we believe these clonal patches take origin tion analysis. The deficiencies of the apomutase locus are further sub- in stem cells. Dual-color enzyme histochemistry was used to identify divided into defects without (mut0) and with residual activity (mut-). The COX-deficient cells and mutations confirmed by microdissection of cblA, cblB and the variant 2 form of cblD complementation groups are single cells with polymerase chain reaction sequencing of the entire linked to processes unique to AdoCbl synthesis. The cblC, cblD and mtDNA genome. These techniques have been applied to human in- cblF complementation groups are associated with defective methyl- testine, liver, pancreas and skin. Our results suggest that the stem cell cobalamin synthesis as well resulting in combined MMAuria and ho- niche is located at the base of colonic crypts and above the Paneth cell mocystinuria. Mutations in the genes associated with most of these region in the small intestine, in accord with dynamic cell kinetic studies defects have been described. Finally, a few patients have been de- in animals. In the pancreas, exocrine tissue progenitors appeared to scribed with mild MMAuria associated with mutations of the methyl- be located in or close to interlobular ducts, and in the liver, we propose malonyl-CoA epimerase gene or with neurological symptoms due to that stem cells are located in the periportal region. In the skin, the ori- SUCL mutations. gin of a basal cell carcinoma appeared to be from the outer root sheath The clinical presentation of affected patients is variable. The majority of of the hair follicle. We propose that this is a general method for detect- patients present during the newborn period or infancy with life-threat- ing clonal cell populations from which the location of the niche can be ening metabolic crises resulting in multi-organ failure or even death. inferred, also affording the generation of cell fate maps, all in human These crises are often precipitated by catabolic stress, e.g. induced tissues. The technique also allows analysis of the origin of human tu- by febrile illness. Severe keto- and lactic acidosis, hypo- or hypergly- mors from specific tissue sites (Proc Natl Acad Sci USA; 103:714-9; cemia, neutropenia, hyperglycinemia, and hyperammonemia are the Stem Cells (in press). most common laboratory findings. In a subgroup of patients chronic progressive disease, psychomotor retardation, and failure to thrive s12.2 are the leading symptoms. Although the overall survival has improved mapping mRNA expression QtLs in hematopoietic stem cells during the last two decades, long-term outcome still remains disap- and their progeny pointing. Neurological outcome is often impaired by extrapyramidal G. de Haan; movement disorder and developmental delay. Furthermore, chronic Department of Cell Biology, Section Stem Cell Biology, University Medical Cen- renal failure is frequently found. Patients with mut0 and cblB have an ter Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. earlier onset of symptoms, a higher frequency of complications and A fundamental problem in biology is how a single genome can lead to deaths, and a more pronounced urinary excretion of methylmalonic widely different cellular phenotypes. An illustrative and clinically rel- acid than those with mut- and cblA defects. Reliable classification of evant example is the generation of all mature blood cells types from these patients is essential for ongoing and future prospective studies a small population of hematopoietic stem cells. Identification of gene on treatment and outcome. networks specifying stemness or lineage commitment is of major rel- evance for the emerging fields of tissue engineering and regenerative s11.3 medicine. We developed a genetical genomics approach as a tool to Homocysteine/folate and neural tube defects dissect networks of interacting genes that specify cellular function in H. J. Blom; four developmentally distinct hematopoietic cell stages. We evaluated VU University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Metabolic genome-wide RNA transcript expression in highly purified Lin-Sca-1+c- Unit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. kit+ multilineage cells, committed Lin-Sca-1-c-kit+ progenitor cells, ery- No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. throid Ter119+ and myeloid Gr1+ precursor cells isolated from a large org/eshg2009 for updates. pedigree of genetically related and fully genotyped BXD recombinant mouse strains. Variation in transcript abundance across all strains and s12.1 in all cell types was assessed by Illumina Sentrix Mouse-6 chip tech- Using naturally-occurring mutations to identify stem cell niches, nology, interrogating ~47,000 probesets mapping across of the ge- trace cell lineage and the origins of cancer in humans nome. For each variably expressed transcript genetic linkage analysis N. Wright; identified a quantitative trait locus that affects variation in expression Histopathology Lab, London Research Institute, Cancer Research UK, London, levels of the corresponding gene (eQTL). These eQTLs map in the United Kingdom. vicinity of their target gene (cis-regulation), or map elsewhere in the There have been considerable advances in our understanding of the genome (trans-regulation). organisation of stem cells in epithelial tissues. The identification of reli- Complex transcript profiles for each cell type could be dissected into able stem cell markers has allowed lineage tracing in some tissues, more simple individual gene networks, each consisting of transcripts such as the intestine. But these observations are currently confined whose variation in expression levels are regulated in trans by a single to experimental animals, and the genetic manipulation required is not genomic locus. We identified 1316 regulatory loci with cell-stage-spe- available in humans. We have used a series of naturally-occurring ge- cific activity, including 140 loci that controlled gene expression pre- netic alterations in humans to infer what we think are interesting obser- dominantly in the most primitive hematopoietic cells. We performed hi- vations about human stem cells and the origins of human cancer. erarchical clustering of all genes that were consistently downregulated It is widely accepted that tumors are monoclonal in origin, arising from or upregulated during erythroid or myeloid development and detected a mutation or series of mutations in a single cell and its descend- multiple modules of co-varying transcripts for each set of consistently ants. The clonal origin of colonic adenomas and uninvolved intestinal downregulated or upregulated transcripts. To reveal whether such mucosa from an XO/XY mosaic individual with familial adenomatous modules of transcripts were under common genetic control, we per- polyposis (FAP) was examined directly by in situ hybridization with Y formed eQTL clustering of 52 transcripts that were consistently down-Concurrent Symposia  regulated during both erythroid and myeloid differentiation. A genetic cal sites in situ confirmed this pattern. The proposal that the four cell analysis in revealed co-localization of eQTLs for multiple transcripts, types are indeed constituents of an as of yet undescribed stem cell which confirms shared regulatory relationships. Interestingly, a sub- hierarchy was assessed in long-term cultures in which senescence stantial number of the 52 transcripts were regulated by loci on chromo- was bypassed. These findings identified an adult human breast ductal somes 1, 5, 9, 12, and 18, consistent with earlier QTL studies which stem cell activity and its earliest descendants. documented that these chromosomes contain loci that control the pool Multi-potent progenitor cells are some of the most primitive members size or the turnover of primitive hematopoietic cells. In addition to gene of the developmental hierarchies that maintain homeostasis. That expression data, we have recently embarked on studies aimed to de- progenitors and their more mature progeny share identical genomes termine whether micro-RNA abundance and DNA methylation patterns suggests that fate decisions are directed by interactions with extrinsic are regulated in a strain-dependent way during myeloid and erythroid soluble factors, ECM, and other cells, as well as physical properties of development. the ECM. To understand regulation of fate decisions, therefore, would Our data illustrate how hematopoietic cell differentiation may be the re- require a means of understanding carefully choreographed combina- sult of cell-type dependent rewiring of transcriptional connections. This torial interactions. We used microenvironment protein microarrays to rewiring is observed as switches in correlation patterns, and indicates functionally identify combinations of cell-extrinsic mammary gland pro- reversal of regulatory polarity due to cell-type-specific transcriptional teins and ECM molecules that imposed specific cell fates on bipotent co-factors. Our dataset leads to an unprecedented number of concrete human mammary progenitor cells. Micropatterned cell culture surfaces predictions about the dynamic rewiring of the developmental regula- were fabricated to distinguish between the instructive effects of cell– tory network, which can be followed-up by hypothesis-driven experi- cell versus cell–ECM interactions, as well as constellations of signaling mentation. molecules; and these were used in conjunction with physiologically relevant 3 dimensional human breast cultures. Both immortalized and s12.3 primary human breast progenitors were analyzed (3). We report on the stem cells as common ancestors in a colorectal cancer functional ability of those proteins of the mammary gland that maintain ancestral tree quiescence, maintain the progenitor state, and guide progenitor differ- D. K. Shibata; entiation towards myoepithelial and luminal lineages. (4,5,6,7) USC / Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, Los References: Angeles, CA, United States. 1. Péchoux C, Gudjonsson T, Rønnov–Jessen L, Bissell MJ and Pe- Stem cells can be defined in many ways. One retrospective way to de- tersen OW., Dev Biol. 1999 Feb 1; 206(1):88–99. fine and characterize stem cells is by ancestry. A somatic cell ancestral 2. T. Gudjonsson, R. Villadsen, H. L. Nielsen, L. Ronnov-Jessen, M. J. tree has three types of cells. A start (zygote or first transformed cell), Bissell and O. W. Petersen, Genes Dev., 2002, 16, 693–706. present day cells, and no longer present cells. No longer present cells 3. LaBarge MA, Nelson CM, Villadsen R, Fridriksdottir A, Ruth JR, can be divided into ancestors (with present day progeny) and dead- Stampfer M, Petersen OW and Bissell MJ, Integr Biol. 2009 Jan; ends (no present day progeny). Functionally, ancestors are stem cells 1:70–9. and dead-ends are non-stem cells. Therefore, a somatic cell ancestral 4. O. W. Petersen, L. Ronnov-Jessen, A. R. Howlett and M. J. Bissell, tree is essentially a stem cell tree. In theory, molecular phylogeny can Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1992, 89, 9064–9068. reconstruct ancestral trees by comparing variations between present 5. R. Villadsen, A. J. Fridriksdottir, L. Ronnov-Jessen, T. Gudjonsson, day genomes. Genomes are almost perfect copies of prior copies, and F. Rank, M. A. Labarge, M. J. Bissell and O. W. Petersen, J. Cell Biol., the numbers of random replication error can be used to infer the time 2007, 177, 87–101. back to a common ancestor. Preliminary studies suggest that methyla- 6. M. J. Bissell and M. A. Labarge, Cancer Cell, 2005, 7, 17–23. tion patterns in certain CpG rich regions effectively function as epigen- 7 M A. LaBarge, O. W. Petersen and M. J. Bissell, Stem Cell Rev., etic somatic cell molecular clocks. Methylation patterns sampled from 2007, 3, 137–146. normal colon crypts are consistent with a niche with multiple mitotic stem cells per crypt. Methylation patterns sampled from colorectal can- s13.1 cer glands are diverse and inconsistent with very rare cancer stem Reverse Phenotyping: towards an integrated (epi)genomic cells (CSCs). Simulations suggest that each cancer gland, similar to a approach to complex phenotypes and common disease normal crypt, is also maintained by a stem cell hierarchy and contain S. Beck; multiple CSCs. Potentially it may become practical to read the histories UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom. of human cells from their replication errors, which primarily accumulate What determines a phenotype remains one of the most fundamental in stem cells. questions in biology and medicine. In addition to genetic factors, non- genetic factors such as epigenetic and environmental factors have s12.4 been shown to play important roles. Of the epigenetic factors, meth- Using microenvironmental microarrays to decipher the role of ylation at CpG dinucleotides is the only known biologically relevant the niche signaling in breast progenitor cell fate epigenetic modification at the DNA level in humans and vertebrates in M.A. LaBarge1, R. Villadsen2, O. Petersen2, M. J. Bissell1; general. Knowledge of the methylation status of each of the ~28 mil- 1Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of lion CpG sites (methylome) in the haploid human genome is therefore California, Berkeley, CA, United States, 2Department of Cellular and Molecular of great importance for cellular identity, differentiation, development Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, and Zoophysiological Laboratory, Depart- and, if perturbed, for disease aetiology. To understand the rules gov- ment of Molecular Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. erning DNA methylation and the consequences if DNA methylation is Previously we had shown that within the luminal population of the hu- perturbed requires genome-wide analysis of its temporal and spatial man breast, a subpopulation of cells resembling stem cells could be plasticity. Almost 60 years after the discovery of 5-methyl cytosine and identified (1). These cells contained both luminal and myoepithelial about 25 years since the discovery that altered DNA methylation plays characteristics. Since cellular pathways that contribute to adult human a role in disease (particularly in cancer), technologies for methylome mammary gland architecture and lineages had not been described pre- analysis have finally become available. viously, we identified a candidate stem cell niche in ducts and zones I will present data from our efforts using sequencing- and array-based containing progenitor cells in lobules (2). Putative stem cells residing platforms for high-throughput DNA methylation analysis, discuss some in ducts were essentially quiescent, whereas the progenitor cells in the of the lessons learnt and give an outlook on how the data may be used lobules were more likely to be actively dividing. Cells from ducts and in an integrated approach - termed ‘reverse phenotyping’ - to analyse lobules collected under the microscope were functionally characterized and better understand the (epi)genomics of phenotypic plasticity in by colony formation on tissue culture plastic, mammosphere formation health and disease. in suspension culture, and morphogenesis in laminin-rich extracellular For more details, please visit matrix gels (LrECM). Staining for the lineage markers keratins K14 http://www.ucl.ac.uk/cancer/research-groups/medical-genomics and K19 further revealed multipotent cells in the stem cell zone and three lineage-restricted cell types outside this zone. Multiparameter cell sorting and functional characterization with reference to anatomi-Concurrent Symposia  s13.2 (sarcopenia), cataracts, arterial stiffening, loss of subcutaneous fat, A novel genetic mechanism for Lynch syndrome resulting in reduced stress tolerance and impaired wound healing. We show that heritable somatic methylation of MSH BubR1 hypomorphic mice exhibit high expression of p19Arf in skeletal M. Ligtenberg1,2, R. Kuiper2, T. L. Chan3,4, M. Goossens1, K. Hebeda1, M. muscle and fat. Surprisingly, inactivation of p19Arf exacerbates in vivo Voorendt2, T. Lee3, D. Bodmer2, E. Hoenselaar2, S. Hendriks-Cornelissen1, W. senescence and aging specifically in these tissues, suggesting that Tsui3, C. Kong5, H. Brunner2, A. Geurts van Kessel2, S. Yuen3,4, J. van Krieken1, p19Arf is an attenuator, rather than an effector of aging and senes- S. Y. Leung3,4, N. Hoogerbrugge2; cence. Furthermore, in accordance with a generalized anti-aging ef- 1Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, fect of the p53 pathway, we find that abrogation of p53 also selectively Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Uni- accelerates senescence and aging in skeletal muscle and fat of BubR1 versity Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Department of hypomorphic mice. Importantly, BubR1 hypomorphic mice lacking the Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 4Department cell cycle inhibitor p21, a key target of p53 activation, exhibit the same of Pathology, St. Paul’s Hospital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 5Department of Sur- accelerated aging characteristics and senescent cell accumulation as gery, Yan Chai Hospital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. BubR1 mutants lacking p19Arf or p53, suggesting that p53 exerts its Lynch syndrome (HNPCC) patients are susceptible to colorectal, en- anti-aging effect through p21, and not through targets that mediate dometrial and a range of other cancers due to heterozygous inacti- apoptosis. Based on these data, we propose that chronic stress as- vating mutations in one of the mismatch repair genes, MLH1, PMS2, sociated with BubR1 insufficiency or normal aging, induces a relatively MSH2 or MSH6. In multiple patients with an MSH2-deficient tumor, in mild p53 transcriptional response that instead of promoting aging and whome no germline mutation in MSH2 could be detected, a hetero- senescence acts to attenuate aging by providing stress resistance. zygous germline deletion of 4.9 kb encompassing the last exons of EPCAM (formerly known as TACSTD1) was found. EPCAM is located s14.2 directly upstream of MSH2 and encodes the epithelial cell adhesion Aging and cancer: Rival Demons? molecule Ep-CAM. Due to the deletion of the transcription termination J. Campisi1,2; signal transcription of EPCAM was shown to extend into MSH2. As 1Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkely, CA, United States, 2Buck antisense transcription of CpG islands may lead to methylation, we Institute for Age Research, Novato, CA, United States. tested whether the transcription of the MSH2 promoter would lead to Age is the largest single risk factor for developing cancer. In this re- methylation of its CpG dinucleotides. Indeed, the MSH2 promoter in gard, cancer is no different from a host of other age-related diseases -- cis with the deletion is methylated in Ep-CAM positive, but not in Ep- cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis, neurodegeneration, etc. None- CAM negative, normal tissues, thus revealing a correlation between theless, cancer appears to differ from other age-related pathologies in transcriptional read-through of the mutated EPCAM allele and epigen- conspicuous ways. First, cancer is dominated by hyperproliferation, etic inactivation of the corresponding MSH2 allele. A distinct deletion rather than degeneration. Second, somatic are an essential driving that also includes the 3’ end of EPCAM was detected in two Chinese force behind cancer development, but it is not clear whether is the families, one of which was previously described with mosaic MSH2 case for other aging phenotypes. Third, cancer arises from renewable methylation. Also in these families transcriptional read-through corre- tissues, which promote longevity by allowing repair and regeneration, lates with subsequent promoter methylation. Gene-silencing by tran- but are perennially and inherently at risk for developing malignant tu- scriptional read-through of a neighboring gene as demonstrated here mors due to mutations that can arise during DNA replication. Nonethe- in sense direction for MSH2, has been described earlier in antisense less, mutations are known to accumulate very early in life, and it is now direction for HBA2 in a patient with alpha-thalassemia and thus could clear that mutations alone are rarely enough to fully drive malignant tu- represent a general mutational mechanism. Depending on the expres- morigenesis. How then do fundamental aging processes set the stage sion pattern of the neighboring gene that lacks its normal polyadenyl- for the development of cancer, and do these processes differ from ation signal, this may cause either generalized or mosaic patterns of those that set the stage for other age-related pathologies? We present epigenetic inactivation, that are inherited over generations. Moreover, a model and supporting data to suggest that evolutionarily conserved abrogation of polyadenylation signals due to chromosomal aberrations tumor suppressive pathways, which evolved to protect complex multi- in cancer cells may result in aberrant promoter methylation and inacti- cellular organisms from cancer, can have deleterious late-life effects. vation of tumor suppressor genes. We propose that the evolutionary antagonistic pleiotropy of certain tumor suppressor responses can drive aging phenotypes, including, s13.3 ironically, late-life cancer. We suggest that these deleterious effects Functional mechanism of genomic imprinting arise, in part, from the transcriptional response of normal cells to dam- A. Ferguson-Smith; age and other potentially oncogenic insults, which leads to the secre- University of Cambridge, Department of Physiology, Development and Neuro- tion of factors that can alter normal tissue structure and function, and science, Cambridge, United Kingdom. ultimately create a tissue milieu that is conducive for the development No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. of cancer. This model offers a new paradigm for understanding both org/eshg2009 for updates. aging and cancer phenotypes, and new possibilities for ameliorating the deleterious effects of certain tumor suppressive strategies. s14.1 the P53 pathway acts to delay in-vivo senescence and aging s14.3 J. van Deursen1, D. J. Baker1, C. Perez-Terzic2, F. Jin1, N. J. Niederländer2, K. insulin signalling, ageing and age-related disease Jeganathan1, S. Yamada2, R. Lois2, A. Terzic2; D. Withers; 1Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Centre for diabetes and endocrinology, University College London, London, Medicine, Rochester, MN, United States, 2Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic United Kingdom. College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, United States. Although aging appears to be stochastic in nature, involving accumu- Cellular senescence of cultured cells relies heavily on activation of lation of molecular damage caused by such processes as oxidation the p19Arf-p53 tumor suppressor pathway. This together with the ob- or glycation, the rate of ageing is also influenced by genetic varia- servation that p19Arf expression increases with age in many tissues tion. For example, there are striking differences in longevity between of humans and rodents, led to speculation that p53 activity drives in animal species and mutations in single genes can extend lifespan in vivo senescence and natural aging. However, it has been difficult to laboratory animals. There is growing evidence that the insulin/insulin- experimentally test this hypothesis in vivo using a model system, be- like growth factor (IGF) signalling (IIS) pathway, which has long been cause inactivation of p19Arf or p53 in mice results in early death from known to play pleiotropic roles in the development, growth, reproduc- tumors with 100% penetrance. One approach to test the role of the p53 tion, stress resistance and metabolism of multicellular animals, is a key pathway in organismal aging would be to inactivate p19Arf or p53 in a evolutionarily conserved regulator of longevity. The pleiotropic effects mouse model that develops age-related pathologies at a young age. of IIS upon organismal physiology are largely mediated by intracellu- BubR1 insufficient mice (BubR1 hypomorphic), which die five times lar signalling adaptor proteins the best characterised of which are the faster than wild-type mice, develop a variety of early-aging associ- insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins. We recently undertook a sys- ated phenotypes including cachetic dwarfism, skeletal muscle atrophy tematic analysis of the role of IRS proteins in mammalian lifespan. Fe-Concurrent Symposia  male Irs1-/- mice were long-lived and, importantly, resistant to a range mental defects that include severe craniorachischisis, inner ear de- of age-related pathologies, including skin, bone, immune and motor fects (misorganization of the stereociliary bundles of hair cells of the dysfunction. These improvements in health were seen despite mild, organ of Corti), and cardiac abnormality (aberrant right subclavian ar- life-long insulin resistance. Thus, enhanced insulin sensitivity is not a tery). These results show that genetic interaction between Vangl1 and prerequisite for IIS mutant longevity. Irs1-/- female mice also displayed Vangl2 genes causes neural tube defects. They raise the possibility normal anterior pituitary function distinguishing them from long-lived that interaction between individual Vangl genes and other genetic loci somatotrophic axis mutants. In contrast, Irs2-/- mice were short-lived, and/or environmental factors may additionally contribute to the etiol- while Irs1+/- and Irs2+/- and Irs1+/-:Irs2+/- mice showed normal lifespan. ogy of NTDs. We are currently exploring potential downstream effector pathways that mediate the longevity assurance mechanisms regulated by IRS s15.2 signalling and the role of this signalling pathway in neurodegenerative the ciliopathies: a model for dissecting context-dependent disease. IRS signalling is a key intracellular determinant of age-related pathogenesis health, and hence a potential point of intervention for broad-spectrum, N. Katsanis; preventative therapy against age-related diseases. Johns Hopkins University, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Broadway Research Building, Baltimore, MD, United States. s15.1 No abstract received as per date of printing. Please see www.eshg. Vangl genes and neural tube defects org/eshg2009 for updates. E. Torban1, M. Gravel1, A. Ilisescu1, C. Horth1, G. Andelfinger2, D. J. Epstein Jr.3, P. Gros4; s15.3 1Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Cardio- Graded sonic Hedgehog signaling and the control of Neuronal vascular Genetics Unit, Ste-Justine Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Depart- subtype identity in Vertebrate Embryos ment of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, J. Briscoe; PA, United States, 4Department of Biochemistry, Room 802, McIntyre Medical The National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, London, United Building, 3655, Montreal, QC, Canada. Kingdom. Neural tube defects (NTDs) are very frequent congenital abnormalities Neuronal subtype specification in the vertebrate neural tube is one in humans. Recently, we have documented independent association of of the best-studied examples of embryonic pattern formation. Distinct Vangl1 and Vangl2 gene mutations with NTDs. In the Looptail mouse, neuronal subtypes are generated in a precise spatial order from pro- homozygosity (but not heterozygosity) for loss-of-function alleles at genitor cells according to their location along the anterior-posterior Vangl2 causes the severe NTD craniorachischis, while heterozygosity and dorsal-ventral axes. Underpinning this organization is a complex for mutant variants of VANGL1 is associated with NTDs in a human co- network of multiple extrinsic and intrinsic factors. In ventral regions, hort of sporadic and familial cases. Recent functional studies of Vangl2 the secreted protein Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) acts in graded fashion Looptail alleles (S464N, D255E) show that loss-of-function in these to organize the pattern of neurogenesis. This is a dynamic process two variants is associated with reduced protein stability and absence in which increasing concentrations and durations of exposure to Shh of mature protein at the membrane. To further understand the role of generate neurons with successively more ventral identities. Interac- Vangl1 in normal development, we created a mouse mutant with an tions between the receiving cells and the graded signal underpin the inactivating mutation at Vangl1 (Vangl1gt). Vangl1 shows a dynamic mechanism of Shh action. In particular the transcriptional regulation of pattern of expression in the developing neural tube and notochord at genes induced or repressed by Shh signaling plays an essential role in the time of neural tube closure. Vangl1gt/+ heterozygotes and Vangl1gt/gt shaping the graded readout. Thus the accurate patterning of the neural homozygotes are viable and fertile, although Vangl1gt/gt display subtle tube relies on the continuous processing and constant refinement of alterations in polarity of inner hair cells of the cochlea. Remarkably, the cellular response to graded Shh signaling. and as opposed to healthy Vangl1gt/+and Vangl2lp/+heterozygotes, Vangl1gt/+;Vangl2lp/+ double heterozygotes show profound develop-Concurrent Sessions  c01.1 c01.3 mRNA-seq Whole transcriptome Analysis of a single cell Genomic variation detection by DNA selection and high K. Q. Lao1, F. Tang2, C. Barbacioru1, Y. Wang1, E. Nordman1, C. Lee1, N. Xu1, throughput sequencing X. Wang1, J. Bodeau1, A. Surani23; S. Nikolaev1, C. Iseli2, D. Robyr1, A. Sharp1, J. Rougemont3, C. Gehrig1, L. 1Molecular Cell Biology Division, Foster City, CA, United States, 22Wellcome Farinelli4, S. Antonarakis1; Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute of Cancer and Developmental Biol- 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, ogy, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust/ Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Laus- Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute of Cancer and Developmental Biology, anne, Switzerland, 4FASTERIS SA, Geneva, Switzerland. University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. The resequencing of a targeted region of the genome has become a We developed a digital gene expression profiling assay at single cell major goal in order to understand the correlation between genomic resolution by combining a modified single cell whole transcriptome and phenotypic variability. We have optimized a genomic selection amplification method with the next generation sequencing technique, method for high throughput sequencing. The repeat-masked contigu- SOLiD™ System. Using only a single mouse blastomere, our mRNA- ous region of 8.9Mb was targeted on human chromosomes 21 and Seq assay can detect the expression of 74% (5,270) more genes than 7. We used DNA from an individual from the International HapMap microarray techniques. Moreover, 8 - 19 % of the genes with multiple Project for which the genotype data are available. After microarray- known transcript isoforms express at least two isoforms in the same based enrichment and sequencing of genomic DNA from chromosome blastomere or mature oocyte, which unambiguously demonstrated the 21 we observed a 260-fold enrichment with 41% of reads from the complexity of the transcript variants at whole genome scale. Finally, targeted region. The median coverage of the targeted region using for Dicer and Ago2 knockout oocytes, we also showed that in Dicer two lines of an Illumina GA2 sequencing instrument was 16-fold. We knockout and Ago2 knockout mature oocytes, 1,924 and 1,687 genes also observed that regions with low sequence coverage are AT rich respectively were abnormally upregulated, and 1,343 and 987 tran- and are close to low-complexity DNA stretches. 83% of SNPs have at scripts respectively were downregulated compared to wildtype con- least 4-fold coverage, and 80% of the SNPs identified were already trols, which proves the global importance of small RNAs (including mi- listed in dbSNP. For these dbSNP positions our sequence genotypes croRNAs and endogenous siRNAs) for oogenesis. The main technical are concordant in 92% of cases with previously obtained genotypes of novelty of this work is the combination of an improved unbiased ampli- NA12782. 54% of all dbSNP positions had at least 15-fold sequence fication of cDNAs from single cells with well over a 100 million reads, coverage, the coverage previously estimated as minimal for rigorous or a few gigabases of cDNAs on SOLIDTM. This not only allowed us to SNP search. At this threshold, 98.8% of dbSNP genotypes are concor- discover many novel transcripts that have been overlooked but also dant between sequencing and HapMap data for NA12872. Validation to get a quantitative estimate of their abundance in the cell by the fre- experiments using Sanger sequencing after PCR amplification were quency with which the sequence occurs in the mRNA-Seq reads. This done for 46 SNPs covered 15-20 fold; the confirmation rate obtained single cell mRNA-Seq assay will greatly enhance our ability to analyze was 96%. transcriptome complexity during mammalian development, especially We conclude that DNA selection method could provide an accurate for early embryonic development and for stem cells. and inexpensive search for genomic variability. c01.2 c01.4 integrated analysis of high-resolution transcriptomics data Adult human brain samples deep sequencing of small-RNAs reveals new insights into the differentiation state-dependent reveals specific expression profiles in different brain areas control of transcript isoform abundance E. Martí1,2, L. Pantano1,2, M. Bañez-Coronel1,2, E. Miñones1,2, E. Mateu1,2, S. P. A. C. ‘t Hoen1, M. S. Hestand1, Y. Ariyurek1, A. Klingenhoff2, M. Scherf2, M. Porta1,2, X. Estivill1,2,3; Harbers3, W. van Workum4, G. J. B. van Ommen1, J. T. den Dunnen1; 1Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 2Public 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Genomatix Health and Epidemiology Network Biomedical Research Center (CIBERESP), Software GmbH, München, Germany, 3DNAFORM, Yokohama, Japan, 4Ser- Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 3Pompeu Fabra University (UPF), Barcelona, viceXS B.V., Leiden, The Netherlands. Catalonia, Spain. Around 90% of human genes have been estimated to undergo alter- Small RNAs are non-coding RNAs of 20-30 nt in length, associated native splicing. Apart from switching genes on and off, switching be- with members of the Argonaute family of proteins. Small RNAs are tween transcript isoforms can be used for fine-tuning and orchestra- involved in the guidance of diverse types of gene regulation, tipically tion of cellular differentiation. Using the myoblast cell line C2C12 as resulting in reduced expression of target genes. In the central nervous a well-controlled model for cell differentiation, we applied a variety of system miRNAs are key in developmental processess, contributing to high-resolution genomics technologies to study gene transcription in neuronal cell identity and synapse formation. miRNAs also play a role undifferentiated and differentiated cells. We applied CAGE-Seq (cap in mature neurons, participating in synaptic plasticity and neuronal sur- analysis of gene expression followed by Illumina deep sequencing) to vival. Alterations in miRNA-related pathways have been associated to quantitatively identify the 5’-ends of transcripts, SAGE-Seq to quan- several neurological and neurodegenerative diseases. Here we have tify the 3’-ends of transcripts, and assayed mRNA degradation rates used Illumina/Solexa deep sequencing to extensivelly characterize on Affymetrix exon arrays. We found 1400 transcription start sites not and profile small RNA libraries of three adult brain areas: frontal cor- previously annotated. Around 50% of the expressed genes demon- tex, striatum and amygdala. In all the samples the majority of reads strated use of multiple polyadenylation sites. We observed extensive corresponded to previously annotated miRNAs. The most abundant qualitative and quantitative differences in use of transcription start sequences in all libraries included members of the let-7 family, mir- sites, internal exons, 3’-UTRs, and polyadenylation sites between dif- 29a, mir-1, mir-101 and mir-103 miRNAs. Selective miRNAs were spe- ferentiated myotubes and undifferentiated myoblasts. Splice variants cifically enriched in each brain area. We have found strong variability from some genes were produced at comparable levels, but degraded in the mature miRNA reference sequence, mainly in the form of length with different efficiencies; a transcript from the Itga7 gene with an ad- modifications, that match the precursor sequence of the miRNA. Vari- ditional internal exon was much more abundant in differentiated than in ability was also detected as nucleotide substitutions in the different undifferentiated cells, mainly because of specific and extremely rapid positions of the reference mature miRNA, which was clearly reduced degradation of transcripts lacking this exon. Since it is thought that the in the 5’-seed region. These results suggest a miRNA-signature in the abundance of different splice isoforms is mainly controlled by tissue- different brain areas that may be related with the maintance of the tran- specific splicing factors, this represents a new mechanism to regulate scriptome in each brain structure. The present results further highlight the ratio between different splice isoforms. We conclude that promoter the possible importance of the modified mature miRNA sequences in usage, alternative splicing and RNA degradation must be tightly cou- the physiology and pathology of the adult brain. pled through yet unknown mechanisms.Concurrent Sessions  c01.5 c02.1 Estimation of mUtYH variant frequencies in pooled DNA with Phenotypic and genomic evaluation of 52 subjects with a smith- massive parallel sequencing Magenis-like phenotype: identification of new syndromic regions A. A. Out1, I. J. H. M. van MInderhout1, Y. Ariyurek1,2, C. M. J. Tops1, M. van associated with altered gene dosage Galen1,2, J. J. Goeman3, P. E. Taschner1, K. Schneeberger4, S. Ossowski4, M. S. R. Williams1, S. Girirajan1, D. Tegay2, N. Nowak3, E. Hatchwell4, S. Elsea1,5; H. Breuning1, G. J. B. van Ommen1,2, J. T. den Dunnen1,2, P. Devilee1,5, F. J. 1Dept of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Hes1; Richmond, VA, United States, 2Dept of Medicine, New York College Osteopath- 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, ic Medicine, Old Westbury, NY, United States, 3Dept of Cancer Prevention and Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Leiden Genome Technology Center, Leiden Univer- Population Sciences, University of Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, United States, 4Depts of sity Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Statis- Genetics and Pathology, State University of New York, Stony Brook, NY, United tics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Department States, 5Dept of Pediatrics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, of Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübin- United States. gen, Germany, 5Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Haploinsufficiency of the retinoic acid induced 1 gene (RAI1) results Leiden, The Netherlands. in Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS), which includes developmental To evaluate the suitability of massive parallel sequencing by Illu- delays, sleep disturbance, self-injurious behaviors, and dysmorphic mina/Solexa sequencing technology for variant detection and allele features. We evaluated 52 individuals referred for molecular analysis frequency estimation, we sequenced the MUTYH gene in two pools due to a possible SMS diagnosis. Screening for 17p11.2 deletions and of DNA (from breast cancer patients). A 6 kb long-range PCR (LRP) RAI1 mutations was negative, suggesting that at least one other lo- was designed containing exons 2-16. One pool consisted of 287 ge- cus is responsible for the SMS-like phenotype. This cohort is clinically nomic DNA samples, serving as template for LRP. The second pool indistinguishable from SMS, with >90% overlap with core features, in- consisted of 88 LRP-products derived from individual samples. Equi- cluding developmental delays, sleep disturbance, self-injurious behav- molarity of the constituent samples was calculated from concentration iors, motor dysfunction, obesity, and behavioral anomalies of the same measurements with fluorimetry for genomic DNA and high resolution type and prevalence as seen in SMS. We performed whole genome melting curve analysis (HR-MCA) for LRP-products. Illumina sequenc- array CGH to identify genomic lesions contributing to the SMS-like ing results were compared to Sanger sequencing results of individual phenotypes and identified 15 CNVs/52 cases, including 10 deletions samples. Correlation between allele frequencies detected by both and 5 duplications. These CNVs include novel genomic regions where methods seemed poor in the first pool, probably due to variable DNA altered gene dosage has not been previously associated with any clini- quality among samples, a too large pool size and unequal amplification cal syndrome. We also identified several well-characterized regions caused by an Alu insertion polymorphism. Frequencies correlated well associated with known syndromes, suggesting a need for better clini- in the second pool, which allowed reliable detection of a frequency of 2 cal phenotyping and discrimination between syndromes, as well as in 176 alleles (1.1%) or higher, whereas 2 of the 5 singletons detected possible syndromic associations not previously appreciated. Genes in by Sanger were significantly above background noise in the Illumina these regions contribute to development, neurological function, and output. These results provide directions in designing high-throughput behavior, all of which are affected in SMS. Further, some of these loci analyses of candidate genes in large series of patients and controls. have been associated with autism, schizophrenia, and mental retarda- tion, suggesting possible genetic heterogeneity. Given the phenotypic c01.6 overlap between the SMS and SMS-like cases, these molecular data Next-Generation-sequencing as a promising diagnostic tool in may provide insights into the function of RAI1 and may improve di- heterogeneous genetic conditions: the example of Hypertrophic agnosis, understanding, and potentially treatment of these complex cardiomyopathy behavior and mental retardation syndromes. J. L. Blouin1, C. Iseli2,3, D. Robyr4, A. Munoz4, S. E. Antonarakis4,5, S. Fok- stuen1; c02.2 1Genetic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Ludwig Institute for Cancer Re- Further delineation of the 15q13.3 microdeletion and duplication search, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, syndromes: A clinical spectrum varying from non-pathogenic to Switzerland, 4University of Geneva School of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, a severe outcome 5University of Geneva School of Medicine, Switzerland. B. W. M. van Bon1, H. C. Mefford2, B. Menten3, A. Sharp4, J. W. Innis5, C. van Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common inherited Ravenswaaij6, N. de Leeuw1, A. Kurg7, L. Willatt8, S. Knight9, J. Vermeesch10, cardiac disorder with a remarkable genetic and allelic heterogeneity C. Romano11, J. C. Barber12, G. Mortier3, L. A. Pérez-Jurado13, F. Kooy14, H. G. (> 450 mutations in at least 20 genes). Molecular testing for HCM has Brunner1, E. E. Eichler2, T. Kleefstra1, B. B. A. de Vries1, for the collaborative a growing impact on the medical management of patients/families. To 15q13.3 study group; overcome the extensive genetic heterogeneity we had developed a 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, microarray to resequence 30 Kbp including all exons (n=160), splice- 2University of Washington School of Medicine, Washington, WA, United States, sites and 5’-UTR of 12 HCM genes (HCM-custom-DNA-resequenc- 3Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4University of Geneva Medical ing-array, HCM-RA, Fokstuen et al, 2008). This approach, now used in School, Geneva, Switzerland, 5University of Michigan, Michigan, MI, United diagnostics, is very efficient and cheap but does not detect small indels States, 6University medical centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, (~14% of known HCM mutations). Moreover, HCM-RA lacks flexibility 7University of Tartu/Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 8Addenbrookes hospital, since gene additions require a redesign. Cambridge, United Kingdom, 9Oxford Partnership Comprehensive Biomedical We now present new results obtained using short read next-genera- Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom, 10University hospital Leuven, Leu- tion-sequencing (NGS) of 12 HCM genes (targeted by multi-exonic ven, Belgium, 11I.R.C.C.S. Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, Italy, amplicons) and a new downstream data analysis pipeline. DNAs from 12National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 13niversi- 19 patients (11 without known mutations, 8 positive-controls as a com- tat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 14University Hospital of Antwerp, Antwerp, posite-pool) were assessed in one channel (exp.A). In another chan- The Netherlands. nel (exp.B), we sequenced a single patient with no known mutation. Recently, recurrent 15q13.3 micro-deletions were identified with identi- Mutations were confirmed by classical sequencing. In Exp.A, all the 8 cal proximal (BP4) and distal (BP5) breakpoints and associated with known pathogenic mutations and SNPs previously identified were also mild to moderate mental retardation and epilepsy. found by NGS. Furthermore we identified novel variants: two indels To further asses the clinical implications of this novel 15q13.3 micro- and a nonsense mutation in MYBPC3 gene that likely cause the dis- deletion syndrome 18 new probands and 18 family members with this ease. In Exp.B, no pathogenic mutation but 140 non-coding dbSNPs deletion were molecularly and clinically characterised. Moreover, four were identified. patients with a duplication were studied. Although improvements are needed in target enrichment and data The 15q13.3 micro-deletion caused a clinical spectrum ranging from analysis, NGS holds considerable promises in high-throughput analy- normal development, to learning problems, to mild and even severe sis of mutations/variants underlying the highly heterogeneous or multi- mental retardation. Remarkably, at least 11 of the 18 deletions iden- genic genetic disorders in clinical practice. tified were inherited from a normal parent. Moreover, seven out of ten tested sibs had the same deletion of which one had a mild de-Concurrent Sessions  velopmental delay, four had only learning problems during childhood, Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. whereas the other two had no learning problems at all. Unlike previ- Deletions of chromosome 18q are relatively common. The majority of ous reports, seizures were not a common feature in our series (6%). patients carry a terminal 18q deletion, also known as De Grouchy syn- Three patients had a cardiac defect (8%) and based upon earlier mice drome whereas interstitial 18q deletions have been detected in only a knockdown studies we suggest KLF13 to be an interesting candidate small number of patients. The introduction of high-resolution molecular gene underlying these heart anomalies. Overall, our findings broaden techniques like array CGH allows for the detection of submicroscopic the phenotypic spectrum associated with 15q13.3 deletions and sug- aberrations, leading to an increasing number of patients identified with gest that, in some individuals, deletion of 15q13.3 is not sufficient to small (interstitial) 18q deletions. cause disease. We have identified a (sub)microscopic 18q21 deletion ranging from Psychiatric disease was noted in two of four duplication patients, al- 350 kb to 11 Mb in six sporadic patients with psychomotor retarda- though these patients did not share a recognisable phenotype. tion. In all patients the deleted region included TCF4, the gene as- sociated with Pitt Hopkins syndrome (PHS). Our patients, however, c02.3 did not show the classical PHS phenotype including the intermittent incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity in a series of 11 hyperventilation and facial gestalt as displayed by recently described French patients with 15q13.3 recurrent microdeletion detected patients with TCF4 mutations. using array-cGH. In addition, in a severely mentally retarded female patient with a 1 Mb A. Masurel-Paulet1, J. Andrieux2, C. Le Caignec3, P. Callier4, M. P. Cordier5, duplication including the TCF4 gene was identified. M. Beri6, B. Doray7, E. Flori7, O. Boute8, B. Delobel9, B. Isidor3, S. Jaillard10, We conclude that deletions of the TCF4 gene are not always associ- S. Odent11, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, C. Bidon12, B. Aral13, F. Mugneret4, P. Jon- ated with classical PHS. Although the majority of patients with a mi- veaux14, D. Sanlaville15, L. Faivre1; crodeletion in this region show severe developmental delay, a clear 1Centre de génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de genotype-phenotype correlation is lacking. Furthermore, duplications génétique médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, Lille, France, 3Service of the TCF4 region appear to be rare, leading to a phenotype which de génétique médicale, CHU, Nantes, France, 4Service de cytogénétique, remains to be defined. CHU, Dijon, France, 5Service de génétique, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, CHRU, Lyon, France, 6Laboratoire de génétique, CHU, Nancy, France, 7Service de c02.5 cytogénétique, Hôpital Hautepierre, CHU, Strasbourg, France, 8Service de Another new microdeletion syndrome due to 11q13.2q13.4 génétique clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, Lille, France, 9Centre de cryptic deletion mediated by segmental duplications. génétique chromosomique, Hôpital Saint Vincent de Paul, CHRU, Lillle, France, A. Wischmeijer1, P. Magini1, M. Gnoli1, D. Niedrist2, R. Ciccone3, I. Cecconi4, E. 10Laboratoire de cytogénétique, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 11Service Franzoni4, G. Romeo1, O. Zuffardi3, A. Schinzel2, M. Seri1; de génétique médicale, Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, 12Service de Biologie 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, moléculaire, CHU, Dijon, France, 13Service de biologie moléculaire, CHU, Dijon, Bologna, Italy, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzen- France, 14Service de génétique moleculaire, Hôpital d’adultes, CHU, Dijon, bach, Switzerland, 3Laboratorio di Citogenetica Molecolare, University of Pavia, France, 15laboratoire de cytogénétique, Groupement hospitalier Est, CHU Lyon, Pavia, Italy, 4U.O. Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Uni- Bron, France. versity of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. Since the large implementation of array-CGH in the diagnostic work- By array-CGH, we identified a cryptic deletion of about 3,4 Mb, involv- up of mental retardation, novel microdeletion syndromes have been ing the chromosomal region 11q13.2-q13.4, in a child with psychomo- described. In particular, the 15q13.3 microdeletion has been identi- tor retardation and speech delay. At the breakpoints we found several fied in 0.2-0.3% of individuals with mental retardation and epilepsy, highly homologous segmental duplications that could have mediated schizophrenia, autism and other neuropsychiatric features. The criti- the imbalance through the well studied mechanism of non allelic ho- cal region between BP4 and BP5 contains at least seven genes, in- mologous recombination (NAHR), supporting genomic instability in cluding CHRNA7, which is considered a good candidate gene for the this region that might lead to recurrent chromosomal rearrangements epilepsy phenotype. We report a series of 11 patients (8 index cases and diseases. To our knowledge, this is the first report of an intersti- and 3 affected parents) presenting a developmental delay and a 1.5 tial deletion extending from 11q13.2 to 11q13.4: most of the deletions Mb 15q13.3 recurrent microdeletion ascertained through 11 French reported on chromosome 11 involve the distal portion of the long arm CGH-array platforms. All 8 index cases presented mild to moderate and are originated by the presence of fragile sites or by imprinting mental retardation with absent or non-specific dysmorphic features. mechanisms. Here we demonstrate that proximal 11q deletions might Only two had seizures, 4 had an abnormal electroencephalogram and be generated through NAHR and might account as recurrent rear- none had an autistic behaviour. One patient presented a highly differ- rangements leading to new genomic disorders. Moreover, the detec- ent phenotype, including hydrocephaly, joint dislocations, congenital tion of an overlapping, slightly larger deletion in a second patient who lymphoedema and notable dysmorphic features associated to men- shares several dysmorphic features with the first one, shows that the tal retardation. Familial studies could be performed in 5/8 index pa- haploinsufficiency of this region determines a new clinically defined tients. Interestingly, all 15q13.3 microdeletions were inherited (3 from syndrome mainly characterized by preauricular tag, small low-set ears, the mother, 2 from the father). The affected parents had mild mental tubular somewhat beaked nose with round overhanging tip and hypo- retardation with epilepsy in one. In particular, the microdeletion was plastic nares, short philtrum, small mouth, moderate severe develop- found in 2 completely asymptomatic mothers. This study is in favour mental delay, and severe language delay. of incomplete penetrance and more variable clinical expressivity than previously published. Therefore, the 15q13.3 recurrent microdeletion c02.6 might be only considered as a risk factor for mental retardation. The Retrospective external quality assessment: the french AcLF search for mutations on the second allele of the CHRNA7 gene is in online experience progress in order to explain this incomplete penetrance. M. Doco-Fenzy1, D. Sanlaville2, C. Sarraustre de Menthière3, C. Cartier3, M. Combrisson4, S. Dahoun5, A. Moncla6, F. Mugneret7, L. Taine8, S. Tapia9, F. c02.4 Vialard10, I. Luquet1, F. Thepot11, C. Terre12, J. Dupont13; interstitial 18q21 microdeletions and a microduplication 1Service de Génétique CHU-REIMS, REIMS, France, 2Service de Cytogéné- including the tcF4 gene causing Pitt Hopkins syndrome tique, Hospices civils, Lyon, France, 3Institut de Génétique Humaine - CNRS I. Feenstra1, I. Rayen2, G. Houge3, D. Koolen1, S. Kant4, C. Romano5, S. Price6, UPR1142, Montpellier, France, 4Laboratoire Cytogénétique, Nantes, France, M. Fichera5, S. Reitano5, M. Breuning4, C. Ruivenkamp4, L. Vissers1, J. Velt- 5Laboratoire Cytogénétique, CMU, Genève, Switzerland, 6Département de man1, H. Brunner1, C. van Ravenswaaij-Arts7, B. de Vries1; Génétique Médicale, hôpital Timone enfant, Marseille, France, 7Laboratoire de 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, Cytogénétique, CHU, Dijon, France, 8Service de Cytogénétique,CHU Pellegrin, 2Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, 3Haukeland University Hos- Bordeaux, France, 9Laboratoire LCL, Paris, France, 10Laboratoire Cytogéné- pital, Bergen, Norway, 4Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Neth- tique, CHI, Poissy Saint Germain, France, 11Agence de Biomédecine, Paris, erlands, 5I.R.C.C.S. Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, Italy, 6North- France, 12Laboratoire de cytogénétique, Hôpital Mignot, Le Chesnay, France, hampton General Hospital, Northhampton, United Kingdom, 7University MedicalConcurrent Sessions  13Laboratoire Cytogénétique, hôpital Cochin, Paris, France. France, 9CHU de Lyon, Lyon, France, 10CSS-Mendel Institute, Roma, Italy, The External Quality Assessment (EQA) in cytogenetics was under- 11Hopital . F. Hached, Sousse, Tunisia. taken in France since 2005 and the ACLF (Association des Cytogé- Meckel syndrome (MKS) is a lethal polymalformation syndrome char- néticiens de Langue Française) has set up a computerised database acterised by cystic kidneys, polydactyly, a bile duct proliferation of liver, for a constitutional retrospective EQA and a prospective EQA in onco- and a brain malformation, mainly an occipital encephalocele. Joubert haematology (Groupe Français Cytogénétique Hémato-Oncologique) syndrome (JS) is a neurological disorder, characterized by neurologi- (http://www.eaclf.org/infoCQE). cal signs ascribed to a cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and a character- The purpose of the retrospective EQA is to assess the technical quality istic “molar tooth sign” on brain axial images. Other variable features of the laboratories and the biological and clinical interpretation of the define the cerebello-oculo-renal syndrome (CORS). Allelism of Joubert results. The participant laboratories submit, online, reports concluded and Meckel syndromes has been described at 3 loci : TMEM67/MKS3, in the previous year, with three corresponding pictures of the karyo- CEP290/MKS4, RPGRIP1L/MKS5. Very recently a same homozygous types. All the reports are anonymised for the patient’s name and the splice mutation in the CC2D2A gene was reported in Finnish fetuses laboratory origin. The database enables a rapid, and secured handling with MKS defining the 6th MKS locus. Short after, CC2D2A mutations of the assessed reports and pictures. The assessors are licensed in Joubert patients were reported (JBTS9). cytogeneticist divided into 5 groups. They examine the reports and Here we report the mutation and expression analysis of the CC2D2A transmit back their conclusions to the database. The final results are gene during human development. We identified mutations in 11 MKS saved and delivered anonymously by mail. A total of 50/70 laboratories cases, of various ethnic origin, all predicting truncating alleles. These participate in prenatal or/and postnatal scheme. In 2007, 131 postna- results confirm the involvement of CC2DA in MKS and show it major tal reports and 181 prenatal (131 amniotic fluids + 50 chorionic villi) contribution to the disease.We also identified missense CC2D2A mu- reports were uploaded. This represents 934 evaluated mitosis. The tations in two JS cases. Our data suggest a strong phenotype geno- results showed that 74,3% of the reports had 3/3 correct classified type correlation as null alleles were found in MKS while missense/hy- karyotypes in R and/or G banding. The participants evaluated correctly pomorphic mutations in at least one allele were found in all but one the resolution level in 76,1% mitosis. Interpretation of the cases was Joubert cases to date. correct in 94,87% but ISCN nomenclature was wrong in 26.7% reports. These results will help in improving the practice and quality in cytoge- c03.3 netic laboratories (accredited or submitting for accredidation) and to cA8 mutations cause a novel syndrome characterized by ataxia the accredidation of the test itself . and mild mental retardation with predisposition to quadrupedal gait c03.1 S. Türkmen1, G. Guo1, M. Garshasbi2,3, K. Hoffmann1, A. Alshalah4, K. Kahrizi3, Joubert syndrome and related cerebellar disorders among A. Tzschach5, A. Kuss5, A. Kuss5, H. Najmabadi3, H. Ropers5, N. Humphrey6, S. Egyptian patients: clinical and genetic heterogeneity Mundlos1,5, P. Robinson1; M. S. Zaki1, A. K. Abdel Aleem1, G. M. H. Abdel Salam1, S. L. Bielas2, J. L. 1Charité Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany, 2Max Planck Instiute for Molecular Silhavy2, D. Swistun2, S. E. Marsh2, J. G. Gleeson2; Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Genetics Research Center, Islamic Republic of 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Iran, 4University of Babylon, Iraq, 5Max Planc Institute for Molecular Genetics, Department of Neuroscience, San Diego, CA, United States. Berlin, Germany, 6Centre for Philosophy of Natural and Social Science, London, Joubert syndrome and related cerebellar disorders (JSRD) are a group United Kingdom. of autosomal recessive conditions characterized by hypotonia, ataxia, We describe a consanguineous Iraqi family in whom affected siblings dysregulated breathing rhythms, oculomotor apraxia, intellectual dis- had mild mental retardation and congenital ataxia characterized by abilities and the unique pathognomonic finding “molar-tooth sign” quadrupedal gait. Genome-wide linkage analysis identifed a 5.8 Mb in- (MTS) on brain imaging. There is a pleiotropic phenotypic presenta- terval on chromosome 8q with shared homozygosity among the affect- tion with various organs involvement including retina, kidney and liver, ed persons. Sequencing of genes contained in the interval revealed a along with polydactytly and facial dysmorphisms explaining the genetic homozygous mutation, S100P, in carbonic anhydrase related protein heterogeneity. We present 54 patients with JSRD derived from 34 fam- 8 (CA8), which is highly expressed in cerebellar Purkinje cells and ilies. Consanguinity was positive in 88.8% of cases. Their age ranged influences inositol triphosphate (ITP) binding to its receptor ITPR1 on from 3 months to 38 years old. Based on the previous proposed clas- the endoplasmatic reticulum and thereby modulates calcium signaling. sification of JSRD into 4 major subtypes, our patients were catego- We demonstrate that the mutation S100P is associated with protea- rized as classic Joubert syndrome in 32 families, COACH syndrome some-mediated degradation, and thus presumably represents a null in 5 families, CORS in one family and OFD IV in 2 families. Linkage mutation comparable to the Ca8 mutation underlying the previously analysis was done to NPHP1, AHI1, CEP290, TMEM67, RPGRIPL1, described waddles mouse, which exhibits ataxia and appendicular ARL13B and CC2D2A. Four families family were linked to one of the dystonia without pathological four known genetic loci; three of them showed novel AHI1 mutations abnormalities of either the central or the peripheral nervous systems. (JBTS3) and a single family to JBTS1. Mutation in the INPP5E gene, Subsequently, we identifed the mutation R237Q in a highly conserved encoding inositol polyphosphate-5-phosphatase E (INPP5E), which region of CA8 in an unrelated Iranian family with mild mental retar- hydrolyzes the 5-phosphate of phosphoinositides PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 and dation and ataxia without quadrupedal gait. Magnetic resonance im- PtdIns(4,5)P2 has been recently identified in a single family. INPP5E aging studies of an affected person revealed no structural cerebral localized to cilia in the major organs affected in JS and its mutations or cerebellar abnormalities. Our findings underline the importance of promoted destabilization of cilia in response to stimulation. The rest ITP-mediated signaling in cerebellar function and provide suggestive of families were excluded from known and recently identified loci and evidence that congenital ataxia paired with cerebral dysfunction may, are currently subjected to genome-wide linkage scans to identify novel together with unknown contextual factors during development, predis- loci. This work shows clearly clinical and genetic heterogeneity of Jou- pose to quadrupedal gait in humans. bert syndrome. c03.4 c03.2 search for genes implicated in new forms of recessive ataxia CCDA mutations in meckel and Joubert syndromes, a strong M. Assoum1, M. A. Salih2, N. Drouot1, D. H’Mida-Ben Brahim1, C. Lagier- genotype phenotype correlation Tourenne1, A. Aldriss3, S. A. Elmalik3, T. S. Ahmed3, M. Z. Seidahmed4, M. M. S. Zerelli1, S. Thomas1, E. Szenker1, S. Audollent2, S. Romano2, C. Babarit1, M. Kabiraj5, M. Koenig1; Gonzales3, R. Salomon4, P. Loget5, Y. Hillion6, J. Roume7, S. Khung8, R. Bou- 1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2Division of Pediatric Neurology, College of Medicine, vier9, J. Martinovic2, M. C. Gubler4, N. Boddaert2, A. Munnich1,2, F. Encha-Raza- King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Department of Physiology, Col- vi1,2, E. M. Valente10, A. Saad11, S. Saunier4, M. Vekemans1,2, T. Attié-Bitach1,2; lege of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4Department 1INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 2Hopital Necker, of Pediatrics, Security Forces Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 5Department of APHP, Paris, France, 3Hopital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 4INSERM Neurosciences, Armed Forces Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. U574, Paris, France, 5Anatomopathologie, Rennes, France, 6Anatomopathol- Autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias are a heterogeneous group of gie, Poissy, France, 7Génétique, Poissy, France, 8Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, neurological disorders characterized by the degeneration or abnormalConcurrent Sessions  development of the cerebellum and/or the spinal cord, and, in most expansion in unrelated disease proteins. PolyQ expansion confers to cases, by onset before the age of 20 years. Causative genes have mutant proteins a toxic gain of function, which compromises neuro- been identified for the most frequent forms of autosomal recessive nal function and survival. However, the molecular and cellular mecha- ataxia. Nonetheless, genes remain unidentified for about half of the nisms underlying polyQ expansion toxicity remain unclear. cases. SCA7 is unique among polyQ diseases to cause retinal degeneration A SNP-based genome-wide scan in a consanguineous family with 3 and blindness. To get insight into the mechanisms of polyQ toxicity, we affected siblings allowed us to identify a novel locus for autosomal are studying the SCA7 retinopathy in the R7E transgenic mice, which recessive ataxia on chromosome 3qter. By direct sequencing of genes express the polyQ expanded ataxin-7 under the rhodopsin promoter. in this family, we have identified a homozygous frameshift mutation Initial studies showed that R7E retinopathy was characterized by a shared by the patients and heterozygous or absent from the 5 healthy progressive reduction of photoreceptor segments and of electroretino- siblings. The patients have an early onset of ataxia before 7 years graph (ERG) activities, however, without extensive loss of photorecep- associated with delayed motor development, dysarthria, epilepsy with tors. That differed R7E retinopathy from other retinal degenerations in no relapse observed after treatment since 3 years of age. Two of the mammalian (inherited or light-induced), in which degenerative outer patients present also mental retardation. Nerve conduction studies re- segment disappearance is typically followed by photoreceptor death. vealed no evidence of associated peripheral neuropathy. Bioinformat- We now describe the morphological deconstruction of R7E photore- ics predictions show that the homologs of the mutant gene belong to ceptor cells, which is reminiscent of the structural reorganization that a subfamily of genes coding for Plekstrin homology domain. A close assures the survival of photoreceptors in some retinal detachment plekstrin homolog may be linked to small GTPase signaling and colo- paradigms. Moreover, a subset of R7E photoreceptors migrate out of calizes with late endosomal/lysosomal vesicles in osteoclast-like cells, outer nuclear layer, die by non-apoptotic cell death and thereby cause suggesting a putative function in vesicular transport in the osteoclasts. a continuous loss of photoreceptor cells along the pathology. Remark- These data suggest that our recessive ataxia gene is involved in mem- ably, some photoreceptors expressing mutant ataxin-7 undergo cell brane signaling, a function that can now be tested by molecular studies division and likely contribute to maintain the photoreceptor cell popula- in order to understand the mechanism of this novel form of recessive tion until late disease stage. ataxia. In conclusion, in response to ataxin-7 toxicity photoreceptors undergo a wide range of cell fate, including adaptative deconstruction, lethal c03.5 migration and proliferative cell renewal. tRNA Splicing Endonuclease mutations cause Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia c04.1 Y. Namavar1, P. Kasher1, B. S. Budde2, P. G. Barth3, B. Poll-The3, K. Fluiter1, spondylocheiro dysplastic form of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome E. Aronica1, A. J. Grierson4, P. van Tijn5, F. van Ruissen1, M. Weterman1, D. - A novel recessive entity caused by mutations in the zinc Zivkovic5, P. Nürnberg2, F. Baas1; transporter gene sLc39A13 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Cologne Center C. Giunta1, C. Bürer-Chambaz1, N. H. Elçioglu2, B. Albrecht3, G. Eich4, A. R. of Genomics and Institute of Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 3Emma Children’s Janecke5, M. Kraenzlin6, H. Yeowell7, M. Weis8, D. R. Eyre8, B. Steinmann1; Hospital/ Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Academic 1Division of Metabolism, Univ. Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 2De- Unit of Neurology, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 5Hubrecht partment of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, Pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH) represents a group of neurodegen- 4Pediatric Radiology, Kantonspital Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland, 5Division of Clini- erative autosomal recessive disorders with prenatal onset (PCH1-6). cal Genetics, Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 6Division of Endocrinology Children suffer from severe mental and motor impairments due to at- and Diabetes, University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland, 7Division of Dermatology, rophy or hypoplasia of the cerebellum, hypoplasia of the ventral pons, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States, 8Department of microcephaly and variable neocortical atrophy. The disease is progres- Orthopaedics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. sive and usually patients die before they reach adulthood. We present clinical, radiological, biochemical and genetic findings on We identified a common mutation in TSEN54 (A307S) in the major- six patients from two consanguineous families who show EDS-like fea- ity of European PCH2 patients. TSEN54 is one of the four subunits tures and radiological findings of a mild skeletal dysplasia. The EDS- of the tRNA splicing endonuclease (TSEN34, TSEN2 and TSEN15). like findings comprise hyperelastic, thin, and bruisable skin; hypermo- The TSEN complex is responsible for the splicing of intron containing bility of the small joints with a tendency to contractures; protuberant tRNAs and also plays a role in pre-mRNA 3’end formation. In PCH eyes with bluish sclerae; hands with finely wrinkled palms, atrophy of patients without the A307S mutation, we identified other missense and the thenar muscles and tapering fingers. The skeletal dysplasia com- nonsense mutations in TSEN54 , TSEN34 and TSEN2 subunits. prises platyspondyly with moderate short stature, osteopenia, and In situ hybridization for TSEN54 using LNA/2OME probes revealed widened metaphyses. Patients have an increased ratio of total urinary that TSEN54 is highly expressed in neurons of the pons, cerebellar pyridinolines, lysyl pyridinoline/hydroxylysyl pyridinoline (LP/HP), of ~ dentate and olivary nuclei. 1 as opposed to ~ 6 in EDS VI or ~ 0.2 in controls. Lysyl and prolyl Northern blot analysis of tRNA-Tyrosine from fibroblasts of 3 patients residues of collagens were underhydroxylated despite normal lysyl hy- did not show unspliced products. droxylase and prolyl 4-hydroxylase activities; underhydroxylation was The molecular mechanism behind pontocerebellar hypoplasia remains a generalized process as shown by mass spectrometry of the α1(I)- unclear. In order to study the mechanisms underlying PCH we per- and α2(I)-chain derived peptides of collagen type I and involved at formed knock down experiments in zebrafish. Injection of TSEN54 or least collagen types I and II. A genome-wide SNP-scan and sequence TSEN2 morpholino oligonucleotides in zebrafish embryos results in analyses identified in all patients a homozygous c.483_491del9 muta- similar neurodevelopmental phenotypes, most prominently affecting tion in SLC39A13 that encodes for a membrane-bound zinc transporter brain development. SLC39A13. We hypothesize that an increased Zn++ content inside the endoplasmic reticulum competes with Fe++, a cofactor which is nec- c03.6 essary for hydroxylation of lysyl and prolyl residues, and thus explains Retinal neurone remodelling induced by polyglutamine toxicity the biochemical findings. These data suggest a novel entity which we in a scA7 mouse model have designated “spondylocheiro dysplastic form of EDS (SCD-EDS)” Y. Trottier1, M. Yefimova2,1, N. Messaddeq1, C. Jacquard3,1, C. Weber1, L. to indicate a generalized skeletal dysplasia involving mainly the spine Jonet4, J. Jeanny4; (spondylo) and striking clinical abnormalities of the hands (cheiro) in 1Institute of Genetic and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Illkirch, France, 2Sech- addition to the EDS-like features. enov institue of evolutionary physiology and biochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Neuroscience of Montpellier, U583, Montpellier, France, 4Inserm UMRS 872, Centre de recher- che des Cordeliers, Paris, France. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7) belongs to a group of nine in- herited neurodegenerative disorders caused by polyglutamine (polyQ)Concurrent Sessions 0 c04.2 the epidermal architecture, rudimentary hair follicles, and significant Frontorhiny, a distinctive presentation of frontonasal dysplasia changes in epidermal expression markers, indicating the essential role caused by recessive mutations in the ALX3 homeobox gene of ALX4 also in skin structure and proper hair follicle development. S. R. F. Twigg1, S. L. Versnel2, G. Nurnberg3, M. M. Lees4, M. Bhat5, P. Ham- This CRANIRARE consortium study is supported by Turkish Research mond6, R. C. M. Hennekam4,6, J. M. Hoogeboom2, J. A. Hurst7, D. Johnson7, A. Council(TUBITAK) as a partner of European Research Area Network A. Robinson6, P. J. Scambler6, D. Gerrelli6, P. Nurnberg3, I. M. J. Mathijssen2, A. O. M. Wilkie1,7; c04.4 1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Erasmus Medical Centre, Rot- tRPs1, a regulator of chondrocyte proliferation and terdam, The Netherlands, 3University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Great differentiation, interacts with the activator form of GLi3 Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, United Kingdom, 5Centre for F. J. Kaiser1, M. Wuelling2, L. A. Buelens2, D. Braunholz1, R. Depping3, G. Gil- Human Genetics, Bangalore, India, 6Institute of Child Health, London, United lessen-Kaesbach1, A. Vortkamp2; Kingdom, 7Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom. 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, We describe a recessively inherited and distinctive frontonasal mal- Essen, Germany, 3Institut für Physiologie, Lübeck, Germany. formation characterized by hypertelorism, wide nasal bridge, short The TRPS1 gene on human chromosome 8q24.1 encodes a multi nasal ridge, bifid nasal tip, broad columella, widely separated slit-like zinc finger transcription factor protein. Mutations in TRPS1 cause the nares, long philtrum with prominent bilateral swellings, and midline tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome (TRPS). Besides typical craniofacial notch in the upper lip and alveolus. Additional recurrent features pres- anomalies, skeletal malformations are characteristic hallmarks of pa- ent in some individuals include ptosis and midline dermoid cysts of tients with TRPS. craniofacial structures. Assuming recessive inheritance we carried out Here we show that TRPS1 interacts with Indian hedgehog (Ihh)/GLI3 autozygosity mapping and found linkage to chromosome 1p13.3 in 3 signalling and regulates chondrocyte differentiation and proliferation. independent families. Three different homozygous pathogenic muta- By immunoprecipitation assays using transiently transfected cells as tions were detected in the outstanding candidate gene in this region, well as native tissue samples from embryonic mouse limbs, we could the aristaless-related ALX homeobox 3 transcription factor, ALX3. demonstrate that TRPS1/Trps1 specifically interacts with the activa- Subsequently, we ascertained 4 more families with a further 4 differ- tor form of GLI3/Gli3, whereas a direct binding of the repressor form ent mutations. All of the mutations are predicted to lead to severe or of GLI3/Gli3 could be excluded. GST pull-down experiments were complete loss of function and consisted of missense substitutions at used to verify the interaction of the isolated GLI3 activator domain with critical positions within the conserved homeodomain, as well as non- TRPS1. Through the use of different truncated TRPS1 constructs, a sense, frameshift and splice site mutations. Our findings contrast with domain of 185 aa, containing three predicted zinc fingers, was shown previous studies in the mouse, which showed no phenotype in Alx3- to be sufficient for the interaction with GLI3. /- homozygotes, apparently owing to functional redundancy with the Using different mouse models we find that in distal chondrocytes Trps1 paralogous Alx4 gene. However, we demonstrate that both ALX3 and and the repressor activity of Gli3 are required to expand distal cells ALX4 are expressed in the developing frontonasal region in human and locate the expression domain of Parathyroid hormone related pep- embryos. We conclude that ALX3 is essential for normal facial devel- tid. In columnar proliferating chondrocytes Trps1 and Ihh/Gli signal- opment in humans and that deficiency causes a clinically recognisable ling have an activating function. The differentiation of columnar and phenotype, which we term frontorhiny. hypertrophic chondrocytes is supported by Trps1, independent of Gli3. Trps1 seems thus to organize chondrocyte differentiation interacting c04.3 with different subsets of co-factors in distinct cell types. ALX dysfunction disrupts craniofrontonasal and hair follicle development c04.5 N. A. Akarsu1, H. Kayserili2, E. Uz1, C. Niessen3, I. Vargel4,5, Y. Alanay6, G. Homozygous disruption of an extracellular matrix component Tuncbilek4, G. Yigit7, O. Uyguner2, S. Candan2, H. Okur8, S. Kaygin9, S. Balci6, cause temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome E. Mavili4, M. Alikasifoglu1, B. Wollnik7; Y. Li1, S. Temtamy2, K. Laue3, M. Aglan2, B. Pawlik1, G. Nürnberg4, P. Nürn- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 2De- berg4, M. Hammerschmidt3, B. Wollnik1; partment of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, 1University of Cologne, Institute of Human Genetics and Center for Molecular Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Cologne, Germany, 2Department of Clinical Ge- Germany, 4Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Hacettepe Uni- netics, Division of Human Genetics & Human Genome Research, National versity, Ankara, Turkey, 5Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 3Institute for Developmental Biology, University Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey, 6Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Cologne Center for Genomics and Institute for Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 7Institute of Human Genetics and Center Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. of Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, The Temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome (TPBS, OMIM 605282) 8Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 9Hemosoft,Inc, is an autosomal recessively inherited congenital syndrome character- Ankara, Turkey. ized by bilateral symmetrical preaxial brachydactyly and hyperpha- Two families with a severe cranio-fronto-facio-nasal malformation syn- langism of digits, multiple congenital anomalies, mental retardation, drome characterized by frontonasal dysostosis, large cranial skull de- sensorineural deafness, and growth retardation. Skeletal anomalies fects, associated with total alopecia, hypogonadism and cryptorchism in TPBS patients include progressive kyphoscoliosis and pectus ex- were presented as a novel clinical entity at the last ESHG conference cavatum. in Barcelona (Abstract No:C01.6). Using Affymetrix 250K SNP Array We used a homozygosity mapping strategy in two consanguineous genotyping and a homozygosity mapping, we identified the locus for Egyptian families with TPBS, including the original family described this entity on chromosome 11p11.2-q12.3. The ALX4 gene was tested by Temtamy, to map the TPBS locus. Linkage analysis with Affyme- as a highly relevant candidate in the 19.8 Mb critical interval, and we trix 250K SNP array in both families identified the locus on the long found the homozygous nonsense mutation, p. R265X (c.793C>T), in arm of chromosome 15. We tested several highly relevant positional affected individuals of both families. One heterozygous parent showed candidate genes located within the 2 Mb critical region and found two parietal foramina in the radiological evaluation. Alx4 plays an important homozygous causative mutations in one of these genes, named here role in the development of structures derived from craniofacial mes- TPBS1. A homozygous 1-bp deletion c.14delG in exon 1 was found in enchyme, first branchial arch and the limb bud. Heterozygous ALX4 one family, while the index patient of the second family carried a homo- mutations were described in patients with parietal foramina. To date, zygous 30-bp deletion, c.44_73del30, also located in exon 1. Both mu- no homozygous ALX4 mutations have been reported in human. RNA tations were not present in 120 healthy controls. The encoded protein studies on primary fibroblast cell lines from our patients indicated that is an extracellular matrix (ECM) component involved in the regulation the mutated ALX4 transcript is present and not degraded by nonsense- of cartilage growth activity. We used a morpholino knockdown strat- mediated mRNA decay. The mutation is predicted to cause a trunca- egy in zebrafish for further functional characterization of the encoded tion of the ALX4 protein within the functionally essential homeodomain, protein. Currently, the observed developmental phenotype of these most likely leading to impairment of DNA binding. Histological and im- zebrafishes is analyzed in detail and will give novel insights into the munohistological analysis of patient’s skin biopsy showed changes in pathophysiology of Temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome.Concurrent Sessions  c04.6 ant individuals and type 2 diabetes patients based on the 19 variants. Duplication of the EFNB1 gene in familial hypertelorism: We found an area under the ROC curve of 0.60. Two-way gene-gene imbalance in ephrin-b1 expression and abnormal phenotypes in interaction showed few nominal interactions. humans and mice Conclusion: The 19 validated variants enables detection of subgroups C. Babbs1, H. Stewart2, L. Williams3, L. Connell3, A. Goriely1, S. R. F. Twigg1, K. in substantial increased risk of type 2 diabetes, however the discrimi- Smith3, T. Lester3, A. O. M. Wilkie1; nation between glucose tolerance and type 2 diabetes is still too inac- 1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United curate to achieve clinical value. Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Genetics Laboratories, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. c05.2 Familial Hypertelorism, characterised by widely spaced eyes, classi- Joint re-analysis of twenty-nine correlated sNPs supports the cally shows autosomal dominant inheritance (Teebi type), but some role of PcLO/Piccolo as a causal risk factor for major depressive pedigrees are compatible with X-linkage. No pathogenic mechanism disorder has been described previously, but clinical similarity has been noted to Z. Bochdanovits1, A. van der Vaart2, M. Verhage2, A. Smit2, E. de Geus2, D. craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS), which is caused by mutations in Posthuma2, D. Boomsma2, B. Penninx1, W. Hoogendijk1, P. Heutink1; the X-linked EFNB1 gene. 1VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Vrije Universiteit, Amster- Here we report a family in which females in three generations pre- dam, The Netherlands. sented with hypertelorism, but lacked either craniosynostosis or a The first genome-wide association study (GWAS) for major depres- grooved nasal tip, excluding CFNS. DNA sequencing of EFNB1 was sive disorder (MDD) has implicated the pre-synaptic protein Piccolo, normal, but MLPA indicated a duplication of all 5 exons of EFNB1, but results from multiple replication cohorts remained inconclusive. We which segregated with the hypertelorism. We characterised the dupli- propose a simple method for the joint (re-)analysis of multiple SNPs, cation breakpoint sequence, revealing a direct duplication of 937 kb based on published summary data. Our approach is based on two including EFNB1 and two flanking genes, PJA1 and STARD8. By use observations. Firstly, finemapping studies are focused, by design, on of Pyrosequencing, we measured imbalance of EFNB1 expression in a limited number of moderately to strongly correlated SNPs. All test- the affected grandmother. After correction for skewed X-inactivation, ed SNPs are expected to reflect the true association of the unknown we show that the X chromosome bearing the duplicated EFNB1 genes causal variant proportional to their LD with it, in concordance with the produces approximately twice as much EFNB1 transcript as the nor- “Fundamental Theorem of the HapMap”. Secondly, given such corre- mal X chromosome. lated SNP data it has been suggested before that a joint analysis of all We propose that in the context of X-inactivation, the difference in ex- markers together is most powerful for detecting a true association. A pression level of EFNB1 between the normal and duplicated X chro- closer examination of the results reported in the GWAS study reveals mosomes results in abnormal cell sorting during embryogenesis, lead- that the data indeed concur with the ”Theorem of the HapMap”. Based ing to hypertelorism. To support this hypothesis we provide evidence on the above we re-analyzed the replication data using a novel joint from a mouse model carrying a hypomorphic Efnb1 allele, that ab- test of association and conclude and the results strongly favors Piccolo normal cell sorting occurs in the cranial region. Hence we propose to be a causal risk factor for major depression. This study was per- that X-linked cases resembling Teebi hypertelorism may have a similar formed within the framework of Top Institute Pharma project: number pathogenesis to CFNS, and that cellular mosaicism for different levels T5-203. of ephrin-b1 (as well as simple presence/absence) leads to craniofa- cial abnormalities. c05.3 Unified framework for epistasis detection in (un)relateds c05.1 K. Van Steen1,2, T. Cattaert1, M. Calle3; combined analysis of 19 common validated type 2 diabetes 1Montefiore Institute, Liège, Belgium, 2GIGA, Liège, Belgium, 3University of Vic, susceptibility gene variants show moderate discriminative value Vic, Spain. and no evidence of gene-gene interaction When searching for epistatic patterns parametric regression ap- T. Sparso1, N. Grarup1, C. Andreasen1, A. Albrechtsen2, J. Holmkvist1, G. An- proaches have severe limitations when there are too many indepen- dersen1, T. Jørgensen3,4, K. Borch-Johnsen1,5, A. Sandbæk6, T. Lauritzen6, S. dent variables in relation to the number of observed outcome events. Madsbad7, T. Hansen1,8, O. Pedersen1,7; Alternatively, the non-parametric Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction 1Hagedorn Research, Gentofte, Denmark, 2Department of Biostatistics, Univer- method, MDR (Ritchie et al. 2001), can be applied. The common fea- sity of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Research Centre for Prevention ture of MDR and its extensions is that they are extremely computer- and Health, Glostrup University Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, 4Faculty of Health intensive, that best models are evaluated on the basis of cross-valida- Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Faculty of Health Science, Uni- tion (prediction accuracy measures) and permutations and that only versity of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark, 6Department of General Practice, Institute one such best model is proposed when looking at interactions of a of Public Health, Aarhus, Denmark, 7Faculty of Health Science, University of particular order. Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 8Faculty of Health Sciences, University We propose a novel unified multifactor dimensionality reduction strat- of Southern Denmark, Denmark. egy for genetic interaction association analysis that can handle both Background: The list of validated type 2 diabetes susceptibility variants unrelated individuals and families of any structure, different outcome has recently been expanded from three to 19. The identified variants types (e.g., categorical, continuous or survival type), easy covariate are common and have low penetrance in the general population. The handling or adjustment for lower order interactions or confounding aim of this study was to examine for gene-gene interactions and inves- factors, all within the same framework. When applied to family data, tigate the combined effect of the 19 variants by applying receiver op- we obtain a less computationally intensive method than current MDR erating characteristics (ROC) to demonstrate the discriminatory value adaptations to family-data and allow several clusters of markers to be between glucose-tolerant individuals and type 2 diabetes patients in a proposed as showing significant association with the outcome under cross-sectional population of Danes. investigation. This better reflects locus heterogeneity and genetic het- Methods: The 19 variants were genotyped in three study populations: erogeneity, usually present in complex diseases. The population-based Inter99 study, the ADDITION study, and in ad- Our epistasis detection method is further evaluated and validated via a ditional type 2 diabetic patients and glucose-tolerant individuals. The simulation study, by computing type I error and power under a variety case-control studies involved 4,093 type 2 diabetic patients and 5,302 of scenarios, and via application to a real-life data set. glucose-tolerant individuals. Results: Single variant analyses demonstrated allelic odds ratios (OR) ranging from 1.04 (95%CI: 0.98,1.11) to 1.33 (95%CI: 1.22,1.45). When combining the 19 variants subgroups with extreme risk profiles showed 3-fold difference in risk of type 2 diabetes (lower 10% carriers with <15 risk alleles vs. upper 10% carriers with >22 risk alleles, OR 2.93 (95%CI: 2.38,3.62,p=1.6×10-25). We calculated the area under a ROC curve to estimate the discrimination rate between glucose-toler-Concurrent Sessions  c05.5 1Laboratoire de Biochimie hormonale et genetique, hopital Bichat, Univer- Development of molecular pathways analysis of GWAs data: sity Paris 7, APHP, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie hormonale et application to schizophrenia and bipolar disorder genetique, hopital Bichat, Paris, France, 3University Paris 7, APHP, France, C. T. O’Dushlaine, E. Kenny, International Schizophrenia Consortium, M. Gill, 4Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Paris, France, 5University Paris 7, Inserm D. W. Morris, A. P. Corvin; U773, Paris, France, 6Dermatology Department, University of l’Aquila, l’Aquila, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. Italy, 7Laboratoire de Biochimie hormonale et genetique, hopital Bichat, Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) provide substantially University Paris 7, APHP, Paris, France, 8Dermatology Department, hopital greater potential to detect common risk variants of modest effect in Bichat,University Paris 7, APHP, Paris, France, 9Dermatology Department, complex disorders than previous positional cloning methodologies. A hopital Saint Louis, Paris, France, 10Dermatology Department, hopital Saint major criticism has been that these studies have, to date, explained Louis, University Paris 7, APHP, Paris, France, 11Dermatology Department, only a small fraction of predicted heritability despite large sample sizes University of l’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy. and genome-wide SNP coverage. The joint action of common variants Background: Xeroderma pigmentosum variant (XPV) is a rare reces- within pathways may play a major role in predisposing to complex ge- sive autosomal genodermatosis predisposing to multiple early onset netic disorders, where multiple genes may contribute to susceptibility. skin cancers, including melanoma. XPV results from mutations of the Thus, there is a pressing need to develop more sophisticated mining POLH gene that encodes a DNA translesion polymerase. In this work, techniques to identify biologically meaningful signals in data gener- we tested the hypothesis that POLH variants could be associated with ated by GWAS. Molecular pathways- or systems-based approaches melanoma risk. to mining complex GWAS are currently gaining prominence. Here we Patients and methods: A common non-synonymous POLH variant, describe a novel SNP ratio test (SRT) that compares the observed c.1783A>G p.M595V, was genotyped in 1075 melanoma patients and to expected ratios of significant to non-significant SNPs within versus 1091 ethnic matched controls from France. In addition, we searched outside of pathways using GWAS data. In a recent GWAS we reported for rare POLH variants by sequencing the entire coding sequence in evidence that possibly thousands of common genetic variants of small 201 patients having a familial history of melanoma (n= 123), sporadic effect contribute substantially to variance in both schizophrenia and multiple melanomas (n= 65) and a melanoma associated with a skin bipolar disorder susceptibility. We now report a two-stage molecular carcinoma (n= 13). pathways analysis testing 212 experimentally validated molecular Results: Overall, the c.1783G, p.595V allele was statistically associ- pathways using discovery (International Schizophrenia Consortium ated with melanoma (respective allelic frequencies, 0.040 versus (ISC); n=6,909) and validation (Genetic Association Information Net- 0.022, P-value=1.17x10-3, OR=1.86 [1.27-2.71]), which was further work (GAIN); n=2,729)) schizophrenia case-control samples. We also confirmed by a meta-analysis including 274 patients and 174 matched examine whether risk pathways identified by this method contribute to controls from Italy (P-value =7.7x10-4, OR =1.84 [1.29- 2.63]). Inter- bipolar disorder susceptibility using the Wellcome Trust Case Control estingly, three non-synonymous POLH variants were identified in 3 pa- Consortium sample (n=4,847). tients (c.295G>A p.V99M, c.815T>C p.I272T and c.1745C>T p.S582L) that were absent in 352 chromosome controls from healthy subjects. c05.6 Conclusion: Our data strongly suggest that POLH variants could act A comparison of methods for testing Association Between as low penetrance melanoma predisposing alleles. Hence, in addition Uncertain Genotypes and Quantitative traits to pigmentation genes, polymorphism of other genes implicated in UV Z. Kutalik1, T. Johnson1, M. Bochud2, V. Mooser3, P. Vollenweider4, G. Waeber4, response is associated with predisposition to melanoma. Replication D. Waterworth3, J. S. Beckmann1, S. Bergmann1; studies in other populations are awaited to precise these data. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Swit- zerland, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2University Institute for Social and Preventive c06.2 Medicine, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois Lausanne (CHUV), Lau- Identification of novel genes involved in colorectal cancer sanne, Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Medical Genetics, GlaxoSmith- predisposition Kline, Philadelphia, PA, USA, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Department R. Venkatachalam1, M. J. L. Ligtenberg2, E. J. Kamping1, E. Hoenselaar1, M. of Medicine and Internal Medicine, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois Voorendt1, H. Görgens3, H. K. Schackert3, A. Geurts van Kessel1, N. Hooger- (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland. brugge1, R. P. Kuiper1; Interpretability and power of genome wide association studies can 1Departments of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen- be increased by imputing unobserved genotypes, using a reference tre, Nimegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, panel of individuals genotyped at higher marker density. For many 2Departments of Human Genetics and Pathology, Radboud University Nijme- markers, genotypes cannot be imputed with complete certainty, and gen Medical Centre, Nimegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, the uncertainty needs to be taken into account when testing for asso- The Netherlands, 3Department of Surgical Research, Universitätsklinikum Carl ciation with a given phenotype. In this paper we compare the statisti- Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. cal properties of currently available methods for testing association Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common cancer in the between uncertain genotypes and quantitative traits. We propose a Western world in terms of both incidence and mortality rate. A pos- new method that has superior performance, compared to previously itive family history of CRC is observed in about 25% of the cases. available methods. Our new method is based on exact maximization High-penetrant germline mutations in APC, MUTYH or the mismatch of the likelihood function, and use a mixture model to accommodate repair genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 account for less than non-normal trait distributions. Unlike some previously described meth- 5% of hereditary cases whereas in the majority of these families the ods, the proposed new method controls the false positive rate, without genetic defect is still unknown. In order to identify novel moderate- to requiring ad hoc filtering rules, and harsh transformations of the trait high-risk mutations contributing to CRC predisposition we employed under study. Furthermore, our in-silico analysis showed that the new genome-wide copy number profiling using high-resolution SNP-based method can increase power to detect associations when the trait is arrayCGH on normal tissue DNA from 32 early-onset patients with mi- non-normally distributed. Its computation time is around one CPU-day crosatellite-stable CRC without polyposis. We identified small (100- for a genome wide scan, with 2.5M SNPs and 5,000 individuals, which 160kb) copy number anomalies in five independent families (16%), in is comparable to previously proposed methods. Finally, in a case study all cases affecting only a single gene. None of the genes had previ- of three lipid phenotypes, we demonstrate that the superior statistical ously been described to be involved in colorectal cancer susceptibility. properties of the new method lead to an improved selection of SNPs All genomic lesions were validated with multiplex ligation-dependent that successfully replicate in independent samples. probe amplification (MLPA). In four cases we were able to establish that the aberrations were inherited from one of the parents. Two of the c06.1 genomic lesions were deletions affecting a microRNA gene, illustrating Variants of the Xeroderma Pigmentosum Variant gene (POLH) that constitutional defects in these gene expression regulators might are associated with melanoma risk be common. Interestingly, at least two of the identified genes could be N. Soufir1, J. Di lucca2,3, M. Guedj4, J. Lacapère5, M. Fargnoli6, A. Bourillon7, linked to pathways involved in CRC development. In an ongoing lo- V. Descamps8, C. Lebbe9, N. Basset- Seguin10, K. Peris11, B. Grandchamp7, cus-specific validation screen of independent families with suspected MelanCohort; familial CRC (currently ~250), we thus far found at least one of theConcurrent Sessions  genes to be recurrently affected, which strongly supports its role in tion tests were performed on single SNPs and haplotypes to define CRC predisposition. susceptibility PTC loci. Top ten SNPs are currently being validated by KASPar probes in a second stage of the study that includes an Italian c06.3 series of more than 400 patiens and over 500 controls. thetRim8 gene is a novel player of p53 pathway At this moment, we have identified, at least three putative LPG related L. Micale1, M. F. Caratozzolo2, A. M. D’Erchia2, M. G. Turturo1, B. Augello1, C. to thyroid cancer susceptibility. Functional validation is also being per- Fusco1, P. Malatesta3, E. Sbisà2, A. Tullo2, G. Merla1; formed for two of these loci. 1Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo Della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Institute for Biomedical Technologies - C.N.R., Bari, c06.5 Italy, 3National Institute for Cancer Research, Genova, Italy. Detection of tumor-specific somatic mutations by transcriptome p53 helps to maintain genomic integrity, regulates the cell-stress re- sequencing of a cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia sponse, and controls human cancer development and progression. S. H. Eck1, P. A. Greif2,3, A. Benet-Pagès1, H. Popp2, A. Dufour2, T. Meitinger1,4, Approximately half of all human malignancies carry mutant p53, and T. M. Strom1,4, S. K. Bohlander2,3; many tumours containing wild-type p53 have abnormalities in p53 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institue of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, regulators. 2Department of Medicine III, Universität München, Munich, Germany, 3Clinical By using a microarray based approach we found that p53 significantly Cooperative Group “Leukemia”, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Re- induces the expression of TRIM8, a gene belonging to the Tripartite search Center for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany, 4Institute of Human Motif (TRIM) protein family involved in various cellular functions such Genetics, Technische Univeristät München, Munich, Germany. as cell proliferation and differentiation. Bionformatic analysis, ChIP and Approximately half of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients have at luciferase assays revealed that TRIM8 regulation is modulated by four least one chromosomal aberration, whereas the other half classifies p53 responsive elements located in the first intron of TRIM8 gene. as cytogenetically normal (CN-AML). Most of the genetic events that Importantly, we showed that TRIM8 interacts with and increases the initiate the disease are still undiscovered. p53 protein stability and it affects p53 transcriptional activation of p21 To identify tumor-specific somatic coding mutations, we sequenced in mammalian cell lines. the transcriptome of a CN-AML and a matched remission sample by TRIM8 is located within the 10q24.3, a region mostly involved in de- second-generation sequencing technology (Illumina GAII). SNPs were letions and rearrangements in brain cancer. By QPCR we showed called with the MAQ software. Additional filters were applied to exclude that the relative expression of TRIM8 is strongly underexpressed in a known and possible sequencing artefacts. number of human glioblastomas. MTT cell proliferation and colony for- We generated 20.4 and 15.6 million 32 bp paired-end reads of the mation assays showed that the overexpression of TRIM8 inhibits cell CN-AML and remission sample, respectively, which mapped to exons proliferation. Consistently, siRNA mediated TRIM8 silencing in mouse of UCSC genes. 8.9% of reads for the AML and 5.0% reads of the re- neural progenitor cell cultures increases the normal cell cycle progres- mission sample mapped to intergenic regions. Of the 11178 transcripts sion suggesting that TRIM8 might be involved in a tumour suppression with a higher expression than 60 reads per gene (corresponding to ap- mechanism. proximately 1 transcript per cell), we sequenced 5911 with an average Together these observations suggest the existence of a new p53- coverage of greater than seven. By comparing the 63159 SNPs dis- TRIM8 feedback-loop mechanism and support the hypotheses that covered in the CN-AML sample with the respective results in the remis- TRIM8 might participate to the development of glioblastomas through sion sample, we identified 5 non-synonymous mutations not present in yet unknown molecular mechanisms that involve p53. either the remission sample or in dbSNP. Among them is a nonsense mutation affecting the RUNX1 gene, which forms a well known fusion c06.4 gene in AML (RUNX1/RUNX1T1). The other 4 mutations were mis- Identification of Low Penetrance Genes associated to thyroid sense mutations which need further confirmation. Two of these were cancer susceptibility using a two-step case-control approach in tumor-associated genes (TLE4, FOSB). These results demonstrate I. Landa1, S. Ruiz-Llorente2, C. Montero-Conde2, L. Leandro-García1, S. that our technique of transcriptome sequencing is an efficient method Leskelä1, E. López-Jiménez1, A. Maliszewska1, L. Inglada-Pérez1, L. De La to discover new mutations in AML. Vega1, G. Pita1, M. Alonso1, J. Maravall3, V. Andía4, C. Álvarez-Escolá5, A. Meoro6, J. Caballero7, C. Blanco8, J. Díaz-Pérez9, J. Serrano10, D. Mauricio3, c06.6 A. Cascón1, C. Rodríguez-Antona1, A. González-Neira1, P. Santisteban2, M. ikaros is a frequently affected hematopoietic differentiation Robledo1,11; factor in pediatric relapse-prone precursor B-cell acute 1CNIO (Spanish National Cancer Research Centre), Madrid, Spain, 2Biomedical lymphoblastic leukemia Research Institute (IIB, CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital Arnau de Vilano- E. Waanders1, M. W. M. te Loo2, F. N. van Leeuwen2, V. H. J. van der Velden3, va, Lleida, Spain, 4Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, S. V. van Reijmersdal1, J. de Vries3, S. T. M. Keijzers-Vloet1, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa1, Spain, 5Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 6Hospital Universitario E. Sonneveld4, J. J. M. van Dongen3, A. Geurts van Kessel1, P. M. Hooger- Reina Sofía, Murcia, Spain, 7Hospital Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain, 8Hospital brugge2,4, R. P. Kuiper1; Universitario Príncipe de Asturias, Alcalá de Henares, Spain, 9Hospital Clínico 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen- San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 10Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, Ali- ter, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, cante, Spain, 11ISCIII Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CI- Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, BERER), Spain. 3Department of Immunology, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma (PTC) is believed to have a strong genet- 4Dutch Childhood Oncology Group, The Hague, The Netherlands. ic component, as suggested by the high relative risk (8.6-fold) reported Relapse is the most common cause of treatment failure in childhood for first-degree relatives of probands. However, no high penetrance acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), but is difficult to predict in the ma- gene related to PTC has been described so far. The aim of this study jority of cases. To explore the prognostic impact of recurrent genomic was to identify low penetrance genes (LPG) that could explain the in- abnormalities on relapse in children diagnosed with precursor-B cell dividual susceptibility. ALL, we have performed genome-wide copy number profiling of 34 We have selected candidate genes according to the following criteria: paired diagnosis-relapse samples. Results were validated using locus- (i) their relevant role in biological pathways related to thyroid cell dif- specific copy number screening in 200 diagnosis samples of children ferentiation and proliferation and (ii) their differential expression profile, with or without relapse. as observed in our own set of representative samples of thyroid carci- The majority of the copy number abnormalities were preserved be- noma. Through this process, 97 genes, tagged by 768 SNPs, were in- tween matched diagnosis and relapse samples, but lesions unique in cluded. SNPs were chosen through different SNPs databases (NCBI, either of the two samples were observed in 82% of the cases. In 68% HapMap) and in silico tools (Pupa Suite) to include Tag SNPs and of the cases, lesions present at diagnosis were no longer detected in putative functional SNPs when possible. These SNPs were genotyped relapse samples indicating that these lesions were secondary events, in a two step case-control study. In a first stage, we genotyped more absent in the original therapy-resistant progenitor clone. However, le- than 600 PTC Spanish patients versus more than 500 representative sions in IKZF1, which encodes the hematopoietic differentiation factor healthy controls, using the Illumina Sentrix Array platform. Associa- Ikaros, were always preserved in relapse. Sequence analysis revealedConcurrent Sessions  that point mutations in IKZF1 do occur but are less frequent. Valida- c07.3 tion in a large cohort showed that deletions of exons 3-6, encoding the Afamin deficiency in mice leads to reversible infertility DNA-binding Zn-finger domains, were most common. Furthermore, G. Wietzorrek1, S. Olscher2, G. Wakonigg3, K. Pfaller4, P. Grzmil5, I. Adham5, W. IKZF1 deletions were clearly enriched in leukemias that relapsed Engel5, H. Dieplinger2,3; (26%) compared to non-relapse cases (11%, P=0.006). 1Division of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Division In conclusion, IKZF1 deletions are frequent events in therapy-resis- of Genetic Epidemiology, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Vitateq Biotechnology GmbH, tant clones of relapse-prone pediatric precursor B-ALL. Screening for Innsbruck, Austria, 4Division of Histology and Embryology, Innsbruck, Austria, IKZF1 lesions may help to predict disease outcome. 5Institute of Human Genetics, University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany. Previous work from our group has established the vitamin E-binding c07.1 property of afamin, a member of the albumin gene family. Afamin is mutations of the sYcP3 gene in women with recurrent expressed primarily in liver and kidney and secreted into the plasma. pregnancy loss Significant amounts were detected also in follicle and seminal fluid H. Kurahashi, H. Bolor, T. Mori, S. Nishiyama, H. Inagaki, H. Kogo, M. Tsut- suggesting possible roles for afamin in vitamin E transport in these sumi, T. Ohye; body fluids with potential significance for fertility. Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, In order to investigate the physiological role of afamin in detail, afamin- Aichi, Japan. overexpressing transgenic and gene-knock-out mice were created and Aneuploidy, a chromosomal numerical abnormality in the conceptus or characterised. Transgenic animals were phenotypically without patho- fetus, occurs in at least 5% of all pregnancies and is the leading cause logical findings. A detailed histological analysis of their testes revealed, of early pregnancy loss in humans. Accumulating evidence suggests however, a significantly higher density of testis tubules. Chimeric (par- that the correct segregation of chromosomes is achieved by events oc- tial afamin-knockout) mice had undetectable afamin blood levels and curring in prophase during meiosis I. These include a synapsis between were completely infertile so that homozygous afamin-knockout mice homologous chromosomes, cohesion between sister chromosomes, could not be bred. Histological characterisation of male chimeric ani- and meiotic recombination. In our current study, we demonstrate that mals indicated impaired/dysfunctional spermiogenesis resembling the mutations in SYCP3, a gene encoding an essential component of the human Sertoli-Cell-Only phenotype, female animals were histologi- synaptonemal complex that is central to the interaction of homologous cally free of pathological findings. Supplementation with recombinantly chromosomes, contributes to recurrent pregnancy loss. Two out of 26 produced murine afamin by a constant diffusion pump device led to women with recurrent pregnancy loss of unknown cause were found restoration of normal testes size, histology, spermiogenesis and fertil- to carry independent heterozygous nucleotide alterations in this gene, ity. neither of which was present among a group of 150 control fertile wom- Taken together, afamin is described here as a novel gene which plays en. Analysis of transcripts from mini-genes harboring each of these two a key role in fertility. The findings from successfully treating infertile mutations revealed that both affected normal splicing possibly result- mice with exogenous afamin suggest a therapeutic potential for treat- ing in the production of a C-terminally mutated proteins. The mutant ing human fertility with afamin. proteins were found to interact with their wild-type counterpart in vitro and inhibit the normal fiber formation of the SYCP3 protein when co- c07.4 expressed in a heterologous system. These data suggest that these the challenge of prenatal and preimplantation genetic diagnosis mutations are likely to generate an aberrant synaptonemal complex in of mitochondrial DNA disorders a dominant-negative manner and contribute to abnormal chromosomal S. Monnot1, N. Gigarel2, L. Hesters3, P. Burlet2, A. Benachi2, Y. Dumez2, G. behavior that may lead to recurrent miscarriage. Combined with the Tachdjian3, A. Rötig1, R. Frydman3, A. Munnich1, N. Frydman3, J. P. Bonnefont1, fact that similar mutations have been previously identified in two males J. Steffann1; with azoospermia, our current data suggest that sexual dimorphism in 1Inserm U781, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 2Necker-En- response to meiotic disruption occurs even in humans. fants Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 3Antoine-Béclère Hospital, Clamart, France. c07.2 Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations cause a wide range of seri- copy number changes in patients with disorders of sex ous genetic diseases with high transmission risk, due to their maternal development inheritance. Because there is no efficient therapy for these disorders, S. White1, H. Daggag1, T. Ohnesorg1, A. Notini1, K. Roeszler1, L. Gordon1, E. “at risk” couples often ask for prenatal (PND) and/or preimplanta- Vilain2, A. Sinclair1; tion diagnosis (PGD). However, little is known about the factors that 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2UCLA, Los An- might determine the mutant loads (heteroplasmy) in a child of a car- geles, CA, United States. rier mother. Here we report our experience in PND and PGD for the 2 Disorders of sex development (DSD), ranging in severity from genital most common mtDNA mutations. The m.3243A>G, a cause of MELAS abnormalities to complete sex reversal, are surprisingly common and syndrome (Mitochondrial myopathy, Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis as such represent a major pediatric concern. The cause of these dis- and Stroke-like episodes), and the m.8993T>G responsible for NARP orders is most often a disruption of the genetic programs that regulate (Neurogenic weakness, Ataxia, Retinitis Pigmentosa) or Leigh syn- development of testes or ovaries. Although a number of genes have drome, were quantified in 21 preimplantation embryos (3 NARP and been identified in these developmental pathways, in many cases of 18 MELAS) and 19 fetuses (9 MELAS et 10 NARP) from heteroplas- DSD the causative mutations cannot be identified. mic females. While the mutant load pattern depended on the type of We have used the Affymetrix 6.0 whole genome SNP array to perform mtDNA mutation, it was however stable in various blastomeres from a whole genome copy number analysis on genomic DNA from 33 individ- given embryo and in various tissues from a given fetus. No temporal uals with gonadal dysgenesis. Rearrangements affecting known sex variation of heteroplasmy was found in 8 heteroplasmic fetuses who determination genes were a duplication of the X chromosome includ- had at least two samples at different stages of development. ing DAX1 in a 46,XY female, as well as a 1.2 Mb deletion upstream of Eight children, carrying less than 30% mutant load in the prenatal peri- the SOX9 locus that caused sex-reversal without campomelic dyspla- od, were born and are healthy at 18 months to 9 years of age. Prenatal sia in a 46,XY female. Several other potentially causative rearrange- heteroplasmy less than 30% is therefore predictive of a good postnatal ments were identified, including a duplication of the SOX3 gene in a prognosis, even though longer clinical follow-up is required. PGD, by 46,XX male and a 50 kb deletion immediately downstream of GATA4 giving the opportunity to select embryos with low mutant loads, consti- in a 46,XY female. Both of these genes have been suggested to play tutes a valuable alternative to PND. a role in gonadal development in animal models without previous sup- porting evidence in humans. These findings will stimulate molecular analysis of a number of genes in gonadal determination and differentiation, and support the hypoth- esis that mutations affecting the regulation of known genes are re- sponsible for a significant number of DSD cases.Concurrent Sessions  c07.5 c08.1 Prenatal oligo-based arraycGH with custom made focused Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome - Delineation of the Phenotype design: first experiences S. B. Sousa1,2, O. A. Abdul-Rahman3, A. Bottani4, V. Cormier-Daire5, A. Fryer6, A. Lott, M. Kuhn, H. Gabriel, M. Gencik; G. Gillessen-Kaesbach7, D. Horn8, D. Josifova9, A. Kuechler10, M. Lees1, K. ZMG Osnabrueck, Osnabrueck, Germany. MacDermot11, A. Magee12, F. Morice-Picard13, E. Rosser1, A. Sarkar11, N. Shan- ArrayCGH is a well implemented diagnostic tool for the detection of non14, I. Stolte-Dijkstra15, A. Verloes16, E. Wakeling11, L. Wilson1, R. C. M. Hen- submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances. Postnatal array-CGH is nekam1,17; routinely performed in our lab using whole genome oligonucleotide ar- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, rays (Agilent). Sometimes, if imbalances with uncertain clinical signifi- London, United Kingdom, 2Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico de cance are detected, the interpretation of the results is challenging. This Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pe- is particularly crucial in a prenatal setting. To minimize such difficulties, diatrics, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, United States, we decided to design our own focused oligonucleotide microarray us- 4Department of Genetic Medicine, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Swit- ing Agilents eArray tool. Our array design is based on the 44k format zerland, 5Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, (more than 40.000 oligonucleotides) and restricted on the dense cov- France, 6Royal Liverpool Children’s Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 7Insti- erage of about 130 microdeletion/duplication syndromes and subtelo- tut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck, meric regions combined with a 1Mb whole genome spacing. Germany, 8Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Humboldt-Universität, Berlin, Ger- In our ongoing process of validation we found very good concor- many, 9Clinical Genetics Department, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, dance of the arrayCGH results with our focused design compared to 10Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Essen, Germany, 11North the whole genome design. First we used DNA samples derived from West Thames Regional Genetics Service, Kennedy Galton Center, London, blood of patients with known aberrations and normal male and female United Kingdom, 12Regional Genetics Service, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, controls. But the interest in prenatal testing of fetuses with abnormal United Kingdom, 13Medical Genetics Unit, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, ultrasound findings is increasing and therefore we successfully tested France, 14Clinical Genetics Service, City Hospital, Nottingham, United Kingdom, the DNA from fetal samples like chorion villi and cultured amniocytes. 15Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, If there is no time for culturing, uncultured amniocytes is a challenging The Netherlands, 16Department of Clinical Genetics, Robert Debré University material for use in arrayCGH, since the number of cells in amniotic Hospital, Paris, France, 17Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit, Institute of Child fluid in early pregnancies is low. Different methods for DNA isolation, Health, UCL, London, United Kingdom. whole genome amplification and fluorescence labelling were tested to Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome is a mental retardation-multiple con- optimize arrayCGH quality. genital anomalies syndrome, reported for the first time in 1993, and Summarized, our results are encouraging to go on with implementing since then in only four cases. We aimed to delineate the phenotype this focused array design in our lab for pre- and postnatal arrayCGH and natural history better and were able to gather eighteen hitherto diagnostics. undescribed patients through a multi-centric collaborative study. In ad- dition, we gathered follow-up data of the earlier reported cases, includ- c07.6 ing long-term follow-up of the original patient. trend analysis of invasive prenatal diagnosis before and after Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome was found to be a distinct and well rec- the introduction of a new prenatal screening policy in the ognizable entity with limited clinical variability. Main clinical features Netherlands. are severe mental retardation, limited or absent speech, seizures, K. D. Lichtenbelt1, B. Z. Alizadeh2, P. G. Scheffer3, G. C. Page-Christiaens3, P. short stature, sparse hair, typical facial characteristics, brachydactyly, Stoutenbeek3, G. H. Schuring-Blom4; prominent finger joints and broad distal phalanges. Some of the fea- 1Universitary Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Complex tures can be progressive with time. There is no important gender dif- Genetics Section, Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center ference in occurrence, frequency and severity of the syndrome, and Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Department of Perinatology and Gynaecol- all cases have thus far been sporadic. Consanguinity is not increased. ogy, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 4Department Micro-array analysis in 14 of the patients gave normal results. There is of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Nether- no clue to the cause, except possibly the progressive nature. lands. The entity has always been considered a very rare condition, but the In 2007 a new prenatal screening-policy for Down’s syndrome was in- present series gathered over a short period of time may indicate it troduced in the Netherlands. Before 2007 only women of 36 years and to be underrecognized. The present detailed phenotype analysis may older were offered prenatal screening. According to new legislation, help recognizing further patients. Further research to detect the cause this was extended to all women, regardless of maternal age. Screen- is in progress. ing includes maternal blood markers and fetal nuchal translucency measurement. We sought to study the effect of the new policy on the c08.2 outcome of invasive prenatal diagnosis by chorionic villus sampling severe Non-Lethal Recessive type Viii Oi: clinical, Histological and amniocentesis. Therefore we collected the outcome of conven- and Radiographic Features tional karyotyping of all invasive procedures (n=9931) performed be- J. C. Marini1, W. Chang1, F. H. Glorieux2, T. E. Hefferan3, F. Rauch2, M. tween January 2000 and December 2008 in the Universitary Medical Abukhaled1, P. A. Smith4, D. Eyre5; Center Utrecht (UMCU). Data were extracted from the cytogenetic 1NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Shriners Hospital for Children, database. A trend analysis was made of the number- and type of in- McGill Univ, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United vasive procedures, indications and percentage and type of abnormal States, 4Shriners Hospital for Children, Chicago, IL, United States, 5Univ Wash- karyotypes. Results show that the contribution of women younger than ington, Seattle, WA, United States. 36 years rose significantly, from 19,3 % in the years before the new Type VIII osteogenesis imperfecta is a recently defined recessive le- policy, to 25,3% after 2007. For women younger than 36 years, the thal/severe OI caused by null mutations in LEPRE1 encoding collagen percentage of abnormal karyotypes also increased significantly from prolyl 3-hydroxylase I. We present here the first complete description 13% to 19%. The percentage of abnormal karyotypes for all maternal of two non-lethal cases of type VIII OI, 17 and 10 yr old boys with ages increased from 6,5% to 8,8%, mainly due to the increased use of null mutations in both alleles of LEPRE1. Both probands were SGA high performing indications, such as ‘abnormal first trimester screen- term babies. They have extreme growth deficiency, white sclerae and ing’ and ‘sonography findings’, as opposed to ‘advanced maternal age’ normal dentin. Their extremities are rhizomelic with popcorn epiphy- alone as indication for the invasive diagnostics. This rise was mainly ses. They have severe scoliosis with multiple vertebral compressions; due to the increased detection of autosomal trisomies. There was no DEXA L1-L4 z-scores were -6.3 and -5.8. Their dermal collagen fibrils significant difference in the type of autosomal trisomies detected. have same average diameter as matched controls, but greater diame- ter variability and multiple border irregularities. On mass spectrometry, the level of Type I collagen Pro986 3-hydroxylation was <5% of normal in dermis, iliac crest bone and collagen secreted by cultured fibroblasts and osteoblasts, ruling out redundancy of P3H function in skin and bone. Serum test results were distinctive compared to other OI types,Concurrent Sessions  with elevations of both BSAP, an osteoblast product, and TRAP, an ficking. In contrast to the overlapping disorder Debré-type cutis laxa osteoclast product, consistent with elevated bone turnover. Iliac crest (ARCL type II, OMIM 278250) no impairment of retrograde trafficking histomorphometry confirmed extremely high bone turnover, along with was detected in patient fibroblasts. Therefore, it is likely that the novel elevated mineral apposition rate and faster matrix mineralization than golgin SCYL1BP1 plays a role in anterograde trafficking within the type VII OI. Stained sections demonstrated a distinctive broad osteoid secretory pathway. These findings imply an association of secretory seam on all trabecular surfaces and abnormal osteoblast morphology, pathway dysfunction with age-related changes in connective tissues. with irregularly shaped cells piled up on the newly deposited matrix, rather than a normal monolayer of cuboidal osteoblasts. These clinical c08.5 and histological features provide a diagnostic guide for clinicians. Familial cases with hypomethylation of the imprinted iGF2-H19 domain in silver-Russell syndrome (sRs) c08.3 D. Bartholdi1, M. Krajewska-Walasek2, K. Õunap3,4, H. Gaspar1, K. H. Chrza- Aicardi-Goutières syndrome and other disorders associated with nowska2, H. Ilyana5, H. Kayserili6, I. W. Lurie7,5, A. Schinzel1, A. Baumer1; intracranial calcification 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Swit- Y. J. Crow; zerland, 2Department of Medical Genetics,The Children’s Memorial Health Academic Unit of Medical Genetics, Manchester, United Kingdom. Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu Aicardi-Goutières syndrome is a Mendelian mimic of congenital infec- University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of tion, also showing overlap with systemic lupus erythematosus at both Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Belorussian Research Institute of Hereditary Diseases, a clinical and biochemical level. The recent identification of mutations Minsk, Belarus, 6Institute of Child Health, Division of Medical Genetics, Istanbul in TREX1 and genes encoding the RNASEH2 complex in AGS pa- University, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Maryland Physicians Associates, Baltimore, MD, tients, and studies of the function of TREX1 in DNA metabolism, have United States. defined a novel mechanism for the initiation of autoimmunity by inter- Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a heterogeneous condition charac- feron-stimulatory nucleic acid. In a genotype-phenotype analysis, we terized by severe intrauterine growth retardation, poor postnatal catch previously showed that 17% of AGS families do not have identifiable up growth, craniofacial features, body asymmetry and a variety of mi- mutations in AGS1-4. We have now identified the AGS5 gene and will nor malformations. Loss of DNA methylation at the telomeric imprinting present data to show that the AGS5 protein may (also) act as a nega- control region 1 (ICR1) on 11p15 is an important cause of SRS. tive regulator of the cell-intrinsic antiviral response. We studied the methylation pattern at the H19-IGF2 locus in 200 pa- Additionally, through our work on Aicardi-Goutières syndrome we have tients with SRS and SRS-like phenotypes and identified epimutations developed an interest in several ‘new’ syndromes where intracranial in about 40% of patients with SRS. Amongst this cohort we identified calcification provides a significant clue to the diagnosis. These disor- two families each with two siblings with SRS, displaying hypomethyl- ders include Coats plus/cerebroretinal microangiopathy with calcifica- ation of H19 and IGF2. In both families neither of the parents showed tion and cysts (CRMCC), spondyloenchondrodysplasia with CNS dis- clinical signs of SRS and methylation analysis in the fathers revealed ease and immune dysfunction (SPENCD), and (what we have called) normal results. In a third family we identified an epimutation in both a ‘true-pseudo-TORCH syndrome’. We will outline our ongoing clinical 30 year-old clinically affected father and his likewise affected daugh- and molecular efforts to classify diseases in which intracranial calcifi- ter. Father and daughter showed a classical SRS phenotype with no cation provides an important diagnostic handle. additional clinical signs. Sequencing of the differentially methylated region (DMR) 5’ of the H19 gene did not reveal mutations in the three c08.4 families. Gerodermia osteodysplastica is caused by mutations in The two families for whom we identified epimutations in siblings most scYL1BP1, a novel Rab-6 interacting golgin likely represent germ cell mosaicism of an incorrect methylation mark U. Kornak1, H. Hennies2, H. Zhang1, J. Egerer1, X. Zhang1, W. Seifert2, J. Kue- at the ICR1 during spermatogenesis in the fathers. The third family hnisch1, B. Budde3, M. Naetebus2, F. Brancati4, W. R. Wilcox5, D. Mueller6, P. B. accounts for transmission of an epimutation from an affected father to Kaplan7, A. Rajab8, B. Dallapiccola4, W. Newman9, J. Clayton-Smith9, M. Tassa- his daughter through the male germ line. The underlying mechanism behji9, B. Steinmann10, F. A. Barr11, P. Nuernberg2, P. Wieacker12, S. Mundlos1,13; remains to be explained. 1Institut fuer Medizinische Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 2Cologne Center for Our finding of familiar cases with SRS carrying epimutations has im- Genomics (CCG), Cologne, Germany, 3Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), portant implications for both genetic counseling and determination of Colgne, Germany, 4IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Insti- the origin of the epimutations. tute, Rome, Italy, 5Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 6Institute of Medical Genetics, Klinikum Chemnitz, c08.6 Chemnitz, Germany, 7Section of Metabolic Diseases, Children’s Hospital of Germline mutation in NLRP (NALP) in a familial imprinting Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 8Genetic Unit, Directorate Gen- disorder (Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome). eral of Health Affairs, Ministry of Health, Muscat, Oman, 9Medical Genetics, St D. Lim1,2, E. Meyer1, S. Pasha1, L. J. Tee1, F. Rahman1, J. R. W. Yates3,4, C. G. Mary’s Hospital, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 10Divi- Woods3,4, W. Reik5, E. R. Maher1,2; sion of Metabolism and Molecular Pediatrics, University Children’s Hospital, 1Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Re- Zuerich, Switzerland, 11Cancer Research Centre, University of Liverpool, Liver- search, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2West Mid- pool, United Kingdom, 12Institut für Humangenetik, Westfaelische Wilhelms-Uni- lands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Edgbaston, versitaet, Muenster, Germany, 13Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Berlin, Germany. of Cambridge, Cambridge Institute of Medical Research, Addenbrooke’s Hos- Gerodermia osteodysplastica (GO; OMIM 231070) is a rare autosomal pita, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, recessive segmental progeroid syndrome characterized by osteoporo- Addenbrooke’s Treatment Centre, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United sis with increased fracture susceptibility, joint laxity with frequent hip Kingdom, 5Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babra- dislocation, cutis laxa and jaw hypoplasia. Using a positional cloning ham Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. approach in consanguineous Mennonite pedigrees from Germany, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a fetal overgrowth and hu- Canada, and Mexico, we identified an identical homozygous interval man imprinting disorder resulting from the deregulation of a number on chromosome 1q24 with a multipoint lod score of 12.0. Subsequent of genes, including IGF2 and CDKN1C, in the imprinted gene cluster mutation screening revealed the homozygous nonsense mutation on chromosome 11p15.5. Most cases are sporadic and result from p.Glu143X in the gene SCYL1BP1. In nine additional GO patients from epimutations at either of the two 11p15.5 imprinting centres (IC1 and various origins we identified eight other loss-of-function mutations. IC2). However, rare familial cases may be associated with germline SCYL1BP1 encodes the soluble protein SCY1-like 1 binding protein 1, 11p15.5 deletions causing abnormal imprinting in cis. We report a fam- which is expressed at high levels in skin and osteoblasts and contains ily with BWS and an IC2 epimutation in which affected siblings had coiled-coil domains. Protein expression was completely lost in patient inherited different parental 11p15.5 alleles excluding an in cis mecha- fibroblasts. We demonstrated that SCYL1BP1 localizes to the Golgi nism. Using a positional-candidate gene approach we found that the apparatus and specifically interacts with GTP-bound small GTPase mother was homozygous for a frameshift mutation in exon 6 of NLRP2. Rab6, an important regulator of anterograde and retrograde Golgi traf- While germline mutations in NLRP7 have previously been associatedConcurrent Sessions  with familial hydatidiform mole, this is the first description of NLRP2 c09.3 mutation in human disease and the first report of a trans mechanism control of meiotic recombination in the human genome for disordered imprinting in BWS. These observations are consistent M. C. Ergoren1, I. L. Berg1, P. Donnelly2, A. J. Jeffreys1; with the hypothesis that NLRP2 has a previously unrecognised role in 1Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, establishing or maintaining genomic imprinting in humans. 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. c09.1 Meiotic recombination increases haplotype diversity and thus pro- Genetic risk model for coeliac disease helps identify high-risk foundly affects evolution. High resolution analysis of de novo recom- individuals. bination events in human sperm DNA has revealed clustering into J. Romanos1, C. C. van Diemen1, I. M. Nolte1, G. Trynka1, A. Zhernakova2, very narrow hotspots that generally coincide with abrupt breakdown of J. Fu1, M. T. Bardella3,4, D. Barisani5, R. McManus6, D. A. van Heel7, C. Wij- linkage disequilibrium. Using population genetics approaches applied menga1; to whole genome diversity surveys such as the International HapMap 1University Medical Center of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 2Uni- project, sites of historical recombination activity have been inferred. versity Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Fondazione IRCCS Around 40% of ~30000 hotspots so identified contain a 13 bp motif Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 4University of Milan, Milan, Italy, CCNCCNTNNCCNC which appears to be involved in hotspot specifi- 5University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 6Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ire- cation and which may also drive some modes of genome instability. To land, 7Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United test the effect of the motif on crossover frequencies and distributions, Kingdom. candidate hotspots with the motif at their centre and which carry a mo- Background: Coeliac disease (CD) is a common chronic disorder of tif-disrupting SNP are being studied. The first hotspot to be analysed the small intestine, resulting from aberrant cellular responses to glu- in sperm showed extreme biased gene conversion accompanying ten peptides, and often remains undiagnosed. It is a complex genetic crossover in men heterozygous at the disrupting SNP. The bias was disorder although 95% of the patients carry the risk heterodimer HLA- in favour of the motif-disrupting allele, consistent with suppression of DQ2. Genome-wide association studies on CD have identified nine crossover initiation on chromosomes carrying this allele. This provides non-HLA loci that also contribute to CD risk, most of which are shared direct evidence for the importance of this motif in crossover initiation, with other immune-related diseases. Our aim is to predict the genetic and helps shed light on hotspot polymorphism and turnover in human risk for CD using HLA and non-HLA risk alleles. populations. Methods: We selected ten independent polymorphisms in 2308 cases and 4585 controls from Dutch, UK, and Irish populations and catego- c09.4 rized the individuals into three risk groups, based on their HLA-DQ2 New evidences about mHc-based patterns of mate choice genotype. We used the summed number of non-HLA risk alleles per M. Bicalho, J. da Silva, J. M. Magalhães, W. Silva; individual to analyze their cumulative effect on CD risk, adjusting for Immunogenetics Histoc. Laboratory, Curitiba-Paraná, Brazil. sex and population group in logistic regression analysis. We validated Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) genes code for cell surface our findings in 436 Italian cases and 532 controls. proteins, which plays an important role in immune recognition. In the Findings: CD cases carried more non-HLA risk alleles than controls: late 1970s, Yamazaki observed that inbred mice were more likely to individuals carrying 13 or more risk alleles had a higher CD risk (OR mate with partners having MHC dissimilar genes. Females’ preference = 6·2; 95% CI 4·1-9·3) compared to those carrying zero to five risk for MHC dissimilar mates was also observed in other vertebrate spe- alleles. Combining HLA and non-HLA risk genotypes in one model in- cies, including humans. It has been shown that MHC influences mating creases sensitivity by 6.2% compared to using only HLA for identifica- selection mediated by preferences based on body odor. What’s the tion of high-risk individuals with slight decrease in specificity. functional significance of these findings, if some? It was assumed that We can use non-HLA risk factors for CD to improve identification of through olfactory cues MHC-related evolved as a strategy to maximize high-risk individuals. Our risk model is a first step towards better diag- the offspring MHC heterozygosity. Parents with dissimilar MHCs could nosis and prognosis in high-risk families and population-based screen- provide their offspring with a better chance to ward infections off be- ing. cause their immune system genes are more diverse. MHC genotype might be used to signal relatedness and immune response genotypes c09.2 through. identity by descent within and between human populations We investigated whether husband-wife couples (n=90) obtained from A. Gusev, P. Palamara, A. Darvasi, P. Gregersen, I. Pe’er; LIGH’s database were more MHC-similar/dissimilar in comparison to Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, United random couples generated from the same database (n=55 000) as States. to collect evidence of MHC influence in MHC-based patterns of mate The availability of cost-effective, high throughput technologies to geno- choice. type common alleles has yielded an unprecedented wealth of genome- The individuals HLA typing (Class I and Class II) was performed by wide data on human variation, deeply sampled within and across pop- PCR-SSP or PCR-rSSOP using a commercial kit ( One Lambda Inc., ulations. We have developed a rapid method that facilitates extensive Canoga Park. CA, USA). evaluation of shared genetic segments across millions of sample-pairs. Our results and comparisons ( p= 0,014) suggest that couples seem We demonstrate the use of hidden relatives as parent-surrogates for to be formed by individuals with less HLA similarity, corroborating the phasing detection of deletions, and imputation at IBD segments. hypothesis that HLA antigens, especially Class I, may influence mate When combined with phenotypic data, IBD provides a strategy to de- selection and marriages in humans. tect association to rare, untyped alleles. This is especially useful in isolated populations. We demonstrate this by detection of previously c09.5 unreported, genomewide significant associations in Pacific Islanders Genomic tests for identification of authenticity of historical and Ashkenazi Jewish samples. remains in case of Romanov family. In Population genetics, IBD sharing paves the way for observing very E. I. Rogaev1,2, A. P. Grigorenko2,3, Y. K. Moliaka2, G. Faskhutdinova2, A. recent genetic history of samples, both genomewide as well as for spe- Goltsov3, E. L. W. Kittler4, I. Morozova1; cific loci. We show extensive hidden relatedness between individuals 1Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Science, Moscow, within populations that provides estimates of demographic parameters. Russian Federation, 2Brudnick Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, University Specifically, for Ashkenazi Jewish populations we demonstrate and a of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States, 3Research severe bottleneck 20-25 generations before present. We show genetic Center of Mental Health, Russian Academy of Medical Science, Moscow, Rus- sharing to be focused at regions that suggest a causal mechanism for sian Federation, 4CFAR, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worces- ancient sharing rather than recent relatedness, such as the HLA and ter, MA, United States. the commonly polymorphic inversion of 5Mbp on chromosome 8p23.1 We performed the DNA investigation of recently found human historical . Finally, we filter out sharing that is non-informative because it is too remains presumably belonging to Prince Alexei and his sister, children recent or causal and show clustering of populations based on genetic of Russian Emperor Nicholas II. We also provided the comprehensive sharing. genomic analysis of authenticity of skeleton remains of Nicholas II andConcurrent Sessions  members of his family and their attendants. The rapid methodologi- 1715 cases and 2000 random controls. Genotyping was started with cal approach for reconstruction of complete mitochondrial DNA se- 517,401 SNPs that pass quality control filters using the Illumina Hap- quences from very limited amount of old historical human specimens 550duov3 chip and then validated and replicated in a cross-plateform has been developed. We were able to recover the highly informative sequenom. All patients were diagnosed using the American Diabetic nuclear DNA: gender-, autosomal STRs and Y-STR profiles from the Association Criteri and recruited from the China Medical University >90 years old bone specimens or the archival bloodstain samples. Hospital, Taiwan. Random controls were selected from the Taiwan Multiplex PCR assay and population databases analysis were per- Han-Chinese Blood and Cell Bank, Academia Sinica, Taiwan. We ex- formed to test the origin of Y-chromosome haplogroups of Nicholas II cluded SNPs from further analyses by three major criterions: (1) miss- and Prince Alexei. Mitochondrial haplogroups were also defined for all ing data rate>5%, (2) missing data rate>1% for SNPs with a minor al- members of Romanov family and their attendants. Comparison with lele frequency < 5%, and (3) p-value of Hardy-Weinberg Disequilibrium large population databases from Eurasian populations was employed test <10-7. We identified one previously unknown signal with significant to test whether the genographic origin of the haplotypes is consistent evidence (p < 10-7) for association with T2DM. Four SNPs/loci showed with the historical data. positive association (10-7 < p < 10-5), including the KCNQ1 previously We demonstrate here that convergent analysis of complete mitochon- reported in Japanese population. In addition to confirming the known drial genome sequences combined with Y-chromosome profiles is effi- association with KCNQ1, we have identified four novel loci associated cient for individual and kinship identification of historical relics. The ge- with T2DM in Han-Chinese population. Our study indicated the hetero- notyping of damaged specimens and paternal and maternal lineages geneity of type 2 diabetes mellitus between the Asian and Caucasian of Royal family demonstrated that recently found 90-years old human populations. remains belong to Nicholas II children, Prince Alexei and his sister, and provided an evidence that remains of all members of Romanov family c10.2 (including Anastasia and Alexei) have been identified. Genome-wide association analysis and expression analysis from adipose tissue reveals coagulation factor Xiii as a novel c09.6 candidate gene for low HDL-cholesterol Dissecting the genetic make-up of central Eastern sardinia P. P. Laurila1, J. Naukkarinen1, S. Söderlund2, J. Saharinen1, S. Ripatti1, I. using a high density set of sex and autosomal markers Lindqvist1, M. Gentile1, M. Jauhiainen1, M. Taskinen2, L. Peltonen1,3; L. M. Pardo1, P. Rizzu1, G. Piras2, K. der Gaag3, D. Sondervan1, Z. Bochdano- 1National Institute of Health and Welfare, Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 2Depart- vits1, M. Monne2, A. Gabbas2, N. Bradman4, P. de Knijff3, A. Ruiz-Linares4, P. ment of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3The Well- Heutink1; come Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 1Medical Genomics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Biomolecular and Cyto- Inverse correlation between HDL-cholesterol level and atherosclerosis genetic Center, Dept. Of Hematology and Oncology, San Francesco Hospital, has been established. To identify potentially novel variants associated Nuoro, Italy, 3Forensic Laboratory for DNA Research, Leiden, The Netherlands, with HDL-cholesterol, we genotyped 450 Finns (Illumina370K) from 4The Galton Laboratory,University College London, London, United Kingdom. EUFAM population sample, either having extremely high (>90th per- Genetic isolates are valuable for identifying genetic variations underly- centile) or low (<10th percentile) HDL-C levels. Out of these, subcuta- ing complex traits. However, prior knowledge of the genetic structure neous fat biopsies were obtained from 54 individuals, and their global of the isolate is fundamental for carrying-out genome-wide associa- expression profiles were analyzed using Affymetrix microarrays. tion studies (GWAS) in these populations. The Sardinian population is Two best HDL associating SNPs were located at CETP, as in previous currently the target of GWAS because of its ancient origin and long- studies. However, the 3rd and 10th best hits (rs7766109, p=10-5 and standing isolation. To perform GWAS in Sardinia, we aim to character- rs4959377, p=3.45x10-5) were located within F13A1, a coagulation ize a subpopulation from the archaic area of Central-Eastern Sardinia factor with no previously reported associations with lipids. After testing at the genomic level. We used sex-specific markers (Y-chromosome 54 additional SNPs within F13A1 region, we detected associations for and mtDNA) to assess the heterogeneity of the founder lineages and 10 of them, all of them located within introns 3-5. The associations the divergence from other populations. In addition, we used a dense of F13A1 introns 3-5 for HDL were replicated in a normally distrib- set of autosomal markers (SNP 5.0 array, Affymetrix) to investigate uted Health2000 population sample (n=890). At mRNA level, F13A1 genome-wide Linkage Disequilibrium, to construct a Copy Number was higher expressed in adipose tissue of individuals with low HDL Variation map and to estimate pair-wise kinship and inbreeding.We (p=0.007), and a dose-dependent effect of rs7766109 genotype on first determined Y-chromosome lineages in 256 unrelated Sardinians both F13A1 expression (p=0.02) and HDL-levels (p=0.004) was ob- using biallelic and microsatellite markers. Our analysis showed that served. the frequency of the major Y haplogroups clearly sets this population We also analyzed the adipose tissue expression profiles of 5 insulin apart from other European haplogroups. The analysis of microsatellite sensitive and 5 insulin resistant Finnish subjects before and after a markers revealed a high degree of gene diversity. Pairwise kinship euglycemic insulin clamp. Again, F13A1 expression was 6-fold higher and inbreeding were estimated in 113 subjects using 77709 autosomal in IR subjects compared to IS individuals (p=0.003). Moreover, an SNP markers. We found that 16% of the subject pairs shared identi- insulin-induced decrease in F13A1 expression was observed in IR cal-by descent alleles more often than expected by chance. Further- (p=0.047) but not IS subjects. more, 60% of the subjects had low inbreeding coefficient values. Our Here we show that combination of global SNP and expression analy- preliminary results confirm that Sardinia is genetically different from sis can be a powerful tool in studying the mechanisms of complex other populations, as shown by Y-chromosome markers. The kinship diseases. and inbreeding estimates indicate some degree of relatedness among Sardinians, as expected for an isolated population. c10.3 Loci on chromosome 19 and 20 are associated with age at c10.1 natural menopause: a meta-analysis of 10,399 women A genome-wide association study identified novel susceptibility L. Stolk1,2, J. M. Murabito3,4, N. Franceschini5, A. V. Smith6, N. Glazer7, G. loci for type 2 diabetes mellitus in chinese population residing Zhai8, J. R. B. Perry9, P. F. McArdle10, A. Arnold11, E. Boerwinkle12, A. Burri8, L. in taiwan Ferrucci13, V. Gudnason6,14, A. Hofman2, D. Karasik15, A. R. Shuldiner10,16, E. C. F. Yang1, J. Y. Wu1, F. J. Tsai2, C. C. Chen1, P. Chen1, C. H. Chen1, Y. M. Streeten10, A. Murray9, T. D. Spector8, B. McKnight11, T. B. Harris17, E. Demer- Liu1, C. F. Shiu1, C. S. J. Fann1, Y. T. Chen1; ath18, A. G. Uitterlinden1,2, K. L. Lunetta3,19; 1Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 2China Medical University Hospital, Taic- 1Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, hung, Taiwan. 2Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3The Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is the forth leading cause of death in National Heart Lung and Blood Institute’ Framingham Heart Study, Framing- Taiwan. The prevalence of DM in Taiwan increases from 4.63% in 2001 ham, MA, United States, 4Section of Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, to 4.69% in 2003 and the mortality from diabetes mellitus has almost Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States, 5Department doubled over the past ten years. To identify genetic variants for T2DM of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina Gillings School of Global Public in Han-Chinese that accounts for 98% of the Taiwan population, we Health, NC, United States, 6Icelandic Heart Association, Kopavogur, Iceland, conducted a two-stage genome-wide association study with a total of 7Cardiovascular Health Research Unit and Department of Internal Medicine,Concurrent Sessions  University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 8Department of Twin UGT1A1 (p=6.2x10-62) and G6PD (p=2.5x10-8), a strong association on research & Genetic Epidemiology, King’s College, London, United Kingdom, chromosome 12p12.2 (p=3.9x10-9). The findings were replicated in an 9Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School, Exter, independent sample of 1860 Sardinians and in 832 Amish individuals United Kingdom, 10Department of Medicine, University of Maryland School of from the HAPI Heart Study (overall pvalue<5x10-14). Interestingly, we Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 11Department of Biostatistics University observed in all three cohorts that the association with unconjugated of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 12Human Genetics Center, Univer- bilirubin was stronger than with conjugated bilirubin. Finally, we found sity of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX, United States, 13Longitudinal an enrichment of the high bilirubin levels allele at 12p12.2 in patients Studies Section, Clinical Research Branch, Gerontology Research Center, with idiopathic mild unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia lacking mutations National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States, 14University of Ice- in the UGT1A1 gene, suggesting that this locus may be involved in land, Reykjavik, Iceland, 15Hebrew Senior-Life Institute for Aging Research and the regulation of serum bilirubin levels in the general population and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 16Department of Epide- in some bilirubin-related disorders that are only partially explained by miology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 17Laboratory variants in previously identified loci. of Epidemiology, Demography, and Biometry, Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Aging, Bethesda, MD, United States, 18Division of Epidemi- c10.5 ology and Community Health, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, Identification of a Shared Genetic Susceptibility Locus for Minneapolis, MN, United States, 19Department of Biostatistics, Boston Univer- coronary Heart Disease and Periodontitis sity School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States. A. Schaefer1, G. M. Richter1, B. Groessner-Schreiber2, B. Noack3, M. Nothna- Menopause, defined by the cessation of the menstrual cycle due to gel4, N. El Mokhtari5, B. G. Loos6, S. Jepsen7, S. Schreiber1; depletion of the follicle pool, influences a woman’s well-being and is an 1Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel, Germany, 2University Medical Cen- important risk factor for several major age-related diseases including ter Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Department of Operative Dentistry and cardiovascular diseases, osteoarthritis and osteoporosis. The heritabil- Periodontology, Kiel, Germany, 3University Medical Center Carl Gustav Carus ity of age at natural menopause is estimated to be ~60%, suggesting a der Technischen Universität Dresden, Zentrum für Zahn-, Mund- und Kiefer- strong genetic component. While few candidate gene polymorphisms heilkunde, Dresden, Germany, 4University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, are associated with age at menopause, the genetic risk factors are Campus Kiel, Institute of Medical Informatics and Statistics, Kiel, Germany, largely unknown. 5University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Clinic of Cardiology, Kiel, Ger- We conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies many, 6Departement of Periodontology, Academic Centre for Dentistry Amster- with >2,500,000 SNPs for age at natural menopause in 10,399 post- dam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 7Department of Periodontology, Operative menopausal Caucasian women from 9 population-based cohorts. and Preventive Dentistry, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. We identified 20 SNPs on chromosome 19q13.4 and chromosome Recent studies indicate a mutual epidemiological relationship between 20p12.3 that reached genome-wide significance (p-value < 5*10-8). coronary heart disease (CHD) and periodontitis. Both diseases are as- The chromosome 19 SNPs are located on the same locus in BRSK1 sociated with by similar risk factors and are characterized by a chronic and LOC284417, the most significant SNP is associated with 0.47 inflammatory process. In a candidate-gene association study we iden- year earlier menopause per allele copy (SE: 0.05, p-value 1.9*10-18). tify an association of a genetic susceptibility locus shared by both dis- BRSK1 is a brain-specific serine-threonine kinase, for which no link eases. We confirm the known association of two neighboring linkage with menopause could be established. The top hit on chromosome disequilibrium regions on human chromosome 9p21.3 with CHD, and 20 is located in MCM8, and is associated with an 0.89 year earlier show the additional strong association of these loci with the risk of ag- menopause per copy of the minor allele (SE: 0.11, p-value: 2.2*10-15). gressive periodontitis. For the lead SNP of the main associated linkage MCM8 is expressed in mouse ovaries and is involved in DNA replica- disequilibrium region, rs1333048, the odds ratio of the autosomal-re- tion. No other loci reached genome-wide significance. cessive mode of inheritance is 1.99 (95% confidence interval 1.33- Our results provide evidence for common genetic variants regulating 2.94; P = 6.9 x 10-4) for generalized aggressive periodontitis, and 1.72 the timing of ovarian aging although the precise mechanisms are un- (1.06-2.76; P = 2.6 x 10-2) for localized aggressive periodontitis. The known. Additional studies are warranted to identify the causal variants two associated linkage disequilibrium regions map to the sequence at these loci and to characterize their functional significance. of the large antisense noncoding RNA ANRIL which partly overlaps regulatory and coding sequences of CDKN2A/CDKN2B. A closely lo- c10.4 cated diabetes associated variant was independent of the CHD and Genome-wide association scan for bilirubin levels in a sardinian periodontitis risk haplotypes. Our study demonstrates that CHD and population periodontitis are genetically related by at least one susceptibility locus, S. Sanna1, F. Busonero1, A. Maschio1, P. F. McArdle2, G. Usala1, M. Dei1, S. which is possibly involved in ANRIL activity and independent of diabe- Lai1, A. Mulas1, M. Piras1, L. Perseu1, M. Masala1, M. Marongiu1, L. Crisponi1, S. tes associated risk variants within this region. Elucidation of the inter- Naitza1, R. Galanello3, G. R. Abecasis4, A. R. Shuldiner5,2, D. Schlessinger6, A. play of ANRIL transcript variants and their involvement in increased Cao1, M. Uda1; susceptibility to the interactive diseases CHD and periodontitis prom- 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, CNR, Monserrato, Italy, ises new insight into the underlying shared pathogenic mechanisms of 2Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University of Maryland these complex common diseases. School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Clinica Pediatrica, Os- pedale Regionale delle Microcitemie, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e c10.6 Biotecnologie,Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 4Center for Sta- Meta-analysis of genome-wide scans identifies three novel loci tistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, influencing central obesity including one with a women-specific MI, United States, 5Geriatric Research and Education Clinical Center, Veterans association with waist-hip-ratio Administration Medical Center, Baltimore, MD, United States, 6Laboratory of I. M. Heid1, C. M. Lindgren2, C. Lamina3, J. Randall2, V. Steinthorsdottir4, E. K. Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States. Speliotes5, L. Qi6, the GIANT consortium; Bilirubin is the final product of heme degradation. Unconjugated bili- 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Wellcome Trust Centre rubin is transported into hepatocytes, where it is glucuronidated by for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Division UGT1A1 and secreted into the bile canaliculi in its conjugated form. of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, Recent studies have shown that elevated bilirubin levels in adults are 4deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, 5Department of Gastroenterology, Mas- inversely associated with the risk of developing coronary artery disease sachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United and directly with gallstones, while unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia States, 6Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, may be associated with susceptibility to drug toxicity. The genetic fac- United States. tors so far identified cannot fully explain the trait heritability, estimated Central obesity, which is an abnormal accumulation of intra-abdominal to be around 45%. To identify additional loci, we conducted a genome- fat, is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD) and type 2 wide association scan (GWAS) in 4300 Sardinians from the SardiNIA diabetes. Measures of central obesity and fat distribution have been project, genotyped using the Affymetrix 500K and 10K Arrays, and shown to be highly heritable. To identify the influencing genetic loci, evaluated the additive effect of 362,129 SNPs that passed quality con- a meta-analysis of 16 genome-wide scans of 38,580 Caucasians of trol tests. The GWAS results revealed, in addition to two known loci, European-ancestry was performed for waist circumference (WC) andConcurrent Sessions 0 waist-hip-ratio (WHR), two well-measurable and ubiquitously available Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA, United States. surrogate measures for central obesity. Heart formation requires a highly balanced network of transcriptional The top associating variants from this first stage were followed by activation of genes. The homeodomain transcription factor Shox2 is de novo genotyping (N=56,859) and in silico replication (N=13,830) essential for the formation of the sinoatrial valves and for the devel- for 27 SNPs with strong association with WC or WHR, but no or only opment of the pacemaking system. Here we identify the Bmp4 gene a weak association with BMI or height. Two loci reaching genome- as the first direct target of Shox2. Shox2 interacts directly with the wide significance, one at 6p12 (P for WC =1.9x10-11), one at 8p23 Bmp4 promoter and activates transcription in luciferase reporter as- (P for WC=8.9x10-9) were strengthened by the CHARGE consortium says. In addition, ectopic expression of Shox2 in Xenopus embryos (N=31,373). One further locus at 1q41 (P for WHR =2.6x10-8) was stimulates transcription of the Bmp4 gene and silencing of Shox2 in genome-wide significantly associated in the women-specific analysis. cardiomyocytes leads to a reduction in Bmp4 expression. In Tbx5del/+ The WHR women-specific locus (1q41) exhibits association even after and Shox2-/- mice we show that the T-box transcription factor Tbx5 controlling for body-mass-index, is associated also with percentage is required for Shox2 expression in the inflow tract and that Bmp4 is body fat from bioimpedance measures, and most intriguingly shows regulated by Shox2 in this compartment of the embryonic heart. This reciprocal effects on triglycerides in-line with the lipase role of a nearby work contributes to the unravelling of the intricate interplay between gene. For the 6p12 locus, preferential expression in adipose tissue is the heart-specific transcriptional machinery and developmental signal- reported, but association was also strong with body-mass-index. ling pathways. In summary, the results from these genome-wide meta-analyses in- cluding the first scan on WHR suggest novel loci/genes for regulating c11.3 central obesity and highlight the complementary genetics of waist phe- Pharyngeal ectoderm to neural crest signalling is disrupted in a notypes to using body-mass-index. mouse model of DiGeorge syndrome P. J. Scambler, A. Calmont, S. Ivins, K. Lammerts van Beuren; c11.1 Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom. An aCGH screening study in 150 patients identifies a novel Background/Aims: Haploinsufficiency of Tbx1 is a major cause of the dosage-sensitive gene, tAB2, which is disrupted in multiple DiGeorge and velocardiofacial syndromes. It is now apparent that the patients with cardiac defects requirements for Tbx1 vary by tissue and embryonic stage. As part B. Thienpont1, J. Breckpot1, L. Zang2, L. Tranchevent3, P. Van Loo4, K. Møll- of an effort to unravel the function of Tbx1 we conducted microarray gård5, N. Tommerup2, I. Bache2, Z. Tümer2, D. Waggoner6, M. Gewillig7, H. analysis of cells flow sorted from Tbx1 null and heterozygous embryos. Peeters1, Y. Moreau3, J. R. Vermeesch4, L. A. Larssen2, K. Devriendt1; A methodological aim was to validate fluorescent β-galactosidase sub- 1Laboratory for the Genetics of Human Development, Department of Human strates for FACS. Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Wilhelm Johannsen Centre Method and Materials: FACS-GAL derived Tbx1 expressing cells from for Functional Genome Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, E9.5 day embryos provided RNA for Affymetrix array analysis. Po- Denmark, 3Department of Electrical Engineering ESAT-SCD, University of Leu- tential target genes were analysed for function and epistasis in both ven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, fish and mouse. Tbx1(enhancer) Cre, Ap2Cre, and FoxA2Cre were Leuven, Belgium, 5Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University crossed into conditional alleles to assess tissue specific requirements of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Department of Pediatrics and Depart- for one candidate target gene, Gbx2. ment of Genetics of the University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 7Pe- Results and Conclusions: Gbx2 was downregulated in two separate diatric Cardiology Unit, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. microarray and RTQPCR experiments. Gbx2 and Tbx1 were in epis- An array-CGH screening study of 150 patients with congenital heart tasis in both a zebrafish and mouse model of DiGeorge syndrome, defects (CHDs) at 1Mb resolution identified 41 imbalances not known strongly suggesting the involvement of the Gbx2 transcription factor to be CNP. Our genetic decision algorithm classified CNVs as causal in pathways downstream of Tbx1. This epistasis involved the remod- in 25 patients (17%). Systematic analysis of clinical features of the 150 elling of the fourth pharyngeal arch artery leading to interruption of patients showed dysmorphism as the only parameter significantly as- aortic arch type B - the cardiovascular defect most specific for the sociated with detection of a causal CNV at this resolution. To assess if syndrome. We found that, for correct remodelling, Gbx2 was required CNVs below 1Mb are involved in syndromic CHDs, we reanalyzed 30 in the embryonic ectoderm overlying the pharyngeal arches, implying patients on Agilent 244K array: 2 causal CNVs were detected. ectodermal signalling downstream of Gbx2. We provide evidence that Mapping chromosomal aberrations is an established strategy for gene Slit and Robo expression, in ectoderm and cardiac crest respectively, identification. Our array-CGH screening identified a 6q24.2q25.1 dele- is disrupted in Tbx1/Gbx2 mutant embryos. For the first time, we dem- tion in a patient with VSD and coarctation. Genotype-phenotype cor- onstrate abnormal neural crest patterning in Tbx1 heterozygous mice. relations in 9 additional deletion patients identified a critical 1.2 Mb region on 6q25.1 harboring 11 genes. Prioritization of all candidate c11.4 genes on 6q24q25 yielded a ranked list, with TAB2 (located in the criti- Positive and negative feedback regulates the transcription factor cal deletion region) ranking first, suggesting TAB2 haplo-insufficiency FOXL2 in response to cell stress: evidence for a regulatory causes errors in heart development. imbalance induced by disease-causing mutations To reinforce this conclusion, we demonstrated that TAB2 is expressed B. A. Benayoun1,2, F. Batista1,2, J. Auer1, A. Dipietromaria1,2, D. L’Hôte1,3, E. De in the heart of both human and zebrafish embryos. We moreover ti- Baere4, R. A. Veitia1,2; trated a tab2 knock-down in developing zebrafish and showed that 1Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 2Université Diderot-Paris VII, Paris, France, halving tab2 dosage leads to broad developmental problems including 3INRA/Université de Limoges, UMR 1061, Limoges, France, 4Center for Medi- heart defects. Interestingly, Tab2+/- mice were reported to die perina- cal Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. tally for unknown reasons. FOXL2 is a Forkhead transcription factor, essential for ovarian func- Mutation analysis of TAB2 in 100 patients with a CHD failed to identify tion, whose mutations are responsible for the Blepharophimosis Ptosis pathogenic mutations. However, in a small family where a balanced Epicanthus-inversus Syndrome (BPES), characterized by craniofacial translocation segregates with CHDs, we demonstrate that TAB2 is defects, often associated with premature ovarian failure. We show disrupted showing that TAB2 haplo-insufficiency causes CHDs in hu- that cell stress upregulates FOXL2 expression in an ovarian granu- mans. losa cell model. Increased FOXL2 transcription might be mediated at least partly by self-activation. Using 2D-western blot, we show that the c11.2 response of FOXL2 to stress correlates with a dramatic remodeling of shox2 mediates tbx5 activity by regulating Bmp4 in the sinus its post-translational modification profile. Upon oxidative stress, we ob- venosus of the developing heart serve an increased recruitment of FOXL2 to several stress-response S. Puskaric1, S. Schmitteckert1, A. D. Mori2, A. Glaser1, K. U. Schneider1, B. G. promoters, notably that of the mitochondrial Superoxide Dismutase Bruneau2, R. J. Blaschke1, H. Steinbeisser1, G. Rappold1; (MnSOD). Using several luciferase reporter systems, we show that 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Gladstone Institute for FOXL2 transactivation is markedly enhanced in this context. Models predict that gene upregulation in response to a signal should even- tually be counterbalanced to restore the initial steady state. In lineConcurrent Sessions  with this, we found that FOXL2 activity was repressed by the SIRT1 the MYO5B exons and all splice-sites was performed in 11 unrelated deacetylase. Interestingly, we demonstrate that SIRT1 transcription MVID patients and revealed 15 novel nonsense and missense muta- is, in turn, directly upregulated by FOXL2, which closes a negative- tions. 10 patients showed biallelic mutations and in one patient only feedback loop. The regulatory relationship between FOXL2 and SIRT1 one mutation was identified. Immunofluorescence, Western blotting prompted us the test action of nicotinamide, an inhibitor of sirtuins, and immunoelectron microscopy were applied to analyze the effects of on FoxL2 expression/activity. According to our expectations, nicotin- MYO5B-siRNA knock-down in Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cells. Loss of amide treatment increases FoxL2 transcription. Finally, we show that surface microvilli and cytoplasmic vacuoles containing microvilli were 11 disease-causing mutations in the ORF of FOXL2 induce aberrant induced in CaCo-2 cells following MYO5B knock-down. We show that regulation of FOXL2 and/or regulation of the FOXL2 stress-response MYO5B gene mutations are the major cause of microvillus inclusion target gene MnSOD. Taken together, our results establish that FOXL2 disease and MYO5B knock-down recapitulates most of the cellular is an actor of the stress response, and provide new insights into the phenotype in vitro. The finding of a majority of truncating mutations pathogenic consequences of FOXL2 mutations. and our in vitro study independently show loss of MYO5B function as the cause of MVID. MYO5B may mobilize recycling endosomes and c11.5 apical proteins necessary for brush border maintenance. Loss-of-function mutation in the dioxygenase-encoding, obesity- associated FTO gene causes severe growth retardation and c12.1 multiple malformations DPF3 - a Novel Epigenetic Regulator of cardiac muscle S. Boissel *1, O. Reish *2, K. Proulx *3, H. Kawagoe-Takaki4, D. Meyre5, F. Mo- Development and Function linari1, G. Yeo3, B. Sedgwick4, V. Saudek3, S. Farooqi3, P. Froguel5, T. Lindahl4, M. Lange1, B. Kaynak1, U. B. Forster2, M. Tönjes1, J. J. Fischer1, J. Schlesing- S. O’Rahilly3, A. Munnich1, L. Colleaux1, * Equal contibutors; er1, J. Gobom1, S. Abdelilah-Seyfried2, S. Sperling1; 1INSERM U781 and département de Génétique, Paris, France, 2Department 1Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 2Max Delbrück of Medical Genetics, Assaf Harofeh Hospital, Assaf Harofeh, Israel, 3Institute Center, Berlin, Germany. of Metabolic Science, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cam- Chromatin remodeling and histone modifications have a high impact bridge, United Kingdom, 4Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, on cardiac function and development. Both facilitate access of tran- Clare Hall Laboratories, South Mimms, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom, 5CNRS scription factors to DNA by promoting the unwinding and destabiliza- 8090-Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France. tion of histone-DNA interactions. We present DPF3, a novel epigenetic We ascertained a large Palestinian Arab consanguineous multiplex key factor, which plays an essential role in cardiac and muscle devel- family in which nine affected infants presented a previously unreported opment. In a genome-wide gene expression study of congenital mal- polymalformation syndrome including pre- and post-natal growth re- formed human hearts we identified DPF3 as significantly up-regulated tardation, severe psychomotor delay, brain malformations, cardiac de- in hypertrophic right ventricular myocardium of patients with Tetralogy fects, genital anomalies, cleft palate, characteristic facial dysmorphism of Fallot. and premature death. We mapped the disease-causing gene on 16q12 Taking a systematic approach including methods such as gene ex- and subsequently identified a homozygous c.947G>A (p.R316Q) vari- pression arrays, morpholino knockdown, chromatin-immunoprecipita- ation within the FTO gene, a gene associated with human adiposity. tion, GST pulldown and tandem-affinity-purification, we elucidated the This variant co-segregated with the disease, was not found in 730 function of DPF3. DPF3 is associated with the BAF chromatin remod- control alleles and altered a highly conserved residue. FTO has been eling complex and binds methylated and acetylated lysine residues of recently recognized as a member of the AlkB related family of non- histone 3 and 4. During development Dpf3 is expressed in the heart haem iron- and 2-oxoglutarate (2OG) dependent dioxygenases and and somites of mouse, chicken and zebrafish. Morpholino knockdown shown to localise in the nucleus. Members of this family directly re- of dpf3 in zebrafish leads to incomplete cardiac looping and severely verse alkylated DNA and RNA damages by oxidative demethylation reduced ventricular contractility with disassembled muscular fibers. and the R316 residue play a crucial role by mediating 2OG-coordina- The high impact of histone acetylation on transcription and on the phe- tion. While the mutation does not alter the nuclear localisation of the notype is well characterized; e.g., class II histone deacetylases con- protein, western blotting experiments showed a significantly reduced trol cardiac growth and gene expression in response to stress stimuli. amount of FTO protein in patient fibroblasts as compared to controls. DPF3 potentially represents the missing link to explain the high impact More importantly, in vitro assays demonstrated that the R316Q FTO of the histone modification status on the recruitment of the BAF com- mutant protein had a markedly reduced activity, likely due to the in- plex to chromatin target sites and its consequence for cardiac function. ability of the mutant protein to interact with the 2OG co-substrate. Fi- The knowledge of the molecular function of Dpf3 contributes to our nally, patient fibroblasts display signs of senescence including growth understanding of cardiac hypertrophy in patients and might provide the defects, limited replicative lifespan and altered cell morphology. Our basis of future therapeutic options in heart failure. findings demonstrate an unsuspected role for FTO protein in human development and provide the first example of a human disorder related c12.2 to the defect of an AlkB related protein. Neuropathology of Alpha-synuclein and synphilin-1 transgenic mouse models of Parkinson’s Disease c11.6 S. Nuber1, E. Petrasch-Parwez2, T. Franck1, U. Schumann1, B. Winner3, J. microvillus inclusion disease results from loss of myosin Vb Winkler3, H. Wolburg4, S. V. Hörsten5, T. Schmidt1, J. Boy1, H. Ngyuen1, P. Teis- function mann6, J. B. Schulz7, M. Neumann8, C. Holzmann9, I. Schmitt10, W. Kuhn11, A. A. R. Janecke1, F. M. Ruemmele2, G. Utermann1, M. W. Hess3, T. Müller4, L. A. Bornemann12, F. Zimmermann13, A. Servadio14, B. Pichler15, O. Riess1; Huber5; 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Tuebingen, Germany, 2Inst of Neu- 1Division of Clinical Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, roanatomy and Molecular Brain Research, University of Bochum, Germany, 2Université Paris Descartes, Faculté Necker, INSERM U793, Paris, France, 3Dept. of Neurology, University of Regensburg, Germany, 4Inst of Pathology, 3Division of Histology and Embryology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, University of Tuebingen, Germany, 5Dept.of Experimental Therapy, University Austria, 4Department of Pediatrics II, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Erlangen, Germany, 6Inst of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, United Austria, 5Biocenter, Division of Cell Biology, Innsbruck Medical University, Inns- Kingdom, 7Center of Molecular Physiology of the Brain, University of Goet- bruck, Austria. tingen, Germany, 8Center of Neuropathology and Prion Research, University of Autosomal recessive microvillus inclusion disease (MVID) presents Munich, Germany, 9Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Rostock, Germany, with an intractable diarrhea within the first few weeks of life. A pathog- 10Clinic of Neurology, University of Bonn, Germany, 11Leopoldina Hospital of nomonic lack of microvilli on the surface of mature enterocytes and Neurology, Bochum, Germany, 12Inst of BrainResearch, University of Tuebin- an occurrence of intracellular vacuoles lined by microvilli (microvillus gen, Germany, 13ZMBH, University of Heidelberg, Germany, 14TIGEM, Napoli, inclusions) are seen in biopsies. Recently, we identified mutations in Italy, 15Dept. of Radiology, University of Tuebingen, Germany. the MYO5B gene, encoding the unconventional type Vb myosin mo- Alpha-synuclein has been implicated in the pathogenesis of many tor protein in nine MVID patients (Müller et al., Nat Genet 40: 1163-5, neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson’s disease (PD). PD 2008). We here evaluated further the role of MYO5B mutations and is based on progressive neuropathological alterations leading to mo- demonstrate loss of function of MYO5B in MVID. Direct sequencing of tor abnormalities that are frequently predated by olfactory dysfunctionConcurrent Sessions  and then cognitive decline in later disease stages. Whether the neu- normal ranges, with no treatment related adverse events. Pharmaco- rodegenerative process might be halted or even reversed is presently kinetic analysis demonstrated a prolonged half life. All immunological unknown. We therefore generated conditional mouse models by us- specific tests were within normal ranges with no significant immune ing the tet-regulatable system. Mice expressing high levels of human reaction or production of anti-prGCD antibodies. An international multi- wildtype alpha-synuclein in several brain regions developed nigral and center Phase III Pivotal trial is currently on-going under FDA SPA ap- hippocampal neuropathology, including reduced neurogenesis and proval, where 30 untreated patients are administered with 30U/kg or neurodegeneration, leading to progressive motor decline and impaired 60U/kg per infusion over 9 months. Report of the results is expected long-term memory. Turning off transgene expression in aged mice halt- to take place in H2/2009. Submission of our NDA to the FDA, Israeli ed progression of motor symptoms but did not reverse the symptoms. and other regulatory agencies will take place in Q4/2009. Protalix has Mice expressing the mutated (A30P) alpha-synuclein limited to the initiated a follow-on extension study with enrollment of our first patients olfactory bulb showed a reduction of monoamines in this region. In a in June 2008. In addition, a multi center worldwide switch-over study to conducted TMT-smell test these mice also revealed an impaired anxi- assess the safe transition to prGCD of patients with Gaucher disease ety reaction and an increased exploratory behavior; the latter might that are currently undergoing enzyme replacement therapy with imiglu- be a depressive core symptom. These data suggest that approaches cerase was initiated on December 2008. targeting á-syn induced pathological pathways might be of benefit only in early disease stages. We further generated mice with permanent c12.5 expression of the synphilin-1 transgene. We found ubiquitin-positive Trans-splicing gene therapy in autosomal dominant skin disease inclusions in cerebellar Bergman Glia and dark-cell degeneration of V. Wally, U. Koller, H. Hintner, J. W. Bauer; Purkinje cells. At the behavioral level mice showed impairment of mo- Division of Molecular Dermatology and eb-house Austria, Salzburg, Austria. tor performance and motor skill learning. This data suggest a negative Mutations in the KRT14 gene underly different types of the blistering impact of overexpressed synphilin-1 in transgenic mouse brain. skin disease Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS). This form of EB is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant way, rendering it challenge c12.3 for gene therapy, since the expression of wild type cDNA does not Rescue of a Lethal murine model of methylmalonic Acidemia remove the dominant negative keratin aggregates. using rAAV8 mediated Gene therapy- One Year Post-treatment We chose “Spliceosome Mediated RNA Trans-Splicing” (SMaRT) to R. J. Chandler, C. P. Venditti; repair the heterozygous KRT14 missense mutation R125P. By replac- National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, ing a specific gene portion by trans-splicing of a pre-trans-splicing mol- Bethesda, MD, United States. ecule (PTM) to a target pre-mRNA, functionality of the target protein Methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) is a genetic disorder caused by de- is restored and the amount of negatively interfering dominant gene ficient activity of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT). MMA patients product is reduced. exhibit increased methylmalonic acid levels in the plasma and urine Besides the wildtype gene portion to be replaced and essential splicing and exhibit a clinical phenotype of lethal metabolic decompensation, features, the PTM incorporates a binding domain (BD), which is crucial growth retardation, renal failure and metabolic strokes. A recombinant for the trans-splicing specificity and efficiency. We developed a screen- adeno-associated virus (AAV) serotype 8 carrying the murine Mut ing method to identify best BDs for a PTM which specifically replaces cDNA (rAAV8-mMut) was injected directly into the liver of newborn KRT14 exons 1 to 7. It is based on fluorescent molecules which render Mut-/- mice. Greater than 95% of the 27 Mut-/- mice injected with 1 or successful trans-splicing events discriminable. 2x1011GC of rAAV8-mMut have survived for 1 year or longer and are A PTM library including random binding domains specific for KRT14 indistinguishable from their control littermates. All the untreated mu- exon/intron7 was produced. Transfection of the library with a target tants (n=58) perished before day of life 72. Subsequently, a smaller molecule results in fluorescence of trans-spliced molecules, visible group of Mut-/- mice (n=4) received an intraperitoneal (IP) injection of in the fluorescence microscope and detectable by FACS analysis. 3x1011GC of rAAV8-mMut, with 75% of the mice rescued for longer Functional PTMs were isolated and tested for trans-splicing efficiency than 120 days. Hepatic Mut RNA levels decreased from 37-72% at and specificity. Best PTMs were adapted for endogenous trans-splic- 90 days post-injection to 10-15% at one year post-treatment. Plasma ing and transfected to a EBS keratinocytes cell line, showing specific methylmalonic acid levels in the treated mutant mice were significantly trans-splicing into exon 8 of the endogenous KRT14. reduced at 24 and 60 days after treatment and remained stable one- Successful trans-splicing in this model proves that this is a novel ap- year post-treatment, indicating that substantial MUT enzymatic activ- proach to treat autosomal dominant diseases. ity was restored and maintained. Whole body MUT enzymatic activity, indirectly measured by in vivo conversion of 1-13C-sodium propionate c12.6 into 13CO, was readily detected in Mut-/- mice one-year post-treatment. Ciliary beating recovery in deficient human airway epithelial 2 These experiments provide the first evidence that gene therapy has cells after lentivirus ex vivo gene therapy clinical utility in the long term and acute treatment for methylmalonic B. Chhin1, D. Nègre2,3, O. Merrot4, J. Pham1, Y. Tourneur5, D. Ressnikoff5, M. acidemia and provide proof of principle evidence to support the devel- Jaspers6, M. Jorissen6, F. Cosset2,3, P. Bouvagnet1,7; opment of gene therapy for other organic acidemias. 1EA 4171, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France, 2INSERM U758, Lyon, France, 3ENS, Lyon, France, 4Service ORL, Hospices Civils Lyon, Lyon, France, 5Cen- c12.4 tre Commun de Quantimétrie, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France, 6UZ GHB, Novel Enzyme Replacement therapy for Gaucher Disease: Leuven, Belgium, 7Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. On Going Phase iii clinical trials with Recombinant Human Introduction: Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia is a heterogeneous genetic Glucocerebrosidase Expressed in Plant cells disease which is characterized by cilia dysfunction of the epithelial D. Aviezer1, E. Almon-Brill1, Y. Shaaltiel1, R. Chertkoff1, S. Hashmueli1, A. Zimran2; cells lining the respiratory tracts resulting in recurrent respiratory tract 1Protalix Biotherapeutics, Carmiel, Israel, 2Gaucher Clinic, Shaare Zedek Medical infections. Despite lifelong physiological therapy and antibiotics, lungs Center, Jerusalem, Israel. of affected patients are progressively destroyed leading to respiratory Gaucher Disease, characterized by glucocerebrosidase (hGCD) defi- insufficiency. Recessive mutations in Dynein Axonemal Intermediate ciency, provokes glucosylceramide accumulation in cellular lysosomes. chain type 1 (DNAI1) gene have been described in 10% of cases of Protalix has developed a propriety plant cell expressed active form of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia. rh-glucocerebrosidase (prGCD). Protalix unique technology permits Objective: Our goal was to restore normal ciliary beating in DNAI1 de- control of glycosilation pattern and consistency through targeting to ficient human airway epithelial cells. specific plant cell organelles. prGCD has intrinsic exposed mannose Methods: A lentiviral vector based on Simian Immunodeficiency Virus residues and demonstrates batch to batch consistency. prGCD exhib- pseudotyped with Vesicular Stomatitis Virus Glycoprotein was used its similar crystal structure and biological activity to Cerezyme. Preclin- to transduce cultured human airway epithelial cells with a cDNA of ical toxicology studies showed no treatment-related adverse events, DNAI1 driven by the Elongation Factor 1 promoter. Transcription and no neutralizing antibodies and no clinical findings. Phase I safety clini- translation of the transduced gene were tested by RT-PCR and west- cal trial showed that prGCD administered intravenously in sequential ern blot, respectively. Human airway epithelial cells which were DNAI1 doses (15, 30 and 60 units/kg) was well tolerated, all tests being within deficient due to compound heterozygous mutations and consequentlyConcurrent Sessions  had immotile cilia and no outer dynein arms, were transduced by the years, 67.8% male) were examined. Per family, a mean of 2.5 (1-8) lentivirus. Cilia beating was recorded and electron microscopy of the first-degree relatives were examined (N=242). A (probable) diagnosis cilia was performed. was made in 36 of the families (31.3%). Catecholaminergic polymor- Results: Transcription and translation of the transduced DNAI1 gene phic ventricular tachycardia (N=8) and long QT syndrome (N=7) were were detected in human cells treated with the lentivirus. In addition, the most common diagnoses. immotile cilia recovered a normal beat and outer dynein arms reap- Conclusions: By screening family members of a young SUD victim an peared. inherited heart disease is identified in approximately 31% of families. Conclusion: This is the first time that recovery of cilia beating is dem- Family screening at a specialized cardiogenetics department should onstrated in this disease. This preliminary step constitutes a concep- be recommended to relatives of SUD victims. tual proof which is indispensable in the perspective of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia’s in vivo gene therapy. c13.3 mutations in the ANKRD1 gene encoding cARP are responsible c13.1 for human dilated cardiomyopathy clinical characteristics of distantly related families with L. Duboscq-Bidot1,2, P. Charron3,2, V. Ruppert4, L. Fauchier5, A. Richter4, L. idiopathic ventricular fibrillation linked to chromosome 7q36 Tavazzi6, T. Wichter7, B. Maish4, M. Komajda8,2, R. Isnard8,2, E. Villard1,9; I. Christiaans1,2, M. Alders1, T. T. Koopmann3, P. G. Postema2, K. P. Loh4, K. 1INSERM UMR956, Paris, France, 2Groupe hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, Zeppenfeld5, C. R. Bezzina3, A. A. M. Wilde2,3; France, 3Département de génétique, Paris, France, 4Universitätsklinikum 1AMC, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2AMC, Gießen und Marburg GmbH, Marburg, Germany, 5CHU Trousseau, Tours, Department of Cardiology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3AMC, Department France, 6Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, pavi, Italy, 7Department of Experimental Cardiology, Heart Failure Research Centre, Amsterdam, The of Cardiology and Angiology, Münster, Germany, 8Département de cardiologie, Netherlands, 4UMCU, Department of Cardiology, Utrecht, The Netherlands, Paris, France, 9Centre d’investigation Biomédicale Pitié Salpétriére, Paris, 5LUMC, Department of Cardiology, Leiden, The Netherlands. France. Introduction: Idiopathic ventricular fibrillation (IVF) is characterised by Dilated Cardiomyopathy (DCM) is familial in about 30% of cases, and VF in the absence of structural or electrical heart disease. With ge- to date, 15 responsible genes have been identified in isolated forms nome wide haplotype sharing analysis we identified an IVF locus on and up to 25 associated with additional phenotypes including myopa- chromosome 7q36. This locus harbors the DPP6 gene and was found thy, arrythmias or more complex syndromes. No major gene for the in 10 distantly related families with IVF and unexplained sudden car- disease has been identified, demonstrating the genetic heterogeneity diac death (SCD). of DCM. However, in a majority of families the responsible genes are Methods: We studied echocardiograms, MRIs, ECG characteristics at still to be discovered. baseline, exercise and at ajmaline/flecainide provocation, and event- The ANKRD1 gene is overexpressed in heart failure in human or ani- free survival. mal models. The encoded protein CARP is interacting with partners Results: We identified 254 relatives, 117 carriers (mean age 43±20 such as Myopalladin or Titin, previously involved in DCM. We hypoth- years, 56% males) and 137 noncarriers (mean age 40±21 years, esised that mutations in ANKRD1 could be responsible for DCM. 44% males). Echocardiography (n=33) and MRI (n=43) did not re- We have screened a DCM affected population consisting on 231 veal significant or consistent abnormalities. Baseline and exercise caucasian independent familial (158) and sporadic (73) cases by di- ECG characteristics were not different between groups and provoca- rect sequencing of PCR-amplified coding exons. We identified 5 mis- tion with ajmaline/flecainide was negative in six resuscitated carriers. sense mutations : 3 sporadic (mutations p.Glu57Gln, p.Arg66Gln and SCD/IVF had occurred in 37 carriers (32%, median age 34 years). p.Leu199Arg ) and 2 familial (mutations p.Thr116Met and p.Ala276Val) Kaplan-Meier curves showed severely decreased survival for carriers absent from 400 controls and affecting highly conserved residues. with only 50% event-free at 60 years of age. Male carriers seemed to Expression of the mutant CARP proteins in rat neonate cardiomyo- be more severely affected with 50% event-free survival at 48 years of cytes indicated that at least 3 of the mutations identified (p.Glu57Gln, age (p=0.004). At present, an implantable defibrillator seems the only p.Leu199Arg, p.Ala276Val) led both to significant less repressor activi- treatment option in carriers. ty and to greater phenylephrin induced hypertrophy suggesting altered Conclusions: We identified a novel IVF locus on chromosome 7q36 function of CARP mutant proteins. Based on genetic and functional which harbors the DPP6 gene. The associated phenotype is extremely analysis of CARP mutations, we have identified ANKRD1 as a new malignant and presents as premature IVF/SCD. Genetic testing for gene associated with DCM, accounting for about 4% of cases. the responsible haplotype is currently the only risk marker in these patients. This raises the unique possibility to assess the risk status c13.4 of, and treat accordingly, presymptomatic individuals with a potentially clinical Features and Outcome of Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy fatal disease that does not express otherwise. Associated with triple sarcomere Protein Gene mutations F. Girolami1, I. Olivotto2, C. Giuliani1, A. Mariottini1, I. Passerini1, M. Ackerman3, c13.2 F. Cecchi2, F. Torricelli1; the yield of family screening in sudden unexplained death in the 1AOU Careggi-SOD Diagnostica Genetica, Florence, Italy, 2AOU Careggi-Re- young gional Referral Center for Myocardial Diseases, Florence, Italy, 3Mayo Clinic C. Van der Werf, N. Hofman, H. L. Tan, I. M. Van Langen, A. A. M. Wilde; College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, United States. Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Double or compound sarcomere gene mutation heterozygosity have Introduction: Sudden death of a young person is not explained by au- been described in 3-6% of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) pa- topsy in 6-65%, which is termed sudden unexplained death (SUD). In tients, and is associated with early disease onset and severe outcome. these cases, molecular autopsy and cardiological and genetic exami- In the present study, we provide the first description of the clinical pro- nation in surviving first degree relatives might unmask its cause, espe- file associated with triple sarcomere gene mutations in a large, con- cially primary arrhythmia syndromes. We sought to determine the yield secutive HCM cohort. of family screening in a large series of young SUD victims. A total of 247 unrelated index HCM patients underwent screening for myo- Methods: At the cardiogenetics department of our university hospital, filament gene mutations by automatic DNA sequencing of eight genes: we studied all consecutive families who presented with ≥1 first de- MYBPC3, MYH7, TNNT2, MYL2, MYL3, TNNI3, TPM1, and ACTC. gree related SUD victim aged 1-50 years. Autopsy was not performed Of the 247 index patients, 3 (1%) harboured triple gene mutations, as (53.8%) or did not reveal a cause of death. The initial examination of follows: MYH7-R869H, MYBPC3- E258K and TNNI3-A86fs in a 32- the relatives consisted of personal and family medical history and a year old female; MYH7-R273C, MYH7-E1455X and MYBPC3-E165D resting ECG. Cardiac autopsy was revised if possible. Additional car- in a 46-year old male; and MYBPC3-insC1065, MYBPC3-P371R and diological examinations were performed on indication. Genetic anal- MYH7- R869H in a 45-year old female. All 3 experienced early onset ysis of the associated candidate gene(s) was performed in material of severe HCM phenotype, marked symptoms and progression of dis- obtained from the deceased person or in those relatives with clinical ease towards the end-stage phase by the fourth decade, requiring, in abnormalities. one instance, cardiac transplantation. Moreover, all had multiple risk Results: The families of 115 SUD victims (mean age at death 29.1 factors for sudden cardiac death, including resuscitated cardiac arrestConcurrent Sessions  in one, advising the implantation of prophylactic defibrillators which longed or shortened. Previously, a common variant in NOS1AP (CA- appropriately intervened in two patients. Each of the probands’ parents PON) influencing QT interval was mapped in a European population. was a documented or likely carrier of one or two mutations. However, We now analyze genome-wide association data from five European none had a prior diagnosis of HCM or significant cardiac symptoms. ancestry samples (ARIC, KORA, SardiNIA, GenNOVA and HNR, N HCM associated with triple gene mutations was very rare but invariably = 15,842). We confirm the NOS1AP association (P=1.63x10-35) and associated with rapidly progressive disease and adverse outcome. identify nine additional loci at P<5x10-8. Four loci map near the mono- These findings reinforce the unfavourable prognostic significance of genic long QT syndrome genes KCNQ1, KCNH2, SCN5A and KCNJ2. complex genotypes in patients with HCM, with potential impact on ge- Two loci map to ATP1B1 (P=2.18 x10-12), PLN (P =1.97x10-16) that netic screening strategies. have well known roles in myocardial electrophysiology. The remain- ing loci are at RNF207 (P =3.57x10-9), LITAF (P=2.92x10-8) and near c13.5 GINS3-NDRG4-CNOT1 (P=1.26x10-12).. Taken together genetic vari- Noncompaction cardiomyopathy; mutation spectrum, ation at these 10 loci explained 3.3% of corrected QT interval varia- distribution of disease genes and implications for diagnostic tion across all studies. The ~8% of individuals carrying 14 or more QT strategies prolonging alleles had an OR of 2.52 to have prolonged QT by clinical Y. M. Hoedemaekers, K. Caliskan, M. van Tienhoven, M. Michels, D. F. Majoor standards when compared to the ~10% of individuals carrying 8 or less - Krakauer, D. Dooijes; alleles (95% CI 1.74-3.66, P = 4.83 x 10-7). These results provide new Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. insights into myocardial electrophysiology and provide novel candidate Background: Noncompaction cardiomyopathy (NCCM) is characterised genes for ventricular arrhythmias and SCD. by an excessively thickened endocardial layer with deep intertrabecular recesses. Cardiac symptoms include heart failure, lethal arrhythmias c14.1 and/or thrombo-embolic complications. NCCM is genetically heteroge- the vertebrate inner ear microRNAs have unique spatial and neous, predominantly autosomal dominantly inherited. To contribute to temporal expression patterns and are crucial for inner ear a genetic classification 17 different genes associated with cardiomy- development and survival opathy were completely analysed in a cohort of 56 NCCM patients. L. M. Friedman1, A. A. Dror1, E. Mor1, T. Tenne1, G. Toren1, N. Shomron2, D. M. Methods: DNA analysis of the genes βετα-Myosin Heavy Chain (MYH7), Fekete3, E. Hornstein4, K. B. Avraham1; Myosin Binding Protein C (MYBPC3), cardiac Troponin C (TNNC1), 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School Troponin T (TNNT2) Troponin I (TNNI3) and αλπηα-Actin (ACTC1), of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Department of Cell and De- cardiac-regulatory Myosin Light Chain (MYL2), cardiac-essential velopmental Biology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Myosin Light Chain (MYL3), αλπηα-Tropomyosin (TPM1), Cysteine- Israel, 3Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette,, and Glycine-rich Protein (CSRP3), Theletonin (TCAP), Calseques- IN, United States, 4Department of Molecular Genetics, The Weizmann Institute trin (CASQ2), Calreticulin (CALR3), Phospholamban (PLN), Taffazin of Science, Rehovot, Israel. (TAZ), Cypher/Zasp (LDB3) and Lamin A/C (LMNA) was performed. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate the translation of target mRNAs and Results: Twenty-nine mutations were identified in the genes MYH7 affect, directly or indirectly, the expression of a large portion of the (11), MYBPC3 (4), TNNT2 (3), TNNI3 (1), TPM1 (2), ACTC1 (1), protein-coding genes. The RNase Dicer1 is required for production of CASQ2 (2), PLN (1), TAZ (1), LDB3 (2) and LMNA (1) in 23 probands mature and functional miRNAs from pre-miRNAs. The mammalian in- (41%). Eighteen probands had a single mutation, four had two and one ner ear contains the cochlea and the vestibule that are responsible for had three mutations. hearing and balance, respectively. Dicer1 was conditionally knocked- Conclusion: We identified the MYBPC3, TNNI3, TPM1, PLN and out in the sensory epithelia of the mouse inner ear, to study the roles of CASQ2 genes as novel NCCM loci. In 41% of the patients NCCM was miRNAs in these tissues. Mutant mice were born with normal sensory associated with mutations in sarcomere, Z-disc, Ca2+-handling or other hair cells, but developed malformed hair cells and profound deafness genes associated with cardiomyopathy. This warrants molecular anal- a short time thereafter, demonstrating that miRNAs are crucial for post- ysis of these genes in NCCM. The identification of the genetic cause natal survival of functional inner ear hair cells. We identified miRNAs for cardiomyopathy facilitates family study and allows accurate identi- that may have a role in the mouse developing inner ear by combin- fication of relatives at risk of developing cardiomyopathy. Genetically, ing miRNA transcriptome analysis and bioinformatics. Different spatial NCCM is part of a continuous pathophysiological spectrum including and temporal expression patterns of six miRNAs (miR-15a, miR-18a, hypertrophic, dilated and restrictive cardiomyopathy. miR-30b, miR-99a, miR-182 and miR-199a) may reflect their roles. A subset of these miRNAs, miR-15a, miR-18a and miR-30b, were shown c13.6 to be crucial for early development and morphogenesis of the zebraf- common variants at ten loci modulate the Qt interval duration in ish inner ear. To search for putative target mRNAs for miRNAs that are individuals of European ancestry: the QtscD consortium expressed in the mouse inner ear sensory epithelia, we intersected A. Pfeufer1, S. Sanna2, D. E. Arking3, M. Müller4, V. Gateva5, C. Fuchsberger6, the outputs of target prediction algorithms with the mRNA expression C. Pattaro6, M. F. Sinner7, S. S. Najjar8, W. Kao9, T. W. Mühleisen10, S. Möhlen- profiles of these tissues. Slc12a2, Cldn12 and Bdnf mRNAs were ex- kamp11, A. A. Hicks6, B. Müller-Myhsok12, P. P. Pramstaller6, H. Wichmann4, D. amined as targets for miR-15a. Our data support the hypothesis that Schlessinger8, E. Boerwinkle13, M. Uda2, S. Kääb7, T. Meitinger1, G. R. Abeca- inner ear tissue differentiation and maintenance are regulated and sis5, A. Chakravarti3, f. the ARIC, KORA, SardiNIA14, A. Heinz Nixdorf Recall controlled by conserved sets of cell-specific miRNAs in both mouse Study Groups15; and zebrafish. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, CNR, Monserrato, Cagliari, c14.2 Italy, 3McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins Univer- molecular basis of alpha-dystroglycanopathies and phenotype- sity, Baltimore, MD, United States, 4Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Center genotype correlations Munich, Munich, Germany, 5Center for Statistical Genetics, Department of P. Guicheney1,2, S. Quijano-Roy3, C. Bouchet4,5, A. Yanagisawa2, S. Vuillaumier- Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 6Institute of Barrot4,5, P. Richard6, N. Clarke2, N. B. Romero2, B. Estournet3, N. Seta4,5, Genetic Medicine, EURAC European Academy, Bolzano, Italy, 7Department of French network on Congenital Muscular dystrophies; Medicine I, Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, 8Laboratory of Genetics, 1Inserm UMR S956, Faculté de médecine Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2In- National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States, 9Johns Hopkins Uni- serm UMR S582, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3AP-HP, versity, Baltimore, MD, United States, 10Institute of Human Genetics, University Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, Service de Pédiatrie, Garches, France, 4AP-HP, of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 11Clinic of Cardiology, West German Heart Center, Hôpital Bichat-Claude Bernard, Biochimie Métabolique, Paris, France, 5Inserm, University Hospital of Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, UMR S773, Paris, France, 6AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, UF 12Statistical Genetics, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, Cardiogénétique et Myogénétique, Service de Biochimie Métabolique, Paris, 13Genetics Center, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX, France. United States, 14I, I, Italy, 15I, I, Germany. The alpha-dystroglycanopathies are a group of autosomal recessive The QT interval, a measure of cardiac repolarization, predisposes to congenital muscular dystrophies (CMD) and limb girdle muscular ventricular tachycardia and sudden cardiac death (SCD) when pro- dystrophies (LGMD) with high CK levels, muscle hypertrophy, andConcurrent Sessions  abnormal glycosylation of α-dystroglycan in muscle. Only a portion vestibular and cochlear hair cells and their supporting cells. Our data of the patients present with mental retardation (MR), with or without indicates that LRTOMT is essential for hearing and the identification of structural brain and ocular malformations. These disorders are caused LRTOMT, which encodes a leucine-rich protein and a methyltransfer- by mutations in at least six genes encoding O-mannosyltransferases ase, opens an exciting new field for genetic and physiological studies (POMT1 and POMT2), O-mannosyl N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase1 of the inner ear and hearing. (POMGNT1), and enzymes of unknown function (FKRP, LARGE and FKTN). c14.4 The most frequently mutated gene is FKRP, associated with a large clinical and mutational spectrum of the Legius syndrome (or spectrum of phenotypes varying from mild LGMD2I often due to the NF1-like syndrome) founder mutation, L276I, to the most severe form of the spectrum L. M. Messiaen1, S. Yao1, H. Brems2, T. Callens1, E. Denayer2, P. Arn3, D. with major structural brain and eye malformations and early lethality, Babovic-Vuksanovic4, C. Bay5, L. Escobar6, R. Greenstein7, R. Hachen8, M. called Walker Warburg syndrome (WWS). We studied a large cohort Irons9, E. Lemire10, K. Leppig11, M. McDonald12, V. Narayanan13, L. R. Shapiro14, of muscular dystrophy patients with histological and clinical features of D. Tegay15, E. Zackai8, K. Taniguchi16, T. Ayada16, A. Yoshimura16, A. Parret17, B. α-dystroglycanopathy and identified mutations in all 6 genes, includ- Korf1, E. Legius2; ing founder mutations in FKRP and POMT2, and large genomic rear- 1UAB Medical Genomics Laboratory, Birmingham, AL, United States, 2KUL rangements in POMT2 and LARGE. Menselijke Erfelijkheid, Leuven, Belgium, 3Nemours Children’s clinic, Jackson- From genotype-phenotype analysis of 26 CMD families with alpha-dys- ville, FL, United States, 4Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 5University troglycan hypoglycosylation and POMGNT1 (3), POMT1 (4), POMT2 of Kentucky, Lexinton, KY, United States, 6Medical Genetics, Indianapolis, IN, (10), FKTN (3), and LARGE (1) mutations, we suggest the screening United States, 7University of Connecticut, West Hartford, CT, United States, of POMT1 and POMT2 first in CMD patients with MR, especially if 8University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United there is microcephaly, cerebellar hypoplasia, white matter abnormali- States, 9Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, United States, 10University of ties or cortical dysplasia, even in the absence of eye involvement. In Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada, 11University of Washington, Seattle, CMD or LGMD patients with normal intellectual development, other WA, United States, 12Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United genes are better candidates (FKRP, FKTN) , especially if there is pro- States, 13Genetics and Child Neurology, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 14Sound gressive cardiac dysfunction. Shore Children’s Medical Group, Hawthorne, NJ, United States, 15New York College of Osteopathic Medicine, Old Westbury, NY, United States, 16Kyushu c14.3 University, Fukuoka, Japan, 17EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany. mutations of LRTOMT, a fusion gene with alternative reading Autosomal dominant inactivating SPRED1 mutations have recently frames, cause autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing been described in 5 families with a neurofibromatis type 1-like syn- impairment in DFNB families. drome (NFLS). The phenotype consists of café-au-lait-macules E. Kalay1,2, S. Masmoudi3, Z. M. Ahmed4, I. A. Belyantseva4, M. A. Mosrati3, R. (CALM), axillary freckling and macrocephaly. The full clinical spectrum W. J. Collin2,5, S. Riazuddin4, M. Hmani-Aifa3, H. Venselaar6, M. N. Kawar4, A. of this new disorder has not yet been investigated. Tlili3, B. van der Zwaag7, S. Y. Khan8, L. Ayadi3, R. J. Morell4, A. J. Griffith9, I. We performed SPRED1 mutation analysis in 1318 unrelated patients Charfedine10, R. Caylan11, J. Oostrik2, A. Karaguzel1, A. Ghorbel10, S. Riazud- presenting with a broad range of signs typically found in neurofibro- din8, T. B. Friedman4, H. Ayadi3, H. Kremer5,12; matosis type 1 (NF1) and in whom no NF1 mutation was present in 1Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz Technical peripheral blood lymphocytes. A comparison between clinical findings University, Trabzon, 61080, Turkey, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud in patients with a SPRED1 mutation versus those with a NF1 mutation University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands, and those without known mutation was made. Functional assays were 3Unite´ Cibles pour le Diagnostic et la The´rapie, Centre de Biotechnologie, de used to evaluate the pathogenicity of identified missense mutations. Sfax, 3018, Tunisia, 4Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute on We identified 34 different SPRED1 mutations in 43 probands: twenty Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, Rockville, MD, United States, seven were pathogenic (including 2 missense mutations) and 7 mis- 5Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medi- sense mutations were classified as probably benign. Forty eight per- cal Centre, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands, 6Center for Molecular and cent of SPRED1-positive patients fulfilled NIH NF1 diagnostic criteria Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen 6500 HB, based on the presence of >5 CALM +/- freckling or a NF1-compatible The Netherlands, 7Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Rudolf family history. We estimate that 1.2-2.9% of individuals with the clinical Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht diagnosis of NF1 have NFLS. 3584 CG, The Netherlands, 8National Center of Excellence in Molecular Biol- A high SPRED1 mutation detection rate was found in NF1 mutation- ogy, University of the Punjab, Lahore 53700, Pakistan, 9Otolaryngology Branch, negative families with an autosomal dominant phenotype with CALM National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, Rockville, +/- freckling and no other NF1 features. The NF1 diagnostic criteria MD, United States, 10Service d’O.R.L, C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba, de Sfax, 3029, are not specific, since 48% of patients with NFLS fulfilled these criteria. Tunisia, 11Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz NFLS is not associated with the high incidence of peripheral and cen- Technical University, Trabzon, 61080, Turkey, 12Nijmegen Centre for Molecular tral nervous system tumors seen in NF1. We suggest a less intensive Life Sciences and Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Rad- medical follow-up program for patients with NFLS. boud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Hereditary hearing impairment is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Identification of the causative deafness genes is a considerable strat- c14.5 egy to uncover the molecular basis of hearing. Reassessment of three three subgroups of neurodegeneration with brain iron DFNB63 families which were used in the identification of the DFNB63 accumulation (NBiA) locus and two additional Tunisian families helped to narrow the critical M. Hempel1, H. Prokisch1,2, T. Kmiec3, E. Jurkiewicz3, T. Meitinger1,2, M. B. DFNB63 region to a 1.03 Mb interval. This interval has 26 annotated Hartig1; and predicted genes and sequencing of these genes revealed four 1Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Helmholtz Zentrum München, pathogenic mutations in an uncharacterized gene LRRC51, renamed Munich, Germany, 3Memorial Children’s Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. LRTOMT. LRTOMT has two alternative reading frames and encodes Objective: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is two different proteins LRTOMT1 and LRTOMT2. LRTOMT2 is a pu- a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by iron deposits in tative methyltransferase. Further characterization showed that in the the basal ganglia. Mutations in two different genes can be responsible primate lineage, LRTOMT evolved from the fusion of two neighbor- for NBIA: PANK2 gene and PLA2G6 gene. A third gene was discov- ing ancestral genes. In rodents, there are two separate genes, desig- ered recently by our laboratory. From the clinical point of view all NBIA nated Lrrc51 and Tomt which together are orthologous to the primate patients share common symptoms. Nevertheless we suppose these LRTOMT. RT-PCR analysis of human tissues showed that LRTOMT patients can be distinguished in three clinical subgroups. Because of is widely expressed. RNA in situ hybridization in mouse revealed the small patient numbers analysis of clinical symptoms is difficult. expression of Tomt in the cochlear and vestibular sensory cells of the Methods: We present a structured clinical evaluation of a large collec- developing inner ear. Immunolocalization studies of Lrrc51 and Tomt tion of NBIA patients characterized by one clinician (n=49). A mutation in the P30 mouse inner ear showed the expression of both genes in analysis of the PANK2 gene has been done in all patients. PatientsConcurrent Sessions  being negative for PANK2 mutations have been analysed on PLA2G6 experiments also show that CNVs influence the expression of genes gene and furthermore on the recently detected gene. in their vicinity - an effect that extends up to half a megabase. These Results: In 27 out of 49 patients homozygous or compound hetero- controls over expression are effective throughout mouse development, zygous mutations were identified in PANK2 (55%). No PLA2G6 mu- however some genes appear to be under compensatory loops at spe- tations were found. Mutations in the new gene were detected in 16 cific time point. patients (33%). The “eye of the tiger” sign in MRI was found in the Interestingly, genes within CNVs show lower expression levels and majority of patients with PANK2 mutations (24 out of 27) but rarely more specific spatial expression patterns than genes mapping else- in the remaining patients. Furthermore patients with PANK2 mutation, where in the genome. Furthermore, genes expressed in the brain are with mutations in the new gene and idiopathic NBIA patients can be significantly underrepresented in CNVs compared to genes with ex- distinguished by several clinical features: age of onset, generalized pression in other tissues, suggesting differential selective constraint dystonia as presenting symptom, course of disease, oromandibular on copy number changes of genes expressed in different tissues. Our dystonia, optic atrophy and psychiatric symptoms. study provides initial evidence that CNVs shape tissue transcriptomes Conclusion: Clinical symptoms and MRI together allow us to distin- on a global scale and thus represent a significant source for within- guish NBIA patients in a first step. species phenotypic variation. c14.6 c15.2 congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (cDG) due to defects in Methylation profiling in cases with uniparental disomy identifies N-glycan assembly in the endoplasmic reticulum: filling the gaps novel imprinted genes on chromosome 15 in the dolichol cycle A. J. Sharp1, B. Steiner2, Y. Dupre1, M. R. Sailani1, D. O. Robinson3, H. Brun- G. Matthijs1, W. Vleugels1,2, M. Haeuptle1, F. Foulquier2, V. Race1, R. Barone3,4, ner4, A. Baumer2, A. Schinzel2, S. E. Antonarakis1; L. Keldermans1, J. Michalski1, A. Fiumara4, T. Hennet1; 1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Institute of Medi- 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Unité de Glycobiologie Struc- cal Genetics, University of Zurich, Switzerland, 3Wessex Regional Genetics turale et Fonctionnelle UMR/CNRS 8576, IFR147,, Lille, France, 3Department Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 4Department of Human Genetics, Uni- of Neuroscience – University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 4Centre for Inherited versity Medical Center Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Metabolic Diseases - Department of Pediatrics – University of Catania, Catania, One of the major features associated with imprinting is the presence Italy. of parent-of-origin specific Differentially Methylated Regions (DMRs). Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a group of complex Thus, the maternal and paternal genomes possess distinct epigen- metabolic diseases caused by defects in the synthesis, assembly and etic marks which distinguish them at imprinted loci. In order to iden- processing of glycans. Through EUROGLYCANET, we have access tify novel imprinted genes on chromosome 15, we have profiled DNA to a collection of 50 unsolved CDG-I patients (CDG-Ix). An investiga- methylation in cases with uniparental disomy of chromosome 15 tion of lipid-linked oligosaccharides (LLO) has been performed on all (UPD15). Methylated DNA was immunoprecipitated using antibodies cases. We report a patient with severe developmental delay, epilepsy for 5-methyl cytidine, and hybridized to high-density oligonucleotide and dysmorphic features, and a type I pattern on transferrin isoelectric arrays with complete coverage of chromosome 15, generating profiles focusing. LLO showed an accumulation of the dol-PP-GlcNAc2-Man5 of the paternal and maternal methylomes. Comparison of six individu- structure, and a limited and very unusual accumulation of the dol-PP- als with maternal versus paternal UPD15 reveals more than twenty GlcNAc2-Man3, dol-PP-GlcNAc2-Man6, dol-PP-GlcNAc2-Man7 and DMRs on chromosome 15. Putative DMRs were validated by bisulfite dol-PP-GlcNAc2-Man8 species. sequencing, confirming the presence of parent-of-origin specific meth- This patient was compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in the DPM2 ylation marks in multiple samples. Many are associated with known gene: a splice mutation (IVS2-1G>C) and a point mutation (c.68A>G, imprinted genes within the Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome region, p.Y23C). DPM2 is the smallest component of the dolichol-phosphate- such as SNRPN and MAGEL2, validating this as a method of detecting mannose synthase and is a hydrophobic protein of 84 amino acids. It imprinted loci. However, more than half of the novel DMRs identified seems that DPM2 is involved in the regulation of the DPM synthase are located outside of 15q11-q13, and are associated with genes not complex by stabilizing DPM3 but also in the regulation of the GPI- previously thought to be imprinted. These include IGF1R at 15q26.3, GnT (glycosylphosphatidylinositols-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase) which plays a fundamental role in growth regulation, and GABRG3, a . We also identified, among other new cases, 2 new patients with an gene which has previously been shown to be abnormally expressed in RFT1 deficiency, respectively homozygous for the missense mutations autism. Many DMRs occur at CpG islands or overlap conserved non- c.454A>G (p.E152K) and c.892G>A (p.K298E). The clinical phenotype coding regions, suggesting a role in regulating gene expression. includes severe mental retardation, failure to thrive, hypotonia, epi- These data provide an imprinting map of chromosome 15, demon- lepsy, sensorineural deafness, coagulopathy and feeding problems. strate that the number of imprinted loci in humans is much higher than The transmembrane protein RFT1 is suggested to play a crucial role previously thought, and identify novel candidates for human disease. in the flip-flop of the intermediate Man5GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol from the cytosolic to the luminal face of the ER membrane. Flipping of lipids c15.3 across biomembranes is not spontaneous and requires specific pro- closely spaced multiple mutations as potential signatures of teins (flippases) that facilitate ATP-independent, bi-directional flip-flop. transient hypermutability in human genes J. M. Chen1,2,3, C. Férec1,3,2, D. N. Cooper4; c15.1 1INSERM, U613, Brest, France, 2Etablissement Français du Sang (EFS) – Bre- segmental copy number variation shapes tissue transcriptomes tagne, Brest, France, 3Université de Bretagne Occidentale (UBO), Faculté de E. A. C. Chaignat1, C. N. Henrichsen1, E. Aït Yahya-Graison1, N. Vincken- Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Brest, France, 4Institute of Medical bosch1, S. Zollner2, F. Schütz1, J. Chrast1, S. Pradervand1, M. Ruedi3, H. Kaess- Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. mann1, A. Reymond1; Data from a diverse series of organisms suggested that transient hy- 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2University of Michi- permutability is a general mutational mechanism with the potential to gan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3Natural History Museum, Geneva, Switzer- generate multiple synchronous mutations, a phenomenon probably land. best exemplified by closely spaced multiple mutations (CSMMs). How- Copy number variation (CNV) of DNA segments has recently been ever, to date, its potential impact on the evolution of higher eukaryotes identified as a major source of genetic diversity, but a comprehensive has not been widely appreciated. Here we attempted to extend the understanding of the phenotypic effect of this type of variation is only concept of transient hypermutability from somatic cells to the germline, beginning to emerge. We have generated an extensive map of CNV in using human disease-causing multiple mutations as a model system. wild mice and classical inbred strains. Copy number variable regions Employing fairly stringent criteria for data inclusion, we have retro- cover a total of ~340 megabases (~11%) of their autosomal genome. spectively identified numerous potential examples of CSMMs caus- Genome-wide expression data from 6 major organs and 4 develop- ing human inherited disease that exhibit marked similarities to the mental times in six different strains reveal that expression levels of CSMMs reported in other systems. These examples include (i) eight genes within CNVs positively or negatively correlate with copy number multiple mutations, each comprising three or more components within changes in approximatively 35 and 15% of the cases, respectively. Our a sequence tract of <100 bp, (ii) three possible instances of ‘mutationConcurrent Sessions  showers’ and (iii) numerous highly informative ‘homocoordinate’ muta- 3) producing new or improved versions of genome wide databases, tions. Using the proportion of CpG substitution as a crude indicator including HGVbaseG2P (http://www.hgvbaseg2p.org) , IGVdb (http:// of the relative likelihood of transient hypermutability, we also present www.igvdb.res.in), and Disease Cards (http://bioserver.ieeta.pt/dis- evidence to suggest that CSMMs comprising at least one pair of mu- easecard); tations separated by <100 bp may constitute signatures of transient 4) producing improved versions of locus specific database (LSDB) hypermutability in human genes. This analysis not only extends the software LOVD (http://www.lovd.nl/2.0) and UMD (http://www.umd. generality of the concept of transient hypermutability but also provides be), that now host >300 genes, and the DMuDB diagnostic database new insights into what may be considered a novel mechanism of muta- (http://ngrl.man.ac.uk/dmudb) genesis underlying human inherited disease. Finally, our findings raise Our current focus extends into areas such as grid-based services, and serious concerns regarding current practices in mutation screening, systems for providing universal IDs for all biomedical research data which are likely to miss many potentially important secondary muta- and entities on the internet, including individual researchers. This will tions linked in cis to the putative primary pathological lesion. revolutionise the potential for holistic data integration, and ensure fair and equitable use of sensitive G2P information. c15.4 Acknowledgements: GEN2PHEN is funded by the European Commu- the Human Phenotype Ontology nity’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant P. N. Robinson1, S. Köhler1, S. Bauer1, M. H. Schulz2, S. Dölken1, G. V. Gkou- agreement 200754. tos3, M. Ashburner3, C. Mundlos4, P. N. Schofield5, S. Lewis6, J. M. Hancock7, D. Horn1, C. Ott1, S. Mundlos1; c15.6 1Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Establishing a link between microRNAs, genes and hereditary Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3University of Cambridge, Department of diseases : the miRiFix database Genetics, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4ACHSE, Berlin, Germany, 5University A. Henrion Caude1, C. Mugnier2, S. Bandiera1, M. Girard1, M. Le Merrer1, A. of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Berkeley Bioinformatics and On- Munnich1, S. Lyonnet1; tology Project (BBOP), Berkeley, CA, United States, 7MRC Harwell, Mammalian 1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2University Paris Descartes, Paris, France. Genetics Unit, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom. Identification and analysis of microRNAs (miRs) enhance our un- There are many thousands of hereditary diseases in humans, each derstanding of the important roles that small RNAs play in complex of which has a specific combination of clinical features. We have de- regulatory networks. However, there are still few data supporting the veloped a Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) with over 9500 terms involvement of miRs in Mendelian disease inheritance other than can- representing individual phenotypic anomalies and have annotated all cer. MiRs may be regarded either as candidate gene within a disease clinical entries in Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man with the terms locus, or as putative modifier gene, which can regulate the expression of the HPO. of a given disease-causing gene. At this latter level, single nucleotide Each term in the HPO describes a phenotypic abnormality such as polymorphisms (SNPs) within the target gene add a supplemental lay- Atrial septum defect. The HPO itself does not describe individual dis- er of complexity. Herein, we present a comprehensive resource, aimed ease entities but rather the phenotypic abnormalities associated with at linking miRs and hereditary diseases : mirifix.com. MiRiFix is an them. Clinical entities are annotated to the most specific terms pos- easy-to-use, web-accessible framework of tool and data integration. sible. The true path rule applies to the terms of the HPO. That is, if Our model crosses up-to-date information on human miRs and the a disease is annotated to the term Atrial septal defect, then all of the Genatlas database, which provides integrated data on gene mapping ancestors of this term, such as Abnormality of the cardiac septa, also and genetic diseases. MiRiFix enables to systematically explore the apply. The structure of the HPO therefore allows flexible searches for computational involvement of miRs in the pathogenesis of diseases, disease entities according to phenotypic abnormalities with a broad or and retrieves : (i) miR as a candidate gene from a locus, using the up- narrow focus. dated compendium of human miRs and their mapping information, (ii) We have used the HPO to identify a phenotypic network that is made a set of miRs predicted to regulate a disease-causing gene, in both its up of dense clusters of shared phenotypic features that show char- 3’-UTR and coding sequence, using distinct algorithms, and finally (iii) acteristic patterns of interconnections between selected areas of the a set of SNPs predicted to be functional in terms of miR regulation. We phenotypic continuum. We have developed a program for clinical will present the efficiency of miRiFix in predicting previously established genetics diagnostics, which allows searches for specific diagnoses links, but also in retrieving novel data on mapped diseases orphan of based on combinations of features. We have extended our methods identified genes. Our web resource provides a unique integrated way for prediction of disease genes based on random walk analysis to work to assess computational roles of miRs in hereditary disease. for arbitrary phenotypes based on ontological similarity analyses using the HPO. c16.1 The HPO is freely available at http://www.human-phenotype-ontology. the Effect of translocation-induced Nuclear Re-organization on org. Gene Expression L. Harewood1, F. Schütz1,2,3, S. Boyle4, P. Perry4, M. Delorenzi2,3, W. A. Bick- c15.5 more4, A. Reymond1; GEN2PHEN: An international effort to optimise and federate the 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2National Center of databasing of gene-disease relationships Competence in Research (NCCR) “Molecular Oncology”, Lausanne, Switzer- A. J. Brookes1, +. The GEN2PHEN Consortium2; land, 3Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland, 4MRC 1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 219 European Institutions. Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. The GEN2PHEN consortium (http://www.gen2phen.org), which com- Chromosome organization in the nucleus is thought to impact on gene prises 19 research and company partners, is devising novel strategies, expression. To study the effect of balanced chromosomal rearrange- standards and databases, to ensure that genotype-phenotype (G2P) ments on gene expression, we compared the transcriptomes of cell information can be shared and exploited effectively. Our activities are lines from control and t(11;22)(q23;q11) individuals. This translocation based on the idea that rather than just centralising G2P data, the broad between chromosomes 11 and 22 is the only recurrent constitutional community should also be involved in providing G2P databases and non-Robertsonian translocation in humans. The number of differen- analysis platforms, as a part of a federated system. We therefore pro- tially expressed transcripts between the translocated and control co- duce components to help this federated system emerge, in partnership horts is significantly higher than that observed between control sam- with projects such as ENGAGE, CASIMIR, EUROGENTEST, BBMRI, ples alone, suggesting that balanced rearrangements have a greater ELIXIR, and the HVP. effect on gene expression than normal variation. Altered expression GEN2PHEN has already achieved considerable progress, as reflected by: on translocation chromosomes is limited to chromosome 11-mapping 1) producing the Locus Reference Genomic (LRG) system of stable genes. Consistently, we show that the nuclear position of the deriva- reference sequences for genes [in partnership with NIH]; tive chromosome 11, but not that of the derivative chromosome 22, is 2) producing the Phenotype and Genotype Experiment Object Model significantly altered compared to its normal counterpart, suggesting (PaGE-OM) standard data model for G2P information [in partnership that expression changes of chromosome 11 genes are potentially due with JBIC]; to their transposition into an anomalous chromatin environment. OurConcurrent Sessions  results are consistent with recent studies, which indicate that nuclear (PEPD) gene is of particular interest. It is involved in a rare autoso- position plays a functional role in regulating the expression of some mal recessive disorder of the connective tissue. Biochemical assays genes in mammalian cells. Rearrangements may also have implica- showed reduced prolidase activity in our patients. Their dermatologi- tions on reproductive separation, as we show that reciprocal transloca- cal anomalies, including cutis aplasia of the scalp and thin skin, might tions not only provide partial isolation for speciation, but also result in thus be accounted for by PEPD haploinsufficiency. We suggest that significant changes in transcriptional regulation through alteration of del 19q13.11 represents a novel clinically recognizable microdeletion the relative nuclear position of chromosome territories. syndrome caused by haploinsufficiency of dosage sensitive genes in the 19q13.11 region. Moreover, as a complement to the specific clini- c16.2 cal features, prolidase activity in erythrocytes may provide a simple 5q14.3 microdeletion encompassing MEFC, a gene controlling diagnostic marker for this new genomic disorder. excitatory synapse number, is associated with severe mental retardation, poor eye contact and seizures c16.4 A. Goldenberg1, M. Holder-Espinasse2, S. Jaillard3,4, N. Le Meur1,5, D. Bon- Parental origin and possible mechanisms of formation of de neau6, S. Joriot7, A. Charollais8, H. Journel9, S. Auvin10, C. Boucher1, J. Kerc- novo balanced reciprocal translocations kaert11, T. Frébourg1,12, V. David4,13, S. Manouvrier-Hanu2, P. Saugier-Veber1,12, A. Spreiz1, M. Höckner1, S. Demuth2, A. Dufke3, V. Kalscheuer4, M. Rieger5, C. Dubourg4,13, J. Andrieux14; O. Rittinger6, I. Rost7, S. Singer3, A. Tzschach4, E. Wiedersberg8, M. Erdel1, C. 1Service de Génétique, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 2Service de Génétique Fauth1, J. Zschocke1, G. Utermann1, D. Kotzot1; Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 3Laboratoire 1Division for Clinical Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Praxis für Humangenetik, de Cytogénétique, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 4CNRS UMR 6061, Uni- Erfurt, Germany, 3Institute for Human Genetics, Medical Genetics, Tübingen, versité de Rennes 1, IFR 140, Rennes, France, 5Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Germany, 4Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, EFS-Normandie, Bois Guillaume, France, 6Service de Génétique Médicale, 5Heckscher Klinik, Rottmannshöhe, Germany, 6Section Clinical Genetics, CHU d’Angers, Angers, France, 7Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Roger Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Salengro, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 8Service de Médecine Néonatale, CHU Austria, 7Zentrum für Humangenetik und Laboratoriumsmedizin, Martinsried, de Rouen, Rouen, France, 9Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre Hospitalier Germany, 8Humangenetische Beratungsstelle, HELIOS Kliniken Schwerin Bretagne Atlantique, Vannes, France, 10Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, GmbH, Schwerin, Germany. CHU Robert Debré - APHP, Paris, France, 11Plateforme de Génomique Fonc- Balanced reciprocal translocations are found in approx. 1 : 400 new- tionnelle, Université de Lille II, Lille, France, 12Inserm U614, IHURBM, Univer- borns. Most of them are inherited from one parent. De novo formation sité de Rouen, Rouen, France, 13Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU is a rare event and accompanied by various anomalies if there is a Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 14Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital microrearrangement closed to one or both breakpoints. From associ- Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France. ated deletions or duplications, the involvement of the Y chromosome, Over the last few years, array-CGH has remarkably improved the abil- or cytogenetic polymorphisms a preferentially formation in paternal ity to detect cryptic unbalanced rearrangements in patients presenting meiosis was assumed but so far not proven directly. with syndromic mental retardation. Using oligonucleotide array-CGH, Here, we report on the parental origin and possible mechanisms we identified a 5q14.3 microdeletion in 5 unrelated patients and a of formation of de novo cytogenetically balanced reciprocal trans- 5q14.3 microduplication in one patient. Fluorescence In Situ Hybrid- locations in two healthy probands and seven patients affected ization (FISH) and semi-quantitative PCR further confirmed these de by multiple congenital anomalies. Two of them have been re- novo rearrangements. Interestingly, the five patients with the 5q14.3 corded previously. The karyotypes are 46,XY,t(4;5)(q21.1;p15.33), microdeletion showed striking phenotypic similarities, namely severe 46,XX,t(2;3)(q33;q23), 46,XY,t(6;14)(q15;q24), 46,XX,t(2;8)(p13~15;q mental retardation, poor visual contact, absent speech, stereotyped 22), 46,XX,t(2;5)(p21;q11.2), 46,XX,t(2;13)(p13;q12), 46,XY,t(7;11)(q1 behaviour, facial dysmorphic features, epilepsy and/or cerebral malfor- 1.21;p11.2), 46,XX,t(2;7)(q23;p21), and 46,XX,t(2;4)(p16;q35). mations. The boundaries and sizes of the deletions were different but For each chromosome of interest, microdissected derivative chromo- the minimal common deleted region encompassed only the MEF2C somes and their normal homologs were pooled separately for investi- gene. This gene, known to act in brain as a neurogenesis effector gation, which included whole genome amplification (GenomePlex Sin- which regulates excitatory synapse number, constitutes an excellent gle Cell Kit®, Sigma-Aldrich, Vienna, Austria), microsatellite mediated candidate. We suggest therefore that 5q14.3 microdeletion may rep- haplotype analysis, and visualisation of the products by silver staining resent a novel clinically recognizable condition caused by haploinsuf- subsequent to a 6% polyacrylamide/urea gel electrophoresis. ficiency of the MEF2C gene. Involvement of paternal chromosomes was found in all seven cases in- vestigated so far. Our results confirm the assumed preferentially pater- c16.3 nal origin of de novo reciprocal translocations for the first time by direct 19q13.11 deletion syndrome: a novel clinically and biochemically investigation of the chromosomes involved. In addition, the conformity recognizable genetic condition identified by array-CGH for either maternal or paternal origin for all derivative chromosomes V. Malan1,2, C. Ottolenghi3,2, O. Raoul1,2, H. V. Firth4, B. Chadefaux3,2, G. Royer1, and their normal homologs makes a meiotic formation more likely than C. Turleau1,2, A. Bernheim5,6, L. Willatt4, A. Munnich1,2, M. Vekemans1,2, S. Lyon- a postzygotic formation. net1,2, V. Cormier-Daire1,2, L. Colleaux1,2; 1Département de Génétique et INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants c16.5 Malades, Paris, France, 2Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 3Service 22q13.3 deletion syndrome is a multigenic disorder, with de Biochimie Métabolique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, SHANK as the major pathogenic gene 4Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United M. Zollino1, M. E. Grimaldi1, L. Boccuto1,2, C. Schwartz2, D. Battaglia3, E. Mer- Kingdom, 5CNRS FRE2339 Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 6Univer- curi3, F. Guzzetta3, G. Marangi1, D. Orteschi1, D. Buccella1, M. Lauri1, P. Viscon- sité Paris Sud, Orsay, France. ti4, G. Gobbi4, G. Neri1, F. Gurrieri1; Deletions of chromosome 19 have rarely been reported with the ex- 1Istituto di Genetica Medica Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, ception of some patients with deletion 19q13.2 and Blackfan-Diamond 2Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 3Neuropsichiatria syndrome due to haploinsufficiency of the RPS19 gene. The paucity Infantile Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 4Neuropsichiatria Infan- of observations might result from the difficulty to detect small rear- tile Ospedale Maggiore Bologna, Bologna, Italy. rangements on this chromosome that lacks a clear banding pattern. The 22q13.3 deletion syndrome consists of hypotonia, mental retarda- Using array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) tion with delayed or absent speech, normal or accelerated growth, au- we identified three distinct but overlapping interstitial 19q13.11 dele- tistic-like behaviour and few dysmorphic features. This condition was tions, defining a minimal critical region of 2.87 Mb, associated with recently inferred to be a single gene (SHANK3) disorder. a clinically recognizable syndrome. The three patients share several We analysed a total of 32 patients presenting with clinical manifesta- major features including: pre and postnatal growth retardation with tions consistent with this condition, by means of a-CGH, FISH with slender habitus, severe postnatal feeding difficulties, microcephaly, cosmids n66c4 and n85a3 containing SHANK3 and sequence analysis hypospadias, signs of ectodermal dysplasia and cutis aplasia over of SHANK3. Loss-of-function mutations limited to SHANK3 were de- the posterior occiput. Among the deleted genes, the human prolidase tected in three patients (9%). They were c.3895delG (p.Glu1299fs)dn,Concurrent Sessions  partial gene deletion (n66c4 x 2, n85a3 -) dn, and c.1349T mat. Pa- a total of 7,745 Caucasian and ~ 4,000 Asian cases and controls. The tients with SHANK3 mutation (Group A) were compared with a total of strongest consistent association across all populations was observed 7 patients (group B) with a true 22q13 deletion, varying in size from 1.4 within the gene encoding alpha-synuclein (Asian, rs11931074, odds to 7 Mb. Briefly, patients in group A and B shared accelerated growth, ratio (OR) = 1.2, p =6.17 x 10-13; Caucasian, rs2736990, OR = 1.27, p absent/severely retarded speech, facial coarseness and hypotonia. All =5.69 x 10-9), providing unequivocal evidence that common variation at the patients in group A had familiarity for behaviour disorders and ad- this locus is a risk factor for typical PD. A Caucasian-specific associa- ditional CNVs. On the contrary, patients in group B were all sporadic tion was identified across the MAPT locus (rs415430, OR = 1.34 ; p = with respect to behaviour disorders, and no additional CNVs were de- 4.5x10-8), not only indicating that variation at this locus, implicated in tected. Interestingly, the mother with c.1349T mutation presented with several neurodegenerative disorders, is a risk factor for PD but also behaviour abnormalities but with normal intelligence and without ad- that the well-known population specific heterogeneity across this ge- ditional clinical manifestations of the 22q13 deletion syndrome. Differ- nomic region impacts risk for disease. ent CNVs outside 22q13.3 were present in the remaining parents with Besides, our analysis suggests that a 0.17Mb region in chromosome behaviour abnormalities but with normal SHANK3. We suggest that 1q32 containing 7 genes and predicted transcripts might confer risk for the 22q13 deletion syndrome is unlikely to be a single gene disorder. the development of PD in both the Asian and the Caucasian cohorts. Although SHANK3 can be considered the major pathogenic gene, ad- ditional gene mutations are requested for the full phenotype. c17.2 A regional high risk isolate for schizophrenia reveals an c16.6 enrichment of three large copy number variations overlapping An international standardized cytogenomic Array (iscA) developmental genes consortium approach to the design, implementation and O. P. H. Pietiläinen1,2, T. Paunio2, A. Tuulio-Henriksson3,4, J. Suvisaari3, J. reporting of constitutional oligo array-cGH Haukka3, T. Varilo2, K. Rehnström2, E. Jakkula2, J. Wedenoja2, A. Loukola2, J. S. Huang1, D. H. Ledbetter2, C. L. Martin2, S. Aradhya3, S. J. L. Knight4, K. Suokas3, L. Häkkinen4, S. Ripatti2, S. Ala-Mello5, M. Jussila2, J. Lönnqvist3, H. Smith5, K. Kok6, J. R. Vermeesch7, J. A. Crolla1; Stefansson6, L. Peltonen1,2,7; 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Wessex), Salisbury, United King- 1The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Institute dom, 2Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States, 3GeneDx, Gaithersburg, for Molecular Medicine, FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 3National Institute for Health MD, United States, 4Oxford Partnership Comprehensive Biomedical Research and Welfare, Department of Mental Health and Alcohol Research, Helsinki, Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Oxford Regional Cytogenetics Laboratory, Finland, 4University of Helsinki, Department of Psychology, Helsinki, Finland, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, 5Helsinki University Central Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki, The Netherlands, 7University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Finland, 6deCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, 7The Broad Institute of MIT and Experience to date in ~1,000 reported cases from the National Genetics Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States. Reference Laboratory (Wessex) in the UK has shown that use of a cus- Copy number variations (CNVs) have consistently been reported to oc- tomized 4x44k oligo array in karyotypically normal patients ascertained cur more frequently in patients with schizophrenia compared to healthy for developmental delay or mental retardation with or without congenital individuals. Already several rare CNVs, suggestive of high risk for the abnormalities, results in the detection of ~25% significant copy number disease, have been identified. We analyzed a special Finnish study changes (CNCs) ~15% of which are de novo. The NGRL (Wessex) sample of 196 schizophrenia cases and 199 controls emerging from is also part of the ISCA Consortium which is a collaboration compris- a high risk isolate for schizophrenia with a specific interest to iden- ing ~70 laboratories in the USA, Canada, South America and Europe. tify potential moderate to high risk CNV alleles that thanks to recent Two ISCA workshops held in 2008 led to agreement in two main areas population bottle necks would have become enriched in this founder firstly the design, testing and implementation of oligo arrayCGH utilis- population. We discovered three large (> 50 kb) CNV alleles on chro- ing multiple formats including 8x60k, 2x105k and 4x180k. The consen- mosomes 9p24.3, 17p13.3, and 22q11.22 significantly enriched to iso- sus design is based on extensive experience derived principally from late schizophrenia cases (p < 0.05). After analyzing additional 4,431 five laboratories each of which independently custom designed con- Finnish population controls, as well as 2,614 schizophrenia cases and stitutional cytogenetic arrays (4x44k or 2x105k) using Agilent’s eArray 42,276 controls of European origin, the three CNVs were found to be software. The ISCA oligo array combines targeting for ~500 genomic significantly enriched in the Finnish sub-isolate (p < 1.5*10-6) and with- regions of known or suspected pathogenicity together with an “even in the isolate associating to schizophrenia (p<0.05). The deletion on backbone” coverage of one oligo probe every ~25 kb. The second ISCA 22q11.22, yielding the strongest association with schizophrenia, was objective is to set up genome browser-based data sharing between found to be 3-fold more frequent in families with schizophrenia com- Consortium Laboratories to help develop data sets which will help to pared to the general population of the isolate (15% vs. 3%, p=1.2*10- differentiate between benign and pathogenic copy number changes. 7). The CNVs harbor three developmental genes: DOCK8, ABR, and The NGRL (Wessex) is about to initiate testing of the ISCA 4x180k ar- TOP3B, not previously linked to schizophrenia. Our finding refers to ray and preliminary results on 40 patients together with a summary of the impact of population bottleneck on the enrichment of sizable CNVs our results to date with the 4x44k array will be presented. overlapping developmental genes and implies their role in the etio- pathogenesis of familial schizophrenia. Our finding also exemplifies c17.1 the importance of region-or even family specific high risk variants be- Genome-wide analysis in Parkinson‘s disease hind schizophrenia. J. Simón-Sánchez1,2, C. Paisán-Ruiz3, J. Bras2, S. Scholz2, R. Gibbs2, PD Genetics Consortium, T. Gasser4, A. B. Singleton2; c17.3 1Vrije Universiteit Medical center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2National twenty-two Loci affecting haematological traits Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, N. Soranzo1,2, C. Gieger3, M. Mangino2; 3Department of Molecular Neuroscience and Reta Lila Weston Laboratories, 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Department of Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom, Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King’s College London, London, 4Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain United Kingdom, 3Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Neuherberg, Germany. Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive, age-associated neurode- Haematological traits are the most commonly measured blood param- generative disorder characterized by loss of dopaminergic neurons, eters in clinical practice and impact on a wide range of disorders in- resting tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity, and postural instability. PD, which cluding cancer, cardiovascular and immune diseases. We carried out is estimated to be the second most common neurodegenerative dis- a meta-analysis of genome wide data on eight haematological traits ease, will become an increasing social and economic burden as the - red blood cell, white blood cell and platelet counts, red blood cell world population continues to live longer. In an attempt to further un- volume, mean platelet volume, mean corpuscular hemoglobin content derstand the genetic basis of PD and thus gain insight into the etiol- and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration - in 4,627 individu- ogy of this disorder we performed a genome wide association study als from three population-based cohorts, followed by replication in in cohorts of Caucasian (n = 5,691) and Asian (n = 3,500) PD cases 9,515 individuals from three additional population-based samples. We and controls. Replication of the most significant loci was performed in describe 22 genetic loci, of which 15 are novel, associated with oneConcurrent Sessions 0 or more traits at the genome wide significance threshold of 5x10-8. of p<5x10-6. We completed genotyping of 11 CD and 11 RA loci in 842 These include 6 loci affecting erythrocyte traits (e.g. HFE, P-value = CD cases, 1370 RA cases and 1892 healthy controls from the Nether- 1.4 x 10-23, TFR2, P-value = 4.9 x 10-10, HBS1L-MYB, P-value =7.4 x lands. We combined our results in a meta-analysis with earlier GWAS 10-42), one locus for leukocyte count, 11 loci for mean platelet volume results from CD and RA in a UK population. (e.g. ARHGEF3, P-value = 5.5 x 10-31 and TAOK1, P-value = 1.4 x 10- We confirmed association of the IL2/IL21 and TNFAIP3 loci to both 22) and 3 loci for platelet count. The findings identify novel regulators diseases. We also found convincing association of the SH2B3 variant of hematopoiesis in humans, and provide new insights into functional to both CD and RA, especially in an auto-antibody-positive subgroup networks regulating blood cell parameters. of RA patients. Two more genes (LPP and PRKCQ) showed nominally significant association to both diseases, however, these findings need c17.4 to be confirmed. the association of Bardet-Biedl syndrome and Hirschsprung CD and RA share several risk variants for genetic susceptibility. A bet- Disease highlights the role of the primary cilium in ENs ter understanding of the common and specific genetic profiles of au- development toimmune disorders would shed light on the disease pathology and J. Amiel1,2, L. De Pontual1, S. Thomas1, N. A. Zaghloul3, D. M. McGaughey3, E. could point to new drug targets for treating autoimmune diseases. E. Davis3, H. Dollfus4, C. Baumann5, S. L. Bessling3, S. Audollent1, A. Pelet1, P. Beales6, A. Munnich1,2, S. Lyonnet1,2, H. C. Etchevers1, M. Vekemans2,7, T. Attié- c17.6 Bitach1,7, A. S. McCallion3, N. Katsanis3,8; Genome-wide association scan reveals major susceptibility 1INSERM U781, PARIS, France, 2Département de Génétique, AP-HP, Paris, locus for non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate on France, 3McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Baltimore, MD, chromosome 8q24 United States, 4Hôpital de Haute-Pierre, Strasbourg, France, 5Hôpital Robert S. Birnbaum1, K. U. Ludwig2, H. Reutter1, S. Herms2, M. Steffens3, M. Rubini4, Debré, Paris, France, 6UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, C. Baluardo4, J. Freudenberg5, C. Lauster6, B. Braumann7, R. H. Reich8, A. 7Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 8Department of Molecular Biology Hemprich9, R. P. Steegers-Theunissen10, B. Pötzsch11, S. Moebus12, B. Horst- and Genetics, Baltimore, MD, United States. hemke13, F. Kramer14, T. F. Wienker3, P. A. Mossey15, P. Propping1, S. Cichon2,1, Isolated Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a model for multigenic mode P. Hoffmann1,2, M. Knapp3, M. M. Nöthen1,2, E. Mangold1; of inheritance. Some chromosomal rearrangements, monogenic Men- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, delian disorders or poorly defined associations predispose to HSCR. Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, In such cases, penetrance for the HSCR trait is of 5 to 70%, suggest- Bonn, Germany, 4Medical Genetics Unit, Ferrara, Italy, 5Feinstein Institute for ing additional predisposing genetic factor(s). Bardet-Biedl syndrome Medical Research, New York, NY, United States, 6Department of Cleft Lip and (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous multisystemic disorder charac- Cleft Palate Surgery, Berlin, Germany, 7Department of Orthodontics, Cologne, terized by postaxial polydactyly, progressive retinal dystrophy, obesity, Germany, 8Department of Oral and Maxillo-Facial-Plastic Surgery, Bonn, hypogonadism, renal dysfunction, variable learning difficulties and, in Germany, 9Department of Oral and Maxillo-Facial Surgery, Leipzig, Germany, about 5% of cases, HSCR. BBS proteins are involved in the assembly 10University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 11Institute and function of primary cilia or the function of basal bodies, affecting of Experimental Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Bonn, Germany, 12In- both intraflagellar transport (IFT) and planar cell polarity (PCP). stitute for Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, Essen, Germany, RET is the major disease causing gene in isolated HSCR as well as a 13Institute of Human Genetics, Essen, Germany, 14Department of Oral and modifier gene for the enteric phenotype in some but not all HSCR-pre- Maxillofacial Surgery, Göttingen, Germany, 15Dental Hospital & School, Dundee, disposing syndromes; CCHS, Down, and BBS are RET-dependent. Sur- United Kingdom. prisingly, the greatest RET dependence was observed in BBS, although Non-syndromic orofacial clefts are considered to have a multifactorial functional interactions between RET and BBS proteins are not known. etiology with a strong genetic background. The most frequent form is We report the co-segregation of mutations at one BBS locus and at the the non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCL/P). RET locus for the HSCR trait to occur in BBS familial and sporadic cas- We conducted a genome-wide association study involving 224 NSCL/ es. We show that human NCC possess a primary cilium and express P-patients and 383 controls of Central European origin in order to BBS genes as well as many components of the PCP pathway. Genetic identify novel susceptibility loci for NSCL/P. A 640-kb region at chro- interactions between the BBS and RET pathways were supported by mosome 8q24.21 was found to contain multiple markers with strongly zebrafish double Ret and Bbs morphants in which enteric neurons significant evidence for association with the cleft phenotype, including were completely absent from the distal gut. These data emphasize the three markers which reached genome-wide significance. The 640-kb role of a primary cilium in NCC migration and enteric nervous system cleft-associated region was saturated with 146 SNP markers and ana- development. lyzed in our entire NSCL/P sample of 462 unrelated patients and 954 controls. In the entire sample, the most significant SNP (rs987525) c17.5 had a P value of 3.34 × 10-24. The odds ratio was 2.57 (95% CI: 2.02- The common and specific genetic backgrounds of rheumatoid 3.26) for the heterozygous genotype and 6.05 (95% CI: 3.88-9.43) for arthritis and celiac disease the homozygous genotype. The calculated population attributable risk A. Zhernakova1, M. J. H. Coenen2, G. Trynka3, S. Heskamp2, B. Franke2, C. C. for this marker is 0.41, suggesting that this study has identified a ma- van Diemen3, M. van Leeuwen4, D. A. van Heel5, T. R. D. J. Radstake6, P. L. C. jor susceptibility locus for NSCL/P. The locus is devoid of any known M. van Riel6, P. Barrera6, C. Wijmenga1,3; protein-coding genes. It is possible, that the observed association may 1Complex Genetics Section, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Depart- mediate its effect by as yet unknown transcripts mapping within the re- ment of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Ni- gion. An alternative explanation is that the disease-associated region jmegen, The Netherlands, 3Genetics Department UMC Groningen, Groningen, contains cis- or transacting elements which control the expression of The Netherlands, 4Department of Rheumatology, UMC Groningen, Groningen, more distant genes. Interestingly, we found no evidence of any interac- The Netherlands, 55Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Queen Mary Uni- tion between the 8q24.21 locus and IRF6, the only generally accepted versity of London, London, United Kingdom, 6Department of Rheumatology, NSCL/P gene to date.The study was supported by the DFG. Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) discovered a num- c18.1 ber of genetic risk factors in autoimmune and inflammatory disorders Links between psychological characteristics and Distress and, strikingly, several of the associated genes and pathways are after genetic result announcment : emotional regulation and shared between various autoimmune diseases. Rheumatoid arthritis adjustment (RA) and celiac disease (CD) are two common, T-cell mediated, au- C. Fantini-Hauwel1, B. Dauvier2, S. Lejeune-Dumoulin3, J. Pedinielli4, S. Ma- toimmune disorders, which co-occur in families; both are strongly as- nouvrier3; sociated to HLA. 1Université de Provence/CHRU Lille, Aix en provence, France, 2CHRU LILLE, We aimed to perform a cross-study to investigate the effect of known Aix en provence, France, 3CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 4Université de Provence, CD risk factors in RA and known RA risk factors in CD. Aix en provence, France. We selected all loci so far detected for both RA and CD in genome- Distress after genetic result announcement is at major stake for health wide association studies and replication studies, with a p-value cut-off practitioners. Researches tend to demonstrate that genetic resultConcurrent Sessions  leads to distress experience when linked with particular psychological Among women with a mastectomy for breast cancer, 37.7% elected characteristic (Smith, 2007) or coping strategies (Terciak, 2001). We for controlateral prophylactic mastectomy. In women tested after 2006, propose here a biopsychosocial model highlighting the importance of 58% (64% among women under 45 vs 51% among older women NS) emotional functioning prior to the genetic testing and emotional regula- had an adequate breast cancer risk management (screening compris- tion process to explain psychological distress after genetic results. ing MRI or prophylactic mastectomy). Among the 38 women for whom We have proposed questionnaires to 71 patients undergoing genetic management was not recorded as adequate, 4 were not eligible for testing for colonic cancer. Depressive symptoms (CES-D), State and MRI, 19 were followed outside our center and lost to follow-up and 11 Trait anxiety (STAI), coping style/coping strategies (WCC) and diffi- had an advanced ovarian cancer. culties to identifying and verbalizing feelings (TAS20) were assessed These data provide preliminary information on the compliance to before the genetic counselling and after results discovery. Results screening and prevention guidelines of BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. highlight that prior to genetic testing, state anxiety is best predicted by Rates of prophylactic oophrectomy, and adequate breast cancer risk negative affectivity and a disposition to use emotional-focused coping management appear to be high. to face with stressors. A greater state anxiety, social support seeking style and lesser problem-focused coping style prior to the test, associ- c18.4 ated with greater emotional coping strategies and higher difficulties to community views of population carrier screening for fragile X express feeling after the result, were best predictors of anxiety. Being syndrome mutation carrier does not show any effect on psychological distress. S. A. Metcalfe1, A. D. Archibald1, Y. M. Bylstra2, C. Hickerton2, S. Wake3, A. M. Implications to genetic counseling and care giving of subjects implied Jaques2, J. Cohen4; in a genetic testing diagnose are discussed. 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Dept Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 2Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, c18.2 Parkville, Vic, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Vic, Aus- Evaluation of risk prediction updates from commercial genome- tralia, 4Fragile X Alliance and Monash University, Parkville, Vic, Australia. wide scans Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the leading cause of inherited intellectual R. Mihaescu, M. van Hoek, E. J. G. Sijbrands, A. G. Uitterlinden, J. C. M. Wit- disability. Currently, cascade testing of affected relatives fails to detect teman, A. Hofman, C. M. van Duijn, A. J. W. Janssens; the majority of carriers, hence population carrier screening has the po- Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. tential to identify more carriers, providing them with information about Commercial internet-based companies offer genome-wide scans to their health and risk of having a child with FXS. We explored commu- predict the risk of common diseases and personalize nutrition and nity views of population carrier screening for FXS, using a qualitative lifestyle recommendations. These risk estimates are updated with approach. every new gene discovery. In order to assess the benefits of updat- Interviews and focus groups were conducted with 188 participants: ing risk information in commercial genome-wide scans, we compared healthcare providers (81), relatives of people with FXS (29), and the type 2 diabetes risk predictions based on TCF7L2 alone, 18 polymor- community, including pregnant and non-pregnant women (78). phisms alone, and 18 polymorphisms plus age, sex and body mass Overall, participants supported population carrier screening for FXS, index. Analyses were performed using data from the Rotterdam study, provided it was optional. Some participants did have concerns which a prospective, population-based study among individuals aged 55 were more focused on issues around screening in general and im- years and older. Data were available from 5297 participants. The ac- plications that screening has for society rather than about screening tual prevalence of type 2 diabetes in the study population was 20%. for FXS. Participants felt the ideal time to offer screening was before Predicted risks were below average for carriers of the TCF7L2 CC pregnancy and that screening should be offered through general prac- genotype (predicted risk 17.6%) and above average for the CT and titioners clinics; however, some believed prenatal screening is more TT genotypes (20.8% and 28.0%). Including data on the 18 polymor- practical. Most felt that genetic counsellors should deliver the results phisms caused 32% of participants to be reclassified (i.e. switched and provide follow-up support. There was a sense of general lack of between below and above average): 25% of the CC carriers changed awareness about FXS, suggesting it is imperative that detailed infor- to increased risk, 46% and 4% of the CT and TT carriers changed mation about the condition that people can relate to is provided at both to decreased risk. Including information on age, sex and body mass pre-test counselling and when giving a positive result. index caused 28% to change categories (27%, 32% and 18% for CC, The results from this first large qualitative study exploring community CT and TT carriers respectively). In total, 39% of participants changed views provide support for screening and are a valuable insight into the categories once when risk factors were updated, and 11% changed wide range of issues involved. These findings will help inform future twice, i.e. back to their initial risk category. Updating risk factors may development of carrier screening programs. produce contradictory information about an individual’s risk status over time, which is undesirable if lifestyle and nutritional recommendations c18.5 vary accordingly. Effect of Education, Knowledge and Experience on Acceptance of First trimester screening for chromosomal Abnormalities c18.3 V. Stefansdottir1, H. Skirton2, K. Jónasson3, H. Harðardóttir4,5, J. J. Jónsson1,4; compliance to screening and prevention guidelines of women 1Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali University Hospi- carrying a BRcA1/2 mutation tal, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2School of Nursing and Community Studies, University A. Contrain1, L. Huiart1, L. Rabayrol1, S. Olschwang1, V. Bourdon1, T. Noguchi1, of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 3Faculty of Industrial Engineering, E. Amar2, G. Houvenaeghel2, D. Margain3, F. Eisinger1, H. Sobol1; University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 4Faculty of Medicine, University of 1Department of Genetic Oncology, IPC, Marseille, France, 2Department of Sur- Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 5Prenatal Diagnostic Unit, Landspitali University gery, IPC, Marseille, France, 3Department of Radiology, IPC, Marseille, France. Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland. Clinical management of BRCA1/2 mutation carriers has recently been First trimester screening by combined risk assessment for specific standardised. However, few data are available on actual risk manage- chromosomal abnormalities is accepted by the majority of women in ment behaviours of mutation carriers. We reviewed medical files of Iceland. An underlying ethical principle is that involvement in screening mutation carriers in order to describe the use MRI screening, prophy- programs should be voluntary. lactic mastectomy/oophrectomy, focusing on women tested after 2006 Apart from information given by health professionals, pregnant women at the time follow-up was more standardised. receive information from various sources such as friends, relatives, Between January 1998 and 2009, we identified in our center 295 fami- media and education. We investigated the effect of education, knowl- lies with a BRCA1/2 mutation comprising 214 women who tested posi- edge about screening and the direct experience of congenital disabili- tive and who were informed about their status and provided with man- ties on acceptance of prenatal screening, in five different maternity agement guidelines. Among them, 126 were identified after 2006, 104 care clinics in Iceland. Self-completed questionnaire were completed were aged between aged 30-60 years old (mean age = 45.1; SD=7.8) by 379 participants. The age distribution, experience and education of of which 29 healthy carriers. Over the entire time period, among wom- participants were in accordance to the general population. Those with en free of ovarian cancer, 61% over 40 years old elected for prophy- higher knowledge score were more likely to accept a screening offer lactic oophrectomy and 18.6% over 30 for prophylactic mastectomy. than the least knowledgeable (p = 7∙10-6). There was a significant dif-Concurrent Sessions  ference (p = 0.033) in the likelihood of accepting screening between obligatory and the test result can be disclosed by telephone or mail. those with university or high-school education, 69% (n=264) compared Carriers identified by predictive DNA testing are advised to undergo with those in the group with elementary school or vocational education regular cardiological follow-up to prevent sudden cardiac death. (n=94, 57%). Expectant mothers with experience of congenital anoma- Methods: We evaluated the opinion of 143 predictively tested HCM lies in their own families were more likely to accept screening than mutation carriers on received cardiogenetic care using questionnaires those with no personal experience, 76% (n=79) versus 63% (n=188) (response rate 86%). Predictive genetic counselling and DNA testing of the others (p = 0.017). The expectant mother’s age had no effect on were evaluated on four domains: information provision, satisfaction the acceptance likelihood. Many factors affect women’s acceptance of with counselling, social pressure in DNA testing and regret of DNA first trimester screening including personal factors. Our results suggest testing. Opinions on cardiological follow-up were assessed pertaining that increased education, better general knowledge and former experi- to communication, nervous anticipation, reassurance and general dis- ence of congenital disabilities increase the acceptance rate for first advantages. trimester screening for chromosomal abnormalities. Results: Genetic counselling was valued positively. Only four carriers would rather not have known that they were a mutation carrier. A ma- c18.6 jority received their DNA test result by mail or telephone, and almost Genetic counselling and cardiological care in predictively tested all were satisfied. Only 76% of carriers received regular cardiological hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mutation carriers: the patients’ follow-up. Those who did, had a positive attitude regarding the cardio- perspective logical visits. General disadvantages of the visits were valued as low, I. Christiaans1,2, I. M. van Langen1, E. Birnie3, G. J. Bonsel3, A. A. M. Wilde2, E. especially by older carriers, men and carriers with manifest HCM. M. A. Smets4; Conclusions: We conclude that our adapted Huntington guidelines are 1AMC, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2AMC, well accepted and that cardiogenetic care is generally appreciated by Department of Cardiology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3ErasmusMC, Insti- predictively tested HCM mutation carriers. To better understand the tute of Health Policy and Management, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 4AMC, cause of the substantial portion of carriers not receiving regular cardio- Department of Medical Psychology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. logical follow-up, although recommended in international guidelines, Introduction: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an autosomal further research is needed. dominant heart disease associated with sudden cardiac death. Predic- tive genetic counselling and testing are performed using adapted Hun- tington guidelines, i.e. psychosocial care and time for reflection are notGenetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  P01. Genetic counseling Genetics education, P01.03 Genetic services, and Public policy the role of religious involvement, knowledge about and attitudes towards adult genetic testing in formation of intentions-to-test P01.01 - a structural equation modeling approach Association analysis of the ActN3 R577X polymorphism and A. Botoseneanu; performance phenotypes in young soccer players in slovakia School of Public Health - Univerity of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. S. Mačeková1, A. Sovičová1, R. Horváth2, J. Bernasovská1, I. Bernasovský1, Purpose: To investigate the role of knowledge, religious involvement, E. Petrejčíková1, M. Soták1, A. Bôžiková1, I. Boroňová1, D. Gabriková1, P. previous experience with and attitudes towards genetic testing for Švíčková1; adult-life disease susceptibility on the formation of intentions to un- 1Institute of Biology, Faculty of Humanities and Natural Sciences, University of dergo such testing. Presov, Presov, Slovakia, 2Institute of Education of Games, Faculty of Sport, Methods: Cross-sectional survey of a representative sample of 1,824 University of Presov, Presov, Slovakia. adults US adults ages 18 and over from the UNITED STATES PUBLIC Physical performance - related phenotypes are influenced by a com- KNOWLEDGE AND ATTITUDES ABOUT GENETIC TESTING, 2000. bination of genetic and environmental factors. The functional allele M-plus structural equation modelling (both confirmatory factor analysis (577R) of ACTN3 gene, which encodes human α-actinin-3, has been and path analysis) of total, direct and indirect effects of knowledge, reported to be associated with elite sprint athletic status. The 577XX religious involvement, experience and attitudes on intention-to-test for genotype enhances endurance performance. The aim of the presented adult disease susceptibility. study was to determine the frequency distribution of ACTN3 (R577X) Results: Of the 1,824 adults surveyed, 77% expressed willingness-to- gene in children various sports group from Slovakia and detect if gen- test for curable disorders, and only 52% for incurable disorders. 17% otype ACTN3 R577X polymorphism influences sprinting ability in an had some previous experience with a genetic disorder, and 8% had selected Slovak population. Genotypes were determined using Real previous experience with genetic testing. SEM analysis revealed the Time High resolution melting PCR method. The results were compared following significant direct effects on intention to undergo testing: atti- with those 156 children various sports group and 150 sedentary con- tudes (positive effect; p=0.000), knowledge (negative effect; p=0.009), trols. The % distribution of R and X alleles in children was significantly and previous experience (positive effect; p=0.034). Religious involve- different from controls. In association part of study of 33 young soccer ment showed a significant indirect effect on intention to undergo ge- players in Presov,who were 12 years old we show that there is a signif- netic testing, via a negative effect on attitudes (p=0.000); namely, indi- icant association between the ACTN3 R577X polymorphism and 10m viduals with high religious involvement were more likely to hold more sprint time in males with the 577R allele contributing to faster times in negative attitudes towards genetic testing and to express less willing- an additive manner. The R577X polymorphism is not associated with ness to obtain genetic testing. The model as proposed explains 15.2% other power phenotypes (30m sprint and agility run, the hurdle run, of the variance in the intention-to-test. shuttle run test). Sports gene test can help predict talent from a very Conclusion: A majority of respondents indicate willingness to test for early age. Genetic screening is also being used to individualise train- adult life genetic disorders, especially for curable disorders. Our find- ing programs to suit a person’s genotype. ings underscore the need for refinement of outreach and intervention efforts, to account for multiple influences (knowledge, experience, at- P01.02 titudes and religiosity) on willingness-to-test. study of public opinion about some aspects on biobank creation and using P01.04 S. V. Buikin1, E. Y. Bragina1, V. V. Pogrebenkova1, M. V. Golubenko1, V. P. cross-cultural communication in Genetic services: Experiences Puzyrev1,2; in creating a network 1State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, V. Anastasiadou1,2, T. Delikurt1, K. Theochari1, A. Kotti2, E. Spanou1; 2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. 1Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Archbishop The term “biobank” is not well known in the Russia, but there are many Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. collections of biological samples in some research centers (Moscow, The two major communities (Greek and Turkish Cypriots) in Cyprus St.Peterburg, Tomsk, Novosibirsk, Ufa Yakutsk). The availability of were separated by a border since 1974. The sharing of healthcare valuable biological samples and associated data, from one side, and services, between both communities became very difficult. Recently approval of new ethic requirements for handling biological samples, efforts to bring the two communities together have been underway. from other side, suggest that establishment of biobanks on the basis The importance of a multidisciplinary team with cultural competence of these collections is attractive. Biobanks can provide high quality of is essential for the best care of patients with rare diseases such as research and promote integration into research consortiums. To study genetic conditions. Good communication between health profession- public opinion about biobank in Tomsk, we have questioned about 800 als, therapists and patients within such a team is fundamental. The Tomsk habitants (78% of women and 22% of men). 68,5% respon- multicultural composition of Cyprus created the need for a network dents were under 40 years. 67% of respondents had higher or special- to establish new and expand the existing channels of communication ized secondary education, 6% had science degree. 61% of habitants between health professionals. Patients/families were also invited to heard about biobank and its function, 84% of them note that creation share problems, experiences and hopes while contributing in building of biobank in Tomsk is advisable. Only 56% agree with storage their a network for better communication and multidisciplinary care. biological samples in the biobank and using them in genetic studies. Attempt to create a network in the care and referral of patients, living 59% are ready to provide additional information about their health and with or at risk of genetic/inherited conditions, in both communities in 79% want to know results of studies which use their samples. 59% Cyprus officially began in December 2006. At the end of 2 years, a respondents are afraid of information leak and 46% are afraid of dis- network of communication of 181 people (including patients, physi- crimination by the results of their DNA study. cians, speech therapists, scientists, psychologists, special needs spe- Thus, despite of some fear, most of respondents consider creation of cialists and counselling students from both communities) was created. Biobank in Tomsk as useful affair. There is need in additional public A trilingual website and 6 trilingual leaflets on genetic conditions have information about advantages of the biobank as well as development been also been created as part of our public awareness campaign. of strict ethic rules. Following a strenuous campaign, we were expecting a higher number The study was supported by Russian Foundation for Humanitarian Re- of participants; however it was evident that cultural difference was a search, grant No. 08-06-00514. significant barrier to our efforts. The poster will discuss the outputs of the two year project and the experiences of the project team.Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  P01.05 our sanitary area and invasive technics for prenatal cytogenetics diag- the Department of medical Genetics of mAPs: 20 years nostic was indicated when a risk less of 1 in 300 for DS was obtained. experience of teaching The a false-positive rate was of 3 % and with a detection rate up to M. O. Mkheidze; 90 % . Medical Academy for postgraduate studies, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. The results show a high disminution (up to 55 %) in the number of in- There is special structure of medical education to improve professional vasive tehnics from the a median of 650 per year before frist-trimester skill in Russia. It provides for periodical training at the institutes of ad- combinet test implantation to a median of 265 after implantation. These vanced medical studies like St.Petersburg MAPS. Genetics and mo- disminution in the number of invasive technics for prental cytogenetic lecular medicine are the most important part of modern public health diagnostic represent a less pregnancy lost due to invasive technics service. Over a long period of time in the USSR genetics and medical with the same level of DS detection. Also will be of consideration the genetics were prohibited and a lot of physician generations were not economic question, because a disminution in the number of invasive able to study human genetics. Now it is impossible to be the successful technics also carries a decrease of the sanitary expense. physicians without knowledge of clinical genetics. The Department of These results higly support that prenatal first-trimester combined medical genetics of MAPS was organized in 1989. Professor Svetlana screening for DS can be of elecction in order to diminish the pregnancy Klueva (1931-2005) was the first head of the Department. There are lost and the sanitary expense. two principal trends of the staff activity 1) training the physicians for practical genetic service and 2) teaching medical genetics for all doc- P01.08 tors with basic clinical specializations. During 20 years 188 of training DYscERNE: Results from a pilot of the electronic courses have been organized by the staff of the Department of Medical Dysmorphology Diagnostic system (DDs) Genetics of MAPS in St. Petersburg and all over USSR and Russia. S. Gardner1, R. Day1, P. M. Griffiths1, K. Strong1, C. Harrison1, D. Donnai1, B. 6500 of physicians of the basic clinical specialties and geneticists have Kerr1, K. Metcalfe1, H. Brunner2, B. Dallapiccola3, K. Devriendt4, M. Krajewska- been studied. About 10000 of probands with hereditary and congenital Walasek5, N. Philip6, J. Clayton-Smith1; diseases and their families have been examined. The principal goal of 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Universitair Medisch our staff activity consists in forming of genetic thinking in the physician Centrum Sint Radboud, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Instituto Mendel, San community Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Instytut Pomnik-Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka, Warsaw, Poland, 6Assistance Pub- P01.06 lique - Hospitaux De Marseille, Marseille, France. comparative policy analysis on direct-to-consumer genetic The rarity of dysmorphic conditions means that even in Centres of Ex- testing in south Korea and Japan pertise, experience may be limited resulting in delayed or uncertain di- K. Muto1, H. Hong1, C. Chang1, M. Watanabe1, Y. Nakamura1, F. Takada2; agnosis. Correct diagnosis is the cornerstone of patient management, 1The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 2Kitasato University, Sagamihara, Ja- enabling clinicians to locate other patients with the same condition, pan. share clinical experience and increase individual and collective knowl- [Purpose] Direct-to-consumer genetic testing (DTCGT) refers to ge- edge about rare conditions. netic tests that are marketed directly to consumers via television, print The web-based electronic Dysmorphology Diagnostic System (DDS) advertisements, or the Internet. As consumers can send their samples developed by DYSCERNE (www.dyscerne.org) links twenty existing easily to neighbor countries, we need to share regulative policy options European Centres of Expertise for Dysmorphology to form a powerful with other countries. Taking policy process approach, we explored and diagnostic resource for rare dysmorphic conditions. compared to clarify how regulative policies towards DTCGT have been Seventy-four submitting nodes are currently licensed to submit patients’ determined in South Korea and Japan. [Method] Literature review and clinical data and images to the DDS via an online case submission interviews to stake holders [Results] In South Korea, Bioethics and form. These cases are reviewed by the DDS Expert panel, comprising Biosafety Act came into effective since 2005 whose provisions prohibit twenty-six Expert Dysmorphologists from twenty European Centres of genetic testing outside medical institutions or without requested from Expertise, and a diagnostic report including suggested management medical professionals. The Ministry of Health and Welfare have re- plans for the patient is prepared from the consensus of expert opinions sponsibility to regulate genetic testing centers based on this act so that and sent to the submitting node. many DTCGT providers withdrew their business from South Korea. On Patient consent is an important part of the process, and Patient In- the other hand in Japan, the genetic industry including DTCGT provid- formation & Consent leaflets are available in a number of European ers disclosed their original guidelines in 2008, supported by the Minis- languages. With appropriate consent, case histories are stored in an try of Economy, Trade and Industry. The Ministry of Health and Welfare electronic archive which will be reviewed periodically and used to im- take any actions towards DTCGT. Academia in human genetics has prove the definition and classification of syndromes, and facilitate fur- taken responsibilities in both countries. [Discussions] Totally different ther research into these rare conditions. regulative actions towards DTCGT have been taken between South We present results from the DDS pilot, which has demonstrated that Korea and Japan because the initiative ministry is different. We need users have found the case submission system straightforward to ac- to start discussions with China, where DTCGT have close relationship cess and easy to use. The Experts’ discussion forums have facilitated with their national health care and R&D project, because most DTCGT lively debates about cases, and the number of suggested diagnoses providers from Europe and the States seek the new broad market just received has been encouraging. after clinical research in South Korea and Japan. P01.09 P01.07 DYscERNE: Online educational tools for dysmorphology - Reduction of the number of prenatal invasive technics with the examination of a fetus with congenital abnormalities use of first-trimester combined screening for Down Syndrome R. Day1, S. Gardner1, P. M. Griffiths1, C. Harrison1, K. Strong1, D. Donnai1, B. M. Perez Sanchez1, A. Mora1, P. Garrido-Fernandez2, A. Gonzalez3; Kerr1, K. Metcalfe1, H. Brunner2, B. Dallapiccola3, K. Devriendt4, M. Krajewska- 1Hospital Virgen de las Nieves., Granada, Spain, 2FIBAO. Hospital Torrecarde- Walasek5, N. Philip6, J. Clayton-Smith1; nas, Almeria, Spain, 3FIBAO. Hospital Clínico San Cecilio, Granada, Spain. 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Universitair Medisch The frist-trimester combined test (ultrasound measurement of nuchal Centrum Sint Radboud, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Instituto Mendel, San translucency (NT), circulating levels of pregnancy-associated plasma Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, protein-A (PAPP-A) and free beta- human chorionic gonadotrophin (b- 5Instytut Pomnik-Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka, Warsaw, Poland, 6Assistance Pub- hCG) has proved to be of value in prospective studies when screening lique - Hospitaux De Marseille, Marseille, France. for chromosomal defects, including those for Down Syndrome (DS), External examination of a fetus with congenital abnormalities and/or and can be a very good method for DS screening. dysmorphic features can be helpful in a number of ways. It can confirm In our hospital has been implanted these method.The bichemical mark- or modify a suspected antenatal diagnosis, identify previously unde- ers detection was carried out between weeks 9-13, and ultrasound tected problems, determine the underlying etiology of an abnormal- measurement of NT between weeks 11-13. ity or provide direction for further investigation. Such information can From Janury of 2005, the screening was offer to all pregnant women of facilitate accurate genetic counselling to bereaved parents, especiallyGenetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  regarding future recurrence risks and options for prenatal diagnosis. doctor, a nurse and a patient. This tutorial normally takes place for 2 Although there is literature outlining how useful external examination or 3 students each time. We recorded all conversation with shorthand of a fetus with congenital abnormality can be, there is little available to look back easily just after they have done. We also discussed their to describe how this should be done and what the examination find- skills and feelings afterwards. Role play time was about 35 minutes in ings may indicate. The aim of this tool is to provide such guidance in a average. modern, online format. The result shows students are very flexible to put their knowledge into It has been developed within the DYSCERNE project, an EU funded practical use in different situations and made supportive attitude. How- project which has established a Europe-wide network of centres of ever it seemed difficult to choose less harmful words to explain. Inter- expertise in dysmorphology. Further information about DYSCERNE estingly, they pretty much included what they think interesting such as can be found on the website www.dyscerne.org which serves as the new genetics techniques rather than basic genetics to explain genetic access point to registered users for this educational tool. conditions. In addition, it was easier than exam to see what and how The format is a short PowerPoint presentation which can be followed they understand through observing how they explain each things and sequentially, or readers can navigate using links on the contents page it was good for teaching staffs to review themselves. Roleplay in small to specific sections of interest. There are links to downloadable docu- group learning is good tool for teaching communication skills and dif- ments and useful proformas at designated points in the presentation ficult issues in clinical settings. It also was good opportunity to have which provide practical assistance with carrying out the fetal examina- active discussion in rather shy students. tion as well as detailed reference information. This is the first in a series of tools created by the DYSCERNE project P01.12 which aim to guide and educate clinicians throughout Europe on key Nowgen’s new Darwin-inspired molecular genetic workshop for aspects of clinical dysmorphology. school students L. E. Holmes1,2, K. Mathieson1,2, P. Finegold1,2, H. R. Middleton-Price1,2, D. P01.10 Donnai1,2; DYscERNE: Developing clinical management guidelines for 1Nowgen, A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, Manchester, United Kingdom, dysmorphic conditions 2The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. P. M. Griffiths1, K. Strong1, S. Gardner1, R. Day1, C. Harrison1, D. Donnai1, B. Nowgen works closely with students and teachers to ensure that the Kerr1, K. Metcalfe1, H. Brunner2, B. Dallapiccola3, K. Devriendt4, M. Krajewska- next generation appreciate the scientific, social and ethical issues as- Walasek5, N. Philip6, J. Clayton-Smith1; sociated with genetics. One part of this work is our programme for 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Universitair Medisch post-16 biology students. This year, to celebrate Charles Darwin’s Centrum Sint Radboud, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Instituto Mendel, San 200th birthday, Nowgen has been commissioned by the Wellcome Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, Trust to develop and deliver a new molecular genetics practical work- 5Instytut Pomnik-Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka, Warsaw, Poland, 6Assistance Pub- shop exploring human evolution. lique - Hospitaux De Marseille, Marseille, France. Delivering high quality genetic services requires healthcare profes- This project has enabled Nowgen to push the boundaries of A-level sionals to develop evidence based guidelines which are subject to practical work, serving as an exemplar to the scientific education com- validation and quality checks. However, in clinical genetics, there is munity. The practical investigates the students’ own genotypes at one a paucity of guidelines, particularly for rarer conditions. Additionally, variable SNP in the TAS2R38 bitter taste receptor gene. Further bio- many guidelines produced have not used a robust methodology. informatics work investigates the same gene in chimpanzees, to show A main aim of the DYSCERNE Network of Centres of Expertise in dys- that the two species have undergone convergent evolution, the acqui- morphology (www.dyscerne.org) is to develop management guidelines sition of the same trait via independent biological processes. for dysmorphic conditions. A scoping exercise identified, Angelman, During the one-day workshop students determine their bitter-tasting Noonan, Williams and Kabuki Syndromes as conditions that would phenotype, extract their own DNA, set up PCR and restriction digest benefit from guidelines. Guidelines will include; criteria for diagnosis, reactions, and run their results on an agarose gel. The results, viewed information on clinical management at different life stages, and when instantly with fluorescent DNA stain, provide information about their specialist referral is needed. bitter-tasting genotype, leading to discussions regarding the correla- DYSCERNE’s guideline development methodology utilises a modi- tion between phenotype and genotype and the level of determinism fied SIGN (Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network) methodol- of our genes. ogy. SIGN’s methodology involves systematic review and grading of Our current A-level workshop is highly acclaimed by teachers, and published evidence, and uses multidisciplinary groups of clinicians to heavily subscribed. Building on this success, Nowgen is delivering 75 achieve expert consensus. This validated and internationally accepted Darwin-inspired workshops to 1875 students throughout 2009 - 2010. methodology assumes a rich evidence base and has previously been The practical will also be run in two other science centres in the UK, used to develop guidelines for a range of conditions including cancers with a national impact on over 5000 students. with strong genetic components. However, for rarer diseases, the evi- dence base is very small or non-existent, and we have adapted the P01.13 process so more emphasis is placed on expert opinion and consen- Ethical issues and subsequent governance in the GEN2PHEN sus, whilst maintaining systematic rigor and transparency. project Our programme of guideline development is ongoing and subject to A. Cambon Thomsen1, A. Pigeon1, E. Rial-Sebbag1, P. A. Gourraud1, M. continuous appraisal so modifications can be incorporated where nec- Thomsen1, &. GEN2PHEN consortium2; essary. The development protocol will be available on our website and 1Inserm, U558 & University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 2Department of it is hoped that others will be encouraged to utilise this approach to Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. develop much needed guidelines for rare diseases. The GEN2PHEN project aims to unify human and model organism genetic variation databases towards increasingly holistic views into P01.11 Genotype-To-Phenotype (G2P) data, and to link this system into oth- Role play as teaching tool for communication skills in prenatal er biomedical knowledge sources via genome browser functionality. genetics It involves participants from 14 countries. The regulatory and ethical A. Kondo, Y. Nishijima, Y. Onuki, H. Yokoyama, M. Mizoguchi, S. Izumi; framework was analysed for the 3 main levels addressed in the proj- Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan. ect: Getting data in; Data storage & infrastructure ; Getting data out. It is well known that role play is very effective learning tool to obtain The work on ethical issues involved also examination by questionnaire communication skill. In Japan, our medical students learn communica- plus interview of the ethical issues command by project participants, tion and medical interview in 4th and 5th year of 6 years education. leading to the production of a grid of issues that should be applied to In this study, we assessed the roleplays by 5th year student with the any set of data entering the G2P system or emerging from it. The main situation of prenatal settings to see how they could apply their skills ethical issues examined were initial informed consent content in order to rather complicated cases. We made a lecture about prenatal tests to allow GEN2PHEN to be used, appropriate feedback to individuals and discussed with students beforehand and asked them to play as a and communities regarding results, anonymization check, manage-Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  ment of the right of individuals to withdraw data and/or samples from research and therapy in human genetics and reproductive medicine. studies. The internal questionnaire allowed, after analysis of the 1st 20 answers to formulate a proposal of a governance system to prevent P01.16 misuse of data and the protection of fundamental rights of participants “Les couleurs de Jeanne” or “Jeanne’s colours”: a book to in the research. Views were generally concordant on what ethical is- explain familial adenomatous polyposis to at risk children. sues were, except on the level of individual information processed in S. Fosse1, S. Maddonni2, Roche Diagnostics, C. Colas3; the project, but various practical implementation of ethical principles 1Centre Hospitalier de Laval, Laval, France, 2Dessinatrice, Paris, France, were proposed, especially regarding the kind of ethics committee ap- 3APHP- GH Pitié Salpêtrière- Département de génétique, Paris, France. proval, the role of an internal ethics committee, the documentation of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) is an autosomic dominant an appropriate consent and the use of ethnicity based information. predisposition to colorectal cancer due to mutations in the APC gene. Patients present with hundreds of colorectal adenomas which inevi- P01.14 tably develop into carcinomas in the absence of early diagnosis and A View of Ethical issues in medical Genetics in iran treatment using prophylactic colectomy. Children’s patients are at 50% S. H. Jamaldini; risk of receiving the mutation. Polyps can develop at very early ages. Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation Sci- Usual recommendations are to start endoscopic surveillance from the ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. early teens. In France, genetic testing of minors in FAP is usually of- Unexpected advances in medical genetics have provided the genetic fered after 10 years old. It is now well admitted that genetic testing testing tools for a number of genetic disorders which raises complex of minors requires additional counselling considerations and effort to ethical, social, legal and religious issues. ensure understanding of the disease and of the gene test in order to Iran is an Islamic country with many different ethnic groups, high rate reduce uncertainty and misperceptions. of consanguinity marriage resulting in high prevalence of recessive Our experience of genetic testing for these children showed that dis- genetic disorders. cussions about the disease were often difficult between parents and Bioethical decision making in Islam is done within a framework of val- their children. Informations about genetic transmission and risks of the ues derived from revelations and tradition. A Fatwa (consensus edict), disease are complex notions to explain to young children. an authoritative ruling on a point of Islamic law, usually emerges in To improve communication within families and to help professionals Islamic countries, consensus groups will typically include a broad and dealing with genetic counselling, we created a book dedicated to these diverse representation of Ulema (Islamic jurists) and specialists, make children. A professional drawer illustrated the story of Jeanne, a young a final decision about relevant subject. girl, whose father has FAP and who will undergo genetic testing. Roche According to a Fatwa in Iran the abortion is allowed after 120 days Diagnostics helped us to concretize this project by technical and finan- if there is a danger to maternal life, regardless of whether the fetus cial support. This book has been sent to all French genetic centres is normal or abnormal. In this case, termination of pregnancy goes dealing with this pathology and is available on request. We hope that it against religious well-being, but it is done for the mother’s physical will help to improve management of these children and their families. health because protection of human life is one of the main principles of Islam. P01.17 Several strategic plans for medical ethics activities were performed by Evaluation of a prototype assay suitable for Fragile X population ministry of health and medical education. screening Many ethical issues still need to be explored, although Islamic prin- E. Lyon1, P. Yu1, M. Jama1, T. Laver2, K. Young2, M. Zoccoli2, N. Marlowe2; ciples provide a moral and ethical basis for prevention and care in 1ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Celera, Alameda, CA, Muslim countries, there is much to learn from how other countries are United States. challenging to do so within the context of their own moral and religious Population screening has been proposed for Fragile X (FX) syndrome because a common rule in religions that is protection of humanity is to identify pre-mutation carrier females and affected newborns. We the same. have developed a prototype FX assay, which combines a single PCR using a “chimeric” primer with fragment analysis on the ABI PRISM® P01.15 3100 Genetic Analyzer (3100). In this research study, we evaluated Change or not? Reflection on Eugenic ideas in the History of the prototype assay performance using archived samples from routine Human Genetics in Germany and Anglo-American countries. clinical practice, representing a range of FMR1 CGG-repeat expan- H. I. Petermann; sions. Institute of Ethics, History and Theory of Medicine, Muenster, Germany. 205 samples previously genotyped at ARUP using a lab-developed Eugenics as a movement of large ambition had the idea of improving PCR assay and Southern blot analysis were retested with the proto- the genetic make-up of the human race in history. Since the era of ra- type FX assay. The prototype assay uses Celera’s General Purpose cial hygiene in Third Reich the term has bad odour. In 1951 UNESCO Reagents along with a new primer set that distinguishes between nor- said that there is one human race. Comparing the discussion about mal and expanded FMR1 genotypes by PCR. Amplicons were subject- eugenics in Germany and Anglo-American countries there can be ed to fragment analysis on a 3100. Data were analyzed for the pres- stated: ence of a trinucleotide “ladder” extending beyond 55 repeats that was 1. “Old Eugenics” before 1945 had social desire that was contrasting set as a cut-off to identify expanded FMR1 alleles. We identified the to “New Eugenics” with individual one. Before 1945 the decline of birth presence of expanded FMR1 alleles in 135 samples (63 pre-mutation, rate in upper class should be stopped. After then it became the wish 69 full-mutation, 3 mosaics) and normal FMR1 alleles in 70 samples. for individual enhancement. We found 100 % concordance with previous results from PCR and 2. Eugenic ideas were topic in Germany and Anglo-American countries Southern blot analyses. Individuals with expanded alleles can then be like in discussion at Londoner CIBA Symposium “Man and his Future” tested by diagnostic FX testing for allele sizing and methylation. (1962) and following Marburger Workshop “Genetics and Society” Using a single PCR combined with high-throughput fragment analysis (1969) and about those. Despite the past there was no difference in on the 3100, we developed a rapid and reproducible prototype FX as- ideas and utopias. say capable of distinguishing samples with expanded FMR1 alleles 3. Public policy on human genetics and reproductive medicine is more from samples with normal alleles. restrictive in Germany than in Anglo-American Countries. Although new ideas for perfection of man are discussed there is a big fear to P01.18 get on a slippery slope. This influences the discussion about ethical Genetic testing contribution to active longevity and life-span aspects. promotion 4. Historical experiences are always a strong argument in ethical and V. S. Baranov1, H. Baranova2; philosophical discussions. Lack of knowledge of the history of eugen- 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, ics leads to arguments that are neither false nor true. 2European Institute of Personalized Prevention, Nice, France. 5. More and better information about eugenic history could help to de- The review of gene testing contribution into individual DNA data bank velop public policy by preventing mistakes of the past. This may relax reflecting unique genetic peculiarities of each human, its major poten-Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  tial impact for achievements of active longevity and creation most fa- their child and were concerned about the prognosis of the baby. Sec- vorable conditions for maximal duration of individual life-span. Partici- ond family had two counseling sessions, before and after diagnosis. In pation of major age-regulated genes such as «biological clock» genes the first session, they were given information about the procedures to and the «weak chain» genes (predisposing to different multifactorial be performed, in the second; information about the unbalanced karyo- diseases) in ageing of humans is outlined. The significance of genetic type was given. They believed the child is healthy and stated they are testing of allelic polymorphisms and marker-genes implicated in com- ready for any difficulties to be encountered during lifetime of the child. mon multifactor disorders such as bronchial asthma, osteoporosis, Although, we offered termination of the pregnancy as an option, we trombophilia, endometriosis, diabetes and preeclampsis is reviewed. admired their decision. Major problems evoked by sophisticated genetic testing results inter- Genetic counseling sessions have three goals including; education pretation are considered. Special attention is paid to Genome Wide and informing, providing support and help cope and facilitate informed Association Studies (GWAS) technology implemented for analysis of decision making, need to be nondirective and patient relief is impor- genetic profiles and candidate genes associated with common diseas- tant. Social and educational facts as well as the practitioner’s attitude es. Scientific problems and social interests in creation of individually play role in making decision, which sometimes has priority on the men- oriented DNA-data banks (Gene Passes) amenable for the pregnant tioned scientific facts. women, children, sportsmen, etc are discussed. The relationship of Gene Pass concept to the current international genetic program of P01.21 «Perosonificated Genome» is highlighted. Feasible perspectives ge- Role of the family in genetic counselling for predictive testing of netic testing and basic contribution of Gene Pass into gerontology late onset neurological diseases practical medical service are reviewed. M. Paneque Herrera, M. Fleming, J. Sequeiros; IBMC, Porto, Portugal. P01.19 The role of the family in genetic counselling for predictive testing of Orphanet UK and ireland, a growing Rare Disease resource late onset neurodegenerative diseases is a topic of growing interest I. Gomez Paramio1, S. Aymé2, H. Middleton-Price1, D. Donnai1; and not yet sufficiently explored. Impact of involving the family in the 1The Nowgen Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2ORPHANET-INSERM dynamics of the predictive process remains quite unclear. The present SC11, Paris, France. longitudinal study aims at exploring the relationship between family Orphanet (www.orpha.net) the largest international online resource for and disease in the context of genetic counselling during pre-symp- rare diseases involves 38 countries and lists >11500 professionals. tomatic testing (PST) for two neurodegenerative diseases: Spinocer- Orphanet features a comprehensive classification of rare diseases. ebellar Ataxia Type 2 (SCA2) and Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy Orphanet UK and Ireland was established in 2004 and has grown in ATTRV30M (FAP). For one year, we followed 35 subjects that carried depth, listing >2500 rare disease services and now featuring QA data out PST for SCA2 in Cuba and 28 subjects for FAP, in Portugal. It was and professional networks. shown that the family influences psychological behaviour of subjects These cases show how patients, health professionals and researchers requesting PST, starting from the decision making process down to benefit from Orphanet. the changed indicators of psychological wellbeing of those performing Case 1: At 39 years Oliver started to bite his tongue without any appar- PST. After diagnosis, family functioning decreases regardless of the ent reason. He visited many professionals until in 2008 he was diag- outcome, and the presence of the disease in the mother is associ- nosed with Neuroacanthocytosis. Through Orphanet he learned about ated with a greater disrupting effect of the disease in the family. In the his disease. He also found a support group for Neuroacanthocytosis future, additional short and long term longitudinal studies are essen- patients and a specialised clinic close to home. tial, not just regarding the way in which the family influences genetic Case 2: Liz, a consultant specialising in lysosomal storage disorders, counselling process in predictive testing, but also on how the latter is has a three month-old patient suffering from Gaucher disease type2. influenced by the process of diagnosis. Through Orphanet she discovered a new orphan product based on a tartaric acid salt. She also learned about its potential benefits to treat P01.22 this life-threatening disease due to its different mechanism of action in Process to incorporate genetic disease in the WHO international relation to other products. classification of diseases: tools managed by Orphanet Case 3: Tom is a researcher involved in a project about rare types S. Aymé, A. Rath, B. Bellet, M. Georget; of Arthrogryposis, including Kalyanaraman syndrome. Tom uses Or- ORPHANET, Paris, France. phanet to learn about these syndromes, find relevant articles and other The current International Classification of Diseases (ICD10) has un- European research projects. He uses its multiple disease classifica- dergone a revision process which should lead to a release of ICD11 in tions to discover links with other very different diseases having similar 2014. Most genetic diseases are absent in ICD10 and the ones having symptoms. a specific code are often misclassified. As a consequence, morbidity These cases highlight the importance of accessible and accurate in- and mortality due to genetic diseases is invisible in health information formation about rare diseases. They also illustrate the importance of a systems. To overcome this difficulty, Orphanet (www.orpha.net) has European approach to improve diagnosis, care and treatment. established a partnership with WHO to ensure a fair representation of rare diseases in general. In order to prepare the proposal, Orphanet P01.20 has collected all published expert classifications and established a da- Unbalanced Offspring of Reciprocal translocation carriers: tabase of phenotypes indexed with ICD10 codes, MIM codes, genes, Genetic counseling and Ethical considerations mode of inheritance, age of onset, class of prevalence. Phenotypes F. I. Sahin, O. Ozer, Z. Yilmaz; are assigned to as many classification systems as necessary to rep- Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An- resent them. The visualisation of the classification systems and of the kara, Turkey. place of each disease within the classifications is available on the Or- Genetic counseling is the process during which information is given phanet website. A Topic Advisory Group on rare diseases has been about a genetic condition. On the basis of two unbalanced offspring, established to manage the revision process at WHO. The whole com- ethical considerations and parental decisions during genetic counsel- munity of experts is going to be involved in the validation of the pro- ing will be discussed. posals prepared by Orphanet during the year to come. Information will The first family had a baby with multiple congenital abnormalities and a circulate via OrphaNews Europe. The human genetics community is karyotype 46,XY,der(14)t(1;14)(q42.1;q32.3)mat. Their major concern invited to take an active part as the results will condition the visibility of was the wellbeing of the child as the baby had growth retardation. all activities in the field. The second family had a prenatally diagnosed fetus with a karyotype 46,XX,ish der(3)t(3;13)(p22;q21)pat(wcp13+). The parents decided to continue the pregnancy. In the first case, parents did not know about the consequences of an unbalanced child as they did not have the opportunity to have a ge- netic counseling session before the baby was born. They acceptedGenetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  P01.23 P01.25 incorporating genetics into primary care: Education as a tool A comparison study of the practices of genetic counsellors in for health care professionals. the cAPABiLitY ARGENtiNA EUROPE Demonstration Project C. Cordier1,2,3, M. Voelckel2,4, H. Skirton5; C. Z. Barreiro1, U. Kristoffersson2, J. Schmidtke3, A. Kent4, A. L. Christianson5, 1Department of Cytogenetics, Mulhouse, France, 2French Association of R. Raouf6, I. Nippert7; Genetic Counsellors, Marseille, France, 3CREGEMES, Strasbourg, France, 1Hospital de Pediatría Garrahan SAMIC, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Lunds 4Department of Medical Genetics, Marseille, France, 5University of Plymouth, University, Lund, Sweden, 3Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Plymouth, United Kingdom. Germany, 4Genetic Interest Group, London, United Kingdom, 5University of the Genetic counsellors and genetic nurses are health professionals with Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa, 6Ministry of Health, Cairo, Egypt, specialized training and experience in the areas of clinical genet- 7Universitaetsklinikum Muenster, Muenster, Germany. ics and counselling. They work as members of the multi-disciplinary Background: We present the preliminary results of the Demonstration healthcare team that provides genetic services. Project of CAPABILITY in Chaco a Northeastern Argentine province. In most European countries, the profession of genetic counsellor is Chaco has a highly endogamic population and no genetic services relatively new and is not always recognized. The European Network were available. CAPABILITY is a 3-year Specific Support Action for the of Genetic Nurses and Counsellors is working to establish standards Network of Excellence EuroGentest (2007-2009). of practice and education to support developments in the profession in Objectives: The main objective of the Demonstration Project in Ar- Europe. The aim of this survey was to collect baseline data on practice gentina is to enhance genetic services, using training of the health and education of genetic counsellors in European countries. care team as a resource as well as to encourage the creation of com- Members of the Network were asked to respond to an electronic sur- plementary projects financed by Argentina to maintain the structure vey on the practice of genetic counselling in their own country. Data achieved and to reproduce the project in other areas of the country in have now been collected from respondents from 13 countries. correlation with Needs Assessment Argentina. This survey indicates thet there are many differences in practice and Methods: We have designed a logical framework for the planning of training across Europe. There is no legal standing for the profession these processes, performed a diagnosis of the local situation, present- in some countries, so that genetic counselling could be practiced by ed the project to the health authorities, set up a platform with teach- members of other professions. The training may be provided in a hos- ing materials (PP presentation, printed syllabus, and CD) and a web pital or university department of medicine, science or nursing. There page, chosen a zone for the pilot workshop and implemented it in April are also marked differences in the types of clinical responsibilities un- 2008. dertaken. In some countries, the genetic counsellor can only under- Outcome: Through training primary health care professionals who re- take limited duties, such as pre-clinic contact, while in others he can ceive patients with congenital defects have learned how to detect risk work more autonomously, providing the full episode of care. factors and recognize dysmorphisms. The number of interconsulta- These data will help to provide a foundation for further development tions in the period April-December 2008 increased significantly com- in this profession. pared to the period April-December 2007. This increase has led to a further need for genetic services and the building of a Genetic labora- P01.26 tory in Chaco has been planned. We have ensured that the project will the impact of current motivational behaviours on the future of be funded by the Hospital Garrahan of Argentina. genetic medicine and research. A systematic literature review. Funded by: EC Contract no.: FP6-037275 B. S. Dhorajiwala, M. Keane, B. A. Jennings, A. Papageorgiou; The University of East Anglia, School of medicine, Health Policy and Practice, P01.24 Norwich, Norfolk, United Kingdom. the status of genetic information in health systems: a European Background: Ambitious longitudinal studies, such as Biobank UK, rely view on high volunteer recruitment rates. It is important for these studies, A. Cambon Thomsen1, S. Julia1,2, A. Pigeon1, E. Rial-Sebbag1; and for the subsequent application of genetic medicine, to understand 1Inserm, U558 & University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 2Medical genetics motivational factors for the participants. Health behaviour models have department, University hospital Purpan, Toulouse, France. been used to predict responses and explain attitudes about taking up Genetic information can be considered as sensitive personal infor- healthcare. mation or health information and is regulated as such in many health Method: We carried out a systematic review that aimed to evaluate systems. In a number of cases its production and uses are specifi- all current evidence for motivation to participate in genetic testing cally regulated by law or other kind of regulatory texts. There is a huge and summarize the findings using thematic analysis, grouping results variability in the kind of regulations that apply to genetic information in based on health behaviours. We completed a search of qualitative and European countries and we analyse the relevance and influence of su- quantitative literature from 1996 to December 2008. Relevant studies pra-national texts in such regulations. The most recently adopted text were identified from searches of AMED, EMBASE, MEDLINE, Psy- on this topic is at the Council of Europe level, namely, the “Additional cINFO and CINAHL databases. 342 relevant articles were retrieved in Protocol to the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, con- abstract form, of which 18 were found to match our inclusion criteria for cerning Genetic Testing for Health Purposes” Strasbourg, 2008 (http:// review and data extraction. conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/203.htm); it specifies a Results: Analysis of the results encompassed multiple motivational fac- number of points complementary to those addressed in the “Conven- tors for willingness to participate in genetic testing. Specific examples tion on Human Rights and Biomedicine” ,1997 (http://conventions.coe. of grouped themes included: int/treaty/EN/Treaties/Html/164.htm). We will analyse this document in ● Personal, social and family history as predictive factors to partici- relation to the situation in some chosen European countries (includ- pate. ing France, Spain, Sweden), especially with regard to definitions used ● Perceived self-benefit from the development of knowledge and treat- and principles applied, and with reference to the 25 recommendations ment of disease. published by the European Commission in 2004 (http://ec.europa.eu/ ● Perceived social benefit, aiding the understanding of the wider com- research/conferences/2004/genetic/) following the work of an expert munity. group on ethical, legal and social aspects of genetic testing. The focus ● Ability to understand terminology and education in genetic research will be on the issue of genetic exceptionalism, the place of genetic as cues to action/participation. information in public health regulations and how direct to consumer There is a great need for the further development of our offers on internet may challenge the existing regulations. This is of understanding of what motivates individuals to partici- particular relevance as regard to the French situation where the law pate in genetic testing. Understanding these underlying that regulates genetic testing is a “bioethics law” that is under revision motivators can facilitate education, health promotion in 2009. and enhance both participation in future genetic studies and the application of new technologies.Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  P01.27 Genetic Interest Group, London, United Kingdom. Genetic screening programmes in Europe EuroGenGuide is a EC-funded project, aiming to provide information P. Javaher1, E. Nyoungui1, H. Kääriäinen2, U. Kristoffersson3, I. Nippert4, J. about genetic testing and research to patients, the wider public and Sequeiros5, J. Schmidtke1; health professionals. The information will take the form of a ‘manual’in 1Medical School of Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 2Finland and National two parts: one with information for patients or people considering tak- Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 3University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, ing part in research and the other with educational materials about 4Universitaetsklinikum Muenster, Muenster, Germany, 5Institute for Molecular genetics for health professionals. and Cell Biology and ICBAS, University Porto, Porto, Portugal. There is considerable disparity in Europe between the relatively wide- Objectives: Genetic screening is defined as any kind of test performed spread availability of genetic tests and therapies, and the uneven systematically for the early detection or exclusion of a genetic disease, distribution of information and access to both these and counselling genetic predisposition or resistance to a disease, or to determine services for those affected by genetic disorders. EuroGenGuide aims whether a person carries a gene variant, that may produce disease in to reach into areas where information is limited or where clinicians his or her offspring. and patients know little about genetics and the resources available to Methods: This survey intends to present the current (2006-2008) status them in taking advantage of genetic technology and services, and help of genetic screening programmes as a best-effort collection of the ge- to resolve this often life-determining gap. EuroGenGuide’s two-part netic screening landscape in selected European countries, building on manual will provide a readily-accessible comprehensive document a first assessment of genetic screening programmes in Germany with and website for use by all which will help to generate a robust model of the production of a final report in 2003. The data collection was per- informed consent for those making decisions based on their options in formed on the basis of sources via internet, including PubMed search, respect of genetic testing or research. websites of national screening authorities and societies and some oth- The EuroGenGuide team is comprised of thirteen organisations from er organisations, as well as data from a self-designed questionnaire, across Europe, and co-ordinated from London by the Genetic Interest addressing the conditions screened in prenatal, population-based car- Group. Now in its final year, the EuroGenGuide team is working to rier, and cascade screening programmes, and organisational aspects publicise and raise the profile of the guide ready for its launch in De- of screening programmes in selected European countries. cember 2009. Please feel free to get involved by registering to receive Results and discussion: In almost all countries, there are nationwide the newsletter, take the user survey and discuss issues of relevance newborn screening programmes for PKU (in Finland as regional pro- on the forum, at http://www.eurogenguide.eu. gramme targeted to immigrants) and for CH. Apart from Estonia, Fin- land, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway and Slovenia there are other condi- P01.30 tions screened in different countries. These additional conditions vary Genetics education for dental students per country, sometimes depending on prevalence but more often for D. T. Stefanescu1, N. Scribanu2, E. Severin3; historical and/or political reasons. A data comparison shows that there 1Genetic Lab, Bucharest, Romania, 2Georgetown Univ Medical Ctr, Washing- is a heterogeneity in conditions screened, screening methods, organi- ton, DC, United States, 3”Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. sational aspects of screening programmes, and conditions screened The aim of this study is to optimize the genetics education of dental in prenatal, population-based carrier, and cascade screening pro- students and residents based on the implications and applications of grammes among the European countries surveyed. genetic knowledge and skills to dental health and patient care. Materials and Methods: It was found a rich literature using PubMed P01.28 search for articles on the topic studied. We used clinical cases in the People’s concerns and attitudes towards genetic testing for collection of our genetics department too. multifactorial diseases Results - The study of literature has enabled us evidence of many ex- V. V. Markova, O. A. Makeeva, V. P. Puzyrev; amples that demonstrate the use of genetic research in clinical practice: Research Institute of Medical Genetics SB RAMS, Tomsk, Russian Federation. the identification of gene mutations that cause isolated inherited dental The high rate of genetic technologies developments and their forth- anomalies, gene mutations with pleiotropic effects, genetic testing for coming application into disease management and other spheres of life oral cancer susceptibility and pre-symptomatic diagnosis of periodontal provoke a lot of concerns about its short- and long-term effects both in disease. Changes of genetic structure produce the large diversity that lay people and health care professionals . may be encountered in clinical practice. In dental schools, educators A survey of 2000 Russian respondents had been conducted to study and academic staff provide the opportunity for students to learn how peoples’ attitudes towards different aspects of genetic testing. to translate genes into dental health.Therefore, students and residents Results: 85% of respondents expressed their desire “to know more should be trained to understand the impact of genetic modifications about genome”; 68% of survey participants would like to know about on oral health, to recognize genetically determined or environmentally probable future diseases; and 89% believed they would try to change induced anomalies, to know the genetic tests available to identify the their lifestyle or take medications in order to avoid a disease if a high cause of diseases or abnormalities of craniofacial complex, to provide risk were identified. Among the reasons which can force people to un- the patient best treatment possible based on the genetic profile and dergo genetic testing the most important was people’s anxiety about guide the patient to genetic counseling. health which was related to the self-reported individuals’ health status. Conclusions - Genetics has the potential to shape the dental educa- 18% of respondents answered that “nothing” can prevent them from tion and practice. In the context of genetic medicine, the dentist will undergoing genetic testing for disease predisposition. At the same integrate the tools of genetics in their dental practice for prediction, time 48% believed that if genetic testing results will be publicaly avail- prevention and personalized therapy. able, tested people can be discriminated in society. Results of the survey confirm the high level of public interest and a very P01.31 positive perception of novel genomic technologies as well as highly Genetics Made Easy - Non-profit informative web site on Human overestimated expectations which call for special efforts in educating Genetics lay people and health care professionals. The high level of people’s M. T. Solé-Pujol1, J. M. Carrera-Macia2, J. M. Cantú-Garza3, F. Solé-Ristol4, J. concerns about genetic discrimination agues for the necessity of regu- Antich-Femenias1; lation in this sphere. 1Centro Genética Médica, Barcelona, Spain, 2Instituto Universitario Dexeus., Barcelona, Spain, 3Instituto Mejicano del Seguro Social., Guadalajara (Jalisco), P01.29 Mexico, 4Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain. EuroGenGuide: Patient Led Education and Development for EDUCATIONAL web site on human genetics. Genetic Testing in Research and Medicine GENETICS MADE EASY http://www.geneticsmadeeasy.com A. J. McKeown, VSOP, The Netherlands, Milan Policlinico, Italy, University Genetics made easy is a non-profit informative web site on Human Ge- of Muenster, Germany, WANDA, The Netherlands, Heart UK, EFB, The Neth- netics that brings general population and scientific community closer erlands, CEEGN, Croatia, GAMIAN, Romania, Fighting Blindness, Republic together. The principal aim of the web site is to disseminate the scien- of Ireland, Health Coalition Initiative, UK, Rare Disorders Belgium, Alzheimer tific advances and knowledge that take place in genetics and how the Europe, Belgium; general population (students, couples wanting to have a baby, clini-Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 0 cian and other healthcare professionals, law and legal field, journal- We report here findings of a study focussed on the concerns of family ism, etc.) can benefit from this progress. members caring for a person with Huntington disease in the United The web is an excellent complement to genetic counseling and a Kingdom. This was part of a larger study undertaken in the United very useful teaching tool to clinicians and other healthcare profes- Kingdom and the US. UK respondents (n=120) who were currently sionals, in order to complement medical personal consultations at spe- caring for a relative affected with Huntington disease were asked to cific points when teaching the patient, as you will see through the index self-complete the Huntington Disease Family Concerns and Strategies web, as genetically inherited disorders are known across all medical Survey to identify areas of concern and the extent to which specific specialties. issues bothered carers. Items in the scale were derived from a previ- the index web is: ous qualitative study of carers. A series of open questions required * Introduction, * The origin of life, * Cell specialization, * Chromosomes, participants to respond in their own words: 81 respondents completed * How do we acquire our inheritance, * What is heredity, * Types of those sections. The qualitative data were analysed thematically, three inheritance, * Why do disorders develop, * What happens when our main themes emerged. These were: i) the carer’s health, ii) caring for recipes combine with our partner´s recipes?, *And how can we use this the affected person in an appropriate way and iii) accessing social and vast knowledge and benefit from it, * Origin of hereditary disorders, * health care services. Carers were concerned about their own health Prenatal diagnosis techniques, *Gene Therapy, * Cloning, and stem and ability to continue to care. Some health professionals were per- cells, *Questions, * Links of interest, * Further reading, * Foreword. ceived to be uncaring and lacking knowledge to support care, while A FORUM, is included. appropriate services were often difficult to access. Despite living in Supplemented by static pictures and flash animation, at this moment a country with a National Health Service, carers still have consider- is currently available on the Net in spanish, English, chinese and able concerns and stresses associated with support of a relative with a catalan. long-term genetic condition. P01.32 P01.34 Health care needs assessment for medical genetic services in Basic criterias of psycho-medical-genetic counseling of families middle- and low-income nations with children affected by Down and X-fragile syndromes in A. L. Christianson1, R. Zimmern2, U. Kristoffersson3, J. Schmidtke4, A. Kent5, Republic of moldova R. Raouf6, C. Barreiro7, I. Nippert8; M. Sprincean; 1National Health Laboratory Service & University of the Witwatersrand, Braam- National Centre of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Department of fontein, Johannesbrug, South Africa, 2PHG Foundation, Cambridge UK, United Genetic Diseases Prophylaxis, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of. Kingdom, 3Dept Clinical Genetics, University Hosp Lund, Lund, Sweden, 4In- Psycho-medical-genetic assistance, expressed as counseling activity, stitute of Human Genetics, MHH, Hanover, Germany, 55GIG, London, United is dealing with disorders of emotion, will, motor function and speech Kingdom, 6Children with special needs Department, Ministry of Health, Cairo, which are most frequent aspects of psycho-medical retardation of chil- Egypt, 7Hospital de Pediatria SAMIC, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 8Women’s dren affected by Down and X-fragile Syndromes, most frequent ge- Health Research, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany. netic pathologies in Moldova. Psychophysical retardation of children Background: Consequent on improving health, education and infra- with genetic pathologies, in general, is not so evident in first stages of structure many middle- and some low-income nations have experi- their life comparing with healthy children, due to human biological in- enced epidemiological transition resulting in congenital and common born potential. Developmental gap between healthy children and those complex disorders becoming health care priorities. The WHO [2000] affected, progressively and naturally increases later. recommended that developing countries implementing medical ge- Correctional strategy of psycho-medical-genetic counseling of fami- netic services should produce a ‘country report’, in essence a stra- lies for medical-psycho-behavioral stimulation of children up to three tegic health care plan. The first component of such a plan is a health years old with Down and X-fragile Syndromes is based on following. care needs assessment (HCNA). In the 1970s industrialised nations First, amelioration of children’s development by applying in complex of standardised the process of HCNA. The approach was never applied medical, psychological and pedagogical resources. Success of psy- to medical genetic services. Experience from advising middle-income cho-medical-genetic counseling of families with affected children de- nations on developing their nascent medical genetic services indicates pends on efficient applying of medical-genetic, psycho-pedagogical re- they are not undertaking HCNA. A major impediment is the lack of a sources of amelioration of development of such children, especially in documented approach. first three years of life. Second, earlier, differential stimulation of three Objectives: To develop an evidence-based tool for HCNA for medical basic psychic behaviors: psycho-motorial, social-affectional, cognitive- genetic services in middle- and low- income nations. verbal. Evidently, earlier and individual applying of developmental-cor- Outcome: CAPABILITY, an EU funded Specific Support Action inves- rectional medical, psychological and pedagogical resources, during tigating the transfer of medical genetic knowledge and technology to counseling activity, determines successful rehabilitation and social developing nations, has formalised a HCNA for medical genetic ser- integration of children, mostly in next periods of life. Third, support vices that middle- and low-income nations can utilise for their ‘country of children’s families, which amplify the ameliorational effect of medi- reports’. Key elements of the HNCA are the development of strategic cal-genetic and psycho-pedagogical rehabilitational model promoted aims; an evaluation of existing services and the environment in which during psycho-medical-genetic counseling, based on partnership with they function; a review of epidemiology, effective interventions, opin- mothers and/or other persons caring of these children, with the aim to ions of consumers and professionals, available resources and pos- contribute to stimulation of their development in families, representing sible constraints. Analysis of these enables the production of a HCNA. most favorable ameliorational environment for children with Down and This approach will assist nations with emerging economies to marshal X-fragile Syndromes. and allocate their limited resources when developing medical genetic services. P01.35 Funded by: EC Contract no.: FP6-037275 support for patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and their families: what do they want? P01.33 S. Maruyama, A. Sakurai, Y. Fukushima; Huntington disease - concerns of family carers in the United Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan. Kingdom Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1(MEN1) is a familial tumor syndrome H. Skirton1, J. K. Williams2; which develops tumors in different organs and at different times, thus 1Faculty of Health and Social Work, Taunton, United Kingdom, 2University of patients with MEN1 need to continue inspection and various treatment Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. for the entire lifetime. Genetic testing of patients and family members Huntington disease is a neurodegenerative condition. Affected individ- can cause them significant psychological distress. To know what they uals may require health and personal care for 15-20 years: this care have felt when they were diagnosed as having MEN1 and what kind of is frequently undertaken by family members. Previous studies have support they wanted, we carried out a written questionnaire-based sur- demonstrated both the positive and negative impact of caring for rela- vey for affected patients and their spouses. Twenty-nine patients and tives with debilitating conditions. 22 their spouses completed questionnaires and those were analyzed.Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  More than three fourths and more than half of patients, respectively, cluded might be cystic fibrosis. were diagnosed based on results of genetic testing and family history. At the time of diagnosis, with surprise and uneasiness, many respon- P01.38 dents concerned “inheritance of the disease to their children” as well Genetic counseling of phenylketonuria (PKU) patient’s parents as their own “future symptoms” and “future treatment”. As time passes V. L. Izhevskaya1, L. Y. Ivanova2, I. V. Zhuravleva2, E. K. Ginter1; after the diagnosis, majority of patients reported a relief of anxiety, but 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute some reported further increase of their anxiety, probably related to ag- of sociology, Moscow, Russian Federation. gravation of the diseases and concern about genetic testing for their The PKU patient’s parents appraisal of different aspects of genetic ser- children. At the time of diagnosis, medical information was on the top vices in Russia in connection with neonatal screening was estimated. of the list they wanted, but as time passed, they asked more social- 261 respondents from 5 regions of Russia were participated in the and physical support. research. Only 13.4% of respondents knew about the program of neo- In addition to an appropriate medical management, sustained assis- natal screening for PKU in Russia before the birth of the PKU child tance which meets variety of needs of patients and the families is nec- while over 85 % of them knew nothing about it. Many respondents essary to provide better quality of life to them, and establishment of an specified the absence of the adequate information about screening appropriate administration system is desired for that purpose. for hereditary diseases in their comments to the questionnaire. Almost all respondents (97%) have received information about the hereditary P01.36 character of their child disease from the genetic counselors, and 95.8 molecular and cytogenetic laboratory of Leningrad province: % of them have specified that they have understood this information. 2008 However only 62.9% of respondents could correctly specify the value I. A. Ivanov1, M. O. Mkheidze2; of recurrence risk of PKU, and only 36.4 % of them could correctly at- 1District Children Hospital, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical Acad- tribute a risk category. From our point of view the absence of adequate emy for postgraduate studies, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. information about neonatal screening as well as simultaneous provid- Molecular and cytogenetic laboratory is stationed at District Children ing information on hereditary character, recurrence risk and prenatal Hospital. Last year it realized neonatal screening for PKU, CH, CF, diagnostics of the PKU make genetic counseling of such families non- galactosemia, cytogenetic investigations for making diagnosis of chro- effective. Changes in methodology of genetic counseling of PKU fami- mosomal pathology, prenatal screening for congenital defects (double- lies should be introduce in Russia. Prenatal diagnostics of PKU was test), confirmation of hereditary diagnosis, medical care, long term in- acceptable for approximately to 40% of respondents, and the abortion patient and outpatient care, dietary management, genetic counseling. of a PKU foetus is morally acceptable to about two-thirds of them. 10951 of newborns were examined through neonatal screening. Four children with PKU, two cases of CH, one case of galactosemia and P01.39 one case of CF were diagnosed. Cohort of children with PKU, CH, CF correlation of clinic, genetic and epigenetic aspects implicated and galactosemia has special dietary and medicinal treatment. Prena- in the etiology of Prader Willi/Angelman syndromes: model of tal biochemical screening of the first ( PAPP-A, HCGb) and the second multidisciplinary approach for rare diseases in Romania (alfa-FP, HCG) trimesters was performed for pregnant women (5962). M. Puiu1, G. Anton2, D. Dan3, C. Popoiu1, C. Rusu4, V. Pop5, C. Badiu6, M. Owing to realization invasive prenatal investigation (369) we were able Stoian1, N. Cucu7; to detect prenatally trisomy 21 (3 cases), Turner syndrome (2 cases), 1University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2National Institute syndrome of partial deletion of chromosome 18 (1 case). We have de- of Virusology, Bucharest, Romania, 3Romanian National Alliance of Rare Dis- tected some new cases of chromosomal pathology postnatally (in total eases, Zalau, Romania, 4University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 969 samples): trisomy 21 (22 cases), trisomy 18 (2 cases); syndrome 5University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 6National Institute of partial deletion of chromosome 5 (1 case), and some other cases of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania, 7University of Bucharest, Romania. with chromosome pathology. Five children with CF were found using The purpose of this research is to establish the new hypotheses that sweet test for 260 samples. We continue to create register of inherited are responsible for Prader- Willi/Angelman syndromes. Our study has and congenital disorders among Leningrad province population. as objectives the implementation of new molecular methods for ge- netic/epigenetic investigation and establishment of national centers P01.37 with high expertise in approaching the two syndromes, the rare genetic First experiences with the extended newborn screening program diseases that will develop educational reference and release centers. in the Netherlands We also aim to evolve efficient partnership with patients associations M. C. Cornel1,2; through specific modalities like dialogue. The power of these associa- 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Centre for Soci- tions will propel the research, will inform the patients and will respond ety and Genomics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. to civil society questions. The study will establish international collabo- By January 1st, 2007 the newborn screening program in the Nether- ration and partnerships with researchers having similar scientific inter- lands was extended from three disorders to 17, including medium- est, establish partnerships with PWS-Organizations, IPSWO, research chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency and sickle-cell disease. The groups from each country aiming financial support on programs that selection of disorders to be screened for was based on a report of the intend to stimulate collaboration between specialists, researchers and Dutch Health Council. Three categories were distinguished: disorders nongovernmental organizations. Finally, we aim to develop a multi- for which considerable irreparable damage can be prevented (catego- disciplinary partnership, to build a common platform of activities for ry 1), disorders for which this applies to a lesser degree or for which new innovative solutions in respect to rare disease needs. These new the evidence is inconclusive (category 2), and disorders for which new- bridges of real and effective collaboration will ascertain on the national born screening does not prevent damage to health (category 3). level the setting up of a solid network comprising institutions with high In 2007 a total of 194 infants were diagnosed in the neonatal screening expertise in this domain, well connected to other national or interna- program, including 60 with sickle-cell disease or a serious hemoglobin- tional research networks. The results of the research will be published opathy, 70 with a metabolic disorder, 57 with congenital hypothyroid- in well-known journals with high impact factors for enlargement of Ro- ism and 7 with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The uptake remained manian research visibility in international domain of rare diseases. In stable at 99.75%. Information in the third trimester of pregnancy was conclusion our project aims to implement in Romania the European given to enable parents to make an informed decision on participation model of the network for rare diseases research, model adapted with to the newborn screening and to decide on unintentionally found car- success in management of these diseases. rier information. The decision to participate to the newborn screening was an informed decision in 80% of cases. The decision (not) to opt out to receive information on carrier status was an informed decision in 60% of cases. The attitude to the newborn screening program is very positive, but information can be improved. Carrier status was often communicated without stressing the consequences of this information for reproductive choices of the parents. The next disease to be in-Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  P01.40 in the dataset 2008. “Internet (3%)” and “Lecture series (1.1%) ” are the role of Genetic counseling in Premarital screening program less requested media from the public. However, scientists responded in saudi Arabia. that they wanted to provide their research results via “Lecture series A. Al Suliaman, A. Sulaiman, M. Al Mishari, A. Al Sawadi, T. Owaidah; (44.3%)”, “Newspapers (43.4%), “Internet (43.2%)”. “Information on Department of Genetics, Research Centre, King Faisal Hospital and Research the Internet” is less trusted media in the public (11.5%) rather than Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. scientists’ forecast (33.0%). “Information from non-profit organizations” Haemoglobinopathies are the most inherited disorders worldwide are least trusted (7-8%) from both the public and scientists. including Saudi Arabia which can be preventable with application of Discussions: Citizen journalism plays important roles for science com- screening programmers. Ministry of Health in Saudi Arabia had initi- munication in Europe or South Korea, but not in Japan. We discuss ated premarital screening program in all country regions. The aim of this results with our coming final survey. this study was to explore the impact of the PMS and genetic counsel- ing on couples at risk for thalassaemia and sickle cell anima in an P01.43 area of the country with high hemoglobinopathy prevalence. A total Effective strategies to generate public interest and dialogue in of 129 candidates at risk were included, 98% of them proceeded with genetics marriage. Culture pressure was the main reason in more than 48%. Al- K. Mathieson1,2, P. Finegold1,2, L. E. Holmes1,2, M. J. Leech1,2, D. Donnai1,2, H. though most of the candidates did not receive genetic counseling yet, R. Middleton-Price1,2; the concept of genetic counseling was liked by most of them and the 1Nowgen, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2The University of Manchester, United program helped in early detection of the disease in their offspring. Kingdom. Public engagement is central to Nowgen’s work, as we believe that the P01.41 public need to be involved in shaping the future of genetic medicine. towards implementation of non-invasive prenatal diagnosis in We aim to empower citizens to make informed decisions about new the UK National Health service genetic technologies and health services. Nowgen is highly regarded H. Burton, C. Wright; in its work related to education and dialogue and is becoming increas- PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom. ingly involved in influencing policy at local and national level. Emerging technologies that capitalize on the presence of cell-free fetal Nowgen has developed a comprehensive public engagement pro- nucleic acids in the maternal bloodstream have the potential to trans- gramme that incorporates a broad range of approaches, including: de- form prenatal diagnosis and care by allowing non-invasive testing from bates, exhibitions, working with artists, filming with teenagers, popula- as early as 7 weeks. This represents a major advance, since diagnosis tion surveys and patient engagement. Our most successful strategy currently requires a later, invasive procedure (amniocentesis or chori- has been to combine the display of visually engaging materials in the onic villus sampling) with an associated miscarriage risk of around 1%. community, with events involving leading academics. This approach Many women opt against prenatal testing for this reason, and hun- has stimulated public interest, generated significant media coverage dreds of healthy fetuses are lost following testing each year in the UK and provided opportunities for the public to find out more from experts alone. Technological applications already in active development are and discuss their views on scientific issues. the determination of fetal sex or the diagnosis of specific diseases in Two recent projects led by Nowgen have exemplified this approach. the fetus of women at high risk of inherited disease; the determination ‘Faces of Manchester’ involved the production of artwork about the of fetal Rhesus blood-group status in Rhesus-negative women at high human face, alongside events exploring human identity and genetics. risk of complications of pregnancy with a Rhesus-positive fetus; and ‘Our Kid’ led to the development of a multimedia sculpture display- the diagnosis of aneuploidies such as Down Syndrome in the fetus. ing over thirty short films, alongside events highlighting biomedical The approach may permit diagnosis of a wider range of genetic dis- research. eases in the future, subject to certain limitations, and ultimately could An independent evaluator has reported on the impact on these proj- also allow improved monitoring for complications of pregnancy such as ects, finding that overall the audience response was very positive. The pre-eclampsia. The PHG Foundation has led an expert working group main strengths of the projects were to work with numerous community of key UK stakeholders, including National Health Service (NHS) re- partners and use innovative, creative approaches to generate public searchers, clinicians, managers and patient representatives, in an ex- interest. amination of current evidence and associated ethical, legal and social issues in this area. Findings and strategic recommendations for the P01.44 effective and responsible implementation of this new technique into Belgian strategies and actions for rare diseases health services in the UK will be presented. E. Swinnen, J. Cassiman; Catholic University of Leuven, Centre of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. P01.42 All rare diseases (prevalence of less than 1/2000) combined affect Public trust in media and science outreach on genomic studies: around 8 % of the population and are a public health priority of the a comparative study between the public and scientists European Union since 1999. A community action program (1295/99/ Z. Yamagata1, K. Muto2, A. Nagai1, A. Tamakoshi3, I. Ishiyama4, T. Maeda5, T. EC) of the European Commission asked all member states to adopt Shirai6, K. Kato6; a “national plan” on rare diseases by 2011. Belgium, internationally 1University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan, 2The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, respected for its medical infrastructure, services and research, can Japan, 3Aichi Medical University, Nagakute, Japan, 4Teikyo Gakuen college, also improve its suboptimal health care framework to address rare Yamanashi, Japan, 5The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tokyo, Japan, diseases. 6Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. The Belgian taskforce on rare diseases and orphan drugs, supported Objectives: We’ve been conducting questionnaire surveys since 2005 by the King Baudouin Foundation since 2006, is composed of a mul- to explore attitude change on genomic studies of the general public in tidisciplinary team of stakeholders. Representatives of a.o. patient Japan. To clarify their attitudinal change from science outreach and organisations, public health services and institutes, research centres media interaction, we compare the two dataset from the general public and industry have successfully campaigned for a comprehensive Bel- (2005 and 2008) and the dataset from Japanese scientists (2007). gian national plan, in line with the decision of the European Union. Methods: Self-reporting questionnaires were sent regarding molecular A strategic approach to improve the situation regarding diagnosis biology and human genetics/ genomics to the public (2005 and 2008) and treatment as well as the stimulation of rare disease research in and scientists (2007) in Japan. They were asked about their value and Belgium will require many aspects to be considered. Already in place risk cognition towards genome sciences, science outreach and media are e.g. reference centres for certain rare diseases, a framework for interaction. We compared these results with the dataset from 2,171 the approval and follow-up of orphan drug reimbursement and the Or- citizens in 2005 (RR=54.3%), the dataset from 1,613 citizens in 2008 phanet Belgium database. The latter is an important resource to build (RR-53.8%), and the dataset from scientists in 2007 (RR=35.1%). up for both patients and physicians. Results: Regarding media interaction, received media on genomic The existing situation with regard to rare diseases in Belgium together studies (multiple choices) in 2005 are “TV/Radio” (56.7%), followed by with future plans as well as the progress of the Orphanet Belgium da- “Newspapers” (46.3%) and “None” (22.8%). This trend hasn’t changed tabase will be presented.Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  P01.45 We studied how Japanese neurologists explained the genetic causes Rhombencephalosynapsis and related anomalies: the largest of sporadic ataxia to patients by referring to the clinical records. At fetal series lead to suggest a European network. the neurology clinic of Tokai University Hospital, 109 patients have L. Pasquier1,2, C. Bendavid3,2, C. Evain2, I. Gicquel2, P. Loget4, C. Dubourg3,2, S. been diagnosed with spinocerebellar degeneration (SCD) since 1990. Jaillard5,2, S. Mercier1, A. Laquerrière6, V. David3,2, S. Odent1; Among them, 37 patients (34%) had positive family histories. Among 1Medical Genetics, Rennes, France, 2UMR6061 CNRS, Rennes 1 University, the 72 patients with sporadic ataxia only 16 patients had received a Rennes, France, 3Molecular Genetics Lab, Rennes, France, 4Pathology Lab, clear explanation of the genetic causes from doctors, and 8 patients Rennes, France, 5Cytogenetics Lab, Rennes, France, 6Pathology Lab, Rouen, had received genetic tests (SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 17, DRPLA). Although no France. genetic mutations were found among sporadic ataxic patients who Rhombencephalosynapsis (RS) is a rare cerebellar malformation de- took these tests, mutations might have been present among those fined by vermian agenesis with fusion of the hemispheres and the den- who did not take the tests. Family history may be negative because of tate nuclei. Embryologic and genetic mechanisms are still unknown early death or late onset of parents, failure to diagnose SCD patients and to date , no animal models are available. among family members, reduced penetrance of the mutant allele, or We have created a RS database to carefully review the phenotype a de novo mutation for autosomal dominant ataxic gene. Neurologists observed in France including familial, clinical, radiological and patho- should consider possible genetic causes of sporadic ataxia. logical patterns. The morphological analysis of 40 foetuses (Pasquier et al., 2009, Acta Neuropathol 117: 185-200) allowed us to confirm P01.48 that RS is always associated with other brain abnormalities and can Challenges in guiding first year medical students in a one be classified into three groups : 1- pure neurologic forms from iso- semester genetic journey lated RS with hydrocephalus to supratentorial midline abnormalities R. M. Dragotoiu, L. C. Bohiltea; (neural tube defect or holoprosencephaly), 2- syndromic forms with Medical and Pharmacy University “Carol Davila”, Bucuresti, Romania. VACTERL-H association, 3- other syndromic conditions (Gomez-Lo- Teaching is considered a well defined activity, which helped us all pez-Hernandez syndrome). achieve our knowledge, as also did our predecessors, and as, we as- We have also collected several postnatal cases without hydrocephalus sume, will have to do our followers. Changes in everyday life, technol- or severe neurological symptoms. This might suggest that RS is un- ogy development, but also changes in human mentality and/or view of derdiagnosed during prenatal or postnatal periods (less than 80 cases life, modified expectations in students as well as in teachers. reported in the litterature). In order to precise its frequency, neurologi- The dynamics of the teaching process is still under study and consen- cal prognosis and genetic counselling, we intend to create a European sus has not yet been reached on exactly what teaching techniques network to gather most of the rhombencephalosynapsis cases and should be used, to deliver the information and help students reach share the results provided. knowledge on specialty aspects that might suit their own future medi- From DNA samples collected, this survey would also aim at looking cal practice. Genetics is studied only in the first year at the Medical and for genetic factors using a pangenomic screening tool (CGH-array). Pharmacy University “Carol Davila”, generating questions on the level This approach has already enabled us to identify 2 different microre- at which it should be taught. arrangements from a series of 20 cases. Contact: laurent.pasquier@ Different questionnaires about the practicals were answered by 90 chu-rennes.fr Romanian and 38 foreign students. The last group was again divided because 15 students started later, had two practicals/ week instead of P01.46 the usual one, and had only one assistant lecturer, who also evaluated should we screen for gene mutations in blood samples with them at the end of the practicals. Also 38 foreign students, some of mcH greater than 27pg in areas with a high prevalence of which were also in the groups which received questionnaires about the thalassaemia? practicals, were asked about the quality of 6 from 16 lectures. N. Saeidi, M. Jafarinejad, E. Shafieie, M. Mohammadi, M. Taghavi, F. Bayat, M. After analyzing the results one can conclude the necessity of a better Karimi pur, A. Kordafshari, S. Zeinali; connection between lectures and practicals, the latter having to loose pateur Institution, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the mostly theoretical topics, genetics being a proper field for applying Screening strategies for thalassaemia carriers are usually based on different teaching methods even if students have various biology back- cut off values for red blood cell indices (either MCV or MCH).There ground knowledge from high-school. is evidence for a higher sensitivity for MCH <27pg a criterion for β thalassaemia Screening in pregnant women. In this study, investigate P01.49 single globin gene mutations in the normal papulations with MCHs >27 Development of timely and relevant training courses for pg. healthcare professionals and genetic researchers Blood samples from 36 individuals with MCH greater than 27pg (MCV M. J. Leech1,2, F. Salway3, F. Jury3, P. Day3, D. Carthy3, L. Gaunt4, S. Hamilton4, and Hb A is normal too) were screened for presence of globin gene A. Wallace5, R. Elles5, D. vanGent5, A. Devereau5, J. Crolla6, M. Bottomley2, K. 2 mutations and α globin gene deletions by ARMS PCR, Sequencing Mathieson1,2, W. Ollier3, M. Yuille7, D. Donnai1,2, H. R. Middleton-Price1,2; and Multiplex gap PCR. 1Nowgen - A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, Manchester, United Kingdom, Twelve individuals harbored globin gene mutations. Of these, 3 had 2Regional Genetics Service and Medical Genetics Research Group, Central HbS, 2 had HbD, 2 had Cd75 mutations and 2 had deletions of one Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust & University of Man- α globin gene. Three individuals have β thalassaemia major; that we chester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Centre for Integrated Genomic Medical believe because of transfusion these indices is normal. Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Regional If one partner is found to be a carrier of a β thalassaemia mutation or Cytogenetics Unit, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5National single α gene deletion, it is advisable to look for HbS or α globin gene Genetics Reference Laboratory and Regional Genetics Service, St Mary’s Hos- deletions in the other partner, even if MCH and MCV is within normal pital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6National Genetics Reference Laboratory, range. Wessex, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 7UK DNA Banking Network, Centre for Integrated Genomic Medical Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, P01.47 United Kingdom. How do neurologists explain genetic causes of sporadic adult- Techniques for analysing genetic variants related to disease and treat- onset ataxia to patients ? ment are constantly advancing, and allow ever more sophisticated and Y. Ohnuki1, A. Kondo1, S. Izumi1, M. Mizoguchi2, S. Takagi1; rapid analysis of patient samples. The consequence of greater access 1Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan, 2Tokai University to these techniques is that many clinical and laboratory disciplines School of Health Sciences, Kanagawa, Japan. have to embrace the new technology. The etiology of sporadic adult-onset ataxia is poorly understood, but Nowgen, A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, in collaboration with Abele et al. reported that 13% of patients with negative family history leading research and clinical scientists, has developed a portfolio of have causative genetic mutations. We found two patients with SCA3 accredited training courses for genetics professionals involved in re- mutation, who had a history of a family member(s) having been diag- search and/or in the provision of clinical services. These courses have nosed with sporadic ataxia several years earlier. been developed following a thorough consultation with senior clinicalClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  and research scientists to assess training needs. Furthermore, we Molecular and cytogenetic charac- PATIENT FATHER MOTHER have also developed courses in biobanking which are emerging as terization important resources for translating knowledge of the human genome KARYOTYPE 48,XXYY XYY (QF-PCR) XX (QF-PCR) into real benefits for health. AMEL (Xp22.31-Xp22.1/Yp11.2) XY XY X Courses launched in 2007 for clinical cytogeneticists and genetic coun- SRY (Yp11.31) PRESENT PRESENT NO sellors have become well-established, receiving excellent appraisal X22 (Xq28Yq) 199/225/241pb(2:1:1) 199/225pb(2:1) 220/241pb from both delegate and professional bodies alike. The reputation of DXS6854 (Xq26.1) 110/110pb 110pb 106/110pb our courses in bioinformatics for cytogeneticists and molecular geneti- XHPRT (X26.1) 274/285pb 285pb 274/281pb cists has led to them being repeatedly over-subscribed. More recent DXS6803 (Xq21.31) 110/120pb 110pb 120/120pb courses in Real-Time PCR and biobanking have attracted delegates DXS8377 (Xq28) 250/262pb 250pb 253/262pb from around the world and in 2009 we are launching courses in micro DXS6809 (Xq21.33) 263/271pb 263pb 267/271pb RNA analysis and array CGH. G10_STS47 (Yq11.222) PRESENT PRESENT NO To date, over 400 genetics professionals have attended our courses. These are part of a broader training programme at Nowgen that has attracted over 1,500 delegates in the past 5 years. We will continue to P02.003 monitor emerging training needs of research and clinical scientists, to A review of congenital abdominal wall defects update existing courses and to develop fresh initiatives. E. S. Boia, R. Colta, C. Popescu, C. M. Popoiu, M. Boia; University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. Aim: The pathology of umbilical region- middle celosomies-have dif- P02. clinical genetics and Dysmorphology ferent embryology, clinical aspects, treatment and outcomes.Middle celosomies still represent a significant cause of morbidity and mortality P02.001 in neonates. 3-m syndrome: A report of three Egyptian cases Material and methods: This is a 9 years period retrospective review of A. M. Ashour, S. A. Temtamy, M. S. Aglan; patients whom were presented to the Pediatric Surgery Department National Research Centre, Clinical Genetics Dept., Cairo, Egypt. with gastroschisis, omphalocele and umbilical hernia. Patient’s per- The 3-M syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder. It is char- sonal data, positive diagnosis, presence of other congenital malforma- acterized by prenatal and postnatal growth retardation associated with tions and outcomes were recorded. characteristic features. We report on three patients from two unrelated Main results: There were 72 patients (12 presented omphalocele, 24 families, including two male sibs, with the characteristic features and gastroschisis and 36 umbilical hernia).The omphalocele and gastros- radiological findings of the 3-M syndrome. The main features in our chisis were more often observed to boys ( 58.33%) and umbilical her- cases were low birth weight, short stature, malar hypoplasia, promi- nia was more to girls (61,11%). Omphalocele type I Aitken occurred nent premaxilla, anteverted nostrils with a fleshy nasal tip, long phil- to 9 cases, type II to 3 cases,embrionar gastroschisis occurred to 15 trum, thick patulous lips, high arched palate, pointed full chin, short patients and fetal gastroschisis to 9 cases.Other congenital malforma- broad neck, broad chest with transverse grooves of anterior thorax, tions ( digestive- 12, cardiac and vascular anomalies-7, genitor-uri- hyperlordosis, brachydactyly of hands and feet and prominent heels. nary-2, lungs-1 and locomotors anomalies-8) were presented in om- Radiographic studies showed slender long bones and ribs, a narrow phalocele and gastroschisis and no one in umbilical hernia.Pre-term pelvis and foreshortened vertebral bodies. Our reported cases are the neonates were more often in gastroschisis (18 cases -81.82% ) then offspring of healthy consanguineous parents confirming the autosomal to gastroschisis ( 4 cases -18.18%).Surgical treatment was applied in recessive pattern of inheritance in the syndrome. These are the first all cases. Mortality was 16 percents in gastroschisis and zero in om- reported Egyptian patients with this rare disorder. phalocele and umbilical hernia. Conclusions: Middle celosomies have requested surgical treatment. P02.002 Outcomes are different according to stage of illness, gestational age Parental origin and distinct mechanism of formation of the and other anomalies associated. Total parentheral nutrition in postop- 48,XXYY karyotype, molecular characterization erative period in gastroschisis and ompalocele increased the prognos- R. Rodríguez-López, M. Núñez, J. Sáenz, C. Corral, E. Sánchez-Gutiérrez, P. tic. Méndez, M. Garcia de Cáceres, T. Herrera, M. González-Carpio, E. Doblaré, J. M. Carbonell; P02.004 Extremeño Health System, Badajoz, Spain. Array-cGH analysis in a patient with Acrocallosal syndrome Among sex chromosomal aneuploidies, the addition of more than one E. F. Belligni1, G. B. Ferrero1, A. Vetro2, N. Chiesa1, E. Biamino1, C. Molinatto1, extra X and/or Y chromosome are less frequent. We report a child G. Baldassarre1, O. Zuffardi2, M. Silengo1; with karyotype 48,XXYY. Molecular analyses are essential in order 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2University of Pa- to determine the parental origin and mode of formation of the addi- via, Pavia, Italy. tional chromosomes. Quantitative fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR) was We present a patient aged 3 years with a clinical diagnosis of acro- used including the amplification of amelogenin, which is present on callosal syndrome (ACS) and a complex chromosomal rearrangement both sex chromosomes in a biallelic form, SRY gene, a polymorphic (CCR). Pregnancy was unremarkable, except for the detection of cor- short tandem repeat (STR) on the pseudoautosomal region of X and pus callosum agenesis in the second trimester. At birth, weight, length, Y (X22), five polymorphic X-specific STRs, and a Y-specific marker OFC and Apgar scores were all within normal limits. Severe hypotonia, (G10_STS47). Molecular investigations were compatible with the de- hypertelorism, strabismus and nystagmus, short philtrum, microgna- scribed 48,XXYY karyotype. Ratio 2:1 corresponding to the peaks in thia, broad thumbs and toes associated with absence of intermediate the detected fluorescence signal of the X22 marker revealed the ex- and distal phalanges of fifth finger, talipes varus and micropenis were istence of the 47,XYY syndrome in the father (Karyotype pending). noted. Abdominal ultrasound examination detected bilateral kidney Molecular investigations of X STR markers indicated paternal origin of malrotation and bilateral vescico-ureteral reflux. Agenesis of corpus the additional X chromosome and, consequently an error in paternal callosum was subsequently confirmed by cerebral MRI. Karyotype meiosis I. was 46,XY; Prader-Willi syndrome and mithocondrial disorders were The QF-PCR technique resulted extremely sensitive to detect X chro- ruled out. A complex chromosomal rearrangement consisting with a mosome anomalies also in postnatal diagnosis and evidenced an in- deletion (12)(p12.2p2.1) and a duplication (16)(q23.3) was detected frequent parental/meiotic origin of the 48,XXYY syndrome. Additional by a-CGH analysis. Interestingly, the deletion and the duplication have evidence came from molecular data and gained increased importance been inherited from the phenotypically normal mother and father re- in this variant of Klinefelter’s syndrome, in which distinct patterns of X- spectively and they are not described as polymorphic variants. The inactivation could play a role in the observed differences in the degree CCR detected in our patient has never been associated with ACS, but of clinical manifestations of patients. being inherited by phenotypically normal parents, its pathogenetic role is not clear and it is open to speculation.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.005 tic eye signs. The gene frequency is1 in 5000 and it causes 0.6% of complex chromosomal rearrangement in chromosome 4q chronic renal failure in Europe. causes acrofacial dysostosis and cardiovascular malformation Most cases (85%) of AS result from mutations in the X linked colla- K. M. Roetzer1, A. C. Obenauf1, K. Schoner2, M. R. Speicher1, H. Rehder3; gen gene COL4A5; mutations in the autosomal genes COL4A3/A4 on 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2In- chromosome 2 account for others. Mutation analysis of COL4A5 has stitute of Pathology, University Hospital Giessen and Marburg, Marburg, Ger- been available in a service setting for several years; mutation detec- many, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, tion rates using a combination of direct sequencing and MLPA now Austria. exceed 95% in patients with classical clinical signs and an X-Linked Acrofacial dysostoses (AFD) are characterized by the association of pedigree. mandibulofacial dysostosis in combination with limb defects. It is a het- Questionnaires about the number of clinical diagnostic criteria that erogenous group of syndromes which contains many different entities, families fulfilled were sent to clinicians of 250 patients whose DNA was such as the Nager Syndrome, the postaxial (POAD) and the Rodriguez received for diagnostic testing; predictive tests, duplicate family mem- type of AFD. We describe a female fetus exhibiting many features of bers and samples that were only partially screened were excluded. acrofacial dysostosis, including severe retro- and micrognathia, clino- One hundred and fifty two (61 %) were returned. Seventy four patients brachysyndactyly, arrhinencephaly and a complex heart defect. Ac- (49%) had a pathogenic COL4A5 mutation. cording to these findings, AFD Rodriguez type was suspected. This is The mutation detection rate in families fulfilling 0, 1, 2, 3 or 4 diagnostic a very rare disorder of unknown etiology first described by Rodriguez criteria was 0%, 8.6%, 57%, 78% and 67% respectively. Twenty five in 1990. Chromosome analysis had been previously performed in an (64 %) of patients with COL4A5 mutations apparently meeting only 2 outside lab and was reported to be normal (46,XX). Because of the diagnostic criteria had incomplete clinical assessments. complex heart defect, classified as an early absent pulmonary valve In patients meeting 4 diagnostic criteria without an identified COL4A5 syndrome, fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) for the 22q12 mi- mutation, autosomal inheritance was confirmed or suspected in three. crodeletion region was performed. However, no abnormalities were We recommend COL4A5 analysis in any patient meeting at least 2 found. Using high resolution array comparative genome hybridization diagnostic criteria. COL4A3 and COL4A4 analysis can be considered (aCGH) a complex rearrangement on the long arm of chromosome 4 subsequently if a COL4A5 mutation is not detected. consisting of two large duplications separated by two microdeletions was detected. The involved region contains a large number of genes. P02.008 Interestingly, one of the deleted genes encodes a transcription factor Delineation of a lethal autosomal recessive disorder regulating the development of cardiovascular structures, especially of characterized by alveolar capillary dysplasia and limb anomalies the right ventricle. Furthermore, it was previously shown in a mouse A. Innes; model that the gene product negatively regulates intramembranous University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. ossification of the mandible. This is the first case of an AFD syndrome Alveolar capillary dysplasia (ACD) is amongst the common causes of with right ventricular cardiac malformation in which an underlying ge- lethal primary pulmonary hypertension (PPHN) in the newborn. It is netic cause was identified. ultimately unresponsive to inhaled nitric oxide and ECMO. Definitive diagnosis requires lung biopsy, and is characterized by a reduction in P02.006 number of capillaries, with a decreased blood-air interface. The deficit Aglossia-adactyly syndrome with mental retardation likely involves the pseudoglandular and canalicular stages of lung de- B. R. Ökcesiz, S. Basaran Yılmaz, E. Yosunkaya, E. Karaca, G. S. Güven, M. velopment. Over 100 cases have been reported. Seven, A. Yüksel; The etiology of most cases is unknown, but many familial cases have Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genet- been reported. Associated malformations are seen in 50% of patients, ics, Istanbul, Turkey. recurrent anomalies involve the cardiovascular, genitourinary and Aglossia adactyly syndrome is characterized by the presence of aglos- gastrointestinal systems. Mutations in STRA6 have been identified sia, adactyly and various malformations of the cranium, face and limbs. in patients with anophthalmia and malformations including ACD. The Craniofacial anomalies include microstomia, micrognathia, hypoglos- molecular basis for the majority of children with ACD is unknown. One sia, variable tongue deformations, mandibular hypodontia, cleft palate, study excluded mutations in two candidates: BMPR2 and EMAPII (Sen cranial nerve palsy , broad nose, telecanthus, lower eyelid defects, et al, 2004). and facial asymmetry. The limb defects are represented by hypoplasia/ We have encountered 4 children born to consanguineous parents (2 absence of the distal phalanx, total adactyly, partial limb amputation, different ethnic groups) that presented with limb reduction anoma- and syndactyly. Limb defects usually involve all four limbs. Motor de- lies and died of PPHN as newborns. In those who had autopsy, ACD velopment are almost always normal, mental retardation is a very rare was confirmed. Review of the literature identified 4 other reports of occurrence in this syndrome. A 1 month-old-male patient referred to 6 children with limb reduction anomalies and ACD (Cullinane et al, our unit, because of congenital aglossia. His perinatal history was un- 1992; Simonton et al, 1993; Steinhorn et al, 1997; Witters et al, 2001). remarkable. On initial physical examination, his head circumference, Therefore, we are aware of 10 patients with ACD and limb reduction weight and height were all in normal range with 40 cm, 3.5 kg and anomalies. Given consanguinity in 4 families, this is likely an autoso- 54 cm, respectively. He had prominent nose, frontal bossing, down- mal recessive condition. This paper will include a clinical delineation of slanting palpebral fissures, large ears with hypoplastic antihelix, micro- this syndrome, as well as current data on molecular studies on these retrognathia, aplastic tongue, and bifid uvula. Metacarpal bones were families. hypoplastic on his right hand. In his left hand, there was clinodactyly and tips of finger were beaked. The distal phalanx of second, third and P02.009 fourth fingers, nail of second finger and toes on both feet were aplastic. clinical characterization of a microdeletion syndrome in Xq22.3 On follow-up period of this patient, speech therapy was started and in a czech family reconstructive plastic surgery for aglossia was planned for preschool V. Horinova1, V. Vranova2, P. Kuglik2; years. His mental status appeared to be retarded, and IQ was found 1Genetic ambulance and counseling, Jihlava, Czech Republic, 2Department of 53, when he was 6 years old. Here, we report a rare event of mental Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, retardation for aglossia-adactyly syndrome. Czech Republic. An X-linked recessive syndrome (AMME), characterized by the Alport P02.007 syndrome, mental retardation, midface hypoplasia and elliptocytosis When is genetic testing helpful in Alport’s syndrome? associated with a microdeletion in Xq22.3 and explained by mutations H. Hanson1, H. Story2, J. Pagan2, F. A. Flinter1; in the COL4A5 gene was reported by Jonsson et al (J. Med. Gen- 1Clinical Genetics Department, Guy’s & St Thomas NHS Foundation Trust, et.1988,35:273). We have identified a family with two affected male London, United Kingdom, 2DNA laboratory, Guy’s & St Thomas NHS Founda- (maternal uncle/nephew) members showing clinical features similar to tion Trust, London, United Kingdom. AMME, which was associated with an Xq22.3 microdeletion observed Alport syndrome (AS) is a predominantly X-linked hereditary nephritis also in the female members of the family. The aims of this work were associated with high-tone, sensorineural deafness and characteris- to compare the phenotypes of our patients with these cases and toClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  correlate their complex clinical manifestations with the content of the submitted to electrophoresis in 8% polyacrilamide gel. A blank, and deleted chromosomal segment. Detailed examinations showed that two normal individuals were test simultaneously as quality controls. both Czech patients were identical in terms of clinical symptomatology Results: We obtained a single band that corresponds to 19 ATTCT and they shared the major characteristic clinical features with the origi- repeted normal allele, thus our patient corresponds to an heterozy- nally reported AMME phenotype, although the two phenotypes were gous genotype 19/unknown. not completely identical. It thus seems that a very similar contiguous Discussion: SCA10 mutation accounts for almost 15% of autosomal syndrome associated with a microdeletion in Xq22.3 occurred inde- dominant ataxia in Mexicans population and in Brazilians in 1.8%. This pendently in two unrelated families. A detailed cytogenetic comparison low incidence can be explained probably by the limited molecular stud- of the two microdeletions could contribute to clarification of the minor ies in our country. clinical differences observed and to the definition of specific candi- date genes. Our knowledge of the phenotype of the 20 year-old uncle P02.012 might also be useful for predicting the development of the symptoms clinical and genetic study of a large Dutch family with in younger affected patients. autosomal dominant restless legs syndrome A. J. A. Maat-Kievit1, A. M. G. Sas2, S. L. M. Bakker3, A. Di Fonzo1, B. Oostra1, P02.010 A. J. A. Boon2, V. Bonifati1; Association of variants t2373G, t1808A glucocorticosteroids 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of Neurol- gene NR3c1 and c3435t multidrug resistance gene (mDR1) with ogy, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Department of severity of bronchial asthma (BA) Neurology, St. Franciscus General Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Z. A. Mironova, V. I. Trofimov, E. D. Iantchina, M. A. Simakova, M. V. Dubina; Genetic factors play an important role in the aetiology of restless legs Pavlov State Medical University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. syndrome (RLS). Familial aggregation has been documented with up The aim of study was to evaluate the incidence of T1808A (exon 5), to 90% of the idiopathic cases reporting a positive family history. Sev- T2373G (exon 9) NR3C1 gene (associated with primary glucocortico- eral loci and association with several genes have been described for steroidresistance - PSR) C3435T (exone 26) MDR1 gene and their Mendelian forms of RLS. association with BA severity. Thirty-one family members out of three generations of a Dutch family 88 patients with moderate and severe BA and 53 healthy controls were segregating autosomal dominant RLS, were examined. Each family investigated by PCR-RLFP method. member underwent a general medical and neurological examination. All patients were homozygous at T allele of NR3C1 gene, so PSR was An extensive questionnaire was completed, and RLS symptoms were not revealed. quantified using the International RLS Rating Scale. Serum creatinine, Rates of C allele (“aggressive allele”) and T gene MDR1 in BA group hemoglobin and iron levels were determined to exclude secondary were 0,52 and 0, 48, in controls 0,3 and 0,7. T allele was more frequent RLS in this family. in controls than in BA (x2 = 12,1; p=0,0005). In patients with moderate RLS was ascertained in twenty-six subjects. Serum levels of creati- BA T allele of MDR1 gene was more frequent than in severe BA (x2 nine, hemoglobin and iron all were in normal ranges. Mean age at ex- = 4,6; p=0,038). Rate of CC genotype of MDR1 gene was more in amination was fifty years (20-93). The average age at symptom onset patients with severe BA than in controls x2=8,15 (p=0,004). Incidence was 17.8 years (6-35), which is younger (17 versus 27) as described in of TT genotype of MDR1 gene was more in patients with moderate BA literature. RLS symptoms were quantified using the RLS rating scale, than in severe one (x2 = 4,6; p=0,038). with a mean initial score of 12 (0-29) and 12,3 (0-29) after two years. In 33 BA patients complications of glucocorticosteroid treatment In this family the phenotype is very heterogeneous, including vanish- (GCST) were observed. TT genotype of MDR1 gene was more fre- ing RLS symptoms in 2 patients. A genome-wide scan for linkage is in quent in patients without GCST complications (x2=4,19; p=0,0406). progress using the Affimetrix GeneChip® Human Mapping 250K Ar- So, association of T2373G, T1808A variants of NR3C1 gene and ray set. Affected-only linkage analysis is performed considering the MDR1 (C3435T) gene with BA severity degree was shown. In all pa- patients with a severe or stably moderate RLS rating scale score as “ tients signs of PSR were absent. Severe BA course with complications affected”. Due to the large pedigree size and early-onset phenotype, of GCST was revealed in patients with CC genotype of MDR1 gene. this family has great potential for linkage analysis and the results will TT genotype of MDR1 gene was associated with moderate course of be presented. BA. P02.013 P02.011 Heterozygous deletion of the PitX2 gene in a patient with A new case of Ataxia type 10 in a mexican female Axenfeld Rieger syndrome D. Garcia-Cruz1, G. Castañeda-Cisneros2, S. A. Gutierrez-Rubio3, N. Y. Nuñez- N. Weisschuh1, M. Walter2,3, B. Wissinger1; Reveles1, J. Sanchez-Corona3, R. C. Rosales3, A. Andrade1, J. Jimenez-Gil4, C. 1Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Institute of Human Moran-Moguel3; Genetics, Tuebingen, Germany, 3Microarray Facility, Tuebingen, Germany. 1Instituto de Genética Humana “Enrique Corona Rivera”, Universidad de Axenfeld Rieger Syndrome (ARS) is a genetically heterogenous dis- Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico, 2Servicio Neurocirugía, UMAE Hospital de order mainly characterized by developmental defects of the anterior Especialidades, Centro Médico de Occidente, IMSS, Guadalajara, Mexico, chamber and extraocular anomalies. ARS is inherited as an autosomal 3División de Medicina Molecular, Centro de Investigación Biomédica de Oc- dominant trait with high penetrance and has been linked to different cidente, Centro Médico de Occidente, IMSS, Guadalajara, Mexico, 4Servicio chromosomal loci. Two genes - PITX2 and FOXC1, which both encode Neurología, UMAE Hospital de Especialidades, Centro Médico de Occidente, developmental transcription factors and map to chromosomes 4q25 IMSS, Guadalajara, Mexico. and 6p25, respectively - are the most frequently associated. PITX2 Introduction: The spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 (SCA 10) is an auto- mutations show great variety, from point mutations to microscopic or somal dominant disorder with cerebellar dysfunction involving ataxia, submicroscopic deletions, and apparently balanced translocations dysmetria, seizures and anticipation. SCA10 is caused by repeat ex- in few cases. Microscopic or submicroscopic deletions of PITX2 are pansion of pentanucleotide ATTCT in the ataxin 10 gene (ATXN10, known to result in ARS through haploinsufficiency but only in few cas- 603516.0001), candidate region on chromosome 22q13.3, these re- es the extent of the deletion was characterized by molecular means. peats form unpaired DNA structure that works as aberrant DNA repli- Quantitative genomic polymerase chain reaction is the method of cation origin and contributes to the repeat instability and cell death, but choice to analyze patients in which sequencing did not reveal putative how produces a neurodegenerative effect is unknown. mutations as the resolution limit of FISH or array-CGH is too low to The aim of this research is to present the results of the molecular stud- detect mid-size deletions. We identified a cytogenetically invisible sub- ies in a female patient affected with SCA10. microscopic deletion at 4q25 in a patient diagnosed with ARS applying Material and Methods: A female aged 20 years old was studied clini- quantitative genomic PCR analysis. Further genotyping of the patient cally due to SCA10, laboratorial studies were performed with 5mL of and her parents with polymorphic microsatellite markers showed that peripheral blood were used to isolate patient’s DNA by GeneCatcher the maternal allele was not transmitted indicating a de novo deletion Kit (invitrogen). The molecular analysis was made by PCR with previ- event in the patient. The deletion comprised the entire sequence of the ous described primers to detect normal alleles, the PCR product was PITX2 gene but did not include adjacent genes.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  Recent mutation reports indicate that mid-size gene deletions might tions. The prevention of visual impairment is a very important goal in be a rather frequent cause of ARS. Therefore, analyses for mid-size this case. gene deletions should be routinely performed in mutation screenings in ARS patients. P02.016 An unusual case with camptodactyly, thenar, hypothenar muscle P02.014 atrophy, spasmotic pains, excessive sweating and minor facial Abnormal Expression of p63 (tP73L) in Bladder Exstrophy- anomalies Epispadias complex O. Kirbiyik, O. Cogulu, B. Durmaz, F. Ozkinay; B. Ching1, G. Yagnik1, L. Qi2, A. Hata1, M. Ludwig3, H. Reutter4, C. Naidenov5, J. Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. P. Gearheart6, S. A. Boyadjiev1; An unusual case with camptodactyly, thenar, hypothenar muscle 1Section of Genetics, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, United atrophy, spasmotic pains, excessive sweating and minor facial States, 2Rowe Program in Human Genetics, Sacramento, CA, United States, anomalies 3Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Bonn, Germany, 4Depart- Ozgur Kirbiyik, Ozgur Cogulu, Burak Durmaz, Ferda Ozkinay ment of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Germany, 5Department of Chem- We present a fifteen years old girl with deformities in her hands and istry and Biochemistry, Medical Academy, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Department of Urol- pain in the lower extremities. She was born to a consanguineous par- ogy, The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Johns Hopkins University, ents at term. She had minor dysmorphological features such as hyper- Baltimore, MD, United States. telorism, epicanthus, long philtrum. She had a history of inguinal hernia The bladder-exstrophy-epispadius-complex (BEEC) is a spectrum of operation when she was 5 years old. The deformities started at age 11 congenital anomalies of the lower abdominal wall, bladder, anterior years old, particularly in the hands, continued with stiffness and pain in bony pelvis, and external genitalia, ranging from isolated epispadius the hands and in the lower extremities. She had stiff skin, camptodac- (EP), to classic bladder exstrophy (CBE), to cloacal exstrophy (CE; tyly, weak palmar crease pattern, abnormal dermatoglyphics, thenar its most severe form). The etiology of BEEC is unknown but there is and hypotenar atrophy, excessive sweating. X-Rays showed flexion clear indication of genetic factors contributing to this birth defect. p63, contractures on her fingers but no erosion was noted. No laboratory a p53 homolog located at chromosome 3q27-q29, was found to result investigation was suggestive for scleroderma. Autoantibodies for rheu- in a range of developmental defects of the skin and limbs as well as matoid diseases were negative. Mutation analysis for both Crisponi bladder exstrophy in knockout p63-/- mice. Furthermore, p63 gain of syndrome and camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis syn- function mutations in humans cause genetic syndromes that frequently drome were negative. present with urogenital anomalies. Although obvious mutations were not detected, global dysregulation of variable p63 isoforms is apparent P02.017 in our results. Our data conclusively implicates p63 in the etiology of congenital heart defects in cHARGE syndrome patients with BEEC. In eight out of 14 samples, we demonstrate expression dif- cHD7 mutation ferences among p63 isoforms, including a total subclass of isoforms. P. Parisot1, F. Bajolle1, T. Attié-Bitach2,3, S. Thomas2, G. Goudefroye2, V. Aba- Direct sequencing is in progress to rule out regulatory region muta- die4, S. Lyonnet2,3, D. Bonnet1; tions. We also identified a set of genes that are differentially expressed 1Centre national de référence Malformations cardiaques Congénitales Comple- (DE) between normal and exstrophic bladders, one of which is p63 xes - M3C, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Université Paris Descar- (significantly underexpressed in BEEC bladder). p63 downstream ef- tes, Paris, France, 2INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, fector, Perp, is an integral part of desmosome and many other genes 3Department of genetics, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, in the DE set (~30%) were also found to play a role in desmosomal France, 4Department of pediatrics, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, assembly and/or cell-cell connectivity. Consistent with the suggested Paris, France. multifactorial inheritance of this birth defect, we propose that abnormal Background: CHARGE syndrome (MIM 214800) consists of a combi- p63 expression is one of the etiologic factors for this condition. nation of congenital malformations including Coloboma, Heart defects, Atresia of choanae, Retardation of growth and developmental delay, P02.015 Genital anomalies and Ear anomalies. Diagnosis criteria have been re- BPEs syndrome Ohdo type in child - case report cently refined and several other features have been described such as T. Marcovici1,2, I. Sabau1,2, I. Simedrea1,2, O. Marginean1,2, O. Belei1,2, M. semi-circular canals and cranial nerve anomalies. A CHD7 gene muta- Puiu1,2; tion is found in 60 % of patients with a clinical diagnosis of CHARGE 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2”Louis Turcanu” syndrome. Although frequently found, cardiovascular malformations Children’s Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. (CVM) are not specific. Background: BPES (Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Epicantus inversus Methods: In our series, 85% of CHARGE patients with CHD7 mutation Syndrome) is an autosomal, rare and complex dominant malformation have a CVM. We report on the spectrum of CVM in 65 CHD7 mutated of the eyelids that may severely impair visual function. BPES locus patients (including 15 fetuses). All patients were precisely assessed for was assigned to 3q23. BPES syndrome Ohdo type is extremely rare. their cardiac phenotype by echocardiography, CT scan or pathology. It is characterized by BPES anomalies and in addition neurological Results: Conotruncal malformations (n=16), aortic arch anomalies anomalies, growth retardation, congenital heart disease, abnormal (n=10) and atrioventricular septal defects (n=15), were the most fre- ears and clynodactily of fifth fingers are noticed. quent CVM. A rare association of atrioventricular septal defect and Material and methods: We present a five-year and four months old transposition of the great arteries was described in one patient. De- male infant admitted for abnormal phenotype. The patient underwent a spite the small number of mutated cases, our data suggest that hypo- complete pediatric, ophthalmologic and neurologic evaluation. morphic mutations (missense, splice sites) are less frequently associ- Results: No similar case was known in the family. Pregnancy was ated to a heart defect than nonsense and frameshift mutations. uncomplicated and the child was born at 38 weeks of gestation with Conclusions: Although being a minor criteria because of lack of speci- normal weight and length. In the first year of life seizures are men- ficity, CVM proved to be very frequent in CHD7 mutated CHARGE pa- tioned. The following facial characteristic features were noticed at clini- tients. The neural crest cells origin hypothesis of the CVM cannot ac- cal examination: short eyelids, blepharophimosis, ptosis of the upper count for all observed defects. Cardiac progenitor cells of the second eyelids, epicantus inversus, telecantus, arched eyebrows, flat, broad heart field might be implicated in embryological mechanisms leading nasal bridge, protruding ears. Limbs defects: clynodactily of fifth fin- to CVM in CHARGE syndrome. gers, flatfeet and genu valgum were present. Systolic cardiac murmur, mild mental retardation and growth delay (15 kg weight, 100 cm height and 50 cm occipito-frontal circumference) were determined. Cardiac sonography found atrial septal defect. Ocular ultrasound was normal. MLPA analysis with P036C&P070 kit didn’t find major mutations. Conclusions: Child’s phenotype probably represents variable expres- sion of the Ohdo syndrome. Typical clinical features lead to establish- ing the diagnosis and permit the surgical treatment of eyelids altera-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.018 Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. cherubism- case report‘ Nonsyndromic orofacial clefts (OFC) are common birth defects caused F. F. Cionca1, L. Cionca2, C. Vizitiu2, C. Ardeleanu1; by certain genes interacting with environmental factors. Mutations and 1”Victor Babes” National Institute for Research and Development in Pathology association studies indicate that the homeobox gene MSX1 plays a and Biomedical Sciences, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Prof. Dr. Dan Teodorescu” role in human clefting. In a Dutch case-control triad study (mother, Clinical Hospital of Oro-Maxilo-Facial Surgery, Bucharest, Romania. father, and child), we investigated interactions between MSX1 and the Introduction: Cherubism is a rare autosomal dominant inherited dis- parents’ periconceptional lifestyle in relation to the risk of OFC in their ease with variable penetrance and expressivity, characterized by a be- offspring. We studied 181 case- and 132 control mothers, 155 case- nign self-limited bone dysplasia of almost exclusively the lower and the and 121 control fathers, and 176 case- and 146 control children, in upper jaw. Patients present bilateral, painless, generally symmetrical which there were 107 case triads and 66 control triads. Univariable swelling of the jaws, caused by the replacement of normal bone with and multivariable logistic regression analyses were applied, and odds pseudocystic osteolytic lesions. The disease affects pediatric popula- ratios (OR), 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated. Allele 4 tion, frequently below five years of age, with slow progression of the of the CA marker in the MSX1 gene, consisting of nine CA repeats, lesions until puberty, followed by their gradual remission in early adult- was the most common allele in both the case and control triads. Sig- hood, with rare cases of residual jaw deformity. The diagnosis impli- nificant interactions were observed between allele 4 homozygosity of cates clinical findings, associated with radiographic and histological the child with maternal smoking (OR 2.7, 95% CI 1.1-6.6) and with manifestations, and is confirmed by the molecular genetic testing of smoking by both parents (OR 4.9, 95% CI 1.4-18.0). Allele 4 homo- SH3BP2 gene, located on 4p16.3 and affected by mutations in 80% of zygosity in the mother and smoking showed a risk estimate of OR 3.2 the patients with cherubism. (95% CI 1.1-9.0). If allele 4 homozygous mothers did not take daily Case presentation: A 9 years old girl presented with mild, bilateral, folic acid supplements in the recommended periconceptional period, progressive, painless and a little asymmetrical enlargement of the this also increased the risk of OFC for their offspring (OR 2.8, 95% CI mandible. There were no other clinical findings in physical examination 1.1-6.7). Our findings show that, in the Dutch population, periconcep- excepting abnormal teeth implantation on the lower jaw. Radiological tional smoking by both parents interacts with a specific allelic variant of examination revealed bilateral multicystic lesions of the lower jaw and MSX1 to significantly increase OFC risk for their offspring. The article abnormal teeth implantation. Histological examination demonstrated has been published in Hum Genet. 2008 Dec;124(5):525-34. the presence of numerous multinucleated acidophilic giant cells ran- domly distributed in a fibrovascular stroma of mononuclear spindle- P02.021 shaped cells. Family history identified no other members with similar A new case of early-onset cockayne/cOFs syndrome in a lesions. spanish child with mutations in the CSB gene. Conclusion: Clinical findings and radiographic and histological aspects B. Gener1, A. García2, C. Dalloz3, F. Sauvanaud3, A. Sarasin4, D. Pham4, V. of this case plead for the diagnosis of cherubism. In the future, the pa- Laugel3; tient will require molecular genetic testing for confirming the diagnosis, 1Clinical Genetics-Pediatric Department. Hospital de Cruces, Baracaldo, Spain, long -term follow-up and treatment of manifestations if necessary. 2Neuropediatrics Unit. Pediatrics Department.Hospital de Cruces, Baracaldo, Spain, 3Laboratory of Medical Genetics. Faculte de Medecine, Strasbourg, P02.019 France, 4FRE 2939.Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. Reno-urinary anomalies and ciliopathies: a new approach Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a severe neurodegenerative condition c. daescu1,2, i. maris1,2, i. sabau1,2, c. duncescu2, a. chirita-emandi2, i. sime- with multisystemic involvement which belongs to the family of DNA drea1,2, m. puiu1, t. marcovici1,2, a. craciun1,2, o. belei1,2; repair and transcription disorders. Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syn- 1“Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, drome (COFS) has been proved to be allelic to CS but a very limited 2“Louis Turcanu” Emergency Hospital for Children, Timisoara, Romania. number of COFS cases have been clarified at the molecular level so Introduction: In the last ten years there has been significant break- far. We report on a 20-month-old female, second child of a healthy and through in understanding cilia and the pathology associated with cilia non consanguineous family. IUGR was evident at 30 wks of gestation. malfunction. Objective: The authors present 10 cases with reno-uri- The patient was born at term. She had severe congenital microceph- nary anomalies which we believe are ciliopathies. Material: 10 patients aly and developed failure to thrive soon after birth. She had bilateral with anomalies of the renal system admitted in our clinic, Nephrology microphtalmia and congenital cataract. Clenched fingers and lower Department between 01 January 2006 - 31 Dec 2008, median age was limbs rigidity were observed. Bone X-Ray showed mild platyspondyly. 8.9+/-7.12 years (range 1.5 to 20 years), 5 girls and 5 boys. Method: Her neurological development is severely retarded. She has bilateral In order to establish the diagnosis we used the following imaging stud- neurosensorial deafness. Brain CT scan and MRI were normal at 4 ies: renal and bladder ultrasonography, intravenous urography, voiding months of age. No retinopathy is present. Extensive metabolic survey cystourethrography, magnetic resonance imaging. Results: 6 patients and congenital infections were ruled out. In this context, minor senile- were diagnosed with polycystic kidney disease, 2 of them suffered like dysmorphic features and the presence of photosensitivity suggest- nephrectomies, 3 developed renal failure and 1 presented recurrent ed the diagnosis of CS at the age of 13 months. In accordance with the respiratory infections (bronchiolitis). 3 patients have neural tube de- clinical picture the studies on skin fibroblasts of the recovery of RNA fects associated with urinary anomalies and 2 of them developed renal synthesis after UV exposure showed a high deficiency and two differ- failure. 1 case associated situs inversus, hydrocephaly and vesicoure- ent mutations in CSB gene (p.Leu871Pro and p.Lys1172X) were found teral reflux. Discussions: Half of these children present renal failure, in this patient. Very few patients have been described worldwide with one girl deceased because of renal failure complications. The quality these particular mutations. In our opinion this case shares similarities of life of the three adolescents with neural tube defects is poor. Con- with CS and COFS, confirming that both entities should be considered clusions: It is important to recognize and if it’s possible to genetically as different parts of the same clinical spectrum. diagnose ciliopathies for a better management and for improving the quality of life of these children P02.022 craniofacial and Orodental Features and Phenotype/Genotype P02.020 correlations in cockayne syndrome the msX1 allele 4 homozygous child exposed to smoking at M. Rousseaux1, M. Schmittbuhl1,2, R. Mathis1,2, M. Koob3, H. Dollfus4,5, C. Dal- periconception is most sensitive in developing nonsyndromic loz5, V. Laugel4,5, A. M. Bloch-Zupan1,2; orofacial clefts. 1Faculty of Dentistry, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Reference M. H. van den Boogaard1, D. de Costa1,2, I. P. C. Krapels3, F. Liu4, C. van Centre for Orodental Manifestations of Rare Diseases, Hopitaux Universitaires Duijn4, R. J. Sinke1, D. Lindhout1, R. P. M. Steegers-Theunissen4; de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Department of Radiology, Hôpitaux Uni- 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC, versitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 4Department of Medical Genet- University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Academic Hospital ics, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 5Laboratory of Maastricht, 6202AZ Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4Erasmus MC, University Medical Genetics, EA 3949, Faculty of Medicine, Strasbourg, France. Cockayne Syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive neurological dis- ease caused by defects in DNA repair via nucleotide excision repair.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  The incidence in Western Europe has been recently reevaluated to P02.025 2.7 per million. The main clinical features are progressive cachectic mLPA analysis detects an high percentage of mutated alleles in dwarfism, mental retardation with cerebral leukodystrophy, microceph- patients affected by cohen syndrome aly, progressive pigmentary retinopathy, neurosensorial deafness and V. Parri1, E. Katzaki1, V. Uliana1, F. Scionti1, I. Longo1, R. Vijzelaar2, R. Bos- photosensitivity. CS is caused by mutations in ERCC8 (at 5q12) for chloo2, A. Selicorni3, F. Brancati4, B. Dallapiccola4,5, L. Zelante6, C. P. Hamel7, S. CSA and in the ERCC6 genes (at 10q11) for CSB with no genotype/ R. Lalani8, R. Grasso9, S. Buoni10, F. Mari1, A. Renieri1; phenotype correlations so far. However other genes like XPB, XPD, 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2MRC Holland, Amster- XPG are causative. dam, The Netherlands, 3Pediatric Unit, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4IRCSS Caries are considered as a minor diagnostic criteria by Nance and CSS, Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 5Department of Experimental Medicine and Berry, 1992. Other orodental features like delayed deciduous teeth Pathology, La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 6IRCSS CSS, S. Giovanni Ro- eruption, malocclusion, absent/hypoplastic teeth are also described in tondo, Italy, 7Centre Hospitalier Régional et Universitaire, Centre de Référence the literature. Maladies Sensorielles Génétiques, Montpellier, France, 8Department of Mo- The aim of the present study, was to investigate the orodental find- lecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United ings in a series of 10 CS patients included within the PHRC 2005 States, 9IRCSS MEDEA, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy, 10Child Neuropsychiatric “Clinical and Molecular study of Cockayne syndrome”. The phenotype Unit, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. was documented using the D[4]/phenodent registry (www.phenodent. Cohen syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with variability org). Anomalies of teeth number (missing teeth), shape, structure with in the clinical manifestations. It is characterized by mental retardation, enamel hypoplasia, eruption and position (crowding) were found. The postnatal microcephaly, facial dysmorphisms, ocular abnormalities, dental caries diagnostic criteria was correlated to the presence of large and intermittent neutropenia. Mutations in the COH1 gene have been enamel defects prominent in severely affected patients and the subse- found in patients with Cohen syndrome from different ethnic origins. quent difficulties in maintaining appropriate oral hygiene. Cephalomet- In a cohort of 19 patients, we previously identified 11 mutations by the ric data and analysis demonstrate a transverse hypodevelopment of combined use of DHPLC, sequencing analysis and Real Time PCR the craniofacial region as well as a class II skeletal profile with vertical probes covering the entire length of COH1 gene (Katzaki E, 2007 growth and posterior rotation of the mandible inducing an increase of J.Hum.Genet. and unpublished data). The use of an MLPA probemix the lower face height and a retrusive chin. No specific genotype/phe- for COH1 was crucial in identifying missing mutated alleles and in notype correlations were elicited. defining the extension of the rearrangements. Thus, we were able to identify the second mutated allele in 2 unrelated patients and in 2 af- P02.023 fected sisters. We also found 2 intragenic duplications spanning from cockayne syndrom, case Report exons 4 to 13 and from exons 21 to 29, respectively. This is the first F. Hadipour, Z. Hadipour, Y. Shafeghati; time that duplications are reported in Cohen syndrome patients. MLPA Medical Genetics Department, Sarem Woman Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Repub- was also implemental in defining the extent of 4 deletions already de- lic of Iran. tected by Real Time PCR. Although in our small cohort of patients, we Back ground: Cockayne syndrome is a very rare genetic disorder with can consider that MLPA is able to detect 24% of mutated alleles. In a recessive autosomal inheritance characterized by dwarfism, micro- conclusion, MLPA demonstrated to be an essential tool for the detec- cephaly, mental retardation, deafness, a photosensive dermatitis and tion of microdeletions/microduplications within the COH1 gene at rela- a peculiar form of retinal pigmentation.. tively low cost. For this reason we consider that it could be used as an Case report: We report a case of cockayne syndrome in four year old initial screening method for the molecular analysis of patients affected Iranian female child. She was born of a nonconsanguinous marriage. by Cohen syndrome. She is mental retard and dysmorphic, Cachexia (height and weight both were below the 5th percentile). P02.026 She has failure to thrive, short staure, premature aging, microcephally, Amelogenesis imperfecta and cone Rod Dystrophy cORD dysarthic speech , photosensivity, and sunken eyes, dental caries. A. M. Bloch-Zupan1,2, A. J. Mighell3,4, D. A. Parry4, W. El-Sayed3, R. C. Shore3, There was no blindness or deafness, and the fundus examination was I. K. Jalili4, M. Michaelides5, A. T. Moore5, C. F. Inglehearn4, H. Dollfus6; showed Tape to Retinal degeneration. The karyotype was normal .Met- 1Faculty of Dentistry, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Reference abolic screening was normal.The Radiologic examanination (x- ray) Centre for OroDental Manifestations of Rare Diseases, Hôpitaux Universitaires was showed biconvex flattening of vertebrae and kyphosis.The results de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Leeds Dental Institute, Leeds, United of DNA- repair analysis is strongly reduced DNA- synthesis after UV Kingdom, 4Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, indicates Cockaynes syndrome in this patient. United Kingdom, 5Institute of Ophthalmology UCL, London, United Kingdom, 6Centre de reference pour les affections ophtalmiques héréditaires CARGO, P02.024 Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg; Avenir INSERM, Strasbourg, France. Fourth case of cerebral, Ocular, Dental, Auricular, skeletal The recessively inherited association of CORD with amelogenesis im- syndrome (cODAs), description of new features and molecular perfecta (AI) or Jalili syndrome (OMIM 217080) was first reported in analysis a large consanguineous Arabic family from the Gaza strip (Jalili and S. Marlin1, H. Ducou Le Pointe1, M. Le Merrer2, M. Portnoï1, S. Chantot1, A. Smith, J Med Genet. 1988;25:738-740). Recently the causative gene Mantel3, J. Siffroi1, N. Garabedian1, F. Denoyelle1; CNNM4 (2q11), encoding a putative metal transporter, has been iden- 1Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, tified in a pooled cohort of 7 unrelated families. We report and compare 3Hôpital, Kremlin Bicêtre, France. here the orodental phenotype, analyzed using the Diagnosing Dental Cerebral, Ocular, Dental, Auricular, Skeletal Syndrome (CODAS, MIM Defects Database D[4]/phenodent system, in 4 individuals belonging to 600373) syndrome is a very rare congenital malformation syndrome. 2 distinct pedigrees: a two generation Kosovan family (1) and a Turkish This clinical entity is highly distinctive with mental retardation, cataract, family (2). The identified mutations were c1312dupC; Leu438ProfsX9 enamel anomalies, malformations of the helix, epiphyseal and verte- (1) and c.586T>C; Ser196Pro (2). bral malformations and characteristic dysmorphic features. To date, The retinal dystrophy was of early-onset, presenting in the first few three affected children have been reported since 1991. The aetiology years of life with photophobia and nystagmus. Visual acuity was se- and pattern of inheritance of CODAS syndrome is still unknown. We verely reduced in childhood and there was complete absence of color report a new sporadic case presenting with all the characteristic featu- vision. The dental phenotype co-segregating with the CORD was res of CODAS syndrome associated with undescribed malformations that of hypoplastic/hypomineralised AI affecting both the primary and including heart, laryngeal and liver malformations. All investigations permanent dentitions. The teeth looked dysplastic and yellow/brown such as karyotype, metabolic screening and CGH array were normal. with almost no visible enamel leading to severe teeth erosion/abra- We discuss and investigate differential diagnosis. sion. Radiographic examination revealed absence of distinct contrast between enamel and dentine, taurodontic first permanent molars and root formation anomalies. Dentin formation seems also to be altered with the following defects (intrapulpal calcification of primary molars, bulbous appearance of permanent teeth crowns, thin roots). StrikinglyClinical genetics and Dysmorphology 0 the amelogenesis imperfecta appearance is similar in all examined Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Centre for Neonatology, Vilnius patients and could be considered as a real diagnostic marker for this University Children’s Hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania, 4Department of Experimental rare disease. Medicine, “Sapienza” University, Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy. Congenital craniolacunia is a rare calvarial ossification defect charac- P02.027 terized by multiple,‘soap-bubble’ areas of bone rarefactions, resulting congenital ichthyosis - case study in the faulty impression of abnormal calvarial openings. Lacunar skull A. Manea1,2, M. Boia3, D. Iacob1, C. Budisan1, M. Dima1; develops during fetal life, becomes manifest at birth, and usually dis- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, appears by the 5th month of postnatal life. The mechanism underlying 2Clinical Emergency Hospital for Children “L. Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania, craniolacunia is only partially understood, and it is generally related 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. to dysplastic bone formation associated with focal dural defects. Cra- Introduction: Congenital Ichthyosis is a rare disorder in medical prac- niolacunia can occur in patients with spinal or cranial dysraphism and tice. It is characterized by a profound thickening of the keratin layer in Arnold-Chiari malformation type II. Only a few cases of isolated cranio- fetal skin. lacunia have been reported. Material and Methods: We investigated a 6-month-old male born to healthy parents of Lithu- We are presenting a case of a premature newborn, female, hospital- anian origin. He was born at term of an uneventful pregnancy. Mild ized in our Department at the age of six days. cranial asymmetry was noticed at birth prompting to an X-ray, which Results: Clinical and paraclinical examination are leading us to con- disclosed pronounced lacunar skull defects in the absence of any as- genital ichthyosis. From personal history we found out the gestational sociated additional anomaly. Plain X-rays of the whole skeleton, neu- age of 37 weeks, birth weight of 2430 g, Apgar score 7, born through rosonoscopic, cardiosonoscopic, abdominal sonoscopic, ocular fun- cesarean section, oligoamnios. Mother presented urinary tract infec- dus evaluation were unremarkable. Psychomotor development was tion during the pregnancy, fever at 5 month of pregnancy. normal and craniolacunia was vanishing by 6 months of life. Clinical examination emphasize: dry, fissured teguments, generalized In conclusion, isolated congenital craniolacunia is considered a rare exfoliation, bilateral ectropion, upper and lower limbs with retractions calvarial ossification defect. However, since this defect dissapears with at the level of fingers, finger lypoplasia at the level of lower limbs. age it is likely overlooked. There were monitorized urea, serum protein level, levels of creatinine, hemoglobin , serum electrolyte, WBC count, blood cultures. Skin cul- P02.030 tures was positive with E. Coli with favorable evolution under antibiotic mixed maternal iso- and Hetero-disomy for chromosome 7 therapy. Transfontanelar ultrasonography revealed a picture of intra- manifesting as Silver-Russell-like phenotype with cystic fibrosis uterine chronic affection. A. Karalis1, R. Drouin2, L. Lands1, L. Russell1; Conclusions: There is a high risk of systemic infection in congenital 1McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Université de Sher- ichthyosis; this is the main cause of death. brooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada. Under the set therapy the evolution was slowly favorable. Maternal UPD7 accounts for 5-10% of cases of Silver-Russell syn- Congenital Ichthyosis is a rare disorder in medical practice and needs drome (SRS) but is a rare cause of cystic fibrosis (CF). To date, only 5 cooperation between neonatologist, dermatologist and medical geneti- cases of CF due to matUPD7 have been published. We report a sixth cist. case that resulted from crossing over, followed by nondisjunction dur- ing meiosis II, resulting in mixed maternal iso- and heterodisomy for P02.028 chromosome 7. A one-year-old male child was referred for evaluation Clinical findings, MR imagings and cytogenetic studies in a of failure to thrive, global developmental delay and mild hypotonia. The series of 45 corpus callosum dysgenesis patients, born to physical examination revealed features suggestive of Silver-Russell consanguineous parents Syndrome (SRS). Routine investigations yielded normal results, ex- A. Yuksel, E. Karaca, E. Yosunkaya, S. Basaran Yılmaz, G. S. Güven, M. cept for an elevated sweat chloride. Molecular testing demonstrated Seven; that the child was homozygous for the ΔF508 mutation. Parental test- Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genet- ing showed that only the mother carried this mutation. Because of fea- ics, Istanbul, Turkey. tures suggestive of SRS, testing for UPD 7 was undertaken. Maternal We report 45 corpus callosum dysgenesis patients (from 42 families), UPD of the entire chromosome 7 was demonstrated: 32 of 47 micro- born to consanguineous parents. These patients were referred to our satellite markers were informative. No paternal alleles were detected. clinic because of neurodevelopmental delay and/or multiple congenital Two regions of maternal heterodisomy were identified (7p14.3-pter anomalies. We classified the patients according to their clinical picture and 7q22.1-q22.2) and, and by 9 markers between 7q22.1 and 7q22.2. (facial dysmorphism, cognitive functions, seizures..etc ), cranial MRI, The 13 remaining markers were suggestive of maternal isodisomy at and cytogenetic findings. Among 45 patients, 4 had total agenesis of the peri-centromeric region of the short arm (centromere to p14.1) and corpus callosum, and the rest had hypogenesis or hypoplasia of cor- both the proximal portion long arm (q11.21 to q21.3) and its termi- pus callosum. Addition to collasal dysgenesis, cranial MR imaging of nal portion (q22.3 to qter). These results are compatible with crossing the patients revealed periventricular leukomalasia, delayed myelini- over, followed by nondisjunction during meiosis II, resulting in mixed sation, gray matter pathologies (eg. pacygyria, heterotropia), Dandy maternal iso- and heterodisomy for chromosome 7. Isodisomy at the Walker malformation and encephalomalasia. All patiens had neuro- CFTR locus resulted in homozygosity for the ΔF508 mutation. developmental delay or mental retardation, and nearly half of them had seizures. Cytogenetic studies revealed 46,XY,+(21q) karyotype in P02.031 one patient with corpus callosum agenesis, characterized by epileptic convergence of molecular genetics and modern cytogenetics in seizures and he also had severe neurodevelopmental delay. As ge- clinical diagnosis netic etiology of corpus callosum dysgenesis is not clear, categoriz- M. Abdo, E. Edkins; ing patients according to genotype and phenotype, would greatly help PathWest, Subiaco, Australia. in research studies for etiological background. We conclude that this Increasingly the scale or resolution of investigations through cytogenet- categorisition would probably lead to further genetical studies, such ics and molecular genetics are converging; driven by the elucidation as array CGH and linkage analysis, ultimately aiding in finding out the of more complex rearrangements involved in human disease and the responsible gene(s), and genetic mechanisms underlying corpus cal- available technology. Recently the cytogenetics and molecular genet- losum dysgenesis. ics departments made changes to clinical practice whereby patients were screened for several disorders using MLPA, prior to further stud- P02.029 ies and / or confirmation using cytogenetics methodologies (primarily congenital craniolacunia without any associated developmental Fluorescent In-Situ Hybridisation). Analysis for a range of disorders defect including general screening for microdeletions and duplications across B. Tumiene1,2, N. Drazdiene3, V. Kucinskas1,2, B. Dallapiccola4; all chromosomes through to specific deletions associated with pheno- 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius types such as Smith-Magenis, Cri du Chat and DiGeorge Syndrome University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University was performed using one or more multiplex probe ligation-dependentClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  amplification (MPLA) probe mixes. Thereafter, positive or inclusive re- P02.034 sults are referred to cytogenetics for confirmation through FISH. To severe autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita (Dc) due to date, 350 patients have been reported across 17 separate phenotypes TINF  gene mutation using 9 separate MLPA probe mixes (supplied by MRC Holland). Of Y. J. Sznajer1,2, A. Walne3, T. Vulliamy3, A. Ferster4, C. Dangoisse5, F. Roulez6, these patients 15 (4%) have been reported with a pathogenic deletion I. Dokal7; or duplication associated with DiGeorge Syndrome 22q11 (4), telo- 1Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center mere / subtelomere (7), Williams Syndrome 7q11.23 (1), Rubinstein- for Human Genetics, Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles (U.L.B), Taybi Syndrome 16p13.3 (1) and Prader Willi (2). The effectiveness of Brussels,, Belgium, 3Centre for Pediatrics, Barts and the London SMD, Queen this strategy when considering the concordance of results, the limita- Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 4Haematology and Oncol- tions of the methodologies, turnaround times and overall cost-benefit ogy, Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, will be presented. 5Dermatology,Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 6Ophthalmology, Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, P02.032 ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 7Centre for Pediatrics, Barts and the London SMD, Evaluation of three patients with disorders of sexual Queen Mary University of London;, London, United Kingdom. development DC represents a genetically heterogeneous disease which may result V. Belengeanu, D. Stoicanescu, S. Farcas, C. Popa, M. Stoian, N. Andreescu; from the three conventional mendelian mode of inheritance: X-linked University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timişoara, Romania. recessive to mutation in dyskerin (DKC1) gene; autosomal recessive Disorders of sexual development represent a clinically heterogeneous (biallelic mutations) in NOP10, NHP2or TERT genes and autosomal group of conditions that interfere with normal sex determination and dominant (heterozygous mutations) in TERC, TERT or TINF2 genes. differentiation. The manifestations in affected individuals may fluctuate TINF2 is member of genes encoding the shelterin complex of proteins from the neonatal period to adulthood. Disorders of sexual develop- identified mutated in sporadic patients with severe DC. TINF2 gene ment arise from chromosomal, genic, gonadal, or anatomic abnormali- accounts for up to 11% of patients with DC (1). Affected patients de- ties in the pathway of sexual differentiation, occasionally being associ- veloped dermatologic signs (leukoplakia, nail dystrophy, abnormal skin ated with other malformations. We report clinical, hormonal and other pigmentation) with bone marrow failure syndrome. parameters, together with the karyotype, FISH and molecular analysis We report the natural history of a 14 year-old girl, second child from in three cases born with disorders of sexual development. One case healthy consanguineous parents. She developed aplastic anemia at had facial dysmorphism suggesting an autosomal chromosomal ab- the age of 3 yrs and had from her sister HLA homologous bone mar- normality. Surprisingly, cytogenetic investigation revealed a 47, XXY row transplant. Her intelligence and development were normal. She karyotype in all metaphases. Another case had ambivalent external had few premature grey hairs, small area of alopecia, oral leukopla- genitalia and chromosomal investigation showed male genetic sex. kia, right peripheral retinal ischemia, localized keratitis, nail dystrophy Exploratory laparascopy and histopathological examination revealed with pterygia, large dyskeratosis on the perineal region and hypoplas- that gonads were exclusively testes. As all the investigations led to tic dental roots. She didn’t had poïkiloderma, cerebellar hypoplasia, the diagnosis of 46,XY disorder of sexual development, adequate brain anomaly nor any digestive problem. Graft versus host disease hormonal and surgical treatment was initiated. The third case was was suspected but dermatologic features are not found so that dys- also born with ambiguous external genitalia, chromosomal analysis keratosis congenita was diagnosed. Molecular investigation ruled out together with FISH and molecular analysis for SRY region revealing mutation in DKC1 or TERC genes. Combined DHPLC and direct DNA female genetic sex. Clinical and hormonal data led to the diagnosis sequencing of TINF2 gene identified a c.847C>G (p.Pro283Ala) muta- of 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Ambiguous genitalia do not occur in all tion in the index patient and was absent in both parents. The molecular disorders of sex development, but whenever ambiguity is present, it diagnosis allowed precise genetic counseling to the family. needs immediate action, to try to establish the diagnosis and to decide (1) Savage S.A. et al. Am J Hum Genet 2008;82:501-509 the best choice for the sex of rearing. A multidisciplinary approach, with a patient-centered model of care, is necessary in order to reach a P02.035 prompt and correct diagnosis and treatment. congenital cytomegalovirus infection as one of the main causes of early onset sensorineural hearing loss; case report P02.033 R. Teek1,2, T. Reimand1,3, R. Rein3, K. Õunap1,3; Partial distal aphalangia, duplication of metatarsal iV, 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, microcephaly and borderline intelligence: a third patient Estonia, 2Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, University of Tartu, Tartu, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance Estonia, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. G. Utine, Y. Alanay, D. Aktaş, M. Alikaşifoğlu, K. Boduroğlu; Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is one of the most common congeni- Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. tal infection, the overall birth precalence is estimated to ~0,64%. Only Partial distal aphalangia, duplication of metatarsal IV, microcephaly 11% of infected infants have non-specific symptoms at birth. Congen- and borderline intelligence (OMIM %600384) has been reported twice ital CMV is an important but underestimated cause of hearing loss previously [Martinez-Frias et al.; 1995, Di Rocco et al.; 2002]. We de- (HL). Children with congenital CMV have a risk 15-22% of developing scribe a third patient with the same condition, from a family with paren- sensorineural HL. tal consanguinity. The patient is a 10 year-old boy referred for oligo- We report a term-born girl, birthweight 3075 g, length 53 cm. Since dactyly. He was born at term with a birth weight of 3500 gr to healthy first year of the life she had speech delay and bilateral profound sen- first cousins, as their first and only child. On physical examination, he sorineural HL. At the DNA investigation, which covers 201 mutations in was tall and obese, his height being 150 cm (90-97th centiles), his 8 genes we didn’t find any mutations causing HL. Brain MRI showed weight 52.5 kg (over 90th centile) and his head circumference 52 cm non-progressive leukoencephalopathy. The congenital CMV infection (3rd-10th centiles). Fingers were structurally normal. However, there was diagnosed by using PCR testing to detect CMV DNA on neonatal were three toes on the left and four on the right with partial cutaneous screening card. syndactyly between 2nd and 3rd. Both halluces were normal structur- HL occurs up to 22% of children with congenital CMV and HL can be ally, but the distal phalanx of the left hallux assumed a valgus posi- from mild to profound. The severity of the neurologic impairment of pa- tion. X-rays showed duplication of both metatarsal IVs. On the right, tients with congenital CMV is highly variable and neuroimaging studies last toe overrided the 5th and the bifid 4th metacarpals, and had 3 have revealed multiple anomalies. The white matter abnormalities oc- proximal phalanges lying over these metacarpals. On the left, 2nd and cur up to 22% of congenital CMV patients. In the differential diagnosis 4th metatarsals were rudimentary, the fourth being partially duplicated. of patients with white matter lesions and sensorineural hearing loss, Last toe overrided the 4th and the 5th metatarsals. X-rays of hands one should consider congenital CMV infection. Congenital CMV infec- were normal. His IQ was calculated as 50. The pedigree of the first tion is one of the most important causes of hearing loss in young chil- family suggested an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance where- dren, second only to genetic mutations. The CMV DNA analysis from as the second report suggested an autosomal recessive pattern. The neonatal screening card of Estonian children with HL of unknown aeti- present patient may support the existence of the latter pattern. ology is in work and results will be presented (102 cases from group of 219 patients with early onset HL).Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.036 Belgium, 3Center for Human Genetics, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, mutation analysis of Epidermolysis Bullosa in the czech Gosselies, Belgium, 4Department of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques universitaires Republic Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 5Department of paediatrics, Notre-Dame de B. Jerabkova1, H. Buckova2, K. Vesely3, K. Stehlikova1, L. Fajkusova1; Grâce Hospital, Gosslies, Belgium. 1University Hospital, Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Brno, Focal dermal hypoplasia (FDH) or Goltz syndrome (OMIM 305600) Czech Republic, 2University Hospital, Department of Pediatric Dermatology of is an X-linked dominant disorder characterized by patchy hypoplastic 1st Pediatric Clinic, Brno, Czech Republic, 3St. Ann´s Hospital, 1st Institute of skin and digital, ocular, bony and dental anomalies. Recently, muta- Pathological Anatomy, Brno, Czech Republic. tions in the PORCN gene, a putative regulator of Wnt signalling were Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a rare genetic disease characterized by demonstrated to cause sporadic and familial FDH cases. extremely fragile skin and recurrent skin blistering after mild or none We report on here the clinical presentation and the molecular studies mechanical trauma. Traditionally, EB is classified in three major cat- in two unrelated girls with sporadic FDH: an 8-month-old Algerian girl egories according to the level of dermoepidermal separation at the (patient 1) and a 6-year-old Belgian girl (patient 2). Both had: normal basement membrane (BM) zone: i) epidermolysis bullosa simplex head circumference at birth and developed progressive microcephaly (EBS); ii) dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB); and iii) junctional with no developmental delay, patchy, hyper-pigmented or red atrophic epidermolysis bullosa (JEB). skin lesion, abnormal extremities with syndactyly, +/- ectrodactyly, EB is diagnosed by evaluation of clinical findings, transmission elec- dysplastic nails, sparse and brittle hair with patchy alopecia, iris and tron microscopy of skin samples, and immunohistochemical mapping chorioretinal coloboma. of protein components of dermal-epidermal junction zone. Molecular- Sequencing of the 14 coding exons and the exon-intron boundaries of genetic diagnostics of DEB and EBS was initiated in our laboratory in the longest human splice variant of the PORCN gene (isoform D; NM_ 2004. 203475.1) revealed novel heterozygous mutations in both children. Dystrophic EB (EBD) is caused by mutations in the collagen type VII Patient 1 had a de novo duplication of 11 nucleotides in exon 8 caus- (COL7A1) gene, which consists of 118 exons. EB simplex (EBS) is ing a frame-shift and a premature termination codon (c.762_772dup- caused by mutations in the keratin 5 (KRT5) gene (9 exons) and the CAACTATTTTG ). Patient 2 had an A to G substitution which alters the keratin 14 (KRT14) gene (8 exons). ATG start codon (c.1A>G). The PORCN transcript does not have any DNA from EB patients and their relatives were screened for mutations ATG upstream of the start codon and the next in-frame ATG is in posi- in the COL7A1, KRT5 and KRT14 genes. Analysis was performed us- tion 72. Thus, both mutations are expected to cause loss-of-function. ing PCR and direct sequencing. We could identify KRT5 or KRT14 This study expands the number of PORCN mutations in the FDH pa- dominant mutations in 13 out of 19 EBS families. As regards 27 EBD tients to 28. The clinical description contributes to the delineation of the probands, we revealed disease causative mutations in 22 patients and FDH phenotype associated with PORCN mutations. screening of COL7A1 is in progress. Determination of EB at the level of DNA has important implication for P02.039 final confirmation of diagnosis, possibility of genetic counselling and Female-to-female transmission of Frasier syndrome : Lessons early prenatal diagnosis. for genetic counseling This work was supported by IGA MZ CR NR9346-3 and by MSMT K. Dahan1, N. Godefroid2, M. Jadoul2, O. Devuyst2, Y. Pirson2; LC06023. 1Centre for Human Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Nephrology, University Hospital St Luc, Brussels, P02.037 Belgium. Associated malformations in patients with Esophageal atresia Frasier syndrome is defined by the association of focal segmental C. G. Stoll, Y. Alembik, B. Dott, M. Roth; glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), male pseudohermaphroditism with streak Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France. gonads and risk to develop gonadoblastoma. There have been some Esophageal atresia is a common type of congenital malformation. recent reports that observed Frasier site mutations in genetically fe- The etiology of esophageal atresia is unclear and its pathogenesis is male (46XX) patients. These females seemed to have normal genital controversial. Because previous reports have inconsistently noted the development. We present a female-to-female transmission of a Frasier type and frequency of malformations associated with esophageal atre- intronic mutation affecting splicing of the primary transcript of Wilms sia, we conducted this study in a geographically defined population, tumour suppressor gene (WT1). The index patient developped an iso- evaluating the birth prevalence of esophageal atresia and associated lated proteinuria from the age of 3 years with normal renal function at malformations ascertained between 1979 and 2003 in 334,262 con- age 5. No urogenital involvement and wilm’s tumour were observed secutive births. Of the 99 patients with esophageal atresia, 46 (46.5%) throughout the 2 years follow-up. Her karyotype performed at age 5 had associated malformations. These included patients with chromo- with informed consent was normal 46,XX. The mother originated from somal abnormalities (8 cases,8.1%); non chromosomal recognized Belgium had proteinuria at age of 8 years and progressed into end- syndromes including CHARGE syndrome, Fanconi anemia, Fryns syn- stage renal disease at age 17. Renal histology showed FSGS. She be- drome, and Opitz G/BBB syndrome; associations including VACTERL came pregnant when she was 22 years and was delivered at 35 weeks (10 patients), and schisis; oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum; malfor- of gestation from a baby girl of 1800g. The occurrence of proteinuria in mation complex including sirenomelia, and non syndromic multiple our proband combined with the medical history of her mother prompt- congenital anomalies (MCA) (21 cases, 21.2%). Malformations of the ed us to perform genetic analysis which revealed the same Frasier cardiovascular system(24.2%), urogenital system (21.2%), digestive intronic mutation in both mother and daughter. system (21.2%), musculoskeletal system (14.1%), and central nervous Conclusion: these data illustrate that 46,XX patients affected by WT1 system(7.1%) were the most common other congenital malformations mutations in the Frasier site have a conserved ovarian function and occurring in patients with esophageal atresia and nonsyndromic MCA. then, emphasizes the importance of genetic counseling in all female We observed a striking prevalence of total malformations and specific patients presenting a steroid-resistant FSGS. Furthermore, early ge- patterns of malformations associated with esophageal atresia which netic work-up allowed us to avoid a renal biopsy and an useless im- emphasizes the need to evaluate all patients with esophageal atresia munosuppressive therapy in our proband. for possible associated malformations. The malformations associated with esophageal atresia can be often classified into a recognizable P02.040 malformation syndrome or pattern (25.3%). Progranulin gene mutations are infrequent cause of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FtLD) in Polish population P02.038 M. Berdynski1, M. Kuzma-Kozakiewicz2, B. Gajewska3, H. Kwieciński2, C. Ze- Focal dermal hypoplasia: two novel mutations in the PORcN kanowski1; gene 1Department of Neurodegenerative Disorders, Mossakowski Medical Research N. Revencu1,2, A. Destrée3, B. Bayet4, M. Coyette4, J. L. Hennecker5, M. Vik- Centre, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Neurology, Medical University of kula2; Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Biochemistry, Medical University of 1Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Bel- gium, 2Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Brussels,Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. medical history of the patient and the pedigree were recorded. Clinical Introduction: Frontotemporal lobar degeneration, the second most examination, followed by karyotyping, DNA-analysis, metabolic inves- common form of presenile dementia, is clinically, pathologically and tigation and/or a skin biopsy (if indicated) were performed. genetically heterogeneous disorder. Previous studies have shown Four main groups could be discerned, based on diagnosis: that mutations in the gene for progranulin (PGRN) are major cause of 1. Oncogenetic syndromes (n= 31) FTLD with ubiquitin-positive brain inclusions (FTLD-U). PGRN muta- 2. hypermobility/connective tissue disorders (n=47) tion frequency range is 5-11% of FTLD cases worldwide, and 13-25 % 3. disorders involving the X-chromosome (n=11) in subpopulation of patient with familial FTLD. 4. miscellaneous (n= 156) . The aim of the study: To detect PGRN mutations in Polish FTLD co- Medication was prescribed by the dermatologist if in- hort. dicated or referral to the department of dermatology if Material and methods: The Polish patient sample consisted of 76 FTLD special treatment was needed, was arranged. In case patients (age: 59.7±14, 24 females and 52 males). DNA was isolated of a hereditary condition, genetic counselling was of- from blood leukocytes using standard procedure. All PGRN exons with fered to family members. Our results indicate that flanking intronic regions were sequenced. combined efforts are worthwhile to offer these specific Result and conclusion: DNA sequence analysis of PGRN revealed patients. Moreover, in various cases light could be shed nine, previously reported polymorphism (six intronic and three exonic). on the pathogenetic mechanisms leading to a particular No pathogenic mutation was found in the examined group. It could be skin disorder. concluded that PGRN mutations are infrequent cause of FTLD in Pol- ish population. P02.043 Screening of the DFNB3 locus: identification of three novel P02.041 mutations of mYO15A associated with hearing loss and further A 6 year old Fryns-like syndrome child without suggestion for a two distinctive genes on this locus brachytelephalangy and nail defects. H. Belguith1, M. Aifa-Hmani1, H. Dhouib2, M. Ben Said1, M. Mosrati1, I. La- M. L. Dentici1,2, F. Brancati1,3, R. Mingarelli1, B. Dallapiccola1,2; hmar3, J. Moalla2, I. Charfeddine2, N. Driss3, S. Ben Arab4, A. Ghorbel2, H. 1IRCCS C.S.S.-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Sapienza, University of Rome Ayadi1, S. Masmoudi1; Dept. of Sperimental Medicine, Rome, Italy, 3Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, G. 1Centre de Biotechnologie, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service d’O.R.L., C.H.U.H. Bour- d’Annunzio University Foundation, Chieti, Italy. guiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service d’O.R.L., C.H.U., Mahdia, Tunisia, 4Faculté de Médecine, Tunis, Tunisia. Fryns syndrome is an autosomal recessive multiple congenital anom- Recessive mutations of MYO15A are associated with nonsyndromic aly (MCA) syndrome characterised by diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), hearing loss (NSHL) in humans (DFNB3). MYO15A has 66 exons ocular manifestations with cloudy cornea, coarse face, lung hypopla- and encodes unconventional myosin XVA. Analysis of 77 GJB2 muta- sia, distal limb/nail defects, and central nervous system, cardiac and tion-negative Tunisian consanguineous families, segregating severe genito-urinary malformations. FS is usually lethal in the neonatal pe- to profound recessive NSHL, revealed evidence of linkage to micro- riod and only 11 survivors have been reported. The diagnosis of FS is satellites for DFNB3 in 4 (5.2%) families. In three families, sequenc- based exclusively on clinical findings since no gene or locus has been ing of MYO15A led to the identification of three novel mutations: a identified so far. In contrast, different submicroscopic chromosome nonsense (c.4998C>A (p.C1666X) and two splice sites c.9229+1G>A rearrangements were found in subjects mimicking FS, making array- and c.7395+3G>C. The c.9229+1G>A substitution was assessed us- CGH highly recommended. Even though a comprehensive description ing the consensus score calculation to quantify the influence of the of the broad spectrum of FS clinical features has been outlined, no mutation on the formation of splicing loops. The calculated values for major mandatory feature has been found. Recently, the association of the altered sequence were 58.71% as compared to 75.83% for the wild CDH with brachytelephalangy and/or nail hypoplasia were proposed type splice site eliciting an abnormal splicing process. Whereas the dif- as strongly suggestive of FS. We report on a 6-year-old male infant ference obtained for the c.7395+3G>C was less between the normal tested negative for array-CGH (resolution 75 Kb) in whom CDH was (86.49%) and the altered sequence (81.3%). These variations were associated with coarse face, severe mental retardation, corneal leuko- not detected in 100 controls chromosomes. No mutation was found ma, lung hypoplasia and cryptorchidism. Pregnancy was complicated in the fourth family. A maximum LOD score of 7.14 was obtained with by polyhydramnios. He also displayed ventricular dilatation, narrow marker D17S953 in this family. This result suggests that there may small thorax with hypoplastic nipples, gastro-esophageal reflux, in- be another gene in DFNB3 locus. Sequencing of such big gene is a testinal malrotation, flexion contractures, and minor digital anomalies real challenge and a pre-screen of families segregating HL for linkage including dorsiflexion of toes, fifth finger clinodactyly and unilateral four to DFNB3 locus is almost needed before MYO15A mutation analysis. finger line. All these features are variably reported in FS. This patient However, the putative genetic heterogeneity within this locus repre- presents many characteristics of FS in absence of distinct distal limb/ sents a pitfall of such pre-analysis. In conclusion, we discovered three nail defects, and strenghts the broad clinical variability in the rare FS novel mutations of MYO15A and our data suggest the possibility that long-term survivors. there are two distinct genes at the DFNB3 locus. P02.042 P02.044 Genodermatology, a multidisciplinary approach: Overview of Biochemical signs of hemochromatosis in a cohort of canadian five years collaboration and Russian patients under 30 years old with different HFE Y. J. H. A. Detisch1, M. Vreeburg1, C. T. R. M. Schrander-Stumpel1,2, M. A. M. genotype van Steensel3,2, D. Marcus-Soekarman1; M. M. Litvinova; 1University Hospital Maastricht, department of clinical genetics, Maastricht, The Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Netherlands, 2Research Institute Growth & Development (GROW),Maastricht Hereditary hemochromatosis is one of the most common autosomal University, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3University Hospital Maastricht, depart- recessive disorders. This pathology is characterized by iron overload. ment of dermatology, Maastricht, The Netherlands. It is thought that hemochromatosis caused by HFE mutations mani- Since diagnosis of rare genetic syndromes is based on pattern recog- fests in patients over 40-45 years old. The goal of this study was to nition and requires specific expertise, as is the case with many skin investigate ferritin and transferring saturation (TS) levels in patients diseases, we joined forces starting a multidisciplinary out-patient clinic under 30 years old genotyped for C282Y and H63D mutations in HFE “Genodermatology” in March 2004. Our goal was to evaluate patients gene. We used 201 Canadian and 137 Russian patients. Information with diagnostic questions in the combined field of dermatology and about Canadian patients was taken from the hemochromatosis data- clinical genetics by the dermatologist and the clinical geneticist to- base (Children’s & Women’s Health Centre of British Columbia). Rus- gether. sian patients had different therapeutic disorders. Among 137 Russians Patients were referred by either a dermatologist or a clinical geneticist 24 had ferritin and TS tested. The following HFE genotypes (C282Y/ (or other specialists) and were seen by both specialists and a genetic H63D) were found: YY/HH; CY/HD; CY/HH; CC/HD; CC/HH; CC/DD counselor. In a 5 years time-period 245 patients were counselled. The in 17%, 15%; 37%; 13%; 17%; 1% (Canadian) and 0%, 3%; 6%; 28%;Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  60%; 3% (Russian). Difference in results can be explained by lower aminoacid position 412 (p. Trp412X). The mutation results in a trun- frequencies of mentioned mutations in Russian population and differ- cated EXT1 protein or diminished EXT1 mRNA due to mRNA decay. ent principle of groups’ formation. Analysis of genotype-phenotype cor- The c.1235G>A mutation is a novel mutation not previously described relations in combined cohort of patients showed significantly higher in other patients nor in controls. However, due to its truncating nature, levels of ferritin and TS in young YY/HH patients comparing to patients it is most likely disease-causing. with other genotypes (p<0.01) (Table 1). There was no significant dif- ference in ferritin and TS levels between females and males of the P02.047 same HFE genotype. Thus biochemical sings of classical hemochro- Holoprosencephaly - lobar form - associated with occipital matosis appear in YY/HH patients much earlier than 40-45 years old. meningoencephallocele D. Iacob1,2, M. Boia1, A. Manea1, E. R. Iacob3, M. Dima1; Ferritin and transferrin saturation levels in a cohort of patients under 30 years old 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, HFE genotype (c282Y/H63D) YY/HH cY/HD cY/HH cc/HD cc/HH cc/DD 2Clinical Emergency Hospital for Children “L. Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania, Ferritin, ìg/L 414.3±136.3 185.2±127.5 169.9±78.5 231±112.7 195.3±67.4 146.1±198.5 3County Clinical Emergency Hospital, Arad, Romania. measurement amount 35 32 75 36 42 5 Introduction: Holoprosencephaly is a type of cephalic disorder. This is transferrin saturation 0.8±0.1 0.5±0.1 0.3±0.0 0.4±0.1 0.4±0.1 0.4±0.3 measurement amount 35 33 75 34 43 5 a disorder characterized by the failure of the prosencephalon to de- velop. P02.045 Material and Method: medical Genetics and Epidemiology study of seven districts of We are going to present a new born, male, hospitalized in the Prema- Bashkortostan Republic ture and Neonatology Department. Y. I. Grinberg1, S. S. Murzabaeva2, E. R. Grinberg1, E. K. Khusnutdinova1,1, R. Results: The newborn is the sixth birth; 36 weeks gestational age with A. Zinchenko3, E. K. Ginter3; birth weight of 2470 g, Apgar score 6 and cranial circumference 39 cm. 1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir state Personal history of mother reveals urinary tract infection and dental medical university, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Research Center for Medical abscess in the first trimester of pregnancy, therefore she had antibiotic Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. treatment. We have performed epidemiological study of seven districts (Burzyan- Transfontanelar ultrasound shows complex cerebral malformation with sky, Baimaksky, Abzelilovsky, Salavatsky, Archangelsky, Askinsky and holoprosencephaly in lobar form, agenesis of corpus calossum and Kugarchinsky) of Bashkortostan Republic. The total size of the inves- lateral ventricle dilatation, confirmed also by MRI. tigated population was 225387 persons, including 170452 individuals The newborn was operated at neurosurgery, initial for hydrocephaly belonging to southern- east, northern-east and northern-west Bashkir and it was set a ventriculoperitoneal drain followed by the treatment of ethnographic groups. All population of seven districts was examined. occipital meningoencephalocelle. The standard for medical genetic research was elaborated in labora- Conclusions: Lobar holoprosencephaly, a rare disorder, has no specif- tory of genetic epidemiology, Research Centre for Medical Genetics, ic clinic expressiveness; the diagnosis can be missed in the neonatal Moscow. Segregation analysis has demonstrated good agreement be- period. Cerebral imagistic was the main method for setting a diagno- tween the observed and expected segregation frequencies for both sis; cerebral ultrasound has detected the lesions and MRI established AR and AD diseases. On the whole, population of Bashkortostan Re- their dimensions. public is characterized by higher level of the prevalence rate of AD hereditary disorders in comparison with AR and X-linked diseases. Our P02.048 study revealed significant differences in the prevalence rates of auto- Zic2 mutations in holoprosencephaly: clinical and molecular somal dominant, autosomal recessive and X-linked disorders in rural data of a European series of 40 probants (25 fetuses and 15 and urban populations. As regards the indigenous Bashkir population, children) the highest level of the prevalence rate was defined for AD hereditary S. Mercier1, C. Dubourg2, M. Belleguic1, C. Bendavid2, C. Quélin1, S. Jaillard2, disorders. The absolute values of the prevalence rates of AD and AR L. Pasquier1, P. Loget3, J. Sinteff4, V. David2, S. Odent1; hereditary disorders in the indigenous Bashkir population are quite 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, 2Institut high and correspond to Udmurt population. The prevalence rates of all de Génétique et Développement, Université de Rennes1, Faculté de Médecine, Mendelian disorders are varied: 4,49±0,41 per 1000 persons in north- Rennes, France, 3Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, CHU Hôpital Pontchaillou, ern-east; 5,15±0,24 in southern- east and 5,66±0,63 in northern-west Rennes, France, 4Laboratoire d’Informatique Médicale, CHU Hôpital Pont- Bashkir ethnographic groups. chaillou, Rennes, France. ZIC2 transcription factor gene is one of the four main genes implicated P02.046 in holoprosencephaly (HPE), a complex brain malformation resulting An iranian family with 9 cases of hereditary multiple exostoses from incomplete midline division of the prosencephalon. Since 1996, a in three consecutive generations European network was organized from Rennes, France, data and DNA S. Akbaroghli1,2, M. Houshmand3; of 500 HPE patients were analyzed and DNA prospectively collected. 1Deputy for cultural affairs and prevention of welfare organization, Tehran, Here we report the clinical and molecular data of 25 fetuses and 15 Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dr. Susan Akbaroghli genetic counseling center, Teh- children with ZIC2 mutations. HPE is mainly isolated and syndromic ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic in only 5 cases. All three classical types of HPE are described: alobar, of Iran. semi-lobar and lobar, but syntelencephaly (middle interhemispheric A family consisting of an affected father and six children : three af- variant) is also reported twice, anencephaly/cleft face and a minor form fected daughters, two affected sons and only one unaffected daughter once each. Interestingly, neural tube defects are associated with HPE .These children are the results of an unconsanguinous marriage. The in three cases like rachischisis and myelomeningocele. Even in se- paternal grandfather and his two daughters have been also affected. vere forms of HPE, normal faces are described in 4 cases, mild facial The second female child of this family was the proband case and com- anomalies in most of the cases and proboscis in only one case. ing for preconceptional genetic counseling because of her disease Molecular studies identified 36 mutations, including 31 different types with multiple osseous overgrowths around her joints like knees and of mutations, and 4 deletions of the whole ZIC2 gene. Most mutations elbows, limitation in joint active movements, painful lesions and also are detected in only a single family, except for the 8 poly-Alanine tract cosmetic limb deformities. She wanted to know about the recurrence expansion cases, and result from de novo mutations. risk of this disease in her future offsprings. The clinical manifestations In conclusion, most of time, normal face or mild facial anomalies, syn- have become more serious in younger sibling.This 11 years old boy telencephaly and neural tube defect associated with HPE are corre- has more osseous overgrowths and serious deformities. The pedigree lated with ZIC2 alterations. shows an AD inheritance pattern. The clinical diagnosis is compatible with Hereditary Multiple Exostoses. The result of the molecular study on the 11 years old son of this family has shown a heterozygous c.1235G>A mutation in exon 4 of the EXT1 gene .This mutation alters a tryptophane in a premature stop codon onClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.049 in a series of 14 fetuses from 8 unrelated families, permits identifica- TBX analysis in 79 Holt-Oram syndrome families reveals 80% tion of a diffuse form of PGV, affecting totally the CNS that we opposed of genomic alterations in typical cases, 25 “new” mutations and to focal forms, confined to restricted territories of CNS. unusual modes of inheritance In PVHH, the disruptive impact of vascular malformation on the devel- G. de la Villeon1, F. Escande-Narducci2, A. Mezel3, A. Dieux-Coeslier4, S. oping CNS is now well admitted. However, the mechanism of abnor- Odent5, A. Goldenberg6, S. Blesson7, P. Blanchet8, D. Martin-Coignard9, L. Pas- mal angiogenesis involving exclusively brain vasculature remains un- quier5, V. Cormier-Daire10, B. Leheup11, D. Lacombe12, G. Morin13, C. Thauvin- known. Recurrences and consanguinity have been reported, suggest- Robinet14, M. Gonzales15, A. David16, P. Jouk17, M. le Merrer10, P. Bouvagnet18, ing autosomal recessive inheritance.Among the 8 families we report, 3 P. Makrythanasis19, J. Andrieux20, M. Holder-Espinasse4,21, S. Manouvrier- are consanguineous with 2 affected sibs in each. A genome wide scan Hanu4,21; with Affymetrix SNP 250K is currently being performed in these 3 fami- 1Cardiopaediatric Department, CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 2Molecular genetic lies, and will hopefully point to the Fowler syndrome locus. Department, CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 3Paediatric orthopaedics Department, CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 4Clinical genetic Department, CHRU Lille, Lille, P02.051 France, 5Genetic Department, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 6Genetic Depart- A new phenotype in a family with inability of tongue movement, ment, CHU Rouen, Rouen, France, 7Genetic Department, CHU Tours, Tours, dysmorphic face, hypernasal speech, hypogonadism and France, 8Genetic Department, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 9Clinical syndactyly. genetic Department, CH le Mans, Le Mans, France, 10Genetic Department, A. Yesilyurt1, S. Kozan1, D. Torun1, M. Bahce1, A. Koc1, &. Demirkaya2, G. CHU Necker, Paris, France, 11Genetic Department, CHU Nancy, Nancy, France, Genc2, &. Güran1; 12Genetic Department, CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 13Clinical genetic 1Gülhane Military Medical Academy, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Department, CHU Amiens, Amiens, France, 14Clinical genetic Department, CHU Turkey, 2Gülhane Military Medical Academy, Department of Neurology, Ankara, Dijon, Dijon, France, 15Embryology and Genetic Department, CHU A Trousseau, Turkey. Paris, France, 16Clinical genetic Department, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, Dysmorphic face with microbrachycephaly, triangular and elongated 17Genetic Department, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 18Clicardiopaediatric face, fine hair, frontal upsweep, narrow forehead, bitemporal narrow- Department, CHU Lyon-Bron, Bron, France, 19Genetic Department, university ing, thick and medially-flared eyebrows, prominent tubular nose, prom- hospital Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 20Genetic Department, CHRU Lille, inent columella, enophtalmus, thin lips, pointed chin findings may be Lille, France, 21Lille 2 University, Lille, France. related any type of a dysmorphic syndromes. Inability of tongue move- Holt-Oram Syndrome (HOS) is characterized by the association of up- ment, hyper nasal speech, hypogonadism and syndactyly in addition per limb radial-ray and heart malformations. The transmission is au- to dysmorphic face findings in two affected cases in a consanguineous tosomal dominant and TBX5 mutations are observed in about 75% family may represent a new type of rare phenotype with autosomal re- of the typical patients, so that genetic heterogeneity is likely. SALL4 cessive inheritance pattern. Here we presented a male patient which is mutations are responsible for some atypical cases. characteristic with the limitation of tongue movement, and dysmorphic 79 families (126 patients) were referred for TBX5 analysis. Using pre- face, hypogonadism and syndactyly findings. He had 46,XY karyotype. cise diagnostic criteria we classified them in two separate groups: 46 His sister had similar clinical findings including dysmorphic face and (91 patients) were considered “typical” and 33 (35 patients) were con- limitation of tongue movement except syndactyly. We have not per- sidered “atypical”. formed her hormonal analyses for the observation of hypogonadism Sequencing of exonic and intronic flanking regions of TBX5, as well yet. Interestingly, no EMG abnormality was detected in tongue and as QMPSF and MLPA were performed. Thirty-seven anomalies (80%) whole body muscles. There was no cardiac and brain defect according were identified in the typical families (13 nonsense, 10 frameshift, 7 to ECHO cardiography and cranial tomography results, respectively. point, and 3 splice mutations; 3 exonic deletions, 1 exonic duplication). So limitation of tongue movement and other abnormalities in a consan- To our knowledge 25 of these 37 anomalies had never been reported guineous family seems as a new phenotype with autosomal recessive previously. Variable clinical expression is the rule in HOS and was inheritance pattern. confirmed in our patients. Important intrafamilial variability was also noticed in one family (slight abnormal clavicle curvature in a mother P02.052 and very severe radial ray defects in her two daughters). Somatic mo- isolated Hereditary Hypotrichosis Research in Russia saicism was identified in one asymptomatic case. E. I. Sharonova1, N. V. Petrova1, K. N. Suvorova2, E. D. Nefedova2, A. V. Arbu- In the 33 “atypical families”, a precise diagnosis could be performed kova1, R. A. Zinchenko1; in 9/33 (27%). A TBX3-TBX5 deletion in a patient presenting features 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sci- of both HOS and Ulnar-mammary syndrome was identified. In the 32 ences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian Medical Academy of Postgradu- remaining families, a diagnosis was achieved in 8 cases (1 Fanconi, 1 ate education, course of the skin and veneral disorders in childhood, Moscow, Okihiro, 1 TAR, 2 fetal valproate syndromes, and 3 array-CGH anoma- Russian Federation. lies). Laboratory of Genetic Epidemiology RAMS in collaboration with course This large series highlights genetic heterogeneity and clinical variabil- of the skin and veneral disorders in childhood of Russian Medical ity in HOS. Academy of Postgraduate education study hair growth abnormalities and scalp hair loss. In collaboration with Rogaev E.I., in 2006 year we P02.050 mapped phospholipase gene (LIPH) from identified by us 59 Mari and clinicopathological pattern and genetic mapping of fetal Chuvash families, which had isolated hereditary hypotrichosis, and cerebral proliferative vasculopathy: the Fowler syndome described mutation - deletion of exon 4 of the LIPH gene. We studied F. Encha-Razavi1,2, B. Bessières3, N. Leticee4, S. Zerelli1, M. Bonnière5, P. frequency of this mutation in healthy individuals of different ethnosis Marcorelles6, A. Laquerrière7, J. Martinovic2, V. Cayol3, C. Fallet8, B. Foliguet9, from the Volga-Ural region: Maris, Chuvashs, Bashkirs, Udmurts and M. Vekemans1,2, T. Attie-Bitach1,2; Russian. At this moment, we found new mutation in P2PY5 receptor 1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2Hopital Necker, APHP, Paris, France, 3Insti- gene in one patient who had the similar to isolated hereditary hypotri- tut de Puériculture, Paris, France, 4Maternité, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, chosis, caused by deletion of exon 4 of the LIPH gene, phenotype and 5Anatomopathologie, Lille, France, 6Anatomopatholgie, Brest, France, 7Anato- hair structure. Further, we examined one family with clinical presenta- mopathologie, Rouen, France, 8Hôpital Sainte-Anne, Paris, France, 9Anatomo- tion similar to hereditary hypotrichosis, but in this family we observed patholgie, Nancy, France. spontaneously symptoms regress in adult age (although symptoms Cerebral proliferative glomeruloid vasculopathy (CPGV) is a severe did not disappear completely). Hairs show typical beaded or monil- disorder of central nervous system (CNS) angiogenesis, resulting in ethrix appearance and elliptical nodes separated by narrow internodes abnormally thickened and aberrant perforating vessels, forming glo- without medullary layer. We examined the patient with monilethrix by meruloids with inclusion bearing endothelial cells. This peculiar vas- means of molecular genetic tests. We detect previously known muta- cular malformation was delineated by Fowler in 1972 in relation with tion in 7 exon of the hHb6 gene. So, clinical presentation of hair growth a familial, lethal, fetal phenotype associating hydranencephaly-hydro- abnormalities is similar in different gene defects. As a result, now we cephaly with limbs deformities, called proliferative vasculopathy and are working out the differential-diagnostic criteria for genetically differ- hydranencephaly-hydrocephaly (PVHH). Our clinicopathological study ent forms of isolated hereditary hypotrichosis.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.053 P02.055 Genotype-Phenotype correlations in Best Vitelliform macular A very early juvenile Huntington disease revealed by cerebellar Dystrophy ataxia in a 2 years old boy G. Querques1,2, J. Zerbib3, R. Santacroce4, M. Margaglione5,6, J. Rozet7, D. L. Guyant-Marechal1, A. Goldenberg1, C. Hervé2, L. Delhaye2, M. Brasseur- Martinelli8, N. Delle Noci1, G. Soubrane3, E. Souied3; Daudruy2, V. Drouin-Garraud1, P. Saugier-Veber1, T. Frebourg1, D. Hannequin1, 1Department of Ophthalmology - University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy, 2Depart- D. Devys3; ment of Ophthalmology,University Paris XII, Paris, France, 3Department of Oph- 1Inserm and Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 2Rouen University thalmology - University Paris XII, Paris, France, 4Genetica Medica- University Hospital, Rouen, France, 3Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, France. of Foggia, Foggia, Italy, 5Genetica Medica - University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy, Juvenile Huntington disease (JHD) is a rare clinical entity character- 6Unita’ di Emostasi e Trombosi,I.R.C.C.S. “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza”, San ized by an age of onset of Huntington disease (HD) younger than 20. Giovanni Rotondo- Foggia, Italy, 7Department of Genetics, Necker Hospital, JHD accounts for 1% to 10% of the HD cases. In 80% to 90% of cases, University Paris V, Paris, France, 8Department of Hygiene, Policlinico di Bari, transmission of JHD is paternal. Patients with JHD have usually more University of Bari, Bari, Italy. than 60 CAG repeats within the IT15 gene. We report on the case of The Best disease has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance the 4th child of unrelated parents. He was seen at the age of 23 months with very highly variable expressivity. Our purpose was to determine for absence of unaided walk and delayed speech. His development the genotype-phenotype correlation in Best VMD patients with het- was considered as normal until 15 months of age, when an insufficient erozygous or homozygous mutations in the VMD2/BEST1 gene. Best weight gain was noted and motor delay appeared. Clinical examination VMD patients and relatives that presented consecutively at the Créteil showed truncal hypotonia, postural and intentional tremor, lower limbs University Eye Clinic and at the Foggia University Eye Clinic were in- rigidity and ataxia. Cerebral MRI showed cerebellar atrophy. Extensive cluded in this prospective study. They were evaluated prospectively re- chromosomal and metabolic screening was normal. Six months later, garding age, age at onset, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), fundus his father, 47 years old, was seen for a 4 years history of progres- autofluorescence (FAF), fluorescein angiography (FA), optical coher- sive dementia with severe behavioural disturbance and chorea. MRI ence tomography (OCT), electro-oculography (EOG). was normal. DNA analysis revealed a 43 CAG expansion of the IT15 All 11 exons of VMD2/BEST1 were amplified by PCR and mutation gene in the father and a very large expansion (more than 100 CAG) analysis was carried out by sequencing these PCR products. All exons in the child. This unusual case shows that very early onset JHD due were screened in all probands. We identified 9 different VMD2 muta- to large CAG expansions should be considered in case of motor skills tions (2 novel), in 7 unrelated families and 3 isolated cases (9 hetero- delay associated to cerebellar atrophy. In addition, this observation zygous, and 1 homozygous). Patients presented with various stages highlights the diagnosis pitfall of JHD in young children especially if the of the disease, from absence of clinically detectable lesions / previtel- diagnosis is not yet established in the parents. liform lesions to and-stage lesions. The patients age ranged between 3 and 75 years. Age at onset varied between 2 and 67 years. BCVA P02.056 ranged between 20/20 and 20/200. Even with the same mutation, the congenital heart defects in Kabuki syndrome age at onset and the disease progression was highly variable interfa- M. C. Panzaru, C. Rusu, M. Volosciuc, E. Braha, L. Butnariu, M. Covic; milially and intrafamilially. No association existed between the specific Medical Genetics Centre, Iasi, Romania. nature of VMD2/BEST1 mutations and expressivity, as regards age, Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a congenital mental retardation syndrome age at onset, BCVA, and stage of the disease as evaluated by FAF, with additional features, including distinctive facial features, dermato- FA, OCT (p>.05).The type of VMD2/BEST1 mutations were not as- glyphic abnormalities and short stature. Some cases associate heart sociated with the severity of the phenotype in the Best VMD patients defects. Most cases are sporadic. The underlying genetic mechanism determined. remains unknown. We have analysed the prevalence and types of congenital cardiac de- P02.054 fects in 20 children with Kabuki syndrome recorded in the files of Iasi Identification of the common NEMO rearrangement in Korean Medical Genetics Center . There were 7 girls and 13 boys, diagnosed patients with incontinentia pigmenti at a median age of 4.9 years (ranges from 0.2 to 13 years). ). The M. J. Song1, E. A. Park2, J. H. Chae3, C. S. Ki1; diagnosis was based on the presence of the characteristic features of 1Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2Ewha Womans Uni- the disorder. Cardiac defects were present in 9 children (45%) - atrial versity, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 3Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, septal defect (35%), coarctation of the aorta, aortic stenosis, bicuspid Republic of Korea. aortic valve (5%) and dextroposition (5%). The prevalence of heart de- Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a rare X-linked dominant disorder char- fects was higher in boys (53,8%) than in girls (28,5%). Complex heart acterized by highly variable abnormalities of the skin, hair, nails, teeth, defects were present only in males. In the literature aortic coarctation, eyes, and central nervous system. Mutation of NEMO/IKBKG gene in atrial septal defect and ventricular septal defect are the most frequent Xq28 is believed to play a role in pathogenesis and it occurs mostly congenital heart defects associated with Kabuki syndrome. The com- in female patients due to its fatality in male in utero. Although many parison of our data and the literature data will be presented in detail. patients have been reported worldwide, there are no genetically con- In conclusion we present a study of 20 cases with Kabuki make-up firmed patients in Korea. In the present study, we performed a genetic syndrome, 45% of them having heart defects. Cardiac defects are analysis on the NEMO gene in four Korean female patients clinically commonly associated to KS and males are more frequently and se- diagnosed with IP. All the patients had typical clinical manifestations verely affected than females. Patient’s prognosis depends on the pres- of IP including abnormal skin pigmentation, nail and dysplasia. Dele- ence/ absence of cardiac defects, renal failure and severity of mental tion of exons 4 to 10 in NEMO gene, the most common mutation in IP retardation. patients, was detected in all the patients by the long-range polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test. This method enabled us to discriminate be- P02.057 tween NEMO gene and pseudogene (ΔNEMO) rearrangement. There- Kabuki make-up syndrome in two tunisian girls with fore, a PCR-based analysis of the NEMO gene is useful to establish consanguinity and background of mental disability the definitive diagnosis of IP for a timely treatment to improve patient N. B. Abdelmoula1, I. T. Sahnoun2, R. Louati1, S. Kammoun2, T. Rebai1; prognosis. Furthermore, all the patients showed completely skewed 1Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Department of Cardiology, CHU Hedi patterns of X-inactivation, indicating cells carrying the mutant X as the Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia. pathogenicity of the disease. To the best of our knowledge, this is the Kabuki makeup syndrome (KS) is characterized by distinct facial first report of genetically confirmed cases of IP in Korea. More inves- anomalies, mental retardation, congenital heart defect (CHD), and tigations are needed to identify genotype-phenotype correlations and skeletal malformations. ethnicity-specific genetic background of IP. In the present study, we report two Tunisian girls, who fulfilled clinical criteria of KS syndrome, diagnosed in the course of our genetic testing strategy of CHD at the medical university of Sfax. Patient 1 is a 9-year-old girl who had partial atrioventricular canal defect and patient 2 is a 17-year-old girl who had double outlet rightClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  ventricle. Patient 1 had postnatal growth retardation (weight 2200 g at gasterointestinal abnormalities. We report a brother and sister with birth), general developmental delay and recurrent bronchitis. She had this condition. They are resulted from consanguineous marriage (first mild mental retardation with learning and social difficulties. She had cousin once-removed), and too suffered from bilateral cataract, retinal also, a peculiar face characterized by eversion of the lower lateral eye- detachment, high myopia, hypertelorism, bilateral epicanthic folds and lid, arched eyebrows, mild ptosis, strabismus, depressed nasal tip with bilateral sever chorioretinal pigmentary degeneration. They have also prominent nose and short nasal septum, malformed ears and abnor- epilepsy, and retardation of speech and developmental milestone. Oc- mal teeth (delayed teething at 7 years old). The patient had abnormally cipital true encephalocele was detected in two cases. short fifth digits in hands, foetal fingertip pads and deformities of the feet fingers. She had also bilateral perception deafness. Patient 2 had P02.060 postnatal growth retardation and hypotonia, short stature and learn- Laryngomalacia (Omim 150280) and congenital stridor in infants ing difficulties. She had characteristic facial features of KS syndrome A. Petrunitchev; with hair abnormalities (brittle hair) and severe skeletal malformation Saint-Petersburg medical academy of postgraduate studies, Saint-Petersburg, particularly butterfly vertebrae with scoliosis. Russian Federation. Chromosomal studies showed a normal female 46,XX pattern with no At present hundreds children with noisy breathing per year are investi- evidence of del22q11 by FISH. gated in one large hospital. The otolaryngologists proved that laryngo- There was history of consanguinity for our 2 patients with background malacia provides about 70 % of these cases. About 10 % of cases are of mental disability associated to congenital blindness or to seizures, severe and required surgical intervention. The diagnostics is based on multiple new born deaths, celiac disease, scoliosis and male infertility. revealing of peculiar endoscopic sign: inspiratory collapse of laryngeal vestibule. P02.058 It would be naive to regard all these cases as one monogenic syn- Knobloch syndrome : a cause of encephalocele and vitreo- drome. This investigation includes genetic counseling in cases of en- retinal degeneration. doscopically proved laryngomalacia (100 families). The precise history V.Drouin-Garraud1, G. Brasseur2, B.Leducq2, JL Bouin3, P.Saugier-Veber1, of stridor and all other peculiarities of patients were assessed. The T.Frébourg1; genealogical method was used. The proband’s parents underwent in- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Rouen, France, 2Department of Ophtalmol- direct laryngoscopy. ogy, Rouen, France, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Genève, Switzerland. The residual deformation of larynx looked like result of laryngomala- Knobloch syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, described cia was found in 12 proband’s mothers, 7 proband’s fathers and both in 1971 by Knobloch and Layer, characterized by vitreo-retinal degen- parents were peculiar in 3 cases (22 % at all). The anamnestic data eration, high myopia, recurrent retinal detachment, and occipital en- (transitory noisy breathing) proved these findings in just 4 cases and cephalocele. In 1996, the gene was mapped to 21q22.3, in a large were never present in adults with normal larynx. consanguineous Brazilian family (Sertie et al, 1996) and a mutation in Anamnestic and objective peculiarities of patients allowed forming two the COL8A1 gene was identified in this family, and in additional fami- groups with prevalence of neurological problems (27 %) or signs of lies (Sertie et al, 2000). connective tissue dysplasia (73 %). Twenty (91 %) of “family” cases We report here on two sibs with Knobloch syndrome. were revealed in second one. The worsening of stridor occurred in Yacine is the second child of consanguineous Algerian parents. At 4 sleep usually in “neurological” group and under exertion in another. months of age, myopia was detected. At eleven, he had bilateral retinal Conclusion: the laryngomalacia is heterogenous disorder. The genetic detachment with vitreal degeneration and chorio-retinal atrophy. Clini- counseling in cases of congenital stridor is indicated and perspective. cal examination and psychomotor development were normal. Salim, the fourth child, was born after an uneventful pregnancy with P02.061 normal birth weight. A midline occipital meningocele was noted and mitochondrial c11777A mutation in the fourth subunit of NADH confirmed by cranial resonance magnetic imaging excluding other cra- dehydrogenase encoding gene associated with Leigh-syndrome nial malformation. At 4 months, ophtalmological examination revealed A. Maasz1, P. Kisfali1, E. Kalman2, K. Hadzsiev1, K. Komlosi1, B. Melegh1; high myopia and at 3 years he had amblyopia of the right eye and 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pecs, vitreo-retinal degeneration. He had delayed language skills but normal Pecs, Hungary, 2Department of Pathology, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary. neuropsychological evaluation. Leigh-syndrome as a subacute necrotizing encephalopathy has exten- The two sibs were homozygous for COL18A1 gene region microsatel- sive genetic heterogeneity including mitochondrial DNA alterations that lite analysis. Screening of the exons 3, 21, 23, 35, 38 and 42 of the have been described previously in the background of the disease. COL18A1 gene has shown an homozygous duplication in the exon 23 A 17-month-old male proband reported here was born with appropriate : c.2118dupC. parameters at term. At the age of 5 days myoclonus were observed. These cases are illustrating the clinical variability of the phenotype in West syndrome was diagnosed and treated with antiepileptic drug at Knobloch syndrome. the age of 11 months. Soon after, T-weighted MRI of the patients de- 2 picted increased signal intensity within the mesenchephalon and the P02.059 medulla oblongata; moderate frontal atrophy and ventricular dilatations Report of Knobloch-Layer (1971)-detached retina; encephalocele were also discovered. Besides, elevated lactate levels were detected (autosomal recessive) from iranian families in the cerebrospinal fluid. Suddenly, he died from cardiorespiratory ar- N. Almadani1,2, A. Kariminejad2, S. Amirsalari3, M. H. Dehghan4, M. H. Karim- rest at the age of 17 months. inejad2; Postmortem analyses of the respiratory chain enzyme in the skeletal 1Genetic Department, Reproductive Medicine Research Center, Royan In- muscle revealed a defect in the complex I activity, associated with C→ stitute, ACECR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad-Najmabadi A transversion in heteroplasmic form at the 11777 position of the mi- Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, tochondrial DNA causing Arg→Ser amino acid change that affects the 3Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Baqyiatallah University of Medi- fourth subunit of the NADH dehydrogenase enzyme encoding gene cal Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Ophtalmologic Department, (MTND4). Labafinejad Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, This case represents the first report of a mitochondrial mutation as- Islamic Republic of Iran. sociated with Leigh-syndrome in Hungarians, to our knowledge, this Knobloch syndrome (KS) in an autosomal recessive disorder defined mutation was described in two Japanese and in one Italian patients by the occurrence of high myopia, viteroretinal degeneration with reti- with phenotypic variations in correlation with complex I deficiency and nal detachment, macular abnormalities and occipital encephalocele. Leigh-disease. In our case, earlier onset of the symptoms and the ag- Knobloch syndrome caused by mutations in the COL18A1. Clinical gressive outcome of the disease are highly indicative of the pathoge- variability is present in the manifestation of this syndrome, but ocu- nicity and the clinical importance of C11777A mitochondrial mutation in lar abnormalitied are sever, progressive and irreversible, leading to the development of Leigh-syndrome. bilateral blindness. Scalp defect or occipital encephalocele is also a major clinical feature. Other minor clinical abmormalities are: lens sub- luxation, cardiovascular anomalies, joint hyperlaxity, genitourinary andClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.062 ness of the lower limbs and pyramidal signs. Oligoclonal bands were Leucoencephalopathy with megalencephaly, spongy present in the cerebrospinal fluid, and magnetic resonance imaging degeneration and 17p deletion: A new disease? (MRI) revealed white matter lesions characteristic of multiple sclerosis A. Verloes, A. C. Tabet, M. Schiff, S. Drunat, S. Passemard, F. Chalard, A. (MS). DNA sample was isolated from peripheral venous blood. The Aboura; patient tested for the three pathogenic mtDNA LHON point mutations: Robert debré, Bd Sérurrier, France. G11778A, G3460A, T14484C and G15257A by means of PCR and This second child from non consanguineous parents was born at term successive analysis of restriction with specific enzymes. Mutations by cesarean section for unexplained hydramnios. Birth parameters were confirmed by direct sequencing.The patient was homoplasmic were at -1 SD. After minor neonatal feeding difficulties, she was inves- for the T14484C LHON mutation and heteroplasmic for the G15257A. tigated at 3 years of age for moderate and non progressive psychomo- The coexistence of multiple sclerosis and Leber’s hereditary optic neu- tor retardation (with mainly speech delay) and dysmorphic features. ropathy (Harding’s syndrome) is known to occur more often than would Clinical findings included macrocephaly (head circumference +3 SD), be expected by chance; therefore, screening for Leber’s mutations in contrasting with growth delay (weight -1 SD, height -2 SD), wide fore- multiple sclerosis patients should be considered because this has im- head, small nose and coarse facial features. There was no hepato- portant prognostic and genetic implications. splenomegaly, no joints contractures and no signs of peripheral neu- ropathy. Basic biological findings were normal. Brain MRI disclosed P02.065 bilateral and symmetric leucoencephalopathy with triventricular dila- malignant vascular phenotypes in Loeys-Dietz syndromes tion, micro cysts in periventricular white matter and corpus callosum associated with mutations in the tGFBR1 and tGFBR2 genes and Chiari type 1 malformation. . Activities of hexosaminidases A and M. Grasso1, N. Marziliano1, E. Disabella1, M. Pasotti1, A. Serio1, V. Favalli1, F. B measured in leukocytes were normal, excluding GM2 gangliosido- Gambarin1, A. Brega2, H. C. Dietz3, E. Arbustini1; sis. CGH-array (Agilent 44K) revealed a large (2 Mb) subtelomeric 1Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, PAVIA, Italy, 2University of Milan, deletion of the 17p region between nt 48539 and nt 2104702, thus Milano, Italy, 3The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD, United from RPH3AL (rabphilin 3A-like, without C2 domains) to SMG6 (non- States. sense mediated mRNA decay factor). The deletion encompassed 38 Mutations of Transforming Growth Factor beta Receptor 1 (TGFBR1) genes, none of which known to be involved in leucoencephalopathy. and Receptor 2 (TGFBR2) genes cause Loeys-Dietz syndromes The aspartoacylase gene (Canavan) is located centromeric to the de- (LDS). Based on the presence or absence of cranio-facial traits the letion. Although the deletion could be coincidental with the cerebral syndromes are classified as LDS1 and LDS2, respectively. phenotype, our patient show («07») ’s presentation suggests that the The probands of 33 families were referred to our attention for sus- 17pter region may contain a second locus for leucoencephalopathy pected Marfan Syndrome (n=26), EDS-IV (n=1) and Thoracic Aortic with spongy degeneration. Inheritance could be dominant or recessive Aneurysm and Dissection (TAAD) (n=6) and found to carry TGFBR1 (with haploinsufficency by deletion for one allele, and loss-of-function and TGFBR2 mutations. Probands and relatives underwent genetic point mutation for the second allele). counselling, multidisciplinary clinical and imaging evaluations and mo- lecular analysis. Of the 33 probands, 24 were diagnosed with LDS1 P02.063 (18 de novo) and 9 with LDS2 (1 de novo). Of 62 mutated family mem- investigations of LHON in iranian Patients bers, 41 carried TGFBR2 and 21 TGFBR1 mutations; 34 were in LDS1 M. Jamali Hendri, M. Houshmand; and 28 in LDS2 families. LDSs shared aortic aneurysm (88% and Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 86%), dissection (23% and 36%), arterial tortuosity (100%) and, at a Leber’s Hereditary Optic Neuropathy is a rare condition which can minor rate, aneurysms of other arteries (48% and 26%). The mean age cause loss of central vision. It usually affects men. The time when at first diagnosis was 17±17 vs. 38±16 (p<0.0001) and at first aortic someone is losing their eyesight is often called the ‘acute’ period. Af- surgery was 23±15 vs. 43±15 (p<0.0012) in LDS1 and LDS2, respec- ter a few more weeks, the eyesight stops deteriorating. Although that tively. During 59±68 months of follow-up, there were 40 dissection-re- course describes the most common pattern for Leber’s, onset can be lated surgeries in 19 patients and 11 elective surgeries in 10 patients. sudden or take place over a period of years. Not everyone in a family Eight patients, first diagnosed at the time of dissection, died at surgery affected by Leber’s will lose their eyesight, and we do not yet know and one died of cerebral haemorrhage one year after elective surgery. how to tell who will get symptoms. Men cannot pass on Leber’s He- None of the non-dissected patients died. reditary Optic Neuropathy to their children. Leber’s Hereditary Optic LDS1 and LDS2 are malignant diseases affecting cardiovascular sys- Neuropathy is linked to a number of genes, all within mitochondrial tem with high rate of aortic dissection in un-recognised patients. Only DNA (mtDNA). We believe that the particdular gene changes linked to timely diagnosis prevents catastrophic events. Leber’s Hereditary Optic Neuropathy lower the amount of energy avail- able to the cells of the optic nerve and retina. These cells are damaged P02.066 and may even die because of this lack of energy. 50 were analysed for marfan syndrome with extreme cardiovascular complications in mtDNA mutations by PCR, sequencing and RFLP methods for mito- a patient with mutations in both FBN and TGFBR chondrial genome. 15 cases had a G11788A mutation, 10 cases had L. E. van der Kolk1, B. J. M. Mulder1, M. L. Sminia1, G. Pals2, I. M. van Lan- mutation G3460A and 2 patients had mutation T14484C, and no muta- gen1; tions were detected in the remainder. 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Free University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. P02.064 Introduction: Marfan syndrome (MFS) is caused by mutations in the Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy and multiple sclerosis: fibrillin-1(FBN1) gene. Recently, mutations in the TGFBR2 gene were Harding‘s syndrome found to cause Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS), MFS and familiar aortic A. La Russa1, P. Valentino2, V. Andreoli1, F. Trecroci1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, P. dissections. Mutations in TGFBR2 are often associated with aggres- Spadafora1, R. Cittadella1; sive vascular pathology including arterial tortuosity and early dissec- 1Institute of Neurological Science, National Research Council, Cosenza, Co- tions. senza, Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University “Magna Graecia,, Catanzaro, Case report: We describe a 39-year old male who was diagnosed with Italy. MFS at age 13. At that time, he had a dilated aortic root and character- The optic neuropathy Leber’s hereditary, usually affects men between istic skeletal and facial features. The parents and sister were healthy. 20 and 30 years, although the disease can begin at any age, more At age 20, he underwent aortic root replacement, followed by surgery rarely in women. The syndrome of Leber’s due to mitochondrial DNA of the complete aorta in the years thereafter. In addition, aneurysms alterations (maternal mitochondrial inheritance). However, it is not and dissections of multiple other arteries were found. DNA-analysis possible to predict who may be affected even within the same family of the FBN1 gene identified a pathogenic mutation (c.5952T>A). Be- considered “healthy carrier”. Was found that in Caucasian populations cause of the severe vascular pathology, mutation analysis of TGFBR2 mutations of nucleotides 3460, 11778 and 14484 of the mitochondrial was performed as well revealing a known and probably pathogenic DNA are present in 95% of cases of Leber’s syndrome. We describe a missense mutation (c.1159G>A). 33 year old man came to our medical attention complaining of weak- Discussion: This is the first reported patient that carries pathogenicClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  mutations in FBN1 and TGFBR2. The patient fulfils the clinical crite- P02.069 ria for MFS, but has extremely severe cardiovascular complications, A new entity: Report on two siblings with mental retardation worse than observed in patients with TGFBR2 mutations only. Thus, A. Aykut, O. Cogulu, B. Durmaz, F. Ozkinay; the molecular findings match the clinical features. In vitro studies in- Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. vestigating these two mutations and their interactions are pending, Two siblings, 17-year-old female and 13-year-old male, born to con- possibly providing a rationale for the choice of future medical treat- sanguineous parents, were referred to the department of genetics be- ment in this patient. cause of having short stature, motor-mental retardation and complete Conclusion: In selected patients with features of MFS as well as fea- absence of speech. On physical examination, both siblings had short tures suggestive of TGFBR2 mutations, DNA-analysis should include stature, a prominent and hairy forehead, thick eyebrows, synophrys, FBN1 and TGFBR2. acneiform scars on their faces, short and webbed neck, short hands and feet were present. Laboratory data including urine amino acid P02.067 chromatography was normal, methylmalonicacid and dinitrophenyl- Neuhauser syndrome with novel findings: A case report of a rare hydrazine, serum IGF-1 and IGF-BP3 levels were normal. Abdominal disorder ultrasound was normal except mild splenomegaly. Skeletal survey was M. Seven1,2, E. Yosunkaya1,2, S. Yilmaz1,2, K. Ender1,2, G. S. Güven1,2, A. Yuk- normal except coxa valga. Cranial MRI and echocardiography were sel1,2; not indicative for an abnormality. Cultured fibroblasts showed normal 1Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genet- neuraminidase, beta hexozaminidase, beta galaktosidase activity. ics, Istanbul, Turkey. Enzymatic analyses of leucocytes a-iduronidase, β -glucuronidase, Neuhaser Syndrome (Megalocornea-Mental Retardation) is a rare dis- β-galactosidase, α -fucosidase, α-mannosidase, N-asetil glucosa- order associated with major findings of hypotonia, mental retardation, minidase, glucosamine N-asetil transferase showed normal activity. poor coordination, and megalocornea. Sialotransferrin pattern was normal and cases were not compatible A 5 1/2 year -old-male patient referred to our department for atypical with carbonhydrate deficient glycoprotein syndrome. Karyotypes were facies and autism disorder. He had operations for congenital glauco- normal. The siblings were not compatible with any identifiable genetic ma and cryptorchidism at 2 and 4 years old, respectively. He was se- syndrome, and they could be an example of a new clinical picture. verely mentally retarded. He had yellowish white hair, frontal bossing, downslanting palpebral fissures, strabismus, megalocornea, epican- P02.070 thal folds, anteverted nares, thin upper lip, narrow palate, low-set ears Etiology of Mental Retardation in Brazil: The first 200 with hypoplastic helixes. He also had long fingers, pectus carinatus, instituonalized patients widely spaced nipples, scoliosis, kyphosis, sacral dimple, pes plan- J. M. Pina-Neto, L. M. Batista, L. Mazzucatto, D. D. Ribeiro, A. C. Silva; ovarus. Reduced deep tendon reflexes, ataxic walking and hypotonis- School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. ity were evident on neurological examination. Cranial MRI revealed We have studied 200 mentally retarded (MR) patients from two Brazil- arachnoid cyst of posterior fossa, subependimal nodular heterotopies, ians centers; 6% had mild , 48.5% moderate , and 37.5% severe MR. and left venous angioma. Abdominal ultrasonography, blood amino- There were 114 male (57%) and 86 female(43%). Their ages varied acides, urine organic acides, hearing examination were normal. Trans- from 6 month to 69 years, included 55.5% 0-15 years old, 42% 16 to illumination defect of iris, retinal hypopigmentation, megalocornea ( 60 years old and, 2.5% > 60 years old. right: 13 mm, left: 11 mm) and operated congenital glaucoma were It was impossible to perform the etiological diagnosis in 42 patients apparent on eye examination. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a normal (21%); the environmental causes were established in 85 patients male karyotype with 46,XY. The examination findings clinically con- (42.5%); genetic diseases were diagnosed in 64 patients (32%). Chro- firmed the diagnosis of Neuhauser syndrome. mosomal anomalies were detected in 28 patients (14%), including 24 In conclusion, we report a case of Neuhauser syndrome with novel cases of Down syndrome (12%) and 4 structural chromosomal anoma- findings of ventricular nodular heterotopia, congenital glaucoma, reti- lies. Genic abnormalities were detected in 29 patients (14.5%) with 6% nal hypopigmentation, and albinismus-like appearance, which devel- (12 patients) presenting autosomal recessive , 0.5% ( 1 patient) with oped during the course of the disease. autosomal dominant , 1%( 2 patients) with X-linked diseases , one of them (0.5%) affected by fragile X syndrome ; 1 patient (0.5%) with P02.068 imprint defect (Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome); and, we detected 13 Genomic aberrations in relation to unexplained mental families (6.5%) with pure mental retardation. We detected 8 patients retardation in Estonian patients (4%) of isolated CNS primary malformations and, 6 cases (3%) of in- K. Männik1, O. Žilina1, S. Parkel1, P. Palta1, H. Puusepp1,2, A. Veidenberg1, K. born errors of metabolism ( 4 cases of phenilketonuria). The environ- Õunap2,3, A. Kurg1; mental causes (42 cases=21%) were: 33 patients (16.5%) with MR 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, due to isquemic-hypoxic perinatal accident; 28 patients (14%) MR due 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of to complications of prematurity; 11 patients (5.5%) MR due to prenatal Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. infections and, 7 patients (3.5%) MR due to postnatal infections; and, Mental retardation (MR) affects 1-3% of population. This heteroge- 5 patients (2.5%) MR due to Fetal Alcohol syndrome. neous disorder is caused by genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors solely or in their combination. Despite extensive investigations, P02.071 the underlying reason(s) remain unknown in approximately half of the the clinical importance of the variability of tRNALys and its MR patients and molecular basis of the pathogenesis is still poorly neighbouring mtDNA sequence understood. M. Molnar, K. Pentelenyi, V. Remenyi, Z. Pal, B. Bereznai, A. Gal; In order to find out causative factors in Estonian patients with idiopath- Clinical and Research Centre for Molecular Neurology, Semmelweis University, ic MR and to help to shed light on underlying molecular mechanisms, Budapest, Hungary. we have collected a cohort of 250 unexplained MR patients and unaf- Background: The mtDNA has a big variety, this proves the pathophysi- fected members from 90 families. ologically importance of the mtDNA-alterations. Pathogenic mtDNA To screen genomic aberrations potentially related to the clinical pheno- mutations are frequently found in tRNA coding regions of the mitochon- type we have applied Infinium Human370CNV SNP-arrays. drial genome. The tRNALeu gene is one of the hot-spots of the mtDNA. In 14 out of 76 (18%) families analysed to date we have found aberra- Many pathogenic mutations have been reported in tRNALys too. tions with putative clinical significance, ranging in size from 0.5 to 8.3 Design/Methods: The most common mtDNA mutations were investi- Mb. These either affirm recently described microdeletion (like 15q13, gated in 470 patients, presumably with mitochondrial disease and in 17q21.3) or microduplication (for example 7q11.23) syndromes or are 100 controls with PCR-RFLP methods in the region of tRNALys and the less characterized regions with potential clinical significance. intergenic region of COII and tRNALys genes. In patients, whose restric- More detailed characterization of these genomic regions as well as tion patterns differed from the normal, bidirectional sequencing of this investigation how these imbalances influence expression in relations region was performed. to etiology of MR is currently our main interest. Results: The A8344G mutation was found in 8 cases. In one fam- ily (5 people) heteroplasmic substitutions T8312A and T8313G wereClinical genetics and Dysmorphology 0 present. A heteroplasmic A8332G substitution was present in anoth- in previously described family. Although molecular diagnosis of the er family, and a homoplasmic A8347C substitution in 19 cases. We syndrome has been elucidated, the reason for intrafamilial differences have demonstrated 5 polymorphisms and anthropologically markers is still to be evaluated. (G8251A (n=19); G8269A (n=1); C8270T (n=4); G8292A (n=8); and a 9bp deletion (n=4). The 9bp deletion at the nt. 8271-8280 is an an- P02.074 thropologically marker of East-Asian origin. The substitution C8270T Use of mLPA technique for the diagnosis of particular coexisted with this 9bp deletion in all cases. chromosomal abnormalities - clinical and genetic study of a Conclusion: We proved the enormous variability of the mt tRNALys and case the hypervariable non-coding region between COII and tRNALys. The I. M. Ivanov1, C. Rusu2, V. Gorduza2, R. Popescu2, M. Covic2; clinical symptoms developed as the result of one or more SNPs, or the 1Immunology and Genetics Laboratory-St Spiridon Hospital-Iasi, Romania, iasi, synergistic effect of its combinations. On the basis of our investiga- Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr.T.Popa”, Iasi, Romania, tions we suggest to start the screen for pathogenic mtDNA mutations iasi, Romania. in tRNALys and tRNALeu genes. We present a case with multiple birth defects associated with mental retardation due to an abnormal karyotype in order to discuss the im- P02.072 portance of MLPA in guiding the diagnosis. metachromatic leukodystrophy, clinical course and molecular Anamnestic data show that the infant is the only child of a young, un- findings; A case report of an Iranian patient related, apparently healthy couple. She was born after an uneventful M. Akbarpour1,2, M. Houshmand1; pregnancy, naturally, at 36 weeks, birth weight 2800g, height 48 cm, 1Genetic Department of Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of APGAR 8. Postnatal development evolved with severe failure to thrive Iran, 2Reproductive Medicine and Cell Science Research Center, Royan Insti- and developmental delay. tute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Clinical examination of the child (1 year old) revealed: dysmorphic face Metachromatic leukodystrophy or MLD is a rare autosomal recessive (tall forehead, short palpebral fissures, deep set eyes, large mouth, disorder of impaired breakdown of sulfatides that occur throughout the large ears), short neck with excess of skin, skeletal abnormalities (con- body, but are found in greatest abundance in nervous tissue, kidneys, genital hip dysplasia, bilateral talus valgus, arthrogryposis), hypotonia and testes. The three clinical subtypes of MLD include late-infantile and severe developmental delay. MLD, comprising 50-60% of cases; juvenile MLD, comprising about Investigations: Echocardiography: patent ductus arteriosus, atrial 20-30%; and adult MLD, comprising about 15-20%. Age of onset within septal defect; Neurological exam: generalized muscle hypotonia, ar- a family is usually similar. All individuals eventually lose motor and in- throgryposis; Ophthalmologic exam: normal; Karyotype: 46 XX, add tellectual functions. The disease course may be from three to ten or (9)(p24); Karyotype of the parents: normal; MLPA test (with P036C and more years in the late infantile-onset form and up to 20 years or more P070 Mental Retardation Telomere Kit): triple dosage of probe DMRT1 in the juvenile- and adult-onset forms. Death most commonly results from subtelomeric zone 9p (9p24.3). Add (9)(p24) is in fact dup9p. from pneumonia or other infection. Comparison of the clinical features present in our patient and those ARSA is the only gene associated with arylsulfatase A deficiency. MLD in the literature for dup9p will be provided.In conclusion, we present is suggested by arylsulfatase A enzyme activity in leukocytes that is a case with a particular chromosomal abnormality in order to illustrate less than 10% of normal controls using the Baum type assay. The a rare disorder and to discuss the use of MLPA in the identification of ARSA gene which is located on chromosome 22q13, consists of eight chromosomal abnormalities. exons encoding the 507 amino acid enzyme. Over 90 largely missense mutations and polymorphisms have been identified in the ARSA gene. P02.075 The majority of mutations identified in patients with MLD are unique Finding genetic causes of unexplainded psychomotor within individual families. retardation cases. The identity of the mutation was confirmed by amplifying all eight ex- B. Hernández-Charro1, P. Armero1, C. Maqueda1, R. Marin2, G. Gutierrez-Agui- ons by polymeras chain reaction which was followed by direct DNA lar3, M. C. Aragón3, P. Madero1; sequencing. The individual described in our study showed a homozy- 1Centro de Análisis Genéticos, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Unidad de Genética. Hospital gous known missense mutation at c.1173C>G (p.T391S) in exon 7. Puerta del Mar, Cádiz, Spain, 3Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital de Jerez de la Frontera, Jerez, Spain. P02.073 Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) is being rou- Variable expression of the features of cOFs syndrome in two tine used to detect subtelomeric alterations in patients with idiopathic sibs mental retardation and other clinical features. FISH analysis, using E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Kocova, S. Spasevska, N. Angelkova; telomere specific probes, is performed to confirm the aberrations iden- Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. tified by MLPA. Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal (COFS) syndrome is characterized by Here we present a family with three sons, two of them showing psy- severe microcephaly, microphtalmia, blepharophymosis, artrogrypho- chomotor retardation and language difficulty, but no dismorphic fea- sis and characteristic dysmorphic face. It is a autosomal recessive de- tures. Parents were non consanguineous and healthy. In all of them, generative disorder with prenatal onset. Although the syndrome has kariotype was normal, at 550 level banding GTG. We performed MLPA been described thirty years ago, its molecular basis has been recently analysis in order to detect possible subtelomeric rearrangements, and described. Defective DNA repair and homozygous mutation in the confirmed our results by FISH. ERCC6 gene underlies its pathogenesis. MLPA analysis were performed using the SALSA P069 Human Telo- We report on a family of unrelated parents who had two boys with mere containing one probe for each subtelomeric region from chro- variable expression of COFS syndrome. Both pregnancies were un- mosome 1-22 and the two X/Y pseudoautosomal regions (MRC Hol- remarkable, though reduced fetal growth has been noted. After the land, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Fluorescence in situ hybridization delivery both babies serious problems for adapting to the extra uterine (FISH) with subtelomeric probes (QBiogene) were carried out. life. Severity of the main signs of the syndrome was variable. Both MLPA analysis showed evidence of a deletion in the terminal region of had microcephaly under 3rd percentile. Facial dysmorphism included chromosome 3p (probe CHL1 gene in 3p26) and a duplication in the blepharophymosis, wide and nasal root, prominent philtrum, microgna- subtelomeric region 8q (probe KIAA0150 gene in 8.q24.3) in the two tia, large and soft ears. The first sib had more evident microphtalmia affected sons, and normal results in the other family members. FISH especially of the left eye. This sib also had diastasis m. recti abdominis. using probes 3pter (D3S4558) and 8qter (D8S595) confirmed the im- Joint stiffness was present only in small joints of the hands and feet. balanced subtelomeric rearrangements detected by MLPA in the af- The other sib had severely affected extremities with artrhrogryphisis in fected sons and a balanced reciprocally translocation between 3p arm all joints. Ultrasonographic evaluation has been made in both of them, and 8q arm in the father. Mother and unaffected son were normal. and MRI has been performed in the second, showing corpus callosum This study confirms that the combination of MLPA analysis and FISH agenesis, cerebellar hypoplasia, reduced white matter of the brain. allows to resolve cases, where the genetic causes of the clinical fea- There are many reports of families with affected sibs having COFS tures would otherwise remain unexplained. syndrome. The present clinical signs of the sibs were variable, as areClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.076 P02.078 study of D2 dopamine receptor (DRD2) gene expression, in severe congenital cyphoscoliosis associated with multiple morphine-sensitized mice in the absence and presence of Licl congenital anomalies in an adolescent boy H. Mehregan1, M. Sadeghizadeh1, M. Zarrindast2, K. Azadmanesh3, A. Jahan- G. Doros1, M. Gafencu1, A. Popoiu1, B. Zoica1, M. Popoiu1, M. Marusteri2, G. shahi4; Miclaus2; 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Tarbiat Modares Univer- 1University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2Neuromed Clinic, sity, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Pharmacology, School of Timisoara, Romania. Medicine, Tehran Uuniversity of Medical science, tehran, Islamic Republic of Aim: To present a 17 yo boy, with multiple malformations admitted for Iran, 3Hepatitis and AIDS Dept., Pasteur Institute of Iran, tehran, Islamic Re- an accurate treatment. public of Iran, 4Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modares Matherial and methods: The patient was diagnosed at birth with con- University, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. genital cyphoscoliosis, Fallot tetralogy, pulmonary atresia, single kid- One of the consequences of repeated morphine administration is sen- ney and sindactily of the left hand. His teeths, developed anarchic. At sitization in which the intermittent exposure to a fixed dose of drug the age of 7 was operated for a Blalock Taussing shunt. He has 19.5 results in a greatly enhanced behavioral response to further morphine Kg, 132 cm, generalized muscular hypotonia and hypothrophia, cya- administration. The neurotransmitter, dopamine, is involved in several nosis, congenital severe thoraco-lumbar sinistro-concave cyphoscolio- functions of the brain. Of all the five DRDs, D2 receptor has maximal sis, secondary sterno-condral asymmetry, apex located in left axillae, affinity for dopamine; there is a growing evidence for the role of D2 gr. III/6 continous thoracic murmur, and is extremely clever. Laboratory receptor in different aspects of addiction tests revealed poliglobuly and slightly elevated liver enzymes. He per- In this study, the expression level of dopamine D2 long (D2L) and D2 formed a lot of paraclinic investigations. short (D2S) isoforms of D2 receptor in morphine-sensitized mice were Results: The cardiac examination mentioned also: MAPCA, anomalies investigated in the absence and presence of LiCl (5 and 10 mg/kg). of the aortic arch and gr. II aortic insuficiency. Neurologicaly was found Morphine sensitization was induced by once daily injection of mor- generalized muscular dystrophy. Abdominal ultrasound developed two phine (30 mg/kg) for 3 days, followed by 5 days wash-out. Using rela- hepatric tumors, one left kidney and multiple vascular anomalies. Sur- tive Real-Time PCR, D2L and D2S expression were examined in the gical exam described a Marfan fenotipe. Thorax Angio CT confirmed brain regions including striatum, PFC and hippocampus. We found aortic arch anomalies, Lusoria artery and multiple arterial connections that morphine treatment leads to a significant increase in D2S level in to the lungs. Abdominal MRI developed three hepatic tumors, one he- the striatum and PFC but has no effect on D2L level in the examined patic nodular fibrosis and two small hepatic hemangioma. The patient regions. While administration of LiCl 5mg/kg along with morphine does is in chronic heart failure treatment with Digoxin, antiagregant therapy not alter D2L and D2S isoforms, LiCl 10 mg/kg treatment results in a and vitamins for the liver. He is suspected of hemangioendothelioma . markedly increase in D2S but not D2L expression level in the striatum Conclusions: Because of his poor clinical condition, severe column cy- and PFC of sensitized mice. The result indicates that morphine sensi- phoscoliosis and multiple associated malformations, the patient was tization leads to an increase in presynaptic D2S receptor expression temporized for the final surgical cardiac repair. His column needs sur- level and is affected by lithium in a dose-dependent manner with low gical stabilization. The hepatic tumors needs fine needle biopsy. We dose to inhibit and higher dose to enhance the effect. have to decide the priorities in treatment for a psedo-normal life. P02.077 P02.079 mucopolysaccharidosis type iH - A case report mURcs Association With situs inversus totalis: A case Report E. Kiss1, C. Duicu1, C. Banescu2, V. Bodescu1, I. Pascanu2, K. Csep2; U. Çetinçelik1, C. Sayar2; 1Pediatric Department, Univeristy of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg Mures, Ro- 1Sisli Etfal Training & Research Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Zeynep Kamil Gyne- mania, 2Genetic Department, Univeristy of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg Mures, cologic and Pediatric Training and Research Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey. Romania. MURCS association is a rare, developmental disorder which involves Mucopolysaccharidosis Type IH (OMIM #607014) or Hurler Syndrome the Mullarian duct, the kidneys and the cervicothoracic spine. It is a is the most common disorder of the group of seven mucopolysaccha- sporadic disorder with unknown etiology. The prevalence is 1/50000 ride storage disorders. MPS IH is inherited in an autosomal reces- female. Occasionally, it may be accompanied by abnormalities involv- sive manner. The estimated incidence is approximately 1:100,000 ing various other organs or systems. A 24 year old woman came to newborns. MPS IH is caused by mutation in the gene encoding α- our clinic suffering from primary amenohrrea, then she was diagnosed L-iduronidase. Deficiency of α-L-iduronidase conduct to progressive MURCS association. accumulation of undegraded glycosmaminoglycans in all bodily tis- Röntgenograms showed thoracolumbar vertebral defects-scoliosis sues. Our proband is a 5 years old male, the only child of an unrelated and abdominal MRI revealed pelvic renal ectopy, the absence of the couple who was addmited in our clinic for severe respiratory distress. uterus and also the upper part (2/3) of the vagina. MRI revealed also A comprehensive medical evaluation was made: prenatal and birth his- presented situs inversus totalis which is a very rare anatomic condi- tory, physical, neurologic and genetic examinations, biologic and imag- tion. Her karyotype was normal 46,XX. This is the first report of situs istic evaluations (cardiac and abdominal ultrasonography, chest, hand inversus totalis in a case of MURCS association. and skull X-ray). By clinical examination we noticed: mental and motor development retardation, gibbus deformity, claw hand deformity, short P02.080 stature, coarse facies, large head, proeminent forehead, hypertricho- two cases of myhre syndrome with retinopathy: further sis, corneal clouding, hepatosplenomegaly, abdominal enlargement, delineation of the phenotype inguinal hernia, wheezing. His past medical history revealed recurrent S. Whalen1, A. Afenjar1, D. Doummar2, N. Dorison2, S. Chantot-Bastaraud3, B. ear and respiratory infections. Positive diagnosis was based on as- Keren1, D. Héron1; sociation of clinical signs, imagistic evaluation and enzyme deficiency 1Dpt de Génétique Cytogénétique et Embryologie, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, testing- which demonstrated absent α-L-iduronidase activity in plasma. Paris, France, 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, Unfortunately his parents refused enzyme replacement therapy (Al- 3Service de Génétique et d’Embryologie médicales, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, durazyme®) in spite of his poor condition, knowing it’s evolution and France. prognosis. Proper genetic counselling was offered. Prognosis of our Myhre syndrome is characterised by facial dysmorphism, short stat- case is linked to the respiratory and cardiovascular complications. In ure, joint limitations, brachydactyly, muscle hypertrophy, hearing loss conclusion,we present a case of MPS IH in order to illustrate this rare and mental retardation. Specific radiological findings include thickened genetic disorder but also to discuss the positive diagnosis, the man- calvarium, hypoplastic iliac wings, broad ribs, and abnormal vertebrae. agement and the genetic counseling. No genetic basis has been identified. We report two unrelated patients with Myhre syndrome, who both had retinopathy, undescribed up to date. Patient 1, a 13 year old male, presented with typical dysmorphism, lan- guage delay, learning difficulties, obesity, precocious puberty, brachy- dactyly, athletic build, joint limitations, and thick skin. Height was nor-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  mal with advanced bone age. Mild unilateral transmission hearing loss P02.082 was detected. Strabismus was noted and electroretinogram showed Severe combined immunodeficiency, microcephaly and failure to macular retinopathy. thrive. A chromosomal breakage syndrome with mutations in the Patient 2, a 10 year old female, presented similar clinical features as NHEJ gene patient 1 leading to a diagnosis of Myhre syndrome. She had intra uter- G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, H. Neitzel2, V. Dutrannoy2, K. Konrad2, R. Varon2; ine growth retardation and then showed normal stature with advanced 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, bone age. She presented mild transmission hearing loss. Unilateral Charité, Berlin, Germany. cataract was diagnosed at 6 months. Severe myopia was noted and Recently mutations in the NHEJ (nonhomologous end-joining factor) electroretinogram showed macular retinopathy. gene have been described (Ahnesorg et al., 2006; Buck et al., 2006) Karyotype banding, subtelomeric analysis, and metabolic screening causative for a new chromosomal breakage syndrome characterized were normal, and CGH array analysis is underway for both patients. by severe combined immunodeficiency, microcephaly, developmental Description of retinopathy in our patients suggests that electroretino- delay and subtle facial dysmorphism. gram should be systematically undertaken in Myhre patients, in order Here we present the clinical, cellular and molecular findings in a Turk- to confirm this new feature. ish boy, first son of consanguineous parents. At term, he showed low At this time, the main differential diagnoses of Myhre syndrome are birth measurements [weight 2290g (-4.2 SD), length 49 cm (-2 SD), mainly bone disorders (such as geleophysic and acromicric dysplasia). OFC 32 cm (-4 SD). He developed respiratory infections and a severe However, the association of bone, muscular, auditory and retinal in- autoimmune anemia. At age 13 months he had a weight of 5200g (-3.3 volvement could suggest that a metabolic disorder, such as mitochon- SD), height: 64 cm (-2.8 SD) and OFC: 38,5 cm (-5,3 SD). Motor and drial dysfunction, could be responsible for Myhre syndrome. mental developmental development was nearly normal. At the age of 4 months a tentative clinical diagnosis of Nijmegen breakage syndrome P02.081 was made. Chromosomal breakage analysis revealed a high rate of Pancreatic hypoplasia presenting with neonatal diabetes chromosomal breakage and extremely high levels of damage after ir- mellitus in association with congenital heart disease and radiation. Molecular testing showed a known homozygous mutation developmental delay (R178X) in exon 5 of the NHEJ gene. M. Balasubramanian1, J. P. H. Shield2,3, C. Acerini4,5, S. Ellard6, J. Walker7, J. We describe the clinical, cellular and molecular findings of this new Crolla8, D. J. G. Mackay9,10, I. K. Temple11,12; autosomal recessive chromosome breakage syndrome with respect 1Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, to the literature. Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Department of Child Health, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3University of Bristol, United Kingdom, P02.083 4Department Of Paediatrics, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United King- Broad first digits, facial and oral anomalies, and developmental dom, 5University Of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Institute of Biomedical and delay in a three-generation family: A Novel syndrome? Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 7Depart- E. Lisi1, V. Mardo1, A. Hata2, D. Riegert-Johnson1, S. A. Boyadjiev2; ment of Paediatrics, St Mary’s Hospital, Portsmouth, United Kingdom, 8Wessex 1McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury, Baltimore, MD, United States, 2Section of Genetics, University of California United Kingdom, 9Division of Human Genetics, University of Southampton, Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States. Southampton, United Kingdom, 10Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salis- A characteristic combination of facial, oral, and digital anomalies was bury NHS Foundation Trust, Salsibury, United Kingdom, 11Academic Unit Of observed in a three-generation Caucasian family, with a segregation Genetic Medicine, Division of Human Genetics, University Of Southampton, pattern suggestive of an autosomal dominant inheritance. The facial Southampton, United Kingdom, 12Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess dysmorphism included prominent forehead, almond shaped eyes with Anne Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom. upslanting palpebral fissures and medial epicanthal folds, broad na- Congenital pancreatic hypoplasia is a rare cause of neonatal diabetes. sal bridge, thin upper lip, and posteriorly rotated ears. Observed oral We report a case series with pancreatic agenesis and congenital heart anomalies included high arched palate, torus palatinus and midline disease. Case (1) was born prematurely at 34+2 weeks gestation and groove of the lower lip. All affected family members had broad thumbs developed hyperglycemia within the first 12 hours of life requiring in- and great toes, speech delay, and mild mental retardation. Seizures, sulin. She also has exocrine pancreatic insufficiency needing supple- macrocephaly, abnormal brain MRI, somatic overgrowth, congenital mentation. Cardiac imaging revealed ventricular septal defect, patent heart defects (VSD with coarctation of the aorta), and cryptorchidism ductus arteriosus and pulmonary artery stenosis. She is severely de- were also observed among various members of this family. Microsatel- velopmentally delayed and has abnormalities on cranial imaging (focal lite analysis excluded linkage to CREBBP and EP300, the genes as- microcalcification, gliosis and cerebral atrophy). sociated with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Additionally, Simpson-Go- Case (2) is a child who had antenatally detected truncus arteriosus labi-Behmel syndrome was considered, but X-linked inheritance was who developed diabetes in the neonatal period post surgery. Imaging excluded by the presence of male-to-male transmissions and two af- of the abdomen confirmed pancreatic agenesis. He has microcephaly fected females. Cytogenetic studies, including karyotype, subtelomere and is developmentally delayed screen, and FISH for 22q11 deletion syndrome, were normal. Taken Case (3) is a female infant born at 34 weeks gestation with an ante- together, we believe that this condition represents a novel dysmorphic natal diagnosis of Tetralogy of Fallot. She manifested hyperglycemia genetic syndrome. and pancreatic insufficiency from day 3 of life requiring replacement therapy. Repeated imaging failed to visualise the pancreas. She had P02.084 initial motor delay, but is currently well. Xp11.4 deletion identified by array-CGH in a mother and her Investigations included sequencing of GCK, ABCC8, IPF1, SUR1, daughters causing OFcD phenotype NEUROD1, GATA4, PTF1A and KCNJ11 genes, but no mutation was N. Pasz1, A. Dieux-Coeslier1, C. Morisot2, E. Laumonier3, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1, found. Genetic investigation to exclude paternal UPD 6, methylation J. Andrieux4; aberrations and duplications of 6q24 was also negative. Array CGH in 1Service de génétique Guy Fontaine, Lille, France, 2Service de Réanimation case (1) showed a paternally inherited ~250 kb dup(12)(q24.33), not et Médecine Néonatale, Lens, France, 3Service d’ophtalomogie, Lille, France, present in the others. 4Service de Cyto-génétique, Lille, France. Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus due to pancreatic hypoplasia We report on a familial case of syndromic bilateral congenital cata- with congenital heart disease has been reported before and may repre- ract with dysmorphic features in a mother and both of her daughters. sent a distinct condition (Gurson CT et al 1970; Yorifuji T et al 1994). The younger daughter, referred to the genetic clinic, showed additional malformations comprising atrial septal defect, facial dysmorphic fea- tures (synophris, high nasal bridge, small cup shaped ears, bifid uvula, long philtrum, microstomia), dental anomalies (delayed eruption, oligo- dontia), skeletal manifestations (irregular metacarpal epiphyses ossifi- cation) and moderate developmental delay. High resolution karyotype was normal. The array-CGH analysis identified an Xp11.4 deletion ofClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  2-2.2 Mb. This deletion, which encompasses several genes including of Pediatrics, University Federico II, Naples, Italy. RPGR, OTC, TSPAN7 and BCOR, was also present in the mother and Oral-facial-digital type I (OFDI; MIM 311200) syndrome is a male lethal the sister of the proband. Both of them also have congenital cataract X-linked dominant developmental disorder belonging to the heteroge- and dental anomalies, and hammer toes as well as bilateral 2-3 toe neous group of Oral-facial-digital syndromes (OFDS). OFD type I is syndactyly were also present in the sister. characterized by malformations of the face, oral cavity and digits. CNS Among the deleted genes, TSPAN7 plays a role in mental retardation, abnormalities and cystic kidney disease can also be part of this condi- and BCOR (BCL6 co-repressor) seems to be the best candidate gene tion. This rare genetic disorder is due to mutations in the OFD1 gene to explain the familial clinical features. Several frameshift, deletion, that encodes a centrosome/basal body protein necessary for primary nonsense mutations and exonic deletions were found in BCOR caus- cilium assembly and for left-right axis determination, thus ascribing ing Oculo-facio-cardio-dental (OFCD) syndrome. OFCD syndrome is OFDI to the growing number of disorders associated to ciliary dysfunc- an X-linked dominant condition with presumed male lethality charac- tion. We now report a mutation analysis study in a cohort of 109 unre- terized by multiple congenital anomalies: cardiac abnormalities (septal lated affected individuals collected worldwide. Putative disease-caus- defects), ocular malformations (congenital cataracts, microphtalmia), ing mutations were identified in about 80% of patients. We describe facial dysmorphic features, cleft palate and dental anomalies (delayed 67 different mutations, 64 of which are novel, including 36 frameshift, dentition, oligodontia, abnormal shaped teeth, radiculomegaly). Some 9 missense, 11 splice-site and 11 nonsense mutations. Most of them reported cases developed psychomotor and mental retardation. concentrate in exons 3, 8, 9,12,13 and 16, suggesting that these may represent mutational hotspots. Phenotypic characterization of the pa- P02.085 tients collected provided a better definition of the clinical features of Renal insufficiency, a frequent complication of oral-facial-digital OFD type I. Differently to what previously observed, our results indi- syndrome type i cate that renal cystic disease is present in 60% of cases with over 18 S. Saal1,2, L. Faivre1,2, B. Franco3, A. Toutain4, L. Van Maldergem5, A. Destrée5, years of age. Genotype-phenotype correlation reveal significant asso- I. Maystadt5, P. S. Jouk6, B. Loeys7, D. Chauveau8, E. Bieth9, V. Layet10, M. ciations of the high-arched/cleft palate most frequently associated to Mathieu11,12, J. Lespinasse13, N. Gigot14, B. Aral14, E. Gautier15, C. Binquet15, A. missense and splice-site mutations. Our results contribute to expand Masurel-Paulet1,2, C. Mousson16, F. Huet17, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2; our knowledge on the molecular basis of OFD type I syndrome. In 1Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, C.H.U. Dijon, France, 2Centre de addition these results will help in defining the clinical spectrum and Référence Maladies Rares -Anomalies du Développement Embryonnaire et recognition of Oral-facial-digital syndromes. Syndromes Malformatifs- de la Région Grand Est, France, 3Laboratorio di Ricerca, Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Napoli, Italy, P02.087 4Service de Génétique, C.H.U. Tours, France, 5Institut de Pathologie et de Gé- isolated oligodontia and hypodontia in multiplex families nétique, Loverval, Belgium, 6Service de Génétique, C.H.U. Grenoble, France, E. Severin, C. C. Albu, D. F. Albu, D. Stanciu; 7Centre de Génétique Médicale, Ghent, Belgium, 8Service de Néphrologie - Im- “Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. munologie Clinique, C.H.U. Hôpital Rangueil, Toulouse, France, 9Laboratoire Introduction: Oligodontia is defined as congenital lack of more than de Génétique, C.H.U. Purpan, Toulouse, France, 10Unité de Cytogénétique et six teeth and hypodontia is used when one to six teeth are missing. Génétique médicale, C.H. Le Havre, France, 11Département de Pédiatrie - Unité Oligodontia is a rare anomaly of tooth number while hypodontia is a de Génétique Clinique, C.H.U. Hôpital Nord, Amiens, France, 12Centre de Ré- common one. Both anomalies have a genetic background and are in- férence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de la Région herited in successive generations of a family. Nord, France, 13Laboratoire de Génétique Chromosomique, C.H. Chambéry, Objectives: to evaluate and compare the pattern of missing teeth in France, 14Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital du Bocage, C.H.U. families, to observe similarities and differences of dental phenotype Dijon, France, 15Inserm, CIE1, Centre d’Investigation Clinique - Epidémiologie among affected relatives, to characterize the mode of inheritance and Clinique/Essais Cliniques, Dijon, France, 16Service de Néphrologie, Hôpital to identify distinct groups of patients for further molecular investiga- du Bocage, C.H.U. Dijon, France, 17Service de Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d’Enfants, tions. C.H.U. Dijon, France. Patients and Methods: Clinical examinations were carried out on 6 The oral-facial-digital syndrome type I (OFDI) involves multiple con- Caucasian patients and their affected first-degree relatives from 3 genital malformations of the face, oral cavity and digits. It is the most families with a family history of missing permanent teeth. Combined frequent type of oral-facial-digital syndrome, characterised by X-linked examination of clinical phenotypes and orthopantomograms improved dominant mode of inheritance with lethality in males. The OFD1 gene the precision of diagnosis. Family study was used to determine wheth- encodes for a centrosomal protein located both in the primary cilium er there is a hereditary basis for oligodontia or hypodontia. and in the nucleus, leading to consider the OFDI syndrome as a ciliop- Results: We describe tooth agenesis in three main groups: mother- athy. A polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is reported in almost one third daughter, sister-sister and brother-sister. None of the patients and of OFDI patients, but long-term outcome of the renal disease has been their first-degree relatives shared similar patterns of missing teeth. No essentially described through isolated cases. We report on the renal correlation exists between the patterns of missing permanent teeth in manifestations of a cohort of 34 patients with an identified mutation related individuals. Predominant dental phenotype involved anterior in the OFD1 gene. Patients are aged of 1 to 68 years. Their median teeth agenesis and symmetrical (left - right) hypodontia. Anomalies of follow-up is of 16.5 years. Among them, 12 (35%) patients presented tooth-size and tooth-shape were also observed in association with hy- with PKD (11/16 (69%) if only adults were considered) with a median podontia but not with oligodontia. Gender difference did not influence age at discovery of 29 years. Ten of them also presented with renal the severity of phenotype. impairment and six were grafted. One grafted patient under immuno- Conclusions: Multiplex family research allows for the study of inherit- suppressive treatment died from a malignant tumor originated from a able oligodontia/hypodontia, pattern of inheritance and genetic cause. native kidney. In patients aged 36 or more, the probability to develop renal failure was estimated to be more than 50%. Besides, neither P02.088 genotype-phenotype correlation nor clinical predictive association with Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2, perinatal approach and renal failure could be evidenced. These data reveal an unsuspected identification of a new mutation in the Filamin A gene high frequency with age of renal impairment in OFDI syndrome. Sys- M. Aguinaga1, C. Yam1, A. Hidalgo2, D. G. Mayén1; tematic ultrasound scans and renal function follow-up are therefore 1Instituto Nacional de Perinatología, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Hospital General de highly recommended for all OFDI patients. México, Mexico City, Mexico. Introduction: Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 (OPD2) is part of the P02.086 so-called spectrum otopalatodigital disorders, it presents an X linked mutational spectrum of the Oral-facial-digital type i syndrome: a mode of inheritance and males generally have a more severe pheno- study on a large collection of patients type than women. Mutations responsible for the phenotype are found B. Franco1,2, C. Prattichizzo1, M. Macca1,2, V. Novelli1,2, R. Tammaro1, G. Gior- in the FLNA gene located in Xq28, the Filamin A protein is widely ex- gio1, A. Barra1, The OFDI collaborative group; pressed and has an essential role in migration and cell morphology. 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine-TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Department Case Report: Newborn mexican male patient, first pregnancy of healthy and non-consanguineous parents. Prenatal ultrasound as-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  sessment was carried out at 23.3 weeks of gestation, the study re- France, 8Service de Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France. vealed intrauterine growth restriction, ribs with angle grinding, cleft Oral-facial-digital syndromes (OFDS) result from the association of hands and bowed femurs. An amniocentesis was performed showing abnormal clinical features affecting almost invariably the face, mouth a normal 46, XY karyotype. Physical examination showed wide fonta- and digits. Other organ systems can be involved, defining a complex nels and sutures, broad face, downslanting palpebral fissures, broad nosology including 13 specific subtypes. Some of them have been de- and depressed nasal bridge, anteverted nares, central cleft palate, mi- scribed in only one or two reports. Some overlap between subtypes croretrognathia and rotated and low implanted ears. Short neck, hands is suspected. The clarification of this complex nosology could only with digitalization of thumbs,diastasis between first and second finger come from a better understanding of their molecular bases. However, bilaterally, clinodactyly of bilateral fifth fingers and cutaneous syndac- only the OFD1 gene responsible for OFD type I is currently known. tyly between third and fourth fingers with hypoplasic, convex nails. X- Because of the presence of multiple congenital abnormalities (MCA) rays of the tubular bones showed bowed humerus, femur and tibia, and/or mental retardation in some OFDS, we questioned about the both fibulas were small. possibility of submicroscopic rearrangements as a cause of OFDS. We Results: Molecular analysis of exon 3 of FLNA gene showed and in- therefore performed high-resolution array-CGH (244 or 105K Agilent) sertion at codon 209 that generates a frameshift without causing a in a series of 20 OFDS negative for mutations and large rearrange- premature stop codon in the patient and his mother and has not been ments in the OFD1 gene, gathered through an international collabo- previously reported. ration. Only seven patients could be assigned to a specific subtype Discussion: A clinical diagnosis of OPD2 was initially suspected in our of OFDS. Three patients had malformations that are not commonly patient based on prenatal and postnatal clinical findings. Clinical evo- found in the different OFDS subtypes, including gyration abnormali- lution and molecular studies confirmed the disease. ties, abnormal lung lobulation, deafness, imperforate anus, and trigo- nocephaly. Nine patients had mental retardation. We failed to evidence P02.089 submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances in this series. These results spectrum of oral clefts in the light of contemporary research suggest that chromosome imbalances appear rarely involved in OFDS study and that mutations within single genes may be responsible for these A. Matulevičienė1,2, L. Ambrozaitytė1,2, E. Preikšaitienė1, A. Utkus1,2, L. phenotypes. Further work at a molecular level is needed to identify Linkevičienė3,4, B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, E. Dagytė1,2, Ž. Čiuladaitė1,2, V. Šliužas1,2, V. the causes and allow appropriate counselling for families regarding Kučinskas1,2; specific recurrence risk and prognosis. 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University P02.091 Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Institute of Odontology, Faculty Confirmatory report of Megarbane autosomal recessive oto- of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 4Vilnius University Hospital facial syndrome Žalgirio Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. M. Mathieu1, G. Morin1, B. Demeer1, F. Imestouren-Goudjil1, B. Devauchelle2, Aim. To apply contemporary knowledge in genomics, modern tech- C. Kolski3, B. Deschepper4, T. Attié-Bitach5, A. Receveur6, H. Copin6; niques for experimental testing and data analysis in the investigation 1Unité de Génétique Clinique - CHU d’Amiens, Amiens, France, 2Service de of genetic and genomic basis of oral clefts (OCs) and the acquired Chirurgie Maxillo-Faciale - CHU d’Amiens, Amiens, France, 3Service d’ORL knowledge introduced into the practise of Lithuanian health system. - CHU d’Amiens, Amiens, France, 4Service de Radiologie A - CHU d’Amiens, Material and method. The study group consisted of 250 patients with Amiens, France, 5Département de Génétique - Hôpital Necker - Enfants Mala- OCs and one or more major congenital anomalies. According to syn- des, Paris, France, 6Laboratoire de Cytogénétique - CHU d’Amiens, Amiens, dromologic, cytogenetic and molecular genetic data analysis were cat- France. egorized into two groups: recognized conditions (40.8%, 102 cases) In 2005, Megarbane et al reported two sisters from a Libanese con- and unknown origin (59.2 %, 148 cases) during the past decade. The sanguineous family (their parents were first cousins), with a new oto- type of cleft was classified according to ICD-10 and LAHSHAL clas- facial syndrome. These patients presented microcephaly, dysmorphic sifications. features, very dysplastic low-set ears, malformation of the middle ear Results. 74 patients had recognized syndromes and sequences (20 and short stature. In addition, one of the patients had a posterior cleft different units). One of the most common was Pierre Robin sequence palate, and the other an oesophageal atresia. Because of the recur- (32 cases), 6 cases of holoprosencephaly, 5 cases of OFD syndrome, rence in sibs and the parental consanguinity an autosomal recessive 4 of amniotic band sequences. Among the cases with recognized con- mode of inheritance was suggested. ditions 28 had chromosomal abnormalities: such as trisomy 13 (16 We report a similar observation concerning an 18-year-old boy. This cases), trisomy 21 (1 case) and trisomy 18 (1 case), others were partial patient was the second of three children from non consanguineous trisomies (46, XY, rec(14) dup(14) inv(14)(p11.2;q32.1); 46, XX, der(1 parents. There was no remarkable familial history. He presented a 3)t(13;20)(p11.2;p13)), partial deletions (46,XX, del(18)(q21.32;qter)), mandibulo-facial dysostosis with microcephaly, extremely rudimentary reciprocal translocations (46, XX, t(10;11)(p11.2;q23.3), 46, XX, and low-set helix of ears, absence of the external auditory channel, t(2;6)(p21;p25), 46, XX, t(8;16)(p21.1;p13.1)) and two mosaic karyo- long nose with low columella, short philtrum, everted lower lip and types (46, XY [1]/46, XY, r(21) [10]/46, XY, -21, +mar [30]/45, XY, -21 small chin. A low implantation of the thumbs, with ankilosis of the right [9] and 47,XX,+mar [17]/46,XX [3]). DNA microarray based on APEX2 one, was noticed. The patient also presented a mild mental retardation technology with 640 SNPs in 43 CLP candidate genes was carried out and severe conduction deafness. The CT scan revealed hypoplastic for 104 triads. middle ear cavity with absence of aeration and underdeveloped audi- Conclusion. The obtaining results were relevant to further prophylaxis tory ossicles. At the age of 18, the microcephaly persisted (-3 SD), of the definite population. stature was normal (171cm) but stayed inferior to the familial height. Chromosomal investigations (standard karyotype and array-CGH) P02.090 were normal. The molecular screening of the CHD7 gene responsible search for genomic imbalances in a cohort of 20 patients with of the CHARGE association was negative. oral-facial-digital syndromes negative for mutations and large We compare this observation with other known oto-facial syndromes rearrangements in the OFD gene and especially the familial observation of Megarbane. C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, P. Callier3, B. Franco4,5, B. Aral6, N. Gigot7, A. Donzel7, A. Mosca-Boidron3, A. Masurel-Paulet1,2, F. Huet8, J. Teyssier6, F. Mugneret3, L. P02.092 Faivre1,2; Phenotypic characterization of PHACE(S) Association, first 1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2Centre de Référence Maladies Rares italian study based on Eight patients - Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de l’Interrégion Est, A. Baban1,2, M. Pelegrini1, M. T. Divizia2, N. Vercellino1, L. Bricco2, G. Gimelli2, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 3Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Dijon, Dijon, E. Priolo3, A. Rimini1, A. Rossi4, S. Gimelli5, R. Ravazzolo2,6, G. Pongiglione1, M. France, 4Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Napoli, Italy, Lerone2, P. Dalmonte1; 5Medical Genetic Services, Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University 1Cardiovascular Department- Gaslini Children Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Mo- of Naples, Napoli, Italy, 6Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Dijon, lecular and Cytogenetics Unit- Gaslini Children Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3Oph- Dijon, France, 7Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Le Bocage, Dijon, thalmology Unit- Gaslini Children Hospital, Genova, Italy, 4NeuroradiologyClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  Unit- Gaslini Children Hospital, Genova, Italy, 5Department of Genetic and P02.094 Laboratory Medicine- Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, Bilateral vocal cord paralysis, left lower motoneurone7th cranial 66Department of Pediatrics and Center of Excellence for Biomedical Research nerve palsy and left 12th cranial nerve palsy - another case of (CEBR)- University of Genova, Genova, Italy. Plott syndrome? PHACE (OMIM No. 606519) is a neurocutaneous syndrome encom- K. Becker1,2, C. Riddick1, R. Kneen3, K. Southern4, A. M. Danzell5, P. Minchom6; passing: Posterior cranial fossa malformations (PCFM), Facial Hem- 1North Wales Clinical Genetics Service, Glan Clwyd Hospital, Bodelwyddan, angiomas (FH), Arterial anomalies (AA), Cardiac Anomalies (CA), and Rhyl, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Eye Abnormalities (EA). PHACE(S) is used when ventral developmen- Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Department of Neurology, Alder Hey Hospital, tal defects are present. The underlying pathogenesis of PHACE is un- Liverpool, United Kingdom, 4Department of Respiratory Medicine, Alder Hey known. To date less than 300 patients are reported world wide since Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 5Department of Gastroenterology, Alder initial description. Hey Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 6Department of Paediatrics, Wrexham Aims of our study: Maelor Hospital, Wrexham, United Kingdom. -Describe the phenotype in a patients’ series. Plott syndrome was first described in 1964 by Plott et al. in three broth- -Verify already present data in literature. ers with permanent laryngeal abductor paralysis and mental retarda- -Obtain diagnostic standards. tion [Plott et al., 1964]. One affected male had a left 6th cranial nerve -Obtain useful information from prognostic and therapeutic points of palsy. In 1973, Watters and Fitch described a pedigree which made X- view. linked recessive inheritance likely [Watters et al., 1973]. Two brothers -Identify new etiopathogenetic hypotheses or validate already present were affected as well as a first cousin once removed through females. ones in literature.This is a multidisciplinary study of 8 patients referred The mental retardation seen in two of these three patients was more to our Tertiary Medical Center. severe than in the previously reported patients. We report a male pa- The diagnosis of PHACE was established if the characteristic large, tient who presented at birth with stridor. He required a tracheostomy plaquelike, or segmental FH were observed associated to any of pre- and bilateral vocal cord paralysis was diagnosed. Neurological exami- viously described anomalies. According to our protocol all patients nation revealed a left lower motoneurone 7th cranial nerve palsy and a undergo vascular surgeon, cardiologist, pediatrician, geneticist, oph- left 12th cranial nerve palsy. He showed mild motor delay and walked thalmologist, neuroradiologist and whenever indicated cardiosurgeon at 22 months. He is the only affected child in the family, and therefore specialistic visits. Blood sample is performed for standard Karyotyping no definite conclusions can be drawn as to possible inheritance. Auto- and Array CGH. Informed consent was obtained from the parents of somal recessive inheritance of bilateral vocal cord paralysis has also each participating child. been postulated in the literature [Koppel et al., 1996], as well as au- Our preliminary results confirmed the strong female predominance tosomal dominant inheritance [Schinzel et al., 1990; Manaligod et al., (6/8) and absence of familial cases. 1998], but in these patients, no developmental delay was observed, Although PCFM constitute the most commonly observed developmen- nor was there involvement of any other cranial nerves. Plott syndrome tal brain abnormalities in PHACE, none of our patients had any. On the therefore seems to be the most likely diagnosis in our patient. other hand, 6 patients presented cerebrovascular abnormalities. AA, mostly aortic coarctation, was present in 6 and none had CA. EA are P02.095 present in 4 patients. We present the classification of most frequently Poland syndrome - case report observed malformations, Array-CGH results and different therapeutic I. I. Kavecan, J. D. Jovanovic Privrodski, M. Vislavski, M. R. Obrenovic, D. aspects. Katanic; Institute for Children and Youth Health Care Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia. P02.093 Poland Syndrome (PS) is named after Alfred Poland, who described Polycystic kidney disease associated with 21-hydroxylase it in 1841. Poland described a range of several abnormalities, among defficiency - case report which the absence of the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor mus- I. Maris1,2, C. Daescu1,2, I. Sabau1,2, I. Micle1,2, C. Capitaneanu1, M. Puiu1, C. cles and syndactyly. The incidence of PS was estimated at 1 in 30,000. Duncescu2; The syndrome is thought to be of vascular origin. Our female patient 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, was first - born child. This was controlled and non-complicated preg- 2Children’s Hospital „Louis Turcanu” , Pediatric Clinic I, Timisoara, Romania. nancy of not consanguineous parents. The baby was born on term. Background: PKD in children is defined as an inherited disorder involv- Growth parameters were weight=2620 g; length=46 cm. Mother no- ing progressive cystic dilations at any point along the nephron and ticed smaller right hand and right nipple and asymmetry of thorax at varying degrees of extrarenal involvement (gastrointestinal tract, car- birth. Development milestones have been appropriate for her chrono- diovascular system, reproductive system, CNS), and is known now logical age. She attained menarche at age 14. Investigation of family as a cilliary disease. The issue of this paper is to present a case of history revealed a deaf and mute grandfather. The proband was first PKD associating 21-hydroxylase defficiency, diagnosed and followed- observed by geneticist at age 14. Growth parameters were weight=43 up in our clinic since newborn. Method: female girl, aged 3 years and kg; height=153 cm; and head circumference=53 cm (below 10th per- 4 month, presented as newborn with clytoris hypertrophia, SGA. En- centile). Vital parameters were normal. At the physical examination docrine evaluation (17-hydroxiprogesterone, cortisole, testosterone, there were aplastic right breast and hypoplastic right nipple. In addi- DHEA) established the diagnosis of adrenogenitally syndrome - 21- tion, she lacked the sternal origin of the right pectoralis muscle and hydroxylase defficiency. Elevated serum BUN and creatinine led to a axillary hair. She had shortening of right upper limb, hypoplastic right nephrologic imagistic evaluation, which showed a polycystic right kid- hand and nails with brachydactyly of all fingers and clynodactyly of 5th. ney and a hypoplasia of the left kidney, CrCl = 12,12 ml/min, no hyper- Lower limbs were normal and symmetric. Karyotype revealed 46,XX. tension. Substitutive treatment with hydrocortisone orally was initiated. Radiographic examination showed shortening of middle phalanxes of Close follow-up included: growth parameters, clinical examination, the right hand and lack of soft tissue shadow of right breast. Treatment renal function, Ca - P metabolism, hematologic evaluation, hormone should include reconstructive surgery and possibly implantation of bio- determinations, imagistic assessment. Results: The patient devel- engineered tissue in adult period. oped progressive renal failure (CrCl = 16,3 ml/min), anemia (Epoetine started december 2007), renal osteodystrophy (1,25-dihydroxy vitamin P02.096 D3 administration), presented few episodes of urinary tract infections Poland-möbius syndrome associated with celiac disease-case and failure to thrive. Clinical evaluation of the genitalia and hormone report determinations showed a good response to substitutive treatment. The M. Mihailov, M. Serban, G. Doros, A. Popoiu, B. Zoica, I. Bacos, M. Puiu, I. evaluation of growth hormone therapy, started december 2007, is in Simedrea, O. Belei, E. Ursu; course. Conclusion: metabolic balance was difficult to obtain because University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. of the associated pathology, and the 21-hydroxylase defficiency could Poland-Möbius syndrome associates two rare congenital syndromes be an unfavorable factor for the evolution of the renal disease. and consists of craniofacial, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular defects and cranial nerve palsies. We report a case of a male newborn with Poland-Möbius syndrome,Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  who was admitted in the IIIrd Pediatric Clinic Timisoara. The patient, Rennes, Rennes, France, 8Département d’anatomie et cytopathologie, CHU born at 38 week of gestation, with 3000g, was the second child of Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 9Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique; Départe- young, healthy and unrelated parents. The older brother has no anom- ment de Pédiatrie; Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 10Service de génétique, CHU alies. There was no history of maternal irradiation or drug ingestion Hôpital Clémenceau, Caen, Caen, France, 11Département de pédiatrie et géné- during pregnancy, and no family history of any congenital birth anoma- tique médicale, CHU Hôpital Morvan,, Brest, France, 12Laboratoire de biochimie lies. et génétique moléculaire, CHU Hôpital Cochin, Paris, Paris, France, 13Institute Clinical examination revealed underdevelopment of the left pectoralis of Molecular Pathology, 7 Dr Bohr-Gasse, Vienna, Vienna, Austria. major muscle, absence of the left areola, absence of the distal pha- Polymicrogyria is a relatively common but poorly understood defect lange of the left index, dextrocardia (confirmed by chest radiography, of cortical development characterized by numerous small gyri and a electrocardiograpy and echocardiography). He has also gastroesoph- thick disorganized cortical plate lacking normal lamination. We show ageal reflux, confirmed by Barium Swallow X-ray. Abdominal sonogra- an association between bilateral asymmetrical polymicrogyria and de phy was normal. Neurologic examination revealed generalized hypo- novo mutations in a beta-tubulin gene, TUBB2B, in four patients and tonia, convergent strabismus, unexpressive face, right facial palsy and a 27 GW(gestational week) fetus. Neuropathological examination of swallowing difficulties. Chromosomal analysis was normal. the fetus revealed an absence of cortical lamination associated with The patient was admitted several times in our clinic, presenting respi- the presence of heterotopic neuronal cells in the white matter, and ratory infections with respiratory insufficiency. In time, he developed neuronal overmigration through breaches in the pial basement mem- signs of severe malnutrition, so that malabsorbtion tests were per- brane, reminiscent of “cobblestone-like” phenotypes observed in a formed. We found positive IgA/IgG anti-tissue transglutaminase anti- Gpr56-/- mice model. In utero RNAi-based inactivation demonstrates bodies (IgA/IgG tTG), as well as Immunoglobulin A anti-endomysium that TUBB2B is a new gene that is critically involved in neuronal migra- antibodies (EMA) serum levels. tion. We also show that two disease associated mutations lead to an We performed enteroscopy with jejunal biopsy, which revealed Marsch impaired formation of tubulin heterodimers as a result of deficiencies IIIC villous atrophy. Haplotype analysis showed DQ2 in cis conforma- in the complex chaperone-dependent tubulin heterodimerization path- tion (DQA1*0501 and DQB1*0201 alleles). way. These observations, together with previous data, demonstrate Conclusion. We present a rare association between Poland-Möbius that disruption of microtubule-based processes underlies a large spec- syndrome and celiac disease. It is unclear if their etiology is common, trum of neuronal migration disorders that includes not only lissenceph- or there are just two coincidental factors. aly/pachygyria, but also polymicrogyria malformations. P02.097 P02.099 Parkinsonism, axonal neuropathy and cerebellar signs in two is the pattern of root resorption in human teeth dependent on siblings with recessive POLG mutations the gene amelogenin? J. Rankin1, N. Gutowski2, V. Pearce3, C. Smith4, J. Poulton5; M. Bille, D. Nolting, I. Kjaer; 1Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Department of Department of Orthodontics, Copenhagen, Denmark. Neurology RD&E, Exeter, United Kingdom, 3Department of Medicine RD&E, Introduction. It has been demonstrated that abnormal resorption of Exeter, United Kingdom, 4Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratories, Oxford, United primary roots is associated with unexpected resorption of permanent Kingdom, 5Mitochondrial Genetics Service, Oxford, United Kingdom. roots (Bille et al., Eur J Orthod 2008; 30(4): 346-51). This leads to Mutations in POLG, which encodes the catalytic subunit of mitochon- the hypothesis that root resorption is not always acquired, but can be drial DNA polymerase gamma, have been identified in patients with inherited. This preliminary study is an immunohistochemical study on diverse phenotypes. For example, recessive mutations are found in human teeth focusing on the gene amelogenin. Amelogenin has for- Alpers syndrome, autosomal recessive progressive external ophthal- mally been associated with root resorption in mice (Hatekeyama et al., moplegia (arPEO) and ataxia neuropathy spectrum (ANS) whereas J Biol Chem 2003; 278(37): 35743-8). dominant mutations are found in families with autosomal dominant Material. 18 primary teeth extracted from 10 children due to dental PEO (adPEO) in which there may also be parkinsonism and premature treatment. ovarian failure. In 2006, two sisters with early onset parkinsonism and Method. Paraffin sections for immunhistochemistry reaction were pre- neuropathy, but without PEO, were found by Davidzon and colleagues treated with Tris-EDTA pH 9 at 60°C for 90 minutes. Sections were to be compound heterozygotes for the recessive POLG mutations washed in TBS, encircled with a Dako pen (Dako, S2002), washed G737R and R853W. in TBS. Sections were incubated with Peroxidase-Blocking Solution We report a brother and sister with the same two mutations. The sister (Dako, S2023), washed in TBS, incubated in primary antibody for 60 presented with parkinsonism aged 28 years and subsequently devel- minutes using: Anti-Amelogenin (ABIN 187765, antibodies-online. oped dysarthria. The brother was ataxic from age 18 years and later de- com) diluted 1:3000 (Antibody Diluent, Dako, S2022). veloped dysarthria and nystagmus. Ophthalmoplegia and ptosis were Sections were washed in TBS, incubated with peroxidise labelled absent, however both had a severe, axonal, predominantly sensory polymer (Dako, K5007), washed, incubated in Substrate Buffer/DAB+ neuropathy. MRI revealed no intracranial abnormality but prominence Chromagen (Dako, K5007), washed in destilled water, of the temporalis muscle was noted in both. Muscle biopsies were not counter stained in Carazzi’s haematoxylin (Dako, S3301), washed, de- done. The heterozygous parents were clinically normal. These siblings hydrated and coverslipped using Pertex (Histolab, Sweden). are remarkable firstly because parkinsonism is only rarely associated Results. Strong amelogenin expression was seen in the periodontal with recessive POLG mutations and secondly because patients with membrane as small and well distinct islands in regions without root ANS due to POLG mutations usually have typical MRI abnormalities. resorption, while amelogenin expression was weak and mostly absent in resorption lacunas. P02.098 Conclusion. The present study showed that amelogenin might play a mutations in Human Beta-2b tubulin Result in Asymmetrical decisive role in human root resorption and therefore might influence an Polymicrogyria inherited pattern of root resorption. K. Poirier1, X. Jaglin1, Y. Saillour1, E. Buhler2, G. Tian3, N. Bahi-Buisson1,4, C. Fallet-Bianco5, F. Phan-Dinh-Tuy1, P. Bomont6, L. Castelnau-Ptakhine1, S. P02.100 Odent7, P. Loget8, M. Kossorotoff9, G. Plessis10, P. Parent11, C. Beldjord12, C. Restrictive dermopathy in a newborn caused by null mutation in Cardoso6, A. Represa6, D. Keays13, N. Cowan3, J. Chelly1; ZmPstE24 gene 1Institut Cochin; Université Paris Descartes; CNRS (UMR 8104); Paris, France. G. Yeşil1, I. Hatipoğlu1, A. De Sandre-Gionovalli2, B. Tüysüz1; Inserm, U567, Paris, Fr, Paris, France, 2Plate-forme Post Génomique de l’IN- 1İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Pediatric Genetics, İstanbul, MED, INSERM U901, Marseille, France, 3IDepartment of Biochemistry, New Turkey, 2Hôpital d’Enfants la Timone, Département de Génétique Médicale, York University Medical Center, New York, NY, New York, NY, United States, Marseille, France. 4Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique; Département de Pédiatrie; Hôpital Necker, We described a 4 days boy old with tight, translucent skin, prominent PAris, France, 5Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, Hôpital Sainte Anne, 75014 vessels, skin erosions and dysmorphic findings consisting hyper- Paris, France, Paris, France, 6Institut de Neurobiologie de la Méditerranée, telorism, antimongoloid axis, sparse eyelashes and eyebrows, pinched INSERM U901, Marseille, France, 7Service de génétique médicale, CHU de nose, natal teeth, microretrognathia and ‘o’ shaped mouth. MultipleClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  joint contractures, dysplastic clavicles and thin ribs were also noteable. encodes a protein essential in establishing sister chromatid cohesion He died on 14 days of his life from respiratuar distress. The patient was during S phase. Allelic to this condition is SC phocomelia (SC) (OMIM diagnosed as Restrictive Dermopathy which is a rare, lethal autosomal #269000), which has a milder phenotype compared to RBS with less recessive disorder characterized by; tight and rigid skin with erosions, severe symmetric limb reduction, flexion contractures of various joints, prominent superficial vasculature and epidermal hyperkeratosis, small minor facial anomalies, growth retardation and occasionally, mental mouth, small pinched nose, micrognathia, sparse or absent eyelashes retardation. Individuals with SC typically survive to adulthood whereas and eyebrows and joint contractures. Restrictive dermopathy is caused severely affected RBS infants may be stillborn or die in the post-na- by the mutations in the zinc metalloproteinase gene ZMPSTE24 or tal period. As a result, there is little literature about the follow-up of LMNA. Analysis by direct sequencing of the gene ZMPSTE24 was per- adults with the spectrum of SC phocomelia/Roberts syndrome or the formed and a single base insertion on exon 9 was identified in the pa- recommended management. We report an adult presentation of SC tient on homozygous state (c.1085_1086insT) leading a null mutation phocomelia/Roberts spectrum disorder with a history of major cardiac (p.Leu362PhefsX19). The parents latter demanded genetic consulta- malformation in childhood, mild facial anomalies, normal intelligence tion for next pregnancy. Found mutation on ZMPSTE24 was searched and premature centromere separation. A literature review is presented on the DNA derived from corionic villi specimen and seen that the fetus focussing on adult manifestations of this condition. Finally, we estab- inherited normal allels form both of the parents. lish follow-up guidelines based on the reviewed cases. P02.101 P02.103 Restrictive dermopathy in two siblings caused by novel is schinzel-Giedion syndrome a genomic disorder? compound heterozygous mutations of the ZmPstE24 gene G. M. S. Mancini1, R. Schot1, P. J. Poddighe1, R. de Coo2, A. Schinzel3; R. Smigiel1, A. Jakubiak1, V. Esteves-Vieira2, K. Szela3, A. Halon4, T. Jurek5, N. 1Clinical Genetics, ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Child Neurology, Lévy6, A. De Sandre-Giovannoli7; ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Medical Genetics, University of 1Genetic Department Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland, Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Département de Génétique Médicale, Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (SGS) is a severe neuro-developmental Hôpital d’Enfants la Timone,, Marseille, France, 3Newborns and Premature disorder characterized by distinctive face, short stature, limb abnor- Infants Ward, Specialist Mother and Child Health Care Unit, Opole, Poland, malities, sclerosis of the basis of the skull, wormian bones, gap in oc- 4Pathomorphology Department, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, cipital skull, broad ribs, curved long bones and hypoplastic phalanges. 5Forensic Medicine Department, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, Hydronephrosis, congenital heart defects and urogenital anomalies 6Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Département de Génétique Médicale, have been described. Inheritance is considered autosomal recessive. Hôpital d’Enfants la Timone, Marseille, France, 7Inserm UMR_S 910, « Medi- A boy was observed in 1997 after birth for short stature, hydronephro- cal Genetics and Functional Genomics », Faculté de Médecine de Marseille, sis, mild pulmonic stenosis, unilateral cryptorchidism and limbs abnor- Marseille, France. malities. He developed obstructive apnoeas and swallowing difficulties. Restrictive dermopathy (RD) is a rare, lethal disorder caused by muta- At the age of 18 months he was still short with hypotonia, pyramidal tions in the ZMPSTE24 gene (autosomal recessive) or in the LMNA signs, epilepsy with multifocal EEG anomalies, no eye contact, high gene (autosomal dominant). To date, about sixty cases of RD have myopia, nasolacrimal duct stenosis, a large fontanel, high forehead, been described. The signs of RD are very characteristic and include hypertelorism, midface hypoplasia, arched eyebrows with synophrys, intrauterine growth retardation, thin, tight skin, superficial vessels, typi- chubby cheeks, broad nose, large mouth and protruding tongue, low cal face changes and joint contractures. Children die within the first set dysplastic ears, cochlear deafness, short neck, brachydactyly and week of life. We observed the recurrence of the disease in a Polish abnormal creases, short broad 1st toe and generalized hirsutism. Brain family and report the identification of two novel inactivating ZMPSTE24 MRI showed an empty sella. X-rays showed wormian bones, no scle- mutations. The children showed respectively, during the prenatal pe- rosis of the skull, short hand phalanges. His karyotype was 46,XY. riod: IUGR, decreased fetal movements, polyhydramnios, for the first At that time Schinzel-Giedion syndrome was diagnosed. In 2008 Affy child, and normal pregnancy to 30 weeks of gestation for the second. 250K NspI arrays showed a submicroscopic der(9)t(9q34;17q25). This At premature delivery (32 and 33 weeks of gestation) both children represents one of the largest 9q34 microdeletions described, probably showed typical facial features: hypertelorism, down-slanting palpebral explaining the severe phenotype. Hirsutism, hydronephrosis and se- fissures, pinched nose, posterior rotated ears, micrognathia, mouth in vere neurological phenotype are typical of SGS and unusual for 9q34 “o” position, skin and skeletal anomalies: thin and rigid skin with ero- deletions. Our observation, however, arises the question whether at sions and scaling, prominent superficial vessels, multiple joints con- least some SGS patients might have a cryptic chromosomal imbal- tractures, camptodactyly, absent and small nails, rocker-bottom feet ance or, less likely, whether some of the genes on 9q34 in our patient and narrow chest. Biological material was available for the second contain a second recessive mutation. child: skin histology revealed thinned epidermal layers, focal hyperor- thokeratosis, partial parakeratosis. Hair follicles and sebaceous glands P02.104 were immature and poorly developed. The dermis showed absence Novel Findings By Genome-wide copy Number Analysis on of elastic fibers. Molecular analyses could be performed on the sec- chromosome 22 in a case with mild Facial Dysmorphology and ond child and his parents. Two novel, compound heterozygous, inac- Autistic/schizophrenic Behaviours tivating mutations of the ZMPSTE24 gene were observed in exon 1 E. Pariltay, O. Cogulu, A. Aykut, A. Alpman, B. Ozbaran, S. Erermis, C. Aydin, (c.50delA; p.K17SfsX21) and 5 (c.584_585delAT; p.Y195Ffs22X). The F. Ozkinay; autosomal recessive inheritance was confirmed by the parents’ mo- Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. lecular analysis. Autism and schizophrenia are two neuro-psychological disorders which may occur superimposed on each other. They can be accompa- P02.102 nied with some dysmorphic syndromes such as Fragile X syndrome, sc phocomelia/Roberts syndrome spectrum - A case Report of Williams syndrome and Down syndrome. We present a 13-year-old an Adult with Review of the Literature female case who showed autistic symptoms at first and followed by C. Morel1, E. Goh2, E. Kolomietz3; positive schizophrenic symptoms. She also had multiple mild dysmor- 14 University Health Network and Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, phic features such as elfin-like facial features, arched eyebrows, hy- 2Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Mount Sinai Hospital, To- pertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, bulbous nasal tip, downturned ronto, ON, Canada. corners of mouth, thick lower lip and joint laxity. Karyotyping and FISH Roberts syndrome (RBS) (OMIM #268300) is a rare autosomal re- for Williams, Angelman and subtelomere of 22q were performed. We cessive disorder characterized by tetraphocomelia (symmetrical limb performed whole genome copy number analysis by Affymetrix Gene reduction), craniofacial anomalies, growth retardation, mental retar- Chip 6.0 array for both case and parents. We showed inherited copy dation, cardiac and renal abnormalities. Karyotype investigations number variations without any additional region. We also performed in affected patients characteristically reveal premature centromere LOH analysis and showed ~ 7Mb homozygosity at 22q11. separation, or heterochromatin repulsion. The syndrome is caused by No dysmorphic syndrome was identifiable; therefore she could be an mutations in the ESCO2 gene, which is located at locus 8p21.1, and example of an unusual clinical picture with positive autistic, psychoticClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  symptoms, speech, language disability and multiple minor anomalies. (SHOX) is located on the pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) of the short arm of the X and Y chromosomes. SHOX gene haploinsuficiency, due P02.105 to microdeletions or intragenic mutations, causes a highly variable spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda with progressive phenotype, ranging from isolated short stature to Leri-Weill dyscon- arthropathy (sEDt-PA) in siblings drosteosis (LWD), while nullizygosity results in Langer mesomelic dys- A. AlKindy1, S. Morris1, G. J. Shortland1, J. te Water Naude,1, A. Cowe2, M. plasia (LMD). James-Ellison3, D. T. Pilz1; We described the clinical and cytogenetic findings of a familial case 1University Hospital Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Singleton Hospital, Swan- of SHOX haploinsuficiency due to a microdeletion inherited by an un- sea, United Kingdom, 3Morriston Hospital, Swansea, United Kingdom. usual mechanism. The proband, a six-year old girl, was referred to Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda with progressive arthropathy our clinic for growth failure. On physical examination she presented (SEDT-PA OMIM#208230) also known as Progressive Pseudorheu- disproportionate short stature with mesomelic shortening of the limbs matoid Arthropathy of Childhood (PPAC) is a very rare autosomal re- and appearance of muscular hypertrophy. There were no dysmorphic cessive skeletal dysplasia with an estimated incidence of 1per million features, except relative macrocephaly and high arched palate. X-rays in the UK. It is characterised by a postnatal progressive chondropathy of the forearms showed no evidence of Madelung deformity. Endocrine affecting primarily articular cartilage. Clinically, the condition mimics studies and karyotype were normal. Fluorescence in situ hybridization Juvenile Rheumatoid Arthritis, and the diagnosis is often significantly (FISH), using a SHOX probe, revealed a microdeletion on one of the delayed. We want to raise awareness of this debilitating condition and X chromosomes in the girl - 46,XX.ish del(X)(p22.3p22.3)(SHOX−)pat present 2 siblings from a non-consanguineous family with SEDT-PA -, and on the Y chromosome in her father - 46,XY.ish del(Y)(p11.3p11. diagnosed radiologically. They presented with severe progressive 3)(SHOX−) -, who also shared similar features. These results suggest pain and stiffness of the hip joints, waddling gait and rheumatoid- like a prior meiotic recombination event on the father to account for the hands from 3 years of age. Their X-rays showed generalised osteo- transfer of the deleted SHOX gene to the alternate sex chromosome. penia, platyspondyly, narrow joint spaces, metaphyseal widening and Only three cases of inherited SHOX deletions by the same mechanism flattening of epiphyses. SEDT-PA was confirmed by identifying com- have been reported. The recognition of the etiology of short stature in pound heterozygote mutations in the Wnt1-inducible secreted protein this family allowed an adequate genetic counseling. 3 (WISP3) gene. The WISP3 protein is a member of the CCN family (cysteine-rich 61, connective tissue growth factor, Nephroblastoma P02.108 overexpressed) of secreted proteins that specifically associate with ex- silver-Russell syndrome: a case report tracellular matrix. CCNs are primarily maintenance proteins that mod- C. Vincent-Delorme1, S. Rossignol2, M. Holder-Espinasse3, O. Boute-Béné- ify cellular responses to environmental factors and stimuli. Absence of jean3, A. Coeslier-Dieux3, F. Petit3, S. Manouvrier-Hanu3, I. Netchine2; WISP3 interferes with normal regulation of postnatal skeletal growth 1Service de Génétique Clinique CHRU Lille. UF de Génétique CH Arras. Centre and cartilage homeostasis leading to precocious joint degeneration. de Référence Maladies Rares pour les Syndromes Malformatifs et Anomalies The older sibling is on a trial treatment with Bisphosphonates in view du Développement Nord de France, Lille, France, 2Biologie Moléculaire En- of her marked osteopenia. docrinienne. Centre de Référence des Maladies Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance. Hôpital Trousseau (APHP), Paris, France, 3Service de Génétique P02.106 Clinique CHRU Lille. Centre de Référence Maladies Rares pour les Syndromes Gender affects clinical suspicion of Down syndrome Malformatifs et Anomalies du Développement Nord de France, Lille, France. N. V. Kovaleva1,2; We report on a 33 years old male, with moderate adult Silver-Rus- 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian sell syndrome presentation. He was born at 41 weeks of gestation by Federation, 2St. Petersburg Centre for Medical Genetics, St. Petersburg, Rus- spontaneous delivery with intrauterine growth retardation. Birth length sian Federation. was 46cm (-2 SDS), birth weight was 2200g (-3.5 SDS), and occipi- Recent study suggested that low male to female ratio (sex ratio, SR) in tofrontal circunference was 35cm (+1SDS). At 1 month he was sus- patients with only clinical diagnosis of Down syndrome (DS) was due pected to develop hydrocephalus and at 1 year, because of prominent to a sex bias in clinical diagnosis (Kovaleva NV, AJHG 69,S4:296). skin scalp vessels and systolic murmur, he was thought to present ce- OBJECTIVES: (1) to determine a proportion of misdiagnosed cases rebral vascular malformation. Additional investigations were all normal. among children tested for suspicion of trisomy 21, and (2) to study SR At 12 years, ultrasonography and skeletal x-rays showed asymmetric among those not having trisomy 21 according to their age at the ge- kidneys and delayed bone age. He grew up without feeding difficulties netic investigation. STUDY POPULATION: children referred to cytoge- (BMI= -2 SDS at 2 years old) and did not receive growth hormone netic testing because of having clinical features resembling DS, born in therapy; he demonstrated excessive sweating during childhood. Now, 1970-2008. RESULTS: Among 1197 children born in 1986-2008, when at 33 years old, his final height is152cm (-3.5 SDS) and he presents a completeness of cytogenetic confirmation of trisomy 21 had been im- slight lower limbs asymmetry, relative macrocephaly (+1.5 SDS), bilat- proving from 86% to about 100%, there were 96 (8%) with normal eral fifth finger clinodactyly, and triangular face. karyotype (annual rate varied from 0% in 1990 to 19% in 2008). Overall, Methylation analysis of the 11p15 ICR1 region was performed and in- normal karyotype was diagnosed in 99 newborns (16M/83F, SR=0.19, dicated loss of methylation, leading to biallelic expression of H19 and p<0.0001), in 68 babies of the age up to 1 year old (25M/43F, SR=0.58, loss of expression of IGF2. p=0.01), and in 59 children aged 1 year and older (27M/32F, SR=0.84, We would like to emphasize the relative good clinical evolution of this p>0.05). Thus there was a strong female prevalence in misdiagnosed male patient without hormonotherapy, nor feeding enteral requirement newborns decreasing to about population value of 1.06 when children eventhough his short stature is a real socio-professional disability growing up. CONCLUSION: the data obtained suggest that gender which is not enough recognized by the institutions. We speculate that affects clinical suspicion of DS. Since characteristic features allowing given the difficulty of assessing this diagnosis especially in adults, this suspicion of DS include facial dysmorphism, one may hypothesize sex syndrome must be underdiagnosed until molecular analysis is per- differences in the normal process of facial cranium ontogenesis during formed. perinatal period. An abnormal condition(s) specific to females might also be implicated in a proportion of the misdiagnosed cases. Data of P02.109 the follow-up study will be presented. A family with spinocerebellar ataxia type 8, Friedreich‘s ataxia and Hemoglobine s P02.107 F. Koc1, A. Nazli Basak2; A girl with short stature due to SHOX deletion inherited from 1Cukurova University School of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Adana, paternal Y Turkey, 2Bogazici University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, J. Dupont, R. Silveira-Santos, A. Medeira, A. Sousa, M. Ávila, S. Serafim, I. Istanbul, Turkey. Cordeiro; Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) are is a heredodegenerative disease. It Hospital Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal. is classified according to the clinical signs, affected neuroanatomical Short stature is a frequent disorder for which clinical attention is re- regions and genetic features. SCA type 8 is characterized by gait and quired during childhood. Short stature homeobox-containing gene limb ataxia, dysarthria, nystagmus, pyramidal findings and decreasedClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  deep sensation. SCA 8 is caused by an expanded (CTG) trinucleo- American Society of Human Genetics, Oct 26,2007). tide repeat on the chromosome 13. Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA), the Only 2 cases of TOF (2.8%) were seen in the NorCAS study and none most common subtype of early onset hereditary (SCA), is an autoso- in the current study or in Forrester and Merz’s study. Moreover, while mal recessive neurodegenerative disorder caused by unstable GAA 17 cases (27%) of syndromic malrotation in the NorCAS study had tri-nucleotide expansions in the first intron of FRDA gene located at features of VACTERL, and 2 cases (13%) in the current study, and 2 9q13-q21.1 position. Clinical findings are characterized by neurologic cases in Forrester and Merz’s study, none of them exhibited TOF. signals and symptoms of the dorsal root ganglia, the posterior col- Mutant mouse models with Hedgehog signaling defects exhibit intesti- umns, and pyramidal and spinocerebellar tracts nal malrotation and features of VACTERL, including TOF. Whilst it has Here we reported a family who was affected by SCA 8, FRDA and yet to be seen whether and what proportion of humans with malrotation Hemoglobine S. Gait ataxia was the first symptom in index cases, and VACTERL have Hedgehog signaling defects, the striking absence followed by dysarthria, weaknes in lower distal limbs and decreased of TOF from VACTERL in cases of syndromic intestinal malrotation as deep sensation and deep tendon reflexes respectively. Cerebral MRI seen in these studies, and virtual absence of TOF in known hedgehog- showed pure cerebellar atrophy in patient. An spinocerebellar ataxia opathies such as Pallister-Hall Syndrome, merits further investigation and HbS were diagnosis on the virtue of family history, neurological for differences between hedgehog signaling in mice and humans. examination and laboratory and genetics studies. Genetic studies dis- closed a mutation on the SCA 8 locus and FRDA. Index case was P02.112 homozygot for FRDA (675/775), his morther (normal/775) and father Familial congenital unilateral cerebral ventriculomegaly: were heterozygot, (normal/675). In additionaly we determined HbS Delineation of a distinct genetic disorder trait in some person in family. M. S. Zaki1, H. H. Afifi1, A. J. Barkovich2, J. G. Gleeson3; Spinocerebellary ataxias are a group of disorders classified according 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2(2) Section of Neuroradiology, to associating clinical signs and symptoms. To the best of our knowl- Department of Radiology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United edge, this unusual finding has not been reported previously in the lit- States, 3(3) Neurogenetics Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, De- erature. partment of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, CA, United States. P02.110 We identified 2 female siblings, derived from healthy first cousin par- tongue anomalies in clinical genetics evaluation - iasi medical ents, with congenital unilateral cerebral ventriculomegaly detected genetics center’s experience prenatally. Patient 1 underwent ventriculoperitoneal shunt operation at E. Braha, C. Rusu, M. Volosciuc, M. Covic; 1 week old, while patient 2 was followed without surgical intervention. University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. Both patients presented with mild developmental delay and hemipa- Traditionally the oral area receives minimal emphasis in the medi- resis contralateral to the involved hemisphere. Focal seizures were cal examination. Tongue birth defects are among the most common observed in patient 1, whose neuroimaging revealed posterior insular anomalies and require a careful clinical evaluation. The purpose of this polymicrogyria in the normal sized ventricle hemisphere and retrocer- study is to facilitate the clinical diagnosis of a syndrome with tongue ebellar cyst. Both siblings displayed near absence of white matter with anomaly. marked thinning of the overlying cortex in the affected hemisphere and We selected 16 patients (8 boys and 8 girls) from the total patients very thin corpus callosum. Investigations revealed no other system evaluated in Iasi medical genetics centre during 5 years (2000 - 2004, involvement and karyotyping was normal. Normal TORCH screening 8615 patients). We studied all tongue anomalies according dysmophic in subsequent pregnancies, normal parental coagulation profile and terms defined by Carey JC et al, 2009. We selected those anoma- undetectable maternal autoantibodies suggested against the possible lies with a high power to suggest the diagnosis (evocative anoma- role of extrinsic factors as an etiological factor for unilateral ventricu- lies): macroglossia, lobulated tongue, microglossia/ hypoglossia; bi- lomegaly. Parents had normal brain imaging findings. To our knowl- fid tongue, asymmetric tongue, tongue fasciculation. We observe the edge, unilateral ventriculomegaly has never been reported with familial preponderance of following traits: macroglossia (10 cases - 62.5%), clustering. We suggest delineation of a distinct developmental brain Microglossia (2), Lobulated tongue (1), bifid tongue (1), asymmetric defect, most likely of autosomal recessive inheritance. tongue (1), tongue fasciculation (1). The syndromes diagnosed were: congenital hypothyroidism (7 cases), Down syndrome (1), hypoglos- P02.113 sia-hypodactylia spectrum (3), MEN IIB (1), Opitz G/BBB (1), Werdnig clinicil genetic analysis of non system vasculitis of small Hoffmann (1) and multiple anomalies (2). The tongue anomalies were vessels in children. diagnosed after 2 months age old because of the tongue role in mas- E. Voronina1, N. Sokolova2, L. Zhukova1, M. Bogdanova3, V. Chasnyk1, A. tication, deglutition, speech etc. The small number of cases could be Harchev1, V. Larionova3; explained by the low frequency of the anomalies or by messing the 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian diagnosis owing to a facile clinical evaluation. Federation., St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Children municipal hospital For accurate assessment, correct diagnosis, and management, the N 1, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation., St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, patients should be dealt with in a team approach. When the genetic 3Laboratory of molecular diagnostics of the Research Center at St. Petersburg tests are budget limited a clinical proper diagnosis is essential to initi- State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation., St. ate the correct treatment and genetic counseling. Petersburg, Russian Federation. Currently there are no any known specific markers for differential diag- P02.111 nostics of the majority of vasculites. Tracheoesophageal fistula is not significantly associated with Objective: to identify the most informative traits, with the aim to facilitate intestinal malrotation - a study based on the Glasgow Register classification in two groups vasculites of small vessels in children. of congenital Anomalies and NorcAs database Patients And Methods: 80 children with vasculites of small vessels S. K. Munir; aged from 3 to 17 years. Among them, 46 patients suffered from sys- Western Infirmary (NHS Greater Glasgow & Clyde), Glasgow, United Kingdom. tem vasculitis (purples of Shenlejna-Genoh, PSG) and 34 suffered Numerous and large epidemiological studies have been undertaken from non system vasculitis (purples of Schamberg, PS). Control group of tracheoesophageal fistula (TOF). Only a single study has been included 144 healthy individuals. Diagnoses were verified by clinical, published specifically looking at the epidemiology of intestinal mal- laboratory and morphological methods (skin biopsy). 4a/4b, T-786C, rotation (Forrester and Merz,2003). The Glasgow Register of Con- G894T polymorphisms of the gene of endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) genital Anomalies was used to study anomalies associated with cases were studied by standard methods. of intestinal malrotation in babies born between 1997 and 2005 (30 Results: Two distinct forms of PS were identified: sharp cyclic clini- cases, 15 syndromic) in Glasgow,UK, and findings were compared cal course in 12 patients (36 %) and chronic recurrent course in 22 with a previous study (157 cases, 70 syndromic) (Munir S, Muneer A, patients (64 %). Intestinal malrotation and Hedgehog signaling defects - an epidemio- Hemosiderin in skin biopsy was found in 5 patients with the sharp logic study based on the NorCAS database and London Dysmorphol- course of the disease and in 6 patients with the chronic form of PS. aa ogy Database.[Abstract 631]. Presented at the annual meeting of the genotype of 4a/4b polymorphism was found more often in patients withClinical genetics and Dysmorphology 0 both vasculites compared to the control (p = 0.001). G allele of G894T P02.116 polymorphism was found to be more frequent patients with vasculites X-linked agammaglobulinemia: the underlying genetic defect in compared to the control (p = 0.001). three families Conclusion: 4a/4b and G894T polymorphisms were appeared to be the M. Cucuruz, E. Boeriu, L. Pop, M. Serban; most informative traits helping differential diagnostics of both groups of IIIrd Pediatric Clinic, Timisoara, Romania. the vasculites (purples Shenlejna-Genoha and purples Schamberg). X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) is a heritable immunodeficiency disorder that is caused by a differentiation arrest in the bone marrow P02.114 resulting in severe B cell deficiency. It is caused by mutations in the Antithrombin Ala383Pro: a new missense variant identified in a Bruton’s tyrosine kinase gene (Btk), that encodes a pathological tyro- patient with venous thrombosis sine kinase with a pivotal role in the life cycle of B cells. To date, more I. Tirado1, M. Borrell1, D. Llobet1, I. Coll1, C. Vallvé1, P. Fuentes2, E. Martínez- than 550 mutations have been identified scattered along the entire Sánchez1, J. Mateo1, J. Fontcuberta1; length of the Btk gene. We investigated three unrelated patients with 1Hospital Sant Pau Lab. Hematologia Unitat Hemostàsia i Trombosi, Barcelona, clinical diagnosis of XLA and their mothers for mutations in the Btk Spain, 2Hospital Sant Pau Institut de Recerca, Barcelona, Spain. gene. Two patients were found to have chain-termination mutations Our aim was to study a new mutation in the SERPINC1 gene in a in the kinase domain: a 4 bp deletion at positions 527-528 resulting in patient with venous thrombosis. We performed analysis of Antithrom- frame shift and a premature termination codon at position 528, and a bim (AT) Cambridge II (SERPINC1 G13268T; p.Ala384Ser) using PCR nonsense mutation at codon 520 at the second patient. The third pa- followed by digestion and it was confirmed by direct sequencing to tient has a missense mutation c.29T<A in exon 2. All patient’s mothers distinguish it from the AT Cambridge I (G13268C; p.Ala384Pro). We were proved to be heterozygous for the mutation found in here sons. determined functional AT (AT-f) and antigen AT (AT-Ag) and the mo- Mutation detection in the Btk gene provides a definitive diagnosis in bility of AT by crossed-immunoelectrophoresis (CIE) in the presence X-linked agammaglobulinemia, indispensable for adequate genetic of heparin. Also Protein C, Protein S, activated protein C resistance, counseling and carrier detection. antiphospholipids antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, Factor V Leiden, F2G20210A, F12C46T were determined. The patient had a qualita- P02.117 tive (type II) AT deficiency (AT-f:54%, AT-Ag: 95% with a normal hepa- Detection of an heterozygous R553G cystic Fibrosis mutation in rin binding pattern in CIE). The results suggested that proband was routine carrier screening in Greece a carrier of AT Cambridge. However, sequencing analysis revealed a S. Protopsalti, E. Louizou, A. Vasiageorgi, S. Rapti, P. Tsoplou; new genetic variant within exon 6 of the SERPINC1 gene, G13265C. Bioiatriki Medical Services, Athens, Greece. This mutation result in the exchange of residue Ala383 by a proline, 10 Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal recessive disease residues N-terminally of the Arg393-Ser394 scissile peptide bond lo- in Caucasians. The carrier frequency is approximately 5 % in North cated in the reactive center loop and it was not detected in 100 healthy Europe, while among the Greek population, cystic fibrosis constitutes subjects. It is likely that this phenotype is a substrate-like behaviour of the second most common disease after β-thalassemia. A 35-year-old mutant AT molecules, as the bulkier proline residue would not be able Caucasian male chose to have mutation screening although there was to insert rapidly into the main body of the serpin after thrombin/FXa- no family history of CF. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance mediated cleavage of the Arg393-Ser394 peptide bond. Moreover, the regulator (CFTR) mutation analysis using the Inno-LiPa CFTR assay presence of this new variant could interfere with the diagnosis of muta- revealed presence of hybridization for both the wild-type and mutant tion Antithrombin Cambridge II. oligonucleotides for R553X mutation. The Tag-IT CFTR 40+4 assay Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, RE- was also used for further testing of the sample. Upon analysis of the CAVA (0014/0016) patient results no mutant allele was detected for the mutation R553X. The patient seemed to be normal in all mutations screened. This re- P02.115 gion was sequenced, and an apparent heterozygous for R553G muta- Waardenburg syndrome type ii: about 4 cases tion was detected. This is the second time this mutation is found but L. Ben Jemaa1, H. Jilani1, H. Ben Mariem1, F. Maazoul1, R. Meddeb1, M. Cha- not in a patient but in a healthy carrier with no symptoms. As shown in abouni1, G. Besbes2, F. Tinsa3, M. Ferjaoui4, R. Mrad1, H. Chaabouni1; this case the method used for carrier screening is also of high impor- 1Service des maladies congénitales et héréditaires, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Service tance in order to determine the actual mutation. Technical anomalies d’ORL EPS la rabta, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Service de pédiatrie hôpital d’enfants, leading to the incorrect interpretation of the patient’s results cannot be Tunis, Tunisia, 4Service D’ORL EPS Charles Nicolle, Tunis, Tunisia. excluded. This case demonstrates that counseling patients who meet Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a hereditary auditory-pigmentary syn- laboratory criteria for a CF diagnosis but do not have clinical symptoms drome, the major symptoms being congenital sensorineural hearing of CF is problematic. The rare mutations detected in these nonsymp- loss and pigmentary disturbance of eyes, hair and skin. Depending in tomatic patients may not represent independent disease-causing mu- additional symptoms, WS can be classified into four types: WS type I tations, and care is advised in offering phenotypic predictions. (WS1) is associated with facial deformity such as dystopia canthorum; WS2 has no other symptoms; WS3 is associated with upper limb de- P02.118 formity; and WS4, with megacolon. the French cystic Fibrosis Laboratory Network: seven years’ It is an autosomal dominant affection which has a wide heterogeneity. experience We describe here the clinical manifestations of 4 patients. E. Girodon1, M. des Georges2, M. Audrézet3, T. Bienvenu4, E. Bieth5, C. Costa1, The first case was a familiar case in witch the father and his son have M. Delpech4, M. Goossens1, M. Claustres2, C. Férec3; congenital deafness, heterochromia irides, and a slight scoliosis. 1Hôpital H Mondor APHP, Génétique, Créteil, France, 2IURC, Génétique, Mont- The second case is an isolated case of a boy aged of 18 mounths, hav- pellier, France, 3Génétique, Brest, France, 4Hôpital Cochin APHP, Génétique, ing severe deafness, hypochromic iridis and ocular albinism. Paris, France, 5Hôpital Purpan, Génétique, Toulouse, France. In the last case we report an eight year-old boy who got a partial al- CFTR gene studies represent one of the most frequent genetic analy- binism (white forelock, hypopigmented skin lesions) associated with ses performed worldwide. In order to ensure provision of best genetic dysmorphic features and mental retardation. Audiometry was normal. services in this field, 35 molecular genetics laboratories organized the Our patients had clinical features compatible with Waardenburg syn- French CF Laboratory Network. This network, the implementation of drome type II. which was facilitated by the European CF Network, was recognized Type II Waardenburg are a heterogeneous group with normally located in 2001 by the French Ministry of Health. Ten laboratories received canthi, sensorineural, hearing loss (77%) and heterochromia iridium financial support for in-depth CFTR gene studies and a subgroup of (47%). four had additional support, as reference centres, for management of Two genes are mutated in this form et should be screened. the Network and clinical research. Based on best practices guidelines for CFTR gene analysis, DNA sam- ples may be processed in one or two different laboratories, depending on the indication of the test and the laboratories’ level of expertise. More than 10,000 samples are studied per year (50-1500 per lab) in-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  cluding 200 for prenatal diagnosis. The continuous share of experi- loci in order to verify the absence of contamination with maternal blood ence with rare variants greatly helps genetic counselling. or cells. When maternal contamination of amniotic fluid was unavoid- Since 2001, six workshops were organized, convening molecular ge- able, the culture of amniocytes in specific media was used for selection neticists, technicians, clinicians of CF care centres and private compa- of fetal cells. nies. Three main topics were addressed: 1) Network functioning, dis- Results: 4 heterozygous genotypes were identified (ΔF508/N, G542X/ cussion on best practice guidelines and report on European actions; 2) N), six normal genotypes and one compound heterozygous genotype technical aspects including new technologies; 3) and clinical issues. A (621+1G>T/ΔF508). number of collaborative studies have been published (e.g. Claustres, Conclusions: It is possible to perform prenatal diagnosis using Eluci- Hum Mutat 2000; Muller, Am J Med Genet 2002; Feldmann, Hum Mu- gene CF29 kit in all cases with the exception of cases which can be tat 2003) and others are still ongoing, such as the study of phenotype- homozygous for non-ΔF508 mutations. STR genotyping and amnio- genotype correlations on R117H. The involvement of several of the cytes culture are complementary methods used in difficult cases for Network members in European actions contributes to the dynamism obtaining a correct prenatal diagnosis. of the French Network. P02.121 P02.119 Prenatal diagnosis in cF Russian families the prevalence of common cFtR gene mutations and 5t allele N. V. Petrova, E. E. Timkovskaya, T. A. Vasilyeva, R. A. Zinchenko; between infertile men in Russia Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, V. B. Chernykh, T. M. Sorokina, L. V. Shileiko, L. F. Kurilo, A. A. Stepanova, A. Moscow, Russian Federation. V. Polyakov; Cystic fibrosis is the most common recessive disease in Caucasians. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, The spectrum and relative frequencies of mutations in the CFTR Moscow, Russian Federation. gene significantly varied between different populations and ethnic Introduction: Cystic fibrosis conductance transmembrane regulator groups. According to our previous investigations 20 different CF mu- (CFTR) gene mutations are common genetic cause of male infertil- tations (CFTRdele2,3(21kb), 394delTT, 604insA, L138ins, 621+1G>T, ity. The frequency and the spectrum of CFTR mutations are variable R334W, R347P, F508del, 1677delTA, G542X, 2143delT, 2184insA, between populations. K598ins, 3821delT, S1196X, 3677insTCAA, 3849+10kbC>T, W1282X, Materials and methods: We examined a cohort of 850 men from 3944delTG, N1303K) were accounted for 77% of CF alleles in Russian Russian infertile couples. Fourteen common CFTR mutations patients with F508del (54,2%) and CFTRdele2,3(21kb) (7,2%) being (CFTRdele2,3(21kb), 394delTT, L138ins, R334W, F508del, I507del, the most frequent ones. We have performed 123 prenatal diagnoses 1677delTA, G542X, 2143delT, 2184insA, 3821delT, W1282X, N1303K for 98 couples. Two cases included twin pregnancies: one homozy- and 3849+10kbC>T) and Tn-polymorphism in the intron 8 (IVS8T) gous and one heterozygous. 74 families with 17 different genotypes have been analyzed. were fully informative for direct DNA analysis performed by using multi- Results: CFTR gene mutations were found in 40 (4.7%) patients. Fol- plexPCR, heteroduplex analysis and restriction analysis. In 19 families lowing heterozygous mutations have been revealed: F508del (n=17), only one parent mutant allele was known and in 5 families none of CFTRdele2,3 (n=7), W1282X (n=6), 2143delT (n=4), 2184insA (n=1), CF mutations were identified, so prenatal analysis was done by in- G542X (n=1), R334W (n=1), 1677delTA (n=1), 3849+10kbC>T (n=1) direct DNA analysis using haplotype analysis of four dinucleotide re- and 3821delT (n=1). The presence of 5T allele was found in 96 (11.3%) peats (IVS1CA, IVS8CA, IVS17bCA, W30), one tetranucleotide repeat infertile men. This CFTR allele has been revealed in the heterozygous (IVS6aGATT) and four biallelic restriction polymorphic sites. Materials (87,5%), in the homozygous (4,2%) and in the compound heterozygote used for fetal DNA analysis were CVS samples. 30 fetuses were af- state (8,3%) with following common CFTR mutation: F508del (n=4), fected, 66 - heterozygous carriers and 28 were healthy with two normal CFTRdele2,3 (n=1), W1282X (n=2) and G542X (n=1). Mild (atypical) alleles of CFTR gene. In all cases when prenatal diagnosis indicated forms of cystic fibrosis (CF) with extragenital features of CF (with a that the fetus had CF the couples chose pregnancy termination. presence of chronic bronchitis or chronic pancreatitis) were diagnosed in 4 (0.5%) infertile men. CBAVD and/or obstructive azoospermia were P02.122 revealed in about 2% of examined individuals. One severe oligozoo- A new cryptic CFTR exon in mild cystic Fibrosis spermic patient presented with unilateral renal agenesis (URA) associ- C. Costa1, V. Prulière Escabasse2, L. Bassinet3, L. Golmard1, C. Gameiro1, A. ated with CUAVD syndrome. de Becdelièvre1, A. Coste2, M. Goossens1, E. Girodon1; Conclusion: Obtained results demonstrated high prevalence of com- 1Laboratoire de Génétique et INSERM U955 équipe 11, Creteil, France, 2ORL mon CFTR mutations and 5T allele between Russian infertile men. Fol- CHU H Mondor, Creteil, France, 3Pneumologie-CRCM CHIC, Creteil, France. lowing four mutations: F508del, CFTRdele2,3, W1282X and 2143delT, Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most frequent autosomal recessive disease are the commonest CFTR mutations in Russia. in the Caucasian population. So far, over 1500 CFTR gene mutations have been described responsible for classical CF and CFTR-related P02.120 disorders. Screening for large gene rearrangements has improved Prenatal diagnosis by ARms-PcR and genetic counseling in identification of CF alleles but a number of cases remain unsolved, couples of cFtR mutations carriers making genetic counselling difficult, particularly when the diagnosis L. A. Tamas1, Z. L. Popa2, L. Pop3, I. Popa3, G. Budau2, A. Anghel1, C. Samoi- is uncertain. Unidentified CF mutations may lie in introns, such as la1, Z. Popa4, I. M. Ciuca3, C. Gug5; 3849+10kbC>T and 1811+1.6kbA>G. 1Department of Biochemistry, UMF, Timisoara, Romania, 2Obstetrics and Gyne- We report the case of a French 25y woman diagnosed with dissemi- cology Clinic III, UMF, Timisoara, Romania, 3Pediatric Clinic II, UMF, Timisoara, nated bronchiectasis, pancreatic sufficiency and borderline sweat Romania, 4National Center of Cystic Fibrosis, Timisoara, Romania, 5Depart- tests. Screening of the 27 exons including search for gene rearrange- ment of Genetics, UMF, Timisoara, Romania. ments only identified F508del in heterozygosity. Investigation at the Objectives: The aim of this study was to provide a correct prenatal mRNA level was then performed from nasal epithelial cells. diagnosis and genetic counseling for couples with previous family his- An abnormal, longer CFTR mRNA was detected, corresponding to a tory of cystic fibrosis who intended to have a new child. 97bp insert between exons 6b and 7. This fragment matches a 101bp Method and materials: 11 couples were selected for prenatal diagnosis, sequence of intron 6b, and is flanked by the consensus donor and based on family history or typical echographic findings. The couples acceptor splice sites. A new stop codon is created within the inserted had previous children with cystic fibrosis who had been genetically sequence. The amount of abnormal CFTR mRNA of the patient was tested and had both mutations identified or had deceased children estimated to be 20% of the wild type, which suggests the abnormal diagnosed with cystic fibrosis but without molecular diagnostic. Ge- splicing is due to partial activation of a cryptic splice site. This hypoth- nomic DNA was isolated from amniotic fluid collected by transabdomi- esis is supported by the fact that the patient does not suffer from se- nal amniocentesis in the 16th week of pregnancy and from venous vere CF. Studies at the genomic level are still ongoing to identify the blood collected on EDTA from both parents. The genetic analysis for mutation which leads to partial activation of a cryptic splice site and CFTR mutations was performed with Elucigene CF29 kit which uses explains the creation of a new exon. the ARMS-PCR method. STR genotyping was performed for severalClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.123 P02.125 A synonymous mutation in the cFtR gene causes an aberrant Distribution of CFTR mutations in cystic fibrosis patients from splicing in an Italian patient affected by cystic fibrosis. Eastern Hungary V. Faa’1, A. Coiana2, L. Costantino3, S. Pirroni2, M. Masala2, A. Cao1, M. Cristina I. Balogh1, B. Nagy1, F. Gonczi2, E. Ajzner3, E. Dzsudzsak1, J. Kappelmayer1; Rosatelli2; 1University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Kenezy Gyula Hospital, Debre- 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle cen, Hungary, 3Josa Andras Hospital, Nyiregyhaza, Hungary. Ricerche, Cagliari, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common severe inherited monogenic Universita’ degli Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 3Policlinico Mangiagalli e Regi- disease in Caucasians. In addition of the most frequent deltaF508 mu- na Elena, Milano, Milano, Italy. tation which is responsible for the 50-65% of the cases, more than Genotype screening in human disease frequently identifies exon/ in- 1300 different rare mutations are present in the CFTR gene. Distribu- tron sequence variations whose association with the disease pheno- tion of the different CFTR mutations show large ethnic variability. As type is unclear. In fact the pathologic effect of an apparently benign an initial attempt to create a mutation testing panel in Hungary, the polymorphism, such as codon third position variations, or nucleotide aim of this study was to determine which mutations are present among change/ deletion in the intronic non canonical splicing regulatory ele- Eastern Hungarian CF patients. ments, are difficult to assess. For the mutation analysis, 43 patients with severe CF phenotype were In this work we define the pathogenic role of a synonymous mutation selected and tested with commercially available multiplex allele spe- found in an Italian patient affected by cystic fibrosis (CF). It consists cific PCR and oligonucleotide ligation methods. of a G>T substitution at nucleotide 2811 on exon 15 of CFTR gene. Mutations in both alleles could be identified in 28 patients (65%). 19 CFTR mRNA analysis showed that this synonymous mutation created patients (44%) were homozygous for deltaF508, while the other 9 pa- a new 5’ splice site inside exon 15 causing the skipping of 76 amino tients were compound heterozygous for two mutations. 4 out of them acids. had deltaF508 and CFTRdele2,3(21kb), 2 had deltaF508 and N1303K Furthermore, CFTR mRNA analysis showed that, although this aber- and one patient had deltaF508 with c.1717-1G>A. The remaining two rant splicing caused a shorter exon 15, the downstream exonic se- patients possessed two rare mutations (G542X with N1303K and quence from exon 16 to the end of the ORF was in frame. G542X with R347P). Therefore, the skipping of amino acid residues included in exon 15, In 12 patients (28%), only one mutation could be detected. 10 patients located in CFTR transmembrane domain MSD7, probably modify the were heterozygous for delta F508, one patient had G542X and an oth- structure and the regulation of the Cl- channel. er had N1303K in heterozygous form. In 3 patients (7%) no mutation The growing interest on the potential effects of single-nucleotide was found. changes in coding and non-coding regions on the extent and accuracy In conclusion, using multiplex mutation detection methods, the com- of pre-mRNA splicing is expected to have a significant impact on the plete underlying genetic background could be identified in 65% of CF diagnosis and treatment of genetic diseases. The correct classification patients form Eastern Hungary, while in other 28%, one mutation was of mutations is essential to understand structure-function relationship found. The frequency of CFTRdele2,3(21kb) mutation with Slavic ori- in the corresponding protein, to assess the phenotypic risk in CF pa- gin was surprisingly high (9%). tients and to devise new therapies. P02.126 P02.124 Cystic fibrosis liver disease and CFTR or MBL Identification of a novel CFTR mutation in a patient with cystic I. M. Ciuca1,2, I. Popa1,2, L. Pop1,2, Z. Popa3, L. Tamas4; fibrosis 1Pediatric II Department, Timisoara, Romania, 2UMFT V.Babes, Romania, 3Na- N. Polgar1, J. Bene1, K. Bolbas2, K. Pongracz2, K. Gyurkovits2, B. Melegh1; tional Cystic Fibrosis Centre, Timisoara, Romania, 4Biochemistry Department, 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pecs, UMFT V Babes, Timisoara, Romania. Pecs, Hungary, 2Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for Chest Diseases of the Background: CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regu- Reformed Church of Hungary, Mosdos, Hungary. lator) gene and MBL (mannose binding lectine) gene seems to influ- Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a most common autosomal recessive disease ence development of CF liver disease. Severe CFTR genotype and with a prevalence of 1 in 2500 and a carrier frequency of 1:22. CF low serum MBL are promoting factor in development of CFLD. Study is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conduc- aim: assessment of CFLD patients in relation with genotype and MBL tance regulator (CFTR) gene expressed in several organs including levels. Methods: Twenty five children with CFLD, followed in our Na- the lung, the pancreas, and the sweat glands. So far 1604 mutations tional CF Centre were evaluated. Genotype results were taken from of the CFTR gene have been reported at the CF Mutation Database. centre’s data base. MBL assay procedure was performed using MBL We examined a 17-year-old girl, a daughter of a Hungarian mother oligomer ELISA kit. Results: In patients with CFLD, 36% were MBL and a Nigerian father with a tentative diagnosis of CF. The patient’s deficient; from those 66% Δ F508 homozygous, while in patients with history was uneventful until her school years when mild upper respira- normal or increase MBL 56% patients had “severe” genotype. Δ F508 tory infections appeared with repeated coughing periods and sweat- homozygous genotype was found in 43% CFLD patients, each other chloride levels of 102mmol/l, however she did not have any intestinal with a different genotype. Conclusions: A correlation between CFLD symptoms. As direct sequencing of all 27 exons of CFTR revealed, the and specific genotype or MBL level could not be made. MBL2 genotyp- patient had two mutations in compound heterozygous form: a 2183 ing is necessary to identify the patients predisposed to develop CFLD. AA>G frameshift mutation in exon 13, described previously in three Heterogeneity of genotypes in CFLD patients suggests the hypothesis unrelated CF patients of Sardinian descent; and a mutation not yet of other factors in determination of cystic fibrosis associated liver dis- reported elsewhere, a 3872 G>A transition in exon 20 resulting in a ease. glycine-glutamate amino acid change at position 1247. We found that the 2183 AA>G frameshift mutation was inherited from her Hungarian P02.127 mother, while the 3872 G>A transition from her Nigerian father. The Abnormal ultrasound signs of fetal bowel in cystic fibrosis: a latter is also carried by her brother. This novel mutation affects an ATP- molecular approach. binding site of the CFTR protein, and was predicted to be probably L. Porcaro1, L. Costantino1, V. Paracchini1, D. A. Coviello1, P. Capasso1, D. damaging by the Poly-Phen prediction software, thus we presume that Degiorgio1, C. Colombo2, M. Seia1; it is a CF-mutation causing a milder, late-onset form of CF. 1Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2CF Centre, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policli- nico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy. Hyperechogenic fetal bowel (HFB), a possible prenatal sign of CF, is detected in 0.1−1.8% of pregnancies during the second or third trimes- ter. The prevalence of meconium ileus (MI) is higher among neonates with previous HFB than in neonates with normal ultrasound imaging so there could be a relationship between HFB and MI. The aim was to evaluate usefulness and limits of genetic analysis inClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  couples with HFB, defining the best testing strategy based on a review 39% of newborns compared to 22% in the general population. We did of CF patients with MI. not find an increased frequency of the 5T allele in neonates with hy- Results of genetic analysis on 79 Italian CF patients with MI, and 47 pertrypsinemia, however longer adjacent TG tracts, which are directly HFB couples were reviewed. proportional to disease penetrance, are more frequent in this cohort Screening for the most frequent mutations in 79 MI patients allowed a of newborns. These findings may warrant further investigation into the 90.5% detection rate, which increased to 96.8% after DNA sequenc- applicability of 5T-TG genotyping within the panel of mutations used ing, and to 98.1% after MLPA; in two couples of carriers was confirmed for CF newborn screening. CF in the fetus. A third couple terminated the pregnancy of a child F508del/P5L. In a further pregnancy the fetus F508del heterozygote P02.130 again had HFB. Because of the severity of the ultrasound picture, this cystic Fibrosis in Rostov region pregnancy was terminated.Testing the most frequent mutations and S. Amelina, N. Vetrova; deletions covers 91.8% of CFTR mutations in CF with MI. A similar Rostov Medical Institute, Rostov, Russian Federation. testing strategy may be appropriate in HFB. We do not suggest to Cystic Fibrosis is one kind of single-gene hereditary diseases caused sequence the gene: it’s possible to identify mutations with unknown/ by a mutation in the gene, cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator. unclear clinical consequences. We also suggest to proceed with ex- Cystic Fibrosis has high morbidity and mortality. treme caution when counselling parents of a fetus with HFB who are There is a trend of Cystic Fibrosis transforming lethal childhood dis- carriers of mild or novel mutations, as their presence in the fetus does ease into chronic illness of adolescents and adults. Prevalence of Cys- not justify a diagnosis of CF. tic Fibrosis in Russian Federation is significantly lower comparing to North America and Europe. By now more than 1,000 gene mutations P02.128 resulting in Cystic Fibrosis are known. Polymorphism of cystic fibrosis in Moldavian patients The most common gene mutations identified in the Russian Federation N. I. Barbova, V. V. Egorov, A. P. Gavriliuc; population are ΔF508 (53,0%), CFTRdel 2,3 (21kb) (6,4%), N1303K State Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Moldova, (2,6%), 2184insA (1,8%), 2143delT (1,8%). Republic of. Newborn screening for Cystic Fibrosis was introduced in 2006 in Rus- The aim of presented study was to determine clinical features in pa- sian Federation. This test measures raised blood concentrations of tients with cystic fibrosis (CF) in correlation with types of mutations in immunoreactive trypsinogen. Since newborn screening was imple- CFTR-gene. mented, 105263 children were tested and 139 children had elevated Were investigated 123 patients with CF aged from 2 months to 24 levels of immunoreactive trypsinogen. All children were followed up years (55 female and 68 male), during the period 1992 - 2008. Were clinically. DNA analysis and sweat chloride tests were performed , too. determined 9 mutations (F508del, G542X, N1303K, W1282X, R117H, DNA tests were done in order to identify 8 major mutations. Accord- G551S, R347P, R334W, R553X). In 3,2% of patients the diagnosis car- ing to the results of the test 80% of patients had ΔF508 heterozygote ried out in France and Russia. Adult patients were 18,7%. In 91,9% of mutations. The prevalence of Cystic Fibrosis was 1:9500 in Rostov cases was mixed CF, in 4,9% - pulmonary and in 3,2% - intestinal CF. Region, which is similar with Russian Federation numbers. The most The course of CF was severe in 59,4% of cases, moderate in 40,6%. common genetic mutation was ΔF508. The introduction of newborn We detected F508del mutation in 57,7% of patients, 16,26% homozy- screening allowed to identify groups of children at risk. . gous, 41,46% heterozygous, suffered from severe mixed CF, 39,1% of Modern DNA analyses allow us to establish diagnoses of Cystic Fibro- them died. Were revealed heterozygous mutations: R334W in 2,4%, sis and to implement appropriate therapy before clinical symptoms of N1303K in 0,8%, G542X in 0,8% of cases, and 3849+10kbC>T in 0,8% the disease become apparent. of cases, compounds in 2,4% (F508del/185+1G>T; G542X/ N1303K; 128+1G>A/1677 del); the type of CF was mixed, and course was se- P02.131 vere with early manifestations. Mutations were identified in 65,8% of New pathogenic mutation in cystic fibrosis patient cases, in 43,9% one, in 18,7% two mutations and in 34,2% mutations S. Dadgar, S. Dadgar, H. Aryan, M. Houshmand; were not identified. Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Conclusions. The prognosis and severity of CF in Moldova was deter- Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an inherited disease that affects the respiratory mined not only by F508del mutations which frequency was 57,7%, but tract, intestine and many body organs because of this called multisys- some mutations in compound, which suggest the necessity to enlarge tem desease. In addition to affectance of respiratory and digestive sys- spectrum of detecting mutations. It is possible the influence of non- tem, CF can lead to diabetes, polyps in nose and infertility in men. CF identified major mutation in Moldavian population. patients have shorter life expectency. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common severe autosomal recessive disorder in Caucasian popula- P02.129 tions and affects 1 in 2500 live births. Mutations in the gene Cystic Assessment of a common variant repeat sequence within a Fibrosis Transmembrane conductance Regulatory (CFTR) which en- cystic fibrosis newborn screening program codes a protein expressed in the apical membrane of exocrine epithe- M. J. Somerville, S. Bleoo, M. Hicks, C. Walker, K. Sprysak, M. Lilley, S. Chris- lial cells, leads to this disorder. This gene has 27 exons. To date over tian, L. Podemski, R. Kelln, B. Elyas, S. Haase, S. Ordorica, L. Vicen, P. Scott; 1400 different mutations in this gene have been identified. University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. The proband was a 3.5 years old that was born in a third degree fa- We have assessed the heterozygote frequency among neonates with milial marrige with a weight 3100 grams. Poor sucking, cough and hypertrypsinemia (elevated IRT) detected through a provincial CF diarrhea were seen from the first days of birth. At present, the chief newborn screening program by monitoring the CFTR mutation spec- complain of the patient are pulmonary sticky sputum and cough. The trum and frequency, including the IVS8-5T variant and tandem TG- patient was analysed for mutations by PCR and sequencing methods tract lengths. The Luminex xTAG™ Cystic Fibrosis Kit, which detects for CFTR gene. The parents of patient were also analysed to confirm 39 cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene the found mutation. mutations as well as 4 CFTR variants was used for molecular analy- A homozygout T deletion in exon 13, codon 754 was found in the pa- sis. A total of 116,550 neonates were screened for CF using a top 2% tient DNA sample. This mutation in heterozygout state was found in cutoff for mutation analysis. Of the 2,331 newborns with increased IRT, parents. This mutation changes frameshift of Cystic Fibrosis Trans- one mutation was detected in 176 (heterozygote frequency of 7.6%), membrane conductance Regulatory protein. or about 2 times greater than in the general population. IVS8 T-tract We believed that this mutation is pathogenic. More investigation in cel- alleles were only reported in newborns with R117H mutations, in ac- lular level needs to confirm our results. cordance with ACMG recommendations. However, all samples from IVS8-5T carriers were further genotyped for TG-tract lengths. In total, P02.132 220 5T alleles were detected (9.4% vs 10% in the general popula- mutation detection in sporadic NF1 tion). However, the 11TG allele had a frequency of 61% in 5T new- S. Bendova1, A. Krepelova1, B. Petrak2, T. Marikova1; borns with elevated IRT, as compared to 78% in the general popu- 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, University Hospital Motol and lation. Conversely, longer TG tracts were detected in the remaining 2nd Medical School, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2DepartmentClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  of Child Neurology, University Hospital Motol and 2nd Medical School, Charles in this signaling cascade have recently been identified as underlying University, Prague, Czech Republic. Noonan syndrome and related disorders. Sporadic neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) occurs in the absence of a We have identified an identical germline KRAS mutation in two unrelat- family history of the disease and usually results from a new mutation in ed Noonan syndrome patients with a similar type of craniosynostosis. the germ cell of one of the parent. In most cases, the disease is caused Although craniosynostosis does not seem to be an invariant feature either by mutation in the NF1 gene, or by a particular or complete dele- of patients with this mutation, this finding highlights the significance tion of the NF1 gene. The NF1 gene exhibits one of the highest muta- of aberrant signaling mediated by the RAS pathway in the origin of tion rates of any human disorder. Here we report preliminary data of craniosynostosis. the experimental NF1 gene study in patients from the Czech Republic. We have screening germinal and somatic mutations spectrum of 30 P02.135 unrelated sporadic NF1 patients, using denaturing high-performance two cases of LEOPARD syndrome with same missense mutation liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and multiplex ligation-dependent in PTPN gene but different clinical manifestation probe amplification (MLPA) assay. DNAs of all patients were isolated K. Muru1,2, I. Kalev3, R. Teek1,4, R. Žordania5, T. Reimand1,2, K. Õunap1,2; from peripheral blood and 10 cutaneous neurofibroma biopsies. By 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, direct sequencing of the pre-selected amplicons we identified 6 causal Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Depart- germinal mutations, inclusive of 2 novel splice site mutations (c.2850+1 ment of Human Biology and Genetics, Institute of General and Molecular Pa- G >T, c.6641+1 G >A). All patiens were examined by MLPA metod and thology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngol- one of them harboured entire gene deletion. ogy, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Cildren`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia. Supported by GAUK 200 072 and AV-CR-1ET 101210513 LEOPARD syndrome (LS, OMIM 151100) a rare multiple anomalies condition belongs within of so called neuro-cardio-facial-cutaneous P02.133 syndromes group. Mutations in PTPN11 and RAF1 gene are the only two PtPN11 gene mutations (Y63c and R501J) detected in two genes known to be associated with LS, mutation have been identified tunisian Noonan syndrome’s children in about 93% affected individuals. R. Louati1, N. B. Abdelmoula1, I. T. Sahnoun2, S. Kammoun2, T. Rebai1; Patient 1 was born from first pregnancy with normal birth parameters. 1Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Department of Cardiology, CHU Hedi Parental main complaint was hyperactive behavior. First lentigines Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia. were presented at birth, but intensive growth started at the age of 2 Congenital heart defects (CHD) remain the most common birth defect, years. Heart ultrasound showed mitral insufficiency. Patient 2 is sec- occurring in 1% of live births. Despite great advances in the CHD di- ond child in family born from the induced labor due to polyhydramnion. agnosis and treatment, there continues to be significant associated Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) was diagnosed at the age of 1 mortality, morbidity and economic burden. The identification of genetic month and closely followed by since to find out the etiological factor. causes of CHD is important; to improve understanding of the aetiology She presented her first lentigines at birth, but rapid growth started only of CHD and to promise the opportunity of a better prevention, diagno- at the age of 3 years. sis, and care. Patients were referred to the genetic consultation due to rapid growth In Noonan syndrome (NS) characterized by CHD and dysmorphic of lentigines at the age of 4 years. They both had additionally slightly features, missense mutations of PTPN11 gene responsible of gain of short stature, characteristic facial features. Molecular analyses was function in the protein tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 account for approxi- performed by bidirectional sequencing and revealed one of most fre- mately 50% of cases. At the Medical University of Sfax; Department of quently described PTPN11 gene missense mutation in LS, 836A→G Histology; the pattern of PTPN11 mutations is defined in 15 NS Tuni- (Tyr270Cys). Although patients have different health problems, rapid sian patients (and 3 mothers) using Bi-directional direct sequencing of growth of lentigines in infancy lead to correct diagnosis. In literature PTPN11 exon 3 and its flanking intron boundaries. All patients harbour mutation Tyr279Cys is more frequently associated with short stature, congenital pulmonary vein stenosis (PVS) (with or without other CHD) deafness and also with HCM. An earlier diagnosis of LS is useful for and NS facial dysmorphic features. Two mutations of the exon 3, Y63C surveillance of the specific medical problems associated with LS and (known mutation) and R501J (new mutation) are identified. Y63C, for precise genetic counseling to the family. which is shown in a NS’s patient with PVS associated to an ASD, af- fects the N-SH2 domain of SHP2. This mutation is not detected in the P02.136 mother who has NS clinical phenotype. We suggest that the patient is A boy with atypical phenotype of NF1 with a type 1 microdeletion a compound heterozygote with Y63C (de novo or paternal germline S. Kivirikko1, P. Alhopuro1, T. Lönnqvist2, P. Höglund3, L. Valanne4, L. Messi- inherited) mutation and an other mutation inherited from the mother. aen5, M. Pöyhönen6,1; R501J mutation that affect PTP domain of SHP2, was identified in a 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, patient with NS features and an isolated PVS. Finland, 2Hospital for Children and Adolescent, Helsinki University Central Hos- pital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Rinnekoti Foundation, Espoo, Finland, 4Department of P02.134 Radiology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department craniosynostosis in patients with Noonan syndrome caused by of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United germline KRAS mutations States, 6Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Fin- M. Kriek1, C. P. Kratz2, G. Zampino3, S. G. Kant1, C. Leoni3, F. Pantaleoni4, A. land. Oudesluys-Murphy1, C. Di Rocco5, S. P. Kloska6, M. Tartaglia7, M. Zenker8; Patient was born as a first child of healthy, non-consanguineous Cau- 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Wellington casian parents at week 38+5. During pregnancy hydronephrosis was School of Medicine and Health Sciences, New Zealand, 3Università Cattolica seen at 19 weeks of gestation. Birth weight was 3890 g, length 47 del Sacro Cuore, Italy, 4Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Italy, 5Università Cattolica cm and head circumference 35 cm. As a newborn dysmorphic facial del Sacro Cuore, Leiden, Italy, 6University of Muenster, Leiden, Germany, features, anterior anus and an anocutaneal fistula was seen. The chro- 7Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Leiden, Italy, 8University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, mosomes (400 bands) were normal. Germany. He walked independently at the age of 2 years 4 months, but did not Craniosynostosis, the premature fusion of one or more cranial sutures, speak. His height was 87.5 cm (slightly below his target height), body is a developmental defect that disrupts the cranial morphogenetic pro- mass index (BMI) 16.2 and head circumference 53 cm. His facial fea- gram, leading to variable craniofacial dysmorphism and associated tures were distinct with high anterior hairline, thick eyebrows, epican- functional abnormalities. Craniosynostosis is frequently observed as thal folds and hypertelorism. The nasal tip was broad and he had an- an associated feature in a number of clinically and genetically hetero- teverted nostrils. The filtrum was long and the upper lip was thin. The geneous syndromic conditions, including a group of disorders caused ears were thickened and the ear lobules were uplifted. He had one by activating mutations of the fibroblast growth factor receptor family classical cafe au lait spot. members FGFR1, FGFR2 and FGFR3. In these disorders, dysregula- In addition he has had severe feeding problems because of an intesti- tion of intracellular signaling promoted by the aberrant FGFR function nal malrotation. His MRI revealed high signal intensity lesions of white is mediated, at least in part, by the RAS-MAPK transduction pathway. matter, hippocampal and cortical area. The spinal cord was thickened Mutations in RAS and other genes coding for proteins participating at THVIII - LI.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  A de novo interstitial deletion of 1.3 Mb in 17q11.2 was detected at 20/48 (42%) cryptorchidism. CA were present in 64/84 (76%) patients. high-resolution oligonucleotide array CGH. By MLPA this deletion was Of these 30/64 (47%) had pulmonary valve stenosis, 8/64 (13%) atrial found to be the most common NF1 microdeletion (type 1) spanning septal defect, 8/64 (13%) ventricular septal defect, 6/64 (9%) hypertro- 1.4 Mb. This deletion is known to remove 14 genes. Some dysmorphic phic cardiomyopathy, 6/64 (9%) had stenosis of the peripheral pulmo- features, intestinal malrotation and some of the brain abnormalities nary arteries and 9% others CA. Forty patients, 41% IC and 25% AR have not been reported previously to be associated with NF1 micro- with CA were enrolled in the molecular genetic study. PTPN11 muta- deletion patients. tions are found in 22 patients, 4 patients had no detectable mutation and 14 are under molecular study. The PTPN11 mutation T468M was P02.137 found in patients with either NS or LS. In two families the PTPN11 mu- Spinal neurofibromatosis- a rare de novo presentation of NF1 tations, N308D and T468M were transmitted by fathers. J. Pilch1, E. Kluczewska2, E. Marszał1; CONCLUSION: PTPN11 is the gene most frequently mutated in NS 1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Po- and LS in this cohort and in 2 families were transmitted by fathers. land, 2Department of Radiology Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia, Zabrze, Poland. P02.139 The authors present a 16-year-old boy admitted to neurological de- Germline BRAF mutations in Noonan, LEOPARD and partment with clinical symptoms of polyneuropathy. He was born from cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes: molecular diversity and first uneventful pregnancy and delivery, his psychomotor development associated phenotypic spectrum was normal but frequently suffered from bronchitis. Family anamnesis A. Sarkozy1, C. Carta2, S. Moretti3, G. Zampino4, M. C. Digilio5, F. Pantaleoni2, without any history of inheritable diseases. When he was 11 the con- A. P. Scioletti6, G. Esposito1, V. Cordeddu2, F. Lepri1, V. Petrangeli2, M. L. Den- genital heart defect (ASD) was diagnosed and successfully corrected. tici1, G. M. S. Mancini7, A. Selicorni8, C. Rossi9, L. Mazzanti9, B. Marino10, G. Few months after double operation of left hallux onyxis the steppage B. Ferrero11, M. Cirillo Silengo11, F. Faravelli12, L. Stuppia6, E. Puxeddu3, B. D. gait was observed. On the patient’s skin two ,,café-au-lait” spots were Gelb13, B. Dallapiccola1, M. Tartaglia2; noted as well as several neurofibromas along nerves in upper and 1Istituto CSS-Mendel, Rome, Italy, 2Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, lower limbs. Neurological examination and nerve conduction studies 3Università di Perugia, Perugia, Italy, 4Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, revealed neuropathy. MRI of the brain showed high intensity signal in Rome, Italy, 5Ospedale Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 6Università “G. d’Annun- globus pallidus on the right side. MRI of the vertebral canal and the spi- zio”, Chieti, Italy, 7Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 8IRC- nal cord of cervical and lumbo-sacral regions revealed bilateral numer- CS Fondazione Policlinico Milano, Milano, Italy, 9Università di Bologna, Bolo- ous neurofibromas comprising all the levels of nerve roots, along plex- gna, Italy, 10Università “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 11Università di Torino, Torino, uses and nerve ways. In the cervical part neurofibromas invaginates Italy, 12Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy, 13Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New into the vertebral canal with meningeal sack and spinal cord modeling. York, NY, United States. No other clinical symptoms of NF1 were found. Noonan, LEOPARD and cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes (NS, LS Spinal neurofibromatosis (OMIM #162210 ) is a rare manifestation of and CFCS) are developmental disorders with overlapping features in- NF1 affecting nerve roots, occurring mostly in families. In most pa- cluding distinctive facial dysmorphia, reduced growth, cardiac defects, tients single or no diagnostic symptoms of NF1 have been noted. Mo- skeletal and ectodermal anomalies, and variable cognitive deficits. lecular examinations made in some families confirmed mutations in Dysregulated RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal neurofibromin gene. Presence of a gene modifying the clinical pheno- traffic has been established to represent the molecular pathogenic type compensating for the deficiency of neurofibromine is suggested. cause underlying these conditions. To investigate the phenotypic spec- As causal therapy is impossible, the only opportunity is symptomatic trum and molecular diversity of germline mutations affecting BRAF, treatment. which encodes a serine/threonine kinase functioning as a RAS effector frequently mutated in CFCS, subjects with a diagnosis of NS (N= 270), P02.138 LS (N= 6) and CFCS (N= 33), and no mutation in PTPN11, SOS1, Phenotype- genotype correlations in Noonan/Leopard KRAS, RAF1, MEK1 or MEK2, were screened for the entire coding syndromes in a Portuguese medical Genetics Department sequence of the gene. Besides the expected high prevalence of muta- I. M. Gaspar1,2, R. Anjos3, R. Ferreira4, G. Nogueira5, M. Rebelo6, A. Teixeira3, tions observed among CFCS patients (52%), a de novo heterozygous S. Afonso7, E. Reis8, J. C. Ferreira9, P. Cabral9, I. Menezes3, J. Martins5, R. missense change was identified in one subject with LS (17%) and Rossi3, A. Gaspar10, F. Martins3, M. Zenker11; 5 individuals with NS (1.9%). Mutations mapped to multiple protein 1Medical Genetics Department, Egas Moniz Hospital, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Cardio- domains and largely did not overlap with cancer-associated defects. logia Pediátrica, Hospital Santa Cruz, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Ocidental, NS-causing mutations had not been documented in CFCS, suggesting Lisboa, Portugal, 3Serviço de Cardiologia Pediátrica, Hospital Santa Cruz, Cen- that the phenotypes arising from germline BRAF defects might be al- tro Hospitalar de Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa, Portugal, 4Serviço de Cardiologia lele specific. Selected mutant BRAF proteins promoted variable gain of Pediátrica, Hospital Santa Cruz, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa, function of the kinase, but appeared less activating compared than the Portugal, Lisboa, Portugal, 5Serviço de Cardiologia Pediátrica, Hospital Santa recurrent cancerassociated p.Val600Glu mutant. Our findings provide Marta, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Central, Lisboa, Portugal, 6Serviço de evidence for a wide phenotypic diversity associated with mutations af- Cardiologia Pediátrica, Hospital Cruz Vermelha, Lisboa, Portugal, 7Serviço de fecting BRAF, and occurrence of a clinical continuum associated with Pediatria, Hospital CUF Descobertas, Lisboa, Portugal, 8Serviço de Pediatria these molecular lesions. Ambulatoria, Clínica de Santo António, Amadora, Portugal, 9Serviço de Neu- rologia Pediátrica, Hospital São Francisco Xavier, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa P02.140 Ocidental Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 10Unidade de Metabólicas, Serviço de Pe- Noonan Syndrome and Neurofibromatosis type I in a family with diatria, Hospital de Santa Maria Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 11Institute of Human a novel mutation in NF Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. S. Ekvall1, A. Nyström1, J. Allanson2, C. Edeby1, M. Elinder1, G. Holmström3, M. Noonan syndrome (NS) and LEOPARD syndrome (LS) are character- Bondeson1, G. Annerén1; ized by short stature, typical facies, cardiac anomalies (CA), haemato- 1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, logical anomalies and skin involvement. 2Department of Genetics, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, and Professor OBJECTIVE: Clinical and molecular characterization of patients and of Paediatrics, University of Ottawa, Canada, 3Department of Neuroscience, affected relatives with NS and LS. Section of Ophthalmology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Patients with a clinical diagnosis of NS or Noonan Syndrome (NS) and Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) belong to LS were prospectively enrolled in this study conducted at 3 paediatric a group of clinically related disorders that share a common pathogen- cardiology units. A clinical protocol was completed for all patients. A esis, dysregulation of the RAS-MAPK pathway. NS is characterised by total of 104 patients, 84 index cases (IC) and 20 affected relatives (AR) short stature, heart defect, pectus deformity and facial dysmorphism, were included. The known genes for NS/LS (PTPN11, KRAS, SOS1, while skin manifestations, skeletal defects, Lisch nodules and neurofi- and RAF1) were analysed by PCR amplification and sequencing. bromas are characteristic of NF1. Both disorders display considerable RESULTS: Specific prenatal features were present in 18/84 (21%). clinical variability. Features of NS have been observed in individuals Postnatally, 60/84 (71%) had short stature, 42/84 (50%) typical facies, with NF1 - a condition known as Neurofibromatosis-Noonan SyndromeClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  (NFNS). The major gene causing NFNS is NF1. Rarely, a mutation in a transcriptional profile specifically associated to the mutational status PTPN11 in addition to an NF1 mutation is present. of NS samples. Both PTPN11 and SOS1 subgroups were well distin- We present the clinical and molecular characterisation of a family dis- guished from control samples, however displaying clearly distinct pat- playing both NS and NF1 features, with complete absence of neu- terns of gene expression, not consistent with a homogeneous generic rofibromas. To investigate the aetiology of the phenotype, mutational NS group. These data provide initial evidence of a high potential for analysis of NF1 was conducted, revealing a novel missense mutation PBMCs GEP analysis to dissect at transcriptional level the molecular in exon 24, p.L1390F, affecting the GAP-domain. Additional RAS- complexity of the inherited developmental disorders of the Ras-MAPK MAPK pathway genes were examined, but no additional mutations pathway. were identified. We confirm that NF1 mutations are involved in the aetiology of NFNS. Furthermore, based on our results and previous P02.143 studies we suggest that evaluation of the GAP-domain of NF1 should A possible role for the PtPN11 gene in sex determination be prioritised in NFNS. S. Jain1,2, M. Thomas1, J. Jessen1, S. Keating1, D. Chitayat1; 1Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of Toronto, Toronto, P02.141 ON, Canada. molecular and clinical characterization of 37 patients with The PTPN11 (protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 11) Noonan syndrome gene carries the instructions for making a protein called protein ty- G. Baldassarre1, C. Rossi2, M. Tartaglia3, C. Carta3, E. Banaudi1, N. Chiesa1, rosine phosphatase, nonreceptor type 11, more commonly known as M. C. Silengo1, G. B. Ferrero1; SHP-2. SHP2 forms a subgroup of this class and is a key player in 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Department of generating signals within cells that affect cell function, division and dif- Pediatrics, Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Policlinico S. Orsola, Bologna, Italy, ferentiation. Germline mutations in this gene have been known to be 3Department of Cell Biology and Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, associated with various diseases, including Noonan syndrome, LEOP- Roma, Italy. ARD syndrome, and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). The Noonan syndrome (NS, OMIM 163950) is an autosomal dominant dis- case presented here was diagnosed antenatally with cystic hygroma, order, with a prevalence of 1:1000-1:2500 live births, characterized hydrops fetalis, bilateral club feet, ASD and a karyotype of 46XX. Ter- by short stature, facial and skeletal dysmorphisms, cardiovascular de- mination of pregnancy occurred at 17 weeks of gestation and autopsy fects and haematological anomalies. Missense mutations of PTPN11 identified ambiguous genitalia and normal testes. DNA analysis for gene account for approximately 50% of NS cases, while molecular PTPN11 showed a heterozygous C > A nucleotide change in exon 13, lesions of other genes of the RAS/MAPK pathway play a minor role which has not been previously reported. The mutation is found in a in the molecular pathogenesis of the disease. Twenty-nine sporadic strongly conserved domain across species. and 4 familial cases of NS, for a total of 37 patients, underwent mo- The spectrum of PTPN11 mutations and their clinical implications are lecular analysis of the main genes of the patwhay with a total mutation wide-spread, explained by the ubiquitous expression of this protein. It detection rate of 78.8% (26/33). In details, we found 15 sporadic and remains interesting that association of the gene with sex differentiation 2 familial PTPN11 (51,5%), 6 sporadic and 1 familial SOS1 (21,2%), or ambiguous genitalia has not been made previously. Our patient was 1 sporadic KRAS and 1 sporadic BRAF (3%) mutated cases. The two found to have a novel, likely pathogenic PTPN11 mutation. Although PTPN11 familial cases were characterized by a very high intrafamilal the karyotype revealed a normal female genotype, the gonads were varability, with a surprisingly mild facial phenotype. Interestingly, we normal testes with the external genitalia showing ambiguity. The ab- have observed some peculiar clinical features in SOS1 patients, in sence of SRY gene and the finding of a de novo, germline mutation particular a prominent metopic suture in a turricephalyc cranial vault, in the PTPN11 gene raises a possible important role for the PTPN11 not observed in PTPN11 mutated NS patients. The KRAS patient pre- gene in sex determination. sented typical NS dysmorphisms not associated with congenital heart defects, while the BRAF patient, in addition to the characteristic NS P02.144 phenotype, presented epilepsy, a severe mental retardation and a mutation database of Noonan, costello and cardio-facio- Chiari type I malformation, so far reported only in 4 other cases; it cutaneous (cFc) syndromes is possible to propose that the cervical-occipital anomaly resulting in Y. Aoki, T. Niihori, T. Kobayashi, S. Kure, Y. Matsubara; Chiari I malformation, and its variants, can be an aspect of the skeletal Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. dysplasia of the syndrome. Noonan syndrome, Costello syndrome and cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome are autosomal dominant multiple congenital anomaly P02.142 syndromes characterized by a distinctive facial appearance, heart de- transcriptional hallmarks of Noonan syndrome in peripheral fects, musculocutaneous abnormalities and mental retardation. There blood mononuclear cells has been growing evidence that these syndromes are caused by dys- G. B. Ferrero1, D. Cantarella2, G. Baldassarre1, C. Isella2, N. Crescenzio1, S. regulation of the RAS/mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) path- Pagliano1, M. Silengo1, E. Medico2; way. Noonan syndrome is caused by mutations in PTPN11, KRAS, 1Department of Paediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Institute for Can- SOS1, or RAF1. Costello syndrome is caused by mutations in HRAS, cer Research and Treatment, University of Torino Medical School, Torino, Italy. whereas CFC syndrome is associated with mutations in KRAS, BRAF Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant syndrome charac- or MAP2K1/2. The molecules encoded by these genes in the pathway terized by a distinctive facial appearance, heart defects and skeletal play pivotal roles in cell proliferation, differentiation, survival and cell abnormalities, rarely associated with mental retardation or juvenile death. We recently suggested that disorders with mutations of mol- myelomonocytic leukemia. The majority of germline mutations respon- ecules in the RAS/MAPK cascade may be comprehensively termed sible for this disorder are in the PTPN11 and SOS1 genes encoding “the RAS/MAPK syndromes” (Aoki et al., Hum Mutat 29(8):992-1006, proteins of the Ras-MAPK pathway, which regulates cell prolifera- 2008) . As more mutations were identified in affected patients, sig- tion, differentiation and senescence by controlling gene expression. nificant overlaps of clinical pictures among these syndromes became To investigate the transcriptional consequences of these mutations, evident. It may be necessary to re-classify these syndromes accord- we performed Global mRNA Expression Profiling (GEP) with Illumina ing to molecular diagnosis and re-evaluate clinical manifestations. To oligonucleotide microarrays on Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells this end, we launched a website including the details on the MAPK (PBMCs), a target tissue of the syndrome. In detail, we analyzed 23 syndromes and mutation database (http://www.medgen.med.tohoku. samples from molecularly defined NS patients (17 with PTPN11 and ac.jp/RasMapk syndromes.html). Although the database is still in its 6 with SOS1 mutation), and 20 samples from age- and sex-matched infancy, it would help us to overview the spectrum of mutations of vari- controls. Out of over 20,000 genes analyzed, 5,254 passed a statisti- ous genes and to aid genetic testing of these elusive disorders. cal filter for reliable signal detection and for not being correlated with age, sex, or differential leucocyte count. Subsequently, t-test and sig- nal-to-noise ratio were used to select genes differentially expressed between control samples and NS cases, all together or subdivided in PTPN11 and SOS1 subgroups. Interestingly, GEP analysis highlightedClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.145 P02.147 Noonan-syndrome-like phenotype associated with a familial Atypical molecular findings in four patients with suggestive 12q13 about 1.1 mb microduplication proximal to the PtPN11- Noonan-related syndromes gene. Rt-PcR-investigations on a large number of Noonan J. Santome Collazo1, A. Carcavilla2, A. Tabernero Garcia1, E. Albinana3, E. syndrome patients who were found to be negative for mutations Guillen Navarro4, A. Perez-Aytes5, P. Lapunzina6, B. Ferreiro Fernandez1, R. in genes related to this disorder for similar genome aberrations. Munoz-Pacheco Roman1, B. Ezquieta Zubicaray1; P. M. Kroisel1, A. C. Obenauf1, P. Kubec2, K. Wagner1, M. R. Speicher1, M. 1Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Maranon, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Vir- Zenker3, T. Schwarzbraun1; gen de la Salud, Toledo, Spain, 3Hospital General de Almansa, Albacete, Spain, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics, Ober- 4Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 5Hospital General Universitario wart, Austria, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany. la Fe, Valencia, Spain, 6Hospital General Universitario la Paz, Madrid, Spain. Noonan-syndrome, a relatively common heterogeneous disorder (es- Germline missense mutations in genes coding for different compo- timated incidence of 1 in 1000 - 2500 live births) was shown to occur nents of the RAS/MAPK signalling cascade (PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1 due to dysregulation of the RAS-MAPK pathway. Gain-of-function mu- and RAS) have been recognized as the cause of several phenotypi- tations in the PTPN11, KRAS, SOS1, and RAF1 genes from the RAS/ cally overlapping autosomal-dominant disorders, recently referred to MEPK signalling pathway can be identified in about 70-80 % of indi- as the Noonan-related Syndromes (Noonan, LEOPARD, Costello and viduals with Noonan syndrome. In 40-50 % mutations of the PTPN11 Cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes). Herein we describe four patients gene were found to be responsible with considerable phenotype vari- presenting atypical findings in molecular diagnosis. ability. There is an overlap of phenotype features with Costello- and Patient #351 had suggestive facial dysmorphology, severe short stat- CFC-syndrome, also developmental disorders of the RAS-RAF-MAPK ure and bilateral cryptorchidism. DNA testing identified an in-frame pathway. Recently an 8 Mb large duplication in 12q24 including the 3pb-insertion in exon-7 of PTPN11 gene (p.Q255_Q256insQ). Two PTPN11 gene was reported in a Noonan syndrome patient, who was other affected members of the family segregate the variant. negative for mutations of the PTPN11, KRAS, SOS1 and RAF1 genes. Patient #178 presented with facial dysmorphology and mild short stat- The conclusion that duplication of the PTPN11 gene could be respon- ure. PTPN11 assays were performed, revealing a 3pb-deletion in in- sible was therefore put forward. Here we describe a new microduplica- tron-12 (c.-16_-18delATG). In silico splicing simulation produced new tion of about 1.1 Mb at 12q13 identified by microarray analysis and acceptor splice sites, thus probably affecting the correct splicing. verified by RT-PCR in a 7 year old boy and his mother who both show Patient #301 displayed craniofacial anomalies with severe short stat- physical including facial and mental symptoms compatible with diag- ure, pulmonic stenosis and hypertrophic myocardiopathy, moderate nosis of Noonan syndrome. Sequencing analysis of the PTPN11 and developmental delay, and severe linfatic dysplasia. PTPN11 gene KRAS genes did not show a causative mutation. Interestingly a gene analysis revealed the presence of a de novo single-codon double- of the MAP-kinase family is duplicated in these patients. Results of a nucleotyde substitution (p.T73L) that produces an aminoacidic change detailed investigation for genome copy alterations by RT-PCR-analy- not previously reported. sis using primer sets for the proximal, central and distal part of this Patient #255 had typical facial phenotype, pulmonic stenosis, hyper- 1.1.Mb microduplication in more than 100 Noonan syndrome patients trophic myocardiopathy and severe feeding difficulties. Molecular diag- negative for mutations in Noonan syndrome related genes will be pre- nosis showed a heterozygous 6pb-deletion in intron-1 5’UTR region in sented. HRAS gene (c.-84_-89delGGGCCT). Mutations in 5’UTR might affect regulation of gene expression. P02.146 This study describes four patients with suggestive Noonan-related Syn- molecular analysis of the Noonan (-like) syndromes: overview of dromes with atypical molecular findings. Phenotypical consequences 7 years of DNA diagnostics in the Netherlands of all these mutations have not been proved with an in vitro analysis, H. G. Yntema1, W. M. Nillesen1, K. P. J. van der Donk1, G. M. G. van de Ven- but some indirect approaches have been performed to explore the ef- Schobers1, M. T. M. Schepens1, M. C. J. Jongmans1, C. Noordam2, I. van der fect of these atypical variants. Burgt1; 1Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Department of P02.148 Pediatrics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Duplication of the Rubinstein-taybi locus at 16p13: a novel case The clinically related Noonan syndrome, Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous with overgrowth is broadening the phenotypic spectrum (CFC) syndrome, and Costello syndrome are characterised by a typical S. Azzarello-Burri, A. Schinzel, A. Baumer, M. Riegel, B. Steiner; facial appearance with hypertelorism, ptosis, down slanting palpebral Institute of Medical Genetics, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. fissures, low set posteriorly rotated ears, and short neck. Other char- Microduplications encompassing the Rubinstein-Taybi region at acteristic findings include congenital heart disease, mental retardation, 16p13.3 lead to a rare multiple congenital anomalies/ mental retarda- and short stature. These disorders are caused by dysregulation of the tion syndrome. We report on a 19 years old male patient with an over- RAS/mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, due to muta- growth syndrome with multiple congenital anomalies and mild mental tions in the genes PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1(Noonan syndrome), BRAF, retardation due to a 0.95 Mb duplication at 16p13.3. He presented MAP2K1, MAP2K2 (CFC syndrome), HRAS (Costello syndrome), or with a left dysplastic ear with atresia of the external auditory canal, a KRAS (Noonan, CFC, and Costello syndrome). preauricular tag, fused middle ear ossicles and bilateral deafness. The In our laboratory, PTPN11 mutation analysis has been performed in dysmorphic facial features were characteristic for a long and narrow more than 1000 index cases with a clinical suspicion of Noonan/CFC/ face, deep set eyes with low position of eyebrows, prominent nasal Costello syndrome. In 25% of patients a mutation could be identified, root and tip, lateral flaring of eyebrows, short philtrum, prominent lips, up to 80% of which appeared to be de novo. In one family, homozy- everted upper lip and large hand and feet with broad interdigital joints. gosity for a PTPN11 mutation caused severe cardiac disease in two He showed tall stature with a mild scoliosis and a marked thoracic fetuses, and lethality shortly after birth. Selective mutation analysis of kyphosis. Beside the typical facial and skeletal features, overgrowth the other genes in the MAPK pathway led to a molecular diagnosis in seems to be a key feature for submicroscopic duplications of the Ru- an additional 30% of patients. binstein-Taybi region. Many of the clinical features of our patient fit well The recent implementation of a high-throughput automated parallel with the three cases published so far; however, some are unique (in sequencing protocol of all known genes involved in Noonan/CFC/ addition, he presented ear anomalies, very distinctly advanced growth Costello syndrome in our laboratory, has led to the identification of and relatively mild developmental delay), delineating the common clin- novel mutations. We gained more insight in genotype/phenotype cor- ical phenotype on one side and broadening the clinical spectrum on relations, and concluded that more Noonan (-like) genes remain to be the other side. From this observation, we conclude that the evaluation discovered. Furthermore, there is an urgent need for a prenatal testing of patients with overgrowth syndromes with variable degree of mental protocol, since we identified one PTPN11 and one KRAS mutation in retardation should also include the investigation for submicroscopic fetuses with polyhydramnion and increased nuchal fluid with a normal chromosomal imbalances. karyotype.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.149 nated due to severe patological findings noted on fetal ultrasound in- A chest tumor in a child with Rubinstein taybi syndrome - case vestigation. Clinical picture and radiological investigations of the fetus report showed typical findings of achondrogenesis type II. Molecular analysis O. D. Marginean, Tamara Marcovici, Ioan Simedrea, Maria Puiu, IlieRodica; of genomic DNA extracted from fetal cells (Prof. Geert Mortier,Ghent 1 Ist Pediatric Clinic, Timisoara, Romania. University) revealed the heterozygosity for c.2473G>T mutation Background : Rubinstein Taybi is a rare syndrome caused by genetic (p.Gly825Arg) in the COL2A1 gene. defect. Ultrasound investigations during the second pregnancy revealed fetal Matherial and method: D.I, 4 years old, female patient, with particu- hygroma, severe micromelia suggesting the recurrence of achondro- lar phenotype, admitted in our hospital in may 2004, for poliarticular genesis type II within this family. arthritis.She followed clinical examination, and analisis (blood count, Clinical and radiological findings in mother are not similar to the skel- ESR, rheumathoid factor, immunoglobulins, cariotype, bacteriological etal anomalies present in children. analisis from blood, throut , nose, urine ), NPI, ophtalmological and x- As the family history is complicated with the disorder which affects the ray exams, MRI. was perform. same organsystem in the mother and siblings we suspect that the dif- Results and discutions: The child was diagnosed with Rubinstein-Taybi ferent and milder phenotype in mother is due to the somatic mosaicism syndrome [by facial anormalities, specific digital anormalities, growth of the mutant COL2A1 gene. The molecular analyses of the parents retardation (> 3 SD) and mental retardation, genetic defect on 16p13 ] DNA are in process in the time of abstract submission. and oligoarthritis negative RF. Under steroid therapy the arthritis evolu- tion was well but the child get a right paracardiac pneumonia - treated P02.152 13 days with third generation cephalosporins. The X-ray control exam Acro-mandibulofacial dysostosis associated with microcephaly shows in a right paracardiac a small tumor (2/2 cm) confirmed by MRI. and mental retardation: a new case The pathological exam indicates a paravertebral rhabdomysaroma C. Nava1, V. Abadie2, S. Lyonnet1, G. Baujat1; The girl was transferred in the oncology department and received the 1Department of medical genetics, Université Paris Descartes, Necker-Enfants standard protocols. The evolution was good she is in the second grade Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 2Department of paediatrics, Necker-Enfants at school, and there are no malign relapse signs. Malades Hospital, Paris, France. Conclusions : • The Rubinstein Taybi syndrome is rare; Acro-mandibulofacial dysostosis is a rare and heterogeneous group • The diagnosis is made by clinical exams and with association of the of conditions, characterized by variable craniofacial features includ- high quality (pro) methaphase genetic exams; ing malar hypoplasia, micrognathia, external ears defects and limb • The association of this syndrome with right paravetebral rhabdo- abnormalities. Among them, Nager syndrome (preaxial acrofacial dys- mysaroma and paraneoplasic arthritis is rare. ostosis) is the most common. Post-axial acrofacial dysostoses include • There is a great need to have more sophisticated methods for inves- close entities such as Miller, Wildervanck-Smith, and Genée-Wiede- tigating this syndrome in our department. mann syndromes. Mandibulofacial dysostosis may be also associated with slit-foot deformity. P02.150 In 2000 and 2006, four Brazilian patients were reported with a char- A series of patients with Rubinstein-taybi syndrome: Review of acteristic combination of mandibulofacial dysostosis associated with clinical features marked microcephaly, trigonocephaly, preauricular skin tags, cleft pal- S. Basaran Yilmaz, E. Yosunkaya, K. Ender, G. S. Güven, M. Seven, A. Yuk- ate and mental retardation. Preaxial polydactyly was observed in two sel; cases. All cases showed feeding difficulties, post natal growth retarda- Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey. tion, and severe delay in language development. Rubinstein Taybi Syndrome (RTS) is a rare disorder, characterised We report a further patient with the same association of mandibulofa- by distinctive facial features, broad and often angulated thumbs and cial dysostosis, pre and post-natal microcephaly on -4 SD, preauricular great toes, short stature, and moderate to severe mental retardation. skin tags, large ear lobes and abnormal thumbs. The patient, the first Other frequent symptoms include seizures, hypotonia, hyperreflexia, child of unrelated heathy Caribbean parents, also presented with se- microcephaly, frontal bossing, down-slanting palpebral fissures, small vere feeding difficulties and severe delay in language development. mouth, frontal hair-up sweep, ear abnormalities, micrognathia, heavy In conjunction with the other reported Brazilian cases, our observation eyebrows, long eyelashes, ptosis, epicanthal folds, strabismus, per- gives support to a novel original phenotype within the complex group sistent fetal finger pads, scoliosis, spina bifida occulta, cryptorchidism, of mandibulofacial dysostosis. The molecular bases of this condition hirsutism, and capillar hemangioma. Cardiac defects and structural remains unknown, as genetics investigations, including CGH arrays brain abnormalities have also been occasionally reported.Although in our patient, were normal. Hitherto, all cases are sporadic and an RTS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, and clinical vari- autosomal recessive inheritance may be considered based on paren- ability is common in this mode of inheritance, we did not observe a tal consanguinity in one Brazilian case; however, de novo dominant remarkable clinical heterogeneity among our series of patients. Here, mutation at an autosomal locus cannot be excluded. we report the clinical features of five RTS patients and compare them with the anomalies reported in the literature. Mental retardation, hy- P02.153 potonia, down-slanting palpebral fissures, small opening of mouth, Larsen syndrome: clinical report of a patient with a new de novo hypoplastic alae nasi, ear abnormalities, broad toe and thumbs were mutation evident in all patients, supporting the previously reported high ratios of G. Soares1, M. J. Sá1, V. Mendonça2, N. Alegrete3, S. Robertson4, A. M. For- these findings. Additionally, optic disc pallor and chorioretinal atrophy tuna1; were detected in one of the present cases. We suspect that these are 1Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto de Magalhães, Porto, Portugal, 2Paediat- novel findings, which have not been described in the clinical picture of rics Department - Hospital São João, Porto, Portugal, 3Orthopaedics Depart- RTS up to date. ment - Hospital São João, Porto, Portugal, 4Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, Dunedin, New Zealand. P02.151 Introduction: Larsen et al. (1950) described one of the original cases Recurrence of achondrogenesis type ii within the same family of this bone dysplasia in a patient that in 1972 had an affected child. E. Kurvinen1, M. Shois2, K. Joost1, R. Zordania1; Features of Larsen syndrome (MIM: #150250) are dislocations of large 1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Fertilitas, Tallinn, Estonia. joints and unusual facies. Characteristic radiologic findings are also Achondrogenesis type II (ACG2) is a lethal dysplastic disorder of the present. Larsen syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant man- skeleton caused in most cases by a novel dominant mutation in the ner. It’s a rare disease, around 100 cases have been published. In type II collagen gene (COL2A1) which is present in the heterozygous 2004 de novo missense mutations in the FLNB gene were described. state. ACG2 is characterized micromelia, absent of ossification in the Here we report a new heterozygous de novo mutation in a patient with vertebral column, sacrum and pubic bones. The trunk is short with Larsen syndrome. prominent abdomen and hydropic appearance. Case Report: First and only child of non-consanguineous parents. At We report a family where counsulted patient had had severe scolio- birth, he presented with congenital anomalies: cleft palate, bilateral sis, body disproportion with short trunk. Her first pregnancy was termi- clubfoot, camptodactily and arthrogryposis.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  Referred to our Genetics consultation at the age of four. Physical ex- disruptions (ID) and genetic abnormalities. The second group is very amination showed knee and elbow dislocation, arthrogryposis, kypho- heterogeneous and, although many chromosomal abnormalities and scoliosis and spatulate fingers with broad thumbs and halluces. Face genomic alterations have been described, most of CLM remain un- was flat with prominent forehead and short nose with flat nasal bridge. explained. Psychomotor development was normal. We performed array-CGH (Agilent 244K) in a series of 54 index pa- Skeletal radiography showed rhizomelia of upper and lower limbs and tients with normal karyotype and unexplained CLM either isolated (10) multiple joint dislocations. Anterior decompression and posterior fusion or part of known or unknown MCA syndromes (44). In 19 patients, the was attempted at the age of 5. gene responsible for the disease had been previously unsuccessfully The molecular study was performed after informed consent within a tested. In the remaining 35 patients, no gene testing was available or research environment. The mutation 4580T>C was found, leading to a precise clinical diagnosis could not be achieved. an aminoacid substitution at position 1527 of the Filamin B protein. Thirty analyses detected either no genomic variation or known CNVs Discussion: The mutation 4580T>C had not been described before. (55%). In 5 index patients, array-CGH revealed one or more unknown Examination of parental samples showed that this mutation has oc- CNVs which either were present in one asymptomatic parent (4) or did curred de novo. Additional investigation is ongoing to further character- not segregate with the malformation (1). We identified anomalies in the ize this new mutation, including functional studies in fibroblasts. remaining 19 index patients. Three of them were deleterious, either de novo (1) or familial (2). One recurrent identical anomaly identified in 3 P02.154 index patients sharing similar radial malformations could be deleteri- “Laurin-sandrow syndrome”: a new family with rare genetic ous, but familial additional analyses are still pending for these and the disorder other 13. N. Rumyantseva1,2, B. Zoll3, R. Chmel1; Overall, at least 6 genomic anomalies have been identified in this se- 1Republican Medical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus, 2Belarusian ries of 54 patients presenting limb malformations (≥ 11%). Medical Academy of Post-Graduate Education, Minsk, Belarus, 3Institut für Conclusion: After precise clinical and genetic evaluation, unexplained Humangenetik, Göttingen, Germany. CLM are good candidates for Array-CGH analysis. “Laurin-Sandrow syndrome” (LSS) (OMIM 135750) is rare disorder characterized by distinct combination of mirror polysyndactyly, sym- P02.156 metric tetramelia, nasal defects. A study of the Genetics of Limb Reduction Defects We described a new family with autosomal dominant transmission of M. S. Aglan, M. O. El-Ruby, S. A. Temtamy; LSS, presented a clinical findings of affected child and father, reviewed National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. a literature data according diagnostic criteria. Limb reduction defects are an important group of congenital limb mal- Proposita - second child of young couple (G1- healthy sister) was born formations that requires thorough assessment. They can be isolated at term BW=2110; BL=42cm; OFC=32 cm. Female infant showed pre- or associated with other malformations as a part of syndrome. Causes natal hypoplasia, microcephaly, posterior encephalocele, dysmorphic of limb deficiencies include single gene disorders, chromosomal ab- ears, facial appearance similar to frontonasal dysplasia (hypertelorism, normalities or teratogens. However, the etiology remains unknown in microphthalmia, partial aplasia of nasal bones, partial atresia of nasal many cases. The present study aimed at the proper diagnosis and canals, wide flat nose, nares defects, unilateral cleft lip and palate, classification of 30 cases with limb defects referred to the Limb Malfor- micrognathia), heart defect (ASD), bilateral mesomelic anomalies of mations and Skeletal Dysplasia Clinic, NRC, Egypt in order to provide lower limbs, pre- and postaxial polydactyly of feet (8 toes), syndactyly, accurate and efficient genetic counseling. Detailed history, three gen- clubfoot. At follow-up growth and mental delay, neurological signs, py- eration pedigree analysis, examination of different body systems with eloectasia were developed. Child died at 3 months age. specific studies of different parts of the limbs documented by radio- Father presented normal limbs, growth (W-63kg, L-172cm, OFC- logical examination, photography and basic anthropometric measure- 55cm), mental development, unusual facial features - small soft mass ments were conducted for all cases. Dermatoglyphic analysis, cytoge- (no biopsy) on the left part of forehead, hypertelorism (40 mm), ecto- netic studies and other investigations were done whenever indicated. pia of lacrimal ducts, myopia, astigmatism, angiopathia of retina, wide Cases were classified according to Temtamy and McKusick (1978) into flat nasal bridge, abnormal nostrils (nasal defects were operated at 8 groups; isolated terminal transverse defects (6/30), terminal trans- 18 years old). Echocardiography: additional chorder of left ventricu- verse defect as a part of syndrome (2/30), isolated radial defect (1/30), lus. Karyotype: 46, XY. His parents, sister, nephew showed normal radial defect as a part of syndrome (9/30), isolated ulnar defect (2/30), phenotype. ulnar defect as a part of syndrome (6/30), pre and postaxial defect Clinical features of our patients were compared with published data. (1/30) and axial defect as a part of syndrome (3/30). The results of We diagnosed “Laurin-Sandrow syndrome” based on association of this study have shown that limb absence or reduction defects are not characteristic signs - mirror polysyndactyly, bilateral mesomelic limbs, an uncommon malformation among Egyptian children. Delineation of nasal defects. Presented family illustrated a wide variability of phe- the exact cause, correct classification and diagnosis are essential for notype’s spectrum and confirmed autosomal dominant inheritance of proper genetic counselling. Molecular studies are recommended for LSS. accurate diagnosis and understanding of the pathogenesis. P02.155 P02.157 Array-cGH analysis in a series of 54 index patients with limb Autosomal-recessive primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy malformation identified more than 10% anomalies due to mutations in the 15-OH-prostaglandin dehydrogenase S. Manouvrier-Hanu1,2, A. Mezel3, F. Escande-Narducci4, P. Saugier-Veber5, gene: 15- year follow-up in two Austrian siblings S. Odent6, A. Verloes7, S. Lyonnet8, V. Drouin5, B. Leheup9, C. Francannet10, O. Rittinger1, C. P. Diggle2, I. M. Carr3, D. T. Bonthron4; L. Faivre11, C. Vincent-Delorme1, A. Dieux-Coeslier1, O. Boute-Bénéjean1, B. 1Universitätsklinik fü rKinder- und Jugendheilkunde, Salzburg, Austria, 2Leeds Herbaux3,2, M. Holder-Espinasse1,2, J. Andrieux12,2; Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 1Clinical Genetic Department, CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 2Lille 2 University, Lille, 3Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, U.K., Leeds, United France, 3Paediatric orthopaedics Department, CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 4Mo- Kingdom, 4Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, Salzburg, lecular genetic Department, CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 5Genetic Department, United Kingdom. CHU Rouen, Rouen, France, 6Genetic Department, CHU Rennes, Rennes, Background. Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (HO) is commonly as- France, 7Genetic Department, CHU Robert-Debré, Paris, France, 8Genetic sociated with clubbed fingers as a consequence of cardiopulmonary Department, CHU Necker, Paris, France, 9Genetic Department, CHU Nancy, disease. In contrast, primary forms (PHO) are rare familial disorders Nancy, France, 10Genetic Department, CHRU Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont which may show dominantor recessive inheritance. Features may in- Ferrand, France, 11Genetic Department, CHRU Dijon, Dijon, France, 12Genetic clude skin thickening (usually referred to as pachydermoperiostosis) Department, CHRU Lille, Lille, France. cranial vault abnormalities and patent ductus arteriosus. Recently, the Congenital limb malformations (CLM) affect approximately 1 in 500 pathogenesis of these disorders was shown to be related to mutations new-borns. They can be isolated or part of multiple congenital anoma- of the 15-OH-prostaglandin dehydrogenase (HPGD) gene. lies (MCA) syndromes and are due to two major causes: intrauterine Clinical report. We report on the clinical course of Austrian sibs affect-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 0 ed with the recessive form of this condition: they have clubbed fingers, patients, no mutation was identified. The newly detected amino acid painful periostitis, excessive sweating on hands and feet, thickening change, in two cases, is predicted to be damaging. of the limbs particularily knees with arthralgia of large and small joints, Conclusion: These results, with four new mutations identified in unre- and paroxysomally occurring bone pains. All these symptoms started lated families, emphasize the molecular heterogeneity of the defects in after the first few years of life. Radiologically, cortical thickening and CTSK gene in Picnodysiostosis and the importance of genotyping for sclerosis of the tubular bones with expansion of the diaphyses, and diagnosis and genetic counseling. Wormian bones of the skull were shown. The bone symptoms grossly faded away - however pain attacks and hyperhidrosis still persist. Mo- P02.160 lecular analysis demonstrated the presence of frameshift mutations type 3 Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata in a patient: A of both HPGD alleles: c.120delA (paternal) and c.175_176 del- CT case report of a very rare disorder (maternal). The heterozygous parents are healthy. Investigation of the E. Karaca, S. Basaran Yılmaz, E. Yosunkaya, G. S. Güven, M. Seven, A. Yük- presumably increased PGE2-excretion is under way. sel; Conclusion. Given the causality between the painful clinical symptoms Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genet- and disturbance of the prostaglandine metabolism, antagonist drugs ics, Istanbul, Turkey. like indomethacin may alleviate clinical symptoms, using PGE2-excre- Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is an autosomal reces- tion as a useful monitoring of this therapy. sive disorder, characterized by severe limb shortening, punctate cal- cification of cartilage, flexion contractures, vertebral clefts, cataracts, P02.158 characteristic facial appearance, severe growth deficiency and mental Blomstrand dysplasia - evidence of founder effect in a small retardation. Three genotypes have been identified. Type 1 is associ- northeast Brazilian region ated with a defect in the PEX7 gene, which codes for the receptor of M. T. Sakata1, G. Bertrand2, C. Silve2, C. A. Moreno1, D. P. Cavalcanti1; peroxisome targeting sequence 2. In Type 2, there is an isolated defi- 1Programa de Genética Perinatal, Dept Genética Médica, UNICAMP, Campi- ciency of DHAP acyltransferase, and in Type 3, a defect of alkyl-DHAP nas, Brazil, 2Hôpital St Vincent de Paul INSERM U561, Paris, France. synthase. Plasmalogen levels are reduced in type 2 and 3 patients, Blomstrand Dysplasia (BD), a lethal osteochondrodysplasia (OCD), while phytanic acid levels and the processing of 3-ketothiolase are is characterized by osteosclerosis, carpo-tarsal advanced maturation, normal. Here, we present a 3 5/12 years old patient, born to first cousin narrow thorax with clavicles and ribs thickening, and short limbs dis- parents. He was first referred to our clinic, when he was 5 months playing a dumb-bell appearance of the tubular bones. Other features old, because of growth delay, rhizomelic shortening of limbs, bilateral are hydrops, macroglossia, and atelia. Recessive inheritance was re- cataracts, and facial dysmorphism. His physical examination revealed cently confirmed by the description of homozygous mutations in the that he had severe short stature, large anterior fontanel, microceph- PTHR1 gene. In this report we present a study of two new families aly, high sloping forehead, micrognathia, bilateral cataracts, low and coming from three near small cities of the Brazilian northeast region. broad nasal bridge, anteverted nostrils, contractures, osteopenia, ir- Consanguinity was not referred by the parents of the first studied fam- regular vertebral endplates, rhizomelic shortening of all limbs. Skeletal ily and the proband’s clinical-radiological natal examination revealed radiologic studies displayed punctate calcifications on a number of a typical phenotype of BD. In the other studied family, the parents are cartilages. Biochemical investigations of fibroblasts revealed deficient consanguineous and the proband’s radiological-clinical evaluation alkyl-DHAP synthase. In conclusion, based on clinical picture and bio- confirmed the BD diagnosis. In both probands an identical single ho- chemical enzyme assay the diagnosis of Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia mozygous point mutation at position -2 of the 5’ consensus acceptor punctata type 3, which is an extremely rare disorder, has been diag- site at the exon 9 (c.639 -2 A>G) was identified after PCR amplification nosed in this patient. of all coding exons and intron-exon junctions of the PTHR1 gene. The point mutation was present at the heterozygous state in the proband P02.161 1’s parents. This mutation is expected to result in a loss of function A new classification system for segmentation defects of the of the PTHR1. On the fifteen BD cases previously reported, one was vertebrae, and pilot validation study exactly from the same region referred for the families here reported. In P. D. Turnpenny1, A. Offiah2, P. F. Giampietro3, B. Alman4, A. S. Cornier5, K. conclusion, considering that three families have segregated this rare Kusumi6, S. Dunwoodie7, A. Ward8, O. Pourquié9, Intnl Consortium for Vertebral condition come from the same region and the fact that in two of the Anomalies & Scoliosis (ICVAS); probands were found the same mutation, we suggest a founder effect 1Peninsula Clinical Genetic Service, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Great Ormond in BD at the Brazilian northeast region. Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, United States, 4University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5La Concep- P02.159 ción Hospital, San Germán, Puerto Rico, 6Arizona State University & UA Col- molecular diagnosis in Pycnodysostosis lege of Medicine, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 7Victor Chang Cardiac Research P. Rendeiro, R. Cerqueira, L. Lameiras, H. Gabriel, L. Dias, A. Palmeiro, M. Institute, Darlinghurst NSW, Australia, 8Institute of Child Health, London, United Tavares; Kingdom, 9Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO, United CGC Genetics (www.cgcgenetics.com), Porto, Portugal. States. Introduction: Pycnodysostosis is a rare autosomal recessive trait, The study aimed to develop and assess a new classification system characterized by osteosclerosis, short stature, acro-osteolysis of the for Segmentation Defects of the Vertebrae (SDV), a frequent cause distal phalanges, bone fragility, clavicular dysplasia, and skull deformi- of congenital scoliosis. Existing nomenclature for the wide range of ties with delayed suture closure. The responsible gene, cathepsin K SDV phenotypes is inadequate and confusing, eg ‘Jarcho-Levin syn- (CTSK), is a lysosomal cysteine proteinase critical for bone remodel- drome’. A multidisciplinary group of ICVAS met to formulate a clinically ing and reabsorption. CTSK spans approximately 12 kb in 1q21 and useful classification, based primarily on radiology, and transferable contains 8 exons. Its 987bp open reading frame encodes a polypep- to bioinformatic approaches. SDV are identified by number affected, tide of 329 amino acids. CGC Genetics is a reference laboratory for contiguity, and spinal region(s). The size, shape and symmetry of the diagnosing this disease. We report here our experience for the identi- thoracic cage, and rib number, symmetry and fusion are included, and fication of new Pycnodysostosis cases. familiar vertebral morphology terms retained, together with accepted Method: During 2004-2008, we received 9 samples for CTSK gene syndrome names. The terms spondylocostal and spondylothoracic analysis. Our approach is the sequence analysis of the complete cod- dysostosis apply only to phenotypes typified by the monogenic disor- ing region of this gene including adjacent intron/exon boundaries. At ders due to mutated DLL3, MESP2, LNFG and HES7 genes. Five IC- this moment we designed a microarray based assay (patent pending), VAS members (Group 1) then independently assessed 10 new cases, to be used as a first evaluation that detects 15 mutations and includes inter-observer reliability assessed using kappa. Seven independent those referred in the present work. radiologists (Group 2) then assessed the same cases before and after Results: In 5 patients we found 1 homozygous disease causing muta- introduction to the new system. Inter-observer reliability for Group 1 tion plus 2 new mutations (1 nonsense and 1 frameshift). One patient yielded a kappa value of 0.21 (95% confidence intervals (CI) 0.052, with 1 causative mutation and 1 new amino acid change, and 1 pa- 0.366, p=0.0046). For Group 2, before introduction to the new system, tient with 1 new homozygous amino acid change. In the remaining 2 1/70 responses (1.4%) agreed with the Group 1 consensus,12 differ-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  ent diagnoses were offered, and 38/70 (54.3%) responses were ‘Un- try (with an incidence of 1 : 2 300 - 1 : 3 937). This prompted us to known’. After introduction to the new system 47/70 responses (67.1%; carry out the study presented herein. The incidence and prevalence 95% CI 55.5, 77.0) agreed with Group 1 consensus, a 65.7% improve- of Smith-Lemli-Opitz based on 3-year population surveillance were ment (95% CI 52.5, 75.6, p<0.00005). The system was well received estimated as 1 in 83 168 and 1 in 866 273, respectively. The notable by 6/7 radiologists. The new system was found to be reliable and ac- discrepancy between our previous carrier newborn screening and pro- ceptable. spective results suggests that the syndrome is probably either misdi- agnosed (underascertainment of mild and atypical cases) or results P02.162 mainly in intrauterine and neonatal death. The effects of the causative Opsismodysplasia in a newborn: case report of a SLOS mutations identified in Polish patients, especially of the null spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia mutation p.W151X, and the data collected in our surveillance strongly E. Nava1, M. Tomaske1, G. Eich2, A. Superti-Furga3, M. Rohrbach4; suggest that SLOS embryos are lost very early and that the disease 1Department of Pediatrics, Triemli Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Department of is responsible for a high number of first-trimester miscarriages. The Radiology, Aarau Hospital, Aarau, Switzerland, 3Department of Pediatrics, Uni- study was supported by State Committee for Scientific Research PBZ- versity of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 4Department of Metabolics, University KBN-122/P05/01-10. Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. Opsismodysplasia, a spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia is caused P02.164 by a defect of chondroosseous transformation, with only 40 published Diaphanospondylodysostosis - another evidence for autosomal cases. Inheritance is thought to be autosomal recessive, no causative recessive inheritance and exclusion of iFt80 gene gene has yet been identified. It is characterized by consistent clinical D. P. Cavalcanti1, C. Huber2, C. A. Moreno1, F. P. Monteiro1, M. Le Merrer2, V. signs including craniofacial abnormalities, rhizomelic micromelia and Cormier-Daire2; muscular hypotonia. The diagnosis is based on specific radiological 1Programa de Genética Perinatal, Dept Genética Médica, UNICAMP, Campi- findings. Clinical outcome is variable, depending on the severity of the nas, Brazil, 2Department of Genetics, Université Paris Descartes, INSERM phenotype, however neonatal lethality is common. U781, Hopital Necker, Paris, France. We report on a term boy, first-born to a healthy, non-consanguine Diaphanospondylodysostosis (DSD) is a newly described spinal dys- couple. Prenatal ultrasound at 30 weeks of gestation demonstrated ostoses characterized by abnormal radiolucency of the spine, and shortening of both femora. At birth, he presented with reduced muscle typical rib gaps associated with renal cystic lesions. On the fifteen tone and dysmorphic features such as frontal bossing, broad and de- previously reported cases recurrence was found in four families and pressed nasal bridge, short nose with anteverted nostrils, long phil- parental consanguinity in just one. Due to phenotypic similarities of trum, hypertelorism, low set ears, and large fontanelles. Limbs were DSD to Pax1 and Meox1 deficient mice the PAX1 and MEOX1 were short, in particular hands and feet with narrowed chest. Weight and recently studied as candidate genes, but both were excluded. In this length were both <3 percentile. Skeletal survey revealed characteristic report we relate a baby from consanguineous parents presenting new findings for Opsismodysplasia: major delay in epiphyseal ossification, findings. The proband is a male infant (46,XY), born at 36 weeks and shortening of tubular bones, especially those of metacarpals, metatar- shortly dead. He presented the following features: Potter facies, low sals and phalanges, platysmospondyly, square shaped iliac bones with set ears, short neck, voluminous abdomen, hypotrophy of the lower lateral and medial spurs. Severe muscular hypotonia caused feeding limbs, club feet, hypoplastic buttocks, pulmonary hypoplasia, complex problems and necessitated nasogastral tube feeding. Although the boy heart defect, multiple renal cysts around areas of immature blastema, showed impressive thoracic narrowness, he was normopnoeic. The and typical vertebrae segmentation defect with absence of ossification further clinical course so far was uneventful. of vertebral bodies and pedicles with “zipper-like” appearance associ- Opsismodysplasia is a rare skeletal dysplasia. Awareness of this dis- ated with rib’s small gaps or absence. Other radiologic findings were: order and documentation of the clinical follow up is of utmost impor- narrow pelvis with peculiar iliac wings as well as the ischiopubic rami, tance to help understand its natural course. More data is needed to bilateral slender femur and club feet. Based on the similar renal mani- better counsel parents regarding recurrence risk, prenatal diagnosis festations observed in Jeune thoracic dysplasia, we also excluded and prognosis. IFT80 as the causative gene by direct sequencing. On going studies will hopefully lead to the identification of the molecular basis of this rare P02.163 and severe condition. Results of the Polish 3-year population surveillance program for smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome: Are so many patients missed or P02.165 misdiagnosed? sPONAstRimE Dysplasia- short stature with short dental roots M. Krajewska-Walasek1, A. Jezela-Stanek1, E. Ciara1, E. Malunowicz1, M. and cataracts -a further case Gajdulewicz1, K. Spodar1, A. Materna-Kiryluk2, A. Pyrkosz3, E. Obersztyn4, J. E. Steichen-Gersdorf1, K. Kapelari1, A. Superti-Furga2; Wierzba5, R. Smigiel6, M. Kostuch7, M. Pasinska8, P. Socha1, A. Dobrzanska1, 1Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2University of Freiburg, T. Michalska9, A. Kutkowska-Kazmierczak4, M. Orczyk10, R. Glazar2, L. Ko- Freiburg, Germany. rniszewski11, J. Zaremba12, M. Wielgos13, L. Bablok13, K. H. Chrzanowska1, A. SPONASTRIME Dysplasia (SD) (OMIM#271510) is an autosomal re- Latos-Bielenska2; cessive skeletal dysplasia of the spondyloepimethaphyseal dysplasia 1The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical University, (SEMD). The name was derived from “spondylar and nasal alterations Poznan, Poland, 3Silesian Medical University, Katowice, Poland, 4Institute of with striated metaphyses”. Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 5Medical University, Gdansk, Poland, 6Med- We report on a 14 years old girl with SD, short dental roots and cata- ical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 7Medical University, Lublin, Poland, 8Medical racts The girl was born after a normal pregnancy with discordant twins. University, Bydgoszcz, Poland, 9Medical University, Lodz, Poland, 10University She was the first twin and small for gestational age BW 2090g, L Hospital, Krakow, Poland, 11Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, 43cm, OFC 31,5cm (<P10), whereas the second twin was appropri- Warsaw, Poland, 12Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, ate. During early childhood she developed bilateral cataracts, which 13Medical University, Warsaw, Poland. were treated surgically. Her permanent teeth were small and had Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a malformation disorder, in extremely short roots, which limited orthodontic treatment. Midfacial which an inborn error of cholesterol biosynthesis results in congeni- dysplasia with depressed nasal root, short upturned nose and short tal anomalies and mental deficits. There is evidence that cholesterol stature were present. At the age of 14 years her height was 142 cm (- supplementation improves the clinical course of SLOS. Since atypi- 2,12 SD), weight was 45kg (P25-50) and intelligence was normal. The cal and severe cases are frequently misdiagnosed, a proper diagnosis typical radiological abnormalities consisted of platyspondyly, striations followed by appropriate therapy and reliable genetic counseling may in the metaphyseal margin and flattened capital femoral epiphyses. be delayed. Underdiagnosing is the reason why data on the true inci- The genetic defect is not known in SD and may be heterogenous. The dence of the disease is limited. The results of our previous newborn patients with physical findings typical for SD, short dental roots and screening, based on the carrier frequency of the two most common bilateral childhood cataracts represent a rare, but very distinct entity. SLOS-causing mutations in Poland (p.W151X and p.V326L), would Up to now 16 cases have been published. make SLOS one of the most frequent recessive disorders in our coun-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.166 P02.168 Novel mutation in sEDL gene in three sibling of Russian family Expression and functional analysis of EFNB mutations in with X-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda craniofrontonasal syndrome V. P. Fedotov1, E. A. Bliznetz2, I. S. Plotko1, A. V. Korobov1, A. V. Polyakov2; R. Makarov1, B. Steiner2, S. Preisler-Adams3, A. Rauch2, P. Wieacker3, I. Wie- 1VOCDC genetic counseling, Voronezh, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre land1; for Medical Genetic, Moscow, Russian Federation. 1Institut für Humangenetik, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Institut für Medizinische Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda (SEDL; MIM 313400) is an X- Genetik, Zürich, Switzerland, 3Institut für Humangenetik, Münster, Germany. linked recessive osteochondrodysplasia that occurs in approximately EFNB1 gene (OMIM 300035) encodes ephrin-B1 - a member of the two of every one million people. This progressive skeletal disorder ephrin-receptor ligand family. Together with their receptors (Eph) eph- which manifests in childhood is characterized by disproportionate short rins form signalling complexes involved in cell adhesion and migration. stature with short neck and trunk, barrel chest and absence of system- Mutations of EFNB1 cause craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS; OMIM ic complications. Distinctive radiological signs are platyspondyly with 304110). We describe missense mutations c.161C>T (p.P54L) and hump-shaped central and posterior portions, narrow disc spaces, and c.332C>T (p.T111I), splice-site mutation c.406+2T>C and frameshift mild to moderate epiphyseal dysplasia. The latter usually leads to pre- mutation c.614_615delCT that were found in CFNS female patients. mature secondary osteoarthritis often requiring hip arthroplasty. The The splice site mutation activates a cryptic splice site resulting in a disorder is caused by the mutations in SEDL gene located on Xp22.12- smaller transcript. The frameshift mutation causes a premature ter- p22.31. SEDL encodes a 140 amino acid protein with a putative role in mination codon, but escapes nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. No endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-to-Golgi vesicular transport. truncated ephrin-B1 was detected by Western blot analysis in protein Here we report Russian family case with three affected sibs of five extracts from patient fibroblasts for both of these mutations. Absence sibs born in two mother wedlock. Two patients were investigated at the of mutant protein shows that c.406+2T>C and c.614_615delCT prob- age of 19 and 26 years and had typical clinical and radiological signs ably have loss-of-function effects. Both missense mutations lead to of SEDL. Onset of the disease was at the age after of 10 with growth an amino acid exchange in the ephrin-B1 extracellular domain. In or- impairment, back pain and waddling gait. Osteoarthritic changes were der to evaluate the impact of these mutations on signalling and cell present in both hip joints with flattening of the femoral heads. In the pa- behaviour, NIH 3T3 cells were cotransfected with pEGFP-N3 vector tients, the mutation analysis in SEDL gene was performed, and a novel and pcDNA 3.1 (+) vector containing cDNA of wild-type or mutant type hemizygous mutation c.133G>C leading to the amino acid substitu- c.161C>T and c.332C>T EFNB1. Transfected cells were stimulated tion Ala45Pro was found. This mutation was not identified in healthy with EphB2-Fc/Fc and analysed using fluorescent microscopy. After mother and in 88 control chromosomes (in 35 males and 24 females). stimulation wt- and p.T111I-ephrin-B1 expressing cells formed cell patches, whereas no patches were observed for p.P54L. Western blot P02.167 analysis using anti-ephrin-B1-pTyr(324/329) showed differences con- tAR syndrome case Report cerning ephrin-B1 phosphorylation and its timing for mutant and wt M. Boia1,2, V. Belengeanu1, E. S. Boia1,3, A. Popoiu1, D. Iacob1, A. Manea1, L. protein. This may indicate that other Tyr-residues are more important Stoica4; for signalling. Alternatively, disrupted signalling through the Eph-B2- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2Clinical Emergen- receptor contributes to the disease manifestation. cy Hospital for Children “Louis Turcanu”; Premature and Neonatology Depart- ment;, Timisoara, Romania, 3Clinical Emergency Hospital for Children “Louis P02.169 Turcanu”, Pediatric Surgery and Orthopedics Department, Timisoara, Romania, EVc1 and EVc2 gene mutations associated to Ellis-van creveld 4Clinical Emergency Hospital for Children “Louis Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania. syndrome Extremely rare affection in current medical praxis, TAR syndrome rep- I. Torrente1, M. C. D’Asdia1, N. Grifone1, M. C. Digilio2, B. Dallapiccola1,3; resents an association of malformations that includes almost every tis- 1IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, sues and organs: hematological, cardiac, gastro-intestinal, skeletal. 2Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Experi- Material and Method: A case of a newborn was presented, who was mental Medicine and Pathology, “La Sapienza” University of Rome, Rome, Italy. been hospitalized at 10 hours age with a complex malformed syn- Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EVC, MIM #225500) is a chondral and drome. ectodermal dysplasia characterized by short ribs, polydactyly, growth Results: The physical examination and the paraclinical investigations retardation, and ectodermal and heart defects. This rare genetic dis- revealed us TAR syndrome. The historical record of the newborn was ease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait with variable expres- not containing any special/unusual elements: newborn female with the sion. In general population the incidence is reported as one per 60000 gestational age of 38 weeks, birth weight: 2750 g, natural born in ce- live births. Mutations of EVC1 and EVC2 genes, located in a head phalic presentation, APGAR score: 8/9, green amniotic fluid. to head configuration on chromosome 4p16, have been identified as The physical examination was showing: pale tegument, purple items causative. EVC1 gene has 21 coding exons spanning 120kb of ge- over the chest, short forearms, simian line, ogival mouth palate, low- nomic DNA and gives rise to a 992 amino acid protein. EVC2 gene implanted ears. The cardiologic examination revealed a moderate car- has 22 coding exons spanning 150kb of genomic DNA and encodes diomegaly with atrial septal defect and minimal left-right bridge. a 1,308 amino acid protein. In this study we screened for mutations in The skeletal X-ray confirmed the presence of one malformation: short both genes a panel of 33 EvC patients originated from different coun- forearms with the congenital bilateral radial aplasia. tries and collected relative clinical data. The analysis were conducted The head ultrasonography in dynamics showed the presence of this by DHPLC and direct sequencing of the PCR products resulting from cystic formations specific for periventricularleucomalacia - cystic form. amplification of all coding exons. We identified 22 mutations (16 never A second degree intraventricular haemorrhage was associated. described in literature), 16 in EVC1 gene and 6 in EVC2. In EVC1 we Thrombocytopenia was severe: initially 14000/mmc until 35-40000/ identified 8 splicing, 5 frameshift, 2 missense mutations and a large mmc required several transfusions with thrombocyte concentrate. deletion spanning almost all exon 13 (82419_82561del). In EVC2 gene The evolution was slow, but favorably under the treatment; the dis- we described 3 frameshift, 1 splicing, 1 missense and 1 nonsense mu- charge was done with weekly monitoring of hemogram condition. tations. Our study expands the spectrum of mutations associated with Conclusions: EVC syndrome and will contribute to further understanding of the mo- ● Specific signs were present, except gastro-intestinal affection - the lecular basis underlying the phenotypic variability of the disease. patient didn’t present lactose intolerance; ● The severe thrombocytopenia was maintained throughout hospital- P02.170 ization, but this didn’t aggravate the intraventricular haemorrage (this Alpha thalassemia: sometimes a complex diagnosis particular one had a relatively good evolution). A. Ravani, A. Venturoli, M. Taddei Masieri, B. Dolcini, C. Trabanelli, S. Cartu- ran, S. Fini, P. Rimessi, F. Gualandi, S. Bigoni, A. Ferlini; Sezione di Genetica Medica - Università degli Studi, Ferrara, Italy. We report the case of a couple, coming from Philippines, referred to our Laboratory during the pregnancy for suspected alpha-thalasse- mia.We performed the routine analysis for the 7 most common muta-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  tions, using gap-PCR for deletions and restriction analysis for point alpha globins genes. However, it can also be result of coinheritance mutations. The male resulted heterozygous Alpha2IVS1-5nt, while the of 2 point mutations. Here we report a case of transfusion dependent woman was negative.We checked the results using a RDB commercial H disease. kit, able to detect 22 alpha-globin mutations. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood cells according to the proto- The female showed a double gene deletion(--SEA), not tested in the cols. Alpha and beta globins gene cluster was investigated using direct first approach, while the point mutation was not present in the male. sequencing and real time PCR. Following direct sequencing we can detect a novel deletion of 24 bp A couple with hematologic picture of alpha thalassemia (low MCV, adjacent to the 5nt-pathogenic deletion: this variation affected the re- MCH, and normal HbA2) were referred to our center (i.e. Father with striction site used for the first diagnosis by RFLP.However, a bioin- MCV=73.6 Fl, MCH=21.6 pg, Hb=12.6 g/dl and HbA2=2.7 and the formatic analysis excluded a possible functional meaning. Since the mother with MCV=73.5 Fl, MCH=22.2 pg, Hb=11g/dl and HbA2=2.2) female had performed an amniocentesis for advanced maternal age, They had an 8 years old child with more severe hematological presen- we explored the presence of these mutations in foetal cells too.We tation (i.e. MCV=62.7 Fl, MCH=16.1 pg, Hb=5.1 g/dl and HbA2=2.5) found the--SEA,but not the 24nt-deletion.We confirmed by MLPA the who received blood transfusion once a month since 7 years old. prenatal diagnosis, but unexpectedly MLPA failed to amplify one probe: Molecular study revealed no mutation in beta globins gene in the child 8488-L8410, located between HBA1P andHBA2.Sequencing the cor- or the parents. Direct sequencing of alpha globins genes showed responding region we identified a SNP in the father and in the foetus, 2 point mutations in alpha II gene of the affected child (i.e. poly A1: responsible for the lack of amplification at MLPA. AATAAA>AATAAG and C59: GGC>CGC). Failing the genotype characterisation, the couple would be wrongly Poly A1 had been inherited from the father and C59 from his mother. considered at risk for HBH in their children.This experience allowed us This report indicates the importance of alpha globins gene point muta- to conclude that molecular characterisation of globin genes, although tion and the possible need for prenatal diagnosis. There is a need for widely and routinely diagnosed, must be performed by laboratories more reports on similar cases to provide a better genetic counseling with consistent cultural background and with availability of a panel of for at risk couples. articulated methods for assuring accurate testing. P02.173 P02.171 Low HbA2, beta thalassemia; not very prevalent but important mLPA: A screening tool for molecular diagnosis of unknown M. Feizpour1, R. Vahidi1, F. Rahiminejad1, S. Frouoghi1, P. Fouladi1, M. Heidari1, alpha thalassemia deletions M. Vahidi1, S. Ghahremani1, Z. Shahab Movahed1, M. Fallah2,1, S. Zeinali3,1; M. S. Fallah1,2, S. A. Aleyasin1, R. Mahdian3, M. Karimpour3, A. Ebrahimi1, M. 1Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Kawsar Genomics & Biotech Cen- Raeisi2, S. Kianfar2, M. Sadeghi2, S. Zeinali3,2; ter, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Dep’t of Mol. Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Kawsar Med., Biotech Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Re- Genomics & Biotech Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Pasteure Insti- public of Iran. tute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Introduction: Beta thalassemia is one of the most prevalent monoge- Introduction: Alpha thalassemia is the most common hemoglobin netic disorders in the word and also in Iran. Those who carry one mu- disorder in Iran. Most of known alpha thalassemia mutations include tation in beta globin gene usually present with hematologic picture of deletion of one or both alpha globin genes. Its importance is mainly microcytic hypochromic anemia with high HbA2. Mutation in IVSII-nt1 due to its role in making a correct decision for performing prenatal in the beta globin gene is one of those, which usually presents with diagnosis (PND) and differentiating unknown alpha thalassemia from HbA2 higher than 3.5 g/dl. normal HbA2 beta thalassemia. MLPA, a recently developed simple Material and methods: Couples referred to us for prenatal diagnosis technique suitable for rapid quantitative analysis of deletions and du- (PND) of thalassemia were investigated using ARMS PCR technique plications, was used to determine new deletion in cases suspected of and direct sequencing. alpha thalassemia. Results: From those investigated for beta thalassemia mutation in the Material and Methods: Couples referred to Kawsar Genomics Center past 8 years, 23 cases (less than 2 %) of those with IVSII-nt1 muta- for PND investigated for common deletional alpha-globin mutations tion, had normal HbA2. From which, 9 cases (39.1%) showed high and point mutation using multiplex Gap-PCR and direct sequencing HbF (>=1.5) (range: 1.6-11.5 g/dl) with hematologic picture of MCV: respectively. Those remained unknown, further investigated for oth- 51-70.4; MCH: 17.1-22.3; Hb: 9.9-14.6 and HbA2: 1.7-3.4. Cases with er deletions by MLPA methods which performed. After denaturation, low HbF (<1.5) (range: 0.5-1.1 g/dl) didn’t show any significance differ- hybridization and ligation, PCR-amplification was performed with the ences in hematologic picture with the previous group. (MCV: 59-78.6; specific SALSA primers. Electrophoresis of PCR products performed MCH: 18-28; Hb: 10.2-15.5 and HbA2: 2-3.5). using ABI-3130 genetic-analyzer. Conclusion: IVSII-nt1 is one of most prevalent beta globin mutation in Result: Thirty three suspected cases with low MCV, low MCH and nor- our country and as we observed, in near to 2% of the cases can pres- mal HbA2 included in the study. No alpha globin gene mutation was ent with normal HbA2. With considering high HbF, it can be diagnosed detected in conventional investigation for common deletions and point in only half of the cases. To be more accurate and not to miss others mutations. In MLPA study of globin gene cluster a variety of diverse with normal HbA2 and HbF, we suggest in couples that one partner deletion patterns in probe set were seen in 23 (69.7%) of cases ex- is carrier of thalassemia minor; beta globin gene mutation should be panding from downstream of teta gene up to HS-40. Deletion lengths excluded in the other one even with normal HbA2. varied from at least 5.8 kb up to 67.2 kb. Conclusion: This study, showed using MLPA can help us to increase P02.174 accuracy of prenatal diagnosis for alpha thalassemia especially when Preimplantation genetic diagnosis of beta-thalassemia by using we face with cases suspected to have large deletion. fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) hybridization probes and melting curve analysis: A case report P02.172 C. Hung1, S. Lin1,2, Y. Su1,2; transfusion dependent H disease: caused by compound 1Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, heterozygote of two point mutations in alpha globin gene Taiwan, 2Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University P. Fouladi1, F. Rahiminejad1, S. Foroughi1, M. Feizpour1, M. Masoudifard1, S. College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. Mousavi1, M. S. Fallah1,2, S. Zeinali1,3; Background: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is being em- 1Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, ployed increasingly, allowing transfer healthy embryos to the uterus. 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Validation of PCR-based assay is challenge because only one blas- Islamic Republic of Iran, 3CenterDep’t of Mol. Med., Biotech Research Center, tomere will be available, and the amount of DNA is insufficient for a Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. given embryo. Thalassemia is the most prevalent genetic disorder. It can be of differ- Material and Methods: We developed a valid single-cell PCR protocol ent severity characterized by an imbalance of α and β-globins genes for PGD by using PCR followed by fluorescence resonance energy expression leading to anemia. H disease is the result of mutation in 3 transfer (FRET) hybridization probes and melting curve analysis. WeClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  optimized and clinically applied the protocol permitting molecular ge- tation was detected either. We then anticipated that the mutation caus- netic analysis to amplify a specific region on the beta-globin gene for ing imbalance in beta-globin synthesis may lie elsewhere. We tried to a couple, carriers of two mutations c.-78A>G and c.52A>T. Among a use known SNP or RFLP markers to use indirect methods for PND. No total of eight embryos were obtained after ovarian stimulation, a single site was informative. We used a newly developed globing -gene linked blastomere per embryos were biopsied. STR markers to do so. Her father was carrier as well (i.e. MCV: 74.5; Results: The PCR fragments (364 bp) encompassing the both muta- MCH: 18.8; A2: 4.6%). The primers for this STR are given below: F=T tion sites were successfully amplified. A single base mismatch resulted GCTAAGTAGATGTCTGAGTGGC, R=GCCAATACTGCTGCATCATG. in a melting temperature (Tm) shift of 8 °C for c.-78A>G mutation and 5 The sizes were: M:253/256; MM: 249/253; MP: 253/256. In this regard °C for c.52A>T mutation, allowing distinguish a wild type allele from the the mutant gene is linked with alleles 253. Use of STR markers are mutate allele. Genetic diagnosis showed that four embryos were unaf- preferred compared with SNPs since STRs are usually multi allelic and fected embryos and two embryos were selected to transfer achieving there is more probability of being informative. pregnancy. Finally, a healthy boy was born. Conclusion: Based on our results, this strategy can be successfully P02.177 performed for PGD by using single-cell PCR. It is suitable as a nonin- Arrayed Primer Extension (APEX) and sNP Analysis for the Non- vasive clinical tool for monogenic diseases. Invasive Prenatal Diagnosis (NIPD) of β-thalassaemia T. Papasavva1, A. Kyrri2, L. Kythreotis2, H. Roomere3, M. Kleanthous1; P02.175 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Cyprus National campaign for the control of thalassemia in iran Thalassaemia Center, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Genorama Ltd, Tartu, Estonia. S. Zeinali1,2; β-thalassaemia is the most common autosomal recessive single gene 1Dep’t of Mol. Med, Biotech Research Cntr.,Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, disorder in Cyprus. Prenatal diagnosis of β-thalassaemia is based on Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetics Lab., Kawsar Human Genetics chorionic villus sampling that poses an abortion risk to the fetus. The Research Cntr., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. discovery of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma has opened up Thalassemia is regarded a major health problem in many parts of the new possibilities for Non-Invasive Prenatal Diagnosis. The develop- world. Population migration from thalassemia endemic regions to North ment of a NIPD assay for β-thalassaemia is based on the analysis and South America as well as Europe has made it a world problem. of maternal plasma DNA for the detection of the paternally inherited In Iran National Thalassemia Screening Program for prevention of fetal alleles using Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) and the transfusion dependent thalassemia began in 1997. Premarital screen- Arrayed Primer Extension (APEX) assay. ing became compulsory and at risk couples are dealt with a compre- A SNP genotyping analysis was performed on 75 random samples hensive program. The program includes test confirmation, iron therapy, from the Greek-Cypriot population using 130 SNPs located across the hematological consultation, genetic tests, prenatal diagnosis (PND) β-globin cluster for the determination of heterozygosity. 48 SNPs with and legal therapeutic abortion of the affected fetuses. PND is covered more than 10% heterozygosity were selected for the development of by health insurance. National guidelines have been devised for every NIPD. Moreover, 55 families at risk for carrying a β-thalassaemic fetus steps including for PND. Laboratories in the program are connected to were analyzed using 11 SNPs in order to determine which were infor- each other as networks including prenatal diagnosis laboratories net- mative for NIPD. work. Their performances are monitored and regular inspections are For the development of the APEX assay we designed a DNA microar- carried out by members of Experts Committee. Every case of PND has ray chip called “thalassochip” containing 60 β-thalassaemia mutations to be reported to the Genetics Office, Ministry of Health. National Ref- and 18 SNPs located across the β-globin locus. The sensitivity and erence Laboratory for PND was created. In provinces with no medical specificity of the approach was determined. 24 maternal plasma sam- genetics center, new centers have been created by tech-transfer using ples were analyzed using the APEX assay for 2 SNPs. NIPD was suc- the experience and expertise from National Reference Laboratories. cessfully performed on 17 samples, 2 were misdiagnosed, whereas 5 More than 10,000 prenatal diagnoses have been performed by these analyses failed. laboratories. In our center more than 3500 PNDs have been performed The APEX assay is a promising technique for NIPD and more tests with only one misdiagnosis. Majority of referred cases were tested for with additional SNPs need to be performed in order to render the as- beta-thalassemia. ARMS and RFLP techniques are used for most say 100% reliable for NIPD. cases. In other cases direct DNA sequencing, Real-time, MLPA, SNPs and newly developed STR markers are used to come to a final conclu- P02.178 sion. simultaneous alpha and beta carriers may caused severe H- Disease P02.176 F. Rahiminejad1, p. Fouladi1, S. Foroughi1, m. Hashemi1, R. Vahidi1, F. Mollaza- Developing a new stR marker to aid prenatal diagnosis of beta deh1, M. Sharafi1, S. Zeinali2; thalassemia 1Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, R. Vahidi1, F. Rahiminejad1, S. Frouoghi1, M. Feizpour1, P. Fouladi1, M. Heidari1, 2Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Dep’t of Mol. Med., Biotech Re- M. Raeisi1, S. Ghahremani1, M. Hashemi1, Z. Shahab Movahed1, M. Vahidi1, S. search Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Mousavi1, M. S. Fallah2,1, S. Zeinali3,1; Thalassemia is a major health issue in Iran. Premarital screening has 1Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, been in effect since 1997. Couples with low MCV and/or MCH are 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, detected and if needed are referred to one of several medical genetics Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Dep’t of Mol. Med., Biotech Research Center, Pasteur laboratories throughout the country. Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. A couple was referred to our center for prenatal diagnosis of thalas- Thalassemia is the most prevalent genetic disorder in Iran. Mutation semia. The male partner had low hematological data comparable with in beta globin gene, in homozygote state, may causes severe clini- thalassemia (i.e. MCV: 63.5 Fl, MCH:19.8 Pg ,Hb:15 g/dl and HbA:2.5 2 cal picture of thalassemia major. Here we report a case of combined g/dl). He was diagnosed to be carrier of alpha thalassemia with Med alpha-beta mutation which couldn’t be diagnosed with conventional mutation (--Med/ αα). The female partner’s hematological data was: molecular studies. MCV:80 Fl , MCH:25.6 Pg , Hb:14.2 g/dl , HbA:5.4 g/dl , HbF:6.6 g/dl. 2 A couple was referred to us for prenatal diagnosis (PND). The couple’s At first glance she would be diagnosed as being a carrier of beta-thal. hematological parameters were: (husband: MCV: 67.9; MCH: 21.0; Molecular analysis showed she was both carrier of alpha and beta HbA2: 5.3%; wife: MCV: 72.9; MCH: 22.2; HbA2: 5.3%). thalassemia. The high level of HbA was indicative of beta-carrier and 2 The mutation in the husband was found to be IVSII-nt1 in the beta near normal MCV and MCH was indicative of being carrier of both beta globin gene. Our investigation on the wife’s DNA using ARMS, MLPA, and alpha-thal. We could detect 3.7 kb deletion in alpha globin gene. Real-time PCR techniques and DNA sequencing revealed no muta- The risk of H-disease for the fetus is 25% though it would be mild. tion. Repeated hematological analysis gave similar results (i.e. low The parents should become aware of this fact. Another point is that MCV, MCH and high HbA2). We also investigated her alpha-globin since point mutation in alpha-genes can give similar hematological re- gene for possible mutation using similar techniques as above. No mu- sult and then in such case a transfusion dependent H-disease mayClinical genetics and Dysmorphology  result. It can be suggested that when one couple carry a severe form P02.181 of alpha-thal as cis the other partner should be checked for alpha-gene New observations and it‘s consequences on genetic mutation even if he is carrier of beta-thal. counselling: a case of β-Thalassemia and Hereditary Hemochromatosis coexistence in homozigosity P02.179 N. Bukvic1, V. Longo1, R. Santacroce1, V. Bafunno1, M. Chetta1, G. D’Andrea1, Segmental duplications involving the α-globin gene cluster as a M. Sarno1, F. Sessa1, F. Sportelli2, M. Roberti2, M. Margaglione1,3; modulating factor in β-thalassemia intermedia. 1Genetica Medica, Foggia, Italy, 2II U.O. Medicina Trasfusionale, Azienda Ospe- C. L. Harteveld1, M. Phylipsen1, M. Tischkowitz2, A. Will3, B. Clark4, S. Thein5,6, dalo-Universitaria, Foggia, Italy, 3Unità di Emostasi e Trombosi, IRCCS, San P. Giordano1; Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy. 1Laboratory for Diagnostic Genome Analysis, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2De- Genetic counselling is an integral and expanding part of medical prac- partments of Human Genetics, Oncology and Medicine, Jewish General Hos- tice, not only for those patients at risk, but also for patients with com- pital, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Royal Manchester Children’s mon disorders with genetic component. Furthermore, together with a Hospital, Hospital Road, Pendlebury, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Depart- fact of extreme velocity in application of new techniques and technolo- ment of Haematological Medicine, Kings College Hospital, Bessemer Road, gies in a field of genetic testing procedures, make that sometimes a London, United Kingdom, 5of Haematological Medicine, Kings College Hospital, role of genetic counsellor is completely forgotten. Bessemer Road, London, United Kingdom, 6King’s College London School of Herein, we discussed some observations regarding double homozi- Medicine, Molecular Haematology, James Black Centre, London, United King- gosity for two well studied illnesses [β-thalassemia (β-thal) and he- dom. reditary hemochromatosis (HH)]. We reevaluate patients previously Recently we have described two cases of heterozygosity for the com- characterized for: HBB (Hemoglobin beta locus) and HFE (major gene mon β°-thalassemia mutation β39 (C→T) presenting with a thalas- associated with HH) respectively by our department. Our attention was semia intermedia phenotype (1). Multiplex Ligation dependent Probe directed to an 18-year-old patient, who was a double homozygote for Amplification (MLPA) analysis of the α-globin gene cluster revealed β-thal [IVS1-110(G>A)/IVS1-110(G>A)] and HFE (H63D/H63D) who, two new rearrangements, consisting of a full duplication of the α-glo- at 16 years of age, had cardiomyopathy with severe hypogonadism. bin genes locus including the upstream regulatory elements. Here, we On the bases of results observed, it seems possible to suggest that present two other case; one, a family of mixed Sephardic Ashkenazi the HFE gene homozygous H63D mutation, which is responsible for Jewish origin living in Canada, in which the propositus (a 2 yrs old girl) an adult onset of HFE, may be sufficient to provoke a juvenile hemo- presented with a pronounced microcytic hypochromic anemia, a bor- chromatosis phenotype, when in combination with β-thal homozygos- derline HbA2 and heterozygous for a β polyA mutation. Only one par- ity. Even though, this observation open a possible “way” to speculate ent showed mild microcytic hypochromic anemia due to heterozygosity regarding synergic (pejorative) effects of these two genes, it seems for the β-mutation. The second case, a 6 yrs old girl of middle-eastern extremely interesting to pay attention to possible cardiac problems, origin living in the U.K., has severe anemia and splenomegaly, while especially for young β-thal patients with high iron overload and HH the mother from whom she has inherited the β0-thalassemia mutation homozygosity for mutation in the HFE gene. If confirmed, with further, is clinically asymptomatic. MLPA analysis of the α-globin gene cluster larger studies, this observation could be interesting from both points of revealed two new rearrangements, consisting of a full duplication of view i.e. clinician’s and counselor’s. the α-globin gene cluster and the upstream regulatory elements. The first is a duplication of approximately 435 kb between position 75563- P02.182 510533 from the telomere (UCSC Genome Browser, May 2004) and molecular diagnostics of thalassemia intermedia in iran the second, approximately 107 kb between positions 90548-198161. M. Neishabury1, A. Azarkeivan2, C. Oberkanins3, F. Esteghamat1, N. Amiriza- We report the clinical and hematological data and the molecular deh2, H. Najmabadi1,4; characterization. We conclude that α-globin gene duplication is more 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation common than previously thought and should be investigated as a con- Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Thalassemia Clinic and Research tributing cause in all unexplained unusually severe heterogeneous β Center, Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization (IBTO), Tehran, Islamic Repub- thalassemia. lic of Iran, 3ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Armenia, 4Kariminejad and (1) Harteveld et al. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008 May-Jun;40(3):312-6. Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. To improve the differentiation of thalassemia intermedia from other P02.180 hemoglobinopathies in Iran, four known genetic mechanisms_XmnI α-Thalassemia: report on the last three years of activity Ggamma polymorphism, inheritance of mild and silent beta-thalasse- C. Curcio, C. Lodrini, A. Biasi, C. Melles, D. A. Coviello; mia alleles, delta beta deletion, and coinheritance of alpha- and beta- Medical Genetics Laboratory - Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policli- thalassemia_were investigated in 52 Iranian individuals suspected nico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena., Milan, Italy. to have thalassemia intermedia based on clinical and hematological α-Thalassemia is the most common of the inherited hemoglobin syn- characteristics. Beta globin mutations were studied using a reverse- thesis disorders, which are the most common monogenic diseases. It hybridization assay and sequencing of the total beta-globin gene. The is characterized by decreased or complete absence of α-globin chain XmnI Ggamma polymorphism, the Sicilian delta beta deletion, and synthesis, caused by deletion of or mutation in the α-globin genes. four alpha-globin mutations (_a3.7, _a4.2, _MED, aaa anti-3.7) were Clinically, 4 variants of the syndrome are recognizable, with increasing studied using PCR-based techniques. The inheritance of the XmnI severity depending on how many normal α-globin genes are present Ggamma polymorphism with severe beta-thalassemia alleles in the (3, 2, 1 or none). During the last three years of activity we have tested homozygous or compound heterozygous state was the predominant 109 individuals characterized by low MCV, normal or slightly reduced mechanism observed in 27 individuals (55.3%). In five cases, this sta- Hb levels and normal HbA. tus overlapped with the _a3.7=aa genotype. The second most frequent 2 Thirty single gene deletions (α 3.7), twenty one double gene deletions cause for thalassemia intermedia (14.8%) was the inheritance of mild (--SEA, --MED, --FIL, α 20.5) and 12 point mutations (Hb Icaria, Torino, beta-thalassemia alleles, including IVS-I-6 (T>C), _88 (C>A), and + Constant Spring, Sun Praire, α2 init cd T>C, polyA) were analyzed by 113 (A>G). In three subjects (4.3%) the Sicilian delta beta deletion was Reverse Dot Blot and direct sequencing, and α thal mutations were identified. HbS in association with beta-zero-thalassemia was found identified in 106 cases. In 12 individuals none of these mutations was in three patients with thalassemia intermedia phenotype. In 11 cases found. (21.3%) no causative genetic alteration could be identified. Our results The following genotypes were observed: α2 IVS 1-5 nt (12 subjects), reflect the diversity underlying thalassemia intermedia, and the limita- ααα (3), polyA/Hb Icaria (1), α 3.7/--MED (1), α 3.7/--SEA (1), α 3.7/- tions of the applied clinical, hematological, and molecular approaches -FIL (1), α 3.7/α2 init cd T>C (4), α 3.7/α 4.2 (1), α 3.7/α 20.5 (4), α for correct diagnosis. Some of the unresolved cases will offer an op- 3.7/Hb Hasharon (2), α 3.7/Hb Torino (1), α 3.7/α2 IVS 1-5 nt (2), α portunity to discover additional molecular mechanisms leading to thal- 20.5/α2 IVS 1-5 nt (1). assemia intermedia. Our study shows that the α 3.7 single gene deletion is a very frequent cause of α-thalassemia in Italy but other mutations (--SEA, --MED, -- FIL, α 20.5) also seem to have acceptable frequencies.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.183 P02.185 Five novel CDKL mutations in girls with severe mental congenital variant of Rett syndrome due to the FOXG gene. retardation, early onset epilepsy, movement disorder and lack of F. Mari1, M. Mencarelli1, A. Spanhol-Rosseto1, R. Artuso1, D. Rondinella1, expressive speech N. Bahi-Buisson2, J. Nectoux2, R. Rubinsztajn2, T. Bienvenu2, A. Moncla3, B. I. Stefanova1, V. Kalscheuer2, M. Kautza3, W. Lieb1, P. Muschke4, T. Polster5, S. Chabrol3, L. Villard4, Z. Krumina5, J. Armstrong6, A. Roche7, M. Pineda6, B. Ben- Purmann1, J. Sperner6, R. Voigt7, C. Zühlke1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1; Zeev8, E. Gak9, F. Ariani1, A. Renieri1; 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Mo- 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Université Paris Descartes, lecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Praxis für Humangenetik, Kiel, Germany, Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 3Université de la Méditerranée, Assistance Pub- 4Institut für Humangenetik, Magdeburg, Germany, 5Krankenhaus Mara, Epilep- lique Hopitaux de Marseille, Hopital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 4Univer- sie-Zentrum Bethel, Bielefeld, Germany, 6Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, sité de la Méditerranée, Faculté de Médecine de la Timone, Marseille, France, Lübeck, Germany, 7Pränatalzentrum Hamburg und Humangenetik im Gynaeko- 5Medical Genetics Clinic of Latvian State, Children’s University Hospital, Latvia, logicum, Hamburg, Germany. Latvia, 6Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Esplugues, Barcelona, Spain, 7Hospital Mutations in the X-linked cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) gene Sant Joan de Deu, Esplugues, Barcelona, Italy, 8Pediatric Neurology Unit, Dana have been reported in the last years in nearly 50 patients as a cause Children’s Hospital, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 9Sagol Neurosci- for a neurodevelopmental disorder, characterized by drug resistant ence Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, early-onset seizures, movement disorder, microcephaly and severe Israel. psychomotor impairment. Rett syndrome is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder representing We screened the CDKL5 gene for mutations in a cohort of 20 female one of the most common genetic causes of mental retardation in girls. and six male patients. Clinical information was available for 24 of them. The classic form is caused by MECP2 mutations. By candidate gene All these patients showed epilepsy and moderate to severe mental approach, we recently identified FOXG1 as responsible for the con- retardation. 12 patients showed microcephaly, 13 hypotonia and two genital variant of Rett. FOXG1 encodes a brain-specific transcriptional had dysmorphic features. Movement disorder (ataxia, athetotic move- repressor, essential for early development of the telencephalon, that ments) was present in ten patients. We detected five novel and one exhibits an expression pattern in the postnatal cortex partially overlap- reported heterozygous mutations in the CDKL5 gene in six female ping with that of MeCP2. Sixty MECP2/CDKL5 mutation-negative Eu- patients aged two to 16 years. The mutational spectrum consisted of ropean Rett patients (classical and variants), 43 patients with enceph- three frame-shift mutations, leading to a premature stop codon, two alopathy with early-onset seizures and 4 atypical Rett patients were missense and one nonsense mutation. One patient with a missense analyzed for mutations in FOXG1. Mutations of FOXG1 were identi- mutation has been already published (PMID 15499549). fied in 4 patients, independently classified as congenital Rett variant Our patients with CDKL5 mutations show a consistent phenotype in- from France, from Spain and from Latvia. Clinical data were compared cluding treatment resistant seizures starting in the first months of life with the two previously reported FOXG1 mutated patients. In all cases after a normal newborn period. Additional features are hypotonia, se- there is an early onset of symptoms. In the perinatal period the girls vere psychomotor retardation, microcephaly, stereotype hand move- are floppy, passive and easy to cry. Deceleration of head growth starts ments as well as ataxia and restlessness. Feeding difficulties, gastro- before the fourth month and leads to severe microcephaly. Motor de- oesophageal reflux and scoliosis were present in some patients. All velopment is severely impaired and the voluntary hand use absent. our patients with CDKL5 mutations lack expressive speech. In contrast with classic Rett, patients have poor eye contact. Typical The clinical findings in our patients with CDKL5 mutations confirm that stereotypic hand movements with hand-washing and hand-mouthing CDKL5 deficiency represents a consistent phenotype. We discuss the activities were constant and present all time. Some patients present clinical features with respect to the main differential diagnoses like Rett tongue movements. Jerky movements of upper limb were also pres- and Angelman syndromes. ent. Brain MRI shows corpus callosum hypoplasia in most cases, while epilepsy is a variable sign. Scoliosis is usually severe. Neurovegeta- P02.184 tive symptoms typical of Rett are frequently present. MECP de novo duplication in a girl with mild mental retardation and no obvious dysmorphic features P02.186 P. Makrythanasis1,2, I. Moix1, S. Gimelli1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2, F. Bena1, M. A. A 2, 8 mb 14q12 deletion in a boy with severe encephalopathy Morris1, A. Bottani1; and Rett-like features 1University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Geneva, O. Boute1, J. Andrieux2, A. Lepine3, L. Vallee3, S. Manouvrier1; Geneva, Switzerland. 1Service de génétique clinique, Lille, France, 2Laboratoire de génétique, Lille, Mutations of MECP2 are responsible for Rett Syndrome (RS), an X- France, 3Service de neurologie infantile, Lille, France. linked neurodevelopmental disorder affecting mainly girls. The avail- We report on a six-years- old boy with a de novo 2,8 Mb interstitial ability of MECP2 testing has led to the identification of mutations in deletion of chromosome 14q12 identified by array-CGH. He presents girls with atypical RS features and the recognition of milder forms. Fur- a severe mental retardation, post-natal microcephaly, epilepsy, jerky thermore, duplication of the entire gene has recently been described movements of the upper limbs and minor dysmorphic features: large in boys presenting a different clinical picture, featuring severe mental ears and a tented upper lip. FOXG1 gene, which encodes a brain-spe- retardation and recurrent infections. cific transcriptional repressor essential for early development of the We describe a girl with a heterozygous MECP2 duplication. The pa- telencephalon, is the only gene entirely included in the deleted region. tient, aged 19 years, has mild mental retardation, a kind, friendly but Alteration of FOXG1 has been previously described in four girls with anxious character. She has neither dysmorphic features nor malforma- severe mental retardation, seizures and Rett-like features: jerky move- tions. As a child she presented no particular health problems. Her mo- ments of the upper limbs, stereotypic activities, abnormal breathing tor development was slightly delayed with walking at 20 months, hypo- patterns. Two girls presented a de novo 14q 12 deletion detected by tonia and minor balance difficulties but otherwise within normal limits. array-CGH ( Bisgaard, 2005; Papa, 2O08), the others had truncating Speech is fluid with good pronunciation but is simple and repetitive. mutation of FOXG 1 gene ( Ariani, 2008). These patients and our case Diagnosis was made after sequencing and MLPA analysis of MECP2. report suggest that haploinsufficiency of FOXG1 gene may cause a Parental analysis demonstrated that the duplication was de novo. severe encephalopathy mimicking the congenital variant of Rett syn- CGH analysis defined a duplication of 0.129Mb (from position 152.930 drome. Array -CGH should be performed in boys presenting with such Mb to 153.059Mb) long, including MECP2 and part of IRAK1 genes. clinical features and in girls without MECP2 mutation. FOXG1 gene X-inactivation is not skewed (in leukocyte DNA). analysis should also be discussed if array -CGH is normal. We conclude that it is highly likely that this duplication has phenotypic consequences. These findings raise considerable issues concerning the diagnosis of girls with mild mental retardation and no dysmorphic signs and the genetic counselling for the parents.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.187 P02.189 Genetic Heterogeneity in Rett syndrome: molecular and clinical Epileptic encephalopathy in a girl with an interstitial deletion of characterization of Females Heterozygous for Deleterious Xp22 comprising promoter and exon 1 of the CDKL gene mutations in CDKL and FOXG Y. Fichou1, N. Bahi-Buisson2, B. Girard3, J. Nectoux1, A. Gautier4, Y. Saillour1, L. Lambert1, C. Nemos2, D. Amsallem3, C. Francannet4, F. Giuliano5, B. Doray6, K. Poirier1, J. Chelly1, T. Bienvenu1; A. Roubertie7, A. Goldenberg8, B. Delobel9, V. Layet10, M. N´Guyen11, A. Sau- 1Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin, CNRS (UMR8103), Paris, France, nier2, F. Verneau2, P. Jonveaux2, C. Philippe2; 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 1Service de Médecine Infantile I, Centre Hospitalier et Universitaire, Vandoeu- 3Laboratoire de Biochimie et Genetique Moleculaire, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, vre les Nancy, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier et Univer- France, 4Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France. sitaire, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 3Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital St We report a two-year-old girl with early onset seizures variant of Rett Jacques, Besançon, France, 4Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Hôtel-Dieu, syndrome with a deletion at Xp22 detected by multiplex ligation-de- Clermont-Ferrand, France, 5Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Hôpital l’Ar- pendent probe amplification (MLPA) technique. This patient presented chet, Nice, France, 6Service de Cytogénétique, CHU Hôpital de Hautepierre, with tonic seizures at seven days of life. Subsequently, she developed Strasbourg, France, 7Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU Hôpital Guy de Chau- infantile spasms at three months and finally refractory myoclonic epi- liac, Toulouse, France, 8Unité de Génétique Clinique, CHU Hôpital C. Nicolle, lepsy. She demonstrated severe encephalopathy with hypotonia, de- Rouen, France, 9Centre de Génétique Chromosomique, Hôpital St Vincent de celeration of head growth, with eye gaze but limited eye pursuit, no Paul, Lille, France, 10Unité de Génétique, Hôpital Flaubert, Le Havre, France, language, limited hand use, and intermittent hand stereotypies. This 11Département de Pédiatrie, CHU, Grenoble, France. combination of clinical features, suggestive of early onset variant of The CDKL5 and FOXG1 genes have been implicated in the molecular Rett syndrome led us to screen the CDKL5 gene. In a first step, screen- etiology of variant forms of Rett syndrome. We screened the CDKL5 ing of the whole coding sequence of the CDKL5 gene revealed no gene in a cohort of 167 patients with early-onset seizures and 10 girls point mutations. In a second step, we searched gross rearrangements with Aicardi syndrome. The screening was negative for all males as by MLPA and identified a microdeletion affecting both the promoter and well as for females with Aicardi syndrome, excluding the CDKL5 gene exon 1 in CDKL5. Subsequent analysis on a Nimblegen HD2 microar- as a candidate for this neurodevelopmental disorder. We found 11 ad- ray confirmed a deletion of approximately 300 kb at Xp22, including ditional de novo mutations in CDKL5 in female patients with a high the BEND2, SCML2 and CDKL5 genes. In conclusion, our report sug- mutation rate (28%) in females with early-onset seizures and infan- gests that searching for large rearrangements in CDKL5 should be tile spasms. In addition, we screened the entire coding sequence of considered in girls with early onset seizures and Rett-like features. FOXG1B in a cohort of 35 female patients with a classical or congeni- tal form of RTT and 6 males with neonatal epileptic encephalopathies P02.190 or RTT-like phenotypes. We found two female patients to be heterozy- mEcP2 mutations in Bulgarian Rett syndrome patients gous for nonsense mutations resulting in truncated FoxG1 transcrip- T. Todorov1, A. Todorova1, R. Tincheva2, D. Avdjieva2, V. Mitev1; tion factors. One patient is affected by a classic form of RTT, whereas 1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, the other patient presents with a congenital variant of RTT. These find- 2Department of Pediatrics, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. ings give additional support to the genetic heterogeneity in RTT, and Rett syndrome (RTT) is a progressive neurodevelopmental disorder help to delineate the clinical spectrum in the phenotypes associated that occurs almost exclusively in females. It is characterized by ar- with FOXG1 and CDKL5 mutated alleles. rested development between 6 and 18 months of age (with apparent normal development before that). The main clinical symptoms are: re- P02.188 gression of acquired skills, loss of speech, stereotypical movements of A novel p. Arg970X mutation in the last exon of the cDKL5 gene the hands, microcephaly, seizures, and mental retardation. The typical resulting in a female with Rett syndrome-like features and mild form of RTT is caused by X-linked dominant mutation in the gene en- seizure disorder coding methyl-CpG-binding protein-2 (MECP2). S. Psoni1, P. J. Willems2, E. Kanavakis1, A. Mavrou1, H. Frissyra1, J. Traeger- In total 21 female patients clinically suspected to be affected by classi- Synodinos1, C. Sofokleous1, P. Makrythanassis3, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1; cal RTT were referred to our laboratory for genetic analysis of MECP2 1Choremio Research Laboratory, Athens, Greece, 2GENDIA (GENetic DIAgnos- gene. The MECP2 gene was screened for mutations by PCR/direct tic Network), Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Genetic Medicine and Develop- sequencing. ment, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. In one patient the karyotype analysis showed abnormal result - Introduction: Mutations in the CDKL5 (Cyclin-Dependent Kinase-like 46,XX,del(X)(p1.22). 5) gene in Xp22 are associated with therapy-resistant seizures and Five of the affected girls (23,8%) were proved to have mutations in atypical Rett Syndrome (RS) features in early infancy along with se- MECP2 gene: c.473C->T, p.Thr158Met; c.808C->T, p. Arg270X (de- vere mental retardation. RS is a serious neurodevelopmental disorder tected in two unrelated patients); c.880C->T, p.Arg294X; c.1157_ caused by mutations in the MECP2 gene in Xq28. In its classic form 1200del44, p.Leu386fs. The detected mutations were all de novo. RS mainly affects females who after a relatively normal development All of our genetically proved cases were very severely affected: total during the first six months of life develop a wide spectrum of symptoms. loss of speech is present in all cases, severe mental retardation, ste- Several atypical forms of RS also exist, such as the Hanefeld variant reotypical hand movements are present, walking without help is im- with early-onset convulsions, suggesting the implication of other genes possible, seizures are invariably found in the presented girls. in the RS phenotype. Two of our patients were additionally tested for Angelman Syndrome Material-Methods: We herein report a 14-year-old female with a RS- (AS) by Methylation Sensitive PCR analysis; 5 girls were screened for like clinical picture, severe mental retardation, and well-controlled sei- mutations along the Cycline-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) gene zures. Results: MECP2 gene testing was negative, but subsequent and 10 were analysed by MECP2 MLPA Kit for large deletions/dupli- sequencing of the CDKL5 gene revealed a novel p.Arg970X (c. 2908 cations detection. These additional genetic tests revealed no genetic C>T) mutation in the last exon. The truncated protein only misses a changes in analyzed patients. small portion of the terminus, which might explain the less severe phe- notype. P02.191 Conclusion: The study of the CDKL5-mutated variable phenotypes as mouse models of mecP2 disorders share gene expression the one presented here, may possibly contribute to the elucidation of changes in the cerebellum and hypothalamus the CDKL5 and MECP2-associated overlapping molecular and clinical S. Ben-Shachar1,2, M. Chahrour2, C. Thaller2, C. A. Shaw2, H. Y. Zoghbi2; pathways. 1Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 2Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. A group of postnatal neurodevelopmental disorders collectively re- ferred to as MeCP2 disorders are caused by aberrations in the gene encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2). Loss of MeCP2 function causes Rett syndrome (RTT), whereas increased copy num- ber of the gene causes MECP2 duplication or triplication syndromes.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  MeCP2 acts as a transcriptional repressor, however the gene ex- the FOXG1 gene in a cohort of 206 MECP2/CDKL5 mutation negative pression changes observed in the hypothalamus of MeCP2 disorder patients with severe encephalopathy and microcephaly (136 females mouse models suggest that MeCP2 can also upregulate gene expres- and 70 males). The screening was negative in all males. Two de novo sion, given that the majority of genes are downregulated upon loss of mutations (c.1248C>G, p.Y416X and c.460dupG) were identified in two MeCP2 and upregulated in its presence. To determine if this role of girls. Both patients showed neurological symptoms from the neonatal MeCP2 extends beyond the hypothalamus, we studied gene expres- period with poor reactivity, hypotony, and severe microcephaly. During sion patterns in the cerebellum of Mecp2-null and MECP2-Tg mice, the first year of life, both weakly progressed and presented feeding modeling RTT and MECP2 duplication syndrome, respectively. We problems. At 5 years, girls showed severe neurological impairment found that abnormal MeCP2 dosage causes alterations in the expres- with gross hypotonia, no language, convergent strabismus, and no sion of hundreds of genes in the cerebellum. The majority of genes voluntary hand use. Instead, both presented the combination of jerky were upregulated in MECP2-Tg mice and downregulated in Mecp2- movements, hand-mouthing and hand-washing activities. Although null mice, consistent with a role for MeCP2 as a modulator that can our patients demonstrate severe encephalopathy compatible with the both increase and decrease gene expression. Many of the genes al- congenital variant, several features previously highlighted in FOXG1 tered in the cerebellum were similarly altered in the hypothalamus. mutations patients were not observed : absent eye contact, inconsol- Our data suggest that either gain or loss of MeCP2 results in gene able crying during perinatal period, and thin corpus callosum. Others expression changes in multiple brain regions and that some of these signs were not systematically observed: protruding tongue, scoliosis, changes are global. Further delineation of the expression pattern of and epilepsy. Although the overall frequency of mutations in FOXG1 MeCP2 target genes throughout the brain might identify subsets of in females with severe mental retardation and microcephaly appears genes that are more amenable to manipulation, and can thus be used to be low (1.5%), our findings suggest the requirement to investigate to modulate some of the disease phenotypes. both point mutations and probably gene dosage in the FOXG1 gene in patients with severe encephalopathy with microcephaly, and some P02.192 Rett-like features. molecular karyotyping reveals CDKL Deletions as frequent cause of mental retardation of unknown origin P02.194 A. Rauch1, M. Zweier2, A. Gregor2, C. Zweier2, E. Bijlsma3, F. Bosch4, J. Hoyer2, DNA Resequencing and Variant Identification Using a Non- A. Ekici2, A. Reis2; syndromic X-linked mental Retardation (mRX) Panel 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Insti- C. Davidson1, F. Bartel2, E. Nordman1, B. Johnson1, L. Joe1, A. Pradhan1, A. tute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germa- Felton1, M. Friez2; ny, 3Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Department of Clinical Genetics, 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Greenwood Genetic Cen- LUMC, University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Pediatric Hospital Fürth, ter, Greenwood, SC, United States. Fürth, Germany. The prevalence of X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is estimated to In order to further elucidate the causes of mental retardation we per- afflict ~1/1000 males. To date, there have been ~90 X-linked genes formed a genome-wide copy number variant (CNV) survey in 160 pa- implicated in causing XLMR with the majority of these genes being tients with mental retardation of unknown origin using the Affymetrix associated with syndromal MR (MRXS). A smaller set of genes on the 6.0 SNP platform. X chromosome have been associated with nonsyndromal MR (MRX) Surprisingly, two of the 160 patients (1.3 %) showed microdeletions where the only discernible feature is mental retardation. Significant involving the CDKL5 gene. Mutations in this gene were only recently overlap between these two sets of genes indicates that syndromal identified as causative for an atypical variant of Rett-syndrome char- and nonsyndromal can both be caused by alterations in many of the acterized by intractable early-onset seizures often accompanied by XLMR genes. From a clinical perspective, proper diagnosis of males Rett-like features. with nonsyndromal XLMR is more straightforward when a positive fam- Patient 1 is a 12 months old girl, born after uncomplicated pregnancy, ily history exists. Unfortunately, many undiagnosed males with MRX with secondary microcephaly, severe mental retardation, severe hypo- exist, and the absence of an X-linked pedigree makes the identifica- tonia and drug resistant seizures. Karyotyping, testing for Angelman tion of their underlying etiology much more difficult. Indicative of this syndrome and MECP2-analysis showed normal results. By array anal- difficulty is that MRX accounts for roughly 2/3 of the total number of ysis a 230kb deletion on Chromosome Xp22.13, including parts of the XLMR cases. To test for MRX, the Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory at CXorf20 gene, the complete SCML2 gene and exon 1 of the CDKL5 the Greenwood Genetic Center has designed a resequencing panel gene was detected. consisting of 95 amplicons encoding the exons and intron junctions Patient 2, a 7 years old girl was born after an uncomplicated preg- of 9 X-linked genes. To demonstrate the advantages of a new capil- nancy and is severely mentally retarded. She had convulsions in her lary electrophoresis (CE) instrument, 19 blinded probands suspected first year of life and shows stereotypical movements of her hands. Her of having MRX were directly sequenced using the Greenwood MRX speech is nasal and limited to a few words. MECP2 and TCF4 testing resequencing panel. Variant detection in the 9 genes across the 19 was normal. In this patient we detected a 157 kb deletion on the X- samples will be discussed. The MRX Resequencing Panel coupled chromosome, including a large part of the CDKL5 gene, furthermore to the Fast Resequencing Workflow highlights the advantages of us- the RS1 gene and parts of the PPEF1 gene. ing CE for DNA resequencing and variant identification across a large Our findings demonstrate for the first time, that CDKL5 microdeletions number of samples and genes. are a major pathomechanism in female patients with severe mental retardation and seizures and seems to constitute a relatively frequent P02.195 cause of mental retardation. Developmental delay and a distinctive facial appearance in two families with Xq25 duplications P02.193 A. Philippe1, V. Malan1, M. L. Jacquemont1, N. Boddaert2, J. P. Bonnefont1, A. two novel cases of congenital variant of Rett syndrome related Munnich3, L. Colleaux1, V. Cormier-Daire1; to mutations in the FOXG gene 1INSERM U781 et Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Mala- J. Nectoux1, N. Bahi-Buisson2, B. Girard3, H. Van Esch4, T. De Ravel de l’Ar- des, Paris, France, 2Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker Enfants- gentière4, Y. Fichou1, J. Chelly1, T. Bienvenu1; Malades, Paris, France, 3INSERM U781 et Département de Génétique , Hôpital 1Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin, CNRS (UMR8103), Paris, France, Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, We have previously reported a duplication (1.2 Mb) at Xq25 using 3Laboratoire de Biochimie et Genetique Moleculaire, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, whole-genome array Comparative Genomic Hybridization in a 20- France, 4Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. year-old man with syndromic mental retardation (MR) (Jacquemont et The forkhead box G1 (FoxG1) is a transcription factor that is critical for al.2006). forebrain development where it promotes progenitor proliferation and This duplication contains four known genes, one of which is GRIA3 suppresses premature neurogenesis. Recently, the FOXG1 gene was (Glutamate Receptor, Ionotropic, AMPA subunit 3). Mutations, deletion implicated in the molecular aetiology of the congenital variant of Rett and partial duplication of the GRIA3 gene have been reported in males syndrome. So far, seven mutations have been reported. We screened with non-syndromic MR (Wu et al., 2007; Chiyonobu et al., 2007).Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  Our goal was to look for other patients with duplication of GRIA3 by roD6 is a member of the NeuroD family of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) performing Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA). transcription factors. It activates E box-dependent transcription in col- We selected about twenty patients with MR based either on their facial laboration with TCF3/E47 and is a trans-acting factor involved in the features or on their behavioral disorders. development and maintenance of the mammalian nervous system. We found a duplication of GRIA3 resulting from a 2.8 Mb duplication at The studied groups included 144 male patients with nonsyndromic Xq25 in a 4-year-old boy who had a similar facial appearance. These MR (ICD-10) divided into two groups: severe and mild MR and 120 two patients presented a common clinical phenotype: psychomotor healthy controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood delay, hypotonia, mild mental retardation, pervasive developmental leukocytes by standard phenol/chloroform method. Genotyping was disorder and non specific cerebral MRI abnormalities associated with performed by the PCR-RFLP technique. characteristic facial features including malar flatness, lower palpebral Significant differences in G allele frequency have been found between eversion, thick lips and hypotonic facies. In both cases, the duplica- patients with severe form MR and mild form (OR=2.4; CI95%=1.1-5.4), tion was maternally inherited. The mothers presented an X inactivation (chi2=4.4; p=0.03; df=1). The frequency of G allele in group of patients bias and were unaffected. with severe MR was 32.1%, which is higher than in mild MR (16.6%). We suggest that the Xq25 region duplication may result in a clinically One of explanations of these differences could be that G* allele is in- recognizable condition. In particular, facial dysmorphism could help to volved in formation of the binding site to miRNA-105 thus probably diagnose this microduplication in males with X-linked MR. suppressing the expression of NeuroD6 gene. P02.196 P02.198 A duplication encompassing the SMS gene involved in a X- molecular characterization of the promoters of the X-linked linked mental retardation different from snyder-Robinson mental retardation gene JARiD1c and additional members of the syndrome JARiD1 gene family A. Delahaye1, E. Pipiras1, S. Drunat2, C. Dupont1,2, A. Tabet2, A. Aboura2, J. L. R. Jensen, M. Schlicht, B. Lipkowitz, H. H. Ropers, A. W. Kuss; Elion2, B. Benzacken1,2, L. Burglen3; Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. 1Histology-Embryology-Cytogenetics Department, APHP-Jean Verdier Univer- X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is genetically heterogeneous dis- sity Hospital, UFR SMBH, Paris 13 University, Bondy, France, 2Department of order affecting approximately 2 in 1000 males. Causative mutations Genetics, APHP-Robert Debré University Hospital, and INSERM U676, Paris, have been found in over 100 different genes, but a significant propor- France, 3Genetics Department, AP-HP-Armand Trousseau University Hospital, tion of the cases are still without molecular diagnosis. The majority of Paris, France. mutations were so far detected in the protein coding regions of X-chro- Duplications on the X chromosome have been rarely reported in males mosomal genes. However, sequence changes in regulatory regions with mental retardation and dysmorphism. In most of cases they are in- may result in similarly detrimental effects by influencing the transcrip- herited from female carrier phenotypically normal. We describe the mo- tion efficiency of the respective genes. lecular characterization of a maternal interstitial dup(X)(p22.11p22.12) Therefore one can assume that part of the unsolved cases of XLMR encompassing the spermine synthase (SMS) gene in two brothers with may be due to promoter mutations. Thus, it is necessary to identify mental retardation. functional promoter elements in known XLMR-genes in order to de- Clinically the two brothers demonstrated mild mental retardation, epi- termine where sequence changes can have functional consequences. canthus, short up-slanting palpebral fissures, short extremities and Furthermore, the identification of factors involved in the transcription hollow feet. The first one presented a strabism and cryptorchid testes, of these genes is also a way to find additional genes with a putative and the second a congenital club foot. Short hands and feet were also role in MR. Therefore we investigated the promoter region of one of observed in the mentally normal mother. the more frequently mutated XLMR-genes, JARID1C, for functionally An Integragen BAC-array showed a gain for CTD-2033A1 clone, not relevant sequences. confirmed by FISH analysis. Agilent 44K oligo-array confirmed the gain As JARID1C encodes a transcription factor, mutations in target pro- and precise the size (460 Kb). Quantitative real-time PCR confirmed moters might also cause MR. Thus, having evidence of regulatory the duplication in both brothers and showed the duplication was in- interplay between JARID1C and its homolog JARID1B, we included herited from their mother. The genes included in the duplication were JARID1B as well as the other JARID1 family members (JARID1A and SMS and PHEX. JARID1D) in our study. Using a dual-luciferase reporter assay to mea- We discuss the implication of SMS gene in the phenotype of our pa- sure the activity of different parts of the 5’-flanking regions of these tients. SMS gene mutations were shown to be involved in the X-linked genes in HEK and SH-SY-5Y cells, we defined regions that are impor- recessive mental retardation Snyder-Robinson syndrome (OMIM tant for transcriptional activity in all four JARID1 genes. 309583). This syndrome is characterized by a marfanoid habitus with long thin hands and feet. We suggest that the SMS gene could be P02.199 involved in another X-linked mental retardation than Snyder-Robinson towards understanding the pathogenetic mechanism of PQBP1 syndrome. Skeletal abnormalities in our patients (short hands and feet) mutations in X-linked mental retardation are the opposite of what is described in lost of function of SMS gene. L. Musante, S. Kunde, H. Ropers, V. M. Kalscheuer; Finally, this report contributes to the clinical and genetic delineations of Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. the SMS gene defects. We have found that mutations in the polyglutamine binding protein 1 (PQBP1) gene cause X-linked mental retardation. Identical and similar P02.197 mutations result in high clinical variability, ranging from moderate men- the role of miRNA-105 in the development of nonsyndromic tal retardation to much more severe forms, including microcephaly, mental retardation short stature and spasticity. More recently we have begun to unravel I. Minniakhmetov1, D. Islamgulov1, N. Ryabchikova2, E. Khusnutdinova1; the pathomechanism of this disease and have found that PQBP1 mu- 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir tant transcripts with a premature stop codon are partially degraded Medical State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. by nonsense mediated mRNA decay (NMD) and that PQBP1 muta- MicroRNAs are noncoding RNAs that regulate many cellular functions tions cause nonsense-associated altered splicing (NAS). Interestingly, including cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. They attenu- some of the mutations resulted in an upregulation of naturally exist- ate gene expression by pairing with the 3’ UTR of target transcripts ing PQBP1 protein isoforms. Additional studies demonstrated that the inducing RNA cleavage or translational inhibition. These small regula- PQBP1 protein is part of a large multiprotein complex containing RNA- tory molecules are central to various physiologic processes and their binding proteins that are established components of RNA granules and disruption is associated with human diseases, particularly mental re- play distinct roles in post-transcriptional RNA regulation and metabo- tardation. lism. Interestingly, we have found that PQBP1 is present in dendritic The purpose of this study was to investigate miRNAs-105 role in the shafts of primary cortical neurons in discrete granular structures and development of nonsyndromic mental retardation (MR). We analyzed co-localises with newly found interacting proteins in these granules. rs10238918 SNP located in a miRNA-105 binding site of 3’UTR of Remarkably, a fraction of the PQBP1-containing granules co-localised NeuroD6 gene in nonsyndromic MR patients and control group. Neu- with the fragile X-mental retardation protein. Taken together, our find-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 00 ings strongly suggest that PQBP1 plays a hitherto unknown role in (NMD) such as emetine and puromicine. An 8 and 2 fold recoveries post-transcriptional RNA regulation and metabolism. Disturbance of of SLC6A8 levels were obtained for p.Phe480del and p.Phe360del one or several of these processes may contribute to the clinical phe- respectively, when compares to corresponding controls. We hypoth- notype in patients with a PQBP1 mutation. esised, that a reduced expression of SLC6A8 gene, probably related to mRNA instability, could be relevant to explain the more severe pre- P02.200 sentation of the disease in these two patients. A recurrent copy number gain at Xq28 in four families with mental retardation reveals a dosage-dependent severity of the P02.202 phenotype and suggests a novel recombination mechanism Autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia with dystonia H. Van Esch1, J. Vandewalle2, K. Govaerts2, C. Zweier3, I. Madrigal4, M. Mila4, in two Russian families I. Fernandez5, D. Böhm6, C. Spaich7, J. Kohlhase6, A. Rauch3, P. Marynen2, J. G. E. Rudenskaya1, E. L. Dadaly1, V. Strelnikov2,3; Fryns1, G. Froyen2; 1Medical Genetics Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Human Genetics, Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute for Mo- Human Genome Laboratory, Leuven, Belgium, 3Institute of Human Genetics, lecular Medicine, Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 4Biochemistry and Molecular Dystonia (DYS) is a very rare feature in ‘complicated’ hereditary spas- Genetics Department Hospital Clínic, Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques tic paraplegias (HSP+). In 2008, Gilbert et al described a large fam- August Pi i Sunyer and CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 5Instituto de Biología y ily with autosomal dominant (AD) HSP+DYS and mapped the locus Genética Molecular, Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 6Center for in 2q24-q31. We diagnosed AD HSP+DYS in two families. Family 1 Human Genetics Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 7Institute for Clinical Genetics, numbered 4 patients, a 31-year-old proband, her 40-year-old brother, Olgahospital, Stuttgart, Germany. their father, and her 2.5 year-old son. In the proband, severe spas- In a study to elucidate the genetic defects in patients with X-linked tic paraplegia (SP) started in childhood; DYS presented in 11 yrs as mental retardation (XLMR) we performed X chromosome-specific writer’s cramp and then as torticollis, in 27 yrs DYS in hands started; BAC-array-CGH and identified a 0.3 Mb inherited apparent recurrent yet, SP prevailed. Her son had severe SP since infancy looking like copy number gain at Xq28 in affected males of four unrelated XLMR spastic cerebral palsy; followed up to 8 yrs he was non-ambulatory, families. All aberrations segregate with the disease and the carrier with normal mental development and no DYS. In the not-examined mothers show nonrandom X-inactivation. Interestingly, this region was brother, SP presented since youth as ‘shuffling’ gait; DYS started at 28 duplicated in two families with nonsyndromic mild to moderate MR, yrs as torticollis and progressed to a severe generalized form resistant triplicated in a third family with more severe characteristics, while in a to treatment and prevailing over SP. The father had ‘shuffling’ gait till fourth family with severe syndromic MR, this region was present in four 50 yrs when the gait deteriorated rapidly; dementia and psychosis also copies. The aberrant region is located at 153.21 Mb to 153.53 Mb and developed; he died in 54 yrs non-ambulatory and mentally disabled. harbors 18 genes of which three are highly expressed in brain (RPL10, In Family 2, 24-year-old male proband was examined. SP and DYS ATP6AP1, GDI1). Expression analysis revealed copy number-depen- started in 7_8 yrs and progressed with generalized DOPA-resistant dent increased mRNA levels in affected patients compared to controls, DYS prevailing over SP. Proband’s father died in 58 yrs with no evident which correlates with the severity of clinical features. Our data strongly symptoms; deceased paternal grandmother and her sister were said to suggest that an increased expression of genes within this region re- have adult-onset generalized hyperkinesia. Intrafamilial variability and sults in impaired cognition in a dosage-dependent manner. Breakpoint anticipiation are seen in both families. Family 2 suggests incomplete analysis revealed recombination sites within two adjacent sets of low penetrance. Origin of dementia in the father in Family 1 is question- copy repeats which implies a yet unknown recombination mechanism. able. Finally, in patients with MECP2 duplication the region described in this study is often completely or partially involved, but the contribution of P02.203 their increased mRNA expression to the severe phenotype is probably Atypical clinical presentation of leukoencephalopathy with brain masked by the strong effect of increased MeCP2 levels. Our data thus stem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation (LBsL) demonstrate that a copy number gain of individual genes present in a S. V. Mikhailova1, G. E. Rudenskaya2, E. Y. Volkova1, E. Y. Zakharova2, V. contiguous genomic aberration can on itself result in a clinical pheno- Strelnikov3,4; type too. 1Russian State Pediatrics Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Medical Genetics Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Research Centre for P02.201 Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Institute for Molecular Medi- transcriptional behaviour of SLCA gene mutant alleles in cine, Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. creatine transport deficient patients LBSL, MIM 611105, is a “new” autosomal recessive disease with dis- P. Alcaide1, B. Merinero1, A. Ribes2, R. Artuch3, J. Campistol3, M. Ugarte1, P. tinctive MRI and spectroscopy features. The causative gene DARS2 Rodriguez-Pombo1; codes mitochondrial aspartyl-tRNA synthetase. Along with some other 1Centro Biologia Molecular SO (CSIC-UAM) CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 2Instituto recently described leukoencephalopathies, LBSL proved to be a not in- de Bioquímica Clínica.CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital San Joan de frequent disorder. In the Department of metabolic disorders of Medical Deu.CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain. Genetics Research Center, 35 unrelated LBSL cases were verified by In mammals, creatine (Cr) is taken from diet or can be synthesized DNA analysis since 2007. Typical features are childhood onset, slowly endogenously. Creatine uptake by cells with high energy demands progressive cerebellar ataxia, spasticity, and dorsal column dysfunc- depends on a specific creatine transporter, CT1 encoded by SLC6A8 tion. We present a 12-year-old female patient with atypical feature gene. Although there are about 20 pathogenic variations described of paroxysmal dyskinesias. They started in 1.5 yrs during a common for the SLC6A8 gene, their transcriptional profile has been poorly febrile infection and reappeared, produced by motion, as involuntary studied. Here, we focus our interest in characterizing at mRNA level body turn to the right with putting right leg aside and crying. Later on, three in-frame mutations p.Ala404Pro, p.Phe360del and p.Phe480del, paroxysms became persistent and of different appearance. By now, identified in three Spanish CT1 patients with a clinical presentation they occur many times a day, mostly in the beginning of motion after of the disease ranging from less to more severe. We performed both rest, and look like abrupt quick legs flexion with sitting on the ground RT-PCR analysis to characterize possible exon skipping events and for few instants, or just like legs flexion if the girl is in a sitting position. quantification of SLC6A8 mRNA levels using qRT-PCR. The cDNA be- Other signs are moderate spasticity and ataxia; mental development haviour did not show any aberrant splicing, failing to explain their dif- is normal. Epilepsy, electrolyte disbalance, myotonia, and psychogenic ferent clinical phenotype. However, a different expression profile of the disorder were excluded. LBSL was diagnosed in 12 yrs when MRI was SLC6A8 gene in the three CT1 patient’s fibroblasts was observed. So, recognized as characteristic for the disease. Compound heterozygos- alleles causing a phenylalanine deletion showed a significative reduc- ity for common DARS2 mutations, c.228-20_21delTTinsC and c.455G- tion in the SLC6A8 mRNA levels, when compared to that measured T, was found. To our knowledge, paroxysmal dyskinesias in LBSL were for p.A404P allele or controls. To analyse if these changes could trig- not described previously; their persistence through many years is also ger mRNA degradation, patient’s fibroblast were treated with different remarkable. The dyskinesias may be of brain stem origin, like those in inhibitors of both protein synthesis and non mediated decay process multiple sclerosis or brain stem stroke.Cytogenetics 0 P03. cytogenetics distal 2p. The patient’s karyotype is 46,XY,rec(2)dup(2p)inv(2)(p25.1 q37.3)pat. Chromosome analysis in the father showed a pericentric inversion of chromosome 2, described as 46,XY,inv(2)(p25.1q37.3). Recurrent spontaneous abortions due to a homologous The proband’s karyotype is a recombinant product of the paternal in- Robertsonian translocation (13q13q) version. A. Faraj Pour, C. Azimi, M. Khaleghian; Parents are consanguineous, with one normal daughter and the affect- Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, ed son. Both father and grandmother are deaf. The patient has moder- Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Islamic Republic of Iran. ate mental retardation with developmental delay. The clinical features Balanced Robertsonian translocations are relatively common in differ- include prominent arachnodactyly in feet and slim lower limbs, speech ent populations, occurring at a frequency of about 1 in 1100 livebirths. delay, poor coordination, prominent supraorbital ridge, contracture The proportion of these translocations that involve homologous chro- deformity of PIP, hands ulnar deviation, mild genuvalgus, mild facies mosomes appears to be extremely small. Robertsonian translocation asymmetry and retrognatia, thick and malformed auricles, refractive between two chromosomes 13 is a rare event, and should not manifest errors (myopia and astigmatism), prominent nose, with lipoma on the any obvious phenotypicl effects. Theoretically, carriers of homologous face and multiple large acnea and scars. Most of the recorded clinical Robertsonian translocations are unable to produce normal children features include the reported features of partial trisomy of distal part of since all their gametes should be either disomic or nullisomic for the the short arm of chromosome 2. However, additional clinical features chromosome involved in the translocation. Our case was a 31 year old which are not characteristic of the observed chromosome imbalances woman who presented with three spontaneous abortions (at 12, 9 and are present. Complementary work for further characterization of the 8 weeks, respectively). Her hysterosalpingography was normal. Her deleted and duplicated chromosome segments is underway. laboratory tests including FSH, LH, Progesterone, Prolactin, Toxoplas- mosis, Listeriosis and TORCH were normal. She had three brothers P03.004 and three sisters, all healthy and married, with a few normal children. Nonmalignant aneuploidization in the human brain: Chromosome analysis was performed on cultured cells according to chromosome instability can mediate neurodegeneration in standard methods from the patient’s peripheral blood samples. All Alzhemer’s disease and ataxia-telangiectasia analyzed mitoses had 45 chromosomes with a derivative chromosome I. Y. Iourov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, T. Liehr3, A. D. Kolotii2, M. K. Tagirova1, Y. B. consisting of the long arms of the two chromosomes 13. The resulting Yurov1,2; net imbalance was loss of the short arms of both chromosomes 13. 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa- Her karyotype showed: 45,XX, der(13;13)(q10;q10). Cytogenetic stud- tion, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, ies of her parents were normal. Russian Federation, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. P03.002 Chromosome instability (CIN) manifesting as aneuploidy is usually as- the 1q-syndrome: A case report and literature review sociated with tumorigenesis. However, recent studies have shown that A. Zagorac, N. Marcun Varda, N. Kokalj Vokac; phenomena related to CIN (cell cycle errors, aneuploidy) are observed University Medical Centre Maribor, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia. in the diseased (nonmalignant) brain tissues. The latter phenomenon Deletions of the long arm of chromosome 1 have been reported in was recently observed in neurodegenerative disorders. To test a pos- numerous patients, with breakpoints occurring along the entire length sible link between CIN and neurodegeneration, we have analyzed in- of the q arm, causing clinical differences. Specific phenotypic findings, terphase chromosomes in the Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and ataxia-tel- resembling a distinct syndrome, are present in cases with terminal angiectasia (AT) brain. By means of interphase chromosome-specific deletions at 1q42 and 1q43. Monosomy 1q42-qter seems to be as- multicolor banding (ICS-MCB) and interphase FISH, we monitored sociated with characteristic manifestations. On these basis, molecular chromosome complement in about 500,000 neural cells derived from techniques are important in order to correctly define the deleted seg- the cerebral cortex of AD, AT and normal human brain (control sam- ment, and establish accurate genotype - phenotype correlations. ples). We have established the mean rate of stochastic aneuploidy We provide a clinical description of a girl with de novo terminal 1q43- per “mean” human chromosome as 0.5% in controls (the normal hu- qter deletion. man brain, 95%CI 0.2-0.7%; SD 0.2%). The AT brain demonstrated a The proband has been recognized as an infant with intrauterine growth dramatic 2-to-5 fold increase of stochastic aneuploidy randomly affect- retardation and generalized muscular hypotonia, microcephaly, epi- ing different chromosomes (mean 2.1%; 95%CI - 1.5-2.6%; SD 0.8%). chanthal folds, telechantus, enophtalmus, short eye openings with lat- The overall proportion of aneuploid cells in the brain of AT individuals eral blepharophimosis, small, broad and flat nose, low-set ears, high- was estimated at 20-50%. The level of stochastic aneuploidy in the AD arched palate and short neck. Valgus deformity of feet was present brain was slightly increased compared with controls. However, a dra- with short right Achilles tendon. matic 10-fold increase of cells with unstable chromosome complement Magnetic resonance of the brain revealed agenesis of the corpus cal- affected by chromosome 21 hypoploidy and hyperploidy was detected losum, ventriculomegaly and enophtalmus. She has seizures. in the AD brain (6-15% versus 0.8-1.8% in control). Thus, CIN mani- Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood showed a de novo terminal fested as aneuploidy does present in the AD and AT brain. Our data chromosome 1 long arm deletion, confirmed with Subtelomeric FISH indicate that CIN mediated by neural aneuploidization does not lead to (Multiprobe-T-System, CytoCell). To define the extent of the deletion tumorigenesis but potentially mediate neurodegeration in these devas- and the breakpoint location we performed 244k array-CGH (Agilent tative brain diseases. Supported by Philip Morris USA. Technologies, USA) demonstrated a loss of 9.4 Mb genomic material and the breakpoint 1q43 (at 237.6 Mb). P03.005 The patient’s features are compared with those of other patients with Evaluation of Amenorrhea: cytogenetic investigation in a similar deletions, and variable phenotypic findings due to different de- tunisian cohort leted chromosomal segments are discussed. R. Bhouri1,2, O. Kilani1, W. Ayed1, H. Elloumi1, F. Talmoudi1, H. Guermani1, N. Abidli1, I. El Kamel - Lebbi1, S. Abdelhak2, N. Bouayed-Abdelmoula3, A. P03.003 Amouri1,2; Partial monosomy of distal 2q and partial trisomy of distal 2p 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Molecular Investiga- in an adult mentally retarded patient, derived from a paternal tion of Genetic Orphan Diseases Research Unit (MIGOD), UR26/04, Pasteur inversion Insitute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Laboratoire d’Histologie Embryologie, Faculté S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, F. Mojahedi2, F. Behjati1, K. Kahrizi1, M. Ataei Ka- de Médecine de Sax, Sfax, Tunisia. choui1, H. Darvish1, G. Bahrami Monajemi1, H. Najmabadi1; Chromosomal abnormalities described in primary and secondary 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation amenorrhea range from X chromosome abnormalities such as Turner Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Mashhad Medical Genetics Coun- syndrome to assorted deletions and translocations to mutations in spe- selling Center, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. cific genes. We describe a 24 year old mentally retarded and dysmorphic Iranian Sixty five women were referred to our Cytogenetic laboratory for chro- male patient with partial monosomy for distal 2q and partial trisomy for mosomal exploration because of primary or secondary amenorrhea.Cytogenetics 0 Metaphase chromosomes were prepared using standard cytogenetic lymphocytes from workers of nuclear-chemical industry and clinically methods. Chromosomes were analysed by using RHG banding and healthy men of the same age using dual-color fluorescent in situ hy- karyotypes were interpreted according to ISCN 1995 nomenclature. bridization. In addition spectrum and level of structural chromosome The mean patient age was 28 years. aberration were estimated by G-banding technique. Statistically sig- An overall frequency of 16,94 % chromosomal abnormalities was de- nificant increasing of non-disjunction frequency has been found for all tected for our 65 patients. Sex chromosome abnormalities were pre- investigated autosomes in the cells of exposed individuals in compari- dominant (90% of cases). son with controls. There were no differences between groups in the Among primary amenorrhea women, 16 had a 46,XX karyotype and frequencies of gonosome non-disjunction. Chromosomal loss, which 5 (26.3%) had abnormal karyotype: 45,X /46,XX , 46,X idic(X)(q11), was detected as centromeric positive micronuclei, demonstrated no 46,X,del(X)(q 21), 46,XY and 45,X /46,XY. differences also. Analysis of the G-banded metaphase spreads has Karyotypes of patients with secondary amenorrhea were abnormal in indicated that the main distinction between exposed and unexposed 5 cases (12,5%) including four X chromosome mosaicism and one individuals was composed of the chromosomal aberrations such as autosomal translocation: 45, X /46,XX , 46,XX /47,XXX, 45X/47,XXX deletions and translocations, which failed to be finding using conven- and 46,XX, t(12 ;19) (q13 ;q13). tional solid-stained analysis. Thereby the internal exposure high-LET The present study has emphasized that karyotyping is one of the fun- alpha-particle irradiation demonstrates aneugenic activity along with damental investigations in the evaluation of amenorrhea. Cytogenetic clastogenic effect, that can be result both alteration metaphase spindle abnormalities seem to be more frequent in primary than secondary and abnormal segregation of the rearranged chromosomes. So, it is amenorrhea and mainly involve the X chromosome. Women with dif- advisable in the course of genotoxic investigations to use the analy- ferent cytogenetic types of X chromosome abnormalities should be di- sis of aneugenic effects in addition to standard approaches. Using bi- agnosed at young age and beneficiate of a carefully followed through- nucleated human lymphocytes coupled with FISH for non-disjunction out life. assessment proved to be the most sensitive technique for detection Genetic counseling is very hard for these patients but mutational anal- of aneuploidy. ysis of candidate genes in 46,XX idiopathic amenorrhea is needed to determine which genes contribute to the cause of this disorder. P03.008 characterization by FisH and array-cGH of 26 apparently P03.006 balanced chromosomal rearrangements associated with an molecular neurocytogenetic survey of variations in chromosome abnormal phenotype numbers and arrangement in the schizophrenia brain F. Petit1, B. Duban-Bedu2, O. Boute-Bénéjean1, M. Holder-Espinasse1, J. Cuis- Y. B. Yurov1,2, I. Y. Iourov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, A. K. Beresheva2, I. A. Demi- set1, S. Sukno2, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1, J. Andrieux1, B. Delobel2; dova2, A. D. Kolotii2, V. S. Kravets2, V. V. Monakhov1, I. V. Soloviev1, V. M. 1CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 2GHICL, Lille, France. Vostrikov1, T. Liehr3; Apparently balanced chromosomal anomalies affect around 0.5% of 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa- individuals. Regarding de novo reciprocal translocations, inversions tion, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, and complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCR), mental retardation Russian Federation, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, and/or congenital malformations are more frequent compared to the Germany. general population. We report 26 patients presenting abnormal phe- It has been proposed that alteration of genome organization and be- notypes and chromosomal rearrangements considered balanced by havior in neuronal cells could contribute to schizophrenia pathogen- conventional cytogenetics (20 reciprocal translocations of which one esis. However, related studies rarely address genomic variations at X-autosome, 5 inversions and 1 CCR), de novo (n=18) or inherited subchromosomal and chromosomal levels in the diseased brain. We (n=8). All were analysed by oligonucleotide array-CGH: 8 turned out to have addressed variation in chromosome numbers and somatic chro- be unbalanced, representing 25% of inherited cases, and 35% of de mosome pairing in neural cells of the schizophrenia brain by interphase novo cases. All cryptic imbalances were deletions, ranging from 1 to FISH. We demonstrate that the schizophrenia brain exhibits increased 15 Mb, of which 2 were localized at distance from the breakpoints. For rates of stochastic aneuploidy affecting different chromosomes with the remaining 18 patients, no quantitative anomaly was detected at the presence of low-level mosaicism involving chromosomes 1, 18, 150 kb resolution. Few of them were selected to characterize precisely 21 and X. Variation in chromosome number may destabilize grnome the breakpoints by FISH. Gene breakage was identified in two of them. in affected neuronal cells and play a definite role in schizophrenia In one case, a new gene implicated in facial clefts namely FAF1 was pathogenesis. The study of interphase chromosome organization has identified. In the other case, disruption of DMD gene was revealed in a showed the schizophrenic brain to differ in the rate of chromosomal girl presenting a progressive dystrophinopathy. According to previous associations by both heterochromatic and euchromatic regions. The studies, although these are preliminary results, two major pathogenic frequency of somatically paired heterochromatic regions was 1.5-3 mechanisms are underlined in this context: cryptic deletions and gene times higher for chromosomes 1, 9, 16 and 18 and for euchromatic disruption. This suggests that array-CGH must be performed system- regions of chromosomes 1 and 18, while pairing of chromosomes 15 atically when apparently balanced chromosomal rearrangement is as- and 17 has occurred more frequently in the non-diseased brain. Since sociated with an abnormal phenotype, including during pregnancy. nuclear organization defines proper functioning of a cell, the present findings propose for the first time alterations of chromosome organiza- P03.009 tion in the brain as a possible epigenetic mechanism involved in the cytogenetic changes of individuals occupationally exposed with pathogenesis of schizophrenia. In summary, we can conclude that the arsenic schizophrenia brain is hallmarked by specific behavior of neuronal ge- A. Karthick Kumar, V. Balachandar, M. Arun, P. Manikantan, S. Mohanadevi, nome which probably defines the cellular pathobiology of this common K. Sasikala; psychiatric disease. Supported partially by Philip Morris USA. Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. Long-term exposure to inorganic arsenic from various factor has been P03.007 documented to induce cancers and vascular diseases in a dose re- comparative analysis of numerical and structural chromosome sponse relationship. Arsenic levels in urine, hair, and nail are biomark- aberrations in peripheral blood lymphocytes from workers upon ers for short-term internal dose, skin hyperpigmentation and palmo- exposure to plutonium-239 plantar hyperkeratosis are for long-term (many years) internal dose, V. A. Timoshevsky, I. N. Lebedev, V. A. Vasilyev, N. N. Sukhanova; and percentage of monomethylarsonic acid in total metabolites of in- Institute of medical genetics, Russian academy of medical sciences, Tomsk, organic arsenic in urine may be considered as an exposure marker for Russian Federation. biologically effective dose. The biomarkers of early biological effects of Aneugenic mechanisms of activity for ionizing radiation have been ingested inorganic arsenic included blood levels of reactive oxidants debated for some time while its genotoxic and clastogenic action is and anti-oxidant capacity, genetic expression of inflammatory mole- well known. Six human chromosomes were investigated in pairs (2 cules, as well as cytogenetic changes of peripheral lymphocytes. In and 8, 7 and 12, X and Y) for the purpose of comparative estimation this regard present study find out whether the arsenic induced genetic of non-disjunction and lagging frequency in the binucleated human damage or not in peripheral blood lymphocytes in exposed subjects. ByCytogenetics 0 use of metaphase analysis with conventional Giemsa-staining, pres- In 9 out of 27 patients (33%) CNVs not previously described as poly- ent study investigated both the groups. After signing a consent form, morphisms were detected. Four of these patients displayed psycho- volunteers provided blood samples (5 ml) to establish cell cultures at motor retardation as an additional clinical characteristic. In conclusion, 72 h. For karyotyping, minimum 40 complete metaphase cells from we demonstrate that BPES-like phenotypes are frequently caused each subject was evaluated. Higher degree of chromosomal - type and by CNVs, and we emphasize the importance of whole-genome copy chromatid type aberrations were observed in experimentals compared number screening to identify the underlying genetic causes of these to controls. Present study shown that the arsenic caused an increase phenotypes. in CA. The mean frequencies per 100 metaphase of major CA type (chromosome rings, translocations, and dicentrics) of the workers and P03.012 the non-exposed controls were 0.91 and 0.24 respectively. Gene-gene mapping of candidate Regions and Genes for congenital and gene-environment interactions are involved in arsenic-induced Anomalies of the Kidneys and Urinary tract (cAKUt) using health hazards through toxicological mechanisms including genomic Array-Based comparative Genomic Hybridization instability and oxidative stress. C. Landwehr1, S. Weber2, M. Renkert2, A. Hoischen1, E. Wühl2, B. Radlwim- mer3, F. Schäfer2, R. G. Weber1; P03.010 1Institute of Human Genetics, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University, Bonn, cytogenetic analysis in BOH cases- an indian experience Bonn, Germany, 2Division of Pediatric Nephrology, University Children’s Hospi- R. Talwar-Sethi, S. K. S. Vats, M. K. Verma; tal, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Department of Molecular Super Religare Laboratories (SRL), Gurgaon, India. Genetics, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Chromosomal imbalance has been identified as a major cause for Congenital anomalies of the kidneys and urinary tract (CAKUT) are spontaneous pregnancy loss, infertility and childhood disability there- frequently associated with malformations of other organs. The etiology by, contributing significantly to the genetic burden on society. The diag- of maldevelopment often remains unknown. Therefore, we wanted to nosis of such chromosomal anomalies in cases with bad obstetric his- identify novel genomic regions associated with the CAKUT phenotype. tory (BOH) can be made by conventional cytogenetics which involves We analyzed 30 unexplained CAKUT-patients with at least one ad- karyotyping of GTG banded chromosome preparations obtained from ditional extrarenal symptom using genome-wide array-CGH. In 3 pa- whole blood. In the present study, conventional cytogenetic analysis tients, causal imbalances were detected. Patient HD1 was affected was used to analyze peripheral blood samples from 167 individuals by the CAKUT-phenotype of hypospadias in addition to extrarenal with BOH. Of these 167 cases, 145 presented with a history of sponta- anomalies. In the patient and his brother with a similar phenotype, ar- neous abortions (mean of 2 abortions) that were mainly in the first tri- ray-CGH detected a terminal loss of 0.59Mb in chromosomal band mester. The remaining 22 cases included 20 with a history of children 1q44 and a terminal gain of 6.55Mb in 16q23.3-q24.3 due to an un- with congenital anomalies and 2 with death of children due to unknown balanced 1;16-translocation according to FISH-analysis. A balanced causes. Cytogenetic analysis revealed chromosomal abnormalities in 1;16-translocation was detected in both patients’ unaffected father. In 10 cases. Robertsonian translocation between chromosomes 13 and patient HD16 presenting with renal hypoplasia and proximal ureteral 14 was reported in one case. Two cases revealed pericentric inver- stenosis in addition to mental retardation, macrocephaly, atresia of the sions in chromosomes 3 and 9 respectively. Novel cytogenetic anoma- auditory canal, and microtia, array-CGH detected a gain of 2.4Mb in lies like t(9;20) and t(1;13) were also observed in two cases. Three 1q21.1. In the patient’s unaffected father, a gain of 1.3Mb in 1q21.1- cases revealed heteromorphic variants in chromosome 1 (n=1) and 9 q21.2 was found involving the distal part of the patient’s gain, for which (n=2). Another case revealed addition of genetic material in the short benign copy number variation was described. In patient HD24 affected arm of chromosome 15 that has not yet been reported in literature, by renal dysplasia with hydronephrosis and extrarenal abnormalities, to the best of our knowledge. The detection of these chromosomal array-CGH identified a loss of 11.93Mb in 3q23-q25.1, confirmed and anomalies, few of which are novel, in cases with BOH reiterates that shown to be de novo by FISH-analysis. In summary, our study provides cytogenetic analysis is a ‘gold standard’ for screening cases with BOH evidence that 1q44-loss and/or 16q23.3-q24.3-gain may be associated where structural anomalies are observed more frequently than aneu- with hypospadias development, a uniallelic deletion in 3q23-q25.1 can ploidies. cause renal dysplasia and hydronephrosis and that a renal phenotype may be associated with the 1q21.1-duplication genomic disorder. P03.011 Identification of copy number variants associated with BPES-like P03.013 phenotypes cytogenetic study of tannery industry workers exposed to A. C. J. Gijsbers1, B. D’haene2, Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee1, M. Mannens3, B. Albre- chromium compounds cht4, J. Seidel5, D. R. Witt6, M. K. Maisenbacher7, B. Loeys2, T. van Essen8, E. M. Arun, V. Balachandar, A. Karthick kumar, P. Manikantan, S. Mohanadevi, K. Bakker1, R. Hennekam9, M. H. Breuning1, E. De Baere2, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp1; Sasikala; 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics; Leiden University Medical Center Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. (LUMC), Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent Uni- Chromium (Cr) is a metallic element which is listed by the Environ- versity Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Center for Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam mental Protection Agency as one of 129 priority pollutants. Chromium Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Institut fur Humangenetik, is considered one of the 14 most noxious heavy metals. Of the 1,083 Universtaetsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 5Department of Pediatrics, SRH, tanneries in India, more than half, i.e. 577 are in Tamilnadu and of the Klinikum Gera, Gera, Germany, 6Genetics Department, Kaiser Permanente, 577, Chennai City and the North Arcot district account for as many as San Jose, CA, United States, 7Devision of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, 397 tanneries. The production in Tamil Nadu is 44% of the total all- University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States, 8Department of Genetics, India production. Hence, the present investigation has been carried University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 9Depart- out the 4 regions in Tamilnadu namely Vanniyampadi; Rani pet; Ambur ment of Pediatrics, Amsterdam Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. and Erode. The objective of this study is to investigate the relation- Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Epicanthus inversus Syndrome (BPES) is a ship between Cr workers and chromosomal alteration in the above well characterized rare syndrome that includes an eyelid malformation population. In the present study totally 82 samples including 41 experi- associated with (type I) or without premature ovarian failure (type II). mentals and 41 controls were selected. After signing a consent form, Patients with typical BPES have four major characteristics: blepharo- volunteers provided blood samples (5 ml) to establish cell cultures at phimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus and telecanthus. Mutations in 72 h. For karyotyping, 40 complete metaphase cells from each subject the FOXL2 gene, encoding a forkhead transcription factor, are respon- were evaluated. Higher degree of chromosomal and chromatid type sible for the majority of both types of BPES. However, many patients aberrations were observed in experimentals compared to controls. with BPES-like features, i.e. having at least 2 major characteristics Statistically significant results were obtained with the value (P<0.001), of BPES, have an unidentified cause. Here, we report on a group of confirmed by Mann-Whitney U. 27 patients with BPES-like features, but without an identified genetic The present study concludes that Cr workers in tannery workers were defect in the FOXL2 gene or flanking region. These patients were ana- found to have a higher level of CA; and the present study recommend lyzed with whole-genome high-density arrays in order to identify copy that further research be conducted on the cellular mechanisms that number variants (CNVs) that might explain the BPES-like phenotype. lead to cancer due to exposure to different Cr valences.Cytogenetics 0 P03.014 P03.016 Estimation of interindividual variability of chromosomal Lower consanguinity rate among Aneuploid patients in iran radiosensitivity of human lymphocytes M. Shariati, E. Daei, R. Pazouki, H. Abassi, R. Jafari; N. Ryabchenko; Cancer research institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. R.Ye. Kavetsky Institute of Experimental Pathology, Oncology and Radiobiology Background: some of the recent reports from Middle Eastern and Is- of NASU, Kyiv, Ukraine. lamic countries claim of a higher chromosomal abnormalities among Increased chromosomal radiosensitivity of human lymphocytes was consanguineous marriages .Our* personal studies from 1965 when shown to be a genetically determined and is seemed to be a parameter one of us * started Cytogenetics studies in Iran and the region does not of increased individual radiation and cancer risk. The study presents support these reports. Here we are reporting 1136 Aneuploid patients analysis of variations of chromosomal aberrations levels in human pe- (45,47 ,48 and 49 chromosome individuals) karyotyped by one of us* ripheral blood lymphocytes, induced by radiation in different cell cycle during 1995-2005. Structural and diploid abnormalities of the patients stages. chromosomes are excluded from this report. Blood samples from 114 healthy individuals were testified for G2 chro- Materials and Methods: mosomal radiosensitivity and 24 from them were testified additionally Whole blood peripheral samples were cultured in McCoy,s 5A plus 20% for G0-, G1-, and S- phase radiosensitivity. The dose of test gamma- FBS and 2% PHA-M(Gibco) and 70 hours cultures were harvested af- irradiation of cell cultures was 1,5 Gy. Metaphase analysis was carried ter 1-2 hours colcemid and ten minutes KCL (0,075M) treatments. 4-5 out in first mitosis. times fixed cells in Carnoy solution (A.Acetic-Methanol 1V/3V) were Cytogenetic parameters (chromosomal breaks and gaps) in lympho- used and Air-dried slides were G-banded by trypsin at the 350-400 cytes induced by test irradiation at G2-phase revealed the highest in- G-bands level and analyzed. Fifty well spread mitoses were counted, terindividual variability: coefficient of variation of 24% against 10 % at analyzed and seven abnormal mitosis were karytyped using the stan- G0, 12 % at G1 and 15 % at S - phases of cell cycle. It was shown that dard ISCN 1995 nomenclature. distribution of cytogenetic parameters induced by test radiation at G2 Results: From 1136 Aneuploid patients .i,e: Trisomy 21, 47,XXY , phase did not correspond to normal and had bimodal character. Two 48,XXXY , 47,XXX 47,XYY ,45X ,Trisomy 18, trisomy 15, and trisomy groups of donors - with normal (88,4 % of samples) and increased 13 and their mosaics . only 56 Patients had consanguious parents cor- (11,6 %) G2 radiation sensitivity on chromosomal level were revealed. responding to only five% of the Aneuploidy of the chromosomes. This There was strong correlation between S- and G2 chromosomal sen- clearly shows that at least at the numerical abnormalities of the chro- sitivity (r2= 0,88) and G0 and G1 cytogenetic parameters (r2= 0,76). mosomes there is not any strong relationship with consanguinity of Correlation between spontaneous, G0 from the one hand and G2 chro- parents and the abnormal child. Since in Iran the rate of consanguinity mosomal radiosensitivity was not revealed (r2= 0,07 and r2= 0,11). is much higher than our five % aneuploid patients. In Down syndrome The results obtained testify for different genetics factors responsible the association is stronger around 8%. for the formation of chromosomal radiosensitivity of human lympho- cytes during the cell cycle. P03.017 An updated map of the genomic copy number variants in P03.015 patients with congenital eye malformations Cytogenetic and fish studies in patients referred for suspected I. Balikova1, T. de Ravel1, C. G. Ayuso2, C. Villaverde2, K. Devriendt1, J. Fryns1, chromosomal aberrations J. R. Vermeesch1; I. Petkovic, I. Barisic; 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Ma- University Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. drid, Spain. Constitutional chromosome aberrations(CCA) cause a large group of Poor sight and blindness cause severe impairment of the quality of genetic disorders and cytogenetic methods are important tool in di- life and have important socio-economical consequences. Congenital agnostics. Although cytogenetic techniques improved rapidly, the fre- ocular malformations (COM) often result in lack or reduced vision. quency of chromosomal aberrations and diagnostic strategy remain However, only in a small subset of the patients the molecular cause important medical problems. can be currently identified. We present the results of cytogenetic and FISH studies in 170 chil- We hypothesized that chromosomal deletions and duplications are dren referred to the Department of Medical Genetics for developmen- frequent cause for COM. We analyzed 55 patients with variable eye tal and somatic delay, congenital malformations, dysmorphic features anomalies by 244K Agilent array CGH and we identified 4 certainly or behavioral problem of unknown etiology (common aneuploidy syn- causal aberrations. Deletions affecting - OTX2, PAX6, FOXC1 and dromes were excluded). The aim of this study was to determine the COH1 genes were detected. Interestingly a region including COH1 de- frequency of structural aberrations and evaluate diagnostic algorithm scribed as a benign variant was found in a homozygous state to cause that starts with a clinical examination, followed by cytogenetic and the autosomal recessive Cohen syndrome. We also identified 2 loci FISH analysis. containing novel genes potentially involved in COM. Cytogenetic analysis was carried out on slides obtained by peripheral Our findings improve the diagnosis of patients with congenital eye blood culture using high resolution GTG-, RBG- and CBG-banding anomalies. Moreover they enable the identification of novel genes im- method. FISH studies were performed using WCP-, CEP-, LSI-probes portant for the development of the eye. and subtelomere FISH screening assay. Cytogenetic analysis revealed structural chromosome aberrations in P03.018 12(7.1%) out of 170 children. FISH analyses with appropriate micro- Younger fathers have a higher risk for children with deletion probes were performed in 127 out of remaining 158 patients chromosomal aneuploidies: a paradox but not unexpected result and microdeletions were identified in 14(11.0%) cases. Rearrange- R. Masood, M. Riegel, D. Niedrist, O. Kundert, A. Schinzel, B. Steiner; ments involving subtelomeric regions were detected in 2(6.5%) out of Institute of Medical Genetics, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. 31 screened children. In our sample we identified 28(16.5%) children Background: The past decades have seen a remarkable shift in the with structural aberrations including 23(13.5%) children with unbal- demographics of childbearing in Western countries. Numerous stud- anced rearrangements [dup(16); dup(8); der(15)t(15;18); der(8)t(7;8); ies showed an exponential increase of the risk for offspring with chro- der(X)t(X;6); del(2); del(14); r(9); psu idic(X) and 14 interstitial microde- mosomal aneuploidies for advanced maternal age, but most studies letions], 3(1.8%) with apparently balanced aberrations [inv(13); t(6;17); failed to demonstrate a paternal age effect. In contrast, recent studies t(6;10)], and 2(1.2%) with complex apparently balanced abnormalities demonstrated that the risk for miscarriages is highest if both partners [t(1;4),t(2;14),inv(3); t(6;19),t(2;13)]. are advanced in age. This study demonstrates the usefulness of applied diagnostic strategy Methods: In a retrospective study, we analyzed the parental ages from in the identification of genome imbalances in patients with suspected postnatal cases with trisomies 21 (N=606), 13 (N=62) and 18 (N=150). CCA. Additionally, we analyzed the parental ages from 1’932’927 live-borns from Switzerland (1979-2006). As the reproductive success is depen- dent on the maternal and paternal age, we dichotomized the couples into two distinct groups (group 1: mother’s age >= father’s age; groupCytogenetics 0 2: mother’s age < father’s age). In conclusion, 66G allele and 66GG genotype of MTRR gene are as- Findings: With increasing maternal age the proportion of younger fa- sociated with an increased risk for Down syndrome among Russian thers increases continuously from 0.65 % (mothers: 15-19 years) to women. 45.2 % (mothers: 45-49 y.) in the control population. This phenomenon is more pronounced in the study group with aneuploidies (15-19 y.: P03.021 10%; 45-49 y.: 64.7 %). The odds ratio for a child with aneuploidy is Partial trisomy of chromosome 21 without Down syndrome significantly higher in couples with younger fathers (mothers: 25-29 phenotype y.: 2.04; 30-34 y.: 1.73; 35-39 y.: 1.64; 40-44 y.: 2.27; for all p<0.001). P. Capkova1, N. Misovicova2, D. Vrbicka1, J. Santavy1; These findings were further confirmed by regression analysis. 1Department of Clinical Genetics and Fetal Medicine University Hospital of Interpretation: The paternal age has a highly significant effect on preg- Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Department of Clini- nancy outcome. In all maternal age groups, the couples with younger cal Genetics University Hospital, Martin, Slovakia. fathers have nearly double the risk for a child with aneuploidy. Trisomy of chromosome 21 is associated with Down syndrome (DS) - the most commonly known genetic cause of mental retardation. P03.019 We report two patients with partial trisomy and tetrasomy 21 without False-positive diagnoses of Down syndrome in Lithuania DS phenotype. Conventional chromosomal analysis revealed one ex- L. Salomskiene, A. Sinkus, I. Andriuskeviciute, L. Jurkeniene, G. Sinkute; tra copy of derivative chromosome 21 in their peripheral blood lympho- Kaunas University of Medicine Lab.of Cytogenetics, Institute of Biology, cytes. FISH and DNA analyses identified duplicated locuses (D21Z, Kaunas, Lithuania. D21S1414,D21S1435) spanning from the centromere to the band In Lithuania (with the population 3.4 m people) we have registered 641 21q21.1. Nimblegen targeted chromosome 21 array specified the alive Down syndrome (DS) patient - 374 children under 15 yrs of age range of duplication from the centromere to the band 21q22.11 in the and 267 adults. For 393 of them (61.3%) karyotype analysis in lympho- first case and the range of duplication and triplication from centromere cyte culture was made. The chromosomal investigation has confirmed to the bands 21q22.11 and 21q21.1 resp. Additional material was of the diagnosis of DS in 372 (94.6%) patients. In 19 (4.8%) patients was maternal origin in both cases. found normal karyotype. In two patients chromosome anomalies other These findings confirm the conclusion of nonpresence of DS when the than trisomy 21 were found. The karyotype in one 3 years old boy was bands 21q22.2 and 21q22.3 (Down critical region) are not duplicated. 49,XXXXY. The boy was deeply mentally retarded and had mongolian Our patients had nonspecific phenotypes although some of their fea- eyeslit, epicanthus, hypertelorism, palmar simian crease, clinodactily, tures such as sandal gaps, joint hyperlaxity and hypotonia are present arches in papilar patterns on all ten fingers, and other microanoma- in patients with DS especially when an extra copy of region D21S55 lies typical for DS patients. The other chromosome patient without located on 21q22.2 or very proximal 21q22.3 is present. We did not trisomy-21 was 29 yrs old mild mentally retarded woman in whose prove a duplication of this region in our patients. karyotype ring chromosome 9 was found. For both patients the physi- cians suspected DS. Therefore, in Lithuanian population false-positive P03.022 diagnosis of DS was found in 5.3% of patients, i.e. two - three times A disposable “microfluidic” chip for diagnostic FISH screening rarely as compared with analogically investigations in other countries. of genetic diseases We suppose that one of the reasons of such situation is the racial R. Carbone1, E. Barborini1, A. Zanardi1, S. Venturini1, M. Leccardi1, D. Bandie- homogeneity of Lithuanian population presented almost exclusively ra1, P. Milani2; by Caucasians. But in newborn Lithuanian babies the frequency of 1Tethis S.r.l., Milano, Italy, 2CIMAINA, Dipartimento di Fisica, Universita’ di Mila- false- positive diagnoses arises up to 32.1 percent: in 43 among 134 no, Milano, Italy. patients with clinical diagnosis of DS the normal karyotype was found. FISH represents a fundamental tool for the diagnosis of a great number The main clinical feature - mental retardation - cannot be recognized in of genetic disorders. Currently FISH is performed on a simple device, infants, and neonatologists do send the patients for karyotype analysis i.e. a glass slide; cells form patients are processed through manual due to isolated microanomalies. execution, followed by acquisition and analysis of results: overall the protocol is complex, costly (i.e. fluorescent probe) and require specific P03.020 expertise, preventing its widespread utilization as screening tool. Folate-related gene polymorphisms and risk for Down syndrome We have recently characterized cluster-assembled nanostructured among Russian women TiOx coating (ns-TiOx) as a biocompatible material with the unique A. Y. Belyaeva, M. S. Nazarenko, M. M. Koval, L. P. Nazarenko; properties of promoting cell adhesion of adherent and not adherent State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. haematopoietic cells. Down’s syndrome represents the most common chromosomal aneu- In this work we present the engineering of ns-TiOx coating into a pro- ploidy with high clinical significance. At least 90% of cases of 21 chro- totype disposable microfluidic chip on glass slide for FISH analysis: mosome nondisjunction are due to maternal meiotic errors. Except for our device allows to perform FISH with minimal volume of cells and re- increased age at conception and altered recombination, maternal risk agents (less than 0,5ul), dramatically reducing cost (more than tenfold) factors for meiotic nondisjunction are not well established. It’s known and cell number requirements, preventing contamination between cell that deficiency in cellular folate and methyl donors have been associ- samples; it can be configured to perform single or multiple assays/ ated with pericentromeric DNA hypomethylation, chromosomal insta- slide, increasing the throughput, with minimal variations of the stan- bility and abnormal chromosome segregation. Attempts to find poly- dard protocol and compatibility with common high resolution micros- morphisms of maternal folate-related genes associated with risk for copy based detection methods. Down syndrome have, however, often been inconclusive in different We have validated the chip by simultaneous FISH detection of Sex populations. We have studied six SNPs of the methylenetetrahydro- Chromosomes in a panel of haematopoietic tumor cells and Periph- folate reductase gene (MTHFR 677C>T (rs1801133) and 1298A>C eral Blood Mononuclear Cells, assessing its efficiency, robustness (rs1801131)), methionine synthase gene (MTR 2756A>G (rs1805087)), and cost effective performance; we expect that this device would be methionine synthase reductase gene (MTRR 66A>G (rs1801394)), suitable for FISH based genetic screenings in research and clinical methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase gene (MTHFD1 1958G>A settings, in particular for diagnostic evaluation of onco-haematological (rs2236225)) and DNA methyltransferase 3B gene (DNMT3B -149C>T malignancies. (rs2424913)) among 55 mothers of children with full form of trisomy 21 and 100 matched control mothers from Tomsk (West Siberia, Rus- P03.023 sia). Prevalence of alleles and genotypes of 1958G>A MTHFD1 and Oligonucleotide-based high-resolution cytogenetics by -149C>T DNMT3B polymorphisms were estimated in the Russian pop- customized fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) ulation for the first time. The frequency of mutant allele 66G of MTRR N. A. Yamada1, L. S. Rector2, R. A. Ach1, P. Tsang1, E. Carr1, A. Scheffer- gene was higher among case mothers than among control mothers Wong1, N. Sampas1, B. Peter1, S. Laderman1, A. R. Brothman2,3, L. Bruhn1; (71% vs. 53%; P=0.005). Down syndrome case mothers also were 1Agilent Laboratories, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2ARUP Laboratories, significantly more likely than controls to be homozygous for the MTRR Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 3Departments of Pediatrics, Human Genet- 66GG genotype (49% vs. 25%; OR=2.89, 95%CI:1.39-6.00; P=0.005). ics and Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT,Cytogenetics 0 United States. incidence of chromosomal aberrations (chromatid and chromosome Recent advancements in our understanding of the structural com- breaks) in patients, where ten FS emerged as specific. Also, the band plexity within the human genome have created a need for finer scale 17q12-21, where known fragile sites have not been reported, was only cytogenetic visualization of chromosomes. Since fluorescence in situ expressed in patients. Fluorescence in situ hybridization using chro- hybridization (FISH) provides the necessary positional and visual un- mosome-specific painting probes revealed the preferential inclusion derstanding of chromosomal architecture to complement other tech- of chromosomes 7, 11, 17 and X in micronuclei (MN) of patients. The nologies for the discovery and analysis of cytogenetic variation, we results also suggest a correlation between chromosomal fragility and set out to improve FISH performance through the introduction of oligo- content of MN and support the findings for a linkage between hyper- nucleotide-based DNA probes. Using chemically synthesized complex tension and a locus on chromosome 17. libraries of oligonucleotides as templates for target regions identified as being variant by array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), P03.026 we directed our probes only at the most informative elements within increased unbalanced structural chromosome alterations in these regions to achieve high specificity with maximum flexibility. Probe lymphocytes from fishermen who participated in the clean-up of generation involved a simple PCR amplification step, followed by the the Prestige oil spill detected two years after their exposure introduction of fluorescent labels by chemical modification. The down- C. Fuster1, G. Monyarch Gros1, G. Rodríguez-Trigo2, J. Zock2, F. Gómez2, F. stream hybridization workflow closely resembles those widely used for Pozo-Rodríguez2, J. Barberà2, M. Coll1; BAC-based FISH. Here, we report the robust and specific visualization 1Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain, 2Grupo of six different regions that could not be readily assayed by traditional SEPAR-Prestige, Barcelona, Spain. BAC-based FISH previously, with our initial studies detecting regions Until now the effects of genotocity due to fuel oil exposure have only as small as 23 kb. One of these regions contained a known benign been reported during initial acute exposition. The objective of the pres- copy number change near the telomere of chromosome 6 which ap- ent study was to evaluate the persistence of genotoxic effects two pears to be amplified in a non-homologous region of another chromo- years after the exposure on individuals who participated in the clean- some. Our results indicate that these chemically synthesized complex up of the oil spill caused by the wrecked tanker Prestige. The fisher- library FISH probes will allow for structural characterization of abnor- men, who were non-smokers and in good health, were included in ex- mal findings seen by high-resolution methods such as aCGH and DNA posed (E) group (>15 days of cleaning-up tasks at least four hours per sequencing and further advance our understanding of copy number day) and non-exposed (NE) group. A total of 91 E and 46 NE fishermen variation in the human genome. were studied. The collection of the samples was performed between July 2004 and February 2005. Cytogenetic damage was determined by P03.024 structural chromosome alterations from peripheral blood lymphocytes. Genotoxicity of formaldehyde in human chromosomes For each subject, more than 25 karyotypes were examined using 72 h M. Pongsavee; cultures. Our results showed a positive association between frequency Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Thammasat University, Rangsit Campus, of structural chromosome alterations and fuel exposure (196 structural Patumthani, Thailand. chromosome alterations in a total of 2448 karyotypes analyzed) vs NE Formaldehyde is a clear, colorless, volatile liquid which has a pungent (33 /1285)(P<0,0001). Of them, the unbalanced chromosome altera- odor and slightly irritating taste. It is useful for industry and medicine but tions (deletions, acentric fragments and marker chromosomes) were it is the forbidding material for the vegetable and seafood preservation. more frequently found in the E group (184 unbalanced structural al- When formaldehyde is accumulated in human body, it causes eyes terations in a total of 196 structural chromosome alterations) vs NE and skin irritation, suffocation, chest pain and death. The heparinized (26/33) (P=0.01). In conclusion, participation in clean-up tasks of oil blood from thirty healthy Thais were studied for the impact of formalde- spills results in prolonged genotoxic effects lasting two years after the hyde genotoxicity through human lymphocyte culture and G- banding exposure, however their human heath consequences are unknown. technic. The formaldehyde concentrations of 0.036, 0.072, 0.15, 0.3, Acknowledgments: This work was supported by FIS (PI07-0086) and 0.576, 0.8 and 1.152 mg/ml were used in this experiment. The results CIRIT (2005, SGR-00495) showed that the numbers of metaphase chromosomes in the 0.036 and 0.072 mg/ml formaldehyde concentration groups were different P03.027 significantly comparing with the control group (P<0.05). The numbers cytogenetic analysis in 317 couples with recurrent spontaneous of metaphase chromosomes were decreased when the concentration abortions of formaldehyde increased. Loss of the human chromosomes in group M. S. Militaru, R. A. Popp, A. P. Trifa, M. Militaru; B, D, E were observed in the formaldehyde concentrations of 0.036 University of Medicine and Pharmacy”Iuliu Hatieganu”, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. and 0.072 mg/ml groups. No metaphase chromosomes were observed Recurrent spontaneous abortions (RSA) represent a common medi- in the formaldehyde concentrations of 0.15, 0.3, 0.576, 0.8 and 1.152 cal matter. RSA is defined by the WHO as two or more consecutive mg/ml groups. It can be concluded that formaldehyde effects to hu- pregnancy losses prior to the 20th week of gestation. The etiology of man genotoxicity. Loss of chromosome induced by formaldehyde may RSA is complex and still not completely understood. A variety of fac- increase risk of carcinogenesis in human. tors underlie the occurrence of miscarriage - these include genetic fac- tors (chromosomal abnormalities, genic mutations), external factors P03.025 (drugs, ionising radiation, lead), infectious factors (viruses, bacteria); correlation between fragile sites and the content of micronuclei anatomic anomalies of the uterus (malformations, fibroma, cervical in human peripheral lymphocytes of patients treated with a beta- insufficiency); immunological factors; chronic maternal or paternal dis- blocker antihypertensive drug ease.Chromosomal abnormalities are thought to be the cause of about M. Telez1, E. Ortiz-Lastra2, A. González3, P. Flores4, I. Huerta1, J. Ramirez1, M. 50% of the miscarriages in the first trimester of pregnancy, of 5% of Barasoain1, M. Hernández1, B. Criado5, I. Arrieta Saez1; those in the second trimester and of around 0,5% of the new-borns. At 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of the chromosomal analysis of the couples with RSA, 2-5% of these were Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 2Department of Medical Surgical Specialities, found to have one partner involved with an equilibrated chromosomal Faculty of Medicine, University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 3De- abnormality which is to lead to the occurrence of gametes with dupli- partment of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of the Basque cations or deficiencies of chromosome segments.Cytogenetic inves- Country, Bilbao, Spain, 4Department of Nursing, School of Nursing, University tigations were performed on 634 patients with reproductive problem of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 5High School Da Maia, CESPU, Porto, using GTG-banding.The frequency of chromosomal abnormalities was Portugal. 6%.Structural balanced aberrations of autosomal chromosomes were The antihypertensive drug atenolol was found to induce chromosome detected in 21 cases.Compared to published data, the observed chro- loss, as detected in micronuclei in the peripheral lymphocytes of treat- mosomal abnormality rate in the present study is considered similary. ed patients. The fundamental question of which chromosomes the Supported by a grant CNCSIS type A 546/2007, Ministery of Education micronuclei were derived from remained to be answered. Analysis of and Research, Romania. structural chromosomal aberrations (CAs) and fragile site (FS) expres- sion were performed in this study. They revealed a significantly highCytogenetics 0 P03.028 P03.030 HLA B27 allele status in turkish patients with Nystagmus and 3-4 syndactyly of hands due to a 2q31.1 spondyloartropathy duplication involving the HOXD cluster P. Ata Eren1,2, A. Aktaş1, N. Denizli1, F. Akdogan1, H. Sokmen1, S. Erdem3, M. J. Ghoumid1, S. Odent2, B. Sablonnière3, X. Zanlonghi4, P. Saugier-Veber5, J. Solak4,5; Andrieux6, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1, M. Holder-Espinasse1; 1Haydarpasa Numune Research and Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Ge- 1Serrvice de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, netics Diseases Research Center, Turkey, 3Kirikkale Univ. Dept. of Medical Biol- 2Unité de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Rennes, France, 3Laboratoire de biochi- ogy, Ankara, Turkey, 4Afyon Kocatepe Univ., Dept. of Medical Biology, Afyon, mie-neurobiologie, Centre de biologie-pathologie, Lille, France, 4laboratoire Turkey, 5Council of Higher Education of Republic of Turkey, Ankara, Turkey. d’exploration fonctionnelle de la vision, Nantes, France, 5Laboratoire de Géné- Some of the spondyloarthropathies are inflammatory joint diseases of tique Moléculaire, faculté de médecine, Rouen, France, 6Laboratoire de Généti- the vertebral column associated with the MHC class I molecule HLA- que Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France. B27. It has shown that HLA-B27 heavy chains can form stable homodi- Mutations or deletions of HOXD genes are known to induce limb anom- mers lacking ß2m, and it is possible that such an aberrant form of the alies such as synpolydactyly for instance when they involve HOXD13. B27 molecule could be involved in disease pathogenesis Here we describe a father and his daughter referred to the genetic Two hundred and seventeen patients admitted to our center because clinic for the association of bilateral 3/4 finger syndactyly and a nys- of artropathy and or uveitis symptoms between July 2008 and Janu- tagmus. Array-CGH was performed in both of them and revealed a ary 2009 were analysed for HLA B27 allele status. Patients were in- 2q31.1q31.2 duplication of around 3.8Mb. This region comprises 27 formed and gave consent. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral genes and involves the whole HOXD cluster. blood leukocytes by ethanol precipitation. HLA B27 allele status was This is the first report of bilateral hand syndactyly associated with a searched by sequence specific primer method by multiplex PCR cov- duplication of HOXD genes. ering HLA B27 and B73 alleles. With the detection of the 145 and 95 Among the other involved genes, one of them seemed particularly base pair products along with internal control bands it was considered interesting. Indeed, the duplication implicates CHN1 which encodes as the presence of these alleles. two Rac-specific guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase)-activating α-chi- In this study 67% (145/217) of our patients were carrying B27 allele. maerin isoforms. CHN1 belongs to the DURS2 locus which is involved There were patients with uveitis (32/145), reactive artritis (25/147), in- in autosomal dominant forms of Duane’s retraction syndrome (DRS). flammatory bowel disease (18/147), spondyloartropathy (72/147). Pa- Miyake et al. recently identified missense mutations of CHN1 which tients had neutrophilic type leukocytosis (43%), raised ESR (66%) and induce a gain of function of alpha2-chimerin and cause aberrant in- anemia (45%). We determined female predominance in allele positive nervations of the oculomotor muscles in animal models. group in contrast to the literature (p<0,05). There was one patient who The cases we report exhibit a nystagmus, which differs from DRS. had HLA B27 allele and positive Rheumatic Factor. Since CHN1 plays a major role in ocular motor axon pathfinding, we As a conclusion we had confirmed that patients with a positive HLAB27 hypothesize that a duplication of this gene might be responsible for allele status had more prone to spondyloartropathy. In our group, fe- the nystagmus. male patients specially middle aged females with sacroileitis must be subjected for B27 typing. P03.031 21-year chromosomal studies among the iranian infertile women P03.029 C. Azimi, M. Khaleghian, F. Farzanfar; microdeletions seem a more common cause of Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, holoprosencephaly than point mutations Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Islamic Republic of Iran. C. Savastano1, V. Romanelli2, J. Nevado2, K. El-Jaick1, D. Cavalcanti3, J. Ller- The infertility is an important health problem, affecting about 15% of ena4, E. Castilla5,6, P. Lapunzina2, I. Orioli1; couples. The important role of genetic factors in pathogenesis of infer- 1ECLAMC - UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, tility is now increasingly recognized. The value of karyotyping women 3CAISM - UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 4IFF - FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in the routine work-out of couples referred for sterility has long been 5IOC - FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 6CEMIC, Buenos Aires, Argentina. recommended. The aim of this study was to define the frequencies of The holoprosencephaly (HPE) phenotypic spectrum can vary from a all chromosomal aberrations in Iranian infertile women. In this 21-year mild single median maxillary central incisor (SMMCI) to severe cyclo- retrospective study, we investigated 896 women which referred to our pia. The etiology of HPE is heterogeneous with at least 20% of the Department due to infertility between 1986 to 2006. For chromosome cases presenting chromosomal anomalies. Mutations of the four major analysis, heparinized peripheral blood samples were cultured, harvest- HPE genes explained another 20% of living infants with normal karyo- ed and banded according to standard methods. Out of 896 patients, type. Recently, gene dosage methods found large deletions in SHH, 712 patients (79.46%) had a normal karyotype, 48 patients (5.36%) ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF in 8% of the cases (4% in liveborn children, and showed Turner’s syndrome (45,X), and 44 patients (4.91%) were sex 12% in fetuses). We studied, mainly from the ECLAMC (Latin Ameri- reversal with 46,XY Karyotype. The rest of 92 patients (10.27%) re- can Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations) DNA Bank, 148 vealled a wide range of chromosome abnormalities which is shown in HPE, mostly liveborn infants, and 10 SMMCI cases without recognized the following table. chromosomal anomalies, finding 10 mutations on the main HPE genes Karyotype Number Per cent (6%). Nineteen patients without mutations from 10 families with HPE, 46,XX 712 79.46 and 7 with SMMCI, and 6 “positive” controls for chromosomal anoma- 45,X 48 5.36 46,XY 44 4.91 lies, trisomy 13, del(18p), t(7:14), and inv(5), were screened for micro- mos45,X/46,XX 19 2.13 deletions or gains using multiplex ligation probe-dependent amplifica- mos45,X/46,XY 5 0.56 tion (MLPA) with SALSA MLPA kit P187. For “positive” controls, only mos46,X,i(X)(q10)/45,X 14 1.57 mos46,X,i(X)(q10)/46,XX 3 0.33 the three inv(5), from the same family, had no alterations using this kit. 46,X,i(X)(q10) 11 1.23 For patients without mutations or chromosomal anomalies we identi- 47,XXX 4 0.45 fied a microdeletion on SHH in a male patient with HPE, microcephaly, 46,X,del(X)(q) 8 0.89 cyclopia, proboscis, microstomia, low set ears, short neck, bilateral 46,X,del(X)(p) 3 0.33 46,X,r(X) 4 0.45 single palmar crease, anal atresia and sacral agenesis. A loss of ZIC2 46,X,del(Y)/45,X 1 0.11 was identified in a male patient with HPE, ocular hypotelorism, nar- 46,X,t(X;2) 1 0.11 row palate, low neck hair and hirsutism. The microdeletions seems to 46,X,t(19;X) 2 0.22 be more common cause of HPE (12%) in younger patients than point 45,X,inv(1) 1 0.11 46,XX,inv(9) 4 0.45 mutations (6%). 46,XX,9qh+ 1 0.11 46,X,+mar/45,X 5 0.56 47,XX,+mar 2 0.22 46,XX,psu dic(X;X) 3 0.33 47,X,-X,+fis(X)(p10);+fis(X)(q10) 1 0.11 tOtAL 896 100Cytogenetics 0 P03.032 P03.034 infertility cytogenetic causes in men cytogenetic abnormalities found among the females suspected S. Soleimani; for mental retardation in and around coimbatore city, tamilnadu, The Blood Transfusion Organization research center, Tehran, Islamic Republic india of Iran. K. Sasikala, V. Balachandar, P. Manikantan, S. Mohanadevi, R. Sangeetha; Male infertility accounts for about 50% of infertility. Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. Some of the chromosomal changes (aberrations) detected in male in- Mental retardation is a condition, not a disease, nor should it be con- fertility include: fused with mental illness and is an important health problem all over 1. Balanced chromosomal translocation the world. The prime aim of the present study was to identify the 2. Chromosome inversion chromosomal alterations in females with mentally retarded patients 3. Marker chromosome in Coimbatore region. In order to investigate the possible cytogenetic 4. Sex chromosome abnormality damage to the mentally retarded patients, a G-banding method was Our investigation provides evidence confirming the importance of the carried out on the lymphocytes of 106 female experimentals and equal sex chromosomes in reproductive disorders. We have analyzed, over number of female controls selected. Experimentals and controls were 10 years of study, 1021 blood samples from infertile men, of whom selected based on the detailed questionnaire. In the present study vol- 664 of them were oligospermic or azoospermic. Constitutional chro- unteers provided blood samples (5 ml) to establish cell cultures at 72 mosome aberrations were diagnosed in 321 of these patients. We h. For karyotyping, 40 complete metaphase cells from each subject observed chromosomal abnormality in 31.4% of azoospermic men, were evaluated. The detection of an increasing number of recogniz- similar to data from literature. able syndromes such as Downs syndrome, Turner syndrome as- The following abnormal karyotypes were found: sociated with chromosomal anomalies 45,XO; 47, XXY; 46, XX+21; 46,XX;47XXY;47,XYY;48,XXXY;45,X[10]/46,XY[134];46,XY[4]/ 46,XX,15s+ ; 46, XX,21s+; 45 ,XO/46,XX, 46, XX,13s+; 45,XO/47,XXX; 47,XXY[82]; 45,XO/46,XX,r21; 46,XXt (13q-; 21q+) was found among the female of 46,XX[11]/47,XXY[36];46,XY[6]/47,XYY[38];46,XY[10]/46,XX[26]/ the city through the chromosomal analysis of the subjects. In the pres- 47,XXY[61]; ent study exhibit chromosomal aberrations showed higher degree in 46,X,del(Y)(q );46,X,inv(Y)(p ;q ). experimentals compared to controls (P<0.001). 11. 23 11. 2 11. 22 We found some patients with complex structural and aneupoloidy ab- In conclusion, to point out that, the systematic study of mental retarda- normalities: tion is very rewarding with an accurate diagnosis in the proband and × 46,XX,inv(9)(p q )/47,XXY,inv(9)(p q )[4] with proper genetic counseling, one can alleviate the misery of many 11; 13 11; 13 × 47,XXY[93]/48,XXY+mar[4]/48,XXXY[2] parent and also can reduce the birth of affected offspring‘s in the family × 47,XXY,inv(9)(p q ) subsequently. 11; 13 × 47,XXY,t(1;17)(p q ) 36.1; 21 × 46,X,del(Y)(q )[98]/45,X[6] P03.035 11. 2 × 47,XXY,inv(9)(p q )/t(10;22)(q q ) A new Y inversion in a man: Case Report 11; 13 26.3; 13.1 × 46,X,idic(Y)(p q )[27]/45,X[36]/46,XY[2] M. Zamanian, F. Manoochehri, F. Mortezapour, F. Nasiri, M. Rahnama, F. Ra- 11.32 ; 11.32 We believe that many infertile man, especially severe oligospermic zazian, F. Mahjoobi; and azoospermic cases, require cytogenetic analysis to reveal the Iranian blood transfusion organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. existence of gonosomal abnormalities. A man was referred to us for chromosomal analysis because of infertil- ity. P03.033 Material & Methods: Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set cytogenetics study of 103 intellectually Handicapped school up in RPMI1640 supplemented with 20% FBS. High resolution chro- children in iran. mosome banding was performed. M. Shariaty, E. Daei, H. Azin, I. Nabipour, H. Abousaidi, H. Abbasi; Result: The karyotype was assessed as 46, X, inv(Y) (q11.2; 12). Cancer research institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Discussion: Karyotyping was recommended for his brother and his Mental Retardation is a medically and socially important health issue father, and was normal. The infertility present in this man could be affecting 2-3% of the general population. It is a multifactorial entity in caused by the possible deletion of important genes located at the which genetic abnormalities at the chromosomal or molecular level are break points or it could just be a coincidence. a major etiological cause. A review of literature indicates that chromo- somal abnormalities are the cause of up to 30% of all mental retarda- P03.036 tion. The present study investigated The frequency of major chromo- A novel case of partial trisomy 2p in a 2-year old girl somal abnormalities in 103 pupils of special educational schools in S. Unlubay1, O. Cogulu2, B. Durmaz2, A. Alpman1, F. Ozkinay2; Bushehr province on the north shore of the Persian Gulf .The children 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, were twelve to eighteen years old from three special schools of Bush- Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, ehr. Turkey. Materials & Methods: Peripheral blood samples of the boys and girls The characteristics of partial duplication of the short arm of chromo- were obtained and analyzed using the standard 70 hours lymphocyte some 2 have been documented in different reports. The clinical phe- culture technique. McCoy,s 5a medium plus FCS and PHA was used. notype of trisomy 2p includes growth and psychomotor retardation, After 2 hours colcemid treatment and 10 minutes KCL (0.075 M) treat- microcephaly, prominent forehead, hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, ment fixation and slide preparation 50 well spread G-banded mitoses ptosis, strabismus, myopia, apparently low set and abnormal ears, at the 350-400 band level were analyzed and seven abnormal mitoses flat nasal bridge, narrow high palate, micrognathia, sternal abnor- were karyotyped and reported using ISCN- 1995 nomenclature. malities, epileptic seizures, kyphoscoliosis, congenital heart disease, Results: a total of 23 pupils had major chromosomal abnormalities de- genital hypoplasia, long widely spaced fingers and toes and hypotonia. tectable at that resolution :16 persons had Trisomy 21, two had fragile Here, we report on a new case of inv dup 2p in a 2 year-old girl. She X syndrome, one was mosaic 48,XXXY/47,XXY,one had ring chromo- was born to no non-consanguineous parents after an uncomplicated some number 3 and two had structural aberrations of chromosomes 5( pregnancy. The birth weight was 2.800 kg. The physical examination 5q deletion) and chromosome 13(13q 2.31-2 duplication). revealed generalized hypotonia, pectus excavatum, frontal bossing, Conclusion: Twenty- three per cent of our pupils (with an IQ of 50-70 ) flat nasal bridge, hypertelorism, low-set and large ears, microgna- studied in Bushehr had a major chromosomal abnormality of which the thia, syndactyly in the 2-3-4 toes. She also had severe growth and commonest were Trisomy 21 and Fragil X syndrome. psychomotor retardation. At 6 months, she had the first epileptic sei- zure and three more seizures occurred afterwards. The EEG showed abnormal discharges. She also had recurrent respiratory infections. Her thorax CT scan showed subsegmental atelectasis in the posterior lobes and areas of bronchiolitis obliterans. Gastroesophageal reflux was determined in the scintigraphy. The cranial MRI was normal. TheCytogenetics 0 karyotype revealed a partial trisomy of chromosome 2p and was noted industries and 39 controls were selected. By use of metaphase analy- as 46,XX,inv dup(2)(p23p25.2). The parents had normal karyotypes. sis with conventional Giemsa-staining, present study investigated both According to the clinical picture and the karyotype, the patient was the groups. After signing a consent form, volunteers provided blood considered to be a novel case of partial trisomy 2p and fluorescence in samples (5 ml) to establish cell cultures at 72 h. situ hybridization (FISH) and array comperative genomic hybridisation The lymphocyte count in the Experimentals, except Group I of printing (aCGH) studies were planned for revealing the exact breakpoints. press and Group III of petrol sniffing subjects exhibited elevated values when compared with those of the Controls. The increase in values of P03.037 Experimentals was statistically significant. MN frequency was higher Abnormal karyotype rate in men from infertile couples in exposed workers than in controls and smoking status significantly I. D. Fedorova1,2, E. M. Shilnikova2, O. G. Chiryaeva1, L. I. Petrova1, V. S. Dud- raised MN frequency among the exposed workers but not among con- kina1, N. A. Sadik1, M. A. Bogdanova3, T. V. Kuznetzova1; trols. In the present study, the incidence of MN in peripheral lympho- 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federa- cytes from workers exposed to smoking was over twice as high in the tion, 2St-Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Medi- controls (P<0.001). cal centre “InAlMed”, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. It may be concluded that the workers occupationally exposed to lead Assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs) allows to overcome infer- toxicity, had significant haemotoxic and genotoxic changes which need tility. Many cases of idiopathic infertility due to numerical and struc- to be elucidated. The reason was not only to protect the genetic mate- tural chromosome abnormalities result in unbalanced karyotype in rial of future generations but also in the prevention of malignant dis- offspring. eases in the present/future populations working in the autoguarage, We aimed at evaluation of abnormal karyotype rate in men from in- printing press and petrol sniffing as well as those residing in the in- fertile couples. The examined cluster totaled 113 individuals. Patiens dustrial areas. were subdivided into 6 groups according results of semen analisys (WHO criteria): 15 azoospermia, 43 oligoasthenoteratozoospermia P03.040 (OAT), 4 oligoteratozoospermia (OT), 39 asthenoteratozoospermia De novo interstitial 15q deletion identified by FBN mLPA and (AT), 1 asthenozoospermia (A), 11 teratozoospermia (T). refined by array-CGH in a female teenager with an incomplete Karyotyping, performed on QFH-banded metaphase chromosomes marfan syndrome from peripheral blood lymphocytes, revealed chromosome abnormali- L. Faivre1, P. Khau Van Kien2, P. Callier3, N. Ruiz-Pallares2, C. Baudoin2, A. ties in 8,84% of subjects. Two chromosome aberrations were detected Plancke2, J. Wolf4, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, A. Masurel-Paulet1, F. Coron1, F. Huet1, in azoospermia group: 46,X,t(X;Y) and 45,X[25]/46,XderY[75]. 6 ab- M. Claustres2, F. Mugneret3; normal karyotypes with 3 of them as robertsonian translocations carri- 1Departement de Genetique, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Molécu- ners: 45,XY,der(13;14)(q10;q10 )were detected In individuals with low laire, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 3Cytogénétique, CHU Dijon, Dijon, spermatozoa count (OAT and OT). One abnormal chromosome have France, 4Cardiologie,CHU Dijon, Dijon, France. been registered In men with AT Chromosome polymorphism was de- Interstitial deletions involving the 15q21.1 band are very rare. Only 4 tected in 17% among OAT and OT men and in 25,64% in AT men. of these cases have been studied using molecular cytogenetic tech- Our results prove the importance of karyotyping of men nominated for niques in order to confirm the deletion of the FBN1 gene. The presence ARTs of clinical features of the Marfan syndrome (MFS) spectrum associat- ed to mental retardation has been described in only 2/4 patients. Here P03.038 we report on a 16-year-old female referred for suspicion of Marfan the clinical effects of isochromosome Xq in Klinefelter syndrome (positive thumb and wrist sign, scoliosis, joint hyperlaxity, syndrome: Report of a case and review of literature high-arched palate with dental crowding, typical dysmorphism, mitral A. Pazarbasi1, O. Demirhan1, N. Tanriverdi1, A. Aridogan2, D. Karahan1; insufficiency with dystrophic valve, significant striae). There was no 1University of Çukurova, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Medical Biology, Adana, family history of MFS. She had therefore 3 minor criteria according to Turkey, 2University of Çukurova, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Urology, Adana, the Ghent nosology. She also had complex dyslexia but could follow Turkey. normal school training. Direct sequencing of the FBN1, TGFBR1 and We describe a male with a variant Klinefelter syndrome, and trisomy TGFBR2 genes was negative. MLPA revealed a genomic deletion of Xq resulting from an isochromosome Xq [47,Xi(Xq)Y]. He had many the whole FBN1 gene, confirmed by multiplex semi-quantitative PCR. characteristics of classical KS: bilateral atrophic testes and microcal- The deletion was confirmed by FISH and was not found in the parents. cifications, normal masculinization, azoospermia, hipergonadotropic Array-CGH permitted to define a 2.97 Mb deletion including 19 genes. hipogonadism elevated FSH and LH, normal intelligence, microcalcifi- This case is the smallest microdeletion including FBN1. Contrary to cations and normal androgenization, but his stature was not increased. the other published observations, our proband do not exhibit mental Ultrasonographic evaluation also revealed parenchymal alterations retardation. Haploinsufficiency of FBN1 is likely to contribute to the secondary to previous epididymo-orchitis. After initial evaluation the presence of features within the MFS spectrum. However, attenuated patient underwent incisional biopsy of testes which showed tubular features could be explained because disturbances of TGF-beta signal- hyalinisation, Leyding cell hyperplasia and sertoli cell only syndrome. ling associated with FBN1 mutations do not exert full phenotypic ef- The i(Xq) found in all cells analyzed. These findings indicate that extra fect through simple haploinsufficiency. Phenotypic variability with other copies of the long arm of X have phenotypic expression, even though patients with interstitial deletions including 15q21.1 band may reflect activated only in early development. In conclusion, review of literature differences in deletion size and/or in-trans modifying factors. on 20 adult patients support the view that the presence of an isochro- mosome Xq in KS has a favorable prognosis in terms of normal mental P03.041 development and normal stature. This case provides an opportunity to micronuclei in human lymphocytes exposed to sodium study the effect of the isochromosome Xq on the phenotype. pertechnetate, in vitro I. P. Aranha; P03.039 Univ. do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. chromosomal alterations and micronuclei frequencies in Technetium-99m (99mTc) has become the most widely used radioiso- smokers who were occupationally exposed to lead in tamilnadu tope in the detection of inflamatory sites as well as in the diagnosis of region, india transplanted tissues. The goal of the present work is to study the effect V. Balachandar, P. Manikantan, S. Mohanadevi, R. sangeetha, K. sasikala, A. of sodium pertechnetate on human lymphocytes in vitro, using the mi- Karthik Kumar, M. Arun; cronucleus assay. Micronuclei appear during cell division as a result of Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. acentric chromosome fragments or whole chromosomes, outside the Lead poisoning is an environmental and public health hazard of global nucleus. Peripheral whole blood cells collected from healthy donors, proportions also tobacco smoking is the main cause of mortality world- 18 to 30 years old, were incubated at 37oC for 48 hours in the presence wide. The focal aim of the present study was to identify the CA and of 99mTc (3.7 MBq/100μl). Cells not exposed to the radionuclide served MN frequencies in cigarette smokers chronically exposed to lead. For as control for the experiment. Cytochalasin B (3μg/ml) was added to this purpose, totally 39 smokers who were worked with lead based the cultures 20 h postinitiation. After fixation, cells were stained withCytogenetics 0 Giemsa Gurr (2%) and were observed under optical microscope. In marker chromosome in two cases and missing Y chromosome in 3 the test group, 12077 binucleated cells were studied and 212 of them cases were observed. These findings indicate the long term cytogenet- showed alterations ( 18 micronuclei and 194 nucleoplasmic bridges). ics effects of MG on chromosomes of somatic cells of exposed indi- Nucleoplasmic bridges are biomarkers of genomic instability and are viduals.We are studing MG effects on germ cells. a result of chromosomic rearrangements involving more than one centromere (dicentric chromosomes). In the control group 12056 cells P03.044 were observed and 06 micronuclei were seen. The chi-square test with cytogenetic studies among Plant Nursery Workers Yates correction indicated that the results were extremely significant occupationally exposed to pesticides (p<0.0001) suggesting that sodium pertechnetate was responsible for S. Mohanadevi, V. Balachandar, P. Manikantan, R. Sangeetha, K. Sasikala; the chromosome alterations observed. Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. Pesticides are among the most widely used chemicals through out P03.042 the world. They include a great variety of substance different both in Genotoxicity evaluation in chronic renal patients undergoing composition and properties with the purpose to kill, destroy or repel hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis, using the micronucleus undesirable living organisms. It is estimated that nearly 10,000 deaths test annually to use of chemical pesticide worldwide, with about three G. S. Güven1, B. Okcesiz1, M. Güven2, N. Bilge2, M. R. Altıparmak3, A. Tun- fourths of these occurring in developing countries. The chromosomal çkale3, S. Trablus4, E. Yosunkaya1, E. Karaca1, S. Başaran Yılmaz1, M. Seven1, aberrations (CA) assay is important for monitoring the populations ex- A. Yüksel1; posed to genotoxic agents because it allows the evaluation of the en- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical School, University of tire genome to identify mutagenic and carcinogenic chemicals. Hence Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Biology, Cerrahpasa Medi- the present study as an eye opener to health risks associated with pro- cal School University of Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Internal longed low doses of pesticide exposure in such workers and empha- Medicine, Cerrahpaşa Medical Faculty, University of Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey, sizes the need for awareness among such workers as far as pesticide 4Department of Nephrology, Istanbul Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, handling concerned. Find out the genetic effects by mixed pesticide Turkey. chemicals and ingredients. In the present study chromosomal aberra- Chronic renal patients on hemodialysis (HD) and peritoneal dialysis tions namely chromatid gaps and breaks, chromosomal gaps, breaks, (PD) treatment are exposed to oxidative stress and DNA damage. deletions and translocations were higher in experimental compared to Therefore, cancer incidence and genomic damage of peripheral lym- the control samples. Also the frequency of chromatid aberrations was phocytes are elevated in patients with end-stage renal failure. The higher when compared to the chromosomal aberrations (P<0.001). genotoxic effect may cause the loss of chromosome fragments, or All results of the present study indicate that the level of cytogenetic even entire chromosomes, which form micronuclei after cell division, damage was significantly affected by the pesticide exposure of sub- and can be detected by the micronucleus test, a sensitive and reliable jects. Another explanation for the genotoxic damage observed is the system for the evaluation of spontaneous and mutagen-induced DNA. lack of protective measures taken by the workers. Therefore, there is In the present case-control study, we evaluated the genotoxic effect in a need to educate those who work with pesticides about the potential the peripheral lymphocytes of 65 patients undergoing hemodialysis, hazard of occupational exposure and the importance of using protec- and 61 subjected to peritoneal dialysis, matched for gender and age tive measures. with 60 controls. MN frequency was expressed as the number of mi- cronuclei per 1000 binucleated cells. Our results revealed that patients P03.045 undergoing hemodialysis (7.1±4.4, P=0.006) and peritoneal dialysis Aneugenic and clastogenic components of the cytogenetic (6.6 ± 4.8, P<0.001) treatment have a significantly higher frequency effects of incorporated plutonium-239 of micronucleated cells compared to control subjects (4.5 ± 2.6). How- S. A. Vasilyev, V. A. Timoshevsky, I. N. Lebedev; ever, there was not a statistically significant difference between MN Scientific Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. levels of hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis patients (P=0.11). In Genetic monitoring has been traditionally used for the surveillance of conclusion, treatments such as HD and PD induce oxidative stress populations exposed to environmental mutagens including ionizing and consequent oxidative damage. radiation, chemicals and life-style factors, and medical treatments. Among the consequences of mutagenic exposure aneuploidy is the P03.043 most important one because of great number of genes involved in mustard Gas Long term Effects on chromosomes of Persian these abnormalities. Unfortunately, aneugenic potential of ionizing soldiers Exposed During 1980-1988 iran-iraq war radiation especially in vivo is poorly understood. Therefore we have E. Daei1,2, M. Shariaty1, I. Nabipour1, A. Nosrati1, H. Abbasi1, F. Farzanfar1, M. analyzed effects of ionizing radiation on 20 male workers of Siberian Shariati1; chemical plant with activity of incorporated plutonium-239 from 10 to 1Cancer research institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Clinical genetic 188 nCi by means of FISH using human pancentromeric DNA probes section, Ali I.A.Taleb hospital, Rafsanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran. in binucleated lymphocytes. We have used group of 20 health male Mustard Gas (MG) is a strong alkylating toxic vesicant gas with an individuals living in Seversk and having no connection with ionizing LD50 of 1500 mg. This very lethal gas was used during world wars radiation as a controls. There was a significant increase of the overall and local wars against army and civilian personal as a mass destruc- micronuclei frequency in the exposed group (8.6 ‰) as compared with tive weapon with thousands death and millions of injuries. Long term the controls (5.1 ‰, p<0.001). This increase mostly was due to higher adverse effects of MG on human cells has not been studied in the last frequency of centromere-negative micronuclei (MnC-) in the group of four decades. So our knowledge of its long term effects on human workers (4.7 ‰) than in the controls (2.4 ‰, p<0.001). But also sig- population was scanty. nificant increase in the centromere-positive micronuclei (MnC+) fre- Unfortunate Iraq-Iran war and the mass usage of MG by Iraqi’s Army quency was observed in the exposed group (3.9 ‰) compared with against thousands Persians provided us the opportunity of studying the controls (2.7 ‰, p<0.05). For the first time it was confirmed that MG long term effects on the chromosomes of exposed soldiers. the influence of complex of occupational factors including incorporated Material and Methods: plutonium-239 in addition to clastogenic effect (MnC-) results in in- Peripheral leukocytes of 115 exposed males aged 32-76 after 14-20 crease of hypoploidy frequency (MnC+). years from contamination and 30 unexposed matched control males were cultured in McCoy,s 5A plus 20% FBS and 2% PHA-M (GIBCO) P03.046 and harvested in the 3rd day after one hour colcemide treatment and chromosomal abnormalities in prenatal diagnosis. ten minutes KCL (0.075 M) shock. 4-5 times changed carnoy fixative, R. Cretu, L. Neagu, A. Mustata, D. Mierla, M. Popa, D. Jardan; Air-dried slides were G-banded and Analyzed by an experienced cyto- Life Memorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. geneticist * and rechecked. Chromosome abnormalities are one of the major causes of first trimes- Results: 101 exposed and all 30 controls resulted in good quality mi- ter pregnancy loss and birth defects. The most frequent autosomal toses.Seven abnormal mitosis were karyotyped. 31 per cent of the aneuploidies are: trisomies 21 (the incidence of Down syndrome is es- exposed and none of the control group had at least one break .Also timated at 1 per 700 births - 0,14%), 18 (the incidence of Edwars syn-Cytogenetics  drome is estimated at 1 per 5000 births - 0,02%) and 13 (the incidence translocation, by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) using whole of Patau syndrome is estimated at 1 per 10000 births - 0,01%). chromosome painting (WCP) probes as well as specific subtelomeric Amniotic fluid karyotyping and FISH (Fluorescent In Situ Hybridiza- probes of the chromosome 4, chromosome 6 and others will be con- tion) have been offered to pregnant women with genetic risk, using the ducted. Auditory testing and renal ultrasound will be also considered standard method and GTG banding techniques. for our patient as he shared some malformations with Townes-Brocks This study presents the cytogenetic results from a total of 654 cases syndrome. that have been analyzed between 2008 - 2009. We have found 18 ab- normal karyotypes of witch 16 cases have been numerical abnormali- P03.049 ties (13 homogeneous aneuploidies: trisomies - 3 cases of 47,XX+21, interspecies variation in recombination rate in mammals 5 cases of 47,XY+21; 4 cases of 47,XY+18 and monosomies - 2 cases P. Borodin; of 45,X0; 1 pseudomosaicism - 47,XX+2 and 1 triploidy - 69 XXX), 2 Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. structural abnormalities (one case of 45,XX with translocation 45,XX, We analyzed frequency and distribution of recombination sites along t(13q;14q) and one case of 46, XY, der(14;21)(q10;q10) +21) and 11 meiotic chromosomes of the common shrew, mink, fox, cat and dog, normal variants (7 cases of 46, XX inv(9)(p11;q13); 2 cases of 46,XY using fluorescently-labeled antibodies to MLH1, a mismatch repair inv (3)(p11;q11.2); one case of 46,XX inv(3)(p11; q11.2), one case of protein of mature recombination nodules, and compared our results 46,XY inv (3)(p11;q11.2) inv(9)(p11;q13)). with those obtained on mice and humans. The species studied dif- The numerical abnormalities have been further verified by FISH analy- fer in the total number of crossovers per cell and recombination rate. sis. This report confirms the importance of karyotype and FISH in pre- The common shrew has lowest recombination rate (0.38 cM/Mb). This natal diagnosis. is rather close to the estimates obtained by MLH1 mapping for male mice (0.44) and mink (0.48). Twice higher recombination rate is de- P03.047 tected in men (0.83), dogs (0.76) and cats (0.72). The species with Not so irrelevant pseudomosaicism of trisomy 18 previously high recombination rate (man, cat and dog) have higher number of found in amniotic fluid culture autosomal arms (FNa) than those with low recombination rate (mink, R. F. Suijkerbuijk, L. Johansson, B. Sikkema-Raddatz, T. Dijkhuizen, P. Rump; mouse and shrew). A comparison of the interference estimates coming University Medical Centre, Groningen, The Netherlands. from the distribution of MLH1 interfocus distances and RAD51/MLH1 In 1993, a woman (G4, P3) underwent amniocentesis because of ma- focus ratio indicates a substantial difference between the species in ternal age. Regular chromosome analysis resulted in thirteen colonies the strength of interference. This factor contributes into interspecies showing a normal female karyotype and a single isolated metaphase difference in recombination rate. For example, cats have smaller FNa, with 47,XX,+18. After extensive work-up according to international pre- smaller total length of synaptonemal complex, but weaker interference natal quality standards, no other colony with trisomy 18 was found in a than dogs, and they exceed dogs in the average number of MLH1 foci. total of 29 colonies. Therefore, the finding of a single “47,XX,+18” cell Selective changes of interference may serve as a mechanism of adap- was considered to represent a pseudomosaicism and the foetus was tive “fine adjustment” of recombination rate, additionally or alternatively diagnosed with a normal female karyotype. to “coarse adjustment” achieved by fixation of the chromosome rear- Fifteen years later and at the age of 14, the very same girl was re- rangements that change FNa, such as pericentric inversions, tandem ferred to our department because of mental retardation and autistiform fusions and centromere shifts. behaviour. After exclusion of a (pre)mutation for Fragile-X syndrome, oligo array CGH analysis was performed, using the Agilent 105 K Ox- P03.050 ford array (custom design ID: 019015), in search for a previously un- Association between the gamma-aminobutyric acid type B detected (sub)microscopic genomic imbalance. receptor 1 (GABBR1) gene and schizophrenia To our surprise, a slightly elevated ratio was found for all (2424) oligo B. Lakshamnkumar1,2, P. Manikantan1, V. Balachandar1, K. Sasikala1; probes on chromosome 18, suggestive for a mosaic pattern of trisomy 1Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India, 2Manipal university, Manipal, India. 18. No further genomic aberrations were detected. Subsequent FISH Schizophrenia (SCZ), which affects approximately 1% of the general analysis on interphase and metaphase cells of blood and other tissue population, is a serious neuropsychiatric disorder that is characterized samples from the patient confirmed the presence of a mosaic pattern by diverse and variably expressed symptoms, which include disor- for trisomy 18. ganized thought pattern and severe neuropsychiatric disorder with a This case demonstrates that, even after careful cytogenetic examina- genetic component. The major inhibitory GABA-(gamma-aminobu- tion, a “with-near-certainty” irrelevant pseudomosaicism might turn out tyric acid) ergic system may be involved. The GABA type B receptor 1 to be a true mosaicism with clinical consequences after all. (GABBR1) gene has been localized to 6p21.3, a region linked to SCZ. The present investigation five polymorphisms in the GABBR1 gene in P03.048 a sample of DSM-IV SCZ probands and their families, 40 unrelated Azoospermia, cryptorchidism and dysmorphic features in a affected individuals matched with 40 healthy controls, using the proper tunisian male with a de novo apparently balanced reciprocal questionnaire. Our research focused on the contribution of the GAB- translocation t(4;6)(q34;q24) BR1 gene variants to the risk for SCZ. This gene has been implicated T. Rebai1, J. Keskes2, M. Meddeb3, N. B. Abdelmoula1; in the etiology of several neurobehavioral disorders such as SCZ, ju- 1Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia, 2P Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 3P Genetic Labo- venile myoclonic epilepsy, and dyslexia, and has been localized just ratory, Tunis, Tunisia. distal to the HLA class I region. To our knowledge, this is the first at- A de novo apparently balanced reciprocal translocation between tempt to study the variant in the GABBR1 gene in our regional SCZ. the long arm of chromosome 4 and the long arm of chromosome6; However, a weak significant difference was observed in the A-7265G t(4;6)(q34;q24) is described in a Tunisian infertile man with azo- polymorphism between the allelic frequency and a trend was observed ospermia associated to an elevated FSH level and cryptorchidism. between the genotype frequency of SCZ individuals and controls. The patient is phenotypically abnormal and had bilateral external ear malformations with preauricular tags, asymmetric nose and abnor- P03.051 mal extremities with bilateral thenar hypoplasia and Simian creases, cytogenetic as a simple too for sex reversal study triphalangeal thumbs and large toes. F. razazian, s. totian, m. rahnama, f. mortezapour, f. manoochehri, m. zama- No familial history of infertility, recurrent spontaneous abortions, he- nian, f. nasiri; reditary disease or malformation is present. Furthermore no personal Iranian blood transfusion organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. record of hearing loss or renal troubles is found. Advance in experimental endocrinology, biochemistry, genetics, and Reciprocal translocation is defined as the exchange of chromosomal molecular biology have all contributed to our understanding of the pro- material between the arms of two heterologous chromosomes, thus cess of human sex differentiation in the decades. changing the order, but usually not the amount of genetic material. But, Based on the recognition Advance in experimental endocrinology, bio- in our patient dysmorphic features are remarkable and lead to expect chemistry, genetics Advance in experimental endocrinology, biochem- cryptic unbalanced karyotype with or without involvement of others istry, genetics, and molecular biology have all, and molecular biology chromosomes like chromosome 16. Further characterization of this have all of the underlying anomaly in the process of sexual differentia-Cytogenetics  tion intersex disorders may be divided into abnormal gonadal deter- aberrations at birth. mination and abnormal genital differentiation males with ambiguous genitalia but two differentiated testis are called MPH. P03.054 Females with ambiguous external genitalia but normal ovaries and Evidence for significance of epigenetic inactivation of the normal internal genitalia are called FPH. cell-cycle checkpoints genes into etiology of chromosomal The XX males may be divided in to 3 subgroups: mosaicism during embryo development 46,XX males with the SRY gene(46,XX males without the SRYgene I. N. Lebedev, E. N. Tolmacheva, A. A. Kashevarova, E. A. Sazhenova, N. N. )and XX/XY mosaics. Sukhanova; DAX1 lies on the X chromosome. When it duplicates it causes an indi- Insitute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. vidual who is genetically male to develop physically as a female. Chromosomal mosaicism is a feature of abnormal embryo development During the ten years (from 1997 to 2008) we have reported 46 patients with increasing incidence during epigenetic genome reprogramming. referred for sex reversal abnormality which was more common in the Probably, aberrant DNA methylation may reinforce mitotic instability female group (n=34 , %0.7) compare to male population (n=12 , %0.4). through inactivation of cell cycle checkpoints. However, relationships We conclude in here, that simple conventional cytogenetic methods between mosaicism and epigenetic abnormalities are not investigated. are very helpful to identify male or female with sex reversal in addition The aim of the present research was delineation of impact of abnormal molecular cytogenetic technology such as fish and molecular method DNA methylation of G1/S-checkpoints genes into etiology of chromo- to investigate the presence or absent of some critical genes such as somal mosaicism. Promoter methylation of P14ARF, CDKN2B and SRY would be very useful to explain phenotype heterogeneity among RB1 genes was studied by methylation-specific PCR in the cytotro- sex reversal group male or female. phoblast and extraembryonic mesoderm of 45 spontaneous abortions (SA) with chromosomal mosaicism, 20 SA with normal karyotype and P03.052 23 induced abortions. Level and tissue-specific distribution of aneu- Automated sperm aneuploidy analysis ploid cells were estimated by interphase FISH. Abnormal methylation J. Diblík, T. Slavík, P. Paulasová, P. Houska, Š. Vilímová, M. Macek Sr.; of P14ARF and RB1 was observed in 9 and 20% of mosaics, respec- Center of Reproductive Genetics, Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, tively. At all 10 SA with epimutations were found. Low-level mosaicism University Hospital Motol, Praha, Czech Republic. confined by cytotrophoblast was denoted for 3 embryos indicating a Analysis of sperm aneuploidy level by fluorescence in situ hybridiza- post-zygotic origin of aneuploidy. At the same time epimutations were tion (FISH) requires a large number of sperm to be evaluated. Au- found in both tissues indicating an error of genome demethylation prior tomated analysis could increase the number of analyzed sperm and to implantation and germ layers differentiation. All other mosaics with reduce the subjectivity. abnormal methylation were developed from aneuploid zygotes. So, We have developed a system using a motorized microscope (Zeiss the epimutations were the secondary abnormalities for such embryos. Axioplan) with software for image acquisition and processing (Zeiss However, in this group association between tissue-specific methylation Axiovision) together with image analysis software (CellProfiler from and level of euploid cells was observed providing evidence for reinforc- Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, www.cellprofiler.org) and ing of trisomy rescue under abnormal epigenotype. Moreover, the in- our own application for reviewing and manual correction of results. cidence of RB1 methylation in the extraembryonic mesoderm (27.8%) We have performed FISH with probes for chromosomes 18, X and was significantly higher than in the cytotrophoblast (5.7%, P=0.04) in- Y on 12 semen samples. Frequencies of normal sperm bearing X or dicating a possible epigenetic mechanism of karyotype self-correction Y as well as frequencies of abnormal sperm with disomies and dip- in the trisomic conceptions. loidies were evaluated by three means: manually, automatically and automatically with manual correction of abnormal results. The results P03.055 were compared by the paired t-test. Detection of parental origin and cell stage errors of a Comparison of manual and automated analysis showed a significant chromosome X polysomy 49,XXXXY and new clinical findings difference in 6 out of 9 parameters: frequency of normal sperm with Y A. I. Guzel, O. Demirhan, A. Pazarbasi, B. Yuksel; (P=0.004), disomy 18 (P=0.009), disomy XX (P=0.007), diploidy XX Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey. (P=0.013), diploidy YY (P=0.015) and diploidy XY (P=0.003). After Polysomy 49,XXXXY is a rare sex chromosome aneuploidy syndrome manual review and correction none of the frequencies of abnormal characterized by mental retardation, severe speech impairment, cra- results differed significantly from the results of manual evaluation. niofacial abnormalities, multiple skeletal defects and genital abnor- Our preliminary results show that the automated sperm aneuploidy malities. There are very few reports concerning prenatal diagnosis of analysis has to be combined with manual correction of results. tetrasomy X, and the genetic mechanism by which it arises was not Supported by VZ FNM 00064203 and NR 9448-3/2007 well investigated. We describe a case with 49,XXXXY syndrome. The case had many P03.053 characteristics of Fraccaro Syndrome; language impairment, mongol- A retrospective study on the results obtained from cytogenetic oid slant, epicanthal folds, peg shaped teeth, cryptorchidism, umbli- analysis of couples encountering recurrent pregnancy loss in cal herni and dysmyelinisation findings. Conventional cytogenetic iran technique was applied for the karyotype analysis. The parental origin S. M. Mohaddes1, J. Mohseni2, A. Lotfivand2, H. Farahmand Azar2, N. Bageri of polysomy X were identified by using Quantitative fluorescent poly- Agdam2; merase chain reaction (QF-PCR) technique. 1Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2ACECR, Tabriz, Islamic Cytogenetic analysis revealed a karyotype of 49,XXXXY for the case. Republic of Iran. QF-PCR with short tandem repeat (STR) markers specific for chromo- Recurrent or habitual pregnancy loss (RPL) is a distressing problem some X revealed that all of the four X chromosomes were of maternal affecting about 1% of all pregnancies. The condition is determined by origin. These data provide additional evidence for the successive non- loss of two or more pregnancies until weeks of 20th - 24th gestation. disjunctions in maternal meiosis I and II. Balanced chromosomal rearrangements have been recognized as a This kind of studies will improve knowledge about the mechanisms of major cause of recurrent miscarriages in women. aneuploidies, and enable appropriate genetic counseling. To evaluate the incidence of balanced chromosomal rearrangements in parents encountering RPL, we carried out a retrospective study on P03.056 the results obtained from analysis of GTG-banded chromosomes pre- A novel Reciprocal translocation t(11;22) pared from lymphocyte culture of 400 couples, referred to our lab due M. Rahnama, F. Mortezapour, F. Manoochehri, F. Razazian, M. Zamanian, F. to recurrent spontaneous abortions. Different types of chromosomal Nasiri, F. Mahjoubi; aberrations including robertsonian translocations (D:D, D:G and g:g), Iranian blood transfusion organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. reciprocal translocations, inversions and mosaeic form of chromosome A couple were referred for cytogenetic testing because they had a child X aneuploidy were identified in 12 percent of the patients. with some form of pulmonary disorder. A standard karyotype was ob- The results indicate that the cytogenetic analysis of couples with two tained and an abnormality reported as 46,XX,t(11;22)(q24;q12) found or more pregnancy losses can prevent the recurrence of chromosomal in the mother. This is a rare translocation.Cytogenetics  P03.057 P03.060 Pathological cytogenetic findings of chromosome 21 prenatally XX male patient with Robertsonian translocation der(13;14) diagnosed in medical Genetic center of Novi sad T. G. Tsvetkova, V. B. Chernykh, V. A. Galkina, L. V. Shileiko, L. F. Kurilo, N. V. J. D. Jovanovic Privrodski, I. Kavecan, M. Kolarski, A. Krstic, L. Gacina, V. Kosyakova, O. P. Ryzhkova, A. V. Polyakov; Cihi, J. Rudez, T. Tarasenko, M. Fojkar, D. Radovanov; Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Institute for Children and Youth Health Care Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia. Moscow, Russian Federation. We present results of prenatally detected trisomy of chromosome 21 in Introduction: Commonly XX sex reversal is a result from translocation Medical Genetic Centre in Novi Sad which is a part of Institute for Chil- of Yp material including SRY gene onto the X chromosome. dren and Youth Health Care of Vojvodina. Prenatal genetic screening Materials and Methods: We report a 27-year-old XX male with Rob- of fetal abnormalities is performed using detailed analyses of pedigree, ertsonian translocation. The proband was born to a 29-years woman maternal and paternal age, biochemical screening and expert ultra- from a second pregnancy. The first pregnancy has ended with child- sound results such as thickness of nuchal translucency, absent nasal birth of the healthy girl. The proband’s sister is healthy, married, has bone, hyperechogenic bowel, short femur, and other. the healthy daughter. The patient was referred to our centre with a 3 In this paper we present incidence of prenatally detected trisomies of year history of male factor infertility. The proband had fully mature male chromosome 21 during last eight years (2000-2008) in Medical Ge- genitalia with descended in the scrotum hypoplastic testes and no sign netic Centre in Novi Sad, Vojvodina northern part of Serbia with around of undervirilization. His weight was 59 kg, height - 166 cm. Intelligence 2.000.000 inhabitans. During last eight years we detected 113 trisomy was normal. Semen analysis showed severe oligoasthenoteratozoo- of chromosome 21 (105 classical trisomies, 5 mosaical forms, 3 trans- spermia (sperm count 0.1 mln/ml). locational forms), that is 38.96% of all prenatally detected chromosom- Chromosome analysis was performed on cultured PHA-stimulated pe- al anomalies (N= 113/290; 38.96%). ripheral blood lymphocytes with GTG-, C- and QFH-staining in accor- dance with standard techniques. DNA was extracted from peripheral P03.058 leukocytes by a standard method. Molecular analysis of Y chromo- Dicentric Y chromosome in turner syndrome some loci was performed using multiplex PCR amplifications for SRY, D. Jardan, V. Radoi, D. Mierla; AMELX/AMELY, ZFY/ZFX, and seven Yq-specific STSs: sY84, sY86, Life Memorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, Bucharest, Romania. sY615, sY127, sY134, sY254 and sY255. Present case relates to a 19 years old girl with Turner syndrome phe- Results: Cytogenetic examination showed 45,XX,der(13;14)(q10;q10) notype referred to our clinic for cytogenetic analysis. Patient presented karyotype in all of 50 analyzed metaphases. PCR amplifications were primary amenorrhea and no signs of virilisation. Cytogenetic analysis positive for SRY, AMELX, AMELY, ZFX, ZFY and negative for all ana- revealed mosaic karyotype 46,X, dic (Y)(q11.2),45,X. FISH analysis lyzed Yq11 loci. The origin of Robertsonian translocation (de novo or confirmed presence of a dicentric Y chromosome. FISH analysis was inherited) was not found because of a material from the proband’s par- performed using centromeric probe for X chromosome and specific ents and sister was not available. probe for SRY region of Y chromosome. Conclusion: To our knowledge we reported the first XX sex reversed Presence of Y chromosome material is associated with a ~12% risk patient associated with Robertsonian translocation. of gonadoblastoma. Gonadoblastomas may transform into malignant germ cell neoplasm. P03.061 Conclusions: testing for Y chromosome material in Turner syndrome Wide spectrum of Peters and Axenfeld-Rieger anomalies should be performed in any Turner syndrome patient. secundary to a 4q25 microdeletion encompassing the PITX gene P03.059 M. Mathieu1, G. Morin1, B. Demeer1, J. Andrieux2, F. Imestouren-Goudjil1, M. Parental Origin of X-chromosome in turner syndrome patients. Vincent3, A. Receveur4, H. Copin4, B. Devauchelle5; I. M. R. Hussein1, A. Kamel1, H. H. Afifi1, A. Cicognani2, L. Mazzanti2, L. 1Unité de Génétique Clinique - CHU d’Amiens, Amiens, France, 2Hôpital Jean- Baldazzi2, A. Nicoletti2, H. F. Kayed1, W. Mahmoud1, A. Amer3; ne de Flandre - CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 3Hôpital Purpan - CHU de Toulou- 1National Research Center, Giza, Egypt, 2University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, se, Toulouse, France, 4Laboratoire de Cytogénétique - CHU d’Amiens, Amiens, 3Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. France, 5Service de Chirurgie Maxillo-Faciale - CHU d’Amiens, Amiens, France. Turner syndrome (TS) is a chromosomal disorder in which all or part Many genes are involved in the ocular development. The alterations of one X chromosome is missing.Objectives: To detect the spectrum of some of them are responsible of the Peters or the Axenfeld-Rieg- of chromosomal abnormalities;to determine the parental origin of the er anomalies (PITX2, FOXC1, PAX6 …). In theses conditions, angle abnormality,and correlate it with the patient phenotype. The study in- anomalies are responsible of glaucoma in 50% of cases, usually con- cluded 42 females who had Turner stigmata(30 Egyptian;12Italian). genital and difficult to manage. When they are associated with extra- The patients were classified into: Group (A) patients with only 45,X ocular symptoms, the name of Rieger or Peter + syndrome can be karyotype (n=16), group (B)patients having either mosaic cell lines or used. In these entities, the mode of inheritance is usually autosomal other X-chromosome abnormalities(n=26). Numerical X-chromosome dominant. mosaicism was observed in 22 patients(52%),7 patients (17%) had an We report a 21-year-old patient, third child of healthy non-consangui- isochromosome X,3 patients (7%) had a ring X chromosome,1 patient nous parents with a negative familial history. He presented a Peters (2%) had a deletion of the short arm of the X chromosome, 3 patients anomaly of the right eye requiring an iridectomy at 3 months of age, (7%) had an isochromosome X and 1 patient (2%) had a deletion of the and an Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly of the left eye associated with a glau- long arm of the X chromosome.FISH technique was performed using coma at the age of 10. During childhood, he beneficiated of several Alpha satellite DNA cocktail probe for chromosome X and Y. A second surgical interventions that concerned umbilical hernia, Meckel diver- cell line was detected in 4 patients who were diagnosed as having ticulum, bifid uvula, posterior sub-mucous cleft palate, pharyngoplasty 45,X. We used PCR-based typing of highly polymorphic microsatellite and tympanoplasty. He developed dysmorphic features including flat markers distributed along the X chromosome to detect origin of the X malar region and retrognathia requiring surgical repair at the age of chromosome. Parental origin of the single X chromosome was mater- 16. He also presented hypodontia and persistence of lacteal teeth. nal in 67% of these patients, while in group (B), parental origin of the He had a normal mental development, a normal puberty and a normal normal X chromosome was maternal in 11 patients (65%), paternal in stature (1m80), but secondary to his visual impairment, he studied in 6(33%), uninformative in 1 patient (6%). No evidence for X-imprinting a special school. of the studied physical features in TS was observed. Thus, there is no Genetic investigations were negative for the standard karyotype and apparent clinical indication for investigation of X-chromosome parental the sequencing of the genes PITX2, FOXC1 and PAX6. The array- origin in individuals with TS. CGH exhibited a de novo 1.7 Mb deletion at the locus 4q25 encom- passing 13 genes including PITX2.Cytogenetics  P03.062 P03.064 Nine patients with a microdeletion 15q11.2 between breakpoints clinical and molecular characterization of the 17q21.31 1 and 2 of the Prader-Willi critical region: is it clinically relevant? microdeletion syndrome in 11 French patients with mental B. Sikkema-Raddatz1, M. Doornbos2,3, C. Ruijvenkamp4, T. Dijkhuizen1, E. retardation K. Bijlsma4, A. Gijsbers4, Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee4, R. Hordijk1, R. Verbruggen2, M. C. Dubourg1,2, J. Andrieux3, D. Sanlaville4,5, M. Doco-Fenzy6,7, C. Le Caignec8, Kerstjens-Frederikse1, T. v. Essen1, K. Kok1, A. v. Silfhout1, M. Breuning4, C. M. C. Missirian9, S. Jaillard10,2, C. Schluth-Bolard4,5, E. Landais6,7, O. Boute11, A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1; N. Philip9, A. Toutain12, P. Edery4,5, A. Moncla9, D. Martin-Coignard13, C. Vin- 1Department of Genetics; University Medical Centre, Groningen, The Nether- cent-Delorme14, I. Mortemousque12, S. Drunat15, M. Berri16, R. Touraine17, S. lands, 2Beatrix Children’s Hospital, University Medical Centre, Groningen, The Odent18,2, V. David1,2, Réseau Français CGH-array; Netherlands, 3Department of Paediatrics, Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Dordrecht, 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, The Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical 2CNRS UMR 6061, Université de Rennes 1, IFR140, Rennes, France, 3Labora- Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands. toire de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 4Labora- Behavioural differences have been described in patients with type I de- toire de Cytogénétique, CBPE, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 5Univer- letions (between breakpoints 1 and 3, (BP1-BP2)) or type II deletions sité Claude Bernard Lyon I, Faculté de Médecine, Lyon Nord, France, 6Service (between breakpoints 2 and 3) of the 15q11.2 Prader-Willi/Angelman de Génétique, HMB, CHRU, Reims, France, 7EA 3801, UFR de Médecine, region. The larger type I deletions appear to coincide with more severe Reims, France, 8Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Nantes, France, 9Dé- behavioural problems (autism, ADHD, obsessive-compulsive disor- partement de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d’Enfants de la Timone, Marseille, der). The non-imprinted chromosomal segment between breakpoints France, 10Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 1 and 2 involves four highly conserved genes, TUBGCP5, NIPA1, 11Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, NIPA2, and CYFIP1; the latter three are widely expressed in the cen- 12Service de Génétique, CHRU Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France, 13Service de tral nervous system, while TUBGCP5 is expressed in the subthalamic Pédiatrie Génétique, CH, Le Mans, France, 14Service de Pédiatrie Génétique, nuclei. These genes might explain the more severe behavioural prob- CH, Arras, France, 15Service de Génétique, CHU Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, lems seen in type I deletions. France, 16Service de Génétique, CHU Hôpital Brabois, Nancy, France, 17Service We describe nine cases with a microdeletion at 15q11.2 between BP1- de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Hôpital Nord, Saint-Etienne, France, 18Service BP2, thus having an haploinsufficiency for TUBGCP5, NIPA1, NIPA2, de Génétique Médicale, CHU Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France. and CYFIP1 without Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome. The clinical Array comparative genomic hybridization has recently led to the char- significance of a pure BP1-BP2 microdeletion has been debated, how- acterization of novel microdeletion and microduplication syndromes ever, our patients shared several clinical features, including delayed like the 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome. motor and speech development, dysmorphisms and behavioural prob- Here we report the clinical and molecular characterization of 11 French lems (ADHD, autism, obsessive-compulsive behaviour). Although the patients with mental retardation and with the 17q21.31 microdeletion deletion often appeared to be inherited from a normal or mildly affected syndrome. We also present here the genotyping for H1/H2 and parent- parent, it was de novo in two cases and we did not find it in 350 healthy of-origin analysis. unrelated controls. Several clinical features such as moderate mental retardation, child- Our results suggest a pathogenic nature for the BP1-BP2 microdele- hood hypotonia, low birth weight and facial dysmorphisms (long face, tion and, although there obviously is an incomplete penetrance, they tubular or pear-shaped nose and bulbous nasal tip) are common. support the existence of a novel microdeletion syndrome in 15q11.2. Other inconstant clinically features include epilepsy, heart defects and kidney/urologic anomalies. P03.063 The described 17q21.31 critical region covers 424 kb and encompass- A 17q21.31 deletion associated with progressive muscle es five reference genes (CRHR1, IMP5, MAPT, STH and KIAA1267). hypertrophy and skeletal anomalies We report here a smaller ~ 200 kb deletion which encompasses only V. M. Siu1, Y. S. Fan2; MAPT, STH and KIAA1267. This narrowing of the critical region point 1Department of Pediatrics, Schulich School of Medicine, University of Western out the MAPT gene as candidate gene, especially since MAPT has Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 2Department of Pathology, University of Miami been associated with several neurodegenerative disorders. Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States. All these deletions arise de novo. A 900 kb inversion polymorphism The 17q21.31 microdeletion is a recently described syndrome with exists in the 17q21.31 region and chromosomes with the inverted seg- characteristic features of developmental delay, hypotonia, long face, ment in different orientations represent two distinct haplotypes, H1 and tubular or pear-shaped nose with bulbous nasal tip, and friendly be- H2. These different orientations are likely to facilitate the generation haviour. We report an 18 year old young man with cognitive delay of the microdeletion through an established mechanism of NAHR and who presented with hypotonia, bilateral radial head dislocation, la- the offspring of carriers of the H2 lineage are predispose to deletion. ryngotracheomalacia, bilateral inguinal hernias, broad thumbs, large In each trio tested, the parent-of-origin of the deleted chromosome 17 hands with fleshy fingers, seizure disorder, congenital partial fusion carries at least one H2 chromosome and, for informative cases, 2/3 out of lower thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, and deep hoarse voice. His of deletions were of maternal origin and 1/3 of paternal origin. facial features were strikingly similar to those previously reported in the 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome and he had a very cheerful outgo- P03.065 ing personality. In early childhood, he had marked ligamentous laxity chromosome 1q21.1 deletion and duplication in the patient with and hypotonia, but his thigh muscles were prominent. After age 12, psychiatric problems he began to develop prominent musculature in his upper extremities, H. Kaymakcalan, M. Seashore, P. Li; without exercising. At age 18, he is quite strong and his muscle bulk Yale University Department of Clinical Genetics, New Haven, CT, United surpasses that of his normal brother who is very physically fit. Microar- States. ray-based comparative genomic hybridization using a 44k oligo array Chromosome 1q21.1 deletions and duplications have recently been revealed a deletion of approximately 627 kb in the 17q21.31 region reported to show associations with developmental delay, schizophre- (chr17: 41073486-41700815). The critical region for the 17q21.31 nia and related psychoses, congenital heart defects, cataracts, micro microdeletion syndrome consists of a 424 kb genomic segment and macrocephaly. (chr17: 41046729-41470954, hg17) encompassing at least 6 genes We report a rare case of chromosome 1q21.1 deletion and duplication (C17orf69, CRHR1, IMP5, MAPT, STH, and KIAA1267). The proximal in the same patient whose brother later presented with similar psychi- deletion breakpoint in our patient is distal to that seen in previously re- atric symptoms and similar chromosomal rearrangement. ported cases, possibly refining the critical region involved in the facial An 8 year old female with PDD NOS, ADHD, expressive language dysmorphic features and behaviour. Haploinsufficiency for a gene in a problems, developmental delay, mental retardation (IQ 60) and failure segment beyond the critical region may account for the muscle hyper- to thrive presented with severe aggressive behaviour that necessitated trophy and/or skeletal anomalies. hospitalization. Her physical examination was remarkable for micro- cephaly (<3%), thin habitus (weight <3%, height 3%) and hyperexten- sible elbows. Her family history is significant for 2 sisters and 2 broth- ers all with hearing problems, a mentally challenged father, a maternalCytogenetics  grandmother and 2 maternal aunts with bipolar disorders. Biochemical was explained by a presumed germline mosaïcism. and metabolic testing for inborn errors of metabolism and Fragile X Reported cases with identical structural chromosomal aberrations DNA analysis were all normal. Chromosome microarray analysis re- born to karyotypically normal parents are rare. Gonadal mosaïcism is vealed an XX female with 0.334 Mb duplication and a 0.984 Mb de- well documented for autosomal dominant and X-linked disorders, but letion at 1q21.1.Her brother with hearing problems who presented 2 seems to be very rare for this type of chromosomal anomaly. Array- months later with aggressive behaviour was shown to carry the same CGH analysis can therefore be very helpful to identify small structural 0.334 Mb duplication and a 1.06 Mb deletion at 1q21.1.(Parental stud- chromosomal aberration in foetuses with unusual multiple congenital ies are not available yet). anomalies syndromes, and for adequate genetic counselling. Identification of 1q21.1 rearrangements should prompt the clinicians to evaluate the other members of the family and closely follow up the pa- P03.068 tients carrying these rearrangements. Given the spectrum of possible De novo 2q36.1-q36.2 including PAX deletion in a patient with outcomes, there may be cases with subtle, undiagnosed findings (in atypical Waardenburg syndrome type 1 our case, psychiatric problems in a brother) and early diagnosis might S. Lejeune-Dumoulin1, J. Andrieux2,3, J. Ghoumid1, S. Joriot4, M. Holder-Espi- improve outcome. nasse1,3, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1,3; 1Clinical Genetic Department, CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 2Genetic Department, P03.066 CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 3Lille 2 University, Lille, France, 4Paediatric Depart- cortical dysplasia and craniofacial dysmorphism in a child with ment, CHRU Lille, Lille, France. interstitial microdeletion of 7q22.1-7q22.3 detected by array Waardenburg syndrome (WS) accounts for 2% of congenital deaf- comparative genomic hybridization ness. It is a heterogeneous group of diseases divided into 4 subtypes. Z. N. Al-Hassnan1,2, N. Kaya1; WS3 associates hearing impairment, abnormal pigmentation, dystopia 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, canthorum and limb anomalies. This condition is due to mutations or 2Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. deletions of PAX3 gene. Mutations in PAX3 have also been reported in Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) has proved useful the craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome (CDHS), a rare form of WS, as a diagnostic tool for patients with developmental delay, craniofacial which comprises a flat midface, hypertelorism, a hypoplastic nose and dysmorphism, and normal karyotyping. Here we report the findings in limb anomalies. a 4 year old boy who was referred to our center for evaluation of de- Here we report on a four year-old boy referred to the genetic clinic for velopmental delay and dysmorphic features. He was born at term with bilateral hand arthrogryposis. He also presented dysmorphic features uneventful prenatal and neonatal periods. His parents, who have 4 such as a flat and asymmetrical face, severe dystopia canthorum and other normal children, noticed that he had developmental delay since a small mouth. Neither depigmentation nor gastro-intestinal involve- early infancy. His examination showed that he had macrocephaly, mal- ments were noted. formed right ear, retrognathia, hypotnia, and undescended testes. Brain He was born at 38 WG with the following growth parameters: 1.650 MR imaging showed hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and thickening kg (<3rd centile) for the weight, 45cm (10th centile) for the length and in the cortex of the frontal lobes predominantly in the singulate gyrus 30cm (3rd centile) for the HC. A brain ultrasound scan performed soon suggestive of cortical dysplasia. MR Spectroscopy was unremarkable. after birth was normal. On heart examination, patent ductus arterio- Karyotyping with 725 band resolution was normal. FISH for subtelo- sus, pulmonary hypertension and Wolf Parkinson White anomaly were meric cryptic rearrangements / deletions / duplications was negative. identified. Subsequently he developed epilepsy and learning difficul- Array CGH using a custom oligonucleotide microarray revealed an in- ties mainly in speech. terstitial microdeletion of 7q22.1 to 7q22.3, spanning approximately Array-CGH allowed the identification of a de novo 2q36.1q36.2 dele- 3.5 megabases. The deletion was confirmed by FISH study. To our tion which involves PAX3. Whole PAX3 deletions have already been knowledge, this particular microdeletion has not been reported in lit- described in WS3, but our patient did not show all the classical WS erature using aCGH. The phenotype we describe here in our patient signs, shared some common findings with CDHS but also presented may represent a unique genomic syndrome of 7q22.1-q22.3 micro- some not previously described features in both conditions. This case deletion that could be clinically recognizable. Furthermore, our report allows broadening the WS spectrum but may also highlight PAX3 dele- supports the value of incorporating aCGH in the evaluation of patients tions involvement in CDHS. with undiagnosed developmental delay and dysmorphism. P03.069 P03.067 independent patients with an identical 9q31.1q31.3 deletion Recurrence of a de novo 2q22.1q22.3 deletion identified by showing similar clinical features: a new microdeletion array-cGH in two sibling foetuses presenting precocious syndrome? lymphoedema and associated malformations A. Marozza1, P. Magini2, F. Mari1, S. Miccoli2, M. A. Mencarelli1, G. Romeo2, G. A. Dieux-Coëslier1, B. Delobel2, P. Deruelle3, V. Houfflin-Debarge3, S. Manou- Hayek3, F. Tavalazzi4, P. Contini4, M. Seri2, A. Renieri1, C. Graziano2; vrier1, J. Andrieux4; 1U.O.C. Genetica Medica, Policlinico S.Maria alle Scotte, Siena, Italy, 2U.O. Ge- 1Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, netica Medica, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 3U.O.C. Neuropsi- 2Service de Génétique Chromosomique, Hôpital Saint-Vincent, Lille, France, chiatria Infantile, Policlinico S.Maria alle Scotte, Siena, Italy, 4U.O. Pneumologia 3Service de Gynécologie Obstétrique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, e Terapia Intensiva Respiratoria, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. 4Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France. Interstitial deletions of chromosome 9 long arm are rare and until now We report on two sibling foetuses presenting major lymphoedema dur- only 20 cases are described in medical literature. Moreover, most of ing the first trimester of pregnancy, associated with several malforma- them were detected by conventional cytogenetic techniques, whose tions. They were born from healthy and unrelated young parents. The limited resolution prevents a precise definition of the breakpoints and first pregnancy was interrupted at 13 weeks of gestation because of the assessment of accurate genotype-phenotype correlation. the severity of the lymphoedema. Karyotype on chorionic villus sample We report two identical deletions of about 6,3 Mb, involving 9q31.1q31.3 was normal. Pathology revealed in a male foetus the association of a region, found through array-CGH in two unrelated patients with com- common mesentery, a unique ectopic testis and small renal cysts. mon phenotypic features. The second pregnancy was terminated at 15 weeks of gestation. The They both present mild psychomotor delay, gibbus dorsalis and pecu- female foetus presented a generalized lymphoedema, a single umbili- liar craniofacial dysmorphisms, especially thick hair, pointed eyebrows, cal artery and bilateral hydronephrosis. midface hypoplasia and mild prognathism, downturned bulbous tip of Both foetus and parents had normal conventional chromosomal analy- the nose and short neck. One of the two patients has a twin sister with sis. Array-CGH revealed a 6.7 Mb 2q22.1q22.3 deletion encompass- highly similar dysmorphic features, which we are going to analyze for ing five genes in the two foetuses. Deleted genes in this region were the presence of the above mentioned imbalance. LRP1B, KYNU, ARHGAP15, GTDC1 and ZEB2. The latter is known to Comparing the genomic positions of all previously described deletions be involved in Mowat-Wilson syndrome. with those we detected, a common minimal region cannot be found No parental anomaly was detected by array-CGH. In addition, FISH because they are not all overlapping. However a better characteriza- analysis on both parents confirmed the de novo deletion. Recurrence tion of cytogenetically defined breakpoints and the finding of furtherCytogenetics  cryptic imbalances in the same chromosomal region, through the ap- Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, plication of high resolution techniques, will lead to the identification of 4McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Legacy Emanuel causative genes and underlying molecular mechanisms. The finding of Children’s Hospital, Portland, OR, United States, 6Dept Medical Genetics, Uni- identical deletions in unrelated patients suggests the occurrence of the versity of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 7Center for Medical Genet- same event mediated by peculiar sequences or structures. Indeed at ics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. the breakpoints, we found repetitive elements, such as Alu sequences, The 12q14 microdeletion syndrome is a rare but distinct disorder char- which are known to generate genomic instability and to promote chro- acterized by learning disabilities, short stature and Buschke-Ollendorff mosomal aberrations. lesions in bone and skin. We have now identified 5 unrelated patients with this microdeletion syndrome using genome wide array CGH anal- P03.070 ysis. All patients have mild mental retardation and growth failure with Deletion 6p25.3-p24.3 and duplication 8q24.22-q24.3 in a low birth weight at term (on average 2240 g), failure to thrive in infancy patient with syndromic Axenfeldt-Rieger malformation and and short stature (- 2.7 to - 6.2 sd) in childhood. Osteopoikilosis le- mental retardation not detectable by standard karyotyping were sions are observed in 3 patients and skin lesions reminiscent of the identified by molecular karyotyping using Array-CGH analysis Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome are present in 2 cases. Renal anomalies T. M. Neuhann1, A. Matthäi1, H. Fink1, K. Brocke2, E. Gerlach1, W. Werner1, E. are found in 2 patients. The deletions are variable in size, ranging from Schrock1, S. Tinschert1; 3.44 to 8.95 Mb. The breakpoints are non-recurrent and not flanked 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Dresden, Germany, 2Klinik und Poliklinik für by segmental duplications. The 5 microdeletions overlap and define a Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden, critical interval of 2.61 Mb on chromosome band 12q14.3 encompass- Germany. ing 10 RefSeq genes, including LEMD3 and HMGA2. We have shown The terminal deletion of chromosome 6p (including FOXC1) leads to previously that haploinsufficiency for LEMD3 results in the Buschke- a well described and very characteristic phenotype with features of Ollendorff syndrome. Transgenic mouse models and association stud- Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (Axenfeld-Rieger eye malformations (AR), ies have suggested that HMGA2 is regulating human growth. To fur- facial dysmorphism, teeth anomalies, and excessive periumbilical ther prove this hypothesis, we have investigated the 2.61 Mb critical skin) plus mental retardation, heart defects, and deafness. The female interval in a series of patients with growth failure. In a mother and son patient we present here showed the full spectrum of these phenotypic with proportionate short stature (height at - 2 sd) we could show the features with a severe manifestation. However, no terminal 6p deletion heterozygous presence of an intragenic deletion encompassing exon was detected by standard karyotyping with a resolution of 400 - 550 3 of the HMGA2 gene. This observation confirms the role of HMGA2 bands. Therefore, Molecular Karyotyping by Array-CGH analysis was in human growth regulation and opens new diagnostic perspectives in performed using the 36K OpArray V4 microarray (Operon, Cologne, children with so-called idiopathic short stature. Germany) and revealed a deletion of 6p25.3-p24.3 spanning 9.7Mb as well as an 8q24.2-q24.3 duplication of 15.0Mb. The complex struc- P03.073 tural rearrangement was finally confirmed by FISH-analysis and the interstitial deletion 3p14 associated with multiple malformations initially suspected terminal deletion of chromosome 6p was found to be and mental retardation - case report. masked by a duplication of chromosome sub-bands 8q24.2-24.3. M. Budisteanu1,2, A. Arghir2, S. Chirieac2, G. Cardos2, A. Lungeanu2; 1“Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia” Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry, Bucharest, Romania, P03.071 2”Victor Babes” National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania. Fontaine syndrome is due to 7q21.3 microdeletion Deletions of chromosome 3 usually involve the terminal segment C. Bigo1, J. Andrieux1, A. Wilkie2, F. Petit1, V. Martinot1, D. Fron1, P. Pellerin1, A. 3p25-3pter in the well known 3p deletion syndrome. Interstitial dele- Dieux-Coeslier1, M. Holder-Espinasse1, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1; tions of the proximal short arm of chromosome 3 occurring as consti- 1CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 2John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United King- tutional aberrations are rare and a defined clinical phenotype is not dom. established, yet. In this paper we report the case of a 5 years-old boy Fontaine syndrome was described in 1974 in a three generations with dysmorphic facial features (including broad forehead, short pal- pedigree. It is characterized by the association of mandibulofacial dys- pebral fissures, epicanthic folds, broad nasal bridge, short philtrum, ostosis, dysplastic ears, and split hand-split foot malformation. Other small malformed ears, micrognathia), clinodactyly of 5th finger, sever features have been described with a wide variability: cutaneous syn- psychomotor retardation, speech delay, congenital heart malforma- dactylies of toes, cleft palate, epilepsy and mild mental retardation. By tion, deafness and genital malformations (small penis, small scrotum, array-CGH analysis we found a 7q21.3 microdeletion in the previously cyptorchidism). reported patient from the original family and her affected daughter. Cytogenetic investigations have been performed on slides obtained This microdeletion ranging from 0.7 to 1 Mb contains 3 genes, namely from peripheral blood cultures by standard procedures. The karyo- DLX5, DLX6 and DSS1, which play a role in limb embryogenesis. The type established on high resolution GTG banding spreads exhibited two DLX genes are also implicated in inner ear development. To our an interstitial deletion of the proximal short arm of chromosome 3, knowledge, about twenty patients presenting larger chromosomal de- del(3p14). letions involving this locus have been described in the literature, shar- Clinical manifestations of this child will be compared with those of ing common features with Fontaine syndrome: ectrodactyly of feet, other patients with the same deletion previously described to further microretrognathia and hearing loss or malformation of the inner ear. delineate the proximal 3p deletion syndrome, which seems to be quite This syndrome was first linked to Patterson-Stevenson syndrome, de- different both of clinical and cytogenetic point of view from 3p25-3pter scribed in one family in 1964, presenting the association of ectrodac- deletion syndrome. tyly, retrognathism, ear malformation and deafness. However, array- Acknowledgments CGH analysis performed in this family was normal. Although Fontaine Financial support PNII Project 42 130 and CNCSIS 1203. and Patterson-Stevenson are two syndromes sharing similar clinical The authors thank Mrs. Marioara Cristea and Ioana Borcan for techni- features, these observations suggest a genetic heterogeneity or the cal assistance. possibility of deletions or mutations of a gene located in the deleted region. P03.074 High Resolution Agilent 244K oligoarray cGH analysis in P03.072 patients with mR/mcA/DD Identification of additional patients with interstitial deletions in M. Tzetis, C. Vrettou, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli, H. Frysira, K. Giannikou, A. Pampanos, the 12q14 interval highlights the role of HMGA in regulating E. Kanavakis; human growth Dept of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece. K. Buysse1, W. Reardon2, L. Mehta3, T. Costa4, C. Fagerstrom5, D. J. Kings- Mental Retardation (MR) and Developmental delay (DD) with or with- bury5, G. Anadiotis5, B. C. McGillivray6, J. Hellemans1, N. de Leeuw7, B. B. A. out multiple congenital anomalies (MCA) occur in 2-3% of the general de Vries7, F. Speleman1, B. Menten1, G. R. Mortier1; population and are very heterogeneous entities. Clinical characteris- 1Dept Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Our tics of these patients are not always related to specific syndromes. Lady’s Hospital for Sick Children, Dublin, Ireland, 3Dept of Genetics & Genomic Array comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH) is a high-throughputCytogenetics  method used to detect small copy number changes within the genome ment of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medi- that are not always visible by conventional karyotyping (>5-10Mb). cine and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Thirty patients with various degrees of MR, seizures, dysmorphic fea- Paediatrics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital tures and/or single or multiple congenital abnormalities and normal Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. previous conventional karyotype, many of which had also received a Interstitial deletions of proximal 3q are rare. To our knowledge 11 cases variety of other genetic tests (FRAX, RETT, single FISH tests or meta- have been described in literature, and just one of them was analysed bolic screens), were analyzed with Agilent 244K oligoarrays, allowing at the molecular level. The patients show distinct and recognisable a theoretical resolution of >50Kb. Clinically significant submicroscopic facial dysmorphism with prominent forehead, epicanthal folds, flat and imbalances were detected in 15 (50%) patients. We are currently in the broad nasal root, and anteverted nares. Structural brain, genitourinary process of confirming our findings with QPCR. The high percentage of and musculoskeletal abnormalities are also observed in the majority positive patients is probably due to the strict criteria of patient selec- of cases. The severity of the phenotype usually correlates with the tion. The clinically relevant results are presented in the table below. Ar- deletion size, but a clear genotype-phenotype correlation has not been ray CGH is a powerful tool for the identification of novel chromosomal established yet. syndromes and for more accurate prognosis and phenotype-genotype We present a male patient with prenatally detected hydrops. Karyotyp- correlations. ing of umbilical cord blood showed a large deletion of the proximal 3q (karyotype 46,XY,del(3)(q13.2q21)). Caesarean section in the 34th Gain/ Position start Position End Length Known week of gestation was performed due to foetal distress. Intensive care iD chromosome Genes* Loss (Ucsc hg18) (Uscs hg18) (mb) syndrome with ventilation support was necessary to combat the apnoea. The 1 1p36.33-p36.32 Loss 554,268 3,332,604 2.8 Yes PLCH2, SKI, GABRD newborn had depressed nasal bridge, hypertelosism, low set ears, 1q41 Gain 220,916,807 221,288,347 0,371 No AIDA, DISP1 short neck, thick arms, single palmar crease on the right hand, hepato- 2 Xp11.3 Loss 44,005,210 44,048,137 0,043 No EFHC2 and splenomegaly, and hypoplastic penis. Head ultrasound detected Xq21.31 Loss 90,917,565 91,035,630 0,118 No PCDHX 3 2q35 Loss 216,986,022 217,664,090 0,68 Yes SMARCAL1 agenesis of corpus callosum. Microarray CGH analysis showed a de- 3p14.1 Loss 70,598,263 71,795,160 1,2 No FOXP1 letion between Mb 108.3 and 129.0 of chromosome 3 affecting about 4 5p15.33 Loss 948,032 2,209,449 1,26 No TERT, SLC6A3, SLC6A19 130 protein-coding genes. When compared to other published cases, 10q26.3 Loss 133,644,221 135,084,833 1,44 Yes NKX6, CALY 3p14.1 Loss 70,951,444 71,601,477 0,65 No FOXP1 the extent of the deletion in our patient is rather large, and this is in ac- 5 11p15.5 Loss 1,515,185 2,499,331 0,984 No DUSP8, TNNI2, TGF2, TH, ASCL2, KCNQ1 cord his relatively severe phenotype. The detailed analysis of deletion 11p11.2 Loss 43,833,775 44,553,392 0,719 Yes EXT2, ALX4 overlaps and their gene content allows a speculation about the role 6 10q26.3 Loss 134,182,454 135,356,716 1,17 Yes NKX6, CALY of individual genes in the symptoms of the syndrome. Supported by 7 17q21.31-q21.32 Loss 41,331,503 42,142,422 0,810 Yes MAPT, STH, NSF 8 17q21.31-q21.32 Loss 41,395,772 41,983,466 0,587 Yes MAPT, STH grants IGA NR/9457-3 and MZO00064203. 9 17q12 Loss 32,024,123 33,121,179 1,09 Yes HNF1B, LHX1, DUSP14 10 Xp11.3 Loss 43,208,140 43,765,770 0,557 No MAOB, MAOA, NDP P03.077 15q11.2 Gain 18,454,050 20,249,945 1,79 Yes? A new case of proximal interstitial deletion of 6q analysed using 11 15q11.2 Loss 21,982,746 22,396,107 0,413 Yes? array cGH 12 15q11.2-q14 Gain 19,109,124 36,837,570 17,73 Yes AS/PWS M. Vlckova1, D. Raskova2, M. Trkova2, Z. Zemanova3, Y. Tan1, Z. Sedlacek1; 13 5q23.2-q31.1 Loss 124,232,611 135,251,538 11,0 No 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty 14 18p11.32-p11.21 Loss 4,316 15,370,683 15,3 No TGIF1, USP14, NDC80, ADCYAP1 of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Gennet, 15 4p16.3-p16.1 loss 62,447 7,455,153 7,39 Yes WHS** Prague, Czech Republic, 3Center of Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Clinical *clinically relevant Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. P03.075 Interstitial 6q deletions are relatively rare. About 60 cases have been De novo 1.2 mb deletion in 2p16.3, disrupting the NRXN gene in described in literature. Three different phenotypic groups according to a boy with autism and developmental delay the localisation of the deletion have been suggested: proximal (6q11- S. Gimelli1, P. Makrythanasis1,2, S. E. Antonarakis1,2, A. Bottani1, F. Bena1; q16), characterised by upslanted fissures, thin lips and hernias; mid- 1University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Geneva, dle (6q15-q25), with microcephaly, hypertelorism, intrauterine growth Geneva, Switzerland. retardation, respiratory problems and limb malformations; and distal Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a group of neurodevelopmental (6q25-qter), with cleft palate, retinal abnormalities, genital hypoplasia, conditions characterized by deficiencies in behavior, communication and seizures. Hypotonia, ear anomalies, facial dysmorphism and men- and socialization. Recent research has shown that different genetic tal retardation are common to all three groups. The localisation of the factors are implicated in the aetiopathogenesis of ASD, including point distal breakpoint is more important for the phenotype than the proximal mutations of several genes (such as NRXN1, NLGN3, NLGN4) as well one. as copy number variants on many chromosomes. We present a girl with mental retardation, hypotonia, facial dysmor- We describe a 6-year-old male with a 1.2 Mb de novo deletion of phism (high forehead, hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, dysplastic 2p16.3 detected by aCGH (Agilent 244K). Most of NRXN1 is missing ears), single palmar crease on the right hand, pectus excavatum, de- and no other known genes are within the deletion. The child has minor layed myelinisation, and bilateral frontal lobe atrophy. Her karyotype dysmorphic features: triangular open mouth, inverted and supernu- was 46,XX,del(6)(q13q15). The phenotype was in agreement with that merary nipples. Growth parameters, including head circumference are of the proximal 6q deletions. mBAND analysis and high resolution ar- within normal limits. At the age of 9 months he had several seizure epi- ray CGH showed that the deletion was more centromeric, involving sodes successfully controlled with valproic acid. Mental development the 6q11-q14.1 region. The length of the deletion was about 15 Mb is delayed (absent speech) and the patient presents typical autistic and it contained about 45 protein-coding genes. The distal breakpoint features. Brain MRI was unremarkable. mapped to intron 1 of the MYO6 gene. The proximal breakpoint was in As the deletion is de novο and the missing segment only encompasses the centromeric genome assembly gap. At present we are attempting part of NRXN1, it is highly likely that haploinsuficieny of this gene is to obtain the nucleotide sequence of both breakpoints. To our knowl- causally related to the patient’s phenotype. This finding will hopefully edge, only 19 patients with proximal 6q deletions have been described, shed more light in the NRXN1 function, deletions of which have addi- and none of them was analysed using array CGH. The deletion in our tionally been associated with susceptibility to schizophrenia. patient is unique. Supported by grants MZO00064203, MZOVFN2005, INCORE and CHERISH. P03.076 molecular cytogenetic analysis of a boy with proximal 3q P03.078 deletion syndrome Further delineation of the phenotype of the 21q22.11q22.12 A. Vazna1, M. Vlckova1, A. Baxova2, A. Puchmajerova1, J. Djakow3, Z. Sed- deletion encompassing the RUNX gene lacek1; C. Popovici1, M. Mathieu2, J. Andrieux3, C. Missirian1, A. Receveur4, L. Lecerf5, 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty A. Moncla1, M. Goossens5, N. Philip1; of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Depart- 1Hopital d’Enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 2Service Génétique Clini-Cytogenetics  que, CHU Amiens, Amiens, France, 3Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital P03.080 Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 4Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Amiens, De novo cryptic deletion at 2q14 in two female patients with Amiens, France, 5Service de Biochimie et Génétique, INSERM 841, IFR10 turner syndrome stigmata - Institut Mondor de, Créteil, France. S. Giglio1,2, R. Ciccone3, I. Ricca4, E. Andreucci1, M. Patricelli5, S. Guarducci2, Familial thrombocytopenia (OMIM 601399) is a rare inherited disor- E. Della Mina3, O. Zuffardi3,6; der due to mutations in the RUNX1 gene, localized in 21q22.12. Af- 1Medical Genetics- Dept of Clinical Pathophysiology, Florence, Italy, 2Medical fected individuals have mild to moderate thrombocytopenia and are Genetics Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Florence, Italy, prone to develop myelodysplasia and acute myeloid leukaemia in 1/3 3Medical Genetics, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 4Genetics Unit- C. Mondino of cases. Deletions including the RUNX1 gene have been reported in Foundation, Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 5Clinical Genetics-San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, patients presenting with syndromic thrombocytopenia. We report two Milan, Italy, 6Genetics Unit- C. Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy. new cases, a 23 year-old boy and a 7 year old girl. Both developed Case1. 13 years old, weight 37 Kg (3th-10th centile), height 133 cm mild asymptomatic thrombocytopenia. Psychomotor development was (<<3th centile), OFC 53,1 cm (50th centile). She presented mild men- severely delayed and both developed severe epilepsia and behavioral tal retardation, short stature, triangular face with bitemporal narrowing, problems with agitation and restlessness. On examination the two “webbed” neck and low posterior hairline, drooping eyelids, thin nose, patients had dysmorphic features, with microcephaly, protruding and high palate, thin lips, shield chest, mild cubitus valgus, multiple pig- everted lips, down turning corners of the mouth and bulbous nasal tip. mented nevi, atrial septal defect, hypothyroidism. Menarche occurred Hypoplastic nipples, short fingers with broad proximal interphalangeal at 15 years of age after hormonal stimulation. Molecular analysis of joints, camptodactyly, broad halluces, toenail hypoplasia and complete SHOX gene resulted to be normal. Karyotype on blood and fibroblasts agenesis of corpus callosum were noted in the male patient. Deletions excluded the presence of a 45,X cell line. at 21q22.11q22.12 including RUNX1 were detected by array-CGH in Case2. 14 years old, weight Kg 45 (25th centile), height 154 cm (10th- the two cases. The two deletions overlapped with distinct breakpoint. 25th centile; expected according to midparents’ stature: 167±7 cm), Recently, genomic deletions overlapping the 21q22.11q22.12 region OFC 53,1 cm (3th-10th centile). She presented moderate mental re- were reported in 5 patients. All had thrombocytopenia, growth retarda- tardation, low posterior hairline, high nasal bridge, thin and convex tion and mental retardation and one developed AML. The facial ap- profile of nose, short philtrum, thin lips, microstomia and prognathism, pearance of the three patients with published pictures is very similar small and simple ears, clinodactyly, cubitus valgus, multiple pigmented to the one of our patients. Interestingly, the size of the deleted region nevi. Menarche occurred spontaneously at the age of 13+8/12 years. is variable and breakpoints are specific to each patient, suggesting a Karyotype: 46,XX,t(2;8)(q21;q24.3). mechanism different from the classical non-allelic reciprocal recombi- Array-CGH (Agilent platform, 244 k) allowed to identify 2q de novo nation. The minimal overlap region contains 13 genes, some of which interstitial deletions of 8 Mb in case 1 (proximal breakpoint at 113,120 are expressed in the central nervous system. Mb; distal at 122,079 Mb) and of 14 Mb (proximal breakpoint at 118,332 Mb; distal at 132,366 Mb) in case 2, with an overlapping region of P03.079 about 3,7 Mb. Duplication of the GPc3/GPc4 gene cluster on Xq26.2 detected Conclusion: a critical deletion region at 2q14 (from 118,332-122,079 by Array-cGH in a family with developmental delay/mental Mb, assembly March 2006) is associated with postnatal short stature, retardation and dysmorphic features. A new syndrome ? low posterior hairline, shield chest, cubitus valgus, multiple pigmented H. Gabriel1, E. Fiedler2, A. Lott1, A. Ovens-Reader2, M. Gencik1, G. Strobl- nevi, reminiscent of TS. Wildemann2; 1Zentrum fuer Medizinische Genetik, Osnabrueck, Germany, 2Praxis für P03.081 Humangenetik, München, Germany. Overlapping deletions in 10q22: characterisation of a novel Simpson-Golabi-Behmel (SGBS) syndrome is an X-linked overgrowth genomic disorder and identification of C10orf11 as a candidate syndrome characterized by pre- and postnatal overgrowth, a character- gene for mental retardation istic facial appearance and different congenital malformations. SGBS A. Tzschach1, A. Bisgaard2, M. Kirchhoff2, L. M. Graul-Neumann3, H. Neitzel4, is caused by mutations or deletions of the glypican 3 (GPC3) gene. S. Page5, A. Ahmed1, I. Müller1, F. Erdogan1, H. Ropers1, V. Kalscheuer1, R. Here, we report on a 2-year-old boy presented with pychomotoric re- Ullmann1; tardation, growth retardation, microcephaly, mild congenital malforma- 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of tions (micropenis, hypospadia) and dysmorphic features (e.g. broad Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Institute of Medi- forehead, facial asymmetry, round face, hypertelorism, micrognathia, cal Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 4Institute of deep set and posteriorly rotated ears, slight bilateral clinodactyly). Human Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 5Westfall Initially, Silver-Russell-syndrome was suspected. While karyotyping Pediatrics, Rochester, NY, United States. and testing for Silver-Russell syndrome were negative, a 1-4 Mb dupli- Interstitial deletions of chromosome band 10q22 are rare, and very little cation at Xq26.2 including the GPC3/GPC4 gene cluster was identified is known about the mechanisms underlying their formation and about by BAC array-CGH. This finding was validated by MLPA and Q-PCR the contribution of individual genes to the clinical problems. We char- analysis. acterised interstitial 10q22 deletions in 3 unrelated mentally retarded For the characterization of the duplication in a much higher resolu- patients by high-resolution array CGH, and we performed breakpoint tion we have designed and customized a 60mer oligo array printed analysis by array painting in a mentally retarded patient with a bal- in a 105K format (105.000 oligonucleotides probes) using the eArray anced chromosome translocation 46,XY,t(10;13)(q22;p13)dn. Patient technology (Agilent). 1 had a 7.9 Mb deletion in 10q21.3-q22.2. Patients 2 and 3 had nearly Testing of more family members revealed that the mother, the grand- identical smaller deletions of approximately 3.4 Mb. The centromeric mother and a maternal uncle were carrier of the Xq26.2 duplication. breakpoints of these two deletions were near an identical low-copy All carriers displayed the characteristic features of the syndrome to repeat (LCR), but there were no LCRs at the distal breakpoints which some extent. differed by 250 kb. Breakpoint analysis in patient 4 revealed the dis- Interestingly, comparison of the Xq26.2 duplication phenotype to the ruption of C10orf11, a brain-expressed gene that is located in the com- phenotype of SGBS patients revealed partially a “reverse” phenotype mon deleted interval of patients 1-3. The presence of an LCR at the to the SGBS. centromeric breakpoints of patients 2 and 3 suggests a common, LCR- Recently, it was proposed that the SGBS phenotype is caused by a mediated mechanism for the formation of both deletions. Since there misregulation of the hedgehog signal transduction pathway. Here we were no corresponding LCRs at the telomeric breakpoints, this mecha- will present a potential explanation of the phenotypical differences be- nism is probably different from non-allelic homologous recombination. tween the two syndromes based on the function of glypican 3 in the The disruption of C10orf11 in a similarly affected patient suggests that hedgehog signal transduction pathway. haploinsufficiency of this gene is a major causative factor for mental retardation in del(10)(q22) patients.Cytogenetics  P03.082 P03.084 High-resolution array analysis detects microdeletions of Array-CGH for the identification of constitutional copy number chromosome region 16q22.1 in two unrelated individuals with changes mR/ mcA syndrome A. C. Obenauf, T. Schwarzbraun, M. Mach, E. Vallant, P. M. Kroisel, S. Uhrig, T. Zagoras1, M. Kibaek2, M. Kirchhoff3, S. Kjaergaard3, J. Dahlgren4, A. Erlands- J. B. Geigl, K. Wagner, M. R. Speicher; son1, M. Stefanova1; Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Up to date, we have analyzed 331 patients with a conspicuous pheno- Sweden, 2Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of Odense, Odense, type e.g. dysmorphic features, metal retardation, and developmental Denmark, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, University Hospital delay by array-CGH. We employed different array platforms, including of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Department of Paediatrics, Sahlgren- the 1 Mb or 8k large insert clone arrays and the commercially available ska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. 44K and 244K oligoarrays from Agilent. Here we report a detailed clinical and molecular investigation of two un- We identified copy number changes (CNCs) in 79 patients (=23.8%). related individuals, an 18-months-old boy and a 13-years-old girl with Subsequent analyses usually include evaluation of the parental ge- de novo overlapping deletions of 16q22.1, sized 1.48Mb and 0.28Mb, nomes and verification of the array-CGH results either by FISH, MLPA respectively. Clinically they both presented with dysmorphic features, or qRT-PCR. moderate developmental delay, sleeping disturbances, and abnormal We identified well-known microdeletion/duplication syndromes like behaviour. The boy had low birth weight, short stature (-4SD), micro- Prader-Willi-, Smith-Magenis-, Di-George-, Miller-Dieker-, Williams- cephaly (-4SD), high forehead, thin eyebrows with “medial flaring”, Beuren-, Phelan-McDermid-, Cri-du Chat-, Wolf-Hirschhorn-, or the strabismus, narrow flat nasal bridge, prominent columella, short flat 2q37 microdeletion syndrome. In addition to the detection of these well philtrum, thin lips, late erupted dysplastic teeth, dysplastic ears, short known syndromes array technologies paved the way for the detection fingers and toes, broad 1st toe, delayed skeletal age. He showed dis- of new deletion/duplication syndromes. The recently described dele- tinct externalising behaviour, friendly and continuously smiling. The girl tions/duplications of 1q21.1, 8p23.1, 15q24, 16p13.11, 16p11.2 were had autistic behaviour, hypermetropia (+6), no signs of puberty at the also detected in our patients demonstrating the great clinical implica- age of 13, and dysmorphism such as hypertelorism, thick eyebrows, tion of these array-CGH findings. However, most of the detected CNCs long eyelashes, epicanthic folds, wide pronounced nasal bridge, low are private. To achieve better genotype/phenotype correlations and to set posteriorly rotated dysplastic ears, long prominent philtrum, thin identify new clinically relevant syndromes, clinical and genetic data lips, hairy skin, sandal gap, broad 1st toe. Chromosome aberrations from all consented patients are entered into the DECIPHER database were detected by high-resolution array analysis, 250k SNPs array (Af- and are compared with the other entries in the database. fymetrix) for the 1.48Mb deletion and 244k CGH array (Agilent) for An especial interesting case represented a de novo deletion of 770 kb the 0.28Mb deletion. Breakpoints on chromosome 16 were defined on chromosome 17p13.1, harboring the tumor suppressor gene p53, as 65101151-66582496 (hg18) and 65958487-66235411 (hg18), re- which was identified in a girl with developmental delay. Furthermore, spectively. Several possibly relevant genes are located in the over- we found that in this patient the breakpoint disrupted the transcriptional lapping gene-rich region such as CTCF, ZDHHC1, TPPP3, LRRC36, control of the GUCY2D gene, which likely causes the amaurosis of the and AGRP. Authors discuss reasons for partially overlapping/partially patient. distinct phenotypes of the two individuals. To our knowledge these are the first two cases reported with microdeletions confined to the P03.085 16q22.1 region. interstitial de novo del(1)(q25.1q31.3): clinical presentation and molecular description with array-cGH P03.083 E. Dimitriadou1, K. Theodoropoulos2, I. Lalou1, M. Tzoufi3, J. Vermeesch4, J. P. A de novo 305 kb interstitial dup(3)(p25.3) encompassing the Fryns4, S. Kitsiou5, M. Syrrou1; VHL and IRAK genes in a patient with mental retardation/ 1Cytogenetics Unit, Laboratory of General Biology, Medical School, University multiple congenital anomalies, epilepsy, spasticity and of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 2General Hospital of Ioannina “Hatzikosta”, ectomorphic habitus Ioannina, Greece, 3Child Health Department, Medical School, University of E. Chabchoub1, G. Michils1, J. R. Vermeesch1, P. De Cock2, J. P. Fryns1; Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 4Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital 1Centre for Human Genetics - University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Bel- Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University gium, 2Department of Neuropaediatrics - University Hospital Gasthuisberg, School of Medicine, Athens, Greece. Leuven, Belgium. We report a 11-year-old male child with prenatal onset of growth retar- Partial duplications of the short arm of chromosome 3 are very rare. dation, growth hormone deficiency, developmental delay and several Often they are reported in translocations involving other chromosomes, dysmorphic features including significant orthodontic problems, severe whereas deletions encompassing the VHL gene in 3p25.3 predispose malocclusion, protrusion of upper jaw and narrow high-arched palate to Van-Hippel Lindau syndrome. with triangular shaped palate, low hairline posteriorly, hypertelorism, While screening for genomic copy number variations (CNV) with a long palpebral fissures, mild epicanthal folds bilaterally, long eye- 1 Mb resolution bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) array-based lashes and reversion of lower eyelid, relatively prominent ears, small comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH) in a 17 year-old male re- hands and digits with 5th finger clinidactyly bilaterally and apparently ferred for the aetiological diagnosis of mental retardation and multiple persistent finger pads, small feet and toes with right 2nd-3rd toe syn- congenital anomalies (MR/MCA) and ectomorphic habitus, a de novo dactyly and increased gap between 1st and 2nd toes bilaterally and 3p25.3 microduplication was detected and refined by Multiplex Liga- Achille’s tendon contractures bilaterally. He also has severe myopia, tion-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) to a 305 kb region encom- strabismus and mild astigmatism. passing the VHL and IRAK2 genes and disrupting the GHRL gene. Molecular karyotyping using a 1 Mb resolution BAC array demon- This is not reported as a benign CNV in the database of genomic vari- strated the presence of a 21 Mb sized deletion on the long arm of ants (DGV). Moreover, we have not found similar duplication in the chromosome 1. The deletion flanking clones are RP11-552K17 and DNA of parents of nearly 1000 patients we tested by aCGH. RP3-433G19. The karyotype is arr cgh 1q25.1q31.3 (RP5-1045J21- The patient was followed since the age of six years. He has no tumour >RP11-435N12)x1. The case is compared with similar cases from the and there is no history of familial cancer. Brain MRI was normal. literature of postnatally detected interstitial deletion on 1q. This is the Interestingly, duplication of IRAK2 can cause epilepsy by activating first time that array-CGH analysis is used for a more accurate assess- the NFκB signalling pathway, both controlling the postsynaptic gluta- ment of the breakpoints in a patient carrying a deletion in the 1q25-q31 mate receptor density. Disruption of the GHRL gene can explain the region. ectomorphic habitus described here, since patients with larger dup(3p) involving GHRL show short stature and obesity. P03.086 To our knowledge, this is the smallest duplication of chromosome 3p Array-cGH in fetuses with polymalformations encompassing the VHL region reported yet. The prognosis of this cy- P. Callier1, N. Laurent2, L. Faivre1, T. Rousseau3, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, N. Mar- togenetic imbalance is unknown and a long-term follow-up is essential le1, S. Couvreur3, A. Mosca1, H. Guy2, S. Pigennat2, G. Herve2, F. Dos santos1, for an early diagnosis of malignancy. A. Masurel-Paulet1, P. Sagot3, F. Mugneret1;Cytogenetics 0 1Département de Génétique, CHU le Bocage, DIJON, France, 2Laboratoire P03.088 d’Anatomopathologie, CHU le Bocage, DIJON, France, 3Maternité, CHU le Whole-genome array-cGH screening in undiagnosed syndromic Bocage, DIJON, France. patients: old syndromes revisited. The importance of array-based comparative genomic hybridization A. Mosca1, P. Callier1, L. Faivre2, N. Marle1, C. Thauvin-Robinet2, A. Masurel- (aCGH) for detecting unbalanced genomic aberrations including mi- Paulet2, M. Beri3, E. Pipiras4, A. Delahaye4, E. Questiaux5, B. Benzacken4, P. crodeletions, duplications and subtelomeric rearrangements have Jonveaux3, F. Mugneret1; been largely demonstrated in postnatal series. We analyzed a series 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Dijon, France, 2Centre de Génétique, Dijon, of 25 fetuses using aCGH (IntegraChip) with at least three malforma- France, 3Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Nancy, France, 4Laboratoire de Cyto- tions and normal karyotype. Fetal DNA was extracted from frozen génétique, Hôpital Jean-Verdier, Paris, France, 5Centre de Génétique, Hôpital sample and analyzed with 1-Mb BAC-arrays, including 4898 clones Robert Ballanger, Aulnay sous bois, France. with a resolution of 600 kilobases. A genomic disorder was found in Most microdeletional syndromes were presumed to be well defined 2/25 fetus (8%), both confirmed by FISH analysis. The first case was clinical entities. However, the introduction of whole-genome screening a fetus with a de novo 15q26qter deletion (7.2Mb) associated with a led not only to the description of new syndromes, but also to the rec- phenotype compatible with Fryns syndrome: congenital diaphragmatic ognition of a broader spectrum of features for well-known syndromes. hernia (CDH), dysmorphic features, cardiac abnormality (aortic ste- Here we report on 3 patients presenting with mental retardation and nosis and hypoplasia left cavities) and hypoplastic distal phalanges. normal standard karyotype. Patient 1 was a 37 year-old male with pro- The deletion overlaps the critical region of CDH in 15q26.1q26.2. The found mental retardation, severe psychiatric disturbances within the second fetus presented de novo 13q32.2qter deletion (14Mb) associ- autism spectrum, non-specific dysmorphic features and bilateral reti- ated with growth retardation, craniofacial dysmorphism, foot anomalies nal detachment. 105K array-CGH Agilent permitted to diagnose a 1.6 (clubfeet) and hypoplastic kidneys. This study demonstrates the utility Mb 17p11.2 microdeletion including the RAI1 gene, smaller than the of the array-CGH technology in detecting chromosomal abnormality common microdeletion usually found in Smith-Magenis syndrome. Pa- in fetuses, allowing genetic counselling for the family. Observation 1 tient 2 was a 31-year-old female with mild mental retardation, severe can also be of interest since it could be a clue in the search for the anxiety, non-specific dysmorphic features and short stature with micro- genes responsible for Fryns syndrome. The detection rate in our se- melia (142 cm) and X-rays compatible with hypochondroplasia. 105K ries is comparable with the two studies of fetuses with malformations array-CGH Agilent revealed a 1.4 Mb 7q11.23 microdeletion, similar to analysed with BACs-array 300 and 3500 clones (8% and 7.3 % after the deletion found in Williams syndrome. Patient 3 was a 6-year-old exclusion of inherited anomalies) [Le Caignec et al., 2005; Schaeffer boy with mild mental retardation, non-specific facial dysmorphism and et al., 2004]. autistic features. BAC-array (Integragen, 1Mb) also revealed a 7q11.23 microdeletion including the ELN gene. Reevaluation in the 3 patients P03.087 confirmed that the diagnosis was not possible on clinical grounds and Detection of known microdeletion syndromes on array-cGH: emphasize that well-known genomic disorders can be phenotypically when the boundaries of clinical diagnoses are reached. heterogeneous and more variable than originally thought. The large S. Bouquillon1, J. Andrieux2, C. Vincent-Delorme1, O. Boute-Bénéjean1, S. Jo- use of array-CGH might lead that such patients may be more readily riot3, J. Cuisset3, S. Auvin4, G. Plessis5, B. Delobel6, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1, M. achieved on the basis of genotype rather than phenotype. Holder-Espinasse1; 1Génétique Clinique, hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Laboratoire P03.089 de Génétique Médicale, hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 3Neurologie 44K array-cGH in 1000 patients presenting mental retardation/ pédiatrique, hôpital Roger Salengro, Lille, France, 4Neurologie pédiatrique, multiple congenital malformations. hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 5Département de Génétique, CHU hôpital J. R. Andrieux1, M. Holder-Espinasse2, O. Boute-Benejean2, A. Dieux-Coes- Clémenceau, Caen, France, 6Centre de génétique chromosomique, hôpital lier2, M. Mathieu3, G. Morin3, B. Demeer3, H. Copin3, L. Vallée4, B. Delobel5, B. Saint Vincent de Paul, Lille, France. Duban-Bedu5, G. Plessis6, M. Kottler6, C. Vincent-Delorme2, S. Manouvrier- The majority of recognizable syndromes had already been well de- Hanu2; scribed in their typical clinical presentations before classical recurring 1Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, CHRU, Lille, France, 2Service de Gé- microdeletions were identified. The limited resolution of the conven- nétique clinique, CHRU, Lille, France, 3Service de Génétique, CHU, Amiens, tional cytogenetics still fails to detect submicroscopic chromosomal France, 4Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHRU, Lille, France, 5Centre de Génétique imbalances. Therefore, suggestive phenotypes lead to targeted Flu- Chromosomique, GHICL, Lille, France, 6Service de Cytogénétique et de Géné- orescence Hybridization In Situ (FISH) that is the most appropriate tique moléculaire, CHU, Caen, France. approach to confirm the diagnosis. Conversely, an apparently “chro- Since 2008, 11 array-CGH platforms have been enforced in France in mosomal” but not specific developmental disorder with normal conven- order to detect constitutional cryptic genomic imbalances as a routine tional karyotype can benefit from a new comprehensive high-resolution diagnosis. approach: Array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (Array-CGH). It To date, 1000 DNAs from patients presenting with MR/MCA have been can however be very disappointing for the clinician when a known mi- studied using Agilent 44K array-CGH in our centre: 914 post-natal crodeletion syndrome is diagnosed by this latter technique. cases and 86 prenatal cases (63 after termination of pregnancy and In our experience, array-CGH identified ~15% chromosomal imbal- 13 during pregnancy). ances in about one thousand individuals presenting unexplained de- Considering post-natal cases, 160 (17.5%) genomic imbalances have velopmental disorders. Nine of them (0.9%) presented a known mi- been detected: 128 (14%) were considered deleterious (i.e. de novo crodeletion syndrome not diagnosed on clinical findings. Three were or transmitted from a parent showing the same phenotype), 13 (1.4%) terminal deletions (two 1pter and one 22qter) and 6 were typical in- were found in a healthy parent but for the remaining 19 (2.1%) no terstitial deletions (3 Di-George, 1 Smith-Magenis, 1 Angelman and 1 parental samples were available. For the prenatal cases, 15 (17.4%) Williams-Beuren syndromes). genomic imbalances were detected: 12 (14%) were considered delete- We present some representative examples and propose hypotheses rious and 3 (3.5%) were identified in a healthy parent. to explain the misdiagnoses: Among the 140 deleterious genomic imbalances: - The phenotype can be atypical in particular for syndromes with im- - 11 (7.9%) corresponded to known microdeletion syndrome not diag- portant clinical variability such as 22q11.2 deletion nosed on clinical findings: 3 were telomeric (two 1pter and one 22qter) - The analysis of the dysmorphic features may be difficult when the and 6 were typical interstitial (three del 22q11.2 (DiGeorge), one del patient is adult 17p11.2 (SMS), one del 15q11.2 (Angelman syndrome), one 7q11.23 - Some recently identified syndromes such as 22qter deletion may be (Williams-Beuren)). Two were Xq28 duplications involving MECP2. “missed” by some clinicians - 4 (2.9%) were imbalanced telomeric anomalies (partial monosomy - The phenotype can be suggestive but associated with rare or none associated with partial trisomy). previously reported features. - 23 patients presented new microdeletion syndromes. Three del 17q21 (MAPT), 3 del 15q13.3 (CHRNA7), 6 del 1q21/3 dup 1q21 (mi- crocephaly/macrocephaly), and 4 del 16p11.2/7 dup 16p11.2. - 5 patients presented single gene deletions.Cytogenetics  All detected anomalies are available on the BACH database (https:// P03.092 www.genopole-lille.fr/bach/menu.php) with login/password on de- De Novo interstitial deletion 7p15.1p21 Encompassing the mand. tWist1 Gene in a Boy with craniosynostosis, marked Lacuna skull and Facial Dysmorphism but Without Limb and spine P03.090 Defects creating a First-Generation chromosome 18 Gene Dosage map C. LI; C. D. Sebold, E. C. Carter, P. L. Heard, D. E. Hale, J. D. Cody; Mcmaster University Medical Center, Hamilton, ON, Canada. Chromosome 18 Clinical Research Center, San Antonio, TX, United States. A baby boy, delivered at 41weeks +3/7 days gestation to a healthy Background. Microarray technology has revolutionized the field of 29 year-old G1P0 after an essentially unremarkable pregnancy, was clinical genetics. For individuals with chromosome abnormalities, the noted to have strikingly abnormal skull shape, abnormal fontanels and promise of microarray technology is that it can quickly identify which cranial sutures as well as facial dysmorphism that included abnormal genes are and are not present in two copies. In order for this informa- anterior hairline, supraorbital creases below and above the eyebrows, tion to be useful to clinicians, there must be some tool to link genotypic shallow orbits, a deep transverse crease over the nose bridge and data with annotated phenotypic information. As an initial step towards an upturned nose with under developed nares. The ears were simple this goal, we have created a first generation gene dosage map for with prominent superior and inferior crus of antihelix and the stem of chromosome 18. Methods. Data from OMIM, the Database of Ge- antihelix. The mouth was held open with tented upper lip. The palate nomic Variants, and medical and scientific manuscripts were reviewed was extremely narrow but without clefting. Microretrognathia was evi- for each of the genes shown on the UCSC Genome Browser using dent. He also had an extremely anteriorly placed anus. The genitalia the March 2006 assembly. 253 genes were classified as haplosuffi- were otherwise normal. The rest of the clinical examination, including cient, haploinsufficient, conditional haplosufficient, or haplolethal. This the extremities, was normal. Head CT and MRI revealed craniosyn- information, along with our data on critical regions for 18q- phenotypic ostosis of the coronal, lamdoid and metopic sutures and partial fu- features, was used to create a custom track on the UCSC genome sion of the sagittal suture, a fenestrated lacuna skull with ventriculo- browser. Results and Discussion. Eighty-one genes were deter- megaly and a hypoplastic corpus callosum. Skeletal survey showed mined to be haplosufficient; 4 were haploinsufficient, and 1 was con- no spine and limb anomalies. He had an abnormal male karyotype ditional haploinsufficient. The effects of the non-haploid state in the 46,XY,del(7)(p15.1p21) but parental karyotype was normal. The de- remaining genes were unknown. Critical regions for aural atresia, renal leted region encompasses TWIST1 gene among several known and abnormalities, growth hormone deficiency, and dysmyelination were presumably many unknown genes. TWIST1 is known to be involved in also included on the custom track. This map allows clinicians to align Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, a condition characterized by craniosynos- the molecular karyotype information from an individual patient with the tosis, facial asymmetry, abnormal ears and digital anomalies, and less annotated genomic content so as to provide a clinical prognosis. Thus, commonly with parietal foramina, radioulnar synostosis, cleft palate we have taken the first step towards creating a genomic map that may and congenital heart malformation. This case exhibited many features be used in counseling and directing care of individuals with chromo- of SCS but without spine and limb anomalies, although several novel some 18 abnormalities. features were also noted. P03.091 P03.093 copy number mutations on chromosome 17q24.2-q24.3 linked to New case of interstitial 1q44 microdeletion and confirmation of a congenital generalized hypertrichosis terminalis with or without critical region for corpus callosum abnormalities. gingival hyperplasia C. Rooryck Thambo1,2, D. Cailley2, M. Delrue2, D. Lacombe1,1, B. Arveiler1,2; M. Sun1, N. Li2, W. Dong3, Z. Chen4, J. Yu5, L. He6, X. Zhang1,2; 1Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine, Bordeaux, France, 2Service de Génétique 1Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Bei- Médicale CHU Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France. jing, China, 2China Medical University, Shenyang, China, 3The Liaoning Prov- We identified by array-CGH (oligonucleotides 105K, Agilent Technolo- ince People’s Hospital, Shenyang, China, 4UCLA School of Medicine, Los An- gies) an interstitial 1q44 deletion, spanning about 2.1 Mb, in a patient geles, CA, United States, 5Beijing Institute of Genomics, CAS, Beijing, China, with mental retardation, dysmorphic features and brain abnormali- 6Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. ties. This deletion arose de novo. The proposita was the only child Congenital generalized hypertrichosis terminalis (CGHT) is charac- of healthy non-consanguineous parents. She was born at term: birth- terized by excessive universal growth of pigmented terminal hairs. In weight was 3060 g (M), length 49 cm (M), and OFC 35 cm (M). Family the present study, we describe three Han Chinese families with CGHT history is non-contributory. At 30 months, height was 82 cm (-2.5 SD), and a sporadic case with extreme CGHT and gingival hyperplasia. We weight was 11 kg (-1 SD) and OFC was 47 cm (-1 SD). Clinical fea- performed linkage analysis in a large four-generation family and identi- tures included brachycephaly, facial dysmorphism with deep set eyes, fied a CGHT locus at chromosome 17q24.2-q24.3. We then carried synophris, horizontal eyebrows, prognathism, clinodactyly of fifth fin- out copy number analysis with the Affymatrix Genome-Wide Human gers, flat feet. She walked unaided at 24 months and had no speech. SNP Array 6.0 and found nonrecurrent microdeletions in three CGHT She had clonic seizures. Brain MRI showed hypoplasia of the anterior families and a larger microduplication in the sporadic case with ex- part of corpus callosum, and veinous angioma in the right frontal lobe. treme CGHT and gingival hyperplasia. We validated all the copy num- Electroencephalogram showed central epileptic spikes predominating ber variations (CNVs) by real-time quantitative PCR, and showed that on the left side. This patient shows common clinical features to the the microdeletions segregated with the disease phenotype in the three individuals with 1q44 deletions. This deletion involves 10 genes and families and the microduplication in the sporadic case was de novo comprises the critical region for corpus callosum abnormalities de- in origin. These CNVs shared a common overlapping genomic region scribed by van Bon BWM et al., J Med Genet 2008, 45:346-354. encompassing the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 6 gene, MAP2K6. CNV at the MAP2K6 locus is not reported in the public data- P03.094 base and was not detected in normal Han Chinese population. Taken A case of partial trisomy/monosomy of chromosome 8p together, our results strongly suggested that the CNVs on 17q24.2- associated with autism and epilepsy defined by genome array- q24.3 were pathogenic copy number mutations responsible for CGHT cGH with or without gingival hyperplasia. This report identifies CGHT as a A. Nucaro1, R. Rossino2, F. Boscarelli3, S. Zorco3, N. Santini3, C. Montaldo3, I. genomic disorder and might suggest an important functional role of the Chillotti4, D. Pruna4, T. Pisano4, C. Cianchetti4; MAP2K6 gene in hair growth control. 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Monserrato( Cagliari), Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze pediatriche e Medicina Clinica- University, Cagliari, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Chirurgiche e Odontostomatologiche, University, Cagliari, Italy, 4Clinica di Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Azienda Ospedaliero- Uni- versitaria, Cagliari, Italy. Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder with early childhood onset and a prevalence of as much as 5/10,000. Symptoms that may contrib- ute throughout life include qualitative impairments in reciprocal com-Cytogenetics  munication and social interaction, as well as repetitive and stereotyped male a 1.8Mb inherited duplication in 17q12 lays 4Mb upstream of the behavior. 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1 gene that encodes 17HSD1, We report on a case of a 8-year-old male with partial trisomy which catalyzes the final step of testosterone biosynthesis. In a sex 8p(22;23.1)/partial monosomy 8p( 23.2;pter) associated with autism, reversal 46XY female a 0.2Mb inherited deletion in 17q12 lays 7Mb mild dysmorphic features, epilepsy and moderate learning disability. apart upstream of the above mentioned gene. In a Cohen-like patient The cryptic deletion has been detected by Genome array-CGH. (microchepaly, truncal obesity tapered fingers with brachidactily, short Although mental retardation is a common finding in patients with mo- stature, evocative facial gestalt) a 2.1Mb de novo deletion in 8q22 lays saic trisomy 8 or partial trisomy of various regions of chromosome 8, 1Mb downstream to the Cohen gene. In order to prove the hypoth- only two cases associated with autism have been reported so far and. esis of recessive syndromes due genes outside the rearranged region In our case a cryptic deletion is also present . To the best of our knowl- mRNA analysis and mutation analysis on the candidate genes is ongo- edge the present case represents the first description of simultaneous ing. presence of dup/del 8p. Clinical manifestations were mild compared to other patients with duplication of the same region of chromosome P03.097 8. Although there has been no strong evidence for linkage on chromo- screening of 314 patients with mental retardation and /or some 8 in any of the genome-wide linkage studies so far, the possibility multiple congenital abnormalities by array-cGH: experience of that this segment includes genes involved in the etiology of autism Geneva-Lausanne centers. should be further explored. F. Bena*1, D. Martinet*2, S. Gimelli1, B. Rapin2, C. Stouder1, N. Besuchet-Sch- mutz2, S. Dahoun1, P. Duca3, N. Brun4, A. Ferrarini2, M. A. Morris1, S. Jacque- P03.095 mont2, A. Giacobino1, F. Fellmann2, E. Roulet3, B. Conrad5, G. P. Ramelli3, S. characterization of a supernumerary marker chromosome using Fokstuen1, M. C. Addor2, A. Bottani1, J. S. Beckmann°2, S. Antonarakis°1; classical cytogenetics and acGH method : example of a partial 1Medical Genetics Division, Geneva Medical University and Hospitals, Geneva, 9p,15q trisomy and genetic/phenotypic correlations Switzerland, 2Service of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire F. Guerry, M. Addor, M. Pidoux, F. Niel, J. S. Beckmann, D. Martinet; Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Service de Génétique médicale, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland. Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Geneva Medical University and Hospitals, Geneva, We report on a 1 year old patient with mild dysmorphism and devel- Switzerland, 5Department of Human Genetics, Inselspital, Berne, Switzerland. opmental delay. *, ° equal contribution Born at term with normal growth parameters, he demonstrated since Array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) allows a high reso- the age of 6 months, growth and weight retardation. Delay in motor lution whole genome analysis of copy number changes and can reveal milestones was observed as the child did not sit alone at 9 months. He submicroscopic deletions and duplications. had also reduced social interactions. We present the results of aCGH analysis compiled from two Swiss G-banding showed the presence of a supernumerary chromosome centers including 314 probands with mental retardation, developmen- (47,XY,+mar), composed, as revealed by high-resolution aCGH, of tal delay, and/or congenital malformations. An oligo aCGH with an 27 Mb from region 9p24.3 to 9p21.2 and 12,3 Mb from 15q11.2 to average coverage of 40 kb (Agilent 244K) was used. De novo Copy 15q13.3. This derivative chromosome [der(15)t(9;15)(p21.2;q13.3)] Number Variants (CNV) were identified in 12.3% of the cases includ- was subsequently found to derive from a maternal reciprocal trans- ing 28 deletions, 11 duplications, and 2 terminal deletions associated location, very likely originating from a meiotic missegregation of 3:1 with proximal duplications. The copy number variants ranged from 39 tertiary type. kb to 13.7 Mb. In 126 (46%) out of the 314 examined patients, CNV Partial trisomy 9p21.2-9pter is not well defined but two patients with an were detected and required further analysis of parental genomic DNA. intrachromosomal duplication of chromosome arm 9p [dup(9)(p21p24)] In 42 of these cases, the observed variant (range 30 kb to 7.3 Mb) was demonstrated classical clinical manifestations of 9p trisomy with, in found to be inherited from a healthy parent. one case, features overlapping with Coffin-Siris syndrome. Our cohort also includes six cases of de novo apparently balanced Duplication of the 15q Prader-Willi /Angelman syndrome region is translocations in which aCGH did not detect cryptic genomic unbal- mainly associated with autistic behavior, mental retardation and de- ances at the breakpoints. As positive controls, 19 cases of unbalanced velopmental delay. Most reported cases with associated clinical symp- karyotypes analysed revealed large deletions and duplications. We toms have been linked to extra copies of 15q11-q13 from maternal conclude that aCGH substantially contributes to the diagnostic evalua- origin, paternally-derived duplications being generally associated with tions of patients, but interpretation of the results requires the collective a normal phenotype. Our results also support this observation. efforts of many laboratories and the examination of large numbers of Presence of potential extra copies of numerous genes from chromo- cases and controls. some 9p in addition to the duplicated 15q region renders a clinical prognosis difficult. Further assessments and clinical evolution of the P03.098 patient will help to better define the spectrum of effects of the diverse monozygotic twins discordant for submicroscopic chromosomal duplicated genes on the phenotype and on their interactions. anomalies detected by array cGH M. Rio, V. Malan, C. Ozilou, S. Gobin, M. de Blois, A. Munnich, L. Colleaux, M. P03.096 Vekemans; Array cGH analysis pinpoints to autosomal recessive Department of Genetic, Paris, France. syndromes due to genes outside the rearranged region Although discordant phenotypes in monozygotic twins used to be con- E. Katzaki, F. T. Papa, V. Disciglio, M. A. Mencarelli, V. Uliana, M. Pollazzon, A. sidered as an exception, an increasing number of reports indicate that Marozza, E. Sala Mariet, M. Bruccheri, F. Mari, A. Renieri; this phenomenon is not so rare. Most of reported patients have nu- Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy. merical chromosomal anomalies, with only few cases having structural A cohort of 213 mentally retarded patients has been analyzed by ar- chromosomal anomalies. Here, we report on the clinical and cytoge- ray-CGH with a resolution of about 100Kb (Agilent 44K). Thirty six netic details of 4-year-old female monozygotic twins with discordant cases (17%) were considered positive using the following criteria: i) phenotypes. de novo non polymorphic rearrangements (13/213 or 6%)(Am J Med Twin 1 exhibited global developemental delay with walk at 35 months, Genet A.2008;146A:1994-8 and A.2007;143A:858-65; Eur J Med Gen- absence of speech, and hyperactivity. Twin 2 had an autistic spectrum et 2007;50:21-32 and 2007;50:315-21 and 2008;51:409-16); ii) either disorder without motor delay. Extensive investigations including blood inherited (15q11.2q13.2) or de novo rearrangements of known syn- karyotype, metabolic screening and brain MRI were normal in both dromes (19/213 or 9%); iii) either inherited or de novo rearrangements twins. in susceptibility regions (16p11.2, 15q13.3) (4/213 or 2%). Since it has Molecular karyotyping in twin 1 identified a 2p25.3 deletion, further been proved that in mammals rearrangements may alter expression confirmed by FISH analysis on leukocytes in all cells. Interestingly, ar- of genes lying up to 10Mb from the breakpoints, we re-analyzed our ray-CGH was normal in twin 2 but FISH analysis performed on leuko- cohort paying attention to the surrounding regions. We describe here cytes using the same probes showed mosaicism with 33 % of deleted three cases (1.4%) with a possible autosomal recessive syndrome cells, 33 % of duplicated cells, and 33% of normal cells. Genotyping due to genes outside the rearranged region. In a sex reversal 46XX confirmed the monozygosity of the twins and ruled out uniparental di-Cytogenetics  somy for chromosome 2. We propose that the discordant chromosome MRKH subjects by direct sequencing and no pathogenic mutations imbalance may be due to a mitotic non-allelic recombination occuring were found. The present results suggest that 17q12 is a candidate during blastomeric divisions of a normal zygote. Such event will result region for a subset of MRKH syndrome individuals, with or without in 3 distinct cell populations whose proportion in each embryo formed renal defects. after separation from the inner cell mass, may differ, leading to dis- cordant chromosomal anomalies between twins. To our knowledge, P03.101 this is the first report of monozygotic twins with discordant phenotypes comparison of 1 mb BAc array and 105K oligo array in a clinical ascribed to a distinct submicroscopic rearrangement detected by ar- diagnostic setting. ray-CGH. P. D. Brady, N. Sohier, A. Boogaerts, C. Melotte, J. P. Fryns, J. Vermeesch; K.U. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. P03.099 Over the last five years, 1 Mb resolution BAC arrays have been imple- Detection of low-level mosaicisms by array cGH mented for the clinical diagnosis of patients with mental retardation I. Vanhevel1, V. Race1, G. Matthijs1, Y. Moreau2, J. Vermeesch1; and/or congenital malformations. Several higher resolution arrays have 1Centre of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Electrical Engi- since been developed. Here, we evaluate the clinical value of a higher neering, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. resolution oligonucleotide based array platform. The array contains Mosaic chromosomal aneuploidy has long been recognized as a 105,000 oligonucleotides (105K). The array consists of a backbone cause of abnormal prenatal and postnatal development. Molecular coverage of one oligo every 30kb and, in addition, targeted over 200 karyotyping or genome wide array comparative genomic hybridization syndromic regions and over 400 clinically relevant genes. 98 patients (CGH) is a technique enabling a rapid screen of the genome at high referred to the CME laboratory for aCGH were analysed using the Syn- resolution. Yet, the detection limit of array CGH to detect and evaluate drome Plus array, and the results compared to those obtained from the low-level mosaic gains or losses is not known. Here we report a signifi- in-house 1Mb BAC array currently in diagnostic use. 31 aberrations cant improvement of the array CGH limit of detection, with the analysis were detected in 23 patients using the 1Mb BAC array, providing a of “artificial” chromosome mosaicisms, created by making mixtures in diagnostic yield of ~23%. All aberrations were confirmed on the 105K varying proportions of genomic DNA samples of a normal diploid adult array. Currently, we are determining the sensitivity and specificity of female and an adult male with trisomy 21. For each mosaic sample, this array to eventually determine whether the arrays provide a higher array CGH was performed using commercial BAC arrays (CytoChip), diagnostic yield. The results of this analysis will be presented. and housemade 1Mb arrays. We describe a statistical power analysis methodology to assess the detection limit of the technology. Our data P03.102 demonstrate that it is possible to detect whole chromosome deletions Deletion of 7.9 Mb in the region 15q21.3q22.31 identified with to as low as 2%. The results of the array CGH analysis were evalu- sNPs array ated using Students t-tests and frequency distribution plots. Thus, F. Faletra1, M. Rocca2, L. Esposito3, L. Rubert4, E. Barbi4, P. Gasparini1,5, V. array CGH, which is based on genomic DNA extracted directly from Pecile2; uncultured peripheral blood, is an excellent method to detect low-level 1Genetica Medica-Dipartimento Scienze e Riproduzione dello Sviluppo, Trieste, mosaic chromosome abnormalities. Italy, 2SOC Genetica Medica, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 3CBM SCRL, Area Science Park, Basovizza, Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 4Clinica Pe- P03.100 diatrica, Università degli Studi di Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 5SOC Genetica Medica, Recurrent microdeletion at 17q12 as a cause of mayer- IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy. Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser (mRKH) syndrome: two case reports Unlike the small proximal 15q deletions causing Prader-Willi and/or L. Bernardini1, S. Gimelli2, C. Gervasini3, M. Carella1, A. Baban4, G. Frontino5, Angelman syndrome, distal or interstitial of long arm of chromosome G. Barbano6, M. T. Divizia7, L. Fedele5, A. Novelli1, F. Lalatta8, B. Dallapiccola1,9; 15 have rarely been described. Here we describe a 8-year-old male 1IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza and Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Ge- with a several mental retardation, speech delay and hypotonia. At netic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Division birth he was hospitalized in neonatology for abdomen significantly in- of Medical Genetics, San Paolo School of Medicine, University of Milan, Milan, creased in volume as a result of polycystic kidney. For this reason was Italy, 4Cardiology Unit, Molecular Genetics Unit, G. Gaslini Children’s Hospi- performed a right nephrectomy. At 5 ½ months to begin seizures, there tal, Genoa, Italy, 5Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Neonatology, was a slowdown in the stages of development and 18 months start- Fondazione Policlinico-Mangiagalli-Regina Elena, University of Milan, Milan, ing antiepileptic therapy. Physical examination revealed dysmorphic Italy, 6Department of Nephrology, G. Gaslini Children’s Hospital, Genoa, Italy, features (plagiocephaly, hypertelorism, telecanthus, palpebral fissures 7Molecular Genetics Unit, G. Gaslini Children’s Hospital, Genoa, Italy, 8Clini- slanting down, small nose with wide nasal bridge and bulbouse tip, cal Genetic Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Pediatrics, University of Milan, anteverted nares, short philtrum, anteverted lips, malformed teeth, Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, large and low-set ears). An electroencephalogram revealed a poorly Italy, 9Department of Experimental Medicine; Sapienza University, Rome, Italy. organized pattern by age. MRI revealed a smaller corpus callosum and Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome (MRKH; OMIM 277000) a slight increase in the cerebral ventricles, but no signs of infection or is a rare disorder, with a prevalence of 1:4,500 female births, charac- stroke were present. ENT examination revealed a laryngomalacia. An terised by congenital aplasia of the uterus and upper part of vagina, ultrasound examination revealed the suspected diagnosis of intestinal due to anomalous development of Müllerian ducts. MRKH can be dysplasia. The chromosomal analysis was performed on blood and isolated or associated to other malformations, including renal, skel- revealed a 46, XY karyotype. SNP array analysis, from a whole blood etal, hearing and heart defects. We report on two patients affected by sample, was carried out using SNPs array using the HumanCNV370- MRKH in which array-CGH analysis disclosed the deletion of the same Duo platform (Illumina, San Diego, California) according to manufac- 1.5 Mb segment at 17q12 region. The first had complete absence of turer’s protocol, and identified in our patient a 7.9 Mb deletion of chro- uterus and vagina, while the second presented with agenesis of the mosome 15q21.3-p22.31. Up to now three other cases with a similar upper part of vagina, right unicornuate uterus and non cavitating rudi- 15q monosomy have been reported, but the present case presents a mentary left horn associated with bilaterally multicystic kidneys. This much smaller deletion. deletion covers the candidate gene TCF2 and represents a recurrent rearrangement mediated by segmental duplications, already reported P03.103 in individuals with developmental kidney abnormalities and diabetes. clinical and molecular characterization of two patients with a TCF2 is the causative gene of Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young 6.75 mb overlapping deletion in 8p12p21 with two candidate loci type 5 (MODY5, OMIM137920) a disorder encompassing a wide clini- for congenital heart defects. cal spectrum which includes, in addition to MODY, abnormal renal de- M. H. Willemsen, N. de Leeuw, R. Pfundt, B. B. A. de Vries, T. Kleefstra; velopment. Interestingly, congenital malformations of the genital trait, Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, such as bicornuate uterus and Müllerian aplasia in females and epi- Nijmegen, The Netherlands. didymal cysts and bilateral agenesis of vas deferens in males, were Several 8p syndromes associated with deletions in different regions reported in patients with point mutations and/or deletions of TCF2. on 8p have been reported, although most cases are terminal dele- We carried out TCF2 gene screening in a group of 20 non-deleted tions encompassing the 8p23 region, It has been proven difficult toCytogenetics  link the separate clinical features to specific chromosomal locations mother. since the various different regions were just partly overlapping and not Conclusions: Partial duplication of 19p13.3 is a rare condition with only highly specific. However, critical regions for some features have been few case reports published. We overview the known published cases delineated, such as heart defects assigned to 8p23.1, encompassing and give a comparison with our patient. The influence of the known the GATA4 gene and GNRH1 in 8p21.2 as a candidate gene for hy- genes in the duplicated region will be discussed pogonadism. To further delineate the phenotypic spectrum of intersti- tial deletions proximal to 8p23, we studied the clinical and molecular P03.106 characteristics of two patients with a 6.75 Mb overlapping interstitial Identification of a Deletion on Chromosome 3p(12.3) by Whole deletion in the 8p12p21 region and compared these with 17 previously Genome Analysis in a Discordant monozygotic twins with a tail published cases with an overlapping deletion. The most common char- and multiple congenital Anomalies acteristics of interstitial deletions of proximal 8p are developmental de- O. Cogulu, E. Pariltay, A. Alpman, O. Altun, N. Kultursay, R. Ozyurek, F. Ozki- lay, postnatal microcephaly and growth retardation. Other frequently nay; reported findings are hypogonadism associated with haploinsufficien- Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. cy of GNRH1 and ocular problems. Congenital heart anomalies are Human tail (caudal appendage) is a rare dysmorphic feature and etio- also common and might be due to haploinsufficiency of NKX2-6 and/or logic mechanisms of human tale are not well understood. Here we NRG1, given that GATA4 is not involved in these proximal deletions. report monozygotic twin brothers who are discordant for the caudal The aforementioned clinical characteristics should be considered in appendage and multiple congenital anomalies. The index case was the care of patients with a proximal interstitial 8p12p21 deletion. referred to the hospital prematurity and intrauterine growth retardation. He was born to born to a healthy nonconsanguineous parents at 27 P03.104 weeks old. On his physical assessment on admission there were mi- A patient with de novo duplication of 13(q31.1--->qter) crognathia, beaked nose, hypospadias and caudal appendage. Cau- K. Karaer, A. Koç, M. A. Ergün, F. E. Perçin; dal appendage was 2,5-cm-tail-like structurte which was surrounded Gazi University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetic, Ankara, by a soft tissue mass at the level of S4. Pathologic examination of the Turkey. excised specimen revealed 1.2x1.1x1.0 cm, mature adipose tissue, We present a 6 month-old boy, who is the third child of consanguine- connective tissue and hyaline cartilage tissue bone tissue. Echocar- ous Turkish parents. He was born by spontaneous vaginal birth at 40 diography revealed juxtaductal aorta coarctation. Karyotype analysis weeks, and referred to our clinic due to facial dysmorphic features and showed 46,XY. FISH analysis for 22q deletion was negative. Mono- abnormalities. zygosity showed by 16 microsatellite markers. We performed genome On his physical examination; weight was 8500 g (<3th centile), height wide copy number analysis to monozygotic twins. We hybridized each was 80 cm (10th centile) and head circumference was 43.5 cm (<3th other for arrayCGH. By 384k whole genome analysis two neighboring centile). He had typical features including upsweep, brachycephaly, probes at 3p12.3 has got high Log2 ratios for deletion. High resolution prominent glabella, long eyelashes, dysplastic ears, high arched pal- of chromosome 3 array confirmed ~ 710 Kb deletion where ZNF717, ate, retrognathia and unilateral cryptorchidism. His ophthalmologic FRG2C and FAM86D genes are mapped. Although it has been report- examination showed bilateral leukocoria, iris colobomata, retrolental ed to be a variable region and epigenetic mechanisms are also blamed membrane and retinal detachment. Echocardiographic findings indi- in the etiology of human tail, this case is the first report presenting a cated perimembranous VSD. His karyotype revealed 46,XY,der(13) CNV in this region with multiple anomalies. by GTG banding. The chromosome abnormality occurred de novo, as both parents had normal karyotypes. To determine the origin of P03.107 the extra segment, we performed microarray analysis with a 50 K characterization of a double ring chromosome 4 mosaicism GeneChip array and it manifested a duplication in the q31.1-qter of associated with bilateral hip dislocation, cortical dysgenesis, chromosome 13. Accordingly, the karyotype was described as 46, XY, and epilepsy dup(13)(q31.1-->qter) Y. Soysal1, S. Balcı2, K. Hekimler1, T. Liehr3, E. Ewers3, J. Schouman4, T. Bui4, In this presentation, the clinical phenotype regarding the literature will N. İmirzalıoğlu1; be discussed, and we expect the presence of the pure dup (13)(q31.1- 1Afyon Kocatepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genet- ->qter) in our patient could provide an opportunity to delineate the phe- ics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine Depart- notypic features due this partial trisomy. ment of Clinical Genetics, Ihsan Doğramacı Children’s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 3Jena University Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology,Kollegi P03.105 engasse, Jena, Germany, 4Department of Molecular Medicine, Clinical Genetics Partial trisomy 19p in a girl with general retardation and Unit, Karolinska University Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden. dysmorphic signs We present the clinical and cytogenetic findings in a Turkish child with C. Duba1, B. Günther1, G. Webersinke2, A. C. Obenauf3; a de novo mosaic double ring chromosome 4, (46,XY,r(4)[83]/45,XY,- 1Humangenetische Untersuchungs- und Beratungsstelle, Landes- Frauen- und 4[6]/47,XY,r(4),+r(4)[5]/48,XY,r(4),+r(4),+dic r(4)[1]/46,XY[5]) karyo- Kinderklinik, Linz, Austria, 2Labor für Molekularbiologie und Tumorzytogenetik, type. The propositus is a 20-month-old male who was the product of 1. Interne Abteilung, Krankenhaus der Barmherzigen Shwestern, Linz, Austria, the first unremarkable pregnancy of nonconsanguineous parents of 3Institut für Humangenetik der Medizinischen Universität, Graz, Austria. 19-year-old mother and 28-year-old father. The baby was delivered Introduction: Array CGH is an essential tool for the detection of micro- vaginally at term and, at birth, weight was 1,700 g (<3rd centile), length scopically invisible chromosomal aberrations in retarded and dysmor- was 46 cm. The baby had feeding difficulties and vomiting problems. phic children. In a female child with general retardation and facial dys- He started walking at 2 years of age and language delay was seen. morphisms a microduplication 19p13.3 was identified. Chromosome While facial appearance was normal, ears were large, dysplastic, and analysis in the parents showed that the mother is carrier of a small had bilateral less configuration in the helices. The hands showed bilat- balanced translocation t(14;19)(p11;1;p13.3). eral clinodactyly of the 5th fingers. The patient’s lower extremities had Case report: AF, the second child of healthy parents, was born in May bilateral hip dislocation. He was mildly mentally retarded with epilepsy 2005 in the 38th week of gestation (38+0). She was small for gestation- starting at 8 months of age. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain al age (birth weight 1.825g, length 43cm, head circumference 28cm showed cortical dysplasia while EEG test was normal. Renal sonogra- - all < 3rd percentile) and showed facial dysmorphisms. At the age of phy and ophthalmic examination were normal, too. The karyotype was one year chromosome analysis revealed a normal female karyotype refined to 46,XY,r(4)(::p16.3->qter::)[67]/46,XY,r(4;4)(::p16.3->qter:: (400 band stage). AF was presented again at the age of 3 years and p16.3->qter::)[2]/46,XY[3] by multicolor banding (MCB) technique. The 2 months at our genetic counselling unit. Weight was 10,8 kg, height Wolf-Hirschhorn critical region was preserved. By array CGH the size 93cm and head circumference 38cm. She showed a developmental of the deletion was delineated as 900 kb in 4p16.3. Additionally, two delay and was able to speak only few words. small unreported copy number variants were detected on other chro- Methods and results: Oligonucleotid-based array CGH on Agilent 44K mosomes which do not contain genes associated with developmental arrays revealed a 4,68Mb microduplication in 19p13.3 deriving from delay. To the best of our knowledge the reported case is unique and a cytogenetically balanced translocation t(14;19)(p11.1;p13.3) in the provides further insights in complex rearrangements present espe-Cytogenetics  cially in chromosome 4. Supported in parts by Prochance 2008 of the lished partial duplication 5p combined with partial deletion 5p of de Friedrich Schiller University Jena 21007091 and DFG (LI 820/14-1). novo origin is the cause of described clinical picture that is typical for 5p duplication syndrome since the critical 5p13 region is also included P03.108 in the duplication. Girl with left hemiatrophy reveals confined mosaicisms for r(13) in fibroblasts P03.111 U. Altunoğlu, B. Karaman, S. Basaran, H. Kayserili; Report of a dysmorphic case from IRAN with a new finding, and Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genet- structural abnormality in the long arm of chromosome 1 ics, Istanbul, Turkey. z. hadipour, f. hadipour, f. behjati, y. shafeghati; In the background of pigmentary skin anomalies or asymmetry (usu- genetic department ,Sarem Woman Hospital and Research center, tehran, ally encountered in the form of hemihypertrophy) when combined with Islamic Republic of Iran. seizures and mental retardation, mosaicism for somatic chromosomal Background: Partial trisomy of 1q42 is one of the structural Chromo- rearrangements should be searched for. some abnormalities with a distinctive phenotype. We report a seven-year-old girl with total left hemiatrophy, micro- Material and Method: Here in we report a 1-year-old Iranian girl re- cephaly, facial dysmorphism and neuromotor retardation. The face ferred to our genetics center because of neuro-developmental delay was asymmetric with ipsilateral microphtalmia and iris coloboma. and dysmorphic findings. Hypertelorism and low-set ears were also noted. Karyotype was nor- Cardinal features were: trigonocephaly, microcephaly, spastisity, sunk- mal in 150 metaphases from peripheral blood lymphocytes. Cytoge- en eyes, prominent forehead, low set and malformed ears (with poste- netic analysis of the cultured skin fibroblasts revealed mosaicism for rior rotation and abnormal helix), micrognathia, long philtrum, carplike ring chromosome 13, 46,XX/46,XX,r(13)(p11q14) [35/15] on the left mouth, frontal bossing, high palate, high nasal bridge, high arched eye- side and [12/8] on the right side of the body. By FISH studies using brows, short neck, strabismus, and asymmetric face and locked jaw, D13S1825 probe spesific to the q telomere of the chromosome 13, no abnormal and small hands and feet, brachydactily of fingers and toes, signal on the ring chromosome was obtained. The uncultured periph- flat feet, congenital hearth disease, dysplastic nails, simian crease in eral blood cells were checked out with this probe, and in each of the right hand and abnormal sole in the left hand. 300 interphase nuclei, 2 signals were observed. Chromosme study: according to the MR, and MCA we carried out chro- Hemiatrophy is a rare clinical finding, and not amongst the clinical find- mosome analysis by high resolution GTG banding technique. The re- ings associated with partial deletions of 13q. To the best of our knowl- sult was a structural abnormality, a duplication in1q42 region. Parents edge, our patient is the second case for somatic mosaicism of 13q, but were investigated and they were normal. unique for hemiatrophy. Conclusion: our study showed that this chromosome Abnormality was de novo in this case. So, we should consider structural and numerical P03.109 chromosome abnormalities in the patients, with MCA+MR. Microceph- chromosomal aberrations among patients with mental aly is a new finding for this locus, and was not reported before. retardation L. Minaycheva1, O. Salukova1,2, L. Nazarenko1, S. Fadyushina1, S. Vovk1, N. P03.112 Sukchanova1, N. Sukhanova1, N. Torchova1, J. Yakovleva1; A case with mosaic Ring chromosome 18 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State H. Şamlı, A. Özgöz, F. Mutlu İçduygu, K. Hekimler, N. İmirzalıoğlu, Y. Sıvacı; Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genet- Cytogenetic investigation among children with mental retardation of ics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey. different degree was performed. In total of 40 children (fourteen girls The 11 year old case was the second pregnancy and the second child and twenty-six boys) aged 4-14 years were examined. For the most of the family, was born full-term with a birth weight of 3100 g. At the part (80%) mental retardation coupled with congenital malformations time of the birth, the age of both parents were 24. Growth retardation and dysmorphisms. of the case was realized at the age of 1,5. The case with congenital Cytogenetic analysis of G-differential staining chromosomes (G- malformation, mental retardation, short stature, high palate, pectus bands) has revealed abnormalities among 30 % patients. The numeri- excavatus, big and low set ears, bilateral strabismus, distinct front inci- cal abnormalities of sex chromosomes were detected among three sors, hypertelorism, flat broad nose root, wide nostrils, long frenulum, patients (25%). It was represented by monosomy and polysomy of pes planus in both feet, overlapping of the second toe onto the third X-chromosome. Two patients (17%) had Fragile X mental retardation toe, frequent infection, speech defect was operated at the age of two syndrome (OMIM 300624). Structural balanced (25%) and unbalanced due to PDA. The karyotype of the case was detected to be 46,XX/ (33%) chromosomal aberrations were diagnosed in other patients 46,XX,r(18) (25% mosaic) in the chromosome analysis performed. (58%). In our study we found rare chromosomal rearrangements: The classical type of the ring chromosome formation is by the fusion of 46,X,t(X;13)(q11;q12), 46,XX,del(18)(p1.1), 46,XX, dup(8)(q12q13). breaks occured in both arms of the chromosome and loss of the distal Thus, our investigation suggested that patients with mental and speech fragments. The ring of the chromosome 18 is rare among ring chro- disabilities, autism and epileptic syndrome needs in additional exami- mosomes. The typical clinical signs of the 18p and 18q Syndrome rate nations, which permit hereditary to diagnose hereditary pathology. depend on the size of the deletions in 18p and 18q. r(18) phenotype is characterized by growth retardation, mental retardation and non-spe- P03.110 cific abnormalities. Facial dysmorphism and malformations may also 5p duplication syndrome: a rare multiple congenital anomaly- be associated. As a result of FISH analysis performed using Cep 18 retardation syndrome caused by partial duplication (5) (p15.2- (Aqua) ve Telomer 18q (Red) probes, the karyotype of the case was p12) combined with partial deletion (5) (pter-p15.31) verified to be 46,XX/46,XX,r(18) (25% mosaic). M. Stopar-Obreza; University Children’s Hospital Ljubljana, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, P03.113 Ljubljana, Slovenia. mandibular dysmorphology in prenatal trisomy 18 We report on an infant with multiple congenital anomalies, develop- L. Caspersen1, U. Engel2, I. Kjaer1; mental delay, abnormal neurological and dysmorphic signs. 1Department of Orthodontics, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Pathol- He is the first and only child of a healthy nonconsanquinous parents ogy, Hvidovre University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. with no positive family history regarding congenital diseases. He’s Introduction: Among 2nd trimester aborted foetuses, trisomy 18 is phenotype is characterised by failure to thrive, developmental retarda- one of the most common autosomal trisomies. By ultrasonography it tion, severe muscular hypotonia, congenital heart anomaly, agenesis may be difficult to distinguish between trisomy 18 and trisomy 13. Ac- of corpus calosum, pronounced macrodolichocephaly, unusual face cording to Keeling (1994), the prenatal trisomy 18 head is globular in with hypertelorism and bulbous nose with flat bridge, full lips, long fin- shape, with hypertelorism, a broad up-turned nose, micrognathia and gers, limb abnormalities and hearing loss. With combination of band- backwards sloping abnormal ears. Short nasal bones have also been ing studies and FISH analyses the karyotype 46, XY, der (5)dup(5) reported. (p15.2-p12) del(5) (pter-p15.31) was identified. This so far unpub- The purpose of this preliminary study is to add phenotypic character-Cytogenetics  istics to prenatal trisomy 18 by evaluating the mandibular morphology, obesity, craniofacial typical dysmorphy (microcephaly, flat midface, easily recognisable by ultrasound. down-slanted palpebral fissures, proeminent nose, prognathism, thin Material and methods: Lateral faxitron radiographs of 13 postmortem upper lip, dental anomalies), short neck, brachydactyly of hand and trisomy 18 foetuses (mean GA=17 weeks) were compared with simi- feets, hypogonadism (micropenis and crypthorhidism), hypopigmenta- lar radiographic exposures of 8 postmortem normal foetuses (mean tion (vitiligo) and severe mental retardation. Paclinical evaluation: ECG GA=16 weeks). The mandibular morphology in the lateral view was revealed prolonged QT interval; EEG indicate abnormal brainwave. expressed by measuring the mandibular angle (also named the gonial Ecocardiography: subaortic SDV (Septal Ventricular Defect), tricuspid angle), which is the angle between the tangent to the mandibular basis insufficiency, pulmonary arterial hypertension, cardiomyopathy. and the tangent to the posterior contour of the mandible. The karyotype was abnormal: 46,XY,del(18)(q21.3→qter). The karyo- Results: Gonial angle in trisomy 18: Mean 154.4º (SD=5.8). Gonial types of both parents are normal. angle in normal foetuses: Mean 135.0º (SD=6.1). Tested by unpaired In conclusion, the patient presents a de novo anomaly (18 q terminal t-test P<0.001. deletion). The risk of the parents to have a new affected child with the Conclusion: The size of the gonial angle, measured in this preliminary same anomaly is very low. study, is significantly larger in trisomy 18 when compared to normal. The gonial angle is easy to recognize and measure during ultrasonog- P03.116 raphy and accordingly, this enlarged angle seems to be a new valuable 18q deletion syndrome - case report dysmorphic feature in trisomy 18. A. Arghir1, M. Budisteanu2,1, S. Chirieac1, G. Cardos1, A. Lungeanu1; References: Keeling JW Fetal Pathology. Churchill Livingstone, 1994. 1„Victor Babes” National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia” Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry, Bucharest, Romania. P03.114 18q- syndrome represents a rare deletion syndrome characterized Report of two iranian Patients with 13q partial monosomy, by mental retardation and congenital malformations. In a majority of mental retardation and dysmorphism patients cytogenetic studies reveal terminal 18q deletions of variable F. Behjati1,2, A. Saremi3, I. Bagherizadeh1, P. Sarkhayl1, A. Saberi4, F. Mojta- size, with only few patients having interstitial deletions or more com- hedi1, Z. Hadipour1, F. Hadipour1, S. Razavi1, N. Mohammadkhani1, M. Yazdan- plex cryptic rearrangements. bakhsh5, Y. Shafeghati1,2; We report on a 3 year-old boy with mental retardation, cerebral dys- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Sarem Women’s Hospital & Sarem Cell myelination and dysmorphic features, bearing a distal deletion of 18q: Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Research Cen- 18q21-qter. ter, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Karyotype analysis was performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes, Republic of Iran, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Sarem Women’s by GTG banding. Painting probe for chromosome 18 and bacterial arti- Hospital & Sarem Cell Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, ficial chromosome probe (BAC-FISH probe) for 18q23 (RP11-248M19) 4Welfare (Behzisty) Organization, Karaj, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5School of were applied for molecular characterization. Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Islamic Republic Clinical features at presentation were severe mental retardation, se- of Iran. vere speech delay, hypotonia, facial dysmorphism (broad forehead, We describe two patients referred to our center because of mental broad nasal bridge, thin lips, micrognathia) and clynodactily of 5th retardation (MR) and dysmorphism. finger. Brain MRI showed cerebral myelination defects. Severe hypo- The first Patient is a five year old boy with non related parents. He has gammaglobulinemia, responsible for repeated febrile episodes, was moderate to severe MR and developmental delay. His clinical features also detected. include IUGR, microcephaly, hypospadias, club foot, speech delay, Chromosomal studies revealed a deletion of the distal fragment of ptosis, syndactyly, equine valgus, strabismus, cleft palate, simple ears, chromosome 18q ranging from band q21 to qter. Painting FISH for micrognathia, and high nasal bridge. Routine cytogenetics investiga- chromosome 18 ruled out cryptic rearrangements involving other chro- tion showed a terminal deletion of the long arm on chromosome 13, mosomes. The terminal 18q deletion was confirmed by FISH with sub- described as 46, XY,del(13)(q32)de novo. telomeric probe RP11-248M19. The second patient is a twelve year old girl with consanguineous par- In conclusion, a large terminal deletion of 18q was detected in a pa- ents. She has moderate to severe MR. Her clinical features include tient displaying major phenotypic features of 18q- syndrome. Further developmental delay, upper limb muscle weakness, high nasal bridge, delineating the deleted region in our case might contribute to a better wide mandibular angle, high arched palate, thin and long face, down phenotype-genotype correlation. slanted palpebral feature, low hair line, webbed neck, expressionless Acknowledgments: The authors thank Prof. Jean Michel Dupont and face, and scapula allata. Routine karyotype analysis showed an inter- Mrs. Dominique Blancho for kindly providing BAC-FISH probes. Fi- stitial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 13, described as 46,XX, nancial support: National Research Program PN II, Project 42-130, del(13)(q12.3q14.3)de novo. Most of the clinical features of these two CAPACITATI 29/2007-2009 Project. patients overlap with other reported cases of 13q partial monosomy. Complementary works for further elaboration of the deleted segments P03.117 are underway. 5q12 proximal deletion : delineation of a phenotype including ocular findings. P03.115 S. JAILLARD1,2, C. Dubourg3,2, M. Le Brun4, J. Andrieux5, L. Lazaro6, C. Henry1, A report of a new case with de novo 18 q deletion syndrome L. Pasquier6,2, J. Lucas1, C. Bendavid7, J. Mosser7, V. David3,2, G. Plessis4, S. L. I. Butnariu, E. Gorduza, I. Ivanov, M. Covic; Odent6,2; “Gr. T. Popa” University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iasi, Department of Medical 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Pontchaillou, RENNES, France, 2CNRS Genetics, Iasi, Romania. UMR 6061, Université de Rennes 1, IFR140, Rennes, France, 3Laboratoire de A deletion involving the long arm of chromosome 18 may be associ- Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Pontchaillou, RENNES, France, 4Laboratoire de ated with a variable spectrum of phenotypic findings. Size of deletion Cytogénétique post-natale, CHU Clémenceau, Caen, France, 5Laboratoire de appears to correlate with severity of phenotype. The major clinical fea- Génétique Mécicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandres, Lille, France, 6Service de tures are postnatal growth retardation and short stature, mental retar- Génétique Médicale, CHU Hôpital Sud, RENNES, France, 7CNRS UMR 6061, dation, typical facial dysmorphy (midfacial hypoplasia with deep set Université de Rennes 1, IFR140, RENNES, France. eyes, ocular anomalies, epicanthal folds, carp-shaped mouth, cleft lip/ Array-CGH enables the detection of submicroscopic chromosomal palate, proeminet antihelix and/or tragus, other ears anomalies), be- deletions and duplications and lead to an accurate delineation of the havioural problems, hypotonia and poor coordination. Other anomalies imbalances, raising the possibility to do genotype-phenotype correla- are: short extremities, hygonadism, urethral reflux and seizures. tions, to identify minimal critical regions and candidate genes for a pat- We present a case with the novo 18q deletion syndrome: S.C., male, tern of clinical features. We report here three patients sharing common 16 years old who present an episode of epistaxis and hematemesis. clinical features (psychomotor retardation, coarse facies and ocular We note normal pregnancy. He was diagnosed with congenital heart motricity anomalies), with a proximal 5q deletion identified by oligo ar- defect (VSD, pulmonary hypertension), afebrile seizures and Ig A de- ray-CGH. The deletions are from 5.7 to 15.3-Mb in size and occurred ficiency at 7 months old. Clinical evaluation at 16 years old revealed: de novo. A common 2.63-Mb deleted region can be defined in 5q12Cytogenetics  (59.390.122 to 62.021.754 Mb for 5pter, hg18). Proximal 5q cytogenet- P03.120 ically visible deletions including 5q12 have been reported in patients Results of 3248 cytogenetic analyses: a retrospective study in with psychomotor retardation and multiple congenital anomalies. No karyotype abnormalities recognizable phenotype has been described but eye findings (ptosis, M. Mackic-Djurovic, I.Aganovic-Musinovic, S. Ibrulj; epicanthus, astigmatism, esotropia and nystagmus) were observed in Center for Genetics, Medical faculty, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. these interstitial deletions. The common deleted region in our cases Center for genetics from Medical faculty in Sarajevo have finished includes 11 genes, some of them are listed in the OMIM database. 3248 karyotype analyses from peripheral blood lymphocytes - and KIF2A, which encodes a kinesin superfamily protein, is particularly in- using GTG -band technique during last ten years. 360 chromoso- teresting as it plays an important role in the suppression of the growth mopathies were reported, 254 somatic and 53 gonad aberrations. Sy. of axonal collateral branches and is involved in normal brain develop- Turner was the most frequent gonad aberration and was reported in ment. Ocular findings seem to be common clinical features, even if 31 patient, Klineffelter Sy was the second most frequent gonad aber- they are not specific, in the 5q12 microdeletion. Identification of ad- rations and was reported in 12 patients, 4 patients were with 47,XXX ditional cases of deletions involving the 5q12 region will probably allow karyotype, 3 patients with testicular feminization and 3 patients with more accurate genotype-phenotype correlations. fragile X syndrome. From 254 somatic aberrations, trisomies including mosaic types were P03.118 reported in 228 cases and 26 were with somatic structure aberrations. complex eye malformation in a fetus with trisomy 6p22p24 The most frequent was Sy Down (Trisomy 21) in total of 216 patients, A. A. Aboura, C. Michot, A. C. Tabet, R. Guilherme, A. Verloes, A. Delezoide, Sy Edwards (Trisomy 18) in 4 patients, Trisomy 13 in 2 patients and F. Guimiot; Trisomy 22 in 2 patients. Translocations and deletions were occurring Robert debré, Bd Sérurrier, France. individually and de novo, 26 of these patients were identified. We report a fetus with additional material on chromosome 6p detected on routine amniocentesis for maternal age in a 39 years old woman. P03.121 Fetal ultrasonographic examination was normal. Both parents had nor- characterization of a complex chromosomal rearrangement mal karyotypes. A medical termination of pregnancy was performed at involving chromosome 10. 31 WG. At autopsy, the fetus was eutrophic and had no major visceral M. De Blois1,2, C. Hyon1, S. Noel1, V. Malan1,2, S. Chevallier1, A. Munnich1,2, M. anomaly. The pancreas appeared short and the right lung was bilobed. Picq1, C. Turleau1,2, M. Vekemans1,2; In the brain, olfactory bulbs were absent and there was a fusion of 1Necker Enfants Malades hospital, Paris, France, 2Universite Paris Descartes, meningeal membrane in the anterior part of cortex. At microscopic Paris, France. examination, we found a duplication of the ependymal canal in the Complex chromosomal rearrangements are rare. Here we report on lumbar region of the spine and bilateral eye coloboma with dysplas- a young baby girl born at 37 weeks of gestation. On clinical examina- tic retina. The karyotype was: arr cgh(RP11-304M10---RP1-67M12)x3 tion, the following dysmorphic features were observed: hypertelorism, using array-cgh BAC (4400 clones - Perkin-Elmer Cytochip). blepharophimosis, bilateral epicanthus, retrognathia and a short neck. The 6p22p24 region contained several genes, in particular KIF13A (ki- The mouth is small with a long and flat philtrum. She has small and nesin family member 13A) and NUP153 (nucleoporin) genes, whose square low-set ears. The fingers are long and thin with a II-IV membra- gain is known to be involved in eye malformations. We hypothesize nous syndactyly and a II and V clinodactyly. Rocker-bottom feet and a that overexpression of these genes may play a role in the ocular anom- II-III syndactyly were observed. Congenital heart defects (atrial septal aly observed in our case. defect and ventricular septal defect), abnormal genitalia (clitoris hyper- trophy) and bilateral renal dysplasia were diagnosed. P03.119 Cytogenetic analyses using G and R banding techniques identified a A new case of chromosomal translocation: t(4;10)(q35;q22.1)tras der(10) chromosome. FISH study using a chromosome painting (wcp nmited from mother to daughter 10) probe excluded other chromosomal material in the rearrangement. E. V. Gorduza1, L. Paduraru1, L. Butnariu1, M. Gramescu1, C. Bujoran2, M. Further FISH studies using subtelomeric probes showed that on the Panzaru1, L. Caba1, M. Stamatin1, M. Covic1; der(10) chromosome, 10qtel was replaced by 10ptel. In addition an 1”Gr. T. Popa” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2”Sf. Maria” inverted duplication of the 10q25.3q26.2 region was observed. Fur- Children Hospital, Iasi, Romania. ther studies revealed that the der(10) chromosome also underwent a We presented a new case with chromosomal translocation, discovered pericentric inversion (10p12.31q31.1). As parental chromosomes were first in a plurimalformate child. The girl is the first child of a healthy, normal, the child’s karyotype was interpreted as : 46,XX,der(10)del(q2 young, nonconsanguinous couple. The delivery was produced at term, 6.3)dup(q26.2q25. 3)dup(pter)inv(10)(p12.31q21.1) de novo. but child presented an intrauterine growth retardation (1400 gr weight, In summary we report on a dysmorphic child carrying a de novo invert- 46 cm height and 28 cm cranium perimeter) neonatal jaundice and ed duplication associated with a deletion of the 10qtel. From previous respiratory distress. The APGAR score was 4. The clinical examination publications one can correlate the child’s phenotype to the inverted revealed: microcephaly, flat face, bilateral microophthalmia (confirmed duplication of the 10q25.3q26.2 region. by ophtalmologic examination) short nose, flat, short philtrum, micro- Finally as 10ptel material replaced 10qtel material, we propose that a retrognatia, short neck, bilateral syndactily of II and III toes, genital hy- transient ring chromosome 10 was formed to stabilize 10qtel. poplasia, and muscular hypotonia. Cardiologic examination revealed a systolic murmur. Thorax radiography revealed a “wooden shoe heart” P03.122 with an important left ventricular hypertrophy. Echocardiography indi- investigation of cytogenetic causes of congenital heart disease cated a small ventricular septal defect, open foramen ovalis, tricuspid- in Pediatric cardiology clinic tg mures, Romania ian insufficiency and persistence of arterial duct. The karyotype of girl C. Banescu1, R. Toganel2, I. Pascanu1, K. Csep1, C. Duicu3; revealed an abnormal chromosomal formula: 46,XX,der(4;10)(q35;q22 1Genetic Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, Ro- .1). For establish if the abnormality is de novo or inherited we made the mania, 2Pediatric Cardiology Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. chromosomal analysis in parents. The karyotype of father was normal, Mures, Romania, 3Pediatric Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, but mother presented a balanced translocation: 46,XX,t(4;10)(q35;q22 Tg. Mures, Romania. .1). Because the moved fragment of chromosome 4 is very small and Objective: The aim of this study was to investigate chromosomal ab- moved fragment of chromosome 10 represent about half of long arm, normalities in children with congenital heart disease (CHD) from the we estimate that couple have a 10% risk to have another abnormal Pediatric Cardiology Clinic Tg Mures, Romania. child with an important partial 10 trisomy associated with insignificant Material and method: 70 children with CHD were included in this study partial 4 monosomy. For this reason we indicate a prenatal chromo- over a period of 2 years (2007-2009). The study included children with somal analysis in next pregnancies of couple. This case reveals the a diagnosis of congenital heart disease confirmed by postnatal echo- importance of chromosomal analysis in neonates with plurimalforma- cardiography. In cultured lymphocytes obtained from peripheral blood, tive syndrome and parents of children with abnormal karyotype. the chromosomes were stained by the GTG banding technique. Chro- mosome analysis was performed following ISCN guidelines. Results: Of the 70 cases studied, 42 (60%) patients revealed obvi-Cytogenetics  ous chromosomal abnormalities; the most part of them have involved (percentile 25). He had a healthy brother. autosomes (eg. trisomy 21, trisomy 18, Cri du Chat syndrome, peri- The baby had typical clinical features of trisomy 21, epispadias and centric inversion of chromosome 9) while only a few involved sex chro- bilateral syndactily of 4th-5th toes. The patient didn’t has conditions like mosomes (eg. Turner syndrome; polisomy X). Several cases have thyroid, digestive and cardiac congenital disease. been diagnosed with various genetic syndromes: Williams syndrome, Chromosome study from peripheral lymphocytes using GTG-banding DiGeorge syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome, Saethre-Chotzen showed mosaicism 47,XY,+21[70]/48,XXY,+21[30] analyzed in 100 syndrome, Klippel Feil syndrome, based on the clinical features. 28 metaphases. Molecular analyses were used to verify the cytogenetic patients with congenital heart diseases and different dysmorphic fea- result. This Down syndrome case with a rare cytogenetic abnormality tures / developmental delay / multiple congenital anomalies revealed as a double aneuploidy demonstrated typical Down syndrome mani- no numerical or structural chromosomal abnormalities. festation along with additional features. Conclusion: Genetic abnormalities are an important cause of congeni- Theories concerning the origin of mixed autosomal-gonosomal triso- tal heart disease in children. Cytogenetic analysis should be the first mies are also discussed. step in the protocol of investigation in all children with congenital heart disease and multiple anomalies. P03.125 Acknowledgements: The study was realized in the research program A de novo double translocations 3;14 and 6;20 in a patient with project Mami no 41-042/2007 financed by the Romanian Ministery of mental retardation and microcephaly Education, Research and Youth. B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, A. Utkus1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius, Lith- P03.123 uania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital Santariškių interstitial de novo deletion, del(4)(p15.2p16.2), indentified in a Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. case with non-syndromic mental retardation The presence of two independent apparently balanced reciprocal C. Sorina Mihaela1, A. Arghir1, D. Le Tessier2, M. Budisteanu3, A. Lebbar2, G. translocations in one person is extremely rare. Cardos4, C. Burloiu3, A. Coussement2, J. Dupont2, A. Lungeanu4; Here we report a patient with developmental delay and microcephaly 1„Victor Babes” National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, Bucharest, who was found to have a karyotype with two apparently balanced de Romania, 2APHP, Cochin Hospital, Cytogenetique Laboratory, “Paris Des- novo reciprocal translocations. Chromosomal rearrangements involv- cartes” University, Paris, France, 3“Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia” Clinical Hospital of ing four chromosomes and four breakpoints. The proband was a 3- Psychiatry, Bucharest, Romania, 4„Victor Babes” National Institute of Pathology, month-old male who was the product of the first multiple pregnancy Bucharest, Romania. (twins) of 22-year-old mother and a 28- year-old father. The parents Interstitial and terminal deletion of chromosome 4p have been pre- were healthy and no consanguineous. The patient was referred to clin- viously described in association with variable phenotypes. The most ical geneticist for developmental retardation when he was 3 months well defined condition is Wolf Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) generated old. His phenotypic findings included microcephaly, small forehead, by 4p16.3 deletions. More proximal deletion, without WHS phenotype, closed fontanelles, relatively log ears. but associated with varying degrees of mental retardation, were also Blood cultures were harvested by standard methods using thymidine reported. block to achieve mitotic synchronization. Cytogenetic analysis was We report on a 2 year-old girl with dysmorphic features (but lacking the performed from GTG banded metaphases. Chromosomal analysis facial characteristics of WHS), moderate mental retardation, spastic of peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed a karyotype of 46,XY,t(3;1 tetraparesis and congenital heart malformation, exhibiting an intersti- 4)(q12;q11.2),t(6;20)(q21?p11.2) in all cells. Cytogenetic study of the tial deletion 4p15.2-16.2. proband’s parents and twin sister showed normal karyotypes. GTG banding, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and array-based Developmental delay and microcephaly are probably due to small de- comparative genomic hybridization (BAC array-CGH) were performed. letions or gene disruption at one or more breakpoints. Cytogenetic slides were obtained from peripheral blood cultures, by standard protocols. For FISH investigations painting probes WC4 P03.126 (Kreatech) and BAC probes (RP11-338K13, RP11-472B18) were Identification of supernumerary marker chromosome 15 used. BAC array-CGH using CytoChip was applied on DNA extracted S. Midyan1, G. Shakhsuvaryan1, B. Sukhudyan2, L. Nazaryan3, R. S. Moller4,3, from peripheral blood with Wizard Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Pro- Z. Tumer5, N. Tommerup3; mega). 1Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Joint Medical Center and In- Classical cytogenetic analysis revealed an interstitial 4p deletion. stitute of Child and Adolescent Health, Yerevan, Armenia, 3Wilhelm Johannsen Painting probes for chromosome 4 excluded rearragements involving Centre for Functional Genome Research, Institute of Cellular and Molecular others chromosomes. BAC array-CGH was applied for a precise de- Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Danish Epilepsy lineation of the deleted region. Proximal and distal breakpoints were Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, 5Kennedy Center, Glostrup, Denmark. established at 4p15.2 and 4p16.2 respectively. Array-CGH result were Among cases with supernumerary marker chromosomes the majority further confirmed by FISH with BAC RP11-338K13 and RP11-472B18 represents the derivatives of chromosome 15. More frequently these probes. Parental karyotypes were normal. derivatives are presented with inv dup (15) that cause the tetrasomy of To our knowledge, an association of the described phenotype and 15q. Less information is published concerning partial trisomy of 15q. del(4)(p15.2p16.2) has not been described so far. Our results also In this study we report identification of a marker chromosome in a fe- strongly support the need for use of various cytogenetic and advanced male patient, who was brought to clinical attention because of epilepsy molecular techniques, for a correct phenotype/genotype correlation. at age 8 months. She did not have any other clinical features. Reex- amination at the age of 1.8 years the patient showed psychomotor P03.124 retardation. She could not sit and stand without assistance. Apart from Double aneuploidy mosaicism in one Romanian male case left eye strabismus she did not have substantial dysmorphic charac- V. N. Plaiasu1, G. Motei1, A. Costin1, D. Ochiana1, E. Neagu2, D. Iancu2, B. teristics. Classical cytogenetic analysis revealed presence of a super- Iancu2; numerary marker chromosome. Due to the clinical presentation the 1IOMC Prof.dr.Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania, 2National Legal Medicine marker chromosome was suspected to be derived from chromosome Institute Mina Minovici, Bucharest, Romania. 15. WCP-FISH confirmed that the marker chromosome was derived The co-occurrence of two numerical from chromosome15. chromosomal abnormalities in same individual is relatively rare. The We characterized the marker chromosome further with FISH analysis purpose of this communication is to report another case with double using BAC clones mapping to chromosome bands 15q15.2; 15q21.1; aneuploidy discovered as the result of the evaluation of an infant for 15q21.2. The results suggested that the BAC clone RP11-626N18 was possible Down syndrome. present on the derivative chromosome, while the BAC clones RP11- We present a male neonate, who was born to a 30 year old gravida 626N18 and RP11-235L4 (mapping to bands 15q21.1 and 15q21.2, two parity one mother, at 36 weeks of gestation, by cesarean section. respectively) were deleted. We discuss the symptoms of our case The pregnancy was uneventful. At birth, the Apgar score was good. comparing with other cases with partial trisomy15q to clarify the mini- The patient’s birth weight was 2750g (percentile 10), body length 49cm mal region responsible for these symptoms developing.Cytogenetics  For further characterization of the derivative chromosome we will ap- drome. ply array-CGH analysis. This may help identification of genes, dosage The three patients have cardiac defect , the first case have a minor abnormalities of which may result in neurological and developmental form of Ebstein disease , the second one has ventricular septal defect, disorders. the third one has auricular and ventricular septal defect and pulmonary stenosis. P03.127 None of our patients has thrombocytopenia. Report of a familial inversion All the deletions included band q23.3 of the long arm of chromosome F. Nasiri, M. Rahnama, F. Mortezapour, F. Manoochehri, F. Razazian, M. Zama- 11 and are de novo. nian, F. Mahjoubi; The 11 q terminal deletion disorder appear to be a contiguous deletion Iranian blood transfusion organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. gene disorder With molecular cytogenetic we will better delineate the A couple was referred to us for chromosomal analysis because they critical regions and precise the correlation genotype phenotype and had a child with growth delay. the identification of candidate causing genes. Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set up in RPMI1640 sup- plemented with 20% FBS. High resolution chromosome banding was P03.130 performed. Variable phenotype of 18p monosomy in two patients In all cells analyzed an inversion on the p arm of chromosome (1) of A. Singer1, J. Rosenblat2, C. Vinkler3; both husband and wife was detected. The karyotypes were assessed 1Genetic Institute, Barzilai Medical Center, Ashkelon, Israel, 2Genetic Institute as 46,XX,inv(1)(p31;p34.3) and 46,XY,inv(1)(p31;p34.3). Kaplan Medical Center, Rehovot, Israel, 3Genetic Institute, Wolfson Medical Therefore chromosome analysis was recommended for their affected Center, Holon, Israel. child. Interestingly the same inversion was found for the affected child, Monosomy 18p ( de Grouchy Syndrome 1), is a rare disorder. The and indeed one of the sisters of this male patient had the same inver- incidence is around 1:50,000 live born infants. The phenotype includes sion. mild to severe mental retardation, speech delay and short stature. The phenotypic abnormalities presented in this child could be caused Various phenotypic expressions have been attributed to the deleted by the possible deletion of the important genes located at the break- regions on the short arm of chromosome 18. point regions or it could just be a coincidence. We describe two patients with 18p monosomy who demonstrate that Chromosome study for all the siblings of this couple was recommend- hemizygosity of the genes located on the short arm of chromosome 18 ed. In addition prenatal diagnosis for the future pregnancies of the all cannot predict similar phenotype. Rather, multiple genetic and environ- the carriers of this inversion was recommended. mental factors contribute most probably, to the spectrum phenotype. Patient 1 is a 16 year old girl from Ethiopian origin who was born at P03.128 term to non-consanguineous healthy parents. She presented to our Unusual cases of trisomy 9p and tetrasomy 9p Detected clinic because of severe mental retardation, poor speech and com- Postnatally munication abilities. She has short stature and short webbed neck. No K. Adamová1, P. Čapková1, M. Holzerová2, M. Jarošová2, V. Curtisová1, A. other remarkable dysmorphic features were noticed. Šantavá1; Patient 2, is a four years old girl born prematurely at 26 weeks gesta- 1Department of Medical Genetics and Foetal Medicine, University Hospital and tion, to healthy unrelated parents. She presented with short stature, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Department of Haematology, mild mental retardation, speech delay and remarkable nasal-voice. University Hospital and Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic. Karyotype analysis in both cases revealed deletion of the short arm of Isochromosomes of autosomes are relatively rare chromosomal aber- chromosome 18, with patient 2 having complete deletion while patient rations. Isochromosome formation results when one arm of a chromo- 1 has near complete deletion. some is lost and the remaining arm is duplicated. An isochromosome These two patients demonstrate the complexity of the factors which has morphologically identical genetic information in both arms. The determine the final phenotype of monosomy 18p. Genetic counseling clinical impact on patient depends on the type of the chromosome and should take into consideration the variable expression of this deletion the length of the duplicated segment. Supernumerary isochromosomes syndrome and the importance of comprehensive medical and educa- may result in autosomal trisomy or much rarely in tetrasomy which has tional assessment, before a definite prognosis is determined. been described only in a limited number of chromosomes. We describe two cases of aneuploidy 9p both of which involved iso- P03.131 chromosome 9p. Pachygyria andpolymicrogyria, cranio-facial dysmorphism The first case is a trisomy 9p (Rethore syndrom) in a form of isochro- and atrio-ventricular canal resulting from a duplication of the mosome 9p detected in a child together with translocation of 9q to proximal region of chromosome  (p.) chromosome 11 confirmed by FISH and CGH. B. Benzacken, L. Elkhattabi, l. Kraoua, A. C. Tabet, E. Pipiras, A. Delahaye, M. The second case describes newborn with severe malformations. Post- Maurin, A. Verloes, A. Aboura; natal examination revealed supernumerary chromosome 9 determined Robert debré, Bd Sérurrier, France. by FISH as isodicenric chromosome 9p. Clinical abnormalities included unusual cranio-facial features. He had a microcephaly, a plagiocephaly and a small forehead, facial asym- P03.129 metry with a dysplastic right ear, upslanted palpebral fissures, ptosis Jacobsen syndrome : about three tunisian cases of the right eyelid, strabismus, long philtrum, congenital hypoplasia of l. ben jemaa, m. chaabouni, m. kssentini, h. jilani, i. ouertani, f. maazoul, r. the left depressor anguli oris muscle, big ears, micrognathia and a mrad, h. chaabouni; high arched palate. Physical examination revealed a continuous car- service des maladies congénitales et héréditaires, tunis, Tunisia. diac thrill. A large ductus arteriosus with an auricular septal defect were Jacobsen syndrome is caused by terminal deletions of the long arm of detected at ultrasound examination. chromosome 11, typically in sub-band 11q23.3 with deletions extend- Congestive cardiac failure led to surgical treatment at 3 months of age. ing to the telomere. Microcephaly was detected at 8 months, and a facial asymmetry be- The phenotype severity depends on the deletion shape witch leads came obvious at that time. Ophtalmological examination and audio- to several dysmorphic features , heart defects and Paris-Trousseau gram were normal. syndrome. His early development was severely delayed and recurrent seizures The first case was a 4-years old boy with dysmorphic features, cardiac developed during the first year of life. Cerebral MRI examination defect and language delay. The second case was a two-and-a-half showed bilateral opercular dysplasia predominant on the right side and year old boy who was referred to our consultation for dysmorphic fea- gyration abnormalities with pachygyria and polymicrogyria. tures, language delay, ventricular septal defect and undescent testes. Cytogenetic investigation from blood and skin samples demonstrated The third case was an eight-mounth-year old boy, he was referred for a chromosomal mosaicism, with a dicentric chromosome 11 seen with malformatif syndrome, he had oesopahagus atresie, cardiac defect both G- and R-banding (25/25 abnormal cells on blood, 8/10 on skin) and clinodactyly of fifth fingers. (Fig.3a). C-banding demonstrated the presence of 2 centromeres, with All patients have dysmorphic features compatible with Jacobsen syn- a small interposed euchromatic extra-material. Parental karyotypesCytogenetics 0 were normal. CGH array was performed and revealed a duplication of guineous parents. The maternal age was 26 years and paternal age the 11p11-q13 region. This was then confirmed by FISH. was 33 years at delivery. There was no problem during the pregnancy. BAC-CGH array and BAC probes (FISH) allowed the determination She was born with Cesarean section at full term and there were no of the precise localization of the breakpoints in our patient. Cromo- neonatal complications. Her birth weight was 2480 g, her height was some 11 genes located in this region may play a critical role in brain 44 cm and her OFC was 29.5 cm. Our case was referred to our depart- development. ment due to growth retardation. She was 3.5 years old ; her weight was 9200 g, height was 87 cm and OFC was 43 cm. Her face was P03.132 triangular, with small chin, mild retrognathia and her palpebral fissures FisH probe selection for preimplantation genetic diagnosis in were slanted upward and outward. There was telecanthus, small alae couples with reciprocal translocation nasi with a full nasal tip, and normally positioned, simple ears.The first J. C. Wang, R. Habibian, J. Szymanska, A. Hajianpour; two toes were widely spaced bilaterally. Her eyes, hearing, talking and Genzyme Genetics, Monrovia, CA, United States. IQ were normal. Karyotyping was performed on her peripheral blood. Individuals with balanced reciprocal translocations are at risk for ad- Heparinized blood samples were cultured, harvested and banded ac- verse pregnancy outcomes due to aberrant meiotic segregation. Per- cording to standard methods. forming PGD by interphase FISH can decrease the risk by selectively Her karyotype showed: transferring only normal or balanced embryos. We show that as long mos46,XX,r(3)(p26 q29) [70] / 45,X,-3 [4] / 46,XX,dic r(3;3)(p26 as one subtelomere probe for FISH analysis is targeted at one of the q29;p26 q29) [1] two translocation segments, the second subtelomere probe can be di- Chromosomal studies of her parents were normal. rected to any of the remaining three subtelomeres. In combination with an appropriately selected centromeric probe, the tri-color probe set P03.135 can detect all unbalanced segregants. The feasibility of using subtelo- Clinical findings and cytogenetic analysis of a ring chromosome meric probes other than those for the two translocated segments has 7 in a girl referred for suspicion of Fanconi Anaemia practical value; if one probe is unavailable or if the signal is subopti- A. Amouri1,2, W. Ayed1, R. Bhouri1, I. El Kamel - Lebbi1, O. Kilani1, H. Guer- mal, an alternate probe can be substituted. When centromeric probe mani1, N. Abidli1, F. Talmoudi1, S. Abdelhak2, N. Bouayed-Abdelmoula3; in a third color is not available, a two-hybridization protocol performed 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Molecular Investiga- sequentially will be necessary to detect all unbalanced segregants. tion of Genetic Orphan Diseases Research Unit (MIGOD), UR26/04, Pasteur This is achieved by using dual-color short and long arm subtelomere Insitute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Laboartoire d’Histologie Embryologie, Faculté probes of one chromosome followed by a second hybridization with de Médecine de Sfax, Tunis, Tunisia. the subtelomere probes of the other chromosome. Ring chromosome 7 is a rare but well documented chromosomal aber- This general guideline cannot be applied to two types of reciprocal ration in man. So far at least 18 cases have been reported in the litera- translocations: cases with centromere break and cases in which the ture showing a variable but distinct pattern of phenotypic characteris- breakpoint is distal to the available subtelomere probe. The interphase tics in affected individuals. Besides others, skin findings as pigmented FISH signal pattern in such cases cannot be predicted by examining naevi are especially frequent. the karyotype alone. It is therefore imperative that pre-PGD interphase We report on a girl with mosaicism of a de novo ring chromosome 7. and metaphase FISH analyses be performed on all translocation carri- She presented for bicytopenia and was suspected for Fanconi Anemia. ers to confirm that probes selected for PGD are appropriate. Examples The main clinical features were growth failure, cafe-au lait spots and of such cases will also be presented. multiple pigmented naevi. Psychomotor development was normal and no major malformations were present. Chromosome analysis after R P03.133 banding and FISH showed a big ring chromosome 7 in 90% of consec- cytogenetic investigation of an intersticial deletion 4q de novo utively scored metaphases (46,XX,r(7)/45,XX,-7/46,XX). The medullar and Rieger anomaly: a case report karyotype showed a monosomy 7. N. Oliva-Teles1, C. Candeias1, B. Marques1, J. Silva1, G. Soares1, S. Gon- We reviewed previously reported patients with ring chromosome 7 in çalves2, H. Correia1; an attempt to establish genotype-phenotype correlations, which are 1INSA, I.P., Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal, particularly important for genetic counselling and clinical genetics. Our 2Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal. patient may represent the first case of ring chromosome 7 with haema- Interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 4 involving the tological manifestation. region 4q25-q27 are rare occurrences. The clinical features of patients carrying similar deletions include craniofacial and skeletal anomalies, P03.136 malformations of the eye, cardiac abnormalities and developmental clinical, cytogenetic and molecular characterization of ring delay. Rieger Syndrome (RS) (OMIM #180500) is an autosomal domi- chromosome 9 formation due to inverted duplication and nant disorder that conditions an abnormal eye development which terminal deletion results in blindness from glaucoma in approximately 50% of affected L. Morozin Pohovski, I. Sansovic, I. Barisic, I. Petkovic; individuals (gene map locus 4q25-q26). We report on a male child Children’s University Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. aged 4 presenting with development delay, attention deficit/hyperac- Ring chromosome 9 is a rare chromosome aberration associated with tivity, normal growth, Rieger anomaly, small conical teeth and some variable phenotype that may include growth and psychomotor retar- mild dysmorphic features. Classical karyotyping using high resolution dation, microcephaly, dysmorphic facial features, heart malformation, GTG banding revealed a de novo 4q (?q25?q27) interstitial deletion. ambiguous genitalia, limb and skeletal defects. The majority of ring (9) To define the deletion breakpoints and the extent of the deletion, CGH cases arise from deletions of the chromosome with breakpoint posi- techniques and FISH analysis using BAC DNA and are in progress. tions between 9p22-9p24 and 9q33-q34, followed by the fusion of the The authors enhance the importance of high resolution banding for ends of terminal segments. Very rarely other structural aberrations are detecting subtle chromosome 4q deletions in patients with phenotypic involved. Here we describe a XY sex-reversed patient carrying ring characteristics of Rieger syndrome and compare the present case chromosome 9 with additional material on 9p. High resolution band- findings with previously published data. ing suggested the presence of a duplication of band p23. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis with whole chromosome painting P03.134 probe for chromosome 9 excluded an insertion or a translocation from De novo mosaic of ring chromosome 3: a new case with growth other chromosomes. The analysis with TelVision 9p and 9q probes retardation identified the subtelomere - specific sequences on 9q but failed to M. Pilechian Langeroudi, C. Azimi, F. Farzanfar, M. Khaleghian; detect a hybridization signal on 9p. The breakpoint positions and the Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, size and location of duplication were further analyzed by molecular Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Islamic Republic of Iran. techniques using microsatellite DNA markers and multiplex ligation There are only a few published cases of ring chromosome 3. This is dependent probe amplification (MLPA). The karyotype was designated the first report from Iran about a girl with a de novo mosaic of ring as 46,XY,r(9)(p24;q34.3)inv dup(9)(p24p22)mat. From 24 cases of cnromosome 3. Our case was the first child of healthy, non-consan- ring (9) reported so far, there is only one case which included distalCytogenetics  9p duplication. This case highlights the importance of using combined full fit the diagnostic criteria for Steinfeld syndrome. Chromosomal molecular and cytogenetic techniques for accurate characterization of studies reveal an unbalanced chromosomal anomaly inherited from rare chromosomal rearrangements in order to make possible geno- the mother resulting in a 13q22-13qter deletion and a partial 1q32- type-phenotype correlations and to understand the genetic mecha- 1qter trisomy. This result confirms the assignment of Steinfeld syn- nisms involved. drome to the long arm of the chromosome 13. FISH study using a specific probe shows a deletion of the ZIC2 gene. High resolution SNP P03.137 array study (Affymetrix SNP array 6.0) is in progress to determine the clinical caracteristics of sindrome 47, XY + 18 AND 47, XX + 18 / exact size of the deletion in an attempt to discuss the molecular as- 46, XX signment of the genes involved in Steinfeld syndrome. I. Aganovic-Musinovic, S.Ibrulj, Z. Seremet, M. Mackic-Djurovic; Center for Genetics, Medical faculty, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. P03.140 In Center for genetics during the last 10 years we had three cases of tetrasomy 9p: case report of a child with mild phenotype Sy Edwards, two boys and a girl. M. Sá1, G. Soares1, I. Teixeira2, S. Pires1, N. Oliva Teles1; Boys had trisomy 18., while a girl had mosaic type of trisomy 18; 47, 1Centro de Genética Médica Doutor Jacinto Magalhães - INSA, I.P., Porto, XX + 18/ 46, XX. All died within first two months of life. By compar- Portugal, 2Hospital Santa Maria Maior E.P.E., Barcelos, Portugal. ing the clinical caracteristics of these three patients, we evaluated the Background intensity of caracteristic symptoms and their influence on overall sur- Tetrasomy 9p is a rare dysmorphic syndrome with approximately 40 vival. cases described to date, both mosaic and non-mosaic cases. We re- Phenotype did not vary significantly, all of them had typical hand posi- port a 3 years old child who has a mosaic isochromosome 9p detected tion with 2. over 3. and 5. over 4. finger; rest of caracteristics were postnatally. Clinical findings and cytogenetic results are presented and identical at the boys. Girl with mosaic type of this trisomy did not have compared to reports of mosaic patients previously published. : microghnaty, irregular formed ears and insert nose base. Case Report Second son of non-consanguineous healthy parents, with an irrelevant P03.138 family history. The mother was 39 years-old at the date of the birth. A male with balanced reciprocal translocation t(5;11)(q32;q24.2) No foetal anomalies were detected by repeated ultrasounds. Physi- and situs inversus: case report cal examination at birth revealed normal somatometry and cleft lip. A. Kamaran1, D. N. Binici2, I. Doru3, M. E. Kabalar4, N. Gunes5; Growth retardation, global mild psychomotor delay, hydronefrosis and 1Department of Medical Genetics, Erzurum Nenehatun Obstetrics and Gyne- hydrocele were noted later. At a Medical Genetics consultation facial cology Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Erzurum dysmorphic features were observed. Height and weight under the 5th Training and Research Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey, 3Department of Radiology, centile, microcephaly, and small hands were confirmed. Erzurum Training and Research Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey, 4Department of Cytogenetics Analysis Pathology, Erzurum Training and Research Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey, 5Depart- GTG-banded chromosome study from lymphocyte cultures of the pa- ment of Family medicine, State Hospital, Igdir, Turkey. tient revealed mos 47,XY, +i(9)(pter->p10::p10->pter)[25]/46,XY[5]. Situs inversus is a condition in which the organs of the chest and ab- This supernumerary structurally anomalous chromosome contains a domen are arranged in a perfect mirror image reversal of the normal mirror duplication of the short arm of chromosome 9, with one centro- positioning. The condition is in about 1 in 8,500 people. Although the mere. Parental karyotypes were normal. mechanism that causes the heart loop to go left is not fully understood, Discussion at least one gene has been identified to have a role in this process. Most secondary isochromosome formation originates from primary tri- However, it is thought that many factors may be involved in causing somy 9 due to maternal meiosis II nondisjunction. Isochromosome for situs inversus. The case was 35 years age and single person. In the the short arm is often found in mosaicism, since it results of a telocen- imaging studies, his heart was on the right (dextrocardia), his liver tric chromosome with centromere instability. Mosaicism of tetrasomy was on the left, and his spleen was on the right. Cytogenetic study 9p presents genetic counselling problems, especially if it is de novo showed that man carried balanced reciprocal translocation: 46,XY, and diagnosed prenatally. The extent of mosaicism does not allow pre- t(5;11)(q32;q24.2) in the man. He had no dismorphism, but he had dicting severity of phenotype, but mosaic cases tend to have increased chronic gastritis and chronic esophageal acid reflux. Here we report a probability of survival compared to non-mosaic cases. case with balanced reciprocal translocation and situs inversus. P03.141 P03.139 two new cases of mosaic tetrasomy 9p with moderate Confirmation of the assignment of Steinfeld syndrome to the craniofacial dysmorphism and mild mental retardation long arm of the chromosome 13. L. Elkhattabi1, A. C. Tabet2, C. Le Long2, M. L. Maurin2, A. Verloes2, A. Aboura2; C. Coubes1, M. Perez1, A. Schneider2, J. Puechberty1,2, M. Tournaire2, A. Mé- 1Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Robert debré, Bd Sérurrier, France. nard3, N. Friès3, A. Couture4, A. Chaze2, L. Pinson1, P. Blanchet1, P. Sarda1, G. Tetrasomy 9p is a rare chromosomal aberration leading to a syndrome Lefort2, D. Geneviève1; resembling to trisomy 9p with additional clinical features and more 1Service de Génétique Médicale et de Foetopathologie, Hôpital Arnaud de Vil- severe phenotype. The recurrent breakpoints have been defined with leneuve, Université Montpellier 1, Faculté de Médecine de Montpellier-Nîmes, conventional cytogenetic (9p12, 9q12; and 9q13). To date, only about CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 2Service de Cytogénétique, Hôpital 45 cases have been described. We review here two new cases of mo- Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 3Centre Pluri- saic tetrasomy 9p, whose rearrangements have been further investi- disciplainaire de Diagnostic Prénatal, Maternité, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, gated by CGH-array (Bac clone 4400 Cytochip Perkin Elmer).The first CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, one is a five-year-old boy presenting a typical phenotype with mental Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France. delay and facial dysmorphy, and subnormal mental development. The Steinfeld syndrome is a rare entity described in only seven patients. It second one is a fifteen-year-old girl with moderate facial dysmorphy is characterized by multiple congenital anomalies namely holoprosen- and no mental retardation. We have mapped the breakpoints in both cephaly, limb defects including thumb agenesis of the four extremities, cases and have compared the molecular data of our patients with pub- dysmorphic signs (hypotelorism, microphthalmia, cleft lip/palate), and lished. We discuss genotype-phenotype correlation in the light of the variable kidney and heart malformations. Differential diagnosis is rep- precise breakpoints of our patients. resented by Garcia-Lurie syndrome also named XK aprosencephaly. Molecular bases of Steinfeld syndrome remain unknown but a pure 13q31.1-13qter deletion has been described in one foetus present- ing with this disorder. The authors discuss on a possible contiguous gene deletion encompassing the ZIC2 (involved in isolated cases of holoprosencephaly), GPC5 and EFNB2 genes, and speculate on the possible involvement of these genes in the phenotype. Here, we report on a foetus with clinical and radiological features thatCytogenetics  P03.142 with mental and speech retardation, dysmorphic facies with strabis- A novel Reciprocal translocation t( X ;7) in a child with mus , ptosis of left eye lid, upturned nose, thick and downturned lower Development Delay lip, alopecia areata, low-set ears with incisure of the helix, high palate, F. Mortezapour, M. Rahnama, F. Nasiri, F. Manoochehri, F. Razazian, M. Za- camptodactily and contracture of the fingers, kyphosis, recurrent bron- manian, F. Mahjoubi; chitis and asthma in early childhood, vitiligo at 7 year`s old .The EEG Iranian blood transfusion organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. was normal.The CAT showed internal hydrocephaly and agenesia Here we report a novel translocation with breakpoints never before of corpus callosum.The chromosomal analysis in peripheral venous reported. A 5 year old girl was referred to our laboratory because of blood revealed:47,XY+8/46,XY.Discussion of the possible etiology and developmental delay. clinical results will be presented. Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set up in RPMI1640 sup- plemented with 20% FBS. High resolution chromosome banding was P03.145 performed. De novo unbalanced translocations: how many of them have a Chromosome study revealed an apparently balanced transloca- post-zygotic origin? tion between chromosome X and7. The karyotype was accessed as M. C. Bonaglia1, R. Giorda1, M. Vitaloni2, R. Ciccone2, O. Zuffardi3; 46,XX,t(X;7)(q13;q32). It is possible that genes disrupted by the trans- 1IRCCS E. Medea, Bosisio Parini (LC), Italy, 2Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, location breakpoints contribute the patient’s phenotype. 3Università di Pavia, P, Italy. Post-zygotic formation of translocations is considered a rare event in P03.143 the absence of mosaicism. We have analyzed with array-CGH and Variegated silencing of a large Xq region in a case of balanced microsatellites analysis of the trios eighteen de novo unbalanced X;2 translocation translocations. In four cases, we demonstrated that the derivative A. Conti, R. Genesio, F. Fabbrini, A. Izzo, V. Ronga, A. Mormile, D. Melis, L. chromosome was not deleted as expected but contained a distal dele- Nitsch; tion associated to a contiguous inverted duplication (inv-dup-del) on University Federico II, Napoli, Italy. which the second chromosome segment involved in the translocation Transcriptional silencing of X chromosome starts in the early em- had been transposed. In the remaining thirteen cases the derivative bryogenesis of female mammals and randomly inactivates either the chromosome was deleted as expected but in three cases the deleted maternally or the paternally derived X chromosome, which thereafter and duplicated portions have different origin. Altogether, these findings shows a late replicating behavior. We studied the X inactivation pat- suggest that at least some de novo unbalanced translocations derive tern in a case of reciprocal balanced translocation: 46,XX,t(X;2)(Xpter- from a dicentric chromosome. Asymmetric breakage of such a chro- >Xq23::2q35->2qter;2pter->2q34::Xq24->Xqter)de novo, presenting mosome would result in the formation of an inv-dup-del chromosome with a phenotype suggestive of hypomelanosis of Ito: mild mental re- and a simply deleted one and both can be healed by telomere capture tardation, short stature, obesity, hypo-pigmented cutaneous patches, from another chromosome either with different (50% probability) or the facial dysmorphisms, myopia, hemi-hypertrophy of limbs, brachydac- same (50% probability) parental origin. The dicentric chromosome can tily. be formed, by NAHR and NHEJ, during gametogenesis or early em- CGH by Affymetrix SNP array 6.0 excluded microdeletions, microdu- bryogenesis. Mosaic situation with two or more cells line with different plications and loss of heterozygosity at the breakpoints. Methylation derivatives, each one originating from the same chromosome dem- analysis at the androgen receptor locus showed completely skewed X onstrated the existence of a dicentric chromosome in the zygote. Its inactivation in the proband lymphocytes. BrdU immunostaining assay, instability should lead during early embryogenesis to different break- combined with in situ hybridization using whole chromosome 2 paint- ages leading to different cell lines. The most viable one(s) will survive ing, demonstrated that the normal X chromosome was late replicating to term. This same mechanism of origin has been suggested also in in 100% of the metaphases from lymphocytes, thus excluding auto- cases of inv-dup-del ring chromosomes. Our data demonstrate that some inactivation. The same analysis, performed in skin fibroblasts, some if not all de novo unbalanced translocations have a postzygotic showed a late replication also in part of the Xq region translocated to origin. chromosome 2q, in 60% of the metaphases, suggesting gene silencing in this region. Analysis of histone H3 lysine methylation confirmed the P03.146 partial inactivation of the translocated Xq region in fibroblasts. Quanti- segmental Uniparental Disomy of short and long arm of tative RT-PCR demonstrated downregulation of some genes mapping chromosome 18, result of parental inversion of chromosome 18 to Xq24qter in the proband fibroblasts. A. Kariminejad, A. Moshtagh, R. Kariminejad, M. Zanganeh, M. H. Karimine- As the altered phenotype can be ascribed neither to chromosome mi- jad; crodeletions/microduplications nor to inactivation of the translocated Kariminejad Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Re- chromosome 2 region, we hypothesize that a mosaic functional nul- public of Iran. lisomy of genes mapping to Xq24qter, through a position-effect varie- Here we report a case of familial pericentric in inversion of chromo- gation mechanism, might be responsible for the phenotypic anomalies some 18, inv(18)(p11.2q21.3). The parents are first cousins and have of the proband. identical karyotypes: inv(18)(p11.2q21.3). Their first child’s chromosomal study revealed 46,XY,rec(18)dup(18q)i P03.144 nv(18) (p11.2q21.3). He had mild dysmorphic features, in the absence trisomy 8 mosaicism syndrome in 2 children from Bulgaria of mental and developmental retardation. Prenatal diagnosis was per- B. Radeva, M. Boneva, M. Stancheva; formed for the second pregnancy. University Children`s Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria. Chromosomal study revealed 46,XX,rec(18)dup(18q)inv(18)(p11.2q2 Mosaic Warkany syndrome 2 or Trisomy 8 mosaicism syndrome/ 1.3), rec(18)dup(18p)inv(18)(p11.2q21.3) detected on normal karyo- T8mS/ is a rare disorder . Over 75 cases have been reported.The type. FISH study using 18q and 18p subtelomeric probes showed clinical features are extremely variable.The authors identified 2 clinical two signals for 18p subtelomeric region on one chromosome 18 and cases with Warkany syndrome 2. two signals for 18q subtelomeric region on the other chromosome 18. The first clinical case is 9 year`s boy with Gipsy origin , born from third Therefore chromosomal findings in karyotype were confirmed and normal pregnancy.After this pregnancy the mother had 7 miscarriages. even though the product is a balanced karyotype, the proband has The clinical picture included dysmorphic facies , microretrognathy , mi- uniparental disomy for the 18q21.3◊ region and pter◊p11.2 region. The crocephaly, many frenulums of the tongue and alveolar ridge , thoracic fetus was chromosomally balanced yet our concern was the possibility deformity , camptodactily, excavated nails, hypertrichosis , mental re- of imprinted gene or genes in the uniparental disomy segments. To tardation with aggressive and autoaggressive behaviour , recurrent our knowledge complete uniparental disomy of chromosome 18 has bronchitis and asthma.The CAT showed internal hydrocephaly.The not previously been reported and there is only one report of segmental chromosome analysis in peripheral venous blood revealed trisomy uniparental disomy of chromosome 18. Therefore genetic counseling 8p47, XY+8/46, XY. was difficult for this couple. The couple decided to keep the child. The The second clinical case is 9 year`s old boy with Bulgarian-Turkish infant was born and is now a 1-year-old apparently healthy girl. This origin, born from first pregnancy with vacuum extraction.He presented study supports the lack of association of uniparental disomy for theseCytogenetics  regions with mental /developmental retardation or any dysmorphic fea- P03.149 tures. Acute lymphocytic leukaemia in a child with a Beckwith- Genetic counseling issues for the family, particularly this child is im- Wiedemann syndrome harbouring a CDKNC germ line mutation portant. C. Abadie1, F. Bernard2, I. Netchine3,4, D. Sanlaville5, A. Roque6, R. Tichit7, G. This child will not have chromosomal balanced gametes, unless “cor- Margueritte7, Y. Le Bouc3,4, S. Rossignol3,4, I. Coupier1,8; rection” of the recombinant chromosome occurs at meiosis due to 1Service de Génétique Médicale, Unité d’Oncogénétique, Montpellier, France, crossover. 2U.A.M. Antalgie, Soins Palliatifs Pédiatriques Service Anesthésie Réanimation A - Pôle Pédiatrie- Hôpital Lapeyronie, Montpellier, France, 3APHP, Armand P03.147 Trousseau Hospital, Pediatric Endocrinology, 75012, Paris, France, 4Research Paternal uniparental isodisomy for chromosome 14 in a child center Inserm U 983, 75012, Paris, France, 5Service de Cytogénétique, HCL, with normal karyotype, resulting from malsegregation of Groupement Hospitalier Est, Centre de Biologie et de Pathologie Est, 69677, maternal Robertsonian translocation. Bron, France, 6Cabinet de psychothérapie, 445 bis Chemin de Maurin, 34430, O. Potok1, K. Schlade-Bartusiak2, R. Perrier1, J. Chernos2,1, J. Parboosingh3, S. Saint Jean de Védas, France, 7Service d’Onco-hématopédiatrie, CHU Arnaud Shetty2, J. Lauzon1; de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 8Service d’Oncogénétique, CRLCC Val 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, d’Aurelle, Montpellier, France. 2Cytogenetics Laboratory, Alberta Children’s Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a rare overgrowth syn- 3Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Alberta Children’s Hospital, Calgary, AB, drome associated with an increased risk in childhood tumours. The Canada. phenotypic variability in BWS reflects its genetic heterogeneity. This Paternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 14 (patUPD14) is a rare syndrome is a multigenic disorder caused by dysregulation of imprint- abnormality associated with a recognizable phenotype of small thorax, ed growth regulatory genes in the 11p15.5 region. Accordingly, epi- hypoplastic ribs, short limbs, abdominal wall defects and characteristic genetic alterations, CDKN1C (p57KIP2) gene mutations, 11p15 paternal facies. Most of the patUPD14 cases have been ascertained because uniparental disomy and 11p15 structural chromosomal abnormalities of an abnormal phenotype. UPD14 can result from trisomy or mono- have been described in BWS. The most commonly tumours reported somy rescue during fetal development. Some cases are associated in this syndrome are tumours of embryologic origin such as Wilms tu- with a familial Robertsonian translocation (ROB), where the affected mours, hepatoblastomas, neuroblastomas, rhabdomyosarcomas and children were shown to carry the balanced translocation. adrenocortical carcinomas. We report an 8 month old girl diagnosed with patUPD14 and normal Here, we report the case of a 10 years old patient diagnosed with karyotype 46,XX. Polyhydramnios, short limbs and small thorax were BWS, who developed an acute lymphoblastic T leukaemia. Lympho- detected prenatally. Post natal clinical features included a narrow blastic T leukaemia is rarer in children compared to the B- type. Molec- bell-shaped chest, short limbs, contractures of the thumbs, blepha- ular genetic analysis demonstrated a heterozygous CDKN1C (p57KIP2) rophimosis, congenital heart defect and dysmorphic features (deep- deleterious mutation of maternal origin. To our knowledge it is the first set eyes, full checks, vertical chin crease and short neck). Molecular report of an acute lymphoblastic leukaemia of T- type in a child with analysis confirmed complete paternal isodisomy of chromosome 14. BWS. Based on this presentation, we discuss the possibility of a link Parental chromosome analyses showed that the mother is a carrier of between BWS and leukemia via one of few known negative regulator der(13;14)(q10;q10). The proposed mechanism leading to patUPD14 of hematopoiesis, the transforming growth factor β pathway, depend- in this patient is the duplication of paternal chromosome 14 in a mono- ing upon the up-regulation of the CDKN1C (p57KIP2). somic conceptus resulting from maternal meiosis I nondisjunction and fertilization of a nullisomic gamete. P03.150 The majority of published UPD14 cases with normal karyotypes were Rapid detection of methylation change in Beckwith Wiedemann not followed with parental karyotype analysis. As der(13;14) is the syndrome and Russell-silver syndrome using methylation- most common translocation in humans, we propose that chromosome sensitive high resolution melting analysis in parents of UPD14 patients with normal karyotype should S. Y. Lin1, C. N. Lee2, H. N. Ho2, Y. N. Su1; be considered to better determine the frequency of ROB in these fami- 1Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan lies. University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. P03.148 Background Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome(BWS) and Russell-Sil- Down syndrome and Hirschsprung’s disease ver syndrome (RSS) are growth disorders with opposing epigenetic V. L. David1, C. M. Popoiu2, M. Puiu2, A. Radulescu3, D. A. Izvernariu2, E. S. mutations. Molecular diagnosis of BWS involved hypomethylation in Boia2; KvDMR or hypermethylation in H19 gene on chromosome 11p15.5; 1Children’s Hospital “Louis Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medi- while the RSS were resulted from hypomethylation in H19 gene or cine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 3The Research Insti- hypermethylation in MEST gene on chromosome 7q32. tute at Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, United States. Methods The methylation-sensitive high resolution melting(MS-HRM) Down’s syndrome (DS) is the most common chromosomal abnormal- was used to analyze methylation within the KvDMR, H19 and MEST ity associated with Hirschsprung’s disease (HD) and patients have a gene. A total of 60 samples comprising normal control(40), BWS(13) worse outcome than HD alone. Incidence of DS in HD is ranging be- and RSS(7) DNA were bisulfite-treated, analyzed and scored as hypo- tween 2% to 15%. In six years period fourteen, 12 boys and 2 girls, methylated, hypermethylated or normal. Results were compare with patients with the diagnostic of HD were admitted to our hospital. Pa- those derived by methylation-specific PCR(MS-PCR), methylation- tient’s records were reviewed for data regarding age, sex, length of the sensitive multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification(MS-MLPA) aganglionosis segment, complications and functional outcomes. Age or sequencing. at initial presentation varied from 1 day to 7 years, mean 4, 5 years. Results In MS-HRM, the normal control would have two melting peaks, Mean hospitalization period was 30days/ patient. Two HD patients had representing the unmethylated and the methylated alleles, while the also DS. Patients with DS had significantly more comorbidities. Both patients would have only one prominent melting peak indicating the DS patient had short segment aganglionosis. Overall there were nine methylation change. The results of MS-HRM were 100% consistent patients with short segment aganglionosis, four patients had a long with that of the MS-PCR and MS-MLPA. segment of aganglionosis and one total colonic aganglionosis .The Conclusion The MS-HRM is a rapid, cost-effective and sensitive meth- procedure of choice in our clinic is two stages opened Duhamel pull- od for detection of the methylation changes in BWS and RSS. It may trough. Complete two stages Duhamel pull-trough was performed in also serve a platform for other epigenetic studies. 10 patients and four underwent temporary diverting colostomy. Two patients died from severe enterocolitis and septic shock. In DS pa- tient’s postoperative course was uneventful suggesting that DS has minimal influence on immediate surgical outcome. Long term follow up in the DS patient’s revealed higher incidence of constipation, but there is improvement with age.Cytogenetics  P03.151 (Uribe, Gernika, Durango, Goierri and Larraun). The results showed Familial Fraxe syndrome detected using mLPA technique that differences in factors implicated in CGG repeat instability (CGG A. Zuñiga, I. Pitarch, Y. Bello, A. Guerrero; repeat size, DXS548/FRAXAC1 haplotypes and AGG interspersion Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (valencia), Spain. pattern) are present in the Basque populations analyzed. We have employed MLPA technique in order to study a family with non specific mental impairment. The term non-specific or non-syndromic P03.154 X-linked mental retardation (MRX) was introduced to indicate a condi- Prevalence of the expanded alleles of the FmR1 gene in blood tion segregating in an X-linked manner in which male patients have no spots from newborn males in a spanish population consistent phenotypic manifestations other than MR. Nineteen genes I. Fernández-Carvajal1, P. Walichiewicz2, X. Xiaosen2, R. Pan2, P. J. Hager- responsible for MRX have been identified so far. P106 MRX MLPA man3,4, M. J. Alonso1, J. J. Telleria1, A. Blanco1, F. Tassone2,5; probemix (MRC Holland MLPA®) can be used to detect copy number 11I.B.G.M.Unidad de Diagnóstico Genético y Perinatal. Universidad de Val- changes of several genes on the X-chromosome that have been impli- ladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, cated in (non-specific) X-linked mental retardation. University of California, School of Medicine, 3Department of Biochemistry and Mother, a daughter (11 year old) and a son (3 year old) were ana- Molecular Medicine, University of California, School of Medicine, Davis, CA, lyzed using P106 MRX MLPA and a deletion was detected in AFF2 United States, 4M.I.N.D. Institute, University of California Davis HealthSystem,, (FMR2) probe. Further analysis using conventional PCR techniques Sacramento, CA, United States, 5M.I.N.D. Institute, University of California and sequencing confirmed that members of family were carriers of an Davis HealthSystem, Sacramento, CA, United States. expanded CGG region in FMR2 gene. Mother was carrier of an ex- Fragile X syndrome is the most common inherited form of intellectual panded allele with 70 CGG repeats, allele of daughter was expanded disability. The frequencies of full mutation (>200 CGG repeats) have till 120 CGGs and allele of son was 135 CGGs. Son has a more se- varied widely from 1/ 2,000 to 1/ 8,000 depending on the nature of vere phenotype, but both mother and daughter had a mild mental re- ascertainment. There remains uncertainty regarding the premutation tardation. FRAXE fragile site associated mental retardation remains allele frequencies due in part to lingering issues of ascertainment bias, unique among X-linked mental retardation phenotypes due to its very but also to real frequency differences across ethnic and regional popu- mild to borderline nature (50 < IQ< 85). It is the most prevalent form lations. of non-specific X-linked mental retardation so far delineated, with an Setting and Methods: We report results of a newborn screening study estimated incidence of at least 1/50-100,000 males. The FRAXE site of 5,267 male blood spots collected from Castilla y Leon, the Northwest is within, or immediately adjacent to, the 5’ untranslated region of the region of Spain. The blood spots were screened by a rapid PCR-based FMR2 gene. method that is capable of identifying the presence of all expanded al- leles categorized as intermediate alleles (45-54 CGG repeats), premu- P03.152 tation (55-200 CGG repeats), and full mutation (>200 CGG repeats). Prevalence of Fragile X syndrome in mentally retarded patients Results: The most common alleles, 29 and 30 CGG repeats, within from Latvia this population accounted for approximately 38% of all. We found 199 Z. Daneberga1,2, Z. Krumina1, B. Lace1,2, D. Bauze1, N. Pronina1, R. Lugovska1; gray-zone alleles (1 in 26; 95%CI, 1/23 - 1/30), 21 premutation alleles 1Medical Genetic Clinic, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. (1 in 251; 95%CI, 1/164 - 1/385), and 2 full mutation alleles (1 in 2,633; The most common form of X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is the 95%CI, 1/714 - 1/10,000). Fragile X mental-retardation syndrome (FXS). Mutations at FRAXA Conclusions: The frequency of premutation alleles is three times high- locus on distal Xq may cause mental impairment. Most common mu- er than the oft-quoted value of 1 in 813 from an Eastern Canadian tation at FRAXA locus is expansion of CGG triplet repeats located in population, and is fully consistent with the results of large-scale Israeli the 5’-untranslated region of the fragile X mental retardation-1 (FMR1) screening studies. Our results demonstrate that newborn screening gene. for the presence of expanded FMR1 alleles is an effective means for The aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of FXS in Latvia defining the distribution of expanded FMR1 alleles in newborn popula- and characterize the FMR1 CGG-repeat structure in Latvian patients tions and is suitable for large-scale newborn screening. exhibiting mental retardation. The group of 374 unrelated patients with mental retardation (MR) referred from clinical geneticists was P03.155 screened by PCR for a normal allele. The final diagnosis of FXS has molecular Genetic test for X-Fragile syndrome in 2008 iVi been confirmed by Southern blotting. DXS548-FRAXAC1-FRAXAC2- Assisted Reproduction treatments. ATL1 haplotype for FXS patients were estimated. DNA sequencing for A. Garda-Salas, I. Pérez, P. Albero, C. Méndez, M. Martínez, M. Nicolás, L. the estimation of AGG inserts structure for gray zone (35-50 repeats) Fernández, J. Landeras; alleles was used. IVI-Murcia, Murcia, Spain. 10 affected patients were detected (detection rate 2.67%). Calculated Since 2007, our company, “Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad” (IVI) prevalence of FMR1 full mutation is 1:6173 for male in general Latvian has implemented the routine molecular diagnosis of X-FRAGILE Syn- population. After active cascade testing in 6 FXS families 6 female drome (FRAXA) into the oocyte donation program. FRAXA is one of permutation carriers, 3 females with full mutation and 4 affected males the greatest genetic prevalence illnesses in general population. The were found. The highest incidence among FXS patients for haplotype prevalence of full-mutation males in white population is aprox. 1/4,000. 4-3-4-G was found. The prevalence of 29, 30 and 31 CGG repeats for FRAXA is the most common cause associated to mental family inher- normal alleles were detected. ited and represents among 15-20% of the total mental delay related to X cr. This illness has its origin in the deficiency of FMR1 protein P03.153 synthesis. The expansion of the “dynamic” and repetitive region CGG, FmR1 gene stability: distribution of premutation and 5´ to Fmr-1, causes it´s methylation and repression of expression. Ac- intermediate alleles in five basque valleys cording repetitions number of the CGG tri-nucleotide, this region is I. Arrieta Saez1, M. Telez1, I. Huerta1, P. Flores2, B. Criado3, J. Ramirez1, M. considered normal (<54 CGGn), premutated (55-200 CGGn) or full Barasoain1, M. Hernández1, A. González4; mutated (>200 CGGn). 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of We present our most recent data for these analysis, using the Abbott the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 2Department of Nursing, School of Nurs- Molecular protocol, called Fragile X-PCR Test. During 2008 we stud- ing, University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 3High School Da Maia, ied 3,485 women from different cities in Spain. All these women were CESPU, Porto, Portugal, 4Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, susceptible oocyte’donors for processing of assisted reproductive University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain. treatments (ART). In conclusion, we found 17 (0,49 %) premutation Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is the most common form of inherited men- carriers; 52 (1,49%) “intermediate” carriers and 1 (0,028%) possible tal retardation. The molecular basis is usually the unstable expansion full mutation carrier; 1/50 women were excluded from the donation of a CGG repeat in the FMR1 gene.The CGG sequence is polymor- program. phic with respect to size and purity of the repeat. We had previously The knowledge of the fragile X premutation carrier condition or full analyzed a sample of two Basque valleys (Markina and Arratia). In mutation carrier will permit the donor to receive the appropriate genetic the present work we extend the study to another five isolated valleys counsel for reproductive end. Finally, the exclusion from the oocyteCytogenetics  donation program of possibly “expanded” trinucleotids of this region Australia. provides greater security to the receptor patients in our processing of FRAXE is a form of mild to moderate mental retardation due to the Assisted Reproduction. silencing of the FMR2 gene. The cellular function of FMR2 protein is presently unknown. By analogy with its homologue AF4, FMR2 P03.156 was supposed to have a role in transcriptional regulation, but robust Fragile X syndrome screening of families with consanguineous evidences supporting this hypothesis are lacking. We observed that and non-consanguineous parents in the iranian population FMR2 co-localizes with the splicing factor SC35 in nuclear speckles, S. Abedini1, A. Pouya1, N. Mansoorian2, F. Behjati1, N. Nikzat1, M. Mohseni1, S. the nuclear regions where splicing factors are concentrated, assem- Esmaeeli Nieh3, L. Abbasi3, H. Darvish1, G. Bahrami Monajemi1, S. Banihash- bled and modified. Similarly to what was reported for splicing factors, emi1, R. Kariminejad2, K. Kahrizi1, H. Ropers3, H. Najmabadi1,2; blocking splicing or transcription leads to the accumulation of FMR2 in 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation enlarged, rounded speckles. FMR2 is also localized in the nucleolus Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology when splicing is blocked. We have recently shown that FMR2 is able and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Max Planck Institute for to specifically bind the G-quartet-forming RNA structure with high af- Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. finity. Remarkably, in vivo, in the presence of FMR2 the ESE (Exonic Fragile X syndrome is the most common form of inherited mental re- Splicing Ehnancer) action of the G-quartet situated in mRNA of an al- tardation (MR). It is caused by the expansion of CGG triplet repeats in ternatively spliced exon of a minigene or of the putative target FMR1 the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene. In mentally retarded (fragile X Mental retardation & gene) appears reduced. Indeed, the males, the frequency of fragile X syndrome is approximately 2 to 3 absence of FMR2 does not affect the total expression of FMR1 mRNA percent, but little is known about its proportion in mentally retarded but increases the expression of the isoforms containing exon 14 and patients from countries where parental consanguinity is common. encoding a protein localized in the cytoplasm. The role of FMR2 in The objective of this study was to estimate the frequency of fragile X splicing is not exclusive to its role in transcriptional regulation, since we syndrome (FXS) in mentally retarded patients from Iran. We examined cannot exclude that the function of FMR2 is modulated by the interac- a total of 508 families with MR that had been referred to the Genet- tion with transcription factors, as, shown, for example, for SWI/SNF, ics Research Center (GRC) in Tehran. 467 of these families had at a complex involved both in chromatin remodelling and regulation of least two mentally retarded children, and in 384 families, the parents alternative splicing. were related. Full FMR1 mutations were found in 32 of the 508 fami- lies studied (6.3%), in 19 out of 124 families with apparently unrelated P03.159 parents (15.3%), and in 13 of the 384 consanguineous families (3.4%). Post axial polidactily and costo-vertebral anomalies in a 31 Thus, in Iran, the relative frequency of FXS seems to be higher than years old woman with 1qter chromosome deletion. in Central Europe and other Asian countries, and much higher in pa- M. Bertoli, F. Gullotta, S. Considera, V. Brugiati, S. Zampatti, C. Catalli, G. tients with unrelated parents. We also show that even in families with Novelli, M. Frontali, A. Nardone; consanguineous parents, FXS has to be ruled out before assuming U.O.C. Laboratorio di Genetica Medica Policlinico Tor Vergata, Roma., Rome, that familial MR is due to autosomal recessive gene defects. Molecular Italy. studies are in progress to explain the high proportion of FMR1 muta- Subtelomeric deletion of long arm of chromosome 1 is described as tions in mentally retarded offspring of unrelated Iranian parents. a recognisable syndrome presenting with mental retardation, micro- cephaly, growth retardation, a characteristic facial appearance, corpus P03.157 callosum abnormalities, cardiac, gastro-oesophageal and urogenital simultaneous analysis of FmR1 and ARX genes improves the defects (van Bon et al., 2008). efficiency of the fragile X screening. We describe a 31 years old women with a de novo 1qter deletion. We F. Martinez, S. Oltra, I. Ferrer-Bolufer, M. Roselló, S. Monfort, C. Orellana; have seen her for the first time at 30 years, identified 1qter deletion by Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. subtelomeric analysis, and characterized the size of the deletion by Fragile X syndrome is the most frequent form of inherited mental retar- CGH array.. dation, caused by the expansion of a CGG triplet in the FMR1 gene. She was born to healthy unrelated parents, pregnancy was compli- On the other hand, microduplications or expansions in ARX gene, cated with threatened abortion and growth delay (at term: weight 2.300 leading to elongations of a polyalanine tract, are considered the sec- gr, length 48 cm, OFC 31 cm). She presented with severe hypotonia, ond most frequent cause of X-linked mental retardation. However, the cianosis, cleft palate, post-axial polydactyly of left foot, bilateral club- genetic screening of this gene is not routinely performed. foot, and dysmorphic features including bulbous nasal tip, thin lips and We conducted a prospective analysis of both genes, by the simultane- left preauricular tag. Echocardiography revealed interventricular septal ous amplification of FMR1 exon 1 and a fragment of ARX gene where defect. Thoracic X-Rays showed dorsal vertebral clefts (D4, D5 and the polyalanine elongations cluster, in a total of 700 developmentally D6), and rib fusions (I and II, V and VI, VII and VIII at left and VIII and retarded males remitted for fragile-X screening. IX at right). Ectopic left kidney and albinoid fundus oculi were also We found nine unrelated cases with the fragile X syndrome and three present. Since the first months of life she had generalized seizures index cases (four patients) with ARX elongations. Given the relative treated with anticonvulsivants. This is the oldest patient with 1qter de- frequencies between both genes and the prevalence of the fragile-X letion described to date. Her phenotype includes features not reported expansions (about 1:5,000 males), the prevalence of ARX elongations so far such as polydactyly and ribs fusions and confirms that vertebral can be estimated in 1:15,000 males. anomalies, previously described in 2 patients only, are not uncommon The duplex analysis we propose offers several advantages: 1) An in- elements of the syndrome. creased sensitivity of the fragile-X screening in about 30%, with no substantial cost increment. 2) As large fragile-X expansions cannot be P03.160 detected by PCR, the amplification of another fragment with similar Evaluation of a case with 5p deletion syndrome size, GC content and presence of repeats, serves as internal reference F. Mutlu Içduygu, H. Şamli, K. Hekimler, A. Özgöz, Y. Sivaci, N. Imirzalioğlu; to differentiate mutations (expansions or deletions) from technical pit- Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genet- falls. 3) Similarly, weak co-amplification of a normal FMR1 allele can ics, Afyon, Turkey. be suggestive of mosaicism with full mutation. Although rare, mosaic The case is the second child of the couple who made third cousin mar- cases represent a limitation of any PCR-based method for the screen- riage. She had a healthy elder brother. The case was born with a birth ing of the fragile-X expansion. weight of 2,720 kg and a height of 52 cm. Her growth retardation was realized at the age of 8 months. The case was physically examined P03.158 and a pedigree was drawn. Metaphase plaques were obtained from FmR2 protein, whose absence causes the FRAXE associated peripheral blood lymphocytes of the case cultered for 72 hours and mental retardation, is a splicing factor evaluated after GTL banding. The findings of the case were congeni- B. Bardoni1, M. Melko1, J. Gecz2, E. Lalli1, M. Bensaid1; tal malformation, mental retardation, cat-like cry at the first 1-2 weeks 1Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Valbonne, France, 2De- after birth, SGA (small for gestational age), growth retardation, micro- partment of Genetic Medicine, Women’s and Children’s Hospital,, Adelaide, cephaly, strabismus, micrognathia, stridor, low set ears, high archedCytogenetics  palate, flat broad nose root, loose abdominal muscles. In the USG per- P03.163 formed, no abdominal abnormality and organomegaly were detected. cri du chat syndrome - clinical and genetic study of a particular The karyotype of the case was found to be 46,XX,del (5p) in the chro- case mosome analysis. 5p- (Cri du Chat) Syndrome is caused by a deletion R. M. Popescu1, C. Rusu1, I. Ivanov2, M. Covic1; on the short arm of chromosome 5 and its incidence ranges between 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy- Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, 1:15 000 - 1:50 000 in live births. In the cytogenetic and phenotypic Romania., Iasi, Romania, 2Sf Spiridon Hospital Iasi – Immunology and Genetics investigations performed on the short arm of chromosome 5, deletions Laboratory, Iasi, Romania, Iasi, Romania. in specific size and shape were found to be related to the specific Cri-du-chat syndrome is a genetic disease resulting from a deletion phenotypic properties. Metaphase plaques obtained from peripheral of variable size occurring on the short arm of chromosome 5. Main blood lymphocytes were investigated and the karyotype of the case clinical features are: high-pitched monochromatic cry, microcephaly, was detected to be 46,XX,del(5p). broad nasal bridge, epicanthal folds, micrognathia, abnormal derma- toglyphics and severe psychomotor and mental retardation. Cardiac, P03.161 neurological and renal abnormalities may be associated. Identification of Two Novel Cases with Terminal Long Arm We present a case of a 6 years old patient with “cri-du-chat” syndrome Deletions of chromosome 1 Displaying microcephaly, Epileptic and complex abnormalities of the karyotype in order to illustrate a rare seizures, corpus callosum Abnormalities form of the disorder and to discuss the management of the patient and S. Cingöz1, S. Hız Kurul2, A. Ünalp3, U. Yis2, Z. Tümer4; her family. 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetic, School of Medicine, Dokuz Eylül Anamnestic data show that the girl is the second child born to a young, University, İzmir, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatrics, Division of Child Neurol- unrelated, apparently healthy couple. Pregnancy was uneventful. The ogy, Dokuz Eylül University School of Medicine, İzmir, Turkey, 3Department of child was born naturally, at term, with low birth weight - 2000g. Postna- Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Behcet Uz Child Disease and Pedi- tal development was severely delayed (walked at 5 years, first words atric Surgery Training and Research Hospital, İzmir, Turkey, 4Kennedy Center, at 4 years). Glostrup, Denmark. Clinical examination of the child (6 years old) reveals: failure to thrive, Majority of the patients with chromosome 1q terminal deletions have microcephaly (-5,9 SD), narrow mongoloid palpebral fissures, epican- similar clinical features such as mental retardation, hypotonia, micro- thal folds, high-pitched voice, micrognathia, displastic ears, severe cephaly, seizures, corpus callosum abnormalities, congenital cardiac mental retardation. defects and various facial features. Echocardiography was normal, as well as renal ultrasound. Psycho- Here we report two cases with overlapping deletions of the region logical examination: IQ 29. A G band karyotyping has been performed 1q43-q44 that have been characterized by BAC array CGH (1 Mb and the result is: 45,XX,der(5)t(5;22)(5p15.1;22q.1)/46XX, der(5)t( resolution). The first patient had a 6.7-7.9 Mb interstitial deletion at 5;22)(5p15.1;22q.1)der (22)(pter→q11.1). FISH analysis confirmed 1q43-q44 chromosomal region. She had mental retardation, develop- the translocation and the breakpoint on chromosome 22 (22q11.2; mental delay, microcephaly, seizure with or without fever and dismor- 22q.13). The karyotypes of the parents have been normal. phic facial features. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) investigation In conclusion we present a case with delayed diagnosis and complex revealed hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. The second patient had karyotype to illustrate the importance of the karyotype and to discuss two consecutive interstitial deletions of 2-4 Mb and 4-6.4 Mb, at 1q41 genetic counselling in this case. and 1q43-q44, respectively. He had microcephaly, febrile seizures, ventricular septal defect (VSD), hypospadias, cryptorchidism, and high P03.164 palate. MRI investigation revealed dysgenesis of the corpus callosum Haploinsufficiency of the gene Quaking (QKI) is associated with and diffuse cerebral atrophy. the 6q terminal deletion syndrome In earlier studies, serine/threonine kinase AKT3 gene at 1q44 has L. Backx1, J. P. Fryns1, C. Marcelis2, K. Devriendt1, J. Vermeesch1, H. Van been suggested as a candidate for microcephaly and corpus callosum Esch1; agenesis, but was excluded by mapping of the interstitial deletions 1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, involving this region. These studies suggested a new critical region 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen- including four refseq genes, namely C1orf100, ADSS, C1orf101 and tre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. C1orf121 for corpus collosum abnormalities at 1q44. It was deleted in Several subtelomeric aberrations, especially deletions, are associated our two cases. Meanwhile, when we compared the sizes of the dele- with clinically recognizable syndromes, including 1p-, 4p-, 5p-, 9p-, 9q- tions in Patient 2 and previously identified the cases with VSD and , 18p- and 22q-. The recent introduction of array-comparative genome terminal 1q deletion, we refined about a 2Mb new critical region for hybridization in the diagnostic clinic not only enables to identify these VSD associated with 1q43 deletion. aberrations, but also to delineate the size and locate the position of the different breakpoints. Comparison of the different sizes and break- P03.162 points of the affected chromosomal regions permits a first correlation A case of de novo pure partial trisomy (6)(p22.3-pter) of the genotype with the phenotype. However, human subtelomere J. Tao, X. Ji, W. Jiang, J. Zhang; regions are gene-rich and it still remains difficult to assign the contribu- Shanghai Institute of Pediatric Research, Shanghai, China. tion of each individual gene within the deleted region. Recently, the We report on a 3-year-old girl with psychomotor retardation, speech Eu-HMTase1 gene was identified as the major gene causing the 9q development delay, hypothyroidism, and a special pattern of crano- subtelomeric phenotype, by studying a balanced translocation involv- facial anomalities. Karyotype analysis showed additional material of ing chromosomes 9 and X. unknown origin on the short arm of chromosome 6. Molecular cyto- Subtelomeric rearrangements involving chromosome 6q have been genetic analysis, by Agilent 44K array CGH, demonstrated a de novo reported in a limited number of studies. Although the sizes are very 27.9 Mb duplication from 6p22.3 to 6pter, with no obvious abnormality variable, ranging from cytogenetically visible deletions to small sub- on the other chromosomes. Thus, our patient is characterized as be- microscopic deletions, a common recognizable phenotype associated ing of pure partial trisomy 6p, which could be distinguished from most with a 6q deletion could be distilled. The main characteristics besides cases found to date. The clinical findings in this patient were compared mental retardation are hypotonia, seizures, brain anomalies, and to those in the previously reported cases. Genotype-phenotype cor- specific dysmorphic features including short neck, broad nose with relation suggests further splitting in the partial 6p trisomy syndrome. bulbous tip, large and low-set ears and a fish-like mouth. We report The distinct facial features including prominent forehead, blepharophi- a female patient, carrying a reciprocal balanced translocation t(5;6), mosis, blepharoptosis, bulbous nose and small pointed chin, are con- presenting with a clinical phenotype highly similar to the common 6q- sistently recognizable in distal 6p duplication, while severer symptoms phenotype. Breakpoint analysis using array painting revealed that the such as feeding problems, recurrent respiratory infections, gastroin- Quaking (QKI) gene that maps in 6q26 is disrupted, suggesting that testinal anomalies, limb deformities are more likely associated with haploinsufficiency of this gene plays a major role in the 6q- clinical proximal 6p duplication. phenotype.Cytogenetics  P03.165 Hospitals-Brasília with subtelomeric chromosome 2q deletion. interpretation of copy number changes of the 1p36.3 terminal Patient 1 is a female referred because of developmental delay at 17 region detected by high resolution oligonucleotide array cGH months with epicantal folds, asymmetric palpebral fissures, small E. J. Seo1, K. R. Chun1, J. O. Lee2, H. W. Yoo3, I. S. Park3; nipples and abnormal palmar and plantar creases. She returned after 1Dept. of Laboratory Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine and 16 years, at 20 years, mild mental retardation (MR) is evident requir- Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2Genome Research Center for ing support for daily life activities. Only height is below the 3th cen- Birth defects and Genetic disorders, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of tile. She has round face, down-slanted palpebral fissures, depressed Korea, 3Dept. of Pediatrics, University of Ulsan College of Medicine and Asan nasal bridge, small posteriorly angulated ears, shortened forearms, Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea. brachydactyly, hallux valgus and joint hypermobility. The 3rd, 4th and 5th Breakpoints of the 1p36 deletion syndrome have been observed be- metacarpals and metatarsals are shortened. Cytogenetic study at 550- tween 0.5 and 10.5 Mb from the 1pter and common deleted regions band levels revealed a terminal de novo deletion with the breakpoint at are terminal 2.5-2.7 Mb. While deletions or duplications of less than 2q36, confirmed by subtelomeric probe FISH. 0.5 Mb from the 1pter are regarded as benign CNVs, copy number Patient 2 is a female referred because of MR, eczema and obesity. At changes of more than 0.5 Mb should be assessed cautiously in factors 14 years, we noted up-slanting palpebral fissures, eczema involving influencing the risk. We detected various copy number changes of the scalp and her small hands and feet. Moderate MR, tantrums and con- 1p36.3 terminal region using Agilent 244K whole human genome CGH trolled seizures were present. Cytogenetic study at 700-band levels oligonucleotide array in 60 Korean patients with congenital anomalies. revealed a tiny terminal de novo deletion at 2q37.2~37.3, confirmed by Out of 6 patients with copy number changes at 1p36.3, three showed subtelomeric probe FISH. the recurrent copy number changes of 1.56 Mb with low log2 ratio: 1 These two cases demonstrate the clinical variability involving con- loss, and 2 gains. A patient with 1.56 Mb loss had total 5.86 Mb de- firmed chromosome 2q terminal deletion. Broadening its clinical spec- letion at 1p36.3 including extended 4.3 Mb loss with high log2 ratio, trum could help health professionals recognize subtle manifestations which was resulted from derivative unbalanced translocation, der(1)t in the context of idiopathic MR. It also stresses the importance of using (1;14)(p36.3;p11.2)dn. The 1.56 Mb gain of two patients appeared to subtelomeric FISH studies in cases of suspected cryptic rearrange- be benign CNV. Another two patients with copy number loss of high ments, when investigating patients with idiopathic MR. log2 ratio had 2.2 Mb simple terminal deletion inherited from a affected mother, and 2.7 Mb deletion by derivative unbalanced translocation, P03.168 respectively. Remaining one patient with 2.7 Mb gain of low log2 ratio Detection of subtelomere imbalances using mLPA revealed 1q12-1q23.2 gain of high log2 ratio which was compatible L. Hila1, Y. Chagrani1, H. Tébourbi1, L. ben Jemaa2, H. Chaabouni2; with his marker chromosome. These findings suggest that a recurrent 1Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine Faculté de Médecine de Tunis, Tunis, Tuni- breakpoint of CNV could be located 1.56 Mb from the 1p telomere, and sia, 2Service des Maladies Congénitales et Héréditaires EPS Charles Nicolle, the log2 ratio should be considered when interpreting the array CGH Tunis, Tunisia. data in constitutional disorders. Subtelomeric rearrangements significantly contribute to idiopathic mental retardation and result in several mental retardation syndromes. P03.166 New molecular techniques like Multiplex Ligation dependent probe Am- Array cGH analysis of 4q terminal deletion diagnosed in a girl plification (MLPA) allow subtelomeric microduplications/microdeletions with mild dysmorphic features, developmental delay and no identification in approximately 5% mentally retarded patients. However major congenital anomalies most of subtelomeric defects lack a characteristic phenotype. K. Schlade-Bartusiak1, A. Innes2, M. Chan1, M. Anderson2, J. Chernos1,2; We analyzed Tunisian mentally retarded patients by MLPA Multiplex 1Cytogenetics Laboratory, Alberta Children’s Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada, Ligation Probe dependent Amplification with SALSA MLPA kit P036B/ 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. MLPA kit P036D and MLPA kit P070 (which test all the subtelomeres). The 4q deletion syndrome, comprising all cytogenetically visible dele- MLPA results for the short arm of the acrocentric chromosomes were tions (interstitial or terminal) of the long arm of chromosome 4, is a well- not considered as significant as these probes hybridise to the long arm recognized distinctive disorder, described in more than 100 patients. near the centromere. Common phenotypic features of 4q- syndrome are mild dysmorphic DNA was extracted from blood, quantified by spectrophotometry features, mild to severe mental retardation, growth deficiency, cleft (Nanodrop) and checked for degradation on an agarose gel, degraded palate, limb anomalies, cardiac and genitourinary defects. A unique DNA was not used for MLPA analysis. finding consisting of a stiff, pointed 5th finger with a hypoplastic distal Patients with known sex chromosome abnormalities were used as phalanx and either a hooked or a volar nail is observed in two thirds controls (45, XO; 47, XXY). of patients. Patients with large terminal deletions, with breakpoints in Relative probe signals of each probe was determined by dividing each 4q31, are most severely affected. More distal 4q deletions involving measured peak height by the height of patient reference peak divided bands 4q33 to 4q35 have been found so far in about 25 cases. These by the mean of height of control test peak divided by the height of patients present less characteristic dysmorphisms and less severe control reference peak. All peaks were insured to be between 50-6000 mental retardation. Some authors suggest that the region 4q31-q34 arbitrary fluorescents units. is critical for most of the clinical phenotype. HAND2 in 4q33 has been We found subtelomeric deletions and duplications. These results will proposed as a candidate gene for the cardiac defects, and a gene in- be discussed upon the patient’s clinical features to make imbalance- volved in limb deficiencies was tentatively assigned to 4q33. It is clear phenotype correlations to discern which abnormalities are disease that phenotypes associated with 4q deletion are grossly related to the causing or probable polymorphisms, in fact 15 subtelomeric copy num- breakpoint location and the amount of genetic material lost. ber changes are reported in phenotypically normal individuals. We present a 12-year old girl with mild dysmorphic features and devel- opmental delay with learning difficulties. Karyotype analysis revealed P03.169 a terminal deletion on chromosome 4q. Array CGH showed a deletion subtelomeric rearrangements in patients with idiopathic mental of over 17 Mb, with the breakpoint within the 4q34.2 band. retardation Literature review and genotype-phenotype correlations in 4q deletion R. Pinto Leite, M. Souto, P. Botelho, M. Martins, E. Ribeiro; syndrome will be discussed. Centro Hospitalar de Tras-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal. Mental retardation affects between 1 to 3% of the general population P03.167 and is associated with several causes including environmental factors, two new cases of pure 2q terminal deletion chromosomal abnormalities and monogenic diseases. 50% of the cas- K. T. Abe, I. M. P. O. Rizzo, A. L. V. Coelho, L. M. Formigli, D. R. Carvalho, M. es have no etiologic diagnosis. Recently mental retardation was linked F. Pereira, N. Sakai Jr., A. F. Castro, C. E. Speck-Martins; to subtelomeric chromosomal abnormalities. SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brazil. The objective of this work is the study of patients with idiopathic mental The subtelomeric regions are gene-rich and often involved in chro- retardation associated with dysmorphic features and/or birth defects mosomal rearrangements. We report two patients referred to medical and/or family history of mental retardation in Trás-os-Montes region evaluation at the Genetic Service of SARAH Network of Rehabilitation - Portugal, by standard cytogenetic and FISH (Fluorescent in situ hy-Cytogenetics  bridization) techniques. followed by marked obesity, but with macrocephaly, inexpressive face In 25 peripheral blood samples were applied conventional cytogenetic and severe tibia vara. Genetic defect: imprinting defect; techniques and FISH with the use of probes specific for the subtelo- Case 3: 20 years old boy with typical neonatal hypotonia and poor meric chromosomes regions. weight gain in infancy followed by mild obesity and relatively normal The authors present the results, comparing them with those described apetite, acromicria (but with shortening of the 4th metacarpal) and a in the literature. particular psychological profile. Genetic defect: 15q deletion identified Supported by the Commission for Promotion of Research in Health on the karyotype. Care: Research Project in Applied Health Care - Nº 5/2007 Clinical features, diagnosis and management will be illustrated in de- tail.In conclusion, we present 3 particular cases of PWS in order to P03.170 illustrate some special features and to discuss the diagnosis and man- clinical features in 102 patients with Angelman syndrome agement strategy. W. Tan1, C. A. Bacino2, S. A. Skinner3, S. A. Skinner3, I. Anselm1, R. Barb- ieri-Welge4, A. Baeur-Carlin3, A. L. Beaudet2, T. Bichell5, J. K. Gentile1, D. G. P03.172 Glaze2, L. T. Horowitz3, H. Lee6, M. P. Nespeca4, S. U. Peters2, T. Sahoo2,7, D. Oro-dental phenotypic spectrum of patients with PWs Sarco1, S. E. Waisbren1, L. M. Bird4; C. Bortun1, L. Ardelean1, M. Puiu2; 1Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, United States, 2Baylor College of 1Faculty of Dental Medicine, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Greenwood Genetic Center, Green- Pharmacy V. Babes, Timisoara, Romania. wood, SC, United States, 4Rady Children’s Hospital San Diego, San Diego, CA, Background. Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic disorder United States, 5Vanderbilt University, Kennedy Center, Nashville, TN, United caused by genetic defects in certain regions of chromosome 15q11- States, 6Data Technology Coordinating Center, University of South Florida, 13. Commonly associated characteristics of this disorder include hypo- Tampa, FL, United States, 7Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, WA, tonia, obesity, mental retardation, short stature, hypogonadotropic hy- United States. pogonadism, small hands and feet, facial dysmorphy, learning and be- Background: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurodevelopmental dis- havioural difficulties, and dental abnormalities (thick viscous saliva). order caused by a lack of expression of the maternal copy of UBE3A. Aim. To describe the oro-dental phenotypic spectrum of patients with We are conducting a 5-year longitudinal study on the natural history PWS. of AS, to improve our understanding of the complications, morbidity Design. Five PWS patients (5-22 years of age) being followed at the and neurodevelopment in AS. We present the baseline clinical data Emergency Children Hospital L. Turcanu, Timisoara were examined at that describes characteristics of the first 102 subjects enrolled in our the dental clinic of the same institution. Medical information collected study. included all clinical manifestation, body mass index (BMI), level of cog- Methods: All subjects were between 5 months and 26 years old. Sub- nitive functioning, genetic investigations. Oral and radiological evalua- jects were evaluated by detailed history, physical examination, stan- tions were performed. dardized neurodevelopmental assessments, and electroencephalo- Results. All 5 patients had caries experience, dental erosion and sali- grams (EEG). Deletions were sized using a chromosome 15-specific vary flow rates were assessed. comparative genomic hybridization microarray. Conclussion. The clinical implications of the dental anomalies, with Results: The median age of the 102 subjects was 36 months (80% genetically controlled patterns are important in establishment of early were between 17 months and 60 months). 74% of subjects had dele- diagnosis and appropriate orthodontic care and collaboration between tions, 15% had either imprinting defects or uniparental disomy, and dentist, geneticist and pediatrician ensure a formula of a correct diag- 12% had UBE3A mutations. The most common findings were mouth- nosis and in giving an adequate therapeutical advice. ing behavior in 93%, short attention span in 91%, microcephaly in 81%, sleep difficulties in 79%, ataxic or broad-based gait in 78%, fascination P03.173 with water in 75%, and inappropriate laughter was observed in 62% of contributions to expanding the concept genetic-epigenetic and subjects. Clinical seizures were reported in 69% of subjects, although the correlation phenotype-genotype in Prader-Willi/Angelman all EEGs were abnormal. Data on the variations in these characteris- syndromes tics by molecular subtype will be presented. M. Stoian1, V. Belengeanu1, N. Cucu2, M. Puiu1; Conclusions: In children with AS, it is the neurobehavioral phenotype, 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, rather than the dysmorphic features or seizures, that is most char- 2Faculty of Biology, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania. acteristic. The “classic” AS phenotype is more frequently observed in Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes are two distinct neurodevelop- those with deletions or UBE3A mutations, and not as evident in those mental disorders, caused by several genetic/epigenetic mechanisms with UPD or imprinting defects. involving chromosome 15. Recent studies revealed differences in different classes of PWS/AS against previous ones. This aspect sup- P03.171 ports the requirement of extending the investigation protocols for the Particular forms of Prader Willi syndrome - clinical and genetic patients in order to acquire an early diagnosis, an accurate etiologi- study cal subtype that will support an adequate genetic counseling and an C. Rusu1, C. Vulpoi1, E. Braha1, M. Volosciuc2, V. Gorduza1, C. Gorduza3, M. efficient management of the disease. We initiated a project and we Covic1; propose to identify possible factors involved in etiology of altering of 1University of Medicine, Iasi, Romania, 2Children’s Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 3”Sf the imprinting process, by applying adapted surveys for the families of Spiridon” Hospital, Iasi, Romania. the patients, including many generations. Applications of genetic and Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a relatively common disorder due to epigenetic testing relevant for subtypes of PWS/AS and the introduc- abnormalities in the 15q11.2-q13 region. Major manifestations include tion of chromatin remodeling tests by chromatin inmmunoprecipitation hypotonia with poor suck and poor weight gain in infancy, early child- assay and possibility of TOF mass spectrometry are original and com- hood-onset hyperphagia and obesity, characteristic appearance, hy- plex aspects that this study has as objectives. In the first three months pogonadism, growth hormone insufficiency causing short stature, mild from the start off of this project we investigated the first four patients (1 mental retardation and characteristic behaviour. boy and 3 girls) that were included in the study. The phenotype of the We present 3 particular cases of PWS recorded in the files of Iasi Med- patients allowed as according to clinical criteria to set the PWS diag- ical Genetics Center in order to illustrate some special features and nose. For all patients FISH analysis was performed using Vysis Prad- to discuss the diagnosis and management strategy. In all 3 cases the er-Willi/Angelman Region Probe - LSI SNRPN SpectrumOrange/CEP suspicion of diagnosis was based on actualized diagnostic criteria. 15 (D15Z1) SpectrumGreen/LSI PML SpectrumOrange probe. For one Case 1: 10 years old girl with typical neonatal hypotonia and poor of the patients the deletion was positive and for the rest the result was weight gain in infancy followed by marked hyperphagia and obesity, negative. The complex epigenetic analysis is to be performed remain- acromicria and hypogonadism, but with tall stature, multiple severe ing that the results to be included in the presentation. allergies, severe mental retardation and seizures. Genetic defect: mi- crodeletion identified by FISH; Case 2: 6 years old girl with neonatal hypotonia and feeding difficultiesCytogenetics  P03.174 of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Antalya, Turkey. Deletion of the cHRNA7 gene in a patient with Prader-Willi Deletion of chromosome 22q11.2 (22q11.2 DS) is one of the most syndrome and epilepsy common microdeletion syndromes. It is estimated incidence of 1:4000- A. Buffet1, V. Gaston1, B. Delobel2, G. Diene3, M. Tauber3, P. Calvas1, E. Bieth1; 5000 live births. Approximately, 22q11.2 DS accounts for 5 % all new- 1Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 2Hôpital Saint Vincent, Lille, France, 3Hôpi- borns with congenital heart diseases (CHD) and 75 % of patients with tal des Enfants, Toulouse, France. 22q11.2 DS have CHD.The aim of this study was to evalute clinical Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is an imprinting disorder caused by findings in individuals with 22q11.2 DS. We retrospectively evaluated loss of expression of paternally inherited contiguous genes from the both clinical findings and CHD in 17 children with 22q11.2 DS. 10 cas- chromosomal region 15q11-q13. In 70 percent of cases the affected es had CHD with/without conotruncal defect and 7 cases had without patients carry an interstitial deletion on the paternal chromosome 15. CHD. Major dysmorphic fndings of the cases are hypertelorism, lat- Two recurrent deletions are commonly reported: one between the eral displacement of the inner canthi, short palpebral fissures, swol- breakpoint 1 (BP1) to BP3 and the other between BP2 to BP3. We len eyelids, dysmorphism of the nose, low set ears, minor ear-lobe have recently shown that approximately 10 percent of the 15q11-q13 anomalies and velopharyngeal insufficiency. We found that 12 cases deletions are atypical and involve other breakpoints. had velopharyngeal insufficiency, 5 cases had hypocalsemia and one PWS and epilepsy is a rare occurrence reported in less of 10 percent case with immune deficiency (Low T-cell level). Interestingly, we found of PWS. Recent studies have shown that CHRNA7 gene (cholinergic that 3 cases (3/7) without CHD had dysmorphism of nose and all of the receptor neuronal nicotinic alpha polypeptide 7) which maps on chro- cases without CHD (7/7) had velopharyngeal insufficiency. But how- mosome 15q13.3 is involved in isolated epilepsy. ever only 5 case with CHD (5/10) had velopharyngeal insufficiency.In We report a case of a young girl affected with PWS and epilepsy. PWS the study, we presented that dysmorphic features of 22q11.2 DS such was suspected because of neonatal hypotonia and craniofacial fea- as velopharyngeal insufficiency and dysmorphism of nose may be im- ture. The diagnostic was confirmed by methylation analysis and an un- portant sign for diagnosis of cases with 22q11.2 DS without CHD. balanced karyotype 45,XX,-15,der(10)t(10;15)(q26.3;q13) was found by cytogenetics analysis. We performed a Quantitative Multiplex PCR P03.177 Short Fluorescent fragment methodology to analyse ten markers of DiGeorge syndrome presenting with laryngeal membrane the 15q11-q13 region including the CHRNA7 gene. We found a large D. Begović, S. Huljev Frković, R. Lasan Trčić, D. Markov Glavaš, D. Šarić, L. atypical deletion leading to the loss of the CHRNA7 gene. Our results Letica; suggest that epilepsy in this case of PWS could be due to the hap- University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. loinsufficiency of CHRNA7. At our knowledge, it is the first case of We present a case of DiGeorge syndrome with laryngeal membrane PWS and epilepsy with a demonstrated deletion of CHRNA7 gene. as additional element of the syndrome. The patient is the first child of We propose to search for an atypical deletion in all patients with PWS healthy parents, male, born on term, spontaneously, BW 3730 gr, BL and epilepsy. 51 cm, HC 37 cm, Apgar 9/10. Within first minutes of life baby cryed without voice with occasional inspiratory stridor. Micrognatia, low set, P03.175 small ears, hypertelorism, short palpebral fissures, blunted nose, short Deletion analysis using Quantitative multiplex PcR of short philtrum, high arched palate were also noticed. Endotracheal endos- fluorescent Fragments (QMPSF) in patients with Prader-Willi copy showed omega epiglottis and laryngeal membrane occupying 50 syndrome: evidence for uncommon deletion types % of laryngeal entrance. Cardiac ultrasound showed ventricular septal V. Gaston1, A. Buffet1, G. Diene2, M. Tauber2, E. Bieth1; defect, atrial septal defect type II and right aortal arch. Fluorescence in 1Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 2Hôpital des Enfants, Toulouse, France. situ hybridistaion (FISH) analysis revealed a deletion of chromosome Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a neurogenetic disorder that results 22q11.2. from the absence of normally active paternally expressed genes from Although rarely, laryngeal membrane, especially in combination with the 15q11-q13 chromosome region. About 70% of individuals have congenital heart defects should be considered for deletion 22q11.2. a paternally derived interstitial deletion of 15q11-q13. Two common classes of deletion has been reported: a type I between the break- P03.178 point 1 (BP1) to BP3 and a type II deletion between BP2 to BP3. The A case of Emanuel syndrome arising from 2:2 segregation of a deletion type status is commonly characterized by FISH on cultured paternal t(11;22) cells and/or by microsatellites analysis on both patient and parental A. M. Mohamed, A. K. Kamel, M. O. El Rouby, M. S. Zaki, H. A. Hussein; DNA. Because these two approaches don’t allow the screening of the National Research cetre, Cairo, Egypt. entire critical 15q11q13 region we believed that other types of deletion Emanuel syndrome is an inherited chromosomal abnormality. It might be missed. We have recruited 66 PWS patients with routinely is the result of 3:1 meiotic segregation of a balanced translocation, diagnosed 15q deletion and we have analyzed the critical region using t(11;22)(q23;q11). This rearrangement is the only recurrent non Rob- a new molecular assay based on the QMPSF (Quantitative Multiplex ertsonian translocation in humans. Affected offspring usually carry a PCR of Short fluorescent Fragments) method. This assay includes supernumerary derivative 22 chromosome and thus effectively triso- three multiplex PCR allowing amplification of 18 different gene-mark- mic for part of chromosome 22 and part of chromosome 11. ers located from BP1 to telomeric to BP3 region. We found 16 PWS A 6 years female patient, presented with mental retardation, cranio- patients (24 %) with TI deletion, 44 (67 %) with TII deletion and 6 pa- facial abnormalities, with no cardiac abnormalities. tients (9 %) carrying an uncommon 15q deletion. The ratio of TI/TII Cytogenetic analysis and FISH using WCP11, WCP 22, LSI N25 and deletion was consistent with previous studies. LSI 22q13.3 revealed that the child had both translocation chromo- In conclusion, our QMPSF assay represents a powerfull tool for rapid somes, plus an additional copy of der(22). Her father had balanced detection and characterization for small rearrangements in 15q11-q13 translocation t(11;22), also her brother had the same balanced trans- region. It is particularly attractive to distinct different deletion types and location. Her karyotype was 47,t(11;22)(q23;q11),+der(22).This rare useful for genotype-phenotype correlation studies in Prader-Willi syn- karyotype can arise by 2:2 segregation in 1st meiotic division in the drome. balanced translocation father, followed by nondisjunction at meiosis II in a balanced spermatocyte. P03.176 Genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis and awareness of high risk Evaluation of clinical findings in 17 Children with 22q11.2 breast cancer is very important in the families with balanced carrier of deletion syndrome with/without congenital hearth defects a t(11;22). E. Mihci1, A. Uslu2, F. Kardelen3, S. Berker-Karaüzüm4, S. Taçoy1; 1AkdenizUniversity School of Medicine Department of Pediatrics Division of P03.179 Clinical Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2AkdenizUniversity School of Medicine De- three cases of two unrelated families with a microduplication partment of Pediatrics, Antalya, Turkey, 3AkdenizUniversity School of Medicine 22q11.2: developmental skull defects and phenotype variability. Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Antalya, Turkey, 4AkdenizUniversity School F. Ahlfors1, L. Grozdanova2, R. Stoeva3,4, J. Fryns4, T. Olausson1, P. Anders- son1, C. Darnfors1, M. Stefanova1; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothen-Cytogenetics 0 burg, Sweden, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Plovdiv, P03.181 Bulgaria, 3Department of Paediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical University, Fourteen new cases contribute to the characterization of the Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 4Center for Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 7q11.23 microduplication syndrome. Leuven, Belgium. N. Van der Aa1, K. Storm1, G. Vandeweyer1, L. Rooms1, C. Romano2, G. Mort- The 22q11.2 microduplication is a considerably new syndrome with ier3, B. Menten3, A. Destrée4, K. Männik5, D. McMullan6, E. M. H. F. Bongers7, an extremely variable phenotype ranging from normal to full clinical S. Jacquemont8, C. Schrander-Stumpel9, S. G. M. Frints9, B. W. M. van Bon7, expression of MR/MCA syndrome. Commonly reported features are R. F. Kooy1; growth and motor delay, cognitive deficit, behaviour problems, hearing 1Antwerp University Hospital, Wilrijk, Belgium, 2Oasi Institute (IRCCS), Troina, impairment, velopharyngeal insufficiency, urogenital anomalies. Here Italy, 3Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4Institut de Pathologie et de we report three cases of two unrelated families with 22q11.2 microdu- Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium, 5University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 6Birming- plication: a 10-year-old boy who inherited duplication from his healthy ham Woman’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 7Radboud University, father and two brothers, 12-year-old and 2-year-10-months-old carrying Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 8University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, the duplication of their healthy mother. Common features for all three 9University Hospital AZM, Maastricht, The Netherlands. were moderate psychomotor delay, widely open fontanel at birth with Interstitial deletions of 7q11.23 cause Williams-Beuren syndrome, one a delayed closure, and following dysmorphism: hypertelorism, strabis- of the best characterized microdeletion syndromes. The clinical phe- mus, fifth finger clinodactyly, overlapping irregular toes. Additionally, notype associated with the reciprocal duplication however is not well the 10-year-old boy, presented unstable gait, asthma, pyeloureteral defined, though speech delay is often mentioned. We present 14 new reflux, ADHD, and both he and his father had open sagital suture at 7q11.23 cases with the reciprocal duplication of the Williams-Beuren birth. Extra features seen on the 12-year-old boy were lack of parietal syndrome critical region, 9 familial and 5 de novo. These were iden- and part of occipital bones, hypoplasia of temporal and occipital part of tified by either array-based MLPA or by array-CGH/oligonucleotide the brain, non-obstructive hydrocephaly, and hypospadias. His 2-year- analysis in a series of patients with idiopathic mental retardation with 10-months-old brother had prominent metopic suture, inverted nipples, an estimated population frequency of 1:13.000-1:20.000. Interchromo- deep palmar and plantar creases, two-phalangeal fifth finger, hypo- somal recombination is the preferred exchange mechanism by which tonia, unstable gait, affect-respiratory episodes resembling epilepsy the duplication arises. The CYLN2 gene within the duplicated region (without EEG changes), and dilatation of lateral brain ventricle. Dupli- is approximately 2 times overexpressed in carriers of the duplication. cation of respectively 3Mb and 2.5Mb of 22q11.2 chromosome region, The expression of the GTF2I gene, just on the boundary of the dupli- “DiGeorge region”, were detected by MLPA and BAC array (duplicated cated region and thus with only 2 intact copies present in patients, was CHKAD-26-1 clone) and confirmed by FISH and MLPA. This report also significantly increased. contributes with three new cases to the variable phenotype spectrum Variable speech delay is a constant finding in our patient group, con- of microduplication 22q11.2 syndrome. To our knowledge it is the first firming previous reports. Cognitive abilities range from normal to mod- report of developmental skull defects and microduplication 22q11. erate mental retardation. The association with autism is present in five patients and in one father who also carries the duplication. There is P03.180 an increased incidence of hypotonia and congenital anomalies: heart Prenatal diagnosis of a maternally derived unbalanced defects (PDA), diaphragmatic hernia, cryptorchidism and non-spe- der(4)t(4;11) leading to an overlapping phenotype of Wolf- cific brain abnormalities on MRI. Specific dysmorphic features were Hirschhorn and Russell-silver syndromes in two siblings: noted in our patients, including a short philtrum, thin lips and straight novel recurrent translocation, acGH and molecular cytogenetic eyebrows. In summary, patients with the reciprocal duplication of the analyses. Williams-Beuren region have a number of features in common, sug- E. Kolomietz, A. Smith, K. Chong; gestive of a clinically recognizable syndrome Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. Constitutional reciprocal translocations were thought to arise randomly P03.182 with the only exception of recurrent rearrangements being the t(11;22). cardiovascular spectrum in Williams-Beuren syndrome. Recent evidence indicates that recurrent breakpoints may be more C. Skrypnyk1, M. Bembea1, C. Jurca1, C. Liveratou2, D. Smeets3; common than previously thought and mediated by non-B DNA struc- 1University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania, 2Williams Syndrome Association, tures, such as cruciforms, caused by palindromic AT-rich repeats. The Bucharest, Romania, 3Institute of Human Genetics, St. Radboud University, clinical significance of these rearrangements may be underestimated The Netherlands. because certain rearrangements, most notably subtelomeric translo- The Williams-Beuren Syndrome (WBS) is a rare genomic disorder cations, can be difficult to detect by conventional G-banding. caused by a contiguous gene deletion on chromosome 7q11.23. The We report on two siblings of same sex and apparently normal karyo- phenotype of WBS consists of typical dysmorphic features, supra- types both presented prenatally with severe intrauterine growth restric- valvular aortic stenosis,infantile hypercalcemia, a characteristic be- tion (IUGR). The mother had an apparently balanced translocation, haviour, and cognitive deficits relatively sparing auditory perception t(4;11)(p16.3;p15.5), and both sibs had an adjacent -1 segregation and cognition. We present four patients, two boys and two girls, ages variant with loss of terminal 4p and gain of terminal 11p regions which ranged from 1 year to 14 years at the time of diagnosis. All patients was detected by aCGH and FISH using subtelomeric probes. Each were clinically diagnosed with WBS and confirmed by FISH testing of these rearrangements is associated with well known clinical phe- with common elastin (ELN) gene probe. The cardiovascular spectrum notypes. of the patients varied and was the reason of genetic reward for 3 out Paternal duplication of 11p15 is associated with the Beckwith-Wiede- of 4 patients. Supravalvular aortic stenosis was found in 1 case, with mann syndrome while maternal duplication is associated with Rus- hypertrophic left heart and arterial systemic hypertension; 1 case had sell-Silver syndrome. As expected both fetuses presented with severe a severe form of pulmonary artery brachial stenosis and mitral valve IUGR consistent with both Wolf-Hirschhorn and Russel-Silver pheno- prolapse, with surgical correction at the age of 10; 1 case had periferic types. pulmonary artery stenosis, renal artery hipoplazia and minor atrial This familial case of what appears to be a novel recurrent transloca- septal defect which suggested the diagnosis in the first year of life tion demonstrates the value of aCGH in the diagnosis of submicro- and remained under supervision; 1 case had only a paroxistic supra- scopic chromosome abnormalities in those patients for whom routine ventricular tachycardia, and was diagnosed at the age of 14 due to chromosome analysis does not adequately explain clinical findings. cognitive deficits. Breakpoint sequence analysis in our cases is compared to previously The cardiac findings from consensus criteria enabled a tentative clini- published cases and an analysis of the 4p and 11p regions for pal- cal diagnosis of WS in 3 out of 4 patients and using FISH, the diagno- indromic repeat sequences may help to elucidate mediators of this sis was confirmed. The variable expression of the WBS cardiovascular recurrent chromosomal aberration. spectrum requires periodic evaluation and impose a detailed analysis of the extra cardiac signs of these patients for a positive diagnosis.Cytogenetics  P03.183 males. Although all of the chromosomes can be involved in reciprocal An atypical 7q11.23 deletion in a normal iQ Williams-Beuren translocations, chromosomes 12, 22 and Y are involved more often syndrome patient than expected on the basis of their relative lengths. A balanced re- E. Biamino1, C. Howald2, L. Micale3, B. Augello3, C. Fusco3,4, M. G. Turturo3, S. ciprocal translocation between chromosome Y and autosomes has Forzano1, M. Silengo1, G. B. Ferrero1, A. Reymond2, G. Merla3; been demostrated. The association between translocation (Y;1) and 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Center for Inte- azoospermia also has been suggested. grative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Medical We report a balanced reciprocal (Y;3) translocation associated with Genetics Unit, IRCCS “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza”, San Giovanni Rotondo, azoospermia which we could not find similar published case in the Italy, 4PhD Program, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Foggia, literature. A 30-year-old man was referred to our department due to Foggia, Italy. infertility. Physical examination of patient was unremarkable. Testicular Williams Beuren syndrome (WBS, OMIM#194050) is a multisystemic sonography revealed a homogenous echo, and mild bilateral varico- neurodevelopmental disorder caused by a hemizygous deletion of celes. The size of the right testis was 47x25 mm, and the left was 1.55 Mb on chromosome 7q11.23 spanning 28 genes. Haploinsuffi- 47x28 mm. His semen analysis showed: volume ( 0.8 ml ), count ( ciency of the ELN gene was shown to be responsible for supravalvular 0.05 mill/ml ), motility ( 100% non-motile ). The levels of his follicle- aortic stenosis and generalized arteriopathy, while LIMK1, CYLN2 and stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, prolactin and testosterone GTF2IRD1 genes were suggested to be linked to the specific cogni- were within normal limits. Chromosomal study on his peripheral blood tive profile and craniofacial features. These insights for genotype-phe- was performed, using standard G-banding techniques, and revealed notype correlations came from the molecular and clinical analysis of that all his cells have a balanced translocation between chromosomes patients with atypical deletions and mice models. number 3 and Y with a 46,X t(Y;3)(q12;q22) karyotype. We report the detailed clinical and cognitive examinations together with cytogenetics (FISH) and molecular (QPCR) analysis of a WBS P03.186 patient showing mild WBS physical phenotype and normal IQ. He AZF microdeletions in iranian non-obstructive azoospermia carries a shorter 1 Mb atypical deletion, which does not include the patients GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I genes and only partially the BAZ1B gene. Our R. Mirfakhraie1,2, F. Mirzajani1, N. Salsabili3, M. Montazeri1, S. Kalantar4, M. results are consistent with the previous hypothesis that hemizygosity Houshmand1; of the GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I genes might be involved in the facial dys- 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Re- morphisms and in the specific motor and cognitive deficits observed public of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Branch, in WBS patients. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Mirza koochak khan Hospital, Tehran Univer- sity of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Clinical & Research P03.184 Center for Infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. the elastin gene is not disrupted in a patient with a balanced Genetic factors cause about 10% of male infertility. In the present study tarnslocation t(5 ;7)(q32;q11.23) and incomplete Williams-Beuren the existence and or absence of 8 sequence tagged sites markers phenotype representing AZF regions (AZFa, AZFb, AZFc and AZFd) was studied M. Chaabouni1, F. Abdelhedi2, I. Ouertani1, M. A. Ksentini1, R. Meddeb1, L. Ben using Multiplex PCR. Of the total 106 azoospermic men analyzed, 14 Jemaa1, H. Chaabouni1; individuals (13.21%) showed Y chromosome deletion, of which dele- 1Department of hereditary and congenital diseases, Charles Nicolle hospital, tion in AZFb region was the most common (71.43%) followed by AZFc tunis, Tunisia, 2Department of hereditary and congenital diseases, Hedi Chaker (50%) , AZFd (42.86%) and AZFa (21.43%). None of these microdele- Hospital, sfax, Tunisia. tions was detected in the control fertile group. Also in the case of AZFc The Williams-Beuren syndrome is a complex developmental disorder partial deletions, no significant statistical correlation was observed with multisystemic manifestations including supravalvular aortic steno- between the incidences of gr/gr, b1/b3 and b2/b3 deletions and male sis (SVAS), a typical face and a specific cognitive phenotype. Elastin is infertility (P values were 0.153, 0.465, and 0.447 respectively). one of the deleted genes in this contigous syndrome whose haploinsuf- ficiency causes cardiovascular malformations. Correlations between P03.187 deleted genes and observed phenotypes are not well established. molecular and cytogenetic analysis of Y chromosome Here, we report the case of a 5 years and 6 months old boy referred to abnormalities in males with reproductive disorders us for psychomotor delay and mental retardation. V. Cejnova1, P. Stolba2, V. Harmas1, M. Wilimska1, J. Lastuvkova1; Physical examination showed a dysmorphic face with a broad fore- 1Regional Health Corporation, Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad Labem, Depart- head, full cheeks, epicanthus,depressed nasal bridge, open mouth, ment of Medical Genetics, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic, 2Regional Health protruding lower lip. He also has a severe myopia. A mild mental re- Corporation, Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad Labem, Department of Transfusiol- tardation was noticed, as our patient is attending school but having ogy, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic. attention difficulties. Introduction: Approximately 10-15% of couples are affected by infer- Neither cardiovascular malformation nor abdominorenal anomalies tility. The male factor of infertility (the azoospermia factor, AZF) was were found by ultrasound examination. However, karyotype showed a mapped to three different subregions (AZFa, AZFb, AZFc) in Yq11 reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 5 and 7: 46,XY,t(5;7)( which are associated with spermatogenic failure. The aim of this study q32;q11.23). After FISH experiments with Vysis ELN probe and Vysis was: 1) to determine the prevalence and type of microdeletions of the EGR1 probe, we concluded that the breakpoint on chromosome 7 was Y chromosome of Czech males with reproductive disorders; 2) to de- proximal to ELN and on chromosome 5 distal to EGR1. Further FISH scribe cytogenetic abnormalities. studies showed that the breakpoint on chromosome 7 is proximal to Methods: Karyotypes and AZF microdeletions were analyzed in 136 the BAC RP11-313P13 (i.e 1Mb from ELN). We are studying the exact males from patients with azoospermia and oligospermia. Genomic breakpoint to determine the disrupted region which could help us to DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples and two multiplex better correlate features in Williams syndrome with candidate genes. polymerase chain reactions (PCR) were performed using sequence tagged sites (STSs) primers to confirm the presence or absence of Y P03.185 chromosome microdeletions (Simoni et al., 1999). Azoospermia due to a de novo balanced reciprocal translocation Results: Microdeletions of Y chromosome were detected in ten (7.35%) (Y;3)(q12;q22) patients. Among these, one had deletions in AZFa, three in AZFc, F. Farzanfar, C. Azimi; three in AZFb+c and two in AZFa+b+c regions. In one case, the partial Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, deletion in AZFb (sY134) region was found. We present a molecular Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and cytogenetic analysis of a mosaic 45,X/46,X,idic(Y) in patient with It has been suggested that among infertile couples 4.5% of males and isodicentric Y chromosome with two short arms and small portion of 6% of women have some sort of chromosomal aberrations. Aside from the long arm (microdeletions in Yq11). sex chromosome abnormalities (males, 2% and females, 4.5%), bal- Conclusion: Screening for microdeletions in AZFa, b and c region of anced reciprocal translocations are the most frequent chromosomal Y chromosome showed a big variation among different studies. Our aberrations with the frequency of about 1% for males and 0.7 for fe- study did not find any population dependent differencies in the preva-Cytogenetics  lence and type of AZF microdeletions comparing to present world stud- P03.190 ies and the incidence of the microdeletions in Czech infertile males Pericentric inversion in chromosome 1 in a patient with falls within the range published in other countries. azoospermia D. Mierla, V. Radoi, D. Jardan; P03.188 Life Memorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, Bucharest, Romania. male infertility - an association study by GGc and cAG repeats A 36 year old patient was referred to our clinic for genetic counseling from gene AR analysis due to infertility. Patient reported no history of inflammation or damage A. Fernandes1, R. Gonçalves1, S. Fernandes2, A. Barros2,3, A. Brehm1; of the testis. Sperm analysis established azoospermia. Cytogenetic 1Human Genetics Laboratory, University of Madeira, Funchal, Portugal, 2Genet- analysis using GTG banding showed 46, XY karyotype with a peri- ics Department, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Cen- centric inversion of chromosome 1 - inv(1)p13q23. Both parents of the tre of Reproductive Genetics A Barros, Porto, Portugal. proband had a normal karyotypes. Background: The human androgen receptor (AR) gene is located on Pericentric inversions of human chromosomes was frequently reported X chromosome, region q11-12 and contains two polymorphic trinucle- in literature, however clinical significance is yet to be established due otide repeats of CAG and GGC, which code for polyglutamine and to apparent lack of phenotypic manifestations. Chromosome 1 was polyglycine tracts in the N-terminal domain where the receptor activity rarely associated with phenotypic alterations and here we present an resides. Longer repeats induce decrease of transactivation function interesting case of infertility associated with this abnormality. in the AR receptor and weaken an anti-proliferative effect on various steroid-related tissues. Shorter GGC and CAG repeats result in higher P03.191 receptor-activity of AR that inhibits the growth of these steroid-related Estimation of genetic abnormalities in male infertility tissues. In fertile men the number of CAG repeats varies between 10 A. Tzeferakos1, C. Billi2, M. Papalouka1, S. Vagelatou1, G. Tsigaridas2, S. Be- and 35 while GGC repeats varies between 4 and 24. shari2, A. Sideri2, L. Florentin-Arar2, F. Sachinidi2; Methods: A group of 108 infertile men and other composed of 99 sub- 1Reproductive Medical Unit, Athens, Greece, 2Alpha Lab Molecular Biology and jects with proven fertility were selected to be used in this study. Dif- Cytogenetics Center, Athens, Greece. ferences in CAG and GGC frequencies were calculated with Fisher’s Twenty oligozoospermic patients were referred to us in order to evalu- exact test. P<0.05 was considered statistically significant. ate some of the commonest genetic abnormalities that lie behind many Results: No significant difference was found between patients and cases of male infertility. Microdeletions of the Y chromosome and controls in distribution of CAG and GGC, when analysed separately. karyotypic abnormalities are the most frequent genetic causes of de- However, the analysis of the joint distribution of CAG and GGC (table fective spermatogenesis. Men with bilateral congenital absence of the 1) showed that the distribution of particular haplotypes is significantly vas deferens are probable CF carriers and patients should be tested different between patients and controls. for CFTR gene mutations. Additionally, sperm DNA fragmentation and Conclusion: Small sizes of both CAG and GGC repeats seems to be elevated aneuploidy rates are being increasingly recognized as impor- able to predispose to the male infertility while the bigger sizes, mainly tant causes of male infertility. for CAG repeats, will be able to have a protector effect in male infertil- Our cohort comprised of 10 patients with severe and 10 patients with ity. moderate oligozoospermia. No patient had deletions for the 5 screened regions of Y chromosome (AZFa, AZFb, AZFc, SRY, Yq12). None of P03.189 the commonest mutations of CFTR gene was detected. All were karyo- A case of azoospermia associated to Yp duplication and partial typicaly normal. DNA fragmentation measured with TUNEL assay was Yq deletion not significantly elevated compared to 20 samples with normal sperm M. Chaabouni, M. A. ksentini, H. Jilani, F. Maazoul, L. Ben Jemaa, R. Mrad, H. parameters and ranged from 2%-18.8% (cut-off limit: 20%), with the Chaabouni; exception of one patient with 40.4%. The rate of aneuploidy was mea- Department of hereditary and congenital diseases, Charles Nicolle hospital, sured using FISH on chromosomes 13, 15, 16, 18, 21, 22, X and Y. Six Tunis, Tunisia. patients (30%) had a significantly increased aneuploidy rate compared Structural abnormalities in Y chromosome are involved in male infertil- to normal controls: 4 patients were aneuploid for chromosomes X and ity. Y, 1 patient for chromosomes 22, X and Y and 1 patient for chromo- The most frequently reported anomalies concern the Y long arm with somes 15, 18, X and Y. deletions especially in the AZF region . Anomalies in the short arm are These preliminary results prove the diagnostic importance of genetic rather rare. studies in investigating male infertility and suggest that molecular cy- We report a case of infertility in a 30 years old man. Spermiogram in togenetics (FISH) should be incorporated in sperm analysis in routine this patient showed azoospermia. basis. Physical examination found small testis confirmed by ultrasound ex- amination, normal stature and normal mental development. He was P03.192 operated at age of 15 years old for cryptorchidism. the Relationship between sperm mtDNA mutations, sperm Karyotype performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes was interpreted Parameters and Genetic testing Results in male infertility as: 46,X,der(Y). D. Javadova1, G. Koc1, K. Ulucan2, D. Ergec3, S. Ergunsu1, M. Özyürek4, D. FISH was done for further characterization using SRY, Yp telomeric Kırac5, H. Tavukcu4, T. Tarcan4, A. I. Güney1; and Yq telomeric probes. 1Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, We found on the rearranged Y chromosome 2 SRY signals, 2 Yptel Istanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara University, Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Signals and noYqtel signal. Medical Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Maltepe University, Faculty of We concluded that the rearranged chromosme contains a duplication Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Mar- spanning at least the region from the Yptel to the SRY locus which mara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Urology, Istanbul, Turkey, contains approximately 2,7Mb. 5Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Istanbul, Our clinical data with these findings led us to study the AZF region. Us- Turkey. ing 9 STS markers, we found a partial deletion. In fact, no deletion was Infertility a significant problem, affecting up to 15% of couples of re- found in AZFa. However, in AZFb one STS marker (sY135) is pres- productive age. Common causes for male infertility are genetic factors ent and two others (sY127 and sY142) are deleted. Markers (sY277, (chromosomal abnormalities, Y chromosome microdeletions), hor- sY158) tested in AZFc region are deleted. mone and/or receptor problems, sperm production, delivery and motil- Thus our patient harbour a duplication of the Yp region (Yptel◊Yp11.31) ity problems. Sperm mitochondria plays a significant role for sperm and a deletion in the Yq region (Yq11.222◊Yqtel) motility as oxidative fosforilation (OXPHOS), driven by mitochondria, associated to azoospermia. provides energy for sperm. Recently, the role of mitochondrial DNA Few cases of i(Yp) have been reported but to our knowledge, this is the defects related OXPHOS enzymatic complexes in male infertility are in first case with duplication of Yp and Yq deletion. great interest. In this study , we aimed to reveal relations between DNA abnormalities, sperm parameters and genetic testing results. 30 patients with both structural and numerical anomalies (19 normo-Cytogenetics  spermia, 11 oligospermia) and 30 controls were recruited. Chromo- P03.195 some analysis were performed from peripheral blood and Y- chromo- MTHFR 5’UtR hypermethylation in testicular biopsy of some deletions were detected by using commercial Kit. Sperm DNA iranian patients with nonobstructive azoospermia: the role of purifications were carried out from both patients and controls. Mito- epigenetics in male infertility chondrial ND1, ATPase6 and Cytb genes were amplified and the am- M. Noruzinia, N. Khazamipour, P. Fatehmanesh, M. Keyhanee; plicons were analysed by direct sequencing. Sarem Research Center (SARC), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. All the participants were 46, XY with no Y- deletions. Some common Genetic factors involved in male infertility are not yet completely polymorphisms/ mutations including patients and controls were de- explored. MTHFR has been shown to be involved in male infertility tected in ND1, ATPase6 and Cytb genes. through the pathway of folate metabolism. However, as contradic- No correlation was found between sperm parameters and mtDNA mu- tory results are reported regarding polymorphisms of this gene, other tations in this study. It is suggested that low sample number may be a mechanism of pathogenesis like as promoter hypermethylation can be reason. We are looking forward to increase the number of cases and involved. In this study we explored methylatin status of 5’ UTR region determine D-loop which is another important locus of mtDNA in terms of MTHFR in male patients with nonobstructive azoospermia with pa- of male infertility. tient who had no known anomaly of spermatogenesis. Materials and method: P03.193 DNA from peripheral blood of 50 patients and 50 controls where ex- cAG repeat length in the androgen receptor gene in infertile men tracted by salting out method. DNA from testicular biopsy samples in serbia of 35 patients with nonobstructive azoospermia and 5 patients with M. L. Ristanovic1, C. Tulic2, J. Trifunovic1, A. Ristanovic1; obstructive azoospemia and normal spermatogenesis were extracted 1Institute of Human genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of Urology and Ne- using Roche DNA extraction kit. MSP was performed using primers phrology, Belgrade, Serbia. which had been designed to hybridize to CpG island in 5’UTR of MTH- The purpose of this study was to evaluate CAG repeat length in the FR. PCR products were electrophoresed on 8% bisacrylamide. androgen receptor gene in Serbian men with severe oligozoospermia. Results: Initially, 180 infertile patients were included in the study and spermo- Blood samples in patient and control groups showed no difference in gram has been performed in order to determine the sperm density. methylation. 53% of patients with nonobstructive azoospemia showed Patients were excluded if clinical evidence of obstructive azoospermia, the presence of methylated allele compaired to 0% in control group. known cytogenetic defects, Y chromosome microdeletion or abnormal This result confirms the presence of hypermethylation in testicular hormonal parameters were present. Control group of 100 age-matched sample of patients with azoospermic male infertility (P-values=0.03 men who had fathered at least two children was also analyzed for CAG <0.05). repeat length in the androgen receptor gene. The screening was per- Discussion:This is the first report to show the implication of epigenetic formed in 106 selected patients with idiopathic infertility by polymerase silencing of MTHFR in patients with azoospermic male infertility. This chain reaction (PCR) method on DNA extracted from peripheral blood. results could be considered as a step toward a tailored therapy in pa- The mean CAG repeat length in the androgen receptor gene in infer- tients with azoospermia. tile group (20.2±1.2) did not differ significantly than in control group (21.0±0.7) (t=0, 0978, p>0.05) Conclusion: No significant correlation P03.196 was found in CAG repeat length between infertile men and controls in Are Y chromosomal fragments involved in müllerian aplasia? Serbian population. M. J. Sandbacka1, J. N. Painter1,2, M. Puhakka3, M. Halttunen4, H. Laivuori3,5, K. Aittomäki1,3; P03.194 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Genetic sperm mitochondrial DNA mutations associated with reactive Epidemiology,Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Australia, oxygen species (ROs) and sperm DNA damage in male infertility 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, S. Venkatesh1, M. Shamsi1, M. Kumar1, R. Kumar2, N. P. Gupta2, R. K. Shar- Finland, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki University Central ma3, P. Talwar3, S. Mittal4, R. Dada1; Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Medical Genetics, University of 1Laboratory for Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, Department of Anatomy, Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Department of Urol- Müllerian aplasia (MA) is a congenital abnormality of the female genital ogy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 3ART centre, R&R tract profoundly affecting a woman’s life. Due to reasons still unknown, Hospital, New Delhi, India, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology , All the Müllerian (paramesonephric) ducts regress during fetal develop- India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. ment resulting in absence of upper two-thirds of the vagina and func- Excess Reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the semen is believed to af- tional uterus. Without treatment intercourse is difficult and pregnancy fect the sperm function. However, the mechanism behind the elevated is only possible through surrogacy. The incidence of MA is 1:5000 new- ROS and impaired sperm parameters is not clear. The present study born girls and the syndrome is often associated with renal and skeletal was aimed to find the correlation between ROS levels, mtDNA muta- malformations. tions and sperm DNA damage in semen of idiopathic infertile men. Previously the Y chromosomal TSPY1 gene has been reported to be Study included 50 idiopathic infertile men and 45 fertile controls. ROS involved in the development of MA. The aim of this study was to inves- was measured by chemiluminescence assay. Whole sperm mtDNA tigate the presence of possible Y chromosomal fragments in 110 Finn- was sequenced by standard PCR-DNA sequencing method. Sperm ish MA patients. In addition to attempting to amplify fragments of the DNA damage was studied by COMET assay. Infertile group showed previously reported TSPY1 gene, we also included 38 additional loci in significant difference in the sperm parameters compared to control order to cover the entire Y chromosome. This investigated sample set men. Infertile group showed significantly (p< 0.001) higher ROS lev- comprises, to our knowledge, a significantly larger sample series than els (157.76+78.88 cpm) /106 spermatozoa compared to fertile controls in any individual studies published to date. (4.98+1.82 cpm) / 106 spermatozoa. mtDNA sequencing revealed that None of our patients showed presence of the TSPY1 gene fragment 66% of the infertile group harboured one or more nucleotide changes or any of the 38 additional Y chromosomal markers, suggesting that Y in the mitochondrial genome compared to control men inspite some chromosomal genetic factors are not associated with development of common nucleotide changes (A750G, A4769G) in both the groups. MA in these patients. However, we can not completely exclude the role An average of 60% sperms showed (C+D) grade-higher DNA damage of Y chromosome fragments in the disorder. comet than the control group, which had an average of 15% sperm cells showing C+D grade comet. Higher ROS in the semen infertile P03.197 men compared to the controls may be due to large number of nucleo- Oxidative stress and apoptosis in spermatozoa of infertile men. tide changes in the mtDNA. As sperm DNA integrity is important for M. B. Shamsi, S. Venkatesh, S. Arora, D. S. Arya, R. Dada; successful fertilization, screening mtDNA mutations in infertile men AIIMS, New Delhi, India. with severe oxidative stress may help in the better management for BACKGROUND: DNA damage in sperm originates due to improper treatment/ART maturation, oxidative stress and apoptosis. DNA damage has recently been proposed as a better diagnostic and prognostic marker of spermCytogenetics  quality as compared to conventional semen analysis. The aim of this infertile men. Other complete (classic) AZF deletions (AZFa, AZFb and study was to examine the role of apoptosis and reactive oxygen species AZFb+c) were revealed in 19 (1.3%) patients. Partial AZFc deletions (ROS) in inducing DNA damage in ejaculated spermatozoa. METH- were detected in 195 (12.9%) in examined individuals. Most common ODS: We examined spermatozoa for apotosis by flow cytometry, DNA types of partial AZFc deletions were b2/b3 and gr/gr deletions. Their damage by comet assay and raw semen for Reactive Oxygen Species frequencies were 8.5% and 3.6%, respectively. Deletion b1/b3 was re- (ROS) by chemiluminescence in 43 idiopathic infertile patients hav- vealed in one patient. Other types of deletions partially covering AZFc ing normal semen parameters, 67 infertile men with abnormal semen region were detected in 11 (0.7%) examined men. Various degrees of parameters and in 29 fertile controls. RESULTS: Apoptosis in infertile spermatogenesis defects (from asthenozoospermia to azoospermia) men with normal semen parameters was significantly higher (p=0.009) have been found in patients with partial AZFc deletions. as compared to controls but non significantly different from infertile Conclusion: Obtained data demonstrated high prevalence of partial men with abnormal sperm parameters (p=0.317). ROS values were AZFc deletions in Russian infertile men. Partial deletion b2/b3 is com- significantly correlated with apoptosis levels in patients with normal monest the Y chromosome microdeletion among Russian infertile and abnormal semen parameters. (p=0.023; p=0.0121 respectively) men. but not in the fertile controls (p=0.067). Non significant difference in Olive Tail Moment (OTM) was obtained in patients with normal and P03.200 abnormal semen parameters. However significant difference for OTM A case of 46,XX male syndrome was observed in the fertile controls and patients with normal and ab- S. Gunes1, G. Okten1, M. Mercimek2, A. Tukun3, T. Ozcelik4, R. Asci2, H. Bagci5; normal semen parameters (p=0.014; p=0.029). CONCLUSION: DNA 1Ondokuz Mayis University, Medical Biology Department, Medical Genetics damage analysis provides additional dimension to semen analysis and Section, Samsun, Turkey, 2Ondokuz Mayis University, Department of Urology, has the advantage of rapidly performed and interpreted. Thus DNA Samsun, Turkey, 3Ankara University, Medical Genetics Department, Ankara, damage evaluation should be included in the diagnostic workup of in- Turkey, 4Bilkent University, Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, Anka- fertile men. ra, Turkey, 5Ondokuz Mayis University, Medical Biology Department, Samsun, Turkey. P03.198 46,XX male syndrome is a rare sex chromosome disorder occur- Analysis of 5t allele of the CFTR gene intron 8 in men with ring about 1 in 25 000 males. XX male syndrome mostly results from azoospermia and oligozoospermia from Ukraine unequal crossing over between X and Y chromosome during male O. A. Fesai, S. A. Kravchenko; meiosis. Point mutations, deletions or translocations of sex determin- Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics,, Kiev, Ukraine. ing region Y gene (SRY) the most common causes of sex reversal. Men with azoospermia or oligozoospermia due to germ cell failure Approximately 80% of 46,XX males have translocation of SRY region were suggested to have an increased risk of carrying CFTR gene mu- onto an X chromosome. SRY positive chromosomal aberrations arise tations. 5T is one of the alleles found at the polymorphic Tn locus in due to unequal recombination between Xp and Yp terminal regions intron 8 of the CFTR gene. A stretch of 5, 7 or 9 thymidine residues during paternal meiosis. In this report, we present the clinical, cytoge- is found at this locus. Less efficient splicing will occur when a lower netical, molecular cytogenetical, molecular data and X chromosome number of thymidines are found, resulting in CFTR transcripts that lack inactivation pattern of a 16-year-old patient referred to urological clinic exon 9 sequences. for evaluation of small testes and small penis. Chromosomal analysis In the present study we evaluated the incidence of the 5T allele in men revealed 46,XX karyotype. SRY amplification was positive and is con- with azoospermia and oligozoospermia from Ukraine. firmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). FISH test showed Isolated DNA from blood samples of 153 infertile men (60 - azoosper- the presence of SRY region translocated to the short arm of the X chro- mia and 93 - oligozoospermia) and of 102 fertile men (control group) mosome. Analysis of these cases illustrated that conventional cytoge- has been amplified by polymerase chain reaction targeting the 5T al- netic, FISH and SRY amplification techniques are useful for accurate lele of the CFTR gene intron 8. For the 5T allele discrimination frag- diagnosis and genetic counseling. ment analysis of Cy5-labeled PCR products on an automated DNA analyzer “A.L.F.-express” were used. P03.201 The percentage of patients with infertility who had 5T allele was signifi- Ambiguous Genitalia: Diagnosis and management with special cantly higher (p<0.05) than that in the control group (13.1% vs. 6.9%). reference to parental consanguinity and age at diagnosis The proportion of patients with azoospermia (15.0%) and oligozoo- S. M. Tayel1, H. S. Kassem2, I. Marzouk3, N. A. Abukarsh4, H. N. Sallam5; spermia (11.8%) who had the 5T allele was higher comparing to the 1Faculty of Medicine & Suzanne Mubarak Regional Centre for Women’s Health control group (6.9%), but not significantly different (p>0.05).Obtained & Development, Alexandria, Egypt, 2Clinical Genomic Centre, Faculty of data suggests that 5T allele could be involved in the process of sper- Medicine, Alexandria, Egypt, 3Genetics Unit, Pediatrics Department, Faculty of matogenesis or sperm maturation in azoospermic and oligozoosper- Medicine, Alexandria, Egypt, 4Histology Department, Al-Fateh Faculty of Medi- mic males. cine, Tripoli, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 5Faculty of Medicine & Suzanne Mubarak Regional Centre for Women’s health & Development, Alexandria, Egypt. P03.199 Diagnosis of ambiguous genitalia (AG) represents an enormous chal- the frequency of b2/b4, b2/b3 and gr/gr deletions in Russian lenge. One hundred six cases were ascertained over the past 10 years infertile men (1999-2008) in three Arab countries (Egypt, Libya, and Saudi Arabia) T. M. Sorokina, V. B. Chernykh, L. V. Shileiko, L. F. Kurilo, O. P. Ryzhkova, A. by clinical evaluation, blood karyotyping, hormones and biochemistry, V. Polyakov; pelvic imaging, and gonadal biopsy and SRY detection when indicated. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Results revealed MSHP in 66 cases, FSHP in 29 cases, 5 cases with Moscow, Russian Federation. genetic syndromes, 5 cases with gonadal dysgenesis (GD) and one Introduction: Y chromosome microdeletions are commonest genetic true hermaphrodite (THF) with the 46,XX karyotype. Age of diagnosis cause of male infertility. In contrast to complete AZF deletions partial ranged between newborn and 36 years (mean is 5.6 years). Parental AZFc region deletions is still under evaluated. The aim of our study consanguinity was observed in 82 cases (74 of them showed auto- was to analyze of frequency of partial AZFc deletions in Russian in- somal recessive disorders as a cause for their genital ambiguity). Six fertile men. families had more than one sib affected (2-6). Proper gender reassign- Materials and Methods: We investigated a cohort of 1510 Russian ment was performed in 15 cases where patients with complete form men from infertile couples. Complete AZF deletions were detected ac- of TFS were assigned the female sex while partial TFS, GD and THF cording to Laboratory guidelines for molecular diagnosis of Y-chromo- were assigned either gender according to the feasibility of surgical somal microdeletions (EAA/EMQN, 1999), with some modifications. reconstruction, the functioning gonads, pattern of expected hormonal Partial deletions in AZFc region were tested by multiplex PCR of fol- pubertal changes and the patient and family desire (gender identity). lowing STS loci: sY142, sY1197, sY1192, sY1291, sY1206, sY1054 Four cases rejected gender reassignment due to late diagnosis (12-23 and sY1125. years), religious and psychosocial reasons. This study highlights the Results: In total AZF deletions were detected in 268 (17.8%) examined high frequency of AG due to parental consanguinity and the late on- individuals. Complete AZFc (b2/b4) deletions were found in 54 (3.6%) set at diagnosis in Arab countries which might correlate with religiousReproductive genetics  and social factors. It also emphasizes the importance of considering sisted reproductive techniques (ART). Moreover mutations of CYP21 gender role and gender identity during sex reassignment especially in can lead to various reproductive disorders in females so they may be late diagnosis to avoid the deleterious psychological impact that might found in ART patients. reach suicidal attempts. We tested 9 frequent mutations of CYP21 gene using PCR and RFLPs in 8 unrelated females with different extents of 21-hydroxylase defi- P03.202 ciency. We also performed a retrospective investigation of 43 oocyte A rare deletion in X chromosome in a child with sexual reversal donors. We determined that one female witha classic virilizing form of F. Manoochehri, F. Razazian, F. Mortezapour, M. Rahnama, F. Nasiri, M. Za- CAH was a compound heterozygote - P30L/IVS2AS,A/C-G,-13 linked manian, F. Mahjoobi; with 8bp del. Another female with a nonclassic form of CAH had a The Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization Research Center,Tehran,Iran., P30L/V281L genotype. Linked mutations IVS2AS,A/C-G,-13 and 8bp Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. del were revealed in a patient with sexual maturation delay. We did not A baby was referred to our laboratory because of ambiguous genitalia. find any mutations in 4 females with hyperandrogenism. Four oocyte There was no relevant family history. donors (9.3%) were carriers of CYP21 mutations: one with the severe Material & Methods: lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set up mutation R356W and 3 donors with the mild mutation V281L as a het- in RPMI1640 supplemented with 20% FBS. High resolution chromo- erozygote. some banding was performed. Genetic investigation of females with CAH and suspicion of CAH re- Result: The karyotype was determined as: 46,X,del(X)(q26). Sonog- vealed CYP21 mutations, including severe mutations. Our results in- raphy revealed that the baby had a normal uterus and ovaries, but no dicate that it seems to be necessary to investigate CYP21 mutations testes were observed. in oocyte donors. Disucssion: The deletion of this region has not previously been re- ported as a cause for the ambiguous genitalia. P04.03 DNA damage in men exposed to occupational conditions of toxic fumes. P04. Reproductive genetics K. Sharma, V. Gupta, M. B. Shamsi, S. Venkatesh, R. Dada; AIIMS, New Delhi, India. P04.01 BACKGROUND: Occupational exposure to mutagenic/carcinogenic multiple aneuploidy in spontaneous abortions is associated fumes which include polycyclic aromatic compounds that bind to DNA with advanced maternal age: data retrieved from analysis of 600 and forms chemical-DNA adducts leading to DNA breaks are a safety consecutive cases concern for car mechanics and petrol pump workers. AIM: To investi- S. G. Vorsanova1,2, I. Y. Iourov1,2, A. D. Kolotii1, A. K. Beresheva1, I. A. Demi- gate the association between exposure to vehicle fumes with sperm dova1, O. S. Kurinnaya1, V. S. Kravets1, E. A. Kirillova3, I. V. Soloviev2, Y. B. DNA and lymphocyte DNA damage in car mechanics and outdoor Yurov1,2; workers at the petrol pump. The sperm parameters of the exposed 1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, Rus- group were also compared to healthy controls. METHOD: Sperm sian Federation, 2National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, and lymphocyte DNA damage was analyzed by comet assay in 23 Russian Federation, 3Woman’s Medical Center, Moscow, Russian Federation. car mechanics and petrol pump workers having an exposure period of Aneuploidy and polyploidy together represent the most common ge- minimum 1 year and 17 unexposed healthy controls. Semen analysis netic cause of spontaneous abortions (SA). However, the origin of was done according to WHO 1999 criterion. RESULTS: The exposed aneuploidy in human conceptions remains incompletely understood. group of men have significantly higher lymphocyte and sperm DNA We have hypothesized the existence of either meiotic or mitotic in- damage as compared to unexposed controls (p=0.0199, p=0.0278 re- stabilities produced by environmental factors, or maternal age, may spectively). The exposed group has higher number of sperm param- be associated with germline aneuploidy or post-zygotic aneuploidiza- eter pathologies. The motility and normal morphology was significantly tion (polyploidization) of fetal tissues. Maternal age has the potential lower in workers and mechanics as compared to controls (p=0.021, to be more evident in cases of multiple aneuploidy (MA) or polyploidy p=0.039). Non significant association between sperm concentration (MP). To test the hypothesis, we have investigated the karyotype in was observed in the exposed and unexposed groups (p=0.065). CON- 600 samples of SA by interphase FISH taking into account maternal CLUSION: The assessment of DNA damage by comet assay in the exposure to common environmental mutagens and maternal age. An- studied occupationally exposed group provides an important tool for euploidy and polyploidy were detected in 50.1% of cases. Both MA and precise assessment of the associated potential health risks. MP were found in 9.4% of cases of SA. More precisely, MP was found in 3.5% of cases, autosomal and autosomal/gonosomal MA - in 3.2% P04.04 of cases, and pure gonosonal MA - in 2.7% of cases. A sociogenetic single nucleotide polymorphisms in promoters of mmP-2 and analysis has not revealed correlations between incidence of MA/MP mmP-9 are associated with endometriosis risk and maternal tobacco exposure, alcohol and irradiation. Analysis of M. Saare1, M. Lamp1, T. Kaart2, Ü. Kadastik3, A. Metspalu4, M. Peters1, A. Salu- maternal age in three aforementioned groups of MA/MP has shown mets1,5; that pure gonosonal MA and MP do not exhibit higher prevalence 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Universi- among mothers with advanced age. On the other hand, autosomal ty of Life Sciences, Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Tartu, and autosomal/gonosomal MA has demonstrated a 2-fold-increased Estonia, 3Tartu University Hospital`s Womens`s Clinic, Tartu, Estonia, 4Institute incidence in mothers with advanced age (P<0.05). The data suggest of Molecular and Cell Biology, Department of Biotechnology, University of Tartu, advanced maternal age increases autosomal aneuploidy risk and sug- Tartu, Estonia, 5Insitute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Department of Biotech- gests autosomal MA could serve as a model for uncovering the origin nology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. of aneuploidy. Background: Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are proteolytic en- Supported by Philip Morris USA. zymes that may contribute to the development of endometriotic le- sions. The aim of this study was to investigate the associations be- P04.02 tween the promoter region polymorphisms of MMP-2 and MMP-9 and investigation of 21-hydroxylase gene mutations in assisted risk of endometriosis. reproductive techniques. Methods: 150 Estonian patients with endometriosis and 199 healthy N. Kazmina, E. Markova, D. Tataru, O. Kazantseva, S. Selezneva, A. Svetla- women were studied. PCR based restriction fragment length poly- kov; morphism analysis was used to detect SNPs in promoter regions of Center for Reproductive Medicine, Krasnoyarsk, Russian Federation. MMP-2 (rs243866, rs243864, rs2285053) and MMP-9 (rs3918242). All The incidence of classic and nonclassic forms of congenital adrenal statistical tests were carried out using SPSS 17.0 program (SPSS Inc., hyperplasia (CAH), which are caused mostly by mutations of the 21- Chicago, IL, USA). hydroxylase gene (CYP21A2), is very high, and in some populations Results: Women with MMP-2 -735 (rs2285053) TC and TT genotype much higher than the frequency of cystic fibrosis. In spite of this fact, had a lower risk (p=0.016) of developing endometriosis compared to CAH is not included in genetic investigations of oocyte donors in as- the CC genotype carriers. The distribution of MMP-9 -1562 (rs3918242)Reproductive genetics  genotypes and allele frequencies was similar in both groups. However, P04.07 after dividing patients into subgroups according to the severity of dis- superovulation in mice alters the methylation pattern of ease (minimal-mild and moderate-severe) the multinomial logistic re- imprinted genes in the sperm of the offsprings gression analysis showed women with TT genotype or TT/TC genotype A. Paoloni-Giacobino, C. Stouder; had higher risk to develop moderate-severe endometriosis than CC Geneva University Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. genotype carriers (p=0.013 and p=0.027, respectively). There were no Imprinting is form of gene regulation that mediates a parent-of-origin- significant differences in genotype and allele frequency distributions dependent expression of the alleles of specific genes. The assisted of the MMP-2 -790 (rs243864) and -1575 (rs243866) polymorphisms reproduction techniques have the potential to interfere with imprinting between studied groups. reprogramming. In the present study, the possible deleterious effects Conclusions: Current study showed that the presence of T-allele in on imprinting of superovulation were evaluated in the mouse. Super- MMP-2 -735 polymorphism was associated with decreased probability ovulation was followed by natural mating and in vivo development. to endometriosis, while the T-allele in MMP-9 -1562 polymorphism was Then, possible methylation defects in the differentially methylated do- related to elevated risk of severe form of endometriosis. mains (DMDs) of 2 paternally (H19 and Gtl2) and 3 maternally (Peg1, Peg3 and Snrpn) imprinted genes were tested in the male offsprings. P04.05 The CpGs methylation status within the 5 gene DMDs was analyzed Follicle -stimulating hormone receptor gene polymorphism and in the liver, skeletal muscle, tail and sperm DNAs by pyro- or bisulfite Ovarian response to controlled ovarian hyperstimulation for iVF sequencing. In the liver, skeletal muscle and tail of controls, the per- M. H. Sheikhha, M. Eftekhar; centages of methylated CpGs were close to the theoretical expected Yazd research and clinical center for infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. value of 50% and no effect of superovulation could be observed. In The aim of study was to investigate the association between FSH re- the sperm of controls the percentages of methylated CpGs were close ceptor (FSHR) gene polymorphism at position 680 and the outcomes to the theoretical values of 100% and 0% in paternally or maternal- of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) for in vitro fertilization ly imprinted genes, respectively. Superovulation did not induce any and embryo transfer (IVF-ET) in Iranian women. change in the numbers of methylated CpGs of Gtl2 and Peg3 genes Materials and methods: one hundred and eight patients under 35 years but, interestingly, induced a significant 6 % decrease in the number of old who underwent IVF-ET procedures were included in this study. The methylated CpGs of H19 and significant 2.5- and 5.3-fold increases hormonal profile and treatment of all patients were analyzed and FSHR in those of Peg1 and Snrpn, respectively. A better understanding of polymorphism was examined by PCR-RFLP. Women from all groups the mechanism by which possible superovulation-induced imprinting were classified as Asn/Asn , Asn/Ser , and Ser/Ser genotype. defects in the oocytes are transmitted to the male germline of the fol- Result: Our study showed that all of patients in Asn/Asn group were lowing generation would certainly help to better understand imprinting normal responder and in Asn/Ser group 64.8% were normal responder defect transmission. and 21.1% and14.1% were poor and hyper responder respectively. In Ser /Ser group we didn’t have normal responder and 46.7% of these P04.08 patients were poor responder and 53.3% were hyper responder. Preventive genetic screening of a human male carriers of In Conclusion: FSH receptor polymorphism is correlated with response balanced structural aberrations to ovarian stimulation by FSH. K. Kvačková1,2, R. Gaillyová1,3, M. Vozdová4,5, E. Oráčová4,5, M. Vilémová1, P. Kuglík1,6, H. Filková1,6, I. Slámová1,6, J. Rubeš4,5; P04.06 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Dept. of intracytoplasmic sperm injection: What Are the Risks? A Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Re- Retrospective tunisian study public, 3Biological Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Dept. A. Zhioua1, N. Ounaies1, S. Hafsia1, H. Elloumi1, W. Ayed2, R. Bhouri2, O. of Genetics and Reproduction, Veterinary Research Institute, Brno, Czech Kilani1, A. Chaker1, F. Zhioua1, N. Bouayed-Abdelmoula3, S. Abdelhak4, A. Republic, 5Repromeda, Brno, Czech Republic, 6Faculty of Science, Masaryk Amouri2,4; University, Brno, Czech Republic. 1Department of Obstetric and Gynaecology, Infertility and IVF Center, Aziza Carriers of balanced structural aberrations are often infertile and have Othaman Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Institute of a higher risk of birth of a child with an unbalanced chromosomal aber- Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Laboratoire d’Histologie Embryologie, Faculté de Méde- ration. Cytogenetic screening of all infertile couples is standard rou- cine de Sax, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseas- tine now. Karyotype is determined in 650 infertile couples per year, es Research Unit (MIGOD), UR26/04, Pasteur Insitute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia. chromosomal abnormalities are detected in 10 % of these pacients. Backround: Over a million children have been born from assisted re- Structural aberrations are more frequent in men, whereas numeric ab- productive technology (ART) worldwide. Children conceived through errations prevail in women. Approximately 10 infertile males - carriers ART comprise as many as 1% to 2% of total births in some countries. of balanced structural aberration are gathered a year in our depart- Newer techniques being introduced appear less ‘natural’, such as in- ment. Concerning the preventive care, an examination of karyotype tracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), but there is little information on is recommended within prenatal screening in these couples, and the these children beyond the neonatal period in Tunisian population. preimplantation genetic diagnosis in case of IVF cycles. Objectives: We aimed to perform a detailed assessment of children The individual genetic risk can be assessed by determination of fre- born from ICSI. One of the primary objectives of the study was to as- quency of chromosomally unbalanced sperm in male carriers of bal- sess whether ICSI is associated with significant health problems. anced aberrations. Sperm samples of 40 male carriers of balanced Material and methods: Here we report findings surrounding growth, translocations were examined using FISH, the frequencies of sperma- morbidity, physical defects and karyotype in the 69 ICSI conceived tozoa with pathological chromosomal content ranged from 4.2 to 70.3 children. %. The sperm FISH analysis of meiotic segregation and aneuploidy Results: The children conceived by ICSI examined had experienced helps to personalize the reproductive risk and choose the most effec- an excess of malformations in the (boys’) urogenital system. In addi- tive assisted reproduction strategy, for example the use of preimplan- tion, all karyotypes were normal except for one detected mosaicism. tation genetic diagnosis or a donor of sperm. A detailed physical examination revealed no further substantial differ- ences between the groups. P04.09 Conclusion: The results of this study on outcome of ICSI pregnancies Karyotype abnormalities in reproductive failure are in line with earlier reports, except that no sex chromosome abnor- V. Radoi, D. Mierla, D. Jardan; malities were found. Assessment of singleton ICSI children was gener- Life Memorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, Bucharest, Romania. ally reassuring, however, we found that ICSI children presented with This study analyses the prevalence of karyotype changes among pa- more congenital malformations and were more likely to need health tients referred for reproductive failure. Each patient was screened for care resources than naturally conceived children. karyotype changes by GTG banding on cultured lymphocytes from pe- ripheral blood. No subjects presented in this report had obvious phe- notypic signs of constitutional chromosomal abnormalities. Results: 25 of 680 couples (3.67%) had one partner carrying a chro-Reproductive genetics  mosomal change. The frequency of chromosomal abnormalities in Newcastle, United Kingdom. men and women were similar. Genetic variation in folate metabolism has been associated with sur- chromosomal rearrangements was: vival in utero, the success of in vitro fertilisation, multiple pathologies - translocations - 1.47% (10) and longevity. We have looked at the prevalence of genetic variants of - inversions - 1.76% (12) the enzymes MTHFR and TYMS in 2656 DNA samples derived from - numerical chromosomal abnormalities - 0.44% (3) five cohorts collected in Norfolk and Cumbria. The simultaneous analy- Conclusions: partners of infertile couples requiring IVF or ICSI treat- sis of genetic variants of the MTHFR and TYMS loci was carried out to ment appear to be affected by higher frequency of chromosomal rear- investigate a putative gene-gene interaction that was initially observed rangements than the general population. in an elderly male population from Norfolk. In five separate population cohorts we have demonstrated that the P04.10 proportion of individuals who are homozygous for the 2R allele of the The influence of consanguinity on miscarriage 5’UTR TYMS polymorphism is less in individuals who are homozygous B. Ginzburg; for the T allele of MTHFR 677 than in individuals homozygous for the C Regional Hospital of Kaluga, Kaluga, Russian Federation. allele of MTHFR 677 (p = 0.02). Comparative analysis of consanguinity in families with miscarriage was The mean ages of our cohorts varied from 27 to 92 and so the consis- been carried out. The first group of families comprised those with mis- tent observation can not be due to an age-related survival factor. carriage before 12 weeks of pregnancy (532 families) was subdivided These data provide evidence for a gene-gene interaction and are sug- into 3 sub-groups: 1 miscarriage - 249 families; 2 miscarriages - 210 gestive of genetic selection in utero, with some pregnancies more or families; and 3 or more miscarriages - 73 families. The second sample less viable because of genetic variation. The MTHFR and TYMS en- included 862 families who also had a history of live-births, abdominal zymes compete for limiting supplies of folate required for homocyste- pregnancies, and medical abortions) and miscarriages up to 28 weeks ine methylation. Given the established role of folate in early develop- of pregnancy. This was subdivided into 2 sub-groups: the sub-group ment, this evidence suggests that fetal viability may be influenced by with 1 miscarriage - 391 families; the one with 2 and more miscar- maternal folic acid intake and /or genotype. riages - 471 families. The control group included 272 families who had no history of miscarriage. The findings showed that in the families with P04.13 3 and more miscarriages before 12 weeks of pregnancy inbreeding Genetic factors related to the development of uterine leiomyoma was more likely. This may lead, in case of successful pregnancy, to an during pregnancy increase in the frequency of births with genetic disorders. A. S. Savov1, D. Bosev1, V. Anchev1, D. V. Konstantinova2, V. Mitev2, A. Dimi- trov1, I. M. Kremensky1; P04.11 1National Genetics Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Medical University - Sofia, multiplex single base extension analysis for the detection of Dept. of Medicinal Chemistry and Biochmistry, Molecular Medicine Center, trombophilia and folate related genes mutations in women with Sofia, Bulgaria. miscarriages Uterine leiomyoma (UL), a common hormonal-dependent benign neo- S. Trivodalieva1, M. Volk2, B. Peterlin2, G. D. Efremov1, D. Plaseska-Karanfil- plasm, is thought to affect up to 40% of women during their lifetime. It ska1; often leads to fetal wastage as the lesion undergoes a rapid expansion 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre for Genetic during pregnancy. Identification of genetic factors that predispose to Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav UL formation could provide further insight into the trigger mechanism Republic of, 2University Medical Center Ljubljana, Institute of Medical Genetics, and risk factors leading to it’s development. Ljubljana, Slovenia. We examined the distribution of common polymorphisms in ERα Miscarriage is a significant clinical problem with many etiologies. (Thr397Cys and Cys351Gly), IGF-II (C/T 820), p53 (Arg72Pro), Certain trombophilia gene mutations have been associated with an CYP2A13 (Arg257Cys), XRCC1 (Arg399Gln) and AR (CAG repeat) increased risk for recurrent miscarriages. Chromosome aneuploidy is genes among 146 Bulgarian women: 72 healthy pregnant controls and the most common cause of miscarriage. Mutations in folate related 74 women affected by UL during pregnancy. Genotypes were deter- genes can lead to DNA hypomethylation and abnormal chromosomal mined by PCR - RFLP. segregation during meiosis (non-disjunction). Thus, mutations in folate The case-control analysis showed no significant difference in the dis- genes might represent a risk factor for having a fetus with chromosom- tribution of IGF-II, p53, CYP2A13, XRCC1 and AR variant polymor- al aneuploidy. We have developed a multiplex single base extension phisms among patient and control groups. reaction assay that allows analysis of 10 different mutations in throm- ERα polymorphisms Thr397Cys and Cys351Gly showed a statistically bophilia and folate related genes (Factor V Leiden G1691A, Factor significant association to leiomyoma development during pregnancy. V A1299G, Factor II G20210A, Factor XIII G34C, PAI-I -675 4G/5G, The distribution of Thr397Cys genotypes in control subjects was as MTHFR C677T, MTHFR A1298C, MTR A2756G, MTRR A66G and follows: 23,9% p/p (+/+), 44,8% p/P (+/-) and 31,3% P/P (-/-), while in FG-ß -455G/A) in one single reaction. The PCR primers have been UL patients it was: 37,3% p/p (+/+), 44,8% p/P (+/-) and 17,9% P/P (- designed to give different fragment sizes (129 to 420 bp), allowing their /-), (P < 0.03). For the Cys351Gly polymorphism, genotype distribution separation by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Different length of was 30,9% x/x (+/+), 38,2% x/X (+/-) and 30,9% X/X (-/-) among con- poly (dC) tails was attached to the single base extension primers to trols, and 48.6% x/x (+/+), 38,6% x/X (+/-) and 12,8% X/X (-/-) among allow analysis of all 10 mutations by one multiplex SNaPshot analysis. leiomyoma patients (P < 0.005). The SNaPshot fragments were separated by capillary electrophore- We conclude that the ERα polymorphisms Thr397Cys and Cys351Gly sis. Using this method we have successfully studied 200 patients with are implicated in pregnancy - related leiomyoma. spontaneous abortions (138 Slovenian, 34 Albanian 28 Macedonian women) and 208 controls (130 Slovenian, 38 Albanian and 40 Mace- P04.14 donian women). In conclusion, we have developed a rapid, simple, is NF-kappa-B inhibitor alpha (ikBa) involved into oocyte-to- reliable and inexpensive method for determination of 10 mutations in embryo transition? thrombophilia and folate related genes that might be implicated in the M. Paciolla1,2, R. Boni2, F. Fusco1, M. Ursini1, M. Lioi2, M. Miano1; etiopathogenesis of miscarriages. 1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics “Adriano Buzzati Traverso” CNR, Naples, Italy, 2University of Basilicata, Potenza, Italy. P04.12 NF-κB activity is regulated by interaction with inhibitory proteins (IκB). Genetic selection? interaction between MTHFR and TYMS The canonical p65/p50 heterodimer is bound to IκBα that inhibits the polymorphisms may affect survival in utero NF-κB activity by masking its NLS domain and so blocking NF-κB abil- G. Willis1, B. A. Jennings2, J. Skinner2, C. Relton3; ity to bind DNA. NF-κB-IκBα complex is continuously shuttling between 1Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, United Kingdom, 2UEA, nucleus and cytoplasm. Its nuclear export rate exceeds its import rate Norwich, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, and thus the complex is generally cytoplasmic. NF-kB signalling stud- ies during oocyte maturation have been limited. The upregulated IκBα expression has been observed in murine oocyte aging suggesting thatReproductive genetics  NF-κB pathway deregulation may be related to oocyte competence. sociation between OHSS and VEGF gene 460 polymorphism. In male gamete development, NF-κB is activated in pachitene stage Methods : 75 OHSS patients and 85 normoresponse patients were and in the following germinal differentiation steps triggering special- enrolled in this study. Polymerase chain reaction- restriction fragment ized genes expression. length polymorphism analysis was used to resolve the VEGF 460 gen- We analysed IκBα transcript levels in meiotic arrested bovine oocytes otype of OHSS patients and normoresponder controls. at different stages of maturation (diplotene of prophase I and meta- Results : The frequency of homozygosity of the VEGF 460 gene was phase II) and in early embryogenesis. We included three expressed significantly higher among women with OHSS. oocyte genes: BMP15, GDF9, SPIN1. We examined ZAR1, specific Conclusion : Homozigosity of the VEGF 460 gene may serve as a oocyte maturation marker, whose transcript generally underwent deg- susceptibility factor affecting for OHSS. radation during meiosis. We observed a significant reduction of the IκBα mRNA during meiotic maturation. On the contrary, we observed P04.17 that the amount of IκBα protein increased during the transition from Prevalence of epimutations in imprinted PLAGL (LOT/ZAC) immature to mature oocytes, while it was significantly decreased in locus in first-trimester miscarriages embryos. Further analysis will be performed to establish how IκBα is E. A. Sazhenova, I. N. Lebedev; regulated during developmental competence and if it is involved in hu- Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. man diseases such as premature aging and infertility. Genomic imprinting plays a critical role in regulation of fetal develop- ment. Previously we have reported a tissue-specific loss of methyla- P04.15 tion in KCNQ1OT1 (11p15) in 9.5% of spontaneous abortions, but nor- Bench to Bedside: translating genetic eye research into mal epigenetic status of H19, CDKN1C and SNRPN genes. The aim different reproductive options. of the present research was investigation of differential methylation of L. S. Kearns1,2, A. C. Cohn2, E. C. Osborne3, V. Kralevski3, C. Beyer3, S. Staf- maternal imprinted gene PLAGL1 (6q24-25), which is involved in con- fieri4, A. W. Hewitt4,2, J. B. Ruddle4,2, J. E. Craig5, A. L. Vincent6, D. A. Mackey4,2; trol of cell proliferation. Methylation-specific PCR of PLAGL1 promoter 1Centre for Eye Research Australia,, East Melbourne, Australia, 2Royal Victo- was performed using DNA from extraembryoniñ mesoderm (EM) and rian Eye and Ear Hospital, East Melbourne, Australia, 3Monash IVF, Clayton, cytotrophoblast (CT) of 87 first-trimester missed abortions. Thirty in- Australia, 4Centre for Eye Research Australia, East Melbourne, Australia, duced abortions were studied as a control group. Nine miscarriages 5Flinders Medical Centre, Department of Ophthalmology, Adelaide, Australia, (10.3%) have revealed a loss of methylation of PLAGL1 on maternal 6Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, Uni- chromosome. Loss of imprinting (LOI) was confined by EM or CT in versity of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. 6 and 2 miscarriages, respectively. For one embryo with epimutation Purpose: To demonstrate the translation of genetic eye research into only cytotrophoblast was available. Two conceptions have revealed the IVF (In Vitro Fertilisation) and preimplantation genetic diagnosis LOI in both PLAGL1 and KCNQ1OT1 genes confined by EM. Tissue- (PGD) setting for a family with Autosomal Dominant Optic Atrophy specificity of epimutations allows suggesting independent sporadic (ADOA). epigenetic events in different embryonic germ layers after its diver- Methods: Genetics is rapidly impacting on clinical care. It helps con- gence. Importantly, significant prevalence of recurrent pregnancy loss firm the clinical diagnosis, as well as identify carrier status and muta- was found in women having a miscarriage with PLAGL1 epimutation tions in non-symptomatic patients who have known familial mutations. in compare with women having a conception with normal imprinting This helps to facilitate early diagnosis and subsequent interventions. (33.3% vs 7.7%, respectively, P=0.05). At the same time, no significant The clinical need and cost effective benefits of genetic testing in oph- differences in the maternal age were found between these groups. Our thalmology has already been well documented in retinoblastoma RB1 results provide evidence that errors of imprinting maintaining mecha- testing. While many genes have been identified as causing inherited nisms on maternal chromosomes during embryo development may be ocular disease, genetic testing has primarily been performed on a re- among molecular processes responsible for dysfunction of imprinted search basis. However this knowledge from the laboratory is translat- loci and recurrent pregnancy loss. ing into clinical care and providing couples with reproductive options This study was supported by RFBR (N 08-04-01344). in the form of prenatal diagnosis (PND) and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). We present a family identified with a known OPA1 P04.18 mutation as part of the Autosomal Dominant Optic Atrophy research common variants on chromosome 9p21 are associated with study who have chosen to utilise In Vitro Fertilisation coupled with pre- preeclampsia in the Finnish population implantation genetic diagnosis to avoid passing this condition on to H. Peterson1, K. Kivinen2, L. Hiltunen3, E. Salmela4,5, T. Lappalainen5, V. Rasi3, their child. A. Sayed6, L. Poston7, L. Morgan6, J. Kere1, H. Laivuori4,8; Results: This couple elected to undergo two IVF/PGD cycles at Monash 1Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, IVF. They achieved a successful singleton pregnancy in their second Sweden, 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Cam- cycle and have subsequently given birth to a healthy baby girl. pus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Finnish Red Cross Blood Service, Conclusions: From research studies we are often able to provide in- Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, dividuals with information on their specific genetic mutation and some Finland, 5Finnish Genome Center, Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, couples choose to use this knowledge to broaden their reproductive University of Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Clinical Chemistry, Institute of options. Genetics, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom, 7Division of Reproduction and Endocrinology, King’s College London, United Kingdom, 8Department of P04.16 Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland. Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Gene Polymorphism and Preeclampsia is a pregnancy specific disorder, characterized by hyper- Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome tension and proteinuria. Its etiology and pathophysiology remain poorly N. Ghasemi, R. Firouazabadi, S. Ahmadi, H. Oskouian; understood, but it has clearly a familial component, suggesting that ge- Yazd Research and Clinical Center For Infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. netic factors play a role in the susceptibility. We have previously report- Purpose : Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) is one of the ed linkage to preeclampsia on chromosome 9p13. Interestingly, sev- most important complication of assisted reproduction treatment . The eral genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identified a region pathophysiology of OHSS remains to be full elucidated. Many sub- on chromosome 9p21 that is associated with coronary artery disease stances and more recently, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) (CAD) and type 2 diabetes (T2D). As preeclampsia has been linked have been suggested to be involved in the pathogenesis of OHSS . to increased risk for both T2D and CAD later in life, and our linkage VEGF is a member of a family of heparin - binding proteins that act region is closely located to the GWA signals, we decided to genotype directly on endothelial cells to induce proliferation and angiogenesis . previously reported associated SNPs in15 preeclampsia families and In vivo , VEGF is a powerful mediator of vessel permeability, Increased a nation-wide case-control preeclampsia cohort (340 cases and 357 vascular permeability mediated by VEGF has been implicated in the matched controls). In total, 23 markers were successfully genotyped. sudden increase in capillary permeability , then it is logical to examine Single-marker and haplotype associations were calculated and four the relationship between the VEGF polymorphism and OHSS. In this SNPs showed nominal association (P<0.02) in the case-control cohort paper, we conducted a case - control study to evaluate potential as- when women with gestational hypertension were excluded. When theReproductive genetics  two cohorts were combined, the odds ratio for the risk haplotype was P04.21 1.38 (1.11 - 1.71). In order to increase power, we included genotypes cytogenetic study in premature ovarian failure for three out of the four SNPs from 260 additional controls representing M. Kumar1, A. Sharma1, D. Pathak1, A. Ammini2, A. Kriplani3, R. Dada1; a Finnish population-wide sample set and observed significant asso- 1Lab for Molecular Genetics and Reproduction, Department of Anatomy, All ciation for two SNPs (corrected P=0.02 and 0.04). These findings were India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Department of Endocri- tested in a UK case-control preeclampsia sample set (237 cases and nology & Metabolism, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 200 controls), but no association was observed. In conclusion, these 3Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, All India Institute of Medical Sci- results indicate that chromosome 9p21 confers risk for development of ences, New Delhi, India. preeclampsia in the Finnish, but not in the UK population. Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is defined as the occurrence of meno- pause before the age of 40 years, biochemically low levels of gonadal P04.19 hormones (estrogen & inhibin) and high levels of gonadotrophins (FSH Polymorphism of factor V Leiden, prothrombin and endothelial & LH). POF is a heterogeneous disorder affecting approximately 1% nitric oxide synthase genes in development of preeclampsia of women <40 years, 1:10,000 women by age 20 and 1:1000 women A. G. Zainullina1, I. A. Zainullin1,2, V. A. Kulavsky2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; by age of 30. Several causes of POF have been identified, including 1Department of Human Genomics, Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa X chromosome aberrations. This study finds out the proportion of ge- Scientific Center of Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, netic causes of POF and analyze different chromosomal pattern. Fifty 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Bashkir State Medical University, patients of POF were referred for cytogenetic analysis. Family history, Ufa, Russian Federation. age, occupation, disease information and all other medical records Preeclampsia (PE) is still one of the leading causes of maternal and were reviewed. Blood was collected and lymphocyte cultures were set fetal morbidity and mortality. Recently, significant associations of fac- up. Twenty GTG banded metaphases were analysed for chromosome tor V Leiden (FV Leiden), prothrombin (FII) and endothelial nitric oxide complement. Mean age and height was found to be 20.2 years and synthase (eNOS) genes polymorphism with thrombophilia at pregnant, 150cm respectively. FSH level was found to be >40mIU/ml in all pa- recurrent spontaneous miscarriages and preeclampsia in women of tients. 82% of cases had a normal karyotype. In 6% cases karyotype different populations were reported (Wilson M. et al, 2002; Kujovich was 45,XO whereas 16% of the cases showed mosaicism with nor- J., 2004). These loci are located on different chromosomes and en- mal cell lines. Two patients had a chromosomal constitution 46,X,i(X) code products involved into various metabolic pathways leading to whereas other two had the karyotype 46,XX,del Xq(13.3-21.1) and obstetrics pathology. Therefore, we studied the eNOS VNTR polymor- 46,XX,delXq(22-24). Various reports suggested that X chromosome phism in 4 introne, FV Leiden G1691A polymorphism and FII G20210A deletions associated with POF are more common than translocations. polymorphism in women with PE from Bashkortostan (Russia). DNA In this study X chromosome aberration are involved in all cases as from 198 preeclamptic pregnant women and from 206 healthy con- reported in the earlier studies. This mosaicism could explain an ac- trol pregnant women were genotyped for polymorphisms using PCR celerated loss of gametes in the ovary. Cytogenetic analysis in as- technique and subsequent enzyme digestion. Allelic and genotypic sociation with molecular techniques could allow finding the molecular frequencies of eNOS polymorphism and FII polymorphism did not dif- pathogenesis of the ovarian failure. fer between both groups of pregnant women. A significant difference were observed in FV Leiden genotype and allele frequencies between P04.22 preeclamptic pregnant women and healthy pregnant women. Factor V clinical, hormonal and cytogenetic study in Premature Ovarian Leiden was associated with PE (OR=3,22). Failure (POF) A. Sharma1, D. Pathak1, M. Kumar1, A. C. Ammini2, A. Kriplani3, R. Dada1; P04.20 1Laboratory for Molecular genetics and Reproduction, Department of Anatomy, BmP15 gene molecular analysis in XX premature ovarian failure All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Department of En- women docrinology & Metabolism, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, W. Ayed1,2, R. Bhouri1, O. Kilani1, D. HOUIJI1, M. Bchatnia2, F. Ouechtati2, I. El India, 3Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, All India Institute of Medical Kamel - Lebbi1, F. Talmoudi1, N. Bouayed-Abdelmoula3, A. AMOURI1,2; Sciences, New Delhi, India. 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Research Unit EM- POF is clinically presented with complaints of abnormal menarche, ir- GOOD (Etude des Maladies Orphelines d’Origine Génétique), Pasteur Institute, regular menstruation, anxiety, depression, psychological distress and Tunis, Tunisia, 3Laboratoire d’Histologie Embryologie, Faculté de Médecine de was less satisfied with their sexual life. POF is believed to be major Sax, Sfax, Tunisia. cause of infertility in women. Several causes of POF have been identi- Premature ovarian failure results from accelerated reduction of the oo- fied, including X chromosome aberrations. This study correlates the cyte pool and a consecutive loss of granulosa cells. Therefore, genes clinical, hormonal and cytogenetic finding causes of POF. This study expressed in oocytes and promoting the proliferation of granulosa included 50 patients with POF. Detailed history, age, occupation, dis- cells are strong candidates for POF. Bone morphogenetic protein-15 ease information and all other medical records were reviewed and re- (BMP15) gene at Xp11.2 and its autosomal paralogue GDF9 (growth corded. 5 ml blood was collected and lymphocyte cultures were set differentiation factor-9: GDF9) fulfill these criteria. Recently, heterozy- up. Twenty GTG banded metaphases were analysed for identifying gous mutations in BMP15 gene have been identified as a possible chromosomal abnormality. Mean age and height was found to be 20.2 cause of ovarian failure. years and 150 cm respectively. In this study 6 % had 45 XO chromo- The objective of our study was to verify the involvement of BMP15 some complement and 16 % were found to be mosaic. In cases with variations in a cohort of 17 Tunisian patients who were diagnosed as structural abnormality, FSH level were 52.4±8.1 mIU/ml in all patients POF women and for who a 46,XX karyotype was identified. (normal 32.4±4.5 mIU/ml). Two patients had chromosomal constitu- Seventeen women were referred to our cytogenetic laboratory of Pas- tion 46, X, i(X) whereas other two had 46,XX,delXq(13.3-21.1) and teur institute with the diagnosis of POF. Patients with POF as a result 46,XX,delXq(22-24) complement. Various studies have suggested that of surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, or chromosome aberrations were X chromosome deletions associated with POF are more common than not included in this study. translocations. The critical requirement for ovarian local and long arm The entire coding sequence and intron-exon junctions of BMP15 gene of X chromosome the structure for intact X chromosome is required for were analyzed in all patients. Patients’ samples were screened by di- normal ovarian function. In this study X chromosome aberration are rect sequencing. involved in cases as reported in the earlier studies. This mosaicism Genetic analysis revealed the presence of three variants of BMP15 could explain an accelerated loss of gametes in the ovary. Cytogenetic gene in three of 17 POF patients: SNP1: rs3810682, SNP 2: analysis in association with molecular techniques could allow finding rs41308602 and SNP 3: rs17003221. the molecular pathogenesis of the ovarian failure. Our results will be compared with literature findings.Reproductive genetics 0 P04.23 analysis. Results of prenatal cytogenetic and molecular genetic study of Materials and methods. In this study, 49 couples with miscarriage the high risk chromosomal or monogenic diseases patients passed medico-genetic counseling with cytogenetic and molecular ge- N. Huleyuk, H. Makuh, M. Tyrkus, O. Nechay, J. Korinets, O. Malanchuk, L. netic analyses. Cytogenetic features of peripheral blood lymphocytes Melenchuk; cultivated according to standard techniques and DNA analyses to esti- Institute of Hereditary Pathology of AMS Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine. mate the differential risk associated with DQ genotypes. Results of 162 prenatal diagnostics have been analysed. 144 prenatal Results. Analyses of family history revealed what in 67.39% of couples cytogenetic studies have been performed. In 20 amniocyte cultures were cases of recurrent spontaneous abortions (RSA), in 30.43% of numeral (8 cases) and structural (12 cases) changes of the karyotype couples were cases of RSA with congenital anomalies, and in 2.17% were detected. In 10 cases chromosomal rearrangements arise due to RSA and single-gene disorders. The analysis of TORCH-infection re- translocations in parents. Balanced chromosomal translocations were vealed that test for serum IgG were positive in 45.13% women with detected in 8 amniocyte cultures. Robertsonian translocations were RSA, in 42.86% women with RSA and congenital anomalies. Cyto- found in 5 cases: 14;21 _ 3 cases, 13;15 and 13;22 _ one case each. genetic analysis showed different chromosomal aberrations involved In 11 of cases, imbalanced karyotype was diagnosed: trisomy of 21-st 1, 9, 15, 17, and 22 chromosomes in 8% of cases. Were investigated and 18-th chromosome; simple and mosaic forms of gonosomal mono- 32 persons (total 64 chromosomes) by molecular analysis of HLA somy; additional marker chromosomes; mosaicism 46,XX/92,XXXX haplotypes DQA1 and DQB1, discovered prevailed haplotypes of (30:20). Non-balanced derivative chromosomes were detected in DQA1*0101/0102 (35,9%) as well as DQA1*0501 (43,6%) in group two foetuses _ 46,XY,der(4),t(4;7)(q35;q31.1)mat and 46,XY,der(10), of patients and in control group. Haplotype DQB1 *0201 (26.6%) was t(10;7)(q26,13; p21.2)pat. more frequent in patients as well as in control group (25.0%). Prenatal molecular genetic diagnostics of families with heterozygous Conclusions. These data indicated that medico-genetic counseling mutations carriers, whose mutations lead to cystic fibrosis and Nijme- with cytogenetic and molecular genetic investigations may be indica- gen syndrome, was performed. DNA was extracted from cells of am- tive in diagnosis of causes of RSA. Cytogenetic analysis could be valu- niotic fluids or chorion. able for these couples when clinical data fail to clarify the cause. 13 prenatal diagnostics of Cystic Fibrosis in families of heterozy- gous carriers of CFTR gene mutations have been performed. As a P04.26 result, following foetus genotypes were identified: F508del/F508del Role of mitochondria in repeated pregnancy loss - 3, F508del/1717-1G>A - 1, F508del/wt - 6, N1303K/wt - 1, wt/wt S. M. Seyedhassani1,2, M. Houshmand2, S. M. Kalantar1, G. Modabber2, R. - 2. 5 prenatal molecular genetic diagnostics of Nijmegen breakage Mirfakhrai2, A. Ebrahimi2, A. Rasti1, A. Aflatoonian1; syndrome in families of heterozygous carriers of 657del5 mutation of 1Research and clinical center for infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, NBN gene were performed. 2 foetuses were homozygous for 657del5 2National institute of genetic engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic mutation of the NBN gene (genotype 657del5/657del5) and 3 cases Republic of Iran. -heterozygous for this mutation (genotype 657del5/ wt). The prenatal Introduction: Mitochondria are small structures in cells that generate conformation of monogenic or chromosomal diseases mostly caused energy for the cell to use. All mitochondria are inherited from the moth- termination of pregnancy by decision of family. er’s ovum. About 1 in 300 couples involve with Repeated Pregnancy Loss (RPL) and the main part of them remains unknown. The aberrant P04.24 expression of apoptotic related genes is seen in RPL. It seems internal immunogenetic markers of secondary infertility apoptotic pathway and mitochondria have important role in fertilization D. Zastavna, O. Terpyljak, J. Zahanjach, N. Helner; and proliferation of the cells. Institute of Hereditary Pathology Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine, Lviv, Methods: In total 96 females who were suffered from idiopathic RPL. Lviv, Ukraine. Four multiplex PCR are done on each sample for detection of dele- In marital couples with secondary infertility and multiple first trimester tions. D-loop part is analyzed by PCR-sequencing method. Bax and miscarriages, HLA-antigen distribution in A-, B-loci and a single nucle- Bcl2 genes is evaluated by PCR-sequencing method for promoter re- otide polymorphism (SNP 1082 G->A) of the promoter region of IL-10 gions and PCR-SSCP for exones. were studied. 157 individuals with secondary infertility with 2 or more Results: No deletions were found in 96 DNA samples. Mononucleotide involuntary first trimester miscarriages and 64 individuals with primary repeat (poly C) from 303 to 315 nucleotide positions (D310) exhibited a infertility were examined. The control group included 227 healthy indi- polymorphic length variation (among 89 cases; 7C in 43, 8C in 34, 9C viduals with healthy children. It was determined that immunogenetic in 8, and ≥10C in 4 females. Many sequence alterations identified in markers of secondary infertility were HLA-antigens A10, B41 and B38, D-loop region of cases, that will be described as mtDNA haplogroups with primary infertility associated with B7 andA19. The results also or novel nucleotide variants. Nucleotide change in Bax gene was seen show that more than 50% investigated couples had homologous HLA in promoter region at -55 A>G. genotypes. We studied the SNP1082 G->A of the IL-10 promoter re- Discussion: Some of these nucleotide alterations might be involved gion in 50 couples with secondary infertility and recurrent loss of first in RPL and could be included in a panel of molecular biomarkers for trimester pregnancies. We determined an allele A (low expressing al- susceptibility in pregnancy loss and even failure of in-vitro fertilization. lele) frequency of 38,2%, and a G allele (high expressing) frequency of We believe that mutation in Bax and Bcl2 genes will lead to early apop- 61,8%. We observed a statistically significant, compared to the control tosis. The results can be used in assessment of RPL. group, increase of high expression GG-genotype frequency, and a sta- tistically significant decrease of normal expression IL-10 gene (AG- P04.27 genotype) frequency. This suggests that IL-10 is active in the patho- Blood pressure in 8 and 10- year-old singleton icsi children genesis of recurrent miscarriages. It was confirmed that the presence F. Belva1, R. Painter2, J. De Schepper3, T. Roseboom4, I. Liebaers1, M. Bondu- of common HLA-antigens in marital couples and an increase of high elle1; expression associated GG-genotypes at SNP -1082 G->A pIL-10 were 1Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Obstetrics and Gynaecol- prognostically unfavourable for completion of pregnancy. ogy, AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Pediatric Endocrinology, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 4Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, AMC, Amsterdam, P04.25 The Netherlands. couples with recurrent spontaneous abortions in moldova Introduction: To evaluate if the in-vitro procedure in humans has long- (genetic characteristics). term consequences on the cardiovascular functioning, longitudinal V. C. Sacara, L. P. Rusu, V. V. Egorov, A. N. Misina; blood pressure measurements were compared between children born Centre of reproductive health and medical genetics, Chisinau, Republic of after intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) and after spontaneous Moldova. conception (SC). Infertility and spontaneous abortions are a major medical-social prob- Material and Methods: Longitudinal questionnaire data and param- lem in the conditions of demographic crisis existing in the Moldova eters of physical examination of 8-year-old ICSI children were com- during the last decade. It’s claimed that all couples with reproductive pared with results of peers born after SC. At the age of 10 years, 108 problems needs complex investigations witch include medico-genetics of the initial recruited150 ICSI children were re-examined and 93 out ofReproductive genetics  the 147 SC children. All children were singletons born after 32 weeks observed in 66% of embryos with more than 80% of trisomic cells. Hy- gestation. pomethylation of IGF2/H19 IC was found in most of analyzed cases (5 Results: Height and weight in ICSI and SC children were comparable out of 6) and was predominantly associated with CT with high level of at the age of 8 and 10 years. Systolic and diastolic blood pressure mosaicism (>74%). Our results provide the first evidence for the pos- were higher in ICSI than in SC children at the age of 8 years (98 mmHg sible linkage of tentative XCI trans-acting factor to chromosome 16. versus 94 mmHg; p<0.001 and 59 mmHg versus 55 mmHg; p=0.001 Hypomethylation of IGF2/H19 IC in extraembryonic tissues of embryos respectively). The difference remained after correcting for birth char- with trisomy 16 mosaicism can be the other proof of the existance of acteristics, maternal factors and current physical characteristics. Ten- such factor and its linkage to chromosome 16. year-old ICSI children had a comparable systolic but a lower diastolic blood pressure compared to their spontaneous conceived peers (99 P04.30 mmHg versus 99 mmHg; p=0.5 and 65 mmHg versus 68 mmHg; comparison of PRm1 and PRm2 genes polymorphisms in fertile p=0.002 respectively), although the effect of lower diastolic blood pres- czech and normozoospermic German men sure attenuated after adjusting for confounders. P. Krenkova1, F. Tüttelmann2, J. Gromoll2, P. Norambuena1, I. Eliasova1, M. Conclusion: ICS is associated with a 5 mmHg increase in blood pres- Simoni3, M. Macek jr.1, M. Macek sr.1; sure at 8 years, but this could not be confirmed at age 10. Our findings 1University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2University of Münster, warrant long-term follow-up of ICSI conceived individuals to assess Münster, Germany, 3University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. possible effects of periconception events on cardiovascular health in Data in German males provide evidence that PRM1 c.230A>C and later life. PRM2 c.373C>A are significantly associated with reduced sperm num- bers (Tüttelmann, unpublished). The aim of study was to compare the P04.28 prevalence of PRM1 and PRM2 polymorphisms of Czech and German Detoxification and blood coagulation system genes men to disclose the impact of different ethnical and life style pattern on polymorphisms: Possible involvement in Recurrent Pregnancy impaired spermatogenesis . Loss PRM1 and PRM2 sequencing was performed in 99 and 94 Czech men P. F. Tatarskyy, L. A. Livshits; with verified fertility and in 77 and 73 German normozoospermic men. Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics NAS of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine. BigDye Terminator chemistry was used on ABI 3130xl Genetic Ana- Recurrent Pregnancy Loss (RPL) represents an intriguing problem lyzer. in obstetric practice in which genetic factors play a role. Enzymes In PRM1 gene one rare SNP c.102G>T (rs35576928) was detected such as P4501A1 (CYP1A1) metabolize organic compounds to reac- only in 1.3 % Germans. One rare (c.54G>A, rs35262993) and one tive compounds which damage cells and DNA. N-acetyltransferase 2 common SNP (c.230A>C, rs737008) in PRM1 gene were found with (NAT2) is involved in the biotransformation metabolism of aromatic same allele and genotype frequencies. No mutations were found. amines. Glutathione S-transferase (GST) catalyze the binding of a In PRM2 gene three rare SNPs c.300A>G, c.281C>T and c.290C>T large variety of electrophils to the sulphydryl group of glutathione. Dur- were not found in Czech males. Two common SNPs (c.298G>C, ing pregnancy, changes in blood coagulation may play a role in the rs1646022 and c.373C>A, rs2070923) were identified with identical occurrence of abortion. Factor V Leiden (FVL) gene, is associated with allele and genotype frequencies. a hypercoagulable state and increased susceptibility for venous throm- Despite the ethnical difference the allele prevalences of the most fre- bosis. Factor II (prothrombin) gene is associated with higher plasma quent PRM1 and PRM2 polymorphisms are identical in Czech fertile protrombin concentrations. Aim of this study was to investigate the and German normozoospermic males, except the four rare PRM1 and possible role of I and II stage detoxification and coagulation systems PRM2 SNPs present only in German males. Homozygosity of PRM1 genes polymorphisms in the pathogenesis of RPL. The polymorphic 230C and PRM2 373A might be associated with reduced sperm num- variants of those genes were analyzed in 24 women (case group) with bers also in Czech subfertile males. RPL and in 171 women (control group) with the uncomplicated obstet- Supported by VZFNM 00064203 and NR9448-3/2007. ric history. The frequency (80%) of NAT2 gene SS genotype in case group was significantly (p<0.05) higher than in control group (57%). Clinically important PRM1 and PRM2 polymorphisms in Czech fertile and Frequencies of GSTM1, GSTT1, CYP1A1, FII and FVL polymorphic German normozoospermic males variants were practically similar in both analyzed groups. It had been Gene Polymorphism Czechs Germans P shown that NAT2 S/S genotype really can be involved in the process A frequence 70.7% (140) 71,4 % (110) ns C frequence 29.3% (58) 28,6 % (44) of RPL, which may be associated with changes in steroid hormones PRM1 230A>C AA 48.5% (48) 53,2% (41) ns level. From our data the identification of NAT2 S/S genotype can be AC 44.4% (44) 36,4% (28) ns used as a marker for high risk recurrent pregnancy loss prediction in CC 7.1% (7) 10,4% (8) ns C frequence 69.7% (131) 69,9% (102) genetic testing family programs. ns A frequence 30.3% (57) 30,1% (44) PRM2 373C>A CC 47.9% (45) 52.0% (38) ns P04.29 AC 43.6% (41) 35.6% (26) ns Unsymmetrical X-inactivation and loss of methylation of iGF2/ AA 8.5% (8) 12.4% (9) ns H19 imprinting center in spontaneous abortions with trisomy 16 E. N. Tolmacheva, A. A. Kashevarova, E. A. Sazhenova, V. N. Kharkov, I. N. P04.31 Lebedev; the role genetic factor in symphysis pubis dysfunctions Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. L. Kyzdarbayeva, G. Svyatova, T. Kravtsova; Skewed sex ratio (0.35-0.45) as well as asymmetrical X-chromosome Scientific Center of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology, Almaty, Kazakh- inactivation (XCI) in prenatally diagnosed fetuses with trisomy 16 mo- stan. saicism provides evidence for differential survival of females with this Recent studies have shown that genetic effects on developing osteo- aneuploidy. There seems to be tentative autosomal trans-factor(s) as- porosis. The pregnant women with dysfunction symphysis pubis have sociated with chromosome 16 and can control XCI. CCCTC-binding a greater risk of preclinical osteoporosis. factor (CTCF) potentially can be the one. It is localized on chromo- Objective. To determine the genetic effects of vitamin D receptor some 16, has binding sites in choice and imprinting center (IC) of X (VDR), collagen type I (Coll1A1) genes on development of symphysis chromosome and in IGF2/H19 IC. So, we suggest that overdosage of pubis dysfunctions by pregnant of Kazakh populations. CTCF may induce hypomethylation of some IC. Firstly, we studied the Subjects. The material of the study was DNA of 100 health (a con- level of trisomic cells in extraembryonic mesoderm (EM) and cytotro- trol group) and 50 pregnant with rupture of the symphysis (a basic phoblast (CT) of 28 spontaneous abortions (SA) with cytogenetically group). verified trisomy 16 using FISH. XCI and methylation of IGF2/H19 IC Results. The frequency of favorable TT genotype of VDR gene among were analyzed in the same samples. Sex ratio among SA with mosaic the control group was 62,0 ± 4,87 %, in the basic group statistically karyotype (<90% of aneuploid cells) appears to be skewed with preva- lower - 38,0 ±6,93% (χ²=7,73; p<0,05). We revealed that the frequen- lence of male abortions (1.25) while females prevail among non-mo- cy of unfavorable CC genotype is significantly more common in basic saic embryos (0.43). At the same time, asymmetrical XCI in EM was group (8,0±3,87% ) than in control subjects (1,0%)(χ²=5,07;p<0,05).Prenatal and perinatal genetics  The distribution of genotype frequencies differed significantly between P05. Prenatal and perinatal genetics patients basic group and controls, with the GG genotype of Coll1A1 oc- curring more frequently in the controls (26,0 ± 6,26% and 62,0±4,87% P05.01 respectively; χ²=17,28; p<0,001). We found a significantly higher prev- Prenatal diagnosis of 5p deletion syndrome following alence of the unfavorable TTgenotype in the patients compared to the abnormally low maternal alpha fetoprotein controls (14 ± 4,95 % and 3 ±1,7 %, respectively) (χ²=6,48;p<0,01). F. Mahjoubi1, S. Karemee2; Conclusion. We conclude that a significantn association exists be- 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Medical Genetics, Taleganee tween the VDR and Coll1A1 genes polymorphisms and symphysis Ave., Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. pubis dysfunctions and indicates the importance of this genetic char- Here we report prenatal diagnosis of 5p deletion syndrome. Amnio- acteristic as a marker for increased development of symphysis pubis centesis was performed following an abnormally low measurement of dysfunctions risk. a screening of serum alpha fetoprotein. The triple test result was in favour of Down syndrome. However, the karyotype showed a terminal P04.32 deletion of the short arm of chromosome 5 including the critical region telomere length in human preimplantation embryos and its 5p15 for cri du chat syndrome. The parents had normal karyotypes. To correlation with chromosomal abnormalities and maternal age our best knowledge this is the first reported case of prenatal detection A. Mania, A. Mantzouratou, J. D. A. Delhanty, S. B. Sen Gupta; of -5p syndrome following abnormal alpha fetoprotein level. It is pos- UCL Centre for PGD, London, United Kingdom. sible that the abnormally low measurement of a screening of serum Telomeres are TTAGGG repeats at the end of chromosomes. Telo- alpha fetoprotein may be a marker for cr du chat syndrome meres get shorter during cell division contributing to cellular senes- cence. Telomere length is set to a maximum during early oogenesis. P05.02 One theory supports that telomere shortening may be mediated in late The utility of maternal serum ADAM12 in first and second exit from the fetal production line and long interval ovulation in the trimester aneuploidy screening adult thus causing reproductive ageing in women. Excessive telomere M. Macek1, H. Kluckova1, A. Lashkevich1, R. Vlk1, I. Spalova1, D. Chudoba1, shortening causes chromosome misalignment during meiosis. D. Novotna1, S. Vilimova1, M. Simandlova1, M. Turnovec1, M. Hladikova1, H. In this study, telomere length was measured in embryos on day 5 of Cuckle2; preimplantation development and correlated to chromosomal ploidy 1University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Columbia University, New and morphology. York, NY, United States. Embryos were donated from patients undergoing treatment in the as- The aim of the study was to estimate the utility of ADAM12 as aneu- sisted conception unit. Seven couples, generating 40 embryos consist- ploidy marker for Ist and IInd trimester. ing of 1111 cells took part. Quantitative fluorescent in situ hybridisation ADAM12 was measured by DELFIA ADAM12 Research Kit (Perkin El- (FISH) measured the average telomere length of every cell using a mer). The control 11-17th week levels were ascertained in frozen (-20 pan-telomeric probe. Conventional interphase FISH on chromosomes ºC) maternal sera from screening within years 2001-2008. For each 13, 15, 16, 18, 21 and 22 was used to assess aneuploidy. Reproduc- day at least 30 samples were used for control percentile (P) calcula- tive history of the couples and embryo morphology was taken into ac- tions. The 54 Ist and IInd trimester sera from pregnancies with different count. types of chromosomal aberrations were tested to ascertain the degree Chromosomally abnormal embryonic cells had significantly shorter of deviation from P50. telomeres than chromosomally normal cells (p38 years) were signifi- The P50 levels within 11-17th week raised from 456 to 1133 µg/l. The cantly shorter than those in younger women (p<0.05). Significantly highest Ist trimester prevalence of trisomy 21 is within P25-50, within shorter telomeres were found in all AMA derived embryos irrespective IInd P50-75. The 2/5 cases with trisomy 18 are in the range P<5-10. of chromosomal content, in agreement with the telomere theory of re- The 3/3 cases with trisomy 13 are under P25. All triploidy cases are productive ageing. below P5. The 5/6 cases with 47,XXX are under P5, 1/6 is below P25. Telomeres play an important role in cell division and shorter telomeres All 47,XXY and 47,XYY are in P50-95 range. The 5/11 cases with Turn- could possibly affect embryonic mosaicism, quality and survival; all er syndrome (including mosaicism) were within P25-50, 3/11 in P75- vital for preimplantation embryo development. 95. In four cases with structural chromosomal aberrations and in one mosaic trisomy 10, the levels were under P25. Decreased ADAM12 P04.33 levels were in 42.3 % of studied aberrations. Our results support fur- Use of Y choromosome specific repeat sequencing for sexing in ther ADAM12 studies to determine its additional value for Ist and IInd cattle trimester screening. E. Arbabi Aval1, F. Mahjobi1, M. Taheri1,2; Supported by VZFNM 00064203 and NR9448-3/2007. 1National institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Zahedan university of medical sciences, Zahedan, Islamic Percentile distribution of aneuploidies Republic of Iran. Percentiles Embryo sexing is one of the important ways for sex selection of off- Trimester Ist Aneuploidy Total <5 5-10 10-25 25-50 50-75 75-90 90-95 >95 spring. This is a potential method to considrerably improve animal +21 - 1 1 4 1 - - 1 8 breeding and the efficiency of dairy and meat production. a novel +18 1 - - 1 2 - - - 4 +13 1 - 1 - - - - - 2 repeated sequence specific to male cattle has been identified and Triploidy 5 1 - - - - - - 6 named S4 . S4 is a 1/5 Kb repeating unit contains various internal Ist 47,XXY - - - - 1 - - - 1 repeated sequence. S4 is localized on long arm of the Y chromosome 47,XXX 2 - 1 - 1 - - - 4 in the region near to ZFY genes. Aim: The objective of this study was 47,XYY - - - - - 1 1 - 2 45,X - - - 3 4 - 1 - 8 to established a simple, sensitive, reliable, reproducible and cost ef- +21 - - 2 2 4 - - 1 9 fective PCR based technique for sexing.. Materials and Methods: Ge- +18 - 1 - - - - - - 1 nomic DNA was extracted from the whole blood samples of 4 male and +13 - - 1 - - - - - 1 female cattles. PCR and real time PCR were performed using specific Triploidy 2 - - - - - - - 2 IInd 47,XXY - - - - 1 - - - 1 primers for this region. Result: By this PCR based methods we could 47,XXX 2 - - - - - - - 2 differentiate between female and male genomic DNA. Real time PCR 47,XYY - - - - - - - - 0 employed in order to have a quantitative method. Discussion:With this 45,X - - - 2 - 1 - - 3 technique we can distinct male from female using as much as 1pg Total 22 (40.74%) 26 (48.15%) 6 (11.11%) 54 DNA . Using this method we could determined the sex of an embryo (4 blastomers) . The Real time PCR method optimized here was able to be used for the quantitative detection of Y chromosomes in semen.Prenatal and perinatal genetics  P05.03 rest, Romania, 4Titu Maiorescu University, Bucharest, Romania. Application of genome wide 250k sNP array analysis in prenatal Bladder exstrophy is caused by incomplete closure of the inferior part diagnosis of the anterior abdominal wall. It has an incidence of 1/10000-1/40000 B. Faas, I. van de B, A. J. A. Kooper, R. Pfundt, A. P. T. Smits, N. de Leeuw; births and is more common in males (2,3M/1F). Separation of pubic Radboud University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. bones, low set umbilicus and abnormal genitalia are associated anom- Objectives: We explore the possibilities for the application of the Af- alies. fymetrix 250k SNP array platform in prenatal diagnosis. We present a case of bladder exstrophy who was diagnosed prenataly. Patients/methods: 250k NspI SNP array analyses were carried out on It was reffered to our Prenatal Department at 32 weeks of gestation for DNA from 16 fetuses (after TOP; n=11 or IUFD; n=5) and 3 newborns, a suspicion of ambigous genitalia. all prenatally karyotyped because of ultrasound anomalies and issued The child was born prematur, at 36weeks. Because of presence of as normal (n=18) or as carrier of a de novo translocation (n=1). CNVs some dysmorphic features, like low nasal bridge and micrognatia we (gains>200kb and losses>150kb) were categorized as either benign or have thought to perform further investigations to estabilish if in this (possibly) clinically significant. case is just an development defect or bladder exstrophy is a part of a Results: Aberrations were detected in 6 cases. Three were highly likely syndrome. Those aspects are important for prognosis and manage- clinically relevant and cytogenetically not visible: a de novo 2.9 Mb ment of the case and also for recurence risk. loss in 17p13 (IUFD), a 5 Mb loss in 3q26.33q27.2 (TOP; de novo t(3;18)(q26.2;q21.3)) and a maternal UPD 16 (live born child with P05.06 MCA). In a fourth fetus a CNV with (yet) unknown clinical significance contribution of three-dimensional computed tomography in was detected: a 340 kb gain in 17q12 (TOP; no parental analysis so prenatal diagnosis of lethal infantile cortical hyperostosis far). Furthermore, in a case of IUFD with no fetal karyotyping pos- (caffey disease) sible and mother being carrier of a t(4;22)(q12;q11.1), a 56.5 Mb gain V. Darmency1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, T. Rousseau2, N. Mejean3, S. Charra2, F. of 4p16.3q12 was found. In a newborn with MCA, a 22qter deletion Coron1, C. Cassini1, F. Huet1, M. Le Merrer4, V. Cormier-Daire4, N. Laurent2, P. detected postnatally was further characterized and shown to be 6.1 Sagot2, L. Faivre1,2; Mb in size. 1Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence « Anomalies du Développement Conclusion: In 6/19 cases, genome-wide SNP array analysis enabled et Syndromes Malformatifs »,hopital d’enfants, Dijon, France, 2Centre Pluridis- the detection of imbalances that otherwise would have remained unde- ciplinaire de Diagnostic Prénatal, Maternité, Dijon, France, 3Radiologie Pédia- tected. Its high resolution increases the reliability for detecting imbal- trique, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 4Centre de Référence Maladies Rares ances, but more knowledge is essential to improve the interpretation of « Maladies osseuses constitutionnelles », Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, CNVs. Moreover, criteria need to be established for the conscientious Paris, France. application of prenatal genome-wide array analysis. Infantile cortical hyperostosis (Caffey disease) is characterized by acute inflammation of soft tissues and profound alterations of the P05.04 shape and structure of the underlying bones, particularly the long Prenatal diagnostic of Anomaly Dandy-Walker. bones, mandible, clavicles or ribs. These manifestations generally ap- I. V. Soprunova1, N. V. Tkacheva2; pear during the first month of life, though time of onset varies, and a 1Astrakhan Medico-Genetic Consulting Centre, Astrakhan, Russian Federation, severe lethal prenatal form has been reported. The diagnosis of lethal 2Astrakhan Medical Academy, Astrakhan, Russian Federation. prenatal Caffey disease is generally made post-mortem since the com- Dandy-Walker malformation is characterized by agenesis or hypopla- bination of two-dimensional ultrasound and antenatal foetal x-rays is sia of the cerebellar vermis, cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle and not sufficient to make the diagnosis. Here we describe the contribution enlargement of the posterior fossa. of three-dimensional helical computed tomography (3D-HCT) in the Between 2000 and 2008 the Astrakhan Medico-Genetic Consulting diagnosis of lethal Caffey disease in a 30 WG pregnant woman, evalu- Centre performed prenatal ultrasound diagnosis for 58220 women. ated for shortened and bowed long bones. Periosteal thickening of the It was found that 10 fetuses had the Dandy-Walker malformation. 3 diaphyses and cortical irregularities were in favour of the lethal form of women were diagnosed before 22 weeks of pregnancy and 7 - after infantile cortical hyperostosis. This diagnosis was confirmed by post- 22. mortem x-rays and histological examination after elective termination 4 fetuses were male, 6 were female. of pregnancy. The search for the 3040C→T COL1A1 mutation on DNA For 7 of the positive fetuses it was their mother’s first pregnancies, 2 extracted from foetal blood cells was negative. This case report is the - second and 1 - fourth pregnancy. first description of 3D-HCT in lethal Caffey disease. It further empha- The main characteristic used to determine a positive test was an en- size the value of 3D-HCT as a complementary diagnostic tool in the largement of the cisterna magna greater than 10 millimeters, complete prenatal diagnosis of osteochondrodysplasia. This aplasia/hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis. technique provides 3D images of the abnormal findings more readily, 5 (50%) of the positive cases had fetuses that had hydrocephalus. which could aid in counselling and management of the pregnancy. 4 (40%) had chromosomal abnormalities: trisomy 18 (2) and mosaic monosomy X (2). All of the present chromosomal abnormalities were P05.07 accompanied by defects within the corresponding patient’s central ner- cell cycle studies of human cytotrophoblast cells in missed vous system (CNS) (dysgensis of the corpus callosum, hyposplastic abortion brain hemispheres, polymicrogyria) and other organs (congenital heart I. Trofimova1, S. Mylnikov1, T. Kuznetzova2, V. S. Baranov2; defects, clubfoot and omphalocele). 3 of the cases were accompanied 1St.Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s Insti- by porencephaly (2) and microcephaly (1), 1 of the cases had cleft lip tute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. and palate. Abnormal proliferation and differentiation of trophoblast can lead to One of the positive cases had associated CNS and non-CNS-associ- functional insufficiency of placenta and developmental destruction of ated malformation, other have short rib-polydactyly syndrome type 2. embryo. Meanwhile available data on proliferative capacity and cell All of these results were verified through autopsy. cycle of cytotrophoblast (CTB) in normal and pathological pregnancies Using this data to analyze the rate of Dandy-Walker syndrome, its was are inconsistent. found to be 0,017 % or 1 in 5822 fetuses. Proliferative capacities of CTB of chorion villi samples (CVS) from missed and artificial abortions (groups M and A respectively) at 5-8 P05.05 weeks of gestations were studied. After 24, 48, 72 hours incubation Prenatal diagnosis of a bladder exstrophy, a developmental with BrdU, semi-direct preparations and AO staining the metaphases pathology or a syndromic association ? with SCD and SCE were registered. Group M included CVS with nor- F. M. Nedelea1, L. Turculet1, L. Popescu1, C. Preda1, M. Ditu1, G. Popescu1, V. mal karyotype (N=4) and with heteroploidy (N=4). Group A included Plaiasu2, G. Peltecu1,3, A. Stana1,4; CVS with normal karyotype (N=6). 1Clinical Hospital Filantropia, Bucharest, Romania, 2Institut for Mother and In spite on conspicuous interindividual variations attributed to the dif- Child, Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania, 3Carol Davila University, Bucha- ferences in mitotic activity and gestation ages, obvious differences were found. The number of cells with accomplished two S-phases afterPrenatal and perinatal genetics  24 h was equal to 3,1+3,09 % and they were detected only in the group free fetal DNA samples achieved 4.05% of false positivity and 7.15% A, whereas after 48 h they were represented in both A (36,1+16,01 %) of false negativity in Y sequence detection. and in M groups (10,5+4,20 %) (P <0.01). There was no significant CONCLUSION: Established method allows fetal sex detection with differences in the number of such cells (55,2+9,09 % and 48,2+5,21 high sensitivity and specificity. The method has got also a potential for % respectively, P> 0.05) after 72 h incubation. No 3rd generations cells quantitative purposes. have been registered in both groups. These results are consistent with some previous data which postulate P05.10 the duration of one complete cell cycle of CTB equal to approximately “False” positive cases in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (cAH) 36 h. However proliferative capacity in vivo of CTB cells from missed neonatal screening: usefulness of a cYP21A2 genotyping abortion is reduced if compared to this one of progressive normal preg- B. Ezquieta1, B. Huidobro B1, R. Muñoz-Pacheco1, A. Rodriguez1, R. Barrio2, L. nancy. Soriano3, Y. Alins4, T. Calvo5, E. Dulin6, .. Ballester7, D. R. Arnao1, L. Santome1, B. Ferreiro1, A. Tabernero1; P05.08 1Hospital Materno Infantil G. Marañón, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Relationship of circulating cell-free DNA levels to cell-free fetal Madrid, Spain, 3Fundación Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 4Hospital V. de la Luz, DNA levels, clinical characteristics and laboratory parameters in Cuenca, Spain, 5Hospital Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 6Hospital General G. preeclampsia Marañón, Madrid, Spain, 7Hospital General Ciudad Real, Ciudad Real, Spain. L. Lazar, B. Nagy, A. Molvarec, J. Rigó Jr.; Aim: To evaluate the usefulness of a second-tier DNA analysis in CAH Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. neonatal screening positive cases without clinical signs. Objective: Elevated amounts of circulating DNA in maternal plasma Patients And Methods: 58 patients (20f, 38m) with three positive 17OH- have been detected in pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia. We progesterone (17OHP) determinations, but no neonatal CAH signs af- attempted to confirm this and simultaneously examined whether in- ter evaluation by paediatric endocrinologists, who indicated the DNA creased circulating cell-free DNA levels are related to the clinical char- analysis. Serial determinations of 17OHP and clinical follow-up (>1y). acteristics and laboratory parameters of preeclamptic patients. Study of the common mutations (PCR-ASO) and R426H (7% virilizing Study design: Circulating DNA was measured by real-time PCR in forms in Spain) together with genomic DNA analysis for hybrid dele- plasma samples obtained from 67 women with preeclampsia and 70 tions/large gene conversions to detect hemizygosity, semiquantitative normotensive pregnant women. Standard laboratory parameters and primer-extension for gene duplications carrying Q318X, microsatellite C-reactive protein levels were determined by an autoanalyzer. Plasma typing to detect unknown homozygosity for rare alleles (complemen- von Willebrand factor antigen levels were quantified by ELISA, while tary sequencing). plasma fibronectin concentration by nephelometry. Plasma malondial- Results: CYP21A2 segregated mutant alleles were detected in 13 pa- dehyde levels were measured by the thiobarbituric acid-based colori- tients: 3 compound heterozygous with I172N and null alleles (3 boys), metric assay. 8 compound heterozygous with severe mutations and V281L, and 2 Results: We confirmed that circulating total free and fetal DNA levels with two mild alleles. Sustained 17OHP levels confirmed CAH-21OHD are significantly elevated in pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia diagnosis of these “neonatal cryptic forms”. In 43, mutations were dis- (median: 11.395 vs. 32.460 and 0.001 vs. 0.086 pg/ul; P < .001). The carded in both alleles and a carrier situation was detected in 4 (655G, quantity of total plasma-free DNA did not correlate with most of the 655G+Q318X,V281L, P453S). The normal variant Q318X in gene du- laboratory parameters, except for serum aspartate aminotransferase plicated alleles was detected in 2 additional samples. Absence of clini- and alanine aminotransferase activities (correlation coefficient: 0.31; cal signs and normalization of 17OHP levels, in these remaining 45 P=0.012 and 0.46; P<.001). There was no correlation with clinical cases, discarded the deficiency. characteristics, including body mass index. Conclusion: CYP21A2 genotyping proved useful as a second-tier Conclusion: The releases of both free fetal and maternal DNA were analysis. The deficiency was discarded in all the negative patients and found to be affected in preeclampsia. The quantity of markers of in- carriers. The genotypes in those CYP21A2 positive patients allowed flammation, endothelial activation/injury and oxidative stress did not to discard a severe deficiency and were compatible with mild forms in show any correlation with cf DNA levels, and neither did cff DNA levels. boys and girls (compound heterozygous with V281L) or virilizing forms Hepatocellular necrosis seems to be responsible - at least partly - for in boys (compound heterozygous with I172N). increased circulating total DNA levels in preeclampsia, as suggested by the significant correlation with liver enzyme activities P05.11 Prenatal diagnosis of Dandy Walker malformation: case report P05.09 D. F. Albu, C. C. Albu, M. Dumitrescu, E. Severin; Fetal sex determination by capillary electrophoresis from “Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. maternal plasma in pregnant women A 35-year-old pregnant Caucasian female was referred at 20 weeks of R. Vodicka, R. Vrtel, E. Schneiderova, M. Prochazka, I. Dhaifalah, E. Kre- gestation for a routine prenatal ultrasound. Fetal monitoring was made jcirikova, J. Santavy; by ultrasound scans for fetal growth, congenital malformations, and University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub- amniotic fluid volume. Information about family medical history was col- lic. lected too. Amniotic fluid samples were taken to perform prenatal cyto- INTRODUCTION: Male specific fetal nucleic acid sequences from Y genetic diagnosis because sometimes Dandy Walker malformation is chromosome in pregnant woman maternal plasma DNA is quite easy associated with chromosome aberrations. The woman was tested for to distinguish even if contribution of fetal DNA is very low. Most ap- TORCH. Results: Ultrasound examination revealed a singleton preg- proaches that are reliably able to determine fetal sex are based on nancy with cerebellar malformation and associated anomalies: ven- Real-Time PCR. Most labs dealing with cell free fetal DNA analyses triculomegaly, meningocele and hydrocephaly. Karyotype indicated a have this method already routinely established. normal cytogenetic female: 46, xx. No evidence of an infectious origin Main objective of our study was optimization of noninvasive fetal sex was found. The pregnancy was terminated at 25 weeks of gestation detection from maternal plasma in pregnant women using capillary Autopsy findings confirmed the ultrasound diagnosis. Conclusions: a electrophoresis and prepare this procedure for quantitative analyses sporadic case with Dandy Walker malformation was described; prena- in our new project ,,Fragment and quantitative profiling of cell free fetal tal ultrasound disclosed a positive result useful for pregnancy manage- nucleic acids from maternal plasma in pathological and physiological ment and counseling for abortion. pregnancies“ which is supported by IGA MZ CR No. NS/9624-3. METHODS: Male/female artificial DNA mixtures and together 475 DNA P05.12 samples isolated from maternal plasma in different weeks of pregnan- importance of Routine Ultrasonography in Detecting Fetal cy ranging from 4th w.g. to 37th w.g. were used for DNA analyses. Y Karyotype Abnormalities in Low Risk Pregnancies chromosomal sequences in AMELY and TSPY were tested by refined A. I. Narin1, Z. Yilmaz1, D. Eroglu2, F. Yanik2, F. I. Sahin1; quantitative fluorescent PCR using capillary electrophoresis. 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An- RESULTS: The method is able to distinguish 1 % of male genom from kara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Obstetrics male/female artificial mixtures. Investigation and assessment in cellPrenatal and perinatal genetics  and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey. Hungary. First- and second-trimester ultrasonographic (USG) findings of fetal Background: Polymorphism of the leptin gene receptor (LEPR) may chromosome abnormalities include structural abnormalities and/or so- modulate the effect of elevated serum leptin levels in pre-eclampsia. nographic markers of fetal aneuploidy. Sonographic markers of fetal The aim of this study was to determine four LEPR SNPs in HELLP aneuploidy may be seen in normal fetuses and are often transient. syndrome patients. We aimed to evaluate the importance of USG findings, in estimating Methods: DNA was isolated from 83 normal healthy pregnant con- cytogenetic abnormality risks in low aneuploidy risk pregnancies. We trols and 75 HELLP syndrome patients’ blood samples. Four SNPs reviewed a number of most commonly accepted markers and struc- LEPR G+5193A (K109), LEPR G+27265A (Q223R), LEPR G+44704C tural abnormalities on pregnant women with low risk who underwent (K656N) and LEPR A+71001G (S1008) were determined by quantita- invasive prenatal diagnostic tests for USG abnormality in the period tive real-time PCR and melting curve analysis. from January 2002 to December 2008. Prenatal genetic diagnosis of Results: The allele and genotype distribution of the four LEPR SNP 68 cordocenteses, 42 chorionic villus samples (CVS) and 1688 am- was not significantly different in HELLP syndrome patients compared niocenteses (AS) were performed. In 179 of all cases (9.95%), cyto- to the healthy pregnant controls. However, there was a difference in genetic analysis was recommended because of USG abnormality. 82 the occurrence of the LEPR G+5193A (K109) GA genotype, which patients had structural abnormalities and 97 had sonographic markers. was twice more frequent in HELLP syndrome patients(40% vs. 24%) We detected 10 aneuploidies in fetuses with structural abnormalities (p=0,089).Conclusion: We did not find a difference in the allele and and 3 aneuploidies in fetuses with sonographic markers, as expected. genotype distribution of the four studied LEPR SNPs between HELLP We concluded that, although the presence or absence of sonografic syndrome patients and the healthy controls. The quantitative real-time markers can substantially modify the risk of fetal aneuploidy, structural PCR combined with melting curve analysis is a fast and reliable meth- abnormalities inevitably have high risk for aneuplodies. od for the determination of LEPR SNPs P05.13 P05.16 Prenatal Detection of Pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 in Limb Body Wall complex- A case presentation and rewiew of 5358 Referrals at a Reference Genetic center literature E. Karaca, E. Pariltay, O. Cogulu, H. Akin, F. Ozkinay; D. Socolov1, C. Terinte2, V. Gorduza1, R. Socolov1, M. Puiu3; Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Gr. T. Popa, Iasi, Romania, 2Hospital of Pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 is a structural chromosomal Obstetrics and Gynecology Cuza Voda, Iasi, Romania, 3University of Medicine variant which usually has no phenotypic effect and occurs 1.98 % in and Pharmacy V. Babes, Timisoara, Romania. human population. In this study, we report on the incidence of peri- Background. Limb Body Wall Complex (LBWC) is a combination of centric inversions of chromosome 9, the indications of those results, development abnormalities involving the neural tube, body wall and and discuss the data in the light of the literature. We have reviewed the limbs. There are few cases in literature, and our case is only the the results of a total of 5358 pregnant women who underwent inva- 2nd presented from Romania. sive prenatal procedures between January 1998 and December 2008. Case presentation. The patient was a 31 year-old women G1P0A0 Inversion of chromosome 9 was detected in 60 of them (1.1%). The with a 33 week pregnancy which had no prenatal care. The ultrasound most common indications were advanced maternal age (AMA) [n: 27, scan described several abnormalities, including: large abdominal wall (45%)], high risk result on triple test (HRRTT) [n: 14, (24%)], anomalies defect, with difficult to identify pelvic organs and ambiguous genita- in USG examination [n: 10, (16%)], increased nuchal translucency [n: lia; enlarged stomach with suspicion of intestinal atresia; scoliosis and 4, (7%)], and other reasons in 5 (8%)[n: 5, (8%)]. In conclusion the spida bifida occulta with bilateral ventriculomegalia; one inferior limb incidence of prenatally detected pericentric inversion of chromosome absent; short umbilical cord with single artery. After therapeutic termi- 9 is compatible with the incidence of general population. nation of pregnancy, the abnormalities were confirmed and polycystic liver and kidneys were also mentioned. Also bilateral cardiac ventricu- P05.14 lomegalia, left superior pulmonary lobe hemorrhage, imperforated Leptin gene (tttc) microsatellite polymorphism in pre- anus and pancreas agenesia were identified. No abnormalities were n eclampsia and HELLP syndrome found at chromosomal examination - 46,XY. B. Nagy, T. Varkonyi, L. Lazar, P. Hupuczi, N. G. Than, J. Rigo Jr; Conclusion. The case presented here is a placento-caudal phenotype 1st Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, of a LBWC syndrome, which had as a special element the polycystic Hungary. kidney and hepatic disease. The description of plurimalformative fea- Genetic variation on the leptin gene (LEP) influences susceptibility to tures in our case is important to better understanding of pathogenesis obesity. A study showed correlation between the length of the microsat- of disease. ellite on the LEP gene and pre-eclampsia. We decided to compare the tetranucleotide repeat (TTTC) polymorphism in the 3’-flanking region P05.17 n in the leptin gene on DNA samples of patients with pre-eclampsia and Detection of maternal cell contamination (mcc) using stR/ HELLP syndrome. Blood samples were collected from normal pregnant microsatellite markers on a capillary Electrophoresis system (n=71), pre-eclamptic (n=64) and HELLP (n=69) syndrome patients. S. Hung1, L. Pique2, C. Davidson1, E. Nordman1, B. Johnson1, L. Joe1, A. Prad- Fluorescent PCR and DNA fragment analyses was performed from han1, A. Felton1, I. Schrijver2; isolated DNA. The electrophoretograms were evaluated and patients 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Stanford University Medi- were assigned to two groups, class I low (<160 basepair) or class II cal Center, Stanford, CA, United States. high (≥160 basepair). We observed a higher frequency of class II al- Typically prenatal genetic testing requires fetal gDNA that is isolated leles in the PE and HELLP syndrome patients, which was only shown from amniotic fluid (AF) and chorionic villus samples (CVS). AF and to be significant in the case of HELLP syndrome (p=0.025) patients. CVS samples are extremely valuable samples that are collected via The Pearson Chi-square test did not show significant differences in the invasive surgical procedures, and as a result are subject to maternal genotype distribution. We observed a high frequency of II/II genotype cell contamination (MCC). Due to the sensitivity of PCR, MCC can in the PE (43.8%) and HELLP (56.5%) syndrome patients relative to potentially contribute a significant source of error in prenatal testing the healthy controls (38%). Our results highlight the necessity of LEP with misinterpretation of a prenatal test thought to be possible at levels (TTTC) polymorphism studies. of MCC as low as 1-2%.Commercially available forensic human iden- n tification kits that employ fluorescent multiplex PCR amplification of P05.15 polymorphic microsatellite repeats are suitable for the MCC detection. Leptin receptor (LEPR) sNP polymorphisms in HELLP syndrome To achieve several informative markers when analyzing samples for patients determined by quantitative real-time PcR and melting MCC, we utilized the AmpFLSTR® Minifiler™ PCR Amplification Kit, curve analysis which interrogates 8 microsatellite loci across four fluorescent dyes. T. Varkonyi, G. Szabo, A. Molvarec, P. Hupuczi, N. G. Than, J. Rigo Jr, B. In order to evaluate a new capillary electrophoresis (CE) instrument, Nagy; synthetic MCC sensitivity controls (10%, 5%, and 1%) as well AF 1st Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, samples were analyzed. Semi-quantitative calculations of the level ofPrenatal and perinatal genetics  MCC contamination were performed by comparing the peak area of P05.20 the informative maternal allele to the unique fetal allele; the new CE Identification of UGTA (tA) and (tA) alleles in slovenian 5 8 instrument provided adequate sensitivity for detecting a synthetic MCC newborns with pathological unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia control at a level of 1% or greater. Further, we discuss common pitfalls B. Ostanek1, D. Furlan2, B. Bratanič3, M. Zupančič3, J. Lukač Bajalo1; to the analysis of MCC results such as broad peak errors, allelic drop 1Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Ljubljana, Slovenia, out (ADO), preferential allelic amplification, and the influence of stutter 2General Hospital Novo mesto, Diagnostic Laboratory, Novo mesto, Slovenia, peaks. 3University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Pediatric Department, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is a common finding during the neo- P05.18 natal period and can sometimes lead to severe consequences such Expression Profiling of Placental microRNAs in Preeclamptic as bilirubin encephalopathy. Increased number of TA repeats in the maternal Plasma promoter region of the bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyltransferase gene T. Gunel1,2, I. Kalelioglu3, P. Akcakaya1, R. Has3, H. Ermis3, K. Aydınlı4; (UGT1A1) results in decreased bilirubin conjugation and is the princi- 1Istanbul University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and pal cause of Gilbert’s syndrome in Caucasians. Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Research and Application The aim of the present study was to investigate whether UGT1A1(TA) n Center for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering 34134, Vezneciler/Istanbul, polymorphism was related to pathological hyperbilirubinemia of unex- Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul-TURKIYE., plained aetiology in Slovenian newborns. Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul University, Cerrahpaşa Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul- Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis was used to geno- TURKIYE., Istanbul, Turkey. type 147 consecutive newborns with unexplained jaundice (total serum Preeclampsia is a potentially dangerous disorder specific to the sec- bilirubin over 220 μmol/L) admitted to the Neonatal unit of University ond half of pregnancy, affecting about 2.5-3% of women. It is the most Medical Centre Ljubljana. frequent pregnancy associated disorder and still a leading cause of The frequencies of genotypes were as follows: (TA) (42.9%), (TA) 6/6 6/7 maternal and perinatal mortality and morbidity and preterm birth. Pre- (37.4%), (TA) (16.3 %), (TA) (2.0%), (TA) (0.7%) and (TA) 7/7 5/6 5/7 6/8 eclampsia starts with placental dysfunction in the first trimester. De- (0.7%). The frequency of (TA) genotype, which is characteristic for 7/7 spite extensive research on preeclampsia during the last decades, the Gilbert’s syndrome did not differ from that of the healthy Slovenian underlying pathogenetic mechanisms remain unclear. population (p>0.05). However, in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia group Identification of placental products rather than cells in the maternal males had higher frequency of (TA) allele than females (p=0.045). It 7 circulation has taken a drastic turn for the better by the observation is interesting that there were 69.4 % males and 30.6% females in our that cell-free DNA and RNA originating from the placenta circulates hyperbilirubinemia group. in a protected form in the maternal blood and can be obtained easily In conclusion, frequency of UGT1A1(TA) polymorphism genotypes n from the maternal plasma. Recent studies on microRNAs (miRNAs) was determined for the first time in Slovenian newborns with patho- offer possibilities for developing another class of molecular markers. logical hyperbilirubinemia. The extremly rare (TA) and (TA) alleles in 5 8 miRNAs are short (19-25 nucleotides), single-stranded, and nonpro- Caucasians were found also in Slovenians. Our results suggest that tein-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression by binding to the 3’ male newborns with (TA) allele have an increased risk to develop 7 untranslated region of the target mRNAs. pathological neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. In this study, it is aimed that detection of miRNAs which have the dif- ferent expression profile in maternal plasma in preeclamtic pregnants P05.21 compare to healthy pregnants. In the content of study, miRNA extrac- Recurrent progressive non-immune hydrops foetalis: better tion from maternal plasma of 20 pregnants with preeclampsia and 20 think of mucopolysaccharidoses type Vii/ beta-glucuronidase non-preeclampsia healthy pregnants, detection of expression differ- deficiency/ GUSB gene defect ences by the use of microarray and expression analysis of detected S. G. M. Frints1,2, Y. Arens1,2, J. Bakker3, J. Huijmans4, S. Stevens5, J. Enge- miRNAs by quantitative real time pcr.The comparison of the collection, len5, R. Blok2,6, J. Nijhuis7, C. Willekes7, A. ten Haaft8, Y. Henskens8, A. Cleven9, isolation and concentration approaches as well as detection can be M. Baldewijns9, W. Lissens10, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders1,2; observed in detail on our poster presentation. 1Prenatal Diagnosis and Therapy, Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2School for Oncology P05.19 and Developmental Biology, GROW, University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The study of the natridiuretic peptide precursor gene (tttc) repeats Netherlands, 3Laboratory for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Department of in essential hypertension and preeclampsia Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Neth- G. Szabo, T. Varkonyi, B. Stenczer, A. Molvarec, J. Rigo Jr, B. Nagy; erlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 5Cytogenetic Laboratory, Department of Clinical Background: Lately a novel variable tandem repeat polymorphism Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands, (TTTC) in the 5’-flanking region of the natriuretic peptid precursor B 6DNA laboratory, Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medi- gene (NPPB) was discovered, which was associated with essential cal Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 7Prenatal Diagnosis and Therapy, hypertension. It has not been studied in preeclamsia (PE). PE is a Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Maastricht University Medical Center, serious complication of pregnancy with hypertension and proteinuria, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 8Department of Hematology, Maastricht University developing in the second half of the pregnancy. We decided to deter- Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 9Department of Pathology, Maas- mine the tandem repeats of the NPPB gene in preeclampsia. tricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 10Center of Medi- Method: DNA was isolated using High Pure PCR Template Preparation cal Genetics, University Hospital Brussels, Brussels, Belgium. kit (Roche, Germany) from blood samples of 28 healthy pregnants, 17 Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII/ beta-glucuronidase is an autosomal pregnants with essential hypertension and 26 preeclamptic patients. recessive lysosomal storage disease. The phenotype is highly vari- We used fluorescent PCR and DNA fragment analysis for the detection able, ranging from severe lethal non-immune hydrops foetalis to mild of the NPPB gene’s tandem repeat units on ABI 3130. forms with survival into adulthood. We describe a non-consanguine- Results: We found that the distribution of the TTTC repeat number is ous couple, first presented with non-immune hydrops foetalis, ascites giving mainly two groups, one at 11 and the other at 16. We found low and clubfeet in the fourth pregnancy at 20 weeks of gestation. They frequency of the high number of repeats (n=16) in the control healthy had one early miscarriage and two healthy children. Prenatal diag- group (21.4%), while it was higher in essential hypertension (32.3%) nosis showed (familial) 45,XX, der(14;15)(q10;q10) karyotype with de and preeclamptic patients (32.6%). Conclusion: We found higher fre- novo RAI1 locus duplication MLPA detected. Uniparental disomy 14 quency of the high TTTC repeat (n=16) alleles of the NPPB gene in and 15 were excluded. The pregnancy was terminated at 26 weeks essential hypertension and preeclampsia. We continue our investiga- of gestation. Lysosomal enzyme investigations in amniotic fluid were tion to find out the role of this polymorphism in the development of not conclusive and 5% recurrence risk for hydrops foetalis was coun- hypertension. selled. In the fifth pregnancy prenatal diagnosis revealed a 46,XY karyotype without RAI1 duplication. However, ultrasound investigation showed again a progressive hydrops foetalis. Cultured amniocytesPrenatal and perinatal genetics  from the fourth pregnancy combined with amniotic fluid investigation P05.24 of the fifth pregnancy using glycosaminoglycan electrophoresis and Overview of Prenatal Diagnosis (PND) in our country (iran) lysosomal enzyme activity measurements confirmed beta-glucuroni- M. H. Kariminejad, Azadeh Moshtagh, Farnaz Azimi, Nasrin dase deficiency in both. Cord blood investigation revealed prominently NabaviNia,Mahnaz Pirveissi,Narges Miraftabi,Roxana Kariminejad; vacuolated monocytes, with basophilic inclusions in lymphocytes Kariminejad & Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Re- (Gasser cells) and metachromatic granules (Alder-Reilly bodies) in public of Iran. granulocytes. Electron microscopic investigations showed vacuolated Prenatal diagnosis became a generally accepted tool for prevention of Hofbauer cells in the placenta and foamy macrophages in spleen, liver, genetics disorders since the 1980s. Simultaneously Iranian geneticists and other organs. Greatly reduced activity of beta-glucuronidase in and clinicians of related fields attempted to establish this procedure in cultured skin fibroblasts reconfirmed the diagnosis of MPS type VII and our country. GUSB DNA analysis is still pending. We can conclude that recurrent It was a great challenge, it took a long time to be overcome the prob- massive non-immune hydrops foetalis is likely autosomal recessive lems, including legal approval initially granted for hemoglobinopathies with 25% recurrence risk in which lysosomal storage disorders need at 1996 and thereafter for other genetic disorders including chromo- to be investigated. somal abnormalities, metabolic diseases MPS, lipid lysosomal stor- age diseases: Single aminoacids, muscular dystrophies, myopathies P05.22 (SMA), triple nucleotide repeats, Skin lesions and mitochondrial dis- Achivements in the NiPD of monogenic disorders: a prenatal eases. diagnosis unit experience Hereby the results, and the practical problems encountered in eleven A. Bustamante Aragones1,2, C. Gonzalez Gonzalez3, M. Rodriguez de Alba1,2, thousand chromosomal study of amniotic fluid samples are present- E. Vallespin4, M. Garcia Hoyos1,2, J. Gallego Merlo1,2, E. Ainse1,2, C. Perez ed. Cerdá5,2, M. Trujillo Tiebas1,2, C. Ramos1,2; The pregnant ladies are classified according to clinical indications as 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz-Capio, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Spain, 3Megalab, follows: Maternal age over 30 years, history of offspring with chromo- Madrid, Spain, 4Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 5Universidad Autónoma de somal aberration, the similar group with advanced maternal age, bal- Madrid, Madrid, Spain. anced chromosomal aberration in either parents, loss of offspring pre Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) using fetal DNA in maternal or postnatal death, high sick of chromosomal abnormalities according plasma has proven its potential for the study of the fetus. Many diag- to triple, quadruple, and 1st trimester fetal screening tests. nostic units are currently offering non-invasive fetal sex assesment for X-linked disorders and Rh determination in Rh(-) pregnant women. P05.25 As for the monogenic disorders, since the fetal DNA circulates within a Prenatal Down’s syndrome screening in st.Petersburg in 2008 high background of maternal DNA, NIPD is mainly based on the study T. K. Kascheeva1, Y. A. Nikolaeva1, M. V. Krechmar1, N. V. Vokhmyanina2, T. V. of paternal alleles, absent in the maternal genome. This limits this ap- Kuznetzova1, O. P. Romanenko2, V. S. Baranov1; proach to pregnancies in which the father is carrier of an autosomal 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian dominant mutation or those in which both parents are carriers for dif- Federation, 2City Medical Genetic Center, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa- ferent autosomal recessive mutations. tion. The clinical incorporation of NIPD for monogenic disorders must fulfil There is a growing interest in the shift of prenatal screening to the the same needs of the conventional molecular prenatal diagnosis. first trimester. Such screening relies on the maternal age, free β-hCG, We have studied 14 paternal mutations associated to different diseas- PAPP-A plus NT. The second trimester screening in Saint-Peters- es: X-linked retinitis pigmentosa, congenital Leber amaurosis, cystic burg is performed for all pregnant women before 35, the first trimes- fibrosis, propionic acidemia and Huntington disease. ter screening - for all at the age 35 and more. Since 2004 combined The diagnosis was performed by the use of different analytical meth- screening was initiated in Saint-Petersburg. Down syndrome (DS) de- ods currently used in the clinical practice. tection rate was 94.5% (52/55) (cut off 1/250, FPR 5.8%). Altogether The fetal condition for the paternal mutation was correctly diagnosed 42111 (82.5%) pregnancies were tested in 15-17 weeks. Detection in 13 out of the 14 cases. The remaining case could not be diagnosed rate in 2-d trimester was 75% (24 of 32) (1/360, FPR 7.0%). 2705 of due to the length of the mutant allele. pregnant women of 35 age and more (36%) were tested in first trimes- NIPD of monogenic diseases could be the forthcoming study to be of- ter. Detection rate in 1-t trimester was 100% (17 of 17) (1/250, FPR fered in clinical practice. The study of monogenic disorders in maternal 16.0%). Many women from them participated in the both screenings. plasma must be individualized and directed. As a Prenatal Diagnosis Since 2008, February the simple calculation formula has been sug- Unit we are aware of the importance of having different diagnostic tools gested for DS risk estimation in the women subjected to both screen- available to get to a reliable diagnosis for each individual case. ing tests. According to this formula the final risk is equal to the risk of the 1st trimester multiplied by the risk of the second one and divided P05.23 by age risk. In that case the number of FPR reduces almost twice. But A case of partial trisomy 3q in a fetus application of two steps screening is economically unjustified. Second O. Nikolayeva, L. Bogodukh, T. Petrova, S. Ripp; screening could be recommended only to the women with risk about Family Planning and Reproduction Centre, Astrakhan, Russian Federation. 0.05 and 0.4% after the 1st trimester screening. This group contributed A married couple underwent cytogenetic testing following the detec- only 17% of all pregnancies in 2008. More sophisticated decision con- tion of abnormalities in a fetus 25 weeks. The father was 22 years old, cerning application of contingent screening could be taken after some the mother was 23 years old, and this was their 3rd pregnancy. Fetal economical considerations. ultrasound had revealed multiple congenital abnormalities including congenital heart disease, common arterial trunk, a 4mm defect of inter- P05.26 ventricular septum, and Dandy-Walker syndrome. The mother’s karyo- Prenatal diagnosis of mucopolyssaccharidoses in Egypt: type was 46,xx, inv (3) (p2.5 q2.1). Cordocentesis allowed karyotyping counseling aspects, sampling techniques and biochemical of the fetus and revealed: 46,xx,der(3) (3qter-cen 3p2.5::3q2.1-3qter), diagnosis resulting in partial trisomy of the long arm of the 3rd chromosome as E. M. A. F. Fateen1, A. A. L. A. Aboul Nasr2; a result of recombination inv(3) by the mother. The pregnancy was 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. subsequently aborted. Fetal pathology revealed: body mass 570g, Objective: prenatal diagnosis of mucopolysaccharidoses in pregnant length 21cm. The sex was indeterminate. There was acrocephaly, high females with previously affected child forehead, and hypertelorism. The nose is small and flat with broad Subjects: The present study included 35 pregnant females with previ- nostrilis, and the bridge was sunken. The ears were low. ously affected MPS child or more. 10 type I (Hurler), 9 type II (Hunter), The fetus also had contracture of knee and talocrucal joints. The lower 5 type IIIb (Sanfilippo), 3 type IVa (Morquio) and 8 type VI (Maroteaux- limbs were adducted to the trunk, and there was lower limb syndactyly. Lamy) The upper extremities are without pathology. There was agenesis of Consanguineous marriage was present in 30 (85.7%) couples. 15 the urinary bladder, the ureters flowing into a broadened rectum. No families have no normal children and 20 families have normal children. internal sexual organs were detected. However families with no normal males are 27.Prenatal and perinatal genetics  All the pregnant females were subjected to history taking, pedigree P05.29 construction, clinical examination and ultrasound scan. Proper coun- Evaluation of the fetus with cheilognathopalatoschisis seling was done and patients were scheduled for prenatal diagnosis. C. C. Albu, D. F. Albu, M. Dumitrescu, E. Severin; 4 cases did not come in scheduled time, 3 of them were type II and “Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. one was type IIIb. Background: Cheilognathopalatoschisis or complex cleft (involves cleft 5 females (3 type I and 2 type IIIb) came in two successive pregnancies of the lip, upper jaw, and hard and soft palates) is a severe birth defect. for prenatal diagnosis to prenatal diagnosis was done in 2 pregnancies It occurs isolated or associated with other medical conditions. of them as anembryonic sacs were diagnosed. Another female (MPS Aim: to determine whether the cheilognathopalatoschisis is syndromic VI) came in three successive pregnancies. However prenatal diagno- or non-syndromic. sis was not performed in two of them as the first was vesicular mole Patients and Methods: A 29-year-old Caucasian female, pregnant for and the second was anembryonic sac, both ended by evacuation the first time, was referred at 17 weeks’ gestation for a routine pre- natal ultrasound. The couple had normal general health and was not P05.27 consanguineous. There was no family history of cheilognathopalatos- molecular Genetic tests and Referral Reasons in Prenatal chisis. Routine ultrasonography at 17 weeks of pregnancy, triple test Diagnosis at a tertiary Referral Hospital (AFP,uE3, hCG), selective ultrasonography for detection of fetal ab- E. E. Bilal, A. Alpman, A. Aykut, H. Onay, O. Cogulu, F. Ozkinay; normalities, and amniocentesis were performed. Ege University Faculty of Medicine, izmir, Turkey. Results: Ultrasound examination revealed a single fetus with an orofa- Prenatal diagnosis is helpful for planning the problems that may occur cial cleft and no other developmental abnormalities. Triple test was not in the newborn period and deciding whether to continue the pregnan- sensitive to the presence of trisomy 13 but chromosome analysis was cy. Single gene mutations as the cause of single gene disorders can recommended because orofacial cleft as a sonographic marker sug- be detected by molecular analysis in the prenatal period. The preva- gested the possibility of a chromosomal anomaly. FISH and QF-PCR lence of all single gene disorders at birth is about 10 per thousand. It detected no aneuploidy in chromosomes X, Y, 13, 18 and 21. is possible to apply the molecular genetic analyses in these patients Conclusions: Cheilognathopalatoschisis was diagnosed by performing for prenatal diagnosis and genetic counseling. Here, we present the 3D US in the second trimester of pregnancy. Our results suggested a most common requested single gene disorders and molecular genetic non-syndromic cleft. Prenatal evaluation was useful in management, tests in our center.The molecular test results of all prenatal referrals prognosis and prevented the negative emotional effects of the par- between 2006-2009 at a tertiary medical center in western part of Tur- ents. key were evaluated retrospectively. Total 121 prenatal samples were included in the study. Ninety-four of 121 prenatal tests were performed P05.30 for beta-thalassemia (77.7%) which was followed by cystic fibrosis in Angiotensin converting enzyme (AcE) polymorphism and its 16 (13.2%), 10 in spinal muscular atrophy (8.3%), 1 in Osteogenesis role in the neonatal respiratory disease development imperfecta (0.8%). Because beta-thalassemia is the most common K. V. Danilko1,2, L. I. Khamidullina1, R. Bogdanova2, A. I. Fatyhova2, T. V. Vic- single gene disorder and one of the most important health problems in torova1,2; Turkey, particularly, prenatal diagnosis of this disease has become a 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir widely available test. State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Angiotensin converting enzyme plays an essential role in two physi- P05.28 ological systems, one leading to the production of angiotensin II and Prenatal diagnostics in Bulgaria - current experience and future the other to the degradation of bradykinin. The wide distribution and trends multifunctional properties of these peptides suggest that ACE could be R. V. Vazharova1, S. Baklova1, A. Savov1, R. Rainova1, I. Sinigerska1, A. Jor- involved in various pathophysiological conditions, including neonatal danova1, A. Todorova1, Y. Petrova1, M. Ivanova1, A. Bichev1, V. Dimitrova2, J. respiratory distress-syndrome (RDS) and pneumonia. The ACE lev- Karagyosova2, D. Markov2, V. Kincheva1, A. Andreev1, T. Chernev2, S. Ivanov2, els are under genetic control, and the insertion/deletion (I/D) polymor- L. Kalaydjieva3, I. Kremensky1; phism in intron 16 of the ACE gene is used as a marker for a functional 1National genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital of Obstetrics polymorphism. and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Centre for Human Genetics, Edith Cowan We investigated the role of ACE I/D polymorphism on the incidence University, Perth, Australia. of RDS and pneumonia. We studied 161 patients with RDS (n=97), Invasive prenatal diagnostics was introduced into medical practice in congenital pneumonia (CP) (n=64) and 286 healthy term neonates the early 70-ies. Since then it is recognized as a useful tool for pre- matched by sex from Ufa, Russian Federation, using two primers PCR vention of severe human diseases. Prenatal invasive diagnostics for for each DNA sample twice. monogenic and chromosomal diseases in Bulgaria started in 1980. For all samples, genotype distribution was in Hardy-Weinberg equi- Since 1996 maternal serum screening for Down syndrome and NTDs librium. II genotype frequency was decreased in all patients (19,88%, is routinely offered. Now National genetic laboratory has well devel- p=0.005), including RDS (20,62%, p=0,031) and CP (18,75%, oped services providing laboratory prenatal diagnostics of monogenic p=0.038), compared with the healthy term neonates (32,87%). The and chromosomal diseases in high risk families. RDS patients with D allele (53,09%, p=0,026, OR=1,2), but not the For a 28 years period 400 families with severe monogenic diseases CP group (51,56%, p=0,12), had the slightly increased risk of disease as CF, DMD/BMD, SMA, beta-Thalassemia, PKU, CMT1A and other (43,53% in healthy term neonates group). rare metabolic diseases underwent DNA prenatal diagnostics. In 55 These data suggest a potential role for angiotensin-converting enzyme families with lysosomal storage diseases prenatal diagnostics was polymorphism in the development of neonatal respiratory disease. The performed by enzymatic assays. Among all families studied 91 fetuses D allele may adversely influence the risk of the RDS development. were found to be affected. In some families new disease causing mu- However this allele can be associated with birth prematurity of the tations were found. RDS patients. So, further study is needed to confirm the association. During the last 5 years rapid growth of prenatal diagnoses for chromo- somal diseases is evident and more than 1000 invasive procedures for P05.31 this indication are performed yearly. As an alternative to cytogenetic Respiratory distress syndrome in neonate and association of analysis Q-PCR for common aneuploidies (trisomy 21, 18 and 13) was polymorphisms surfactant protein D gene introduced in 1999 and since 2002 is used routinely in our practice. L. Khamidullina1, R. Fayzullina2, T. Victorova1,2, K. Danilko1; For 2008 among 490 amniocenteses performed because of risk over 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir 1:250 after maternal serum screening 15 fetuses (3,1%) with trisomy State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. 21 were found. The surfactant proteins play important roles in lung function, and ge- Since the capacity for cytogenetic analysis is limited and targeted Q- netic variants of these proteins have been linked with lung diseases, PCR detects only common aneuploidies the introduction of new tech- including respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). The aim of the study nologies as arrayCGH seems to be a reliable tool for effective prenatal was the investigation of association between polymorphisms of sur- diagnosis of chromosomal diseases. factant protein D gene (SFTPD (Met11Thr, Ala160Thr) and the risk ofPrenatal and perinatal genetics  developing RDS in neonates from Bashkortostan Republic, Russia. fontanellar, renal ultrasonography and eye examination were normal. The whole peripheral blood of 159 patients with respiratory disease Robinow syndrome was then diagnosed. and umbilical cord blood of 299 healthy term neonates was used for ROR2 molecular analysis was normal. Array-CGH is pending. the isolation of genomic DNA. The patient group consisted of 3 sub- Even though Robinow syndrome has, to our knowledge, never been groups (63 neonates with pneumonia, 40 babies with RDS and 53 in- diagnosed during pregnancy on ultrasound findings, it should be sug- fectious complicated RDS) The genomic DNA served for PCR in the gested on the association of short long bones and mesoaxial poly- genotype analysis. dactyly. The results demonstrated that SFTPD (Met11Thr, Ala160Thr) gene genotypes frequency distribution patterns not significantly differ P05.34 between patients with RDS and healthy neonates (χ2=2.68, df=2, split hand-split foot malformation due to 10q24 duplication p=0.262; χ2=1.31, df=2, p=0.518). identified during pregnancy on array-CGH The SFTPD Thr/Thr genotype is protective against the development M. Holder-Espinasse1, A. Valat2, A. Mézel3, P. Bourgeot4, S. Manouvrier- complication in RDS (7.5% vs. 32.5%; χ2=7.9, p=0.006; OR=0.17, Hanu1, J. Andrieux5; 95%CI 0.04-0.64). Whereas, children with RDS who has the Met/Thr 1Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Ser- genotype were susceptible to infectious complication (73.6% vs. 50%; vice de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, Centre Hospitalier, Lens, France, 3Service de χ2=4.5, p=0.003; OR=2.79, 95%CI 1.07-7.32). Chirurgie orthopédique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 4Service de We suppose that the Met11Thr polymorphism of SFTPD gene may play Gynécologie Obstétrique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 5Laboratoire a significant role in the development of complicated RDS in neonates. de Génétique médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France. Ectrodactyly or split hand-split foot malformation (SHFM) is a rare P05.32 condition that occurs in 1 in 8500-25000 newborns and accounts for Prenatal diagnosis of a fetus with ring chromosome 21 around 15 % of all limb reduction defects. SHFM is clinically hetero- characterized by molecular cytogenetic methods geneous and can be either isolated, associated with other malforma- I. D. Papoulidis1, E. Siomou1, E. Manolakos2, T. Liehr3, A. Vetro4, A. P. Atha- tions or part of syndromic entities. This condition is usually inherited nasiadis5, O. Zuffardi4, M. B. Petersen1; in an autosomal dominant manner and several loci have been identi- 1Eurogenetica S.A., Thessaloniki, Greece, 2Bioiatriki, Athens, Greece, 3Fried- fied. Among them, SHFM3 has been located on 10q24 and the natu- rich-Schiller-University, Jena, Germany, 4Universita di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 5Aris- rally occurring Dactylaplasia mouse is the animal model for SHFM3 in totle University, Thessaloniki, Greece. humans. Recently, 0.5 Mb tandem genomic duplications at chromo- Ring chromosome 21 is a rare structural chromosomal abnormality some 10q24 involving at least the DACTYLIN gene have been found resulting, most of the times, from breakage in both arms of the chromo- in SHFM3 patients. No point mutations in any of the genes residing some and subsequent fusion of the two ends. There is a wide spec- within the duplicated region have been reported so far, and it is still not trum of phenotypes in ring 21 carriers that seems to be associated clear how this rearrangement leads to the SHFM3 phenotype. Indeed, with different breakpoints of 21p and q arms, but also with somatic loss complex alterations of gene regulation mechanisms that would impair of the ring. Here we report a case of a fetus that was diagnosed with limb morphogenesis are likely. mos46,XY,r(21)(p11.2q22)[34]/45,XY,-21[4]/46,XY[14] karyotype. Ul- We report on the third pregnancy of healthy non consanguineous trasound examination at 21 weeks’ gestation showed no abnormalities parents presenting normal hands and feet. At 23WG, the routine ul- and amniocentesis opted due to advanced maternal age. Cytogenetic trasound scan identified a split hand-split foot malformation. Chromo- analysis was performed in the parents and showed the presence of the somes on amniotic fluid were normal 46XX and array-CGH shown a de ring chromosome in 1 out of 100 metaphases in the father, indicating novo 400 kb 10q24.31q24.32 duplication, comprising 5 genes includ- a possible familial transmission. Analysis by Fluorescent In Situ Hy- ing DACTYLIN. Reassuring genetic counselling was performed since bridization (FISH) and comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) with these forms of SHFM are isolated and non-syndromic. At birth, limb resolution of 144 kb showed no deletion or duplication. After genetic anomalies were confirmed and corrective surgery performed. counseling, the parents decided to continue the pregnancy and post- To our knowledge, this is the first prenatal report of 10q24 duplication natal examination just after birth found no congenital abnormalities. in SHFM. P05.33 P05.35 Robinow syndrome revealed during pregnancy on limb Antenatal population carrier screening for spinal muscular anomalies atrophy D. Meyran1,2, F. Escande3, A. Dieux-coeslier1,2, C. Chafiotte4, D. Thomas1,5, P. S. Y. Lin, Y. N. Su, C. N. Lee; Dufour1,5, J. Andrieux1,6, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1,2, M. Holder1,2; National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. 1Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Clinical Genetics, Lille, France, 3Centre de Background Biologie Pathologie, Lille, France, 4Radiologie, Lyon, France, 5Maternity, Lille, SMA is one of the most common autosomal recessive diseases with France, 6Genomic platform, Lille, France. a carrier frequency of approximately to 1 in 50. Due to the incidence Robinow syndrome is a rare disease characterised by the associa- and severity of SMA and the availability of a carrier-screening test, we tion of mesomelic limb shortening, facial and genital anomalies. It can embarked on a stepwise prenatal SMA carrier screening program in be inherited in an autosomal dominant or recessive mode. Recessive Taiwan. forms are severe and the result of ROR2 mutations, whereas the aeti- Methods ology of dominant forms remains unknown. We report a further case of A total of 70,048 pregnant women participated in this carrier-screening Robinow syndrome diagnosed at birth, with interesting prenatal find- program from 2005 to 2008. In the first phase, we used DHPLC as the ings. single tool for genetic testing. In the second phase, we combined the Parents were healthy and not consanguineous. The mother was 39- DHPLC and MLPA for the test. If a woman was found to be a SMA car- year-old. The first trimester ultrasound showed an increased nuchal rier, her husband was asked to take the genetic test. If they both were translucency (2.7 mm). Karyotype on amniotic fluid was normal (46, SMA carriers, prenatal genetic diagnosis was suggested. XX). The second trimester ultrasound revealed short ulna and radii (5th Results centile). A spiral CT scan revealed delayed ossification and a meso- A total of 40,756 pregnant women received the single-tool screening; axial polydactyly on both feet. A chondrodysplasia was suggested and 1,726 (4.2%) were discovered to be at high risk of being SMA carriers. pregnancy was followed since no definite diagnosis could be realised. Of these 1,726 couples, 62 husbands were also at high risk of be- The baby girl was born at 39WG with a normal weight and head cir- ing SMA carriers. Five fetuses from these couples were affected SMA cumference but a decreased length (47 cm, 25th centile). Characteris- cases. A total of 29,292 pregnant women received the combined tests; tic facial features were noted comprising hypertelorism, short upturned the results showed 603 (2.1%) were SMA carriers; twenty husbands nose and gum hypertrophy. Mesomelic limb shortening and bilateral were SMA carriers. Six fetuses from this group were affected SMA polydactyly of the feet were observed. Skeletal X-rays confirmed the cases. This screening program cost $401,202 US dollars to avoid a bilateral mesoaxial polydactyly, revealed bifid terminal phalanges of SMA affected child being born. both thumbs and did not show any vertebral anomalies. Cardiac, trans- ConclusionPrenatal and perinatal genetics 0 This was the largest study of population SMA carrier screening. An- P05.38 tenatal population carrier screening for SMA is feasible, effective and Recurrent trisomy 21: Postzygotic formation of i(21q) from both reasonable. maternal chromosomes 21 M. Trková, N. Jenčíková, M. Putzová, D. Rašková, D. Stejskal; P05.36 The Centre of Medical Genetics and Reproduction Medicine GENNET, Prague, Urge of prenatal diagnosis in modernized civilization Czech Republic. B. B. Ganguly, D. Chakrabarti; Structural rearrangements involving chromosome 21 are responsible MGM Centre for Genetic Research & Diagnosis, Navi Mumbai, India. for 5% of trisomy 21 cases. The majority of rea(21q;21q) are, in fact, Industrial revolution and modernization of medical sciences has con- isochromosomes - i(21q) and only a small percentage are true Rob- tributed largely to expand the population and extend human lifespan. ertsonian translocations. The recurrence of de novo structural and Massive quantities of toxic wastes are dispensed in the atmosphere numerical/structural chromosomal rearrangements might have three unchecked as a direct consequence of our dependence on fossil fuels major reasons: a) recurrence by chance; b) gonadal mosaicism and c) and advanced technologies which are rendering adverse effects on low-level somatic-gonadal mosaicism in one parent. the nature. The recent decade has seen an unprecedented rise in nat- We present a family with recurrent trisomy 21 in three consecutive ural calamities due to drastic fluctuations in weather conditions. These pregnancies with maternally derived rea(21q;21q) in all cases. Exten- factors yield cumulative stress on the population causing tremendous sive G-banded karyotyping and FISH analysis of the maternal periph- damage to their health and well being. Infertility among adults, disor- eral blood revealed trisomy 21 mosaicism (1.5% cells were trisomic for ders like diabetes, cancer, HIV - AIDS, faulty births of infants having chromosome 21). Gonadal mosaicism for trisomy 21 in a significant congenital abnormality and/or mental disorders are increasing at an proportion of mother’s ovarian cells provides a plausible explanation alarming rate reducing the productive efficiency and profit derivative for her obstetric history. of the society. Molecular studies using highly polymorphic short tandem repeat (STR) Hence it is the need of the hour to provide a strong and healthy start to markers localised on chromosome 21 permitted constructions of hap- the future generations so that they can cope up with the ever increas- lotypes in three patient foetuses from three consecutive pregnancies. ing hardships. This can be assured if the new born children are free It revealed trisomy 21 was due to the isochromosomes, thus strongly of debilitating ailments acquired before or during parturition. Prenatal suggesting their postzygotic origin. Most surprisingly, molecular analy- diagnosis is already a routine measure to screen and prevent birth of sis also demonstrated that isochromosomes in two cases originated genetically impaired children in well informed societies. However, this from different maternal chromosomes 21. practice is limited at large due to lack of awareness among developing Moreover, pregnancy outcome was also influenced by partners’ con- nations and availability of skilled diagnostic services in cost-effective sanguinity. After two unsuccessful attempts of IVF-PGS they got spon- manner. Conventional cytogenetics is one field of study that can prove taneously pregnant. The child with normal chromosome 21 suffered to be an effective mode of prenatal diagnosis which should be given from an autosomal recessive disorder (LCHAD / long chain 3-hydroxy- impetus by the organizations monitoring global health to bring immedi- acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency) as a direct consequence of con- ate redress. sanguinity. To our knowledge, we demonstrate the first case of mosaics with two P05.37 different maternal i(21q) derived from both maternal chromosomes Exposure to Fluoroquinolones during Pregnancy: An Analysis of 21. Birth Outcomes from a Romanian Pregnancy cohort study V. Dumitrascu1, A. Matusz2, C. Iftode2, A. Cheveresan1, D. Vlad3, C. Gug4; P05.39 1“Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, the analysis of mitochondrial DNA polymorphism in Timisoara, Romania, 2Scientific Secretariat, Association of General Health Care monozygotic twins Providers, Timis County, Romania, Timisoara, Romania, 3Emergency Clinical K. Wielgus1, K. Cieslik2, M. Waszak2, M. Szalata3,4, R. Slomski3,4; County Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, Timisoara, Romania, 4Department of 1Institute of Natural Fibres and Medicinal Plants, Poznan, Poland, 2University Medical Genetics, “Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timiso- School of Physical Education, Poznan, Poland, 3Poznan University of Life Sci- ara, Romania, Timisoara, Romania. ences, Poznan, Poland, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sci- Background: The new fluoroquinolones have favorable pharmacoki- ences, Poznan, Poland. netic properties and high affinity for immature cartilage and bone tis- Since the elucidation of the mitochondrial genome sequence in 1981, sue. nearly 200 pathogenic point mutations, deletions, insertions and re- Objective: to evaluate the teratogenic risk following gestational expo- arrangements have been described and associated with a variety of sure to fluoroquinolones, numbers of fetal deaths, distress, and the mtDNA-related human diseases. Due to unique twin genetics, twins development of the toddler’s skeleton at the age of twelve month. have been identified as an ideal subject for observations of complex Methods: A longitudinal, randomized, 6 year comparative study, from diseases inheritance. Still, so far no wide range analysis of mtDNA in November 2002 to December 2008, was conducted in two primary twins has been reported. In this study the analysis of mitochondrial medical care centers. We followed up 110 women exposed to anti-in- DNA polymorphism in group of monozygotic twins was performed, fective drugs during gestation, divided in 2 groups: a study group of 58 using umblical cord blood. Zygosity of twins was determined by the (52.72%) who took ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin, or ofloxacin for different analyses of DNA fingerprinting and mini- and microsatellite polymor- infections and a control group of 42 (38.18%) exposed to macrolides. phism (hybridization, PCR). The SSCP and HD analyses of D-loop Results: 23 women (25.21%) took fluoroquinolones in the first trimes- mtDNA reveal a high polymorphism of this region. However, within the ter of pregnancy, and there was a higher rate of therapeutic abortions analyzed group of twins, no differences were found in either pair of among the study group (8 of 58 versus 3 of 42 - for the control group). monozygotic twins. T>C transition was detected in mtDNA sequence Rates of major congenital malformations didn’t differ between the two in one pair of twins. The resultant tract of 10 C preceded by 4 A seems groups (relative risk, 0.88; 95% confidence interval, 0.27 to 3.29). The to be related to heteroplasmy of mitochondrial genome. major malformations from the quinolone group were: hip displasia, hy- pospadias and ventricular septal defects, occurred after fluoroquino- P05.40 lone exposure during organogenesis. The relationship between fluoro- Outcome of fetuses with a sonographic finding of echogenic quinolone exposure and arthropaty focused on the newborn’s cartilage bowel. status (craniotabes) and on long-term musculoskeletal dysfunctions V. Scotet1, I. Duguépéroux1,2, M. P. Audrézet1,2, M. Blayau3, C. Férec1,2; until at the age of twelve month (diastasis recti and genu valgum). 1Inserm U613, Brest, France, 2Dept. of molecular genetics, Hospital, Brest, Conclusions: Gestational fluoroquinolone exposure is risky in the first France, 3Dept. of molecular genetics, Hospital, Rennes, France. trimester of pregnancy. Ultrasonography is needed to monitor the fetal Introduction: Routine medical follow-up of pregnancies and develop- development, followed by long-term musculoskeletal survey. ment of ultrasonography have enabled the sonographic finding of fetal echogenic bowel (FEB), a sign that has been associated with various pathologies. Based on the experience of Brittany (western France), this study reports the type and frequency of the pathologies diagnosedPrenatal and perinatal genetics  in fetuses with FEB, emphases on the prevalence of cystic fibrosis According to these results, two copies of DAX1 were present in case 1 (CF) and on the carrier rate in that population, and assesses the ability and could explain the fetal sex reversion, but there was only one copy of ultrasonography to detect CF in utero. in case 2. Other genes than DAX1 could be implicated. Methods: We reviewed all the consecutive cases of FEB diagnosed in pregnant women living in Brittany and who were referred for an analy- P05.43 sis of the gene responsible for CF (CFTR) over the period 1992-2007. Extreme nephromegaly: an unusual antenatal presentation of Results: Over that period, 289 diagnoses of FEB were recorded. A Zellweger syndrome pathology was evidenced in 32.2% of the fetuses. Beyond CF (8.0%), L. Pinson1, N. Bigi1, A. Couture2, C. Rouleau3, P. Blanchet1, F. Deschamps4, A. it mainly included digestive tract malformations (7.0%), chromosomal Schneider5, P. Boulot4, G. Lefort5, M. Zabot6, C. Vianey-Saban6, P. Sarda1, D. abnormalities (3.7%), viral infections (3.7%) and cardiac disorders Geneviève1; (2.9%). Regarding CF, we identified 23 CF fetuses and 19 heterozy- 1Service de Génétique Médicale et de Foetopathologie, Hôpital Arnaud de gous ones, leading respectively to a CF prevalence of 8.0% (1/13) and Villeneuve, Université Montpellier 1, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, a carrier rate of 6.6% (1/15) in fetuses with FEB (rates significantly 2Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHRU de higher than in the general population). Moreover, by combining these Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 3Service d’Anatomo-Pathologie, Hôpital Lapey- data with those of our newborn screening programme, we showed that ronie, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4Maternité, Hôpital Arnaud de ultasonography enabled to diagnose in utero 10.7% of the CF fetuses Villeneuve, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5Service de Cytogénéti- over the study period. que, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, Conclusion: This study highlights the importance of ultrasound exami- 6Centre de Biologie et de Pathologie Est, hospices Civils de Lyon, Montpellier, nations of pregnancies and of the diagnosis of FEB, as well as the France. efficiency of ultrasonography to detect CF in utero. Zellweger syndrome (ZS) is a rare severe autosomal recessive disor- der, characterized by the reduction or absence of peroxisomes in liver, P05.41 kidneys, and brain. ZS patients display dysmorphic features, severe Walker-Warburg syndrome with hyperplastic primary vitreus neurological dysfunction, hepatic and renal failure, and rarely survive detected by prenatal ultrasonography: case report their first year. F. Yazicioğlu1, Z. Ocak2; Because of genetic heterogeneity, ZS diagnosis is usually based on 1Perinatology,Süleymaniye Maternity Hospital for Research and Training, zeyt- biochemical investigation characterized by elevated plasma very- inburnu, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Medical Genetics,Süleymaniye Maternity Hospital for long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA), pipecolate and bile acid intermediates Research and Training, zeytinburnu, Istanbul, Turkey. contrasting with low plasma plasmalogens. Some impaired enzymatic Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS) is an autosomal recessive dis- activity, such as dihydroacetone-phosphate acyltransferase deficiency ease presenting with muscular dystrophy associated with cerebral, (DHAP-AT) can also be detected in fibroblasts of ZS patients. cerebellar and eye anomalies, in which the life span of patients is Here, we report on major and evolutive nephromegaly in a fetus with short1. Following the detection of hydrocephaly during routine USG ZS. This was the first pregnancy for the healthy unrelated parents. for a 28-weeks-pregnant mother, antenatal USG in the perinatalogy Isolated nephromegaly (39mm, normal: 26mm) was observed at 22 department revealed hydrocephaly along with persistent hyperplastic weeks’gestation (WG). Clinical course was marked by a rapid increase primary vitreous (PHPV). A presumptive diagnosis of Walker-Warburg in kidney size at 28 WG (68mm, normal: 32mm) with multiple cortical syndrome was made. The information was used to treat this patient in microcysts. her immediate postnatal life. This case, being the second in the litera- Diagnosis was performed after termination of pregnancy based on ture with persistent hyperplastic primary vitreus (PHPV) detected by dysmorphic features (high forehead, macroglossia), nephromegaly prenatal USG, demonstrates the importance of antenatal diagnosis in without hepatomegaly and stippling of patella and hips. this condition. Neuropathological findings included cortical polymicrogyria, cerebellar and bulbar heterotopias. P05.42 Biochemical investigations confirmed the deficit of the beta-oxydation sex reversal and growth retardation : two case reports with of VLCFA and impairment of DHAP-AT enzymatic activity in cultured partial Xp duplication analyzed by array-cGH amniocytes. E. LANDAIS1, F. SCHNEIDER1, F. CARRE-PIGEON1, E. ALANIO2, O. To our knowledge, this is the first report of prenatal evolutive nephro- NOIZET3, S. AKHAVI3, C. SOMMER3, D. GAILLARD1, M. DOCO-FENZY1; megaly leading to diagnosis of Zellweger syndrome. We suggest that 1Service de Génétique, CHRU de Reims, UFR de Médecine, IFR53, EA 3001, ZS should be considered as a possible diagnosis in evolutive nephro- Reims, France, 2Laboratoire Pol Bouin du CHRU de Reims, Reims, France, megaly. 3Service de Réanimation Infantile et Pédiatrique du CHRU de Reims, Reims, France. P05.44 Transcription factors such as SRY, SOX9, DAX1, WT1, SF1 and WNT4 Growth and medical outcome of hundred and two 2-year-old are involved in many genital development. Segmental duplication of children conceived after preimplantation genetic diagnosis or the X chromosome can interfere with the testis differentiation in 46,XY screening subjects. The Xp region causing sex reversal is designated Dosage S. Desmyttere, J. De Schepper, I. Liebaers, M. Bonduelle; Sensitive Sex reversal and contains the DAX1 gene (Xp21.2). UZBrussel, Jette, Belgium. We report two cases of females with growth retardation, facial dysmor- Objective: In preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) or preimplanta- phism, 46,XY karyotype and partial Xp duplication due to autosomal tion genetic screening (PGS), embryo biopsy is an invasive essential translocation. Such observations have been rarely reported. In both procedure. The major objective of this study was to determine if the cases, Y chromosome and SRY gene were normal as ascertained by embryo biopsy might cause growth restriction and/or affect health out- FISH and molecular biology. come of children. Case 1 : cytogenetic analysis was motivated by growth retardation and Study design: In this prospective study, 102 children (70 singletons hydramnios. Xp disomy was derived from a translocation with the 1 and 32 twins) born after PGD/PGS were compared with a matched chromosome : 46,XY,der(1)t(1;X)(p36;p21). Fetal postmortem showed group for gender, maternal educational level, mother tongue and birth female external and internal genital tract with hypoplastic ovaries and order of 102 children (70 singletons and 32 twins) born after intracyto- hypoplastic adrenals. Under microscope, no tunica albuginea could be plasmatic sperm injection (ICSI). Auxological data at birth and 2 years, seen and the sex cords were dysgenetic. No primordial follicle were physical findings, data on sociodemographic parameters, medical his- differentiated. tory of the pregnancy and the child were compared for both groups. Case 2 : the female infant was born with severe growth retardation and Results: No statistically significant differences regarding weight, height ambiguous genitalia. She died of meningitis at 18 days of life. A Xp and head circumference standard deviation scores (SDS) at birth and disomy was detected derived from a translocation with the 14 chromo- at age two years were observed. At two years of age the mean body some : 46,XY,der(14)t(14;X)(q32;p21). mass index SDS tended to be lower in PGD/PGS children (p=0.058). Array-CGH analysis characterized the length of Xp duplications : 33.88 PGD/PGS babies had been more often breastfed (p=0.013), but most- +/- 1.40Mb and 28.68 +/- 0.25Mb (case 1 and 2 respectively). ly during a shorter time.Prenatal and perinatal genetics  No difference was observed between both conception groups in the P05.47 intake of medication and alcohol, cigarette smoking habits and compli- Nuclear and mitochondrial genetic analysis in men opting for art cations during pregnancy. The prevalences of major as well as minor R. Dada1, S. Venkatesh1, M. B. Shamsi1, M. Tanwar1, R. Kumar2, N. P. Gupta2, congenital anomalies, hospital admissions and surgical interventions R. K. Sharma3, P. Talwar3; were similar. 1Laboratory for Molecular Reproduction and Genetics,,, New Delhi, India, 2De- Conclusion: Children born after embryo biopsy applied in PGD/PGS partment of Urology, AIIMS, New Delhi, India, 3ART centre, R&R Hospital, New present similar growth and physical health in the first two years of life Delhi, India. as compared to ICSI children. These reassuring findings should be Azoospermia factor (AZF) microdeletions, cytogenetic abnormalities further confirmed in a larger cohort study. and mtDNA mutations are the major genetic suspects of idiopathic male infertility. Therefore the aim of the study was to study genetic P05.45 alterations (cytogenetic, Yq microdeletions, and mtDNA mutations) in Assessing microsatellite instability in human preimplantation infertile men with idiopathic infertility. Mt mutations were only asses in embryos men with idiopathic asthenozoopsermia. DNA from semen was iso- L. Xanthopoulou, J. D. Delhanty, T. Mamas, J. C. Harper, S. SenGupta; lated from both patients and controlsfor AZF microdeletion analysis UCL, London, United Kingdom. and mitochondrial genome was sequenced by standard PCR-DNA Introduction: Mutations or silencing of genes involved in DNA mis- sequencing protocol. Of 1500 cases of infertility analysed 17% har- match repair pathways can result in microsatellite instability (MSI), boured cytogenetic abnormalties, 9.8% harboured AZF microdeletions a situation whereby repetitive DNA sequences are unstable during which were found in idiopathic and non idiopathic cases Mt mutations DNA replication. MSI is a common feature of many human tumours, were analysed in 40 athenozoopsermic men.72.5% (29/40) of the in- whereas microsatellite mutations have also been reported in human fertile patients showed significant nucleotide changes in their sperm spontaneously aborted fetuses. Couples undergoing Preimplantation mtDNA compared to the controls. Out of 70 infertile and 40 control Genetic Screening (PGS) are at high risk of meiotic and mitotic chro- samples analyzed, 80% infertile men were found to have significantly mosome abnormalities. This study aims to investigate the level of MSI (p<0.0001) high ROS levels in the semen compared to control. Thus in this group of patients. genetic factors are an important aetiological factor which leads to ir- Materials/Methods: Fifty four blastomeres from 23 untransferred em- reversible spermatogenic arrest. mtDNA alteration may impair sperm bryos from 5 PGS couples were subjected to whole genome amplifi- motility both by depleting ATP and by increasing reactive oxygen spe- cation by Multiple Displacement Amplification (MDA). Genomic DNA cies production. Increased ROS activity in the semen may be respon- and single lymphocytes from both parents were subjected to MDA and sible for the nucleotide change in the mtDNA and for impairment of analysed using microsatellite markers in order to ensure that MDA did sperm motility. Our study highlights the need to analyze mitochondrial not introduce any artefacts. Embryonic and parental samples were an- and nuclear genome in sperm samples for mutations and to assess alysed using the BAT26 and D5S346 markers and the embryonic hap- the free radical levels in order to have better insight into pathophysiol- lotypes were compared to the corresponding parental patterns. The ogy of infertility. ICMR and AIIMS, New Delhi have partially supported generation of any novel microsatellite alleles in the embryonic samples the work was interpreted as MSI. Results: Out of the 54 cells isolated, 44 generated an MDA product. P05.48 The BAT26 and D5S346 PCR results of these MDA products identified When should PGD be performed? A suggested scoring system 2/23 embryos in which a novel allele was detected. for decision-making Discussion/Conclusion: This preliminary data suggests that MSI may M. Malcov1, V. Gold1, A. Reches2, N. Mey Raz1, D. Ben-Yosef1, A. Amit1, Y. be present in embryos from PGS cycles and further analysis is war- Yaron2; ranted. Comparison with MSI levels in embryos from PGD cases with- 1Racine IVF Unit, Department of Ob/Gyn, Lis Maternity Hospital, Sourasky out fertility problems would elucidate whether embryos at high risk of Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, Genetic aneuploidy are at increased risk of MSI. Institute, Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel. Introduction: PGD was designed to prevent the birth of offspring affect- P05.46 ed with severe genetic disorders. However, it may also be employed to is nuclear transfer morally acceptable as a means to prevent prevent late onset and relatively mild conditions. Thus, clinicians find mtDNA disorders if it cannot avoid residual health risks? often uncertainty to decide whether a condition merits PGD. A. L. Bredenoord1,2, W. J. Dondorp1, G. de Wert1; Aim: To devise a scoring system that appraises the justification for 1Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2University Medical Center PGD. Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Methods: In order to construct the model we reviewed our PGD popu- Since the 1990s, different variants of nuclear transfer (NT) techniques lation for monogenic disorders. These include severe and early onset have been proposed as possible strategies for preventing the trans- diseases, as well as conditions with late onset and incomplete pene- mission of a mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutation from mother to trance. The scoring values (0-3) of the disease characteristics and pa- child. The aim is to provide prospective parents with genetically related tient variables were determined based on multi-disciplinary aspects. offspring without the mtDNA mutation. In a clinical application of NT, Results: For each patient the parameters were summed resulting in it seems difficult if not impossible to avoid small amounts of affected values that ranged between 4-15 and the value of 9 was determined mtDNA to come along with the oocyte, pronuclei or nucleus from the to be the threshold value for PGD suitability. Re-evaluation of our 106 recipient woman. This potential carryover may result in the co-exis- patients that have already undergone PGD revealed that 100 of them tence of two populations of mtDNA, also called mtDNA heteroplasmy. (94.4%) scored with a value >9 and indeed suited for PGD. Though, As long as it is not possible to carry out the procedure without the 6 patients (5.6%) scored under the threshold value. This analysis was accompaniment of small amounts of affected mtDNA, the resulting found to be congruent with the majority of our clinical decisions and embryo will always have a certain amount of mtDNA heteroplasmy. reflected our policy. Although in many cases this will be far below the threshold to disease expression, the occurrence of mitochondrial disease symptoms cannot Scoring system be ruled out completely, especially not in the resulting child’s offspring: Risk for infertility PGD performed Objection Scoring due to the existence of a genetic bottleneck, the mutant load may rise Onset severity Penetrance affected requiring for other to t.O.P value again in the third generation - the couple’s grandchildren. offspring iVF condition We will firstly discuss whether NT is morally acceptable as a means Childhood/ Lethal 75-100% - - - -  to prevent mtDNA disease if it cannot avoid residual health risks. Sec- congenital Teen Severe 50-75% >25% Yes Yes -  ondly, we discuss the proportionality of the procedure and compare Early adulthood Debilitating 25-50% 10-25% - - Yes  NT with alternative reproductive options. Thirdly, as mitochondria are Late adulthood Mild <25% <10% - - - 0 transferred maternally, male offspring will not pass on the mtDNA mu- tation. We examine whether this provides a reason to only create or Conclusion: This scoring system is a useful tool in decision-making transfer male embryos. for patients’ inclusion into a PGD program, enabling a consistent andPrenatal and perinatal genetics  objective case management. It is especially valuable in genetic dis- P05.51 eases with low penetrance, late onset conditions and cancer predis- Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis: international Regulatory positions. Approaches B. Knoppers1,2, T. Nguyen1; P05.49 1Centre for Public Law, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Canada Research Chair in medical outcome of children born after PGD for HLA matching Law & Medicine, Montreal, QC, Canada. M. L. Bonduelle, S. Desmyttere, W. Verpoest, H. Van de Velde, M. De Rycke, In the last decade, innovations in reproductive genetic testing and hu- I. Liebaers; man genomic research have altered the policy and legal approaches UZBrussel, Brussel, Belgium. surrounding reproductive choices. Innovations in both prenatal diag- PGD (Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis) with HLA (Human Leuko- nosis (PND) and preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) provide cyte Antigen) matching allows to select unaffected, HLA compatible prospective parents with information regarding phenotypic or genetic embryos to cure an affected sibling. Data on 27 pregnancies con- traits, health status and the sex of their offspring. This information ceived after PGD-HLA between 2004 and 2008 are reported. Children has important implications for reproductive decision-making yet, re- were examined at the age of 2 months, 1 and 2 years at our centre to productive choices must be weighed against broader ethical, legal or analyse the medical outcome. social issues particular to each diagnostic procedure. Contradictory The PGD-HLA procedure was applied to 175 cycles for 65 couples. views and opinions abound in different countries creating an incon- Indications were Beta thalassemia, Severe Combined Immune Defi- sistency in the manner in which PND and PGD are regulated. This ciency syndrome, Wiskott Aldrich syndrome, Fanconi Anemia, Acute is due to the presence or absence of universal health care systems Lymfatic Leukemia, Sickle cell anemia, Duncan’s syndrome, Acute and to demographic, cultural or socio-economic factors that underlie Myeloid leukemia, hyper IgM syndrome, Diamond-Blackfan anemia. different regulatory approaches. The aim of this article is to provide These treatments resulted in 79 transfers, 27 pregnancies (3 bio- an analysis of current laws and policies regarding PND and PGD and chemical, 5 miscarriages, 5 still ongoing) and 14 deliveries (1 twin, 13 the regulatory trends in sixteen different countries: Australia, Belgium, singletons). Outcome data are missing for one child. Four boys and 10 Canada, China, France, India, Israel, Japan, Netherlands, New Zea- girls had a mean birth weight of 3256 ± 637 grams (2300 to 4650 gr) at land, Singapore, Switzerland, South Africa, Spain, United Kingdom a mean term of 38.3 ± 1.6 weeks (36 to 42 weeks). One girl had a left and the United States. Our analysis shows that, despite the similari- eye congenital cataract. Three siblings underwent a successful trans- ties between PND and PGD in terms of their uses and outcomes, plantation of haematopoietic cells. One affected child died before the PND is progressively considered part of routine prenatal care while birth of the HLA compatible sibling. Another ill child was transplanted the various uses of PGD, although expanding, are being heavily scru- with bone marrow from an allogenic donor while awaiting the birth of tinized resulting in the tendency for greater regulatory oversight by the the HLA compatible sibling. The other affected children have as yet majority of countries surveyed. Such scrutiny requires making explicit not been transplanted. both the reasons for additional indications for PGD and the justifica- Children born after PGD-HLA appear to be in good health. These pre- tions for prohibitions, if any. liminary data will be further evaluated in a larger long-term follow-up study including medical and psychological outcome of child and fam- P05.52 ily. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis for complex chromosome rearrangements P05.50 P. Gosset1, M. Fradin1, C. Retter1, M. Schillinger1, M. Minz2, F. Vialard3, S. Polar body diagnosis for female translocation carriers applied Viville1; during conventional iVF treatment 1SIHCUS-CMCO, Schiltigheim, France, 2Centre Cytogénétique - Diagnostic M. Maurer1, T. Ebner2, C. Duba1; Pré Natal, Laboratoire Clément, Le Blanc-Mesnil, France, 3Laboratoire Biolo- 1Humangenetische Untersuchungs- und Beratungsstelle, Landes- Frauen- und gie de la Reproduction et Cytogénétique, CHI Poissy Saint Germain, Poissy, Kinderklinik, Linz, Austria, 2IVF-Kinderwunschabteilung, Landes- Frauen- und France. Kinderklinik, Linz, Austria. Chromosomal rearrangements are relatively common: around 1 indi- Objective: Carriers of reciprocal and Robertsonian translocations vidual out of 1000 is carrying a Robertsonian translocation, 1/1000 a are faced with increased reproductive risks depending on the chro- balanced reciprocal translocation, 1/10000 an inversion. mosomes which are involved in the chromosomal rearrangements. The probability of having a couple where both member is carrying According to the restrictive legal situation in Austria, preimplantation such an abnormality is around 4.4 by million, i.e. around 50 couples in genetic diagnosis is limited by law to polar body diagnosis (PBD). age to procreate in France. Polar body diagnosis was therefore offered and used to identify bal- Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) is offered to patients having anced/normal and unbalanced oocytes. a risk to transmit a genetic disease to their offspring. Materials/Methods: Polar body diagnosis using FISH (fluorescence PGD is frequently used for single chromosomal rearrangement, using in-situ hybridisation) was performed for 9 couples with the female car- fluorescence in situ hybridisation techniques (FISH) on embryo’s cell rying a translocation during conventional IVF cycles. We used trans- nuclei. location specific combinations of distal and proximal probes to the In case of complex chromosomal rearrangement (CCR) PGD faces breakpoint, which allowed differentiation of unbalanced and balanced two major difficulties, I) the chances of having an unaffected embryo oocytes. are low, II): technical difficulties are increased to diagnose all possible Results: Polar body diagnosis was performed for 14 cycles of trans- unbalanced karyotypes in embryos. location diagnosis (7 cycles for reciprocal; 7 cycles for Robertsonian Two couples having PGD for CCR are presented here: translocations). - Couple 1: 45,XY,der(14;21)(q10;q10) and 46,XX,inv(10)(p13q11.2) After PBD only 19 % of oocytes were diagnosed as normal/balanced - Couple 2: 45,XY,der(15;21)(q10;q10) and 46,XX,t(1;9)(q25;q34.1) and 81 % showed an unbalanced chromosomal content. From 14 cy- Chances for having balanced embryos were estimated as sufficient to cles performed, only 4 cycles (28,6 %) had euploid oocytes available, offer PGD to these couples. 71,4 % showed solely aneuploid oocytes. We described here the development of specific FISH techniques for Conclusion: In this study, we found a higher than average aneuploidy these PGDs, allowing an accurate analysis in a short time compatible rate in oocytes of female translocation carriers. Interestingly, patients with the necessity to rapidly replace embryos into uterus. with Robertsonian translocations showed more euploid oocytes than PGD resulted in pregnancy for each couple, but one terminated in carriers of reciprocal translocations. The high rate of chromosomally spontaneous abortion. unbalanced oocytes lead to the conclusion, that for carriers of mater- This work supports the idea that PGD can be efficiently offered to nal translocations who already need IVF treatment for infertility, polar couples with complex chromosomal indications if I) the proportion of body diagnosis is a valuable additional selection tool. Screening for expected balanced embryos is sufficient and II) a reasonable number imbalance in cases with increased risk of viable chromosome abnor- of oocytes can be obtained by ovarian stimulation. mality might help to decrease miscarriages and pregnancy termina- tion after prenatal diagnosis.Prenatal and perinatal genetics  P05.53 standard protocol using a chemically blocked hot start Taq polymerase Rapid prenatal of chromosome aneuploidy by Qt-PcR with Applied Biosystems novel AmpliTaq Gold PCR 360 Master Mix. J. Kasnauskiene1,2, N. Krasovskaja2, V. Kučinskas1,2; We were able to reduce cycling time from 2:45 hours to 2 hours with 1Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu AmpliTaq Gold PCR 360 Master Mix without compromising the PCR Clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania. yield, specificity and sensitivity. We observed reliable amplification of QT-PCR can detect the great majority of chromosome abnormalities in marker alleles allowing us to correctly deduce fetal chromosomal an- prenatal samples being targeted to chromosomes 13, 18, 21 X and Y. euploidies from amniotic fluid and ‘chorionic villus’ samples. It is a rapid robust and accurate test for the prenatal diagnosis of most frequent trisomies. Main advantages of the test: low cost, speed and P05.56 automation large scale application. In Lithuania QT-PCR is as a stand- Quantitative analysis of foetal DNA in maternal circulation in alone test for a sub-set of prenatal samples, with the aim of minimising gestational diabetes mellitus (GDm) pregnancies the identification of chromosome abnormalities of unknown clinical sig- M. Zamanpoor1, T. Karuppiah1, R. Rosli1, M. Yazid1, Z. Husain2; nificance and reducing double testing. All prenatal samples are tested 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of for trisomies 13, 18, 21, X and Y chromosomes using QT-PCR. Katyo- Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia, type analysis is carried out only for referrals with NT >3 mm before 14 2Department of Interdisciplinary Medicine, BIDMC, Harvard Medical School, weeks or >6 mm thereafter, ultrasound abnormalities (excluding single Boston, MA, United States. soft marker), from families with a previous chromosome abnormality Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (GDM) is a condition in which women (excluding single soft markers). During four years 1187 AF and 24 CVS without prior diagnosis of diabetes, show high levels of blood glucose were received. AF 22 % were karyotyped. 4.8 % AF and 4.2 % CVS during pregnancy. GDM affects 3-10% of pregnancies. Studies have were abnormal. All aneuploidies involving chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X shown that women with GDM have a higher risk of preeclampsia and and Y were detected with sensitivity and specificity 100%.Large scale that their offsprings are at a higher risk for congenital malformations. application of QT-PCR has reduced the load of prenatal cytogenetics if Increased amount of cell free foetal DNA (cffDNA) in maternal plas- all pregnancies are monitored by non invasive methods. ma has been found in adverse pregnancies such as preeclampsia, gestational hypertension, foetal chromosomal aneuploidies, placental P05.54 abnormalities, preterm labour and hyperemesis gravidarum. It was Molecular karyotyping of whole genome amplified samples suggested that elevation of cffDNA in maternal plasma could be used H. Raussi1, M. Mäkinen2, S. Ruosaari1, A. Godenhjelm1, P. Ollikka1; for early identification of adverse pregnancies. The aim of our study 1PerkinElmer Human Health, Turku, Finland, 2University Of Turku, Turku, Fin- was to determine the elevation of cffDNA levels in GDM pregnancies land. compared to normal pregnancies. In this study, twenty-three second- Background: Array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) trimester plasma samples from GDM pregnancies were compared with has been widely used for detection of copy number changes in tumors fourteen control samples of normal pregnancies, all carrying a single- and genetic disorders. In the prenatal setting, however, where starting ton male foetus. The cffDNA concentrations were measured by quan- DNA amounts may be too low for array CGH, the feasibility of the tech- titative real-time PCR amplification of SRY gene which is located on nology remains to be defined. Although whole genome amplification Y chromosome, using TaqMan dual labelled probe system. The mean (WGA) has potential for expanding the use of array CGH in analyses of cffDNA levels for cases and controls were 3.47 and 5.64 genome of few nanograms of DNA or even single cells, further information is equivalents/ml, respectively. No significant differences (P = 0.17) in needed about the putative bias WGA introduces to the genomic pro- the mean of cffDNA concentration were observed between GDM and files. normal pregnancies. In conclusion, GDM does not affect levels of ma- Methods: We performed WGA on DNA samples and analyzed the ternal plasma cffDNA. Hence, if cffDNA is used as an additional serum resulting genomic profiles by means of array CGH. The amplification marker in prenatal screening test in the future, our data suggests that was performed with GenomePlex® (SigmaAldrich) products using few cffDNA quantity will not require adjustment for GDM pregnancies. nanograms of DNA or few cells as a starting material. To assess pos- sible bias introduced by WGA, the amplified test samples were hy- P05.57 bridized using both the respective native and an amplified reference Evaluation of automated DNA extraction for non invasive DNA as the reference. PerkinElmer’s Constitutional Chip® platform and prenatal diagnosis using free fetal DNA in maternal plasma SpectralWare® analysis software were used in the array CGH analy- E. Ordoñez1, L. Rueda1, P. Cañadas1, C. Mediano2, C. Fuster3, V. Cirigliano1; sis. 1General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Vall d’Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain, Results and conclusions: Our results indicate that the Constitutional 3Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Chip® platform works effectively for generating array CGH data from The use of free fetal DNA for non invasive prenatal detection of fetal amplified test and reference samples. However, when native DNA is sex and RhD status is part of the daily routine in several genetic cen- compared against the respective amplified DNA, specific chromosome ters. Automation of DNA extraction process simplifies sample handling regions continuously fail to amplify, especially as the amount of the allowing high throughput of samples. We evaluated the suitability of starting material is decreased. The results show that detection of an- using an automated DNA extraction procedure for ffDNA extraction in euploidies is not hampered by the sequence drop-out, yet micro-level comparison with the most commonly used manual method. changes may be missed owing to the biased amplification. Fifty Blood samples collected in the first trimester of pregnancy from pregnant women with male fetuses were selected for this study. DNA P05.55 extractions were performed by using 500µL of plasma for the QIAamp Detection of fetal trisomies with a 19-plex QF-PcR using the DSP Virus Kit (QIAgen Inc.) or 1mL of plasma for the COBAS Am- novel Amplitaq Gold PcR 360 master mix pliPrep® DNA/RNA extractor from ROCHE. ffDNA was quantified by R. Achmann1, F. Stellmer1, K. Held1, H. Schulte1, A. Sartori2; rtPCR amplification of the SRY gene and yield (GE/mL) was calculated 1MVZ genteQ, Hamburg, Germany, 2Applied Biosystems GmbH, Darmstadt, for both extraction methods. Germany. SRY amplification was detectable in all samples independently from In recent years quantitative fluorescent polymerase chain reaction the extraction procedure and no false negative results were observed. (QF-PCR) with short tandem repeat markers (STR) have become the ffDNA quantity obtained by the manual extraction method was higher method of choice for the prenatal detection of the most common chro- than using the automated extraction with a mean of 259,43GE/mL and mosome aneuploidies. The main advantages of QF-PCR are its ac- 109,47GE/mL plasma respectively. curacy and speed. Typically test results can be obtained within a few The lower ffDNA yield obtained using an automated DNA extraction hours after sample receipt. procedure does not affect the efficiency of detecting fetal specific se- We established an elaborated multiplex QF-PCR covering the chromo- quences in maternal plasma by rtPCR. Automated DNA extraction al- somes 13, 18, 21 and X with a total of 19 polymorphic markers. Prim- lows high throughput of samples (up to 72 samples/run) in a closed ers for amplification of markers were labeled with four different fluores- system thus greatly reducing the risk of cross contamination; it also cent dyes. PCR products were analyzed in parallel on a multicapillary requires less sample manipulation reducing overall costs and hands electrophoresis instrument. We compared results obtained with our on time.Prenatal and perinatal genetics  P05.58 pregnancies. Therefore we performed rapid prenatal testing for 700 Partial submicroscopic duplications in markers D13s631 and cases proceeding from small amounts of fetal sample including amni- X22 detected with QF PcR otic fluid, chorionic villi and products of conception. R. Raynova, S. Andonova, J. Genova, I. Kremensky; The methodology included the relative quantification of microsatellite National Genetics Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecol- alleles to determine sequence copy number, using a multiplex QF-PCR ogy, Sofia, Bulgaria. reaction and capillary electrophoresis. The multiplex QF-PCR reaction Rapid diagnosis by Quantitative Fluorescent PCR analysis (QF-PCR) was performed with a commercial available kit for rapid prenatal diag- has proved its cost-efficiency, speed and efficacy for prenatal detec- nosis of trisomy 21, 18, 13 and sex chromosome aneuploidies. tion of the most common autosome aneuploidies - trisomy 21, trisomy 18, trisomy 13. For the past three years in our laboratory QF-PCR was We analyzed 675 amniotic fluid samples, 13 products of conception carried out on 2 300 prenatal samples (amniotic fluid, CVS). Fourteen and 12 chorionic villi samples. All samples with trisomy 21 (n=17), tri- polymorphic STR markers (4 located on chromosome 21, 4 - on chro- somy 18 (n=3), trisomy 13 (n=1), trisomy XXY (n=2), monosomy X mosome 18, 3 - on chromosome 13, and 3 on chromosomes X and (n=2), triploidy (n=2) and mosaicism (n=2) were accurately diagnosed Y) were amplified with Cy5-labeled primers. Trisomy was indicated by without false-negative results. We detected somatic microsatellite mu- at least two informative markers on a single chromosome, showing tation in two cases and submicroscopic polymorphic duplications in triallelic (1:1:1) or diallelic (1:2/2:1) trisomic pattern. In rare cases a four samples, all six cases involving a single STR marker. All six cases single marker result, consistent with trisomy may be observed, whilst were reported as normal by cytogenetic analysis. all other informative markers on the same chromosome are normal. A In conclusion we are confident that the QF-PCR approach is an effi- partial submicroscopic duplication could be suspected. We have found cient, reliable and rapid prenatal diagnosis method offering an alterna- 9 samples to have a single marker result consistent with trisomy - 8 tive to conventional cytogenetic testing. samples showed trisomic pattern for marker D13S631, one for marker X22. In cases when parental DNA was available we proved mater- P05.61 nal or paternal origin of the duplication. Thus we could distinguish the Analysis of heterozygosity level of stR markers by QF-PcR rare inherited polymorphism from unbalanced translocation resulting method for prenatal diagnostics in Northwest region of Russia to partial trisomy. I. Belotserkovsky, G. Demin, T. Ivashchenko, I. Fedorova, V. Baranov; Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian P05.59 Federation. Large scale application of QF-PcR for rapid prenatal diagnosis Last years prenatal diagnosis for the most common chromosome ab- of common chromosome aneuploidies, results of nine years normalities, such as Down’s, Edward’s, Patau’s syndromes and also clinical experience numerical sex chromosomes abnormalities has carried out by quanti- V. Cirigliano1, G. Voglino2, E. Ordoñez1, P. Cañadas1, L. Rueda1, C. Fuster3, M. tative fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR). QF-PCR is highly sensitive and spe- Adinolfi4; cific test revealing these chromosome abnormalities which account for 1General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Promea-Day Surgery, Turin, Italy, 3Universitat around 95% of all chromosome pathologies of the fetus. We have used Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4University College London, Lon- 11 chromosome-specific of markers (DXS6854, D13S628, D13S634, don, United Kingdom. D13S742, D18S386, D18S380, D18S391, D18S535, D21S1270, Despite being deliberately targeted to chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and D21S1411, D21S226) to determine the heterozygosity level for 203 Y the rapid QF-PCR test can detect the great majority of chromosome DNA samples from Northwest region of Russia individuals. The lowest abnormalities in prenatal diagnosis. The main advantages of the assay heterozygosity level was registered for D18S380 marker (59%) where- are low cost, speed and automation allowing large scale application. as the highest level was found 89% for D13S742 marker. The mean We developed a QF-PCR assay that was employed to test 43.000 level of heterozygosity was found as 74%. When using two markers clinical samples with results issued in 24 hours. The most common on the same chromosome heterozygosity level was increased: 99% referral indications were raised biochemical risk (32%) and advanced - for chromosome 13; 91% - for chromosome 18 and 97% - for chro- maternal age (30%). All samples were also tested by conventional cy- mosome 21. Use of three and more markers on each chromosome togenetic analysis and the results compared. increases level of heterozygosity and informativeness of the method A total of 1550 non mosaic aneuploidies involving chromosomes 21, up to 99-100%. Heterozygosity levels of D18S535 and D13S742 mark- 18, 13 X and Y were detected with 100% specificity. Several cases ers were significantly different from English population. We found that of partial trisomies and mosaicism were also identified. Overall 95% D13S742, D18S386 and D21S1411 markers are the most informative of clinically relevant abnormalities were readily detected and termina- for prenatal diagnostics in Northwest region of Russia. tion of the affected pregnancies could be performed without waiting for results of the cytogenetic analyses.Our results support the possibility P05.62 of reducing the load of prenatal cytogenetic tests if pregnancies are Quantitative real-time PcR technique for rapid and prenatal carefully monitored by non invasive screening. As a result, invasive diagnosis of trisomy 21 syndrome procedures should only be performed in high risk pregnancies. In case A. R. Kamyab1,2, N. Masroori2, F. Maryami1, R. Mirfakhraie3, F. Maryami1, M. of abnormal QF-PCR results, medical action can be made available Karimipoor1, R. Mahdian1; in a few hours after sampling. In cases of negative QF-PCR results 1Department of molecular medicine, Pasteur institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic cytogenetic analyses might only be performed for fetuses with clear Republic of Iran, 2Department of biology, science and research branch, Islamic evidence of abnormalities based onl ultrasound results. In Countries, Azad university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of medical where large scale conventional cytogenetic tests are hampered by genetics, National institute of genetic engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, high cost and lack of technical expertise, QF-PCR may be used as the Islamic Republic of Iran. only prenatal diagnostic test Down’s syndrome (DS) is a genetic disorder that affects 1 in 700 live births across all ethnic groups. Trisomy 21 syndrome is caused by P05.60 an extra copy of chromosome 21. Currently cytogenetic methods as Rapid prenatal diagnosis by QF-PcR analysis on 700 cases karypotyping and FISH are used for diagnosis of DS. However these A. M. Stan1, C. Dragomir1, E. Severin2, L. Savu1; are labor and too time-consuming. On the contrary, molecular meth- 1Genetic Lab S.R.L., Bucharest, Romania, 2Carol Davila University of Medicine ods such as Real-Time PCR are sensitive and high throughput. Ac- and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. cording to the study, peripheral blood was collected from patient and The quantitative fluorescence PCR (QF-PCR) assay was recently in- normal controls. Subsequently by salting out method, genomic DNA troduced in Romania in the prenatal diagnosis field allowing the rapid was purified. In this study, two genes as DSCAM and DYRK1A2 (tar- detection of most frequent chromosomal aneuploidies involving chro- get genes) and PMP22 (reference gene) locating on chromosome 21 mosome 21, 18, 13, X and Y in high-risk pregnancies. and 17 respectively, selected and measured copy number of them in The main objective of this study was to demonstrate that QF-PCR trisomy 21 patients and normal individuals. Then, DSCAM/PMP22 and based assay is an efficient, reliable and rapid method that can reduce DYRK1A2/PMP22 ratio was calculated by 2 -ΔΔCt formula. The results the number of conventional cytogenetic analysis in carefully monitored of Real-Time PCR showed the ratio of 1.71±0.16 and 1.01±0.10 (pCancer genetics  value<0.001) in DS and normal samples respectively, demonstrating P06.003 3 copies of target genes in trisomy 21 syndrome (DS) and 2 copies in Opposing roles of telomerase in the generation of polyploidy normal while reference gene (PMPM22) were two copies in both sam- during continuous neoplastic cell growth ples. These results compared to the upshots of cytogenetic karyotype A. Christodoulidou1, M. Chiourea1, C. Raftopoulou1, G. K. Papaioannou1,2, H. analysis. To put it briefly, Quantitative Real-Time PCR can be used Hoshiyama3, W. E. Wright3, J. W. Shay3, S. Gagos1; as a sensitive, accurate and reliable technique for rapid and prenatal 1Laboratory of Genetics. Center of Basic Research II, Biomedical Research diagnosis of trisomy 21 syndrome. Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Ob- stetrics and Gynecology, King’s College Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, P06. cancer genetics Dallas, TX, United States. Abnormal chromosomal segregation is a process of tumor genome P06.001 evolution that occurs frequently in all types and stages of human neo- 15-Lipoxygenase-1 (15-LO-1) in the proliferation, adhesion, plasia. Whole Genome Duplication (WGD) is a common way to create migration and invasion of colorectal carcinoma cell lines polyploid cells and possibly occurs in response to cellular DNA damage I. Cimen1, S. Tuncay2, S. Banerjee2; responses. Although WGD has been observed during telomere crisis 1Biotech Inst. Ankara University, ANKARA, Turkey, 2Biological Sciences, Middle in hyper-proliferating cells and telomerase deficient mouse embryo fi- East Technical University, ANKARA, Turkey. broblasts (MEFs), telomere dysfunction in cancerous growth has been Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is often lethal when invasion and/or me- mainly related to structural chromosomal instability. Our data obtained tastasis occur. 15-lipoxygenase-1 (15-LO-1), an enzyme involved in from a panel of telomerase positive and negative human immortalized the oxidative metabolism of linoleic acid, is down-expressed particu- cell lines show that the telomere defective Alternative Lengthening of larly in CRC. However, little is known about the role of the enzyme Telomeres (ALT) is characterized by significantly higher rates of in vi- in the process of tumor metastasis. In this study, we investigated the tro WGD as compared to telomerase positive growth. Furthermore, hypothesis that 15-LO-1 over-expression in CRC cells results in de- telomere dysfunction after depletion/inhibition of hTERT in telomerase creased cell proliferation, adhesion, migration and invasion and in- positive cell lines was accompanied by significant increase in the fre- creased apoptosis. We have over-expressed 15-LO-1 in HCT-116 and quencies of WGD. In this context, reconstitution of telomerase activity HT29 cells by the use of stable and transient transfections respectively resulted in suppression of WGD. To test the generality of these find- with the eukaryotic expression vector pcDNA3.1-15-LO-1. Cellular ings we examined WGD in the ALT VA-13 cells containing a constitu- proliferation was analysed by MTT assay and the apoptotic potential tive hTERC and a tet-inducible hTERT. When telomerase activity was of 15-LO-1 was evaluated by acridine orange and caspase-3 assays induced in these cells there was an immediate increase in the rates of as well as expression levels of the antiapoptotic protein XIAP. Cellular dysfunctional telomeres and WGD. These results are consistent with the migration and invasion were investigated by scratch wound healing view that the generation of WGD occurs gradually during telomere dys- assay, adhesion on fibronectin, Boyden chamber migration assay as function and can be triggered to be massive in a crisis interphase state well as Matrigel invasion assay. Our data indicate that over-expression between different types of telomere maintenance. Our data suggest a of 15-LO-1 in CRC cell lines significantly decreased cell proliferation, telomere-related universal mechanism of WGD in neoplasia. In this pro- adhesion, migration and invasion, and significantly increased apopto- cess telomerase activity has both enhancing and suppressive roles. sis. These results suggest that 15-LO-1 expression in CRC can inhibit colon cancer cell growth through induction of apoptotic cell death and P06.004 may contribute to the inhibition of their invasive and metastatic capac- Crosstalk between T-cadherin and Wnt/β-catenin pathways in ity in vitro. cancer A. Fejzullahu1, T. A. Tekiner1, M. Erdem2, S. Anak3, U. Ozbek4, F. Atalar5; P06.002 1Istanbul Technical University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, somatic selection of the 8q24 risk allele in colorectal cancer Istanbul, Turkey, 2Yeditepe University, Department of Genetics and Bioengi- A. Kapedanovska Nestorovska1, N. Matevska1, T. Josifovski2, N. Jankulovski2, neering, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul School of Medicine, M. Panovski2, A. J. Dimovski1; Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul 1Center for Biomolecular Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, Skopje, Macedonia, University, Institute of Experimental Medical Research (DETAE), Genetics De- The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Clinic for Abdominal Surgery, Faculty of partment, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Child Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. Health Institute, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey. The presence of risk allele for the development of sporadic colorec- Adiponectin induces PI3K/Akt and Wnt/β-catenin pathways which tal cancer (CRC) at 8q24 (rs10505477) was suggested, although the regulate the growth and survival of cancer cells, it works through its exact mechanism responsible for this trait has not been determinat- cell surface membrane receptors AdipoR1, AdipoR2 and T-cadherin. ed yet. We evaluated whether this locus is involved in the somatic We studied the expression level of adiponectin and its receptors in evolution of the disease by selection of the risk variant in tumors. We 30 pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (pAML) patients and a group of analyzed paired blood and tumor samples from 59 heterozygote CRC solid tumors (n=40) with tumor free control samples by qRT-PCR. patients using Real-time PCR allele discrimination method. The overall The expression of the adiponectin was not detected in pAML patients frequency of allelic imbalance (AI) was 27%, of which 62.3% had pref- and solid tumors in spite of the significant expression of its two ma- erential selection of the risk allele. Although the number of analyzed jor regulators; TNF-α and IL-6, when compared to CD33+ blasts from samples was rather small, we couldn’t observe any difference in age healthy controls and tumor free controls, respectively.The expression of onset, sex, localization, stage at diagnosis or MSI status between of AdipoR1 was observed to be lower in pAML patients and in breast patients with or without AI at 8q24. To determine the mechanism of AI, and stomach tumors compared to controls.AdipoR2 expression was we analyzed the allelic content at 8q24 in additional 20 homozygotes found to be higher in pAML patients compared to controls.In tumor tis- for either the risk A or the wild-type G allele using the NAT2 gene as sues AdipoR2 expression was similar to AdipoR1.T-cadherin expres- internal reference. Using this approach we found that 8 samples had sion was lower in breast and colon tumors but higher in pancreas and a selection of the A allele (5 due to the amplification and 3 due to the stomach tissues.Interestingly, T-cadherin expression was significantly loss of G allele) and 3 samples had selection of the G allele (2 due to higher in pAML patients compared to controls (p<0.01).T-cadherin/β- the amplification and 1 due to the loss A allele). Based on our data we catenin complex together with the controlling proteins APC and GSK- conclude that the risk allele at 8q24 is preferentially selected in tumors 3β were also studied in pAML.Interestingly, β-catenin expression was of colorectal cancer patients, with no preferential mechanism (ampli- found to be significantly higher compared to controls whereas APC ex- fication or the risk allele or loss of the wild-type allele) responsible for pression was not detected and GSK-3β was higher than the controls. this trait. Increased expression of T-cadherin and β-catenin expression might indicate their possible role in cell-cell adhesion in pAML.The cross- talk between T-cadherin and β-catenin need to be further investigated in order to understand the interaction between PI3K/Akt and Wnt/β- catenin signaling pathways in the progression of cancer.Cancer genetics  P06.005 Zagreb, Croatia, 3Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Clinical Hospital Osijek, tiling resolution array-based comparative genomic hybridisation 31000 Zagreb, Croatia. analyses of acute lymphoblastic leukaemias in children with Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) of the skin is the most common human Down syndrome reveal recurrent gain of 8q and deletions of 7p cancer, and shows a continuously increasing incidence. BCCs occur and 9p predominantly on sun-exposed skin of elderly fair-skinned people. C. Lundin1, J. Davidsson1, L. Hjorth2, M. Behrendtz3, B. Johansson1; Several tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes have been implicat- 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Pediatrics, Lund, Sweden, ed in the pathogenesis of BCCs, most of them beeing members of the 3Dept of Pediatrics, Linköping, Sweden. Hedgehog-Gli (Hh-Gli) signaling pathway. Down syndrome (DS) is a risk factor for childhood acute leukemia, with Hh-Gli signaling pathway is one of the fundamental signaling pathways a cumulative risk of 2.1% at the age of 5 years. Acute lymphoblastic in embryonic development and is required in vertebrates for normal leukemia (ALL) is the most prevalent form, constituting 60% of new development of many structures, including the neural tube, axial skel- cases. eton, skin and hair. A total of 286 pediatric B-ALLs have been cytogenetically analyzed Normally, a secreted protein Hedgehog (Hh) binds to a transmembrane at our department. Ten (3.5%) were DS-ALL and DNA was available protein Patched (Ptch), which causes release of another transmem- for array CGH analysis in seven of these. Using G-banding, acquired brane protein Smoothened (Smo) from its repression by Ptch. This changes were detected in five of the cases. None of these aberrations triggers a signaling cascade in the cytoplasm which leads to transloca- were recurrent. However, by the use of the 32K platform, the follow- tion of the activated transcription factor Gli to the nucleus and expres- ing recurrent genomic imbalances were observed: del(2)(p11.2p11.2), sion of target genes (Gli, Ptch, WNT and TGF beta family members, gain of 8q and deletions of 7p and 9p. various cyclins), involved in cell proliferation, while Ptch acts as a limit- The minimally deleted region in 7p occurred at 7p12, which was lost ing factor by blocking pathway activity. in two of our cases as well as in three DS-ALLs from the literature. Aberrant activation of the pathway in adult tissue is associated with the Regarding the 9p deletions, the focal deletions of CDKN2A and PAX5 development of various tumors (BCC, medulloblastoma, pancreatic, previously reported might well correspond to the deletions encompass- gastrointestinal etc ). ing 9p11.2-22.3 in two of our cases and the common deleted segment In our research we investigated mutation status of several Hh-Gli path- 9p13-p22 in two further cases of DS-ALL recently published. An in- way genes in sporadic BCCs. The mutation screening was performed triguing finding of the present study was a deletion of 12q in one case, by high resolution melting approach, which is based on differences in comprising KITLG in 12q21.3. In adults, this gene has been described melting curves caused by variations in nucleotide sequence; detected to function in hematopoiesis. variants were confirmed by direct sequencing. Thus, some interesting regions and specific genes have recently been Our results show mutations in several pathway members (SHH, PTCH, identified in acute leukemias in children with Down syndrome and SUFU) implicating their involvement in tumor pathogenesis. more high resolution studies are clearly needed to evaluate these find- ings and to clarify further the molecular genetic picture in this patient P06.008 cohort. the intracellular localization of folliculin (FLcN) in Birt-Hogg- Dubé syndrome P06.006 M. Vreeburg1, T. Claessens2, D. Marcus-Soekarman1, M. van Geel2, M. A. M. investigation the correlation of Phenotypes with the Genotypes van Steensel2,3; of the AAt in Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (sccE) 1University hospital Maastricht, department of clinical genetics, Maastricht, The S. Mohammad Ganji1, F. Rastgar-Jazii1, A. Sahebghadam-Lotfi1,2, M. Yazdan- Netherlands, 2University hospital Maastricht, department of dermatology, Maas- bod3, A. Mota2, A. Mohsenifar2; tricht, The Netherlands, 3Research Institute Growth & Development (GROW), 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Biochemistry Department, Tarbiat University Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. moddares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Madaen Hospital, Teh- Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (MIM 135150 ) is an autosomal dominant ran, Islamic Republic of Iran. disorder characterized by benign hair follicle tumors, pneumothorax Proteolytic enzymes such as Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) play significant and kidney malignancies. It is caused by nonsense mutations and de- role in malignancy including Loss of growth regulation, invasiveness letions affecting the BHD gene encoding for folliculin (FLCN). FLCN and metastases. AAT is the most abundant serin protease inhibitor is thought to be a negative regulator of mTOR (mammalian Target Of in human plasma which produced mainly in liver and monocytes and Rapamycin), a central player in cellular responses to growth signals. deficiency of it, is an inherited disorder characterized by reduced se- Two binding partners ( FNIP1 and FNIP2) are known. FNIP1 may in- rum level of AAT. The most common deficient genotypes of AAT are teract with AMPK, a kinase upstream of mTOR. Not much is known Protease inhibitors Z(PiZ) and S(PiS). The association of deficient AAT about FLCN’s binding partners or manner of interaction with the mTOR subtypes with several tumors such as primary liver carcinoma, lung network. FLCN is supposed to be a cytoplasmic protein, but it is known cancer, gastrointestinal cancer and malignant hepatoma was reported. that many proteins shuttle between cellular compartments as part of This study aims to test relationship between AAT phenotypes and gen- their normal function. In order to more fully understand its function, otypes Z and S with Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCCE) we decided to study FLCN’s subcellular localization in more detail be- cancer in patients whom were attending Madaen Hospital, in Tehran, cause it might be possible that mutations affect FLCN’s localization during 2006-2007. Serum and DNA were isolated from 37 patients and and, in that way, its function. Isoelectricfocusing was carried out on serum samples. Genotypes of To examine how FLCN’s subcellular localization is influenced by muta- S and Z alleles were performed by RFLP technique using TaqI restric- tions and/or by culture conditions that influence mTOR signalling we tion enzyme. Our results indicated that the mean range for TIC and have prepared N-terminal EGFP-tagged FLCN expression construct AAT by nephlometry test of patients were significant difference rather (CMV promotor). Using site directed mutagenesis, we introduced sev- than healthy peoples (P<0.05). Moreover, 97.3% of the esophageal eral known mutations into the contructs. These constructs and a wild cancer patients were homozygote for the normal allele protease inhibi- type were transfected into HEK293 cells and followed by fluorescence tor MM(PiMM), while 2.7% were MS heterozygote and no PiZ and PiS microscopy. Next, we repeated the experiments under conditions genotypes were found (P>0.05). In conclusion, we can report a rela- known to influence mTOR signaling: hypoxia, starvation and rapamy- tionship between AAT deficient genotypes S and esophageal cancer in cin administration to see if mutations affect FLCN’s response to these the studied patients. alterations in the environment. Results from these experiments will be presented. P06.007 mutations of Hh-Gli signaling Pathway Genes in Basal cell P06.009 carcinomas (Bccs) Evaluating the expression of Bmi1 gene and protein in bladder V. Musani1, M. Cretnik1, M. Levacic Cvok1, P. Ozretic1, M. Situm2, D. Leovic3, S. tumors by means of Rt-PcR and immunohistochemistry Levanat1; M. Malekzadeh Shafaroudi1, A. Malekzadeh2, S. J. Mowla2, A. R. Bahrami3; 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Dermato- 1Sari Medical Faculty, Sari, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tarbiat Modares Univer- venerology, Clinical Hospital “Sestre milosrdnice”, University of Zagreb, 10000 sity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Institute of Biotechnology, Ferdowsi Uni-Cancer genetics  versity of Mashhad, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. enzyme system is highly polymorphic and these polymorphisms within BMI1, a Polycomb group repressor protein, represses the genes that CYP genes have been found to be associated with many cancer types. induce cellular senescence and cell death, and it can contribute to can- In addition, frequency of CYP polymorphisms shows ethnic variations cer when improperly expressed. We aimed to evaluate the expression among populations, so it necessitates population based studies. and tissue distribution of BMI1 in bladder tumors. Tissue specimens In this study, CYP1A1 (m1, m2, m3, m4), CYP1B1 (Leu432Val), CY- containing bladder tumor were evaluated and compared with intact P2D6 (int3/ex4) and CYP2E1 (PstI, RsaI, DraI) polymorphisms and tissues from tumor margins and normal bladders. Tumor specimens their interaction with environmental factors such as sex, age and of patients with transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder, and tumor- smoking are studied in Turkish population and association between free tissues taken from the margin of the tumors were obtained and these polymorphisms and bladder cancer is investigated. Investigated tested for the expression of BMI1 gene and protein. Specific primers CYP1A1, CYP2D6 and CYP2E1 genes are shown not to be associ- for BMI1 and B2M (as an internal control) were used for reverse tran- ated with the disease, however, it is found that CYP1B1 432Val allele script polymerase chain reaction technique. The production and distri- increases the risk of bladder cancer (adjusted OR = 3,080, 95% CI: bution of BMI1 protein was also examined by immunohistochemistry 1,204 - 7,874). Age, sex and smoking are also found to be associated and western blotting techniques. Polymerase chain reaction generated with increased risk of bladder cancer. a 683-bp product, corresponding to the expected size of BMI1 ampli- fied region. The identity of the amplified fragment was then confirmed P06.012 by direct DNA sequencing. The mean of expression of BMI1 detected Gene expression in superficial bladder cancer using microarrays in tumor tissues was significantly higher than that in intact tissues, and J. Mares1, M. Szakacsova2, C. Guelly3, A. Sartori4, V. Soukup2, J. Duskova2, F. there was also a significant association between the mean of gene Zelezny5, J. Klema5, M. Babjuk2; expression and the stage of malignancy (P < .001). The expression of 12nd Medical Faculty, Prague 5, Czech Republic, 21st Medical Faculty, Prague BMI1 at protein level was further confirmed by western blotting and im- 2, Czech Republic, 3Center for Medical Research, Graz, Austria, 4Applied munohistochemistry. BMI1 is a potent repressor of retinoblastoma and Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany, 5Dept. Cybernetics, Czech Tech. University, p53 pathways, and hence, elucidating its role in tumorigenesis is very Prague 2, Czech Republic. important. We reported for the first time the expression of BMI1 and its Non-muscle invasive bladder cancer is a heterogenous disease whose correlation with incidence and progress of bladder tumors. molecular phenotypes are being elucidated. Treatment of these super- ficial tumours is dependent on the risk of recurrence. To improve the P06.010 accuracy of progression prediction various molecular markers have the role of the CYPA, GSTM, GSTP gene polymorphisms in been evaluated by gene expression microarrays but to date no molec- formation of predisposition to bladder cancer ular markers have been used in clinical practice. For the improvement A. A. Izmailov1, S. Izmailova1, L. Akhmadishina2, T. V. Victorova1, V. Pavlov1; of recurrence prognosis we analysed gene expression and identified 1Bashkortostan State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of differences between superficial bladder tumours in a non-recurrence Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. cohort during period of two years (19 patients) and early recurrence Bladder cancer is a wide spread oncological disease with numerous cohort (18 patients), which might explain differences in the biology and risk factors. Such factors include cancinogens of tobacco smoke, clinical outcomes. Data from microarrays containing 29,019 targets polyaromatic hydrocarbons and other substances, collectively named (Applied Biosystems) were subjected to a panel of statistical analyses xenobiotics. Xenobiotics become active in hypersensitive organisms, to identify bladder cancer recurrence-associated gene signatures. Ini- sensitivity of which is formed under a specific genetic background. tial screening using the GeneSpring and Bioconductor software tools That is the reason for the importance of studying peculiarities of ge- revealed a putative set of about 120 genes associating with the early netic systems, which take part in detoxication of xenobiotics. recurrence cohort. Significant differences were observed by CDKN2A, To detect associations of polymorphisms of the P450 cytochrome CDKN1C, HOXA10, GPNMB, TCN1, INA, H19, AURKC, FABP3 and (CYP1A1(Ile462Val)) and glutathione-S-transferases (GSTM1(del), PLOD2 genes. Besides, we integrated the microarray dataset with ad- GSTP1(Ile105Val)) genes in formation of predisposition to bladder ditional background knowledge, in order to algorithmically mine for dif- cancer we genotyped 145 patients (77 patients had surface form, and ferential-expression patterns in terms of the Gene Ontology functions 68 had invasive form of this desease) and 241 controls by PCR-RFLP and processes as well as known regulatory pathway memberships. analysis. All individuals were citizens of the Republic of Bashkortostan Our results indicate that it may be possible to identify patients with a selected on the basis of age, sex and ethnicity. high risk of disease recurrence at an early stage using a molecular That genotypes Ile/Val of CYP1A1 gene (OR=8.6, p=0.0005), Val/Val profile present already in the superficial tumours. Research was sup- of CYP1A1 we found gene (OR=7.8, p=0.006), Val/Val of GSTP1 gene ported by MSM 0021620808. (OR=3.3, p=0.01) were significantly associated with bladder cancer. A positive association were found between a CYP1A1 Val/Val genotype, P06.013 a GSTP1 Val/Val genotype and urinary bladder carcinoma invasive investigation of the relationship between mitochondrial DNA and forms (OR=10.9, p=0.01 и 5.2, p=0.01 respectively). transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder There were no differences in GSTM1 gene deletion frequency distri- D. Ergeç1, H. Tavukçu2, G. Koç3, M. Özyürek2, D. Javadova3, K. Ulucan4, D. bution groups in both. Kıraç5, L. Türkeri2, I. Güney3; The data shown that polymorphisms of the P450 cytochrome and glu- 1Maltepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department Medical Biology and Ge- tathione-S-transferases can be important components of the genetic netics, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department structure of predisposition to the development of cancerous neofor- of Urology, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- mations. ment of Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey, 4Maltepe University, Faculty of Den- tistry, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey, 5Yeditepe P06.011 University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, İstanbul, Turkey. investigation of cytochrome P-450 Polymorphisms in turkish Mitochondrial DNA mutations have been described recently in differ- Bladder cancer Patients ent tumors, whereas similar studies focusing on bladder cancer are K. Incekara, N. Ersoy; scarce. In an effort to understand the significance of mtDNA mutations Halic University, Istanbul, Turkey. in bladder cancer, we investigated the mtDNA alterations. It has been Bladder cancer is the fourth most common cancer in men and the suggested that the extent of mitochondrial DNA mutations might be seventh in women globally. Well-known etiological risk factors are oc- useful in the prognosis of cancer and the response to certain thera- cupational exposure to certain carcinogens and cigarette smoking. It pies. is thought that the interaction between genetic factors and the environ- In an attempt to progress in the understanding of the relationship of ment accounts for the different levels of susceptibilities to the develop- mtDNA alterations and bladder tumorigenesis, we studied the mtDNA ment of bladder cancer. in 38 bladder tumors and 21 microdissected normal bladder tissues. The cytochrome P-450 (CYP) superfamily of enzymes catalyses one of Mitochondrial genes ATPase6, Cytb, ND1 and D-loop region were am- the first steps in the metabolism of carcinogens such as polycyclic aro- plified by PCR. The results of DNA sequencing revealed numerous matic hydrocarbons, nitroaromatic compounds and arylamines. This point mutations in mtDNA genes. We detected 40 mutations in the pa-Cancer genetics  tient group in which 19 of them resulted in aa substitution. Our findings microdissected-FFPE samples, we analyzed by microsatellite LOH on indicate that G8697A, G14905A, C15452A and A15607G mutations 1p, 19q and 10q and the MGMT promoter by methylation-sensitive are frequent in bladder cancers (P< 0.05). These mutations are belong PCR. Two cases (1 astrocitoma and 1 glioblastoma) were not analyz- to mtDNA haplogroup T. No association was found between mtDNA able due to low quality of tumor DNA. mutations and the patients’ gender, tumor stage or grade, recurrence All astrocitomas did not show LOH on chromosomes 1p, 19q and 10q. and progression. Among the 17 glioblastomas, two did not show LOH, three showed In conclusion, the high incidence of mtDNA mutations in bladder can- 1p LOH, two 1p+19q LOH, one 1p+10q LOH, one 19q+10q LOH and cer suggests that mtDNA and mitochondria could play an important eight 10q LOH. All oligodendrogliomas exhibited 1p+19q LOH. MGMT role in the process of carcinogenesis process. Especially, mtDNA hap- promoter resulted methylated in all oligodendrogliomas and astrocito- logroup T may be important to detect the cancer risk. More extensive mas, while among glioblastomas only 6 were methylated. As reported biochemical and molecular studies and further studies in larger groups in literature, 1p and 19q LOH are hallmarks of oligodendrogliomas, are necessary to determine the pathological significance of these mu- while LOH do not seem to be associated to astrocitomas. These re- tations. sults confirm the correlation between histological diagnosis and genet- ic molecular markers; follow up on treatment response is underway. P06.014 molecular genetic alterations and their predictive values in P06.016 superficial bladder cancer. Polymorphisms in DNA BER genes XRcc1 and PARP1 increase A. Y. Babayan1,2,3, S. V. Bashkatov4, O. B. Karyakin4, A. A. Teplov5, D. V. Za- the risk of adult brain tumors letaev1,3, M. V. Nemtsova1,3; G. Kanigur1, E. Yosunkaya2, B. Küçükyürük3, H. Biçeroğlu3, M. Uzan3, Ç. 1Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Rus- Gürel1, &. Onaran1; sian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Medical Genetic 1Department of Medical Biology, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul Univer- Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Medical Radiology Research sity, TURKEY, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Cerrahpasa Centre, Obninsk, Russian Federation, 5Moscow Herzen Oncological Research Medical School, Istanbul University, TURKEY, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Department Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation. of Neurosurgery, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul University, İstanbul, Conventional histopathologic and morphologic factors are widely used Turkey. to predict poor prognosis in patients with superficial bladder cancer Cancer development is a multi-step process, in which polygenetic and (BC) underwent transurethral resection. But this system is not able environmental factors play important roles. Allelic polymorphisms of accurately predict the behavior of the most bladder tumors and need genes that code for DNA repair enzymes could also determine ge- additional factors. netic susceptibility or resistance to cancer in most instances. XRCC1 Our purpose was to establish associations between some genetic al- and PARP1 are two important proteins in base excision repair. In this terations in respect to unfavorable clinical phenotype (recurrence rate, hospital-based case-control study, consisted of 137 patients with pri- invasion, high grade) and to determine the prognostic significance of mary brain tumors and 244 cancer-free control subjects, we sought these genetic alterations. to determine possible associations between XRCC1 Arg399Gln and We have studied 108 matched samples (blood and tumor tissue) from PARP1 Val762Ala polymorphisms and primary brain tumors. We patients with superficial BC, of which 12 patients demonstrated recur- also searched for any possible relation between the tumor grade and rence within one year, and 10 samples from patients with invasive these polymorphisms. The results indicated a significant association BC. The panel included loss of heterozygosity at 3p14, 9p21, 9q34, between the occurrence of primary brain tumor and the existence of p53 locus, activating mutation in 7 exon FGFR3 and RASSF1A, p16, XRCC1 Arg399Gln and PARP1 Val762Ala polymorphisms (OR: 2,113; p14, RARb, CDH1 promoter hypermethylation. Methods: microsatel- 95% CI: 1,069-4,176; p=0.041 and OR: 3,720; 95% CI: 1,673-8,273; lite analysis, SSCP and direct sequencing and methyl-sensitive PCR. p=0.001, respectively). However, there was no statistically significant Statistical analysis included comparison of the patients’ clinical groups relationship between the tumor grade and the polymorphisms studied. by Fisher’s exact test, calculation of odds ratios and corresponding We conclude that XRCC1 Arg399Gln and PARP1 Val762Ala polymor- 95% confidence intervals. phisms might play role in the initial stages but have no effect on the Results: 9p21- locus deletions are significantly more frequent in pri- progression of brain tumor development. mary tumors with high recurrence rate (within one year) (p=0.049. OR=8.70). FGFR3 mutations are associated with Ta stage (p=0.0042. P06.017 OR=5.00). 3p14 locus deletions (p=0.042. OR=5.71), RARb (p=0.016. cancer genes mutation testing - an improved sequencing OR=3.91) and p16 (p=0.055. OR=4.17) promoter hypermethylation workflow for quality-assured, clinical-grade results using are associated with high grade tumors. P53 locus deletions (p=0.006. improved technology capillary electrophoresis OR=8.10) and p16 hypermethylation (p=0.05. OR=4.09) are signifi- T. Schäfer, K. O. Wesche; cantly more frequent in invasive bladder tumors than in superficial tu- Applied Biosystems GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany. mors. Conclusion. Revealed genetic alterations could be used as addi- It was found that the range of mutations that can drive cancer growth tional prognostic markers to predict tumor’s behavior more accurately. could be much wider than initially expected. An international research effort, the Cancer Genome Project, has identified around 120 genes P06.015 that may contain mutations promoting the disease. Moreover, in the Diagnostic and prognostic molecular markers in brain tumors recent years it has been demonstrated that cancer gene mutations can A. R. Lincesso1, D. Marchetti1, S. Pericotti2, D. Barachetti1, L. Pezzoli1, R. Mer- not only report about cancer predisposition like in BRCA1 and BRCA2 li3, M. Iascone1; genes but that they can also serve as biomarkers for therapy decisions 1Genetica Molecolare - USSD Lab. Genetica Medica, Ospedali Riuniti, Berga- and so in clinical practice mutations in the genes KRAS, EGFR and mo, Italy, 2Anatomia Patologica, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy, 3Neurochirur- more recently BRAF are being used for that purpose. This has brought gia, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy. cancer gene mutation analysis from a research study to a clinical man- Malignant gliomas are associated with high morbidity and mortality. agement practice. For this reason also the needs for the technology Despite optimal treatment, the survival is often very low. Recently, capable of performing genetic analysis changed from high productivity there have been advances in our understanding of the molecular features to an easy to use technology. Here we describe the results pathogenesis of gliomas and progress in treating them. This work of independent collaborative studies to develop improved sequencing summarizes preliminary results of molecular markers routinely used workflows on several selected cancer genes. These protocols take ad- to help diagnosis and management of these tumours in adults. Loss vantage of new reagents for better sensitivity and the latest generation of heterozygosity (LOH) on 1p and 19q seem to be a predictor of good capillary electrophoresis instruments, easy to use and with new level prognosis and chemosensitivity. Conversely, 10q LOH predicts rather of data quality. Quality control features built in this new technology will poor outcome. Moreover, epigenetic silencing of the MGMT promoter offer new solutions to the clinical laboratory for obtaining results with predicts response to alkylating agents. the highest level of reliability and quality. We have analyzed 32 cases: 18 glioblastomas, 10 oligodendrocitomas and 4 astrocitomas. After DNA extraction from peripheral blood andCancer genetics 0 P06.018 clude breast, ovarian, colorectal, prostate, and melanoma. The Centre Expression of Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor-1 in tumors of has recently integrated the Fluidigm® technology into its core, high mexican females throughput, genotyping laboratory. S. Avilés1, N. García2, L. Baiza1, D. Arenas2, E. Olvera1, G. Martínez1, F. Sala- Starting with an initial pilot experiment to demonstrate accurate SNP manca1; calling, 384 DNA samples were genotyped using 48 TaqMan® assays. 1National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico, 2IMSS Pedia- These genotypes were compared with those previously obtained using try Hospital, Mexico City, Mexico. conventional genotyping with the same TaqMan assay. Further work Expression of Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor-1 in tumors of Mexi- confirmed that the Fluidigm EP1 system meets high throughput needs, can females. which can be further scaled up easily, when needed, and provides a In Mexico, breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death fast and efficient workflow. The overall process flow was configured so in women 30 to 54 years and ranks as the leading cause of mortality as to handle large sample numbers, including automated liquid han- from malignant neoplasms among women. Fibroblast growth factors dling with associated sample tracking and data QC. The first production are a family of ligands that signal through receptor tyrosine kinase, experiment, using the 96.96 dynamic arrays and the EP1 instrument, has been linked to processes such as proliferation, differentiation, cell genotyped 96 SNP assays across 1200 endometrial cancer samples, migration, angiogenesis and its inappropriate expression has been im- generating over 115,000 genotypes. The Centre plans to use the sys- plicated in breast cancer. It is believed that these receptors are linked tem in genotyping studies involving thousands of samples, studies that to the progression to the independence of steroids in breast cancer. It were previously less feasible due to workflow and cost constraints. has been shown that the expression of FGFR1 is essential in mam- mary development and breast cancer, and the FGFR1 gene shows in- P06.021 creased levels of mRNA and proteins. Therefore, the aim of this study Expression and prognostic significance of cell cycle regulatory is to assess the level of FGFR-1 expression in mammary tumors from genes cDKN1A, TP, CDK, CDKN in breast and colon cancer Mexican women by RT- PCR and Real Time RT-PCR . The tissues D. Macic1, L. Kapur1, J. Ramic1, N. Lojo-Kadric1, N. Obralic2, K. Bajrovic1,2; were obtained from the Hospital de Oncología CMN of S-XXI. 15 tu- 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and mors were used in sporadic stage II and III breast cancer, 5 unaffected Herzegovina, 2Institut for Oncology, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, breast tissues and cultured cell lines MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, MCF10A Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. as a positive control. First we found that cell lines of breast cancer ex- Aim of this study was detection of alterations in expression of cell cycle pressed higher levels of FGFR-1 than the cell line of normal mammary control genes: CDKN1A TP53, CDK4 and CDKN2 in breast and colon epithelium. Similarly, the tumors expressed higher levels of FGFR-1 cancer patients. than unaffected breast tissue. We conclude that FGFR-1 is associ- CDKN1A encodes protein p21 which binds to and inhibits the activ- ated with disease progression and can be used as a tool for diagnosis, ity of CDK4 complex and thus regulates transition of cell trough G1 prognosis and treatment of breast cancer. phase of the cell cycle. CDKN1A gene is under direct control of tumor suppressor gene TP53 which induces G1 phase arrest in response to P06.019 a variety of stress. Mutations may destroy the normal function of p53 characterization of an Oncogene candidate, UsP32, on 17q23 as a transcription factor and induction of cell arrest or apoptosis may A. Sapmaz1,2, S. Akhavantabasi1, E. M. Petty3, A. E. Erson1; be reduced. This study included 100 breast and colon cancer affected 1Department of Biological Sciences, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, individuals. Genetic material was extracted from bioptic tissue speci- Turkey, 2Department of Biological Science, University of Yuzuncu Yil, Van, Tur- men. To analyze effects of mutations on expression of tested genes, key, 3University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. TP53 was subjected to mutational analysis using RFLP. Level of ex- Breast cancer is one of the most common malignancies affecting wom- pression of CDKN1A, TP53, CDK4 and CDKN2 was determined using en. The lifetime risk of any woman getting breast cancer is about 1 in 8. SYBR-green based real time PCR. Gene amplification is a common mechanism of oncogene activation in All relative quantity values of TP53 and CDK4 were normalized to cancers. Previous studies identified the chromosomal band 17q23 as mRNA level of beta-actin and their relative expression was calculated a frequent site of gene amplification in breast cancer. Amplification and using REST®software. overexpression of oncogene candidates in this region are to be likely To test hypothesis that alteration in sequence and expressions of test- important for breast cancer. USP32, a predicted ubiquitin specific pro- ed genes may have a prognostic significance, experimentally obtained tease on 17q23, is one of the oncogene candidates. We hypothesized data were correlated to patohistological findings. that overexpression of USP32 may contribute to breast tumorigenesis as a protein taking part in protein degradation pathways. We detected P06.022 amplification and overexpression of USP32 in MCF7 and BT474 breast investigation of the mitochondrial DNA deletions in patients with cancer cell lines. Presence of Cys-His domain suggests that USP32 chronic cervicitis and cervical cancer and of the correlations functions as a deubiquitinating enzyme. To experimentally confirm this, between mtDNA deletion and pathological diagnosis we sub-cloned three different fragments containing functional domains A. Tatar1, M. Kara1, B. Borekci1, S. Oztas1, A. F. Dagli2; of USP32 into a GST fusion vector. These constructs were tested in 1Ataturk university, Erzurum, Turkey, 2Firat university, Elazig, Turkey. vivo for deubiquitination activity and we demonstrated that this protein Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is the specific DNA molecule within mito- is indeed a ubiquitin specific protease. To understand the physiological chondria and susceptible to mutations because of a disability of DNA role of this protein inside mammalian cells, we performed localization repair mechanisms and more exposure to oxidative stress. The aim of and co-localization experiments for full length and partial fragments the present study was to investigate the mitochondrial DNA deletions of USP32 by generating USP32-GFP fusions. For further localization in the tissue of cervix uteri of the patients with chronic cervicitis and studies, we used Fluorescent Protease Protection assay which sug- cervical cancer and to explain the correlations between mtDNA dele- gested that USP32 could be a membrane bound protein. Further char- tion and pathological diagnosis. acterization of USP32 will help us understand the role of this protein in Tissue samples of cervix uteri were collected from paraffin blocks of the cell and in mammary tumorigenesis. 60 individuals in pathology archives; 20 patients with chronic cervicitis (ChC group), 20 patients with cancer of cervix uteri (CaC group) and P06.020 20 patients, as control group, undergo an operation of uterotomy be- integration of the Fluidigm technology into a high throughput cause of other disorders. After mtDNA extraction, PCRs were made genotyping laboratory using three different primer pairs; first primer pairs for a deletion of C. Luccarini1, L. Smith2, Y. Yi2; 4977 bp, the second primer pairs for negative control within the dele- 1Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Centre for Genetic Epi- tion region and the third primer pairs for positive control out of the demiology, Strangeways Research Laboratory, Cambridge, United Kingdom, deletion region. 2Fluidigm Corporation, South San Francisco, CA, United States. We did not detect a deletion cervix uteri tissue of control group. How- The Centre for Genetic Epidemiology is using high-throughput SNP ever, we determined a heteroplasmic 4977-bp deletion in ChC group. genotyping to identify and verify genetic variants that underlie sus- The deletions were homoplasmic in CaC group. ceptibility to various cancers. Cancers that are being investigated in- It was suggested that overproduction of reactive oxygen species inCancer genetics  chronic inflammation may cause oxidative damage of mtDNA. In addi- production, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Department of Urology, tion, we suggest that mtDNA deletions may be predisposing or accel- University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Department of Pathology, erator factor on malign transformation of cells of cervix uteri. Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. DDX3Y is a DEAD-box-RNA-helicase located on the Y-chromosome. P06.023 It has a functional counterpart on the X-chromosome, DDX3X, and Nucloestemin is highly expressed in gastric adenocarcinoma both are involved in translational control of downstream genes and and its gene expression knock-down caused a G1 arrest in AGs control of G1/S-progression during cell-cycle. While DDX3Y protein is cell line exclusively expressed in the male germ-line, predominantly in sper- M. H. Asadi1, S. J. Mowla1, F. Fathi2, B. Nikkho2, F. Sheikh Esmaili2; matogonia, the DDX3X protein is found also in somatic cells, but in 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Tarbiat Modares Univer- the male germ-line only translated in spermatids. Since the deletion of sity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Faculty of Medicine, Kurdistan University DDX3Y results in pre-meiotic spermatogenic disruption, an essential of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Islamic Republic of Iran. role of DDX3Y in spermatogenesis is assumed. Our purpose was to Nucleostemin (NS) is a nucleolar protein, primarily hypothesized to examine if the mechanisms for translational regulation of DDX3Y tran- be a novel regulator of stem cell self-renewal, where it binds to P53 scripts might be associated with male germ-cell differentiation. Tes- and hence regulates cell cycle. It is now believed that NS is also ex- ticular germ-cell tumours (TGCTs) are derived from different stages of pressed in some highly proliferating cells of adult tissues including sev- germ-cell maturation and therefore provide a model-system for such eral cancer cell lines and tissues. However, molecular links between germ-cell-differentiation studies. Consequently, we used a TGCT sam- NS and stem-cell self-renewal, embryogenesis and/or tumorigenesis ple panel including the pre-invasive carcinoma in situ (CIS) to investi- are not well understood. We have previously shown that NS is highly gate the expression of DDX3Y protein in these specimens. Our results expressed in rat bone marrow stromal stem cells (BMSCs) and the revealed strong DDX3Y expression in CIS cells but a heterogeneous expression is shut off upon induction of differentiation. Knocking-down pattern in other TGCT cell types. The strong CIS expression is mark- the expression of NS in rBMSCs suggests an apparently P53-inde- ing their high proliferative activity and clearly designates DDX3Y as a pendent role for it in these cells. Moreover, NS knock-down in different novel marker for these tumour precursor cells. Overt tumours showed bladder cancer cell lines demonstrated a cell-type dependent function only a small and variable number of DDX3Y expressing cells. An abun- of NS in arresting cell proliferation in either G1 or G2/M phases of dant expression in seminomas compared to non-seminomas points to cell-cycle. Here, we have evaluated the potential expression of NS reduction of DDX3Y expression during tumour-progression. Our re- in 40 tumor/non-tumor biopsies of the patients with gastric cancer. sults indicate a successive vanishing of the spermatogonia cell type Moreover, we have assessed the effects of the NS knock-down on character of these tumour cells and suggest that the spermatogonia cell proliferation of the AGS cell line, using RNAi strategy. Our data specific DDX3Y translation is indeed controlled by germ-cell specific revealed that NS is highly expressed in gastric adoenocarsinoma, but trans-factors. not in apparently normal tissues obtained from the margin of same pa- tients. The data suggest that NS is potentially a suitable tumor marker P06.026 for diagnosis, grading and molecular classification of gastric adoeno- From human papillomaviruses & cervical carcinoma to HPV carsinoma. Furthermore, NS knock-down in the AGS cell line caused a detection G1 cell cycle arrest in the cells, confirming its causative role in gastric D. Konvalinka, J. Dvořáčková, D. Marková, M. Uvírová, J. Šimová, I. Ur- tumorigenesis. banovská; CGB laboratoř a.s., Ostrava, Czech Republic. P06.024 Human papillomaviruses (HPV) are double-stranded DNA viruses, targeting cancer stem cells via Oct4 promoter-derived invading mucosal or cutaneous epithelium. More than 100 different construct types of HPV are already known. R. Najafi, M. Sadeghizadeh, S. J. Mowla; With respect to the oncogenic potential, HPV are divided into “high- Department of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic risk”(HR) and “low-risk”(LR) types. HR HPV invade ano-genital and of Iran. oropharyngeal regions of the human body and cause one of the most Despite significant improvements in cancer therapy, tumor recurrence serious and the second most frequent cancer in women: cervical car- is frequent and can be due to a variety of mechanisms, including the cinoma. HPV DNA carries information for proteins of an early (E-pro- evolution of resistance and tumor metastasis. Cancer stem cells are a teins) and a late (L-proteins) infection phase. Most serious is the inter- subclass of cancer cells possessing parts of properties of normal stem action of E6- and E7-proteins with the human p53 and pRb proteins, cells. The existence of these malignant stem cells has been proven respectively, leading to malignant transformation of infected cells. for hematological as well as some solid tumors. These kinds of cells Within this presentation we would like to draw your attention to rela- have a high capacity of proliferation and are not targeted by standard tions between cervical carcinoma, HPV infection and detection. HPV therapy thus play a critical role in tumor recurrence, resistance to ra- detection can be performed by different techniques: indirect detection, dio- and chemotherapy. The Octamer-binding transcription factor 4 showing us presence of altered tissues or cells. The most widely used gene (OCT4), encodes a POU-domain transcription factor which plays technique, but not the most sensitive one, is gynaecological cytology. a critical role in maintaining pluripotency and self-renewal of ES cells. Direct detection, manifesting presence of HPV, uses (among others) OCT4 expression has also been detected in adult stem cells as well as most sensitive molecular biology techniques, and makes HPV DNA a variety of cancer cells and cell lines e.g. the bladder 5637 cell line. testing possible. We have tested 380 patients. 88 patients (23.1 %) In this study, the OCT-4 promoter was cloned into the pGL3-control were found to be HPV DNA positive. reporter vector encoding the Luciferase gene, followed by transfec- Use of the HPV DNA test allows detection of HPV infection with high tion of the resultant construct into the 5637 bladder cell line. OCT-4 sensitivity and specificity. Such result can more efficiently specify un- promoter-driven Luciferase gene expression was further detected in clear outcomes of other screening methods, such as cytology. HPV the 5637 bladder cell line which suggests the activity of the OCT-4 DNA test has been already incorporated into routine screening within promoter in these cells. Our data indicate that OCT4 can be chosen as several countries. This test can be used for pre-vaccination (e.g. be- a therapeutic target, as well as a novel tumor biological and prognostic fore vaccination against HPV) examination too. marker which could decrease the toxicity of cancer therapy to normal tissues. P06.027 Genome-wide discovery of copy number variations in cancer P06.025 patients using sOLiD sequencing Expression of DDX3Y in testicular germ cell tumours (tGcts) - a X. Xu1, B. B. Tuch1, M. Muller1, C. Barbacioru1, C. Bormann-Chung1, C. Mo- model system for the study of DDXY male germ line function nighetti1, J. Brockman2, J. Schageman2, J. Gu2, S. Kuersten2, R. Setterquist2, B. Gueler1, S. Brask Sonne2, S. Buse3, J. Zimmer1, N. Graem4, M. Hohenfell- Y. Sun1, C. Xiao3, H. Peckham3, R. K. Gottimukkala1, A. Bashir4, V. Bafna4, R. ner3, E. Rajpert-De Meyts2, P. H. Vogt1; Laborde5, E. Moore5, J. Kasperbauer5, M. Barker1, A. Siddiqui1, F. Hyland1, D. I. 1Section Molecular Genetics and Fertility Disorders, University Hospital of Smith5, F. M. De La Vega1; Women, Heidelberg, Germany, 2University Department of Growth and Re- 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems,Cancer genetics  Austin, TX, United States, 3Applied Biosystems, Beverly, MA, United States, kara, Turkey, 2Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Urology, 4University of California at San Diego, San Diego, CA, United States, 5Mayo Ankara, Turkey. Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. Aim: Cyclooxygenases (COX) play role in biosynthesis prostaglandins Copy number variations (CNVs) have been widely observed in tumor from arachidonic acid. There are two COX isoforms, COX-1 and COX- genomes and recognized as one of the causes of cancer progression. 2. COX-2 expression is very low under physiological conditions in most Massively parallel sequencing provides a powerful, accurate and un- organs, but it can be induced. The over-expression of COX-2 was ob- biased way to interrogate CNVs across the whole genome. We se- served in many cancers associated with reduced apoptosis and pro- quenced matched pairs of tumor and normal samples of three patients moting of angiogenesis. The polymorphisms in which is determined in with tongue/tonsillar cancer using the SOLiDTM System, and we report COX-2 gene change gene expression. The COX-2 expression chang- genome-wide discovery of CNVs. Using a modified version of the Seg- es in 765G→C polymorphism. Our aim was to determine the allelic fre- Seq algorithm and controlling the false discovery rate, we compared quencies of the -765G > C COX-2 polymorphism in prostate cancer. the numbers of sequence reads from tumor samples to those from Methods: 29 prostate cancer patients and 40 healthy controls were in normal samples in 100kb windows; we identified at least 300 signifi- this study. Genotyping were carried out with PCR-RFLP in extracted cant copy number changes (gains and losses) per genome, with a DNA. maximum observed copy number of 9x. The size range of CNVs was 1 Results: In control group, the frequency of persons carrying COX-2 kb to 71,000 kb. In parallel, we developed a novel pipeline for identify- GG, GC and CC genotypes were 57.5%, 37.5%, 5%, respectively. In ing CNVs using only a single sample. patient group, the frequencies were 72.4% GG, 20.7% GC, 6.9% CC. Using a new total RNA-based protocol, we SOLiD-sequenced the There was no a significant difference between groups in terms of the whole transcriptome of the tumor and normal samples, and exam- distribution of COX-2 genotypes and alleles (p>0.05). ined the correlation between copy number variation and changes in Discussion: Altered COX-2 gene expression effects invasiveness of gene expression. We found a significantly positive correlation (0.56) malignant cells, the rate of apoptosis and angiogenesis. COX-2 GC between CNV and gene expression in a patient. Some genomic seg- or CC genotypes reduces gene expression. Therefore, we expect that ments with big increases in copy numbers in genomic tumor samples the frequency of GG genotype is more than CC genotype in cancer. also show significantly elevated expression levels in the tumor tran- Our data support this hypothesis. Although there is not a significant dif- scriptome compared to the normal transcriptome. It suggests that the ference in prostat cancer, we found a tendency of GG genotype rather structural mutations in tumors may drive changes in gene expression. than control group. For our knowledge this is the first study to analyze The identified CNV segments offer insight into genes associated with the association between COX-2 gene polymorphism and prostate can- the initiation or progression of cancer. cer in Turkish population. P06.028 P06.030 Role of PTEN gene in the development of prostate cancer: initiation and progression of Prostate cancer in cohort of North should male patients affected with cowden syndrome be indian population by cytokine gene polymorphisms screened for prostate cancer? P. Kesarwani, A. Mandhani, R. Kapoor, R. Mittal; M. Barbosa1, M. Henrique2, J. Martins3, K. Claes4, J. Pinto-Basto5, G. Soares1; Sanjay Gandhi PGI, Lucknow, India. 1Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço de Background: Chronic intraprostatic inflammation is suspected to play Dermatologia - Hospital de Santo André, Leiria, Portugal, 3Serviço de Urologia a role in the pathogenesis of prostate cancer (PCa). Polymorphisms - Instituto Português de Oncologia, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Center for Medical Ge- in cytokine genes influences PCa development via regulation of the netics - Gent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 5Centro de Genética Preditiva anti-tumor immune response and/or pathways of tumor angiogenesis. e Preventiva - Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal. Thus, the present study was undertaken to evaluate the association of Introduction: PTEN (locus10q23.31) is a tumour suppressor gene cytokine gene polymorphisms for the susceptibility to PCa encoding a dual phosphatase protein that negatively regulates the Materials and methods: Our study included 197 histologically con- PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. Somatic loss of PTEN has been described firmed cases of adenocarcinoma of prostate and 256 healthy controls in sporadic human cancers: brain, bladder, colon, lung, breast, endo- of similar age and ethnicity. IL-1 RN (intron 2 VNTR), IL-1 B -511 C>T metrium and prostate. Germline mutations of PTEN cause a spectrum , IL-4 (intron 3, VNTR), IL-6 (-174 G>C), IL-10 (-819 C>T and -1082 of autosomal dominant hamartomatous overgrowth disorders includ- G>A), TNF-A (-1031 T>C, -863 C>A, -857 C>T, -308 G>A) and IFN- ing Cowden syndrome (CS, #158350). CS is mainly characterized by G (+874 A>T)genes were genotyped by PCR-RFLP or ARMS-PCR macrocephaly, facial trichilemmomas, acral keratoses, papillomatous based method papules and increased risk for breast, thyroid and endometrial cancer. Results: Our results illustrated that gene variant of IL-10 -1082 and Surveillance for susceptible malignancies is the mainstay of manage- TNF-A -1031 to be associated with two fold increased susceptibility ment these patients. for PCa. Our results also demonstrated that variant genotypes of IL- Clinical Report: We report on a 58 years old male patient affected with 6 -174 G>C (OR-2.07, p-0.012) and TNF-A -1031 T>C (OR-2.14, p- CS. He presented macrocephaly, sclerotic fibroma, menyngioma, gas- 0.022) polymorphisms to be associated with progression to bone me- trointestinal polyps and renal tumour. At the age of 56 he was diag- tastasis in PCa patients. Moreover IL-10 haplotype T(-819)-G(-1082) nosed a high grade prostate cancer, already metastized (vertebral col- demonstrated 70% decrease in risk for PCa progression. umn). Mutation analysis of PTEN in DNA extracted from lymphocytes Conclusion: The observations from this exploratory study suggested allowed the detection of a heterozygous mutation in exon 5 of PTEN that polymorphism in cytokine genes (IL-10, TNF-A, and IL-6) to be gene c.388C>T (p.R130X). associated with PCa risk and may have a significant effect on prostate Discussion: Although CS is a hereditary syndrome of cancer suscepti- cancer development and progression. However, a definitive study of bility, guidelines of surveillance of this disease don’t comprise screen- SNPs in large cohort and different ethnicity influencing this pathway to ing for prostate cancer. However, there’s compelling evidence indicat- investigate possible associations with prognosis is needed. ing a role for PTEN in the initiation and progression of prostate cancer (due to loss of heterozigosity and/or cooperation with other genes). P06.031 This report highlights the importance of performing large scale studies Analysis of frequency cHEK2, P53, NOD2/cARD15 and REt in patients with CS to evaluate the presence of (pre)neoplastic lesions gene polymorphisms in polish patients with differentiated of the prostate, which might be significant. The confirmation of this thyroid cancer hypothesis would validate the inclusion of prostate cancer screening in J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska1, M. Kaczmarek1, L. Jakubowska-Burek2,3, A. Olejnik4, the surveillance protocol of CS. K. Ziemnicka2, J. Sowiński2, R. Słomski5; 1Institut of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Universty School of Medical Sci- P06.029 ences, Poznan, Poland, 3Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Warsaw, cyclooxygenase-2 gene polymorphism and prostate cancer Poland, 4Plant Breeding and Acclimatization Institute, Poznan, Poland, 5Univer- M. Taspinar1, S. Aydos1, O. Sakiragaoglu1, I. Gokce2, S. Baltaci2, A. Sunguro- sity of Life Sciences, Poznan, Poland. glu1; Thyroid carcinomas are the most often carcinomas of endocrine system 1Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, An- with still growing up frequency. The most often occurs papillary and fol-Cancer genetics  licular thyroid cancer (80-90%), which belong to group of tumors well 8/9 cases of Ewing’s tumors. In 19/25 cases endogenous control B2M prognoses and slowly progress and benignity. Very serious problem indicated adequate RNA quality. We found EWS/FLI1 fusion genes in are recurrences and regional or remote metastasis. Progression from 3/8 Ewing’s sarcomas. In 2 cases ews exon 7 being fused to fli1 exon well differentiated thyroid cancer to malignant anaplastic carcinoma 6, in 1 case ews exon 7 being juxtaposed to 10 ews exon following by is possible also. In this focus, very important seems to be searching fli1 exon 6 (novel fusion variant). for molecular markers of disease course, good or poor prognosis and We detected FUS/CHOP fusion gene in 45% (5/11). All cases had a response on medical treatment as well. It is expected that polymor- type fusion transcript involving fusion of FUS exon 5 with CHOP exon phisms research in genes demonstrating association with neoplastic 2. Two novel transcript modifications were found, of which one had 6 diseases will be helpful in understanding of molecular mechanisms of nucleotides insertion and the other lacked 14 nucleotides of CHOP. thyroid gland tumors development. The dependence of differential thy- Moreover we found two different variants of the transcript in one sam- roid cancer occurrence on DNA variation: I157T in CHEK2 gene, R72P ple, caused by alternative splicing apparently. in P53 gene, 1007fs in NOD2/CARD15 gene and synonymic G2497T Further investigation of structural attributes of fusion genes may be substitution in RET protooncogene was examined. 296 patients with helpful for the prospective target therapy of patients with such fusion differentiated thyroid cancer and 200 individuals from population group oncogenes and give insight into the malignant sarcoma development. was examined. We used pyrosequencing technique. There were no significant differences in allele or genotype frequencies in analysis of P06.034 RET G2497T substitution and R72P in P53 gene but mutated allele Different genetic reasons of gastric cancer frequencies of 1007fs and I157T was 8,95% and 4,9% in patients with A. Tsukanov1, A. Loginova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, T. A. Muzaffarova1, L. N. Lub- thyroid cancer, compared with 2,92% and 2,1% in control individuals chenko2, M. P. Nikulin2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; respectively. Our findings indicates that particular characteristics of 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer cancer risk genes on RNA level as well as DNA changes is necessary. Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. Additionally a summary effect of different SNP changes as a cancer Mutations of CDH1 gene are associated with familial diffuse gastric predisposing factor is possible, so further analysis will be performed. cancer in some populations. MLH1 and MSH2 mutations also may pre- dispose to gastric cancer. P06.032 Three samples of patients for mutations and SNPs in the CDH1, MLH1 two cases of double heterozygotes in families with hereditary and MSH2 genes were studied: 30 patients with familial gastric cancer, cancer 99 patients with sporadic gastric cancer and a control sample of 112 L. Foretova1, M. Lukesova1, J. Hazova1, M. Navratilova1, P. Plevova2, E. Mach- probands by SSCP and sequencing. ackova1; Mutations in gene CDH1 have not been found. We investigated our 1Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 2University Hospi- sample of familial gastric cancer and found 5 germline MLH1 and tal, Ostrava, Czech Republic. MSH2 mutations (16,6%). We have studied the significance of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are tested in all familial or sporadic early CDH1 -160C/A variant in a promoter region for familial and sporadic onset breast and ovarian cases, which fulfil inclusion criteria. Two of forms of gastric cancer. The association of homozygote variant -160A/ the CHEK2 gene mutations, c.1100delC and deletion of exon 9-10, A with gastric cancer was shown for patients as with familial (OR=12,3; are also tested as a last step of examination, in all BRCA1/2 negative p=0,03) so sporadic form (OR=8,4; p=0,02). In addition it has been probands. MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 genes are tested in cases of pos- shown that the genotype 2076TT is associated with risk of a gastric sible HNPCC syndrome. In one of our families both BRCA1 deletion cancer in a presence of a genotype -160CA for sporadic (OR=9,8; of exon 20 and CHEK2 c.1100delC was detected in a proband with p=0,002) and the familial form (OR=12,3, p=0,009) but does not lead breast cancer at 44; her mother had breast cancer at 40 and ovarian to the risk increasing in a presence of -160CC genotype. It is interest- cancer at 48. Proband has three daughters, one non-carrier, one car- ing that -160AC/2076TT genotype have not been found among 112 rier of CHEK2 mutation and one carrier of BRCA1 deletion. In other healthy controls. family originally tested for Lynch syndrome, MLH1 mutation (splice In summary, mutations increasing cancer risk have been shown site) was detected in a proband with rectal cancer diagnosed at 58, more frequent in MLH1 and MSH2 genes than CDH1. The genotype whose father and grandfather had stomach cancer. Because his sister -160AC/2076TT of CDH1 has been certain for the first time as a risk had breast cancer and mother had ovarian cancer, additional testing genotype of gastric cancer. was provided and a BRCA1 mutation (protein truncating) was discov- ered. The occurrence of double heterozygotes is possible but probably P06.035 rare. The clinical geneticist should carefully evaluate family history and cDH1-160 polymorphism in Gastric cancer; could be an indicate testing of additional hereditary cancer syndromes especially informative marker? in probands with positive cancer occurrence from both parents. The A. Falahati1, M. Khoshsoror1, M. Karimpour2, Z. Soltani2, F. Jokar1, M. Jamali1, preventive recommendations should be explained even in non-carriers R. Shahrokhi Rad1, F. Rezaei1, M. Fallah1,3, F. Mansour-Ghanaei1, A. Ebrahimi3; of high-risk familial mutation. Supported by the Ministry of Health of the 1Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases Research Center, Guilan University of Czech Republic: Grant MZ0MZO2005 Medical Sciences, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Pasteure Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Bio- P06.033 technology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Novel variants of fusion gene transcripts in soft-tissue Introduction: Despite declining incidence rates, gastric cancer (GC) is sarcomas. a major cause of death worldwide and in Guilan Province, I.R. Iran. T. V. Kekeeva1,2, A. A. Ryazantseva1, L. E. Zavalishina1, Y. Y. Andreeva1, G. A. E-Cadherin is an adhesion molecule that is thought to be involved in Frank1; gastric cancer patients. Polymorphism at position −160 C/A has been 1Herzen Moscow Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, shown to affect GC risk in some studies. 2Sechenov Moscow medical academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. Material and methods: DNA was extracted from peripheral blood cells Soft-tissue sarcomas have specific recurrent chromosomal translo- according to the protocols. E-Cadherin polymorphism at position -160 cations producing chimeric gene fusions, which regarded as a major C/A was investigated using PCR RFLP method. factor in the development of these tumors. Fusion of FUS and CHOP Result: Fifty-two cases (17 gastric cancer and 35 of their healthy 1st gene is a common genetic event found in liposarcomas. Majority of relatives) were included in the study. Allele Frequency was 90.4 % for Ewing’s sarcomas are associated with fusion gene EWS-FIi1. These C and 9.6 % for A. 84.6 % of cases were Homozygote (CC in 43 cases specific translocations can be used for exact diagnosis in poorly dif- and AA in 1 case) and 15.4 % were Heterozygotes (C/A in 8 cases). ferentiated tumors. A>C polymorphism was seen in 17.3 % of cases (in homozygote or We examined 28 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sarcoma samples heterozygote state). This have seen in 23.5 % of those with gastric (20 liposarcomas, 8 Ewing’s tumors). Translocations were tested by cancer and in 14.3 %.of healthy one with gastric cancer in their 1st FISH, characterization of fusion genes FUS/CHOP, EWS/FLI1 was relatives performed by RT-PCR and sequencing. Conclusion: Polymorphisms in CDH1 have inconsistent relation We observed translocations in 18/20 cases of liposarcomas and in with gastric cancer studies. In the present study, the CDH1−160C/ACancer genetics  (rs16260) polymorphism have higher frequency in affected cases ver- P06.038 sus their healthy related subject. Variation in allelic frequency in this molecular characterization of deletions of sDH genes in study in contrast to other population studies, suggests that this SNP paraganglioma-pheochromocytoma patients identifies five novel may be a good marker along with other SNPs. deletions incl. the first Dutch SDHB founder deletion Key words: Gastric cancer, polymorphism, CDH1-160, Iran J. Bayley1, M. M. Weiss1, M. Losekoot1, P. A. van Bunderen1, M. van der Wiel- en1, J. C. Jansen1, E. P. M. Corssmit1, H. P. Kunst2, J. W. Lenders2, R. P. F. Dul- P06.036 laart3, S. Verhoef4, B. T. J. van Brussel1, F. J. Hes1, P. Devilee1, A. H. Vriends1; Gastric and breast cancer occurrence in cDH1 mutated families 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2University Ni- L. Huiart1, F. Eisinger1, V. Bourdon2, L. Mansuy3, L. Faivre4, B. Buecher5, jmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3University of Groningen, M. Blayau6, O. Caron7, J. Flejou8, J. Gendre9, A. Schielke10, A. Sezeur11, S. Groningen, The Netherlands, 4NKI, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Olschwang2; A major cause of paraganglioma/pheochromocytoma is germline mu- 1Department of Genetic Oncology, INSERM U912(SE4S), IPC, Marseille, tation of SDHB, SDHC and SDHD. France, 2Department of Genetic Oncology, IPC, Marseille, France, 3Department MLPA analysis of 126 patients negative for point mutations in the SDH of Genetic Oncology, CAV, Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France, 4Department of genes identified five deletions in SDHB, SDHC and SDHD, and ad- Genetic, CHU, Dijon, France, 5Department of Genetic Oncology, HEGP, Paris, ditionally in TIMM8B and C11orf57. France, 6Department of Biology, CHU, Rennes, France, 7Department of Ge- An identical deletion of exon 3 of SDHB was identified in nine appar- netic Oncology, IGR, Villejuif, France, 8Department of Pathology, AP-HP, Paris, ently unrelated patients. France, 9Department of Gastroenterology, AP-HP, Paris, France, 10Department One patient had a 10kb deletion of SDHD exons 1 and 2, of the entire of Surgery, Hôpital des Diaconesses, Paris, France, 11Department of Surgery, TIMM8B gene and of exons of C11orf57. A second deletion of SDHD Hôpital des Diaconesses, Paris, France. and TIMM8B gene was identified in one patient. Only molecular char- Age-dependent penetrance of CDH1 mutations and relevance of clini- acterization differentiated the deletions in the above two patients. cal management guidelines are currently debated. Our objective was Another patient showed a SDHD- MIRb -Tensin deletion-insertion. The therefore to describe variabilities in CDH1-related carcinomas. final patient showed deletion of exons of the SDHC gene. Sixteen families were identified with a deleterious CDH1 mutation be- The identical deletion of SDHB and the common haplotype of carriers tween 1998 and 2008 in our laboratory. One mutation was found in 4 indicates that this mutation is the first Dutch SDHB founder mutation. unrelated families, all others were unique. Fourteen index cases had a The predominantly non-familial presentation of these patients strongly gastric cancer: 9 of diffuse type and 5 unspecified. Ages at diagnosis suggests reduced penetrance. ranged from 21 to 63 years (mean = 38). Two index cases were free of The deletions of TIMM8B and C11orf57 are the first to be described gastric cancer but tested because of a bilateral lobular breast cancer but do not appear to result in a phenotype. at age 42 in one case, and a rectal linitis at 23 years of age in the other case. No family history of gastric cancer was found for 5 mutation carri- P06.039 ers. Associated breast cancer was reported in 3 families (2 cases were H-ras gene polymorphisms and sporadic colon cancer in specified as lobular breast cancer). In one family, 6 of 10 mutation croatian population carriers underwent prophylactic gastrectomy; all showed both invasive T. Catela Ivkovic, S. Kapitanovic; and in situ signet cell foci. However the oldest mutation carrier who Ruder Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. declined gastrectomy was clinically asymptomatic at 64 years of age. High incidence of colon cancer worldwide indicates the importance of In a second family, 13 members were tested for the familial mutation, exploring genetic alterations that lead to its carcinogenesis. Two poly- and 2 of the 4 mutation carriers were free of cancer at ages 65 and 49 morphisms in H-ras gene, hexanucleotide tandem repeats in the first respectively. intron and SNP T81C in the first exon, that might be connected with The intrafamilial phenotype variability observed in our series indicates susceptibility to cancer have been described. The aim of our study the need for international consortium to provide reliable data on pen- was to investigate these loci in Croatian population and to determine etrance of CDH1 mutations before validate guidelines for clinical man- if any of them is connected with susceptibility to colon cancer. Two agement. hundred healthy volunteers and 200 colon cancer patients were geno- typed using PCR and RFLP methods. Frequencies at hexanucleotide P06.037 locus were 44,5%, 22,5%, 5,5%, 7%, 1% and 19,5% in healthy popula- IL-1β -511 T/C polymorphism does not contribute to GEP-NEt tion, and 49%, 26%, 3,5%, 2,5%, 5,5% and 13,5% in colon cancer for susceptibility P1/P1, P1/P2, P2/P2, P2/P3, P3/P3 and P1/P3 genotype respectively. M. Cigrovski Berkovic1, V. Zjacic-Rotkvic1, S. Kapitanovic2; Allele frequencies were 65,5%, 20,3% and 14,2% in healthy popula- 1University Hospital “Sestre milosrdnice”, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Institute Rudjer tion and 68,8%, 17,8% and 13,5% in colon cancer for P1, P2 and P3 Boskovic, Zagreb, Croatia. respectively. For SNP T81C locus frequencies were 42,5%, 42,5% and GEP-NETs represent a heterogeneous group of tumors, arising from 15% in healthy population and 62,5%, 35% and 2,5% in colon can- diffuse endocrine system of gut and pancreas. Tumors are either cer for TT, TC and CC respectively. Allele frequencies were 63,8 % solitary, or occur as a part of MEN-1 syndrome. The genetic basis of and 36,2% in healthy population and 80% and 20% in colon cancer GEP-NETs is still largely unknown, but there is growing evidence that for T and C alleles respectively. Genotype P3/P3 was more common chronic inflammation through proinflammatory cytokines contributes to in colon cancer patients and P2/P2 and P2/P3 genotypes in healthy patients’ susceptibility to acquire tumors. The role of IL-1β in the gas- population. Allele -81C was more common in healthy volunteers in trointestinal tract inflammation and cancerosis has been extensively comparison to colon cancer patients. studied and T allele at -511-IL-1β promotor region was associated with aggravated inflammatory reaction measured through elevated IL-1β P06.040 serum levels, higher gastric cancer susceptibility and worse prognosis. contribution of the Rad50, mre11 and NBN genes to hereditary The aim of our study was to estimate allelic frequency for -511 promo- breast and ovarian cancer tor SNP in IL-1ß gene in patients with GEP-NETs. DNAs obtained from N. Uhrhammer, Y. Bignon; 101 GEP-NET patients and 150 unrelated healthy volunteers were Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France. genotyped for the IL-1ß -511 SNP using real-time PCR TaqMan® SNP The Rad50-Mre11-Nbs1 complex is essential for DNA repair. Rare ge- genotyping assays. To compare the frequencies χ2 test was used and netic disorders are associated with homozygosity for mutations of the results were significant if p<0.05. Although high expression genotypes complex components; each including very high cancer risk. Heterozy- (T/C and T/T) and T-allele occurred more frequently among GEP-NET gotes may be at higher risk of breast cancer. patients (63.37% vs. 56.67% and 38.61% vs. 35% respectively), there To evaluate the contribution of mutations and variants in these genes were no statistically significant differences in genotypes distribution to familial breast cancer in France, we analyzed their full coding se- (p=0.5541), high expression genotypes (p=0.3530) or in the allelic dis- quence in a series of non-BRCA HBOC cases. Cases were seen at the tribution (p=0.4651) between patients and controls. Although important Oncogenetics consultation at the Centre Jean Perrin; written informed in pathogenesis of gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma, IL-1β seems not consent was obtained, and DNA purified from peripheral blood. 600 to contribute to GEP-NET development. women with no personal or family history breast or ovarian cancer wasCancer genetics  also studied. complementing group 3 (XRCC3) Threonin (Thr)241Metionin (Met) is In 317 cases, Rad50 revealed two variants (Q426R, Q1011R) pre- associated with risk of developing HCC. dicted to significantly disrupt protein structure or function. Q426R was Method: Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood cells of observed in two families. These exons and exon 5, the site of a Finn- 42 patients with HCC and 105 cancer-free control subjects matched ish founder mutation, were analyzed in 600 controls: none of these for age, gender. XRCC3 Thr241Met genotypes were identified PCR- variants were found, though one additional likely deleterious variant, RFLP. Fisher’s test with Woolf’s approximation was used for statistical N981I, was observed. analysis. In 353 cases, Mre11 revealed two deleterious mutations (R576X, Results: The frequencies of Thr allele was 83.7% in HCC cases and R592X) and three likely benign variants (A492D, E497K, R576Q). One 55.7 in controls, respectively. The Thr allele was significantly asso- probably deleterious mutation was observed among controls: W210G ciated with the presence of HCC (OR, 4,09, 95% CI, 2.131-7.876 concerns the same amino acid seen in ATLD patients homozygous for p<0.0001). In addition patients with HCC had a significantly higher fre- W210C. No variants of NBN were observed in 250 cases. Our results quency of Thr/Thr homozygote genotype than controls (p= 0.01, OR, suggest that the R-M-N complex may contribute to breast cancer risk 2.7; 95%CI, 1.282-5.711). We found also a significant association be- in a small proportion of non-BRCA HBOC families. The observation of tween the Thr/Thr homozygote genotype and hepatitis B virus (HBV) deleterious mutations among the non-HBOC control group, however, positive cases ( p= 0.003, OR, 4.95; 95%CI, 1.740- 14.095). suggests that the oncogenic penetrance of such mutations may be Conclusion: These results provide evidence that the Thr allele of modest. XRCC3 Thr241Met polymorphism is associated with the presence of HCC and Thr/Thr homozygote genotype is a potentially one of the ge- P06.041 netic risk factor for HCC in Turkish population, especially HBV positive codon 72 Polymorphism of P53 gene is Associated with an case. Carriage of Thr allele is significant predictor for HCC therefore it increased susceptibility to Hepatocellular carcinoma in the can be used biomarker for HCC turkish Population F. Eren1,2, N. Tozun3, F. Ture Ozdemir4, H. Over Hamzaoglu5, N. Imeryuz6, O. P06.043 Ozdogan6, E. Avsar6; Identification of a novel missense Mutation in the p53 gene in 1Marmara University, Institute of Gastroenterology P.K. 53, İstanbul, Turkey, iranian Patients with hepatocellular carcinoma 2Marmara University, Instute of Health Sciences, Medical Biology and Genetics, H. Galehdari, B. Soheili, A. Foroughmand; Istanbul, Turkey, 3Acıbadem University, School of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey, Genetics, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. 4Marmara University Institute of Gastroenterology, İstanbul, Turkey, 5Marmara The p53 gene plays a major role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). University School of Medicine Gastroenterology Department, İstanbul, Turkey, Acquired mutations in this gene may provide clues to etiology. Some 6Marmara University Institute of Gastroenterology and School of Medicine Gas- carcinogenic agents, such as aflatoxin are considered to be associ- troenterology Department, İstanbul, Turkey. ated with specific genetic changes in the p53 gene. We attempted also Background and Aim: The P53 tumor suppressor gene plays role ma- to analyze the p53 mutations, especially in exons seven and eight, in jor role in molecular mechanism of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumor tissues from subjects suffering HCC in Iran. being involved in cell cycle contol, the iniatiation of apoptosis and in A total of 25 archival formalin fixed paraffin embedded samples were DNA repair. The effect of p53 Arg72Pro polymorphism on HCC risk collected that have been prepared between of 1997-2006 from hospi- remains consistent due to ethnic differences of the populations stud- tals in southwest and northwest Iran’s. These samples have been diag- ied. We aim to evaluate the p53 Arg72Pro polymorphism on the sus- nosed as HCC and classified into well differentiated (39%), moderately ceptibility of HCC in Turkish population. Method: In case-control study differentiated (54%), poorly differentiated (4.5%) and undifferentiated including 54 patients with HCC and 112 cancer-free control subjects (2.3%), respectively. The hepatitis B virus (HBV) was detected in 16% matched for age, gender. P53 Arg72Pro polymorphism was genotyped (n=7) and 11% (n=5) of patient’s sera that were affected with liver cir- using PCR-RFLP. Fisher’s test with Woolf’s approximation was used rhosis. No patient was infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV). We also for statistical analysis. Results: The frequency of Pro allele was 49,1% examined the codon 249 within the exons 7 using RFLP as well the full in HCC cases and 33,9 in controls, respectively. The Pro allele was length of exons 7 and 8 of p53 gene in the patients by SSCP. However, significantly associated with the presence of HCC (OR= 1,9, 95% [CI]= only in one patient was a mutation detected in codon 302 that has 1,17 - 2,99 p=0.01,). In addition, Pro/Pro homozygote genotype were been afterward verified with direct sequencing. All other samples were more frequent in patients with HCC than controls (OR, 2,9; 95%CI, negative for mutation in the above mentioned exons of p53 gene. 1.242-6.851 p= 0.02). We found that allele and genotype frequen- cies of the control group for codon 72 of P53 are very similar to NCBI P06.044 SNP database records for the European population (RefSNP ID:rs Germline and somatic CDH Deletions in Hereditary Diffuse 1042522).Conclusion: These findings indicate that the Pro allele of Gastric cancer p53 Arg72Pro polymorphism is associated with the presence of HCC C. Oliveira1,2, J. Senz3, S. Sousa1, H. Pinheiro1, R. Sanges4, E. Stupka4, D. and Pro/Pro homozygote genotype is a potentially one of the genetic Huntsman3, R. Seruca1,2; risk factor for HCC in Turkish population. Carriage of Pro allele is a sig- 1Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto nificant predictor for HCC and therefore it can be used as a biomarker (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, for susceptibility to HCC. Portugal, 3Hereditary Cancer Program, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Van- couver, BC, Canada, 4CBM S.c.r.l., AREA Science Park, Basovizza, Trieste, P06.042 Italy. the Polymorphism of DNA repair gene XRcc3 thr241met is Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) families carry CDH1 hetero- Associated with an increased Risk of Hepatocellular carcinoma zygous germline point or small frameshift CDH1 mutations in 30% of in the turkish Population the cases described to date. HDGC tumors acquire complete CDH1 F. Eren1,2, N. Tozun3, F. Ture Ozdemir1, H. Over Hamzaoglu4, N. Imeryuz5, O. inactivation through CDH1 promoter hypermethylation in 50% of the Ozdogan5, E. Avşar5; cases. 1Marmara University Institute of Gastroenterology, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara We hypothesized that CDH1 genomic rearrangements would be found University, Instute of Health Sciences, Medical Biology and Genetics, Turkey, in the germline of CDH1 negative HDGC families and somatically as 3Acıbadem University, İstanbul, Turkey, 4Marmara University School of Medicine the ‘second-hit’ in DGC of CDH1 mutation carriers. Gastroenterology Department, İstanbul, Turkey, 5Marmara University Institute The germline of 93 CDH1 mutation negative families was screened for of Gastroenterology and School of Medicine Gastroenterology Department, large genomic rearrangements by MLPA and validated by RT-PCR. İstanbul, Turkey. Breakpoints were cloned with oligo-CGH-arrays and long-range-PCR. Background and Aim: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is associated In-silico analysis was used to determine a potential mechanism for with HBV infection and chemical carcinogens (such as aflatoxin B1) rearrangements. Samples collected from 28 DGC (17 patients among that induce DNA damage. In addition, genomic instability and DNA 15 HDGC families) were analyzed for somatic CDH1 mutations, LOH repair play important role in hepatocarcinogenesis. we tested the hy- and promoter hypermethylation. pothesis that the polymorphism of DNA repair gene X-ray repair cross Seven percent of previously described mutation negative HDGC pro-Cancer genetics  bands carried genomic deletions caused by mechanisms involving by intracellular pathogen recognition receptors (e.g. Toll-like receptors, mainly non-allelic homologous recombination in Alu-sequences. Two TLRs). We found that undifferentiated keratinocytes, which form the families carried an identical deletion encompassing the full CDH3 basal cell layer targeted by HPVs, express only one intracellular TLR, sequence and CDH1 exons 1 and 2, most probably derived from a namely TLR3 (sensing viral RNA). A genome-wide gene expression common ancestor. Other deletions affecting exons 1, 2, 15 and/or 16 study of poly I:C (TLR3 agonist) stimulated normal and hrHPV-infected were identified. CDH1 somatic deletions (LOH) were found in 42.9% keratinocytes showed a significant decrease in the activation of genes of 28 neoplastic lesions analyzed, adding LOH as a major ‘second-hit’ for type I IFN and pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. MCP1/CCL2, IL1B, mechanism in HDGC tumors. IL6) in hrHPV-infected keratinocytes. In addition, genes encoding anti- CDH1 large deletions increase the susceptibility to HDGC when oc- gen presentation and anti-microbial molecules were downregulated in curring in patients’s germline; and determine DGC development when hrHPV-infected cells. The presence of hrHPV increased expression of targeting the wild-type allele in CDH1 germline mutation carriers’ cell cycle regulators, kallikreins, heat shock proteins, and tumor pro- stomachs. These results are pivotal for HDGC management and treat- moting cyto/chemokines. Results were confirmed by quantitative RT- ment. PCR as well as by ELISA for cytokine production. Our data suggest that hrHPV interferes with the regulation of innate P06.045 and adaptive immunity induced by keratinocytes. These studies will Germline mutation of the E-cadherin Gene in 3 sibling cases yield candidate genes to study genetic polymorphisms that play a role with advanced gastric cancer - clinical consequences for the in susceptibility to persistent infection with hrHPV. other family members B. Mayrbäurl1, G. Keller2, W. Schauer3, S. Burgstaller1, M. Czompo4, W. P06.047 Hölbling4, P. Knoflach5, C. Duba6, H. Höfler7, J. Thaler1; IL0 (-1082G/A) polymorphism and cervival intraepithelial 1Abteilung für Innere Medizin IV, Klinikum Wels-Grieskirchen, Wels, Austria, neoplasia 2Molekulare Pathologie TU München, München, Germany, 3Abteilung für M. Bicalho1, R. Linsingen1, N. S. Carvalho2, E. P. Bompeixe1; Chirurgie II, Klinikum Wels-Griekirchen, Wels, Austria, 4Institut für Klinische 1Immunogenetics Histoc. Laboratory-UFPR, Curitiba-Paraná, Brazil, 2Gynecol- Pathologie, Klinikum Wels-Grieskirchen, Wels, Austria, 5Abteilung für Innere ogy and Obstetrics Department from University Federal of Parana, Curitiba- Medizin I, Klinikum Wels-Grieskirchen, Wels, Austria, 6Humangenetische Unter- Paraná, Brazil. suchungs- und Beratungsstelle, Linz, Austria, 7Institut für Pathologie und Patho- Genital Human Papillomavirus (HPV) is a common sexually transmit- logische Anatomie, Klinikum rechts der Isar, München, Germany. ted infection. The genetic background and the host immune response Background & Aims: Germline mutations in the E-cadherin (CDH1) are believed to be an important determinant in the relation between gene have been found in families with hereditary diffuse gastric can- HPV persistent infection and carcinogenesis. The objective of this cer (HDGC). So far 68 distinct CDH1 germ line mutations have been study was to examine the correlation between IL10 (-1082) polymor- reported in HDGC. These families are characterized by a highly pen- phism and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. etrant susceptibility to diffuse gastric cancer with an autosomal domi- Hundred LSIL and HSIL patients and 50 normal controls were enrolled nant pattern of inheritance. We describe the clinical presentation of in this study. DNA was extracted from blood sample by the salting out 3 sibling cases with advanced gastric cancer, the way of confirming method and PCR amplified. IL10 and IFN genotyping was performed the suspicion of underlying HDGC and the clinical management of the by the PCR-SSP (Polymerase Chain Reaction-Sequence Specific other healthy family members according to the guidelines of the Inter- Primer) method, using the “Cytokine Genotyping Tray” (One-Lambda, national Gastric Cancer Linkage Consortium (IGCLC). Inc, Canoga Park, CA). Methods: Screening for CDH1 germline mutation was done by dena- There was no statistically significant frequency difference observed turing high-performance liquid chromatography and automated DNA- between patients and controls (p=0.09). Then the analysis was per- sequencing. The clinical suspicion of HDGC has been confirmed by formed in the stratified sample, LSIL and HSIL versus controls. The identifing a frameshift mutation in exon 9 (1302_1303insA, 1306_ GG genotype frequency in HSIL patients compared with control group 1307delTT) of the E-cadherin gene. frequency was statistically significant (p= 0.05). The G/G genotype Results: Eight of 9 tested family members have been positive for the was significantly more common in control group, 18% versus 7.3%, CDH1 germline mutation. Prophylactic laparoscopic gastrectomies OR= 2,79 (CI=95%). G/A and A/A genotype distributions were not dif- have been done in 5 mutation carriers. After pathological examination ferent between LSIL, HSIL patients and controls. we could identify intramucosal malignant signet-ring cell carcinoma in This study suggests that IL-10 low levels may influence the cervical all resected stomachs. malignant progression. Further understanding of the role of cytokines Conclusions: This report underlines, that prophylactic gastrectomy re- may contribute, as a prognostic factor, for improved treatment for mains the only option to eliminate the high risk for gastric cancer in squamous intraepithelial lesions. CDH1 mutation carriers. P06.048 P06.046 Bilateral mucinous cystadenoma of ovary in a patient with 10q23 impact of high risk human papillomaviruses on the innate microdeletion including the PtEN and BmPR1A genes immune response of keratinocytes D. Babovic-Vuksanovic, P. S. Simmons, B. Scheithauer, C. Moir; J. M. Boer1, R. Karim2, C. Meyers3, R. Offringa4, C. J. M. Melief4, S. H. van der Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. Burg5; Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) is a rare hereditary condition due 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, to mutations in SMAD4 or BMPR1A genes. Multiple juvenile polyps Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Center for Human and Clinical Genetics and De- can also be found in a related group of syndromes with multisystemic partment of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University involvement including Cowden disease, Lhermitte-Duclos disease, Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Department of Microbiology and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome and Proteus-like syndrome, all Immunology, The Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, grouped as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS). All forms of PA, United States, 4Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, juvenile polyposis manifest in older childhood or early adulthood. In- Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 5Department of fantile juvenile polyposis is a rare entity, presenting in the first year Clinical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. of life with severe gastrointestinal symptoms. Many of these patients The development of anogenital neoplasia by high risk human papillo- have associated macrocephaly, hypotonia and congenital anomalies. maviruses (hrHPVs) is causally linked to the capacity of these viruses It was recently recognized that patients with infantile polyposis have to establish persistent infection. Still unsolved is the major question: 10q23 microdeletion, involving both BMPR1A and PTEN genes. There how can these virus-positive tumors arise from infected keratinocytes is a major risk for gastrointestinal malignancies in these patients, but in the face of immunity? risk for development of other tumors is not known. We describe the Infection of keratinocytes results in the production of antiviral cytokines patient with history of infantile polyposis, macrocephaly, developmen- via the activation of type I interferon (IFN) response genes and the at- tal delay, hypotonia and 10q23 microdeletion. At age 14 she presented traction of the adaptive immune system via the production of pro-inflam- with bilateral mucinous cystadenoma of the ovary. This type of tumor matory cytokines, all activated after the intruding virus is recognized was not previously reported in association with JPS, PHTS or infan-Cancer genetics  tile polyposis. We believe that ovarian cystadenomas is another neo- tained by the overexpression of the studied oncogenes, in both type of plastic complication of infantile polyposis, and that our report widens a tumors, and also the overexpression of the studied tumoral supressor spectrum of 10q23 microdeletion phenotype. genes, especially in primary tumors. P16 gene was underexpressed in the tumor cells, compared to normal ones, in only one case (carcino- P06.049 sarcoma tumor type). P21 gene level is decreasing in the secondary international consensus for neuroblastoma molecular tumors, compared to primary ones. diagnostics: Report from the international neuroblastoma risk The studied genes proved to be good candidates as tumoral markers grouping (iNRG) Biology committee in laryngeal and oropharyngeal cancer. The analysis of the combina- P. F. Ambros1, I. M. Ambros1, G. M. Brodeur2, M. Haber3, J. Khan4, A. Nak- tions between the expression level of these genes is of real relevance agawara5, G. Schleiermacher6, F. Speleman7, R. Spitz8, W. B. London9, S. L. for the prognosis of patient evolution and improvment of the treatment Cohn10, A. D. J. Pearson11; strategies. 1CCRI, Children’s Cancer Research Institute, Vienna, Austria, 2Center for Child- hood Cancer Research, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and the University P06.051 of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, PA, USA, Philadelphia, PA, United States, LATS2 tumour specific mutations and methylation of promoter 3Children´s Cancer Institute Australia, Sydney, Australia, 4National Cancer Insti- in non-small cell carcinoma tute, Bethesda, WA, United States, 5Chiba Cancer Center Research Institute, M. Stražišar, V. Mlakar, D. Glavač; Chiba, Japan, 6Institut Curie, Paris, France, 7Centre for Medical Genetics, Gh- Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia. ent, Belgium, 8University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 9Children’s Oncology LATS2 is putative tumour supressor gene, involved in maintenance Group Statistics and Data Center, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United of cell stability. It is situated on a chromosome location, which is in States, 10The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 11Section of tumours often affected by LOH. Diminished expression is detected in Paediatrics, Institute of Cancer Research and Royal Marsden Hospital, Surrey, different types of cancer and often related to methylation. United Kingdom. Fifty-one adenocarcinomas (ADC) and sixty-seven squamous cell car- Background: Neuroblastoma serves as a paradigm for utilizing tumour cinomas (SCC) in different tumour stages and adjacent healthy lung genomic data for determining patient prognosis and treatment alloca- tissue were included in our study. LATS2 alterations were discovered tion. However, prior to the establishment of the International Neuro- with denaturising high-pressure liquid chromatography (DHPLC). Gene blastoma Risk Group (INRG) Task Force in 2004, international con- expression levels were established with real-time PCR and methyla- sensus on markers, methodology, and data interpretation did not exist, tion with restriction analysis of bisulphite treated DNA. Results from compromising the reliability of decisive genetic markers and inhibit- DHPC and methylation analysis were confirmed by sequencing. ing translational research efforts. The objectives of the INRG Biology LATS2 was down regulated in ADC and SCC (Student’s t test, p<0.05). Committee were to identify highly prognostic genetic aberrations to be Nine different genetic alterations were observed in the LATS2 gene; included in the new INRG risk classification schema and to develop including four novel intron polymorphisms, one novel missense muta- precise definitions, decisive biomarkers, and technique standardiza- tion (S1073R) and one novel PAPA repeat deletion (del 472_479 APA- tion. PAPAP). Methods: The review of the INRG database by the INRG Task Force We were first to describe mutations in LATS2, significantly related finally enabled the identification of the most significant neuroblastoma to SCC in an advanced stage of development. Analysis of promoter biomarkers. In addition, the Biology Committee compared different co- methylation revealed that all of the tumours with diminished LATS2 operative group standard operating procedures to arrive at internation- expression had recognition sites methylated. al consensus for methodology, nomenclature and future directions. Expression of LATS2 gene in ADC and SCC was diminished and re- Results: Consensus was reached to include MYCN status, 11q23 al- lated to promoter methylation. We can conclude that promoter LATS2 lelic status, and ploidy in the INRG Classification System based on an methylation is frequent and early event in lung tumourigenesis, found evidence-based review of the INRG database. Standardized operating already in stage I tumours (SCC and ADC). Mutations are obviously procedures for analyzing these genetic factors were adopted and cri- more specific and late events in carcinogenesis, found mostly in ad- teria for proper nomenclature were developed. vanced SCC tumours. Conclusions: Neuroblastoma treatment planning is highly dependant on tumour cell genomic features, and it is likely that a comprehensive P06.052 panel of DNA-based biomarkers will be used in future risk assignment First LFs family with childhood rib chondro-sarcoma and novel algorithms applying genome-wide techniques. Consensus on meth- p53 germ-line mutation odology and interpretation is essential for uniform INRG classifica- S. Kappel1, C. Bichler1, E. Janschek1, B. Wolf1, F. Wrba2, R. Jakesz1, D. Kan- tion and will greatly facilitate international and cooperative clinical and dioler1; translational research studies. 1Medical University of Vienna, Department of General Surgery, Vienna, Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Pathology, Vienna, Austria. P06.050 A novel p53 germ-line mutation in an Austrian family with Li Fraumeni study of primary and secondary tumors from patients with Syndrome (LFS) is reported here. The mutation was identified as a laryngeal and oropharyngeal cancer - a comparative approach missense mutation in exon 10 at c.1025G>C by direct sequencing of A. Niculescu1, L. Ghetea1, R. Motoc1, D. Manu2; the entire coding sequence of p53. This constitutional mutation leads 1Institute of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Ilfov” to an amino acid substitution in the protein changing arginine for pro- Emergency County Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. line (p.R342P) and occurs in a region that is responsible for oligomer- Our study was focused on laryngeal and oropharyngeal cancers, ization. A review of mutational p53 database UMD-p53 (Beroud and which have nowadays an increased incidence, due to unhealthy habits Soussi, 2007) revealed only 4 cases of sporadic malignancies, namely like tobacco and alcohol consumption. We used transmission electron an advanced breast carcinoma, one ewing´s sarcoma and two ovarian microscopy (TEM) in order to highligth the ultrastructural features of cancers that harbored this genetic alteration demonstrating this variant cancer cells, in primary and secondary tumors. The differences be- to be pathogenic and extremely rare even in somatic malignancies. Af- tween the inner architecture of the tumor cells where correlated with fected members of the here reported LFS family (LF-342-1) developed the expression of some genes (oncogenes and tumor suppressor fac- the classical spectrum of malignancies and carried all the identical tors), in order to establish the aggressiveness of the tumor, in different gene alteration, indicating its transmission by inheritance and suggest- disease stages. ing this mutation to severely impair the physiologic function of p53. Primary- and secondary tumor tissues, and also non-transformed tis- sue (from the vicinity of the tumor) were surgically obtained from 16 patients (8 with primary tumors and 8 with secondary tumors), from the “Ilfov” Emergency County Hospital, Bucharest. The most important observation made from the ultrastructural data obtained by transmission electron microscopy is the aggressiveness and invasiveness of this type of cancer. The TEM conclusions are sus-Cancer genetics  P06.053 Republic of Iran. search for alternative genetic defects in families suggestive Multidrug resistant (MDR) is one of the problems in treatment of can- of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome with no identified missense cer patients by chemotherapy. One of the mechanisms responsible for mutations in the tP53 gene drug resistance is over-expression of ABC-transporter genes such as K. Prochazkova1, A. Finkova1, M. Trkova2, V. Krutilkova2, A. Puchmajerová1, Z. MDR1.MDR1 encodes p-glycoprotein (p-gp), a transmembrane glyco- Sedlacek1; protein that transports many hydrophobic substrates and anti-cancer 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty drugs from cell. Polymorphism in MDR1 gene may affect the expres- of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Gennet, sion level of the Pgp and subsequently can result to drug resistance. Prague, Czech Republic. In this study we investigated the possible association between MDR1 Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a disorder characterised by autosomal gene C3435T polymorphism and MDR1 expression in Iranian breast dominant predisposition to a broad spectrum of cancers. Most LFS cancer patients. patients carry missense germline mutations in the tumour suppressor DNA and RNA were extracted from tumor and blood cells. For cDNA gene TP53. Such mutations can be found in about 70 % of families synthesis, 1 mg of total RNA from each sample was used to synthesize conforming to stringent criteria of LFS, and in about 20 % of families first-strand cDNA. Evaluation of the expression level of MDR1 was conforming to less strict Li-Fraumeni - like (LFL) or Chompret criteria. performed by Real-Time Quantitative PCR and PCR-RFLP was used Most mutations are located in the middle part of the TP53 gene encod- for the detection of C3435T single nucleotide polymorphism. ing the DNA-binding domain (exons 5 - 9), and often only these exons A statistically significance in MDR1 expression was observed when are analysed in routine TP53 testing. samples from breast cancer patients were compared with healthy in- In search for the genetic basis of cancer predisposition in families dividual. We observed no difference in frequency of C3435T polymor- suggestive of LFS but with no identified TP53 mutations in exons 5 phism between breast cancer patients and healthy controls. Clinico- - 9 we focused primarily on other defects possibly affecting the TP53 pathological parameters of patients with breast cancer were compared gene function. First, we completed the analysis of all TP53 exons by for C3435T polymorphism. These data suggest that a number of other sequencing also the outer exons (26 families). Second, we used the factors in addition to gene polymorphisms, e.g., gene amplification, MLPA method to exclude single- or multiexon deletions in the TP53 promoter demethylation might be responsible for MDR1 over-expres- gene (7 families). Third, we applied bisulphite sequencing to analyse sion in these patients. possible epigenetic silencing of one of the alleles of the TP53 gene by promoter methylation (14 families). Finally, we searched members of P06.056 several families for mutations in the CHEK2 and SNF5 genes, which Establishment of study Group of multiple Endocrine Neoplasia have also been associated with LFS in several rare families published in Japan (mEN consortium of Japan) in literature. However, none of these efforts revealed any molecular A. Sakurai1, S. Uchino2, S. Suzuki3, M. Imamura4, MEN Consortium of Japan; defects which could be responsible for hereditary cancer predisposi- 1Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 2Noguchi Thyroid tion in the families analysed. Supported by grants MSM0021620813 Clinic & Hospital Foundation, Beppu, Japan, 3Fukushima Medical University, and MZO00064203. Fukushima, Japan, 4Osaka Saiseikai Noe Hospital, Osaka, Japan. Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) is a rare hereditary syndrome P06.054 characterized by neoplastic disorder of endocrine organs. MEN is sub- Association between manganese superoxide dismutase divided into MEN1 and MEN2, and the latter includes MEN2A, MEN2B gene polymorphism (Ala-9Val) and cutaneous squamous cell and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma. MEN1 and MEN2 are caused carcinoma risk by germline mutations of the responsible genes, MEN1 and RET, re- R. Cocoş1, L. Bohîlţea1, F. Raicu1,2, D. Neagoş1, E. Paune-Buşe3, O. Coman1,4, spectively, and mutations can be identified in most patients. Clinical R. Creţu1, I. Nicolae4; guideline for diagnosis and management of MEN has been published 1“Carol Davila”University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, in 2001, and that is widely accepted as a “golden standard”. However, 2Francisc I Rainer Institute of Anthropology Romanian Academy, Bucharest, its contents are not based on reliable evidences. Efforts to establish Romania, 3University of Bucharest, Faculty of Biology, Bucharest, Roma- clinical evidence are currently ongoing in Europe, USA and other re- nia, 4Centre of Dermatovenerology, Dermato-venerological Hospital “Prof. gions of the world. In Asian countries including Japan, such efforts S.Longhin”, Bucharest, Romania. have not been initiated. Also, some have claimed that clinical courses Superoxide dismutase play an important role in the detoxification of of Japanese (Asian) patients may not be the same as that of Cauca- superoxide radicals thereby protecting cells from damage induced sian patients, which is not verified. To construct a reliable database of by free radicals. One of the several metabolic pathways involved in Japanese patients with MEN, we established a study group of MEN carcinogenesis is the polymorphism in the mitochondrial targeting and named it “MEN Consortium of Japan”. Each participant deposits sequence (MTS) Val-9Ala of the MnSOD gene which influences the anonymized clinical data of patients and those are cumulated in data transfer and acumulation of the MnSOD enzyme into the mitochondria. handling center. Participants can freely extract clinical data from data- Thus, the goal of this study was to find a relationship between MnSOD base for analysis from various respects. This database also enables Val-9Ala polymorphism and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) risk. A long-term follow-up of patients even if they move from one hospital to study of 91 patients with squamous cell carcinoma and 58 normal sub- another. As of February 2009, 21 major institutions have joined this jects was performed. The MnSOD MTS genetic polymorphism was Consortium and additional 20-30 institutions are expected to join in determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment lenght near future. This consortium will help clarify current status of diagnosis polymorphism technique using NgoMIV and automated sequencing. and clinical management of MEN in Japan. No significant difference was found in cutaneous squamous cell carci- noma susceptibility in the subjects with Ala/Ala and Val/Ala genotype P06.057 compared with Val/Val genotype (Odds ratio, 1.49; 95% confidence methyl-binding domain (mBD) protein based isolation of interval, 0.73-2.76; p= 0.3735). These data suggest no correlation methylated DNA from human serum between MnSOD Ala-Ala and MnSOD Val-9Ala genotypes and squa- M. Wielscher, M. Hofner, C. Nöhammer, A. Weinhäusel; mous cell carcinoma (SCC) risk. Austrian Research Centers GmbH, 2444 Seibersdorf, Austria. DNA methylation testing of serum-DNA for minimal invasive testing of P06.055 cancerous disease is of great diagnostic interest. Isolation of cell-free correlation of mDR1 c3435t polymorphism and expression in DNA from human serum is a big challenge because only nanogram iranian breast cancer patients amounts of DNA are present in one ml of serum. m. taheri1,2, F. Mahjoubi1, R. Omranipour3; In this work we tested the MBD-protein to isolate and enrich methyl- 1National institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic ated DNA already during the DNA isolation step. Selective binding of Republic of Iran, 2Zahedan University of Medical science, Zahedan, Islamic cell-free serum DNA onto immobilised MBD directly in the serum would Republic of Iran, 3Cancer Institute of Imam Khomeini hospital, Tehran, Islamic enable favorable concentrations of DNA for further analysis. In addition DNA binding under native conditions preserves proteins for additional proteomic or immunological analyses.Cancer genetics  Upon recombinant expression the MBD protein was attached to nickel otic selection were expanded and stable transfection was confirmed. beads obtaining binding of 1,35 mg MBD protein per ml of NiNTA- Initial studies suggested a decreased proliferation rate in miR-125b bead suspension (50%). After optimization DNA-binding capacity of transfected MCF-7 cells compared to controls. Further functional stud- immobilised MBD was tested in buffer and human serum; using 1µg ies are underway to better understand the consequences of loss of of spiked-in human DNA we could retrieve 30% of the DNA from se- miR-125b in breast cancer cells. rum and about 75% from buffer. Binding specificity towards methylated DNA was evaluated by PCR upon methylsensitive restriction enzyme P06.060 digestion, using several known differentially methylated genomic DNA MiRNA profiles in neuroblastoma: a link to functional studies? regions. Although published, MBD did not selectively bind methylated E. Afanasyeva, A. Hotz-Wagenblatt, K. Glatting, M. Schwab, F. Westermann; DNA in a range of 0.1-0.8 M NaCl,- which might be due to immobili- DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany. zation. Performing the DNA isolation from serum using a commercial Background: neuroblastoma (NB) is an embryonal tumor originating kit, 10-17ng DNA per ml serum could be isolated and using the MBD- from neural crest-derived undifferentiated cells that is characterized based strategy about 5ng/ml were obtained. Thus here we show that by variable clinical courses ranging from spontaneous regression to in principle DNA isolation form serum can be achieved using MBD-pro- therapy-resistant progression. Recent studies suggested differential tein but binding is not selective for methylated DNA. expression of miRNAs in neuroblastoma subtypes. However, the full repertoire of miRNAs expressed in NBs is not yet available. Further- P06.058 more their functional role in NB tumorigenesis remains elusive. Gene network and canonical pathway analysis in hematopoietic Methods: small RNA cloning, overexpression of miRNAs, clonogenic- and soft tissue originated malignancies: A microarray ity assay, western blotting. experience of medical Genetics Department of Kocaeli Results: miRNA libraries provide informative profiles of miRNA ex- University in 2007-2008. pression; the most abundant species were miR-125b, -21, -124a, -16 N. Çine1, H. Savlı1, D. Sünnetçi1, N. Üzülmez1, B. Nagy2, S. Galimberti3, K. and 17-5p. Several new miRNAs are found within 3p25, 9p21, 11q14, Baysal4, T. Limpaiboon5, P. Limtrakul6; 3p12, which represent sites of frequent genomic alterations in neu- 1Medical Genetics Department & Clinical Research Unit, University of Kocaeli, roblastoma. mir-885 on 3p25 and mir-331 on 12q22 were chosen for Kocaeli, Turkey, 2Genetic Laboratory, 1st Department of Obstetrics and Gyne- functional characterization. A mir-885 mimic inhibits growth of several cology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Hematol- NB cell lines triggering cellular senescence. In contrast, mir-331 slight- ogy, Catania University, Catania, Italy, 4Gene Engineering and Biotechnology ly upregulates proliferation. Stable expression of mir-885 but not mir- Institute of TUBITAK, Kocaeli, Turkey, 5Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, 331 inhibits growth of SH-EP and KELLY cell lines. Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand, 6Biochemistry Department, Chi- Conclusions: we provide evidence for several new human miRNAs; ang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand. some novel miRNAs are within neuroblastoma-relevant chromosomal Background: We performed gene expression analysis in hematopoi- regions. mir-885 on 3p25 is a new tumor suppressor candidate. etic tissue, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, cervical cancer; breast cancer, endothelial cell lines, preeclampsia and HELLP sydrome, us- P06.061 ing microarray technology in University of Kocaeli. the RET mutations in Russian families with mEN 2 cancer Materials and Methods: ABI (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, syndromes: molecular diagnostics and prophylactic treatment US) and Agilent (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) platforms were F. A. Amosenko1, V. M. Kozlova2, L. N. Lybchenko2, V. Z. Brzhezovski2, R. F. used as microarray chips. Obtained data were analysed by using Garkavtseva2, V. N. Kalinin2; GeneSpring (GeneSpring 6.1,Silicon Genetics, Redwood City, CA) 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (Ingenuity Systems, Mountain of Clinical Oncology, NN Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Russian Academy View, CA, USA) software programmes for gene network and canoni- of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. cal pathway analysis. Array results were confirmed using Quantitative Activating germline mutations of the RET protooncogene (10q11.2) Real Time PCR (LightCycler, Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, have been identified as the underlying cause of uncommon heritable Germany) and TaqMan® Low Density Array Human Apoptosis Panel cancer syndromes of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2A, (TaqMan®, Applera, Norwalk, U.S.A ). familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC), and MEN type 2B. Pe- Results: Our results represents the first gene network analysis in Tur- ripheral blood DNA was analyzed from 32 individuals of 13 families key. Here we define the importance of bringing samples to the microar- with MEN 2 applied for the help to the Russian NN Blokhin Cancer Re- ray laboratory in safe conditions and value of RNA integrity number. search Center from January 1997 to December 2008. Genetic screen- Conclusion: This technology is very useful to suggest new pathogno- ing was performed by using PCR, restriction enzyme analysis, SSCP monic- prognostic markers and new therapeutic targets. analysis and automatic sequencing for exons 10, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16. Missense mutations of the RET gene were revealed and identified P06.059 in all probands studied and in 11 asymptomatic relatives. Five types of Expression and functional analyses of miR-125b in breast cells mutations were found in 10 MEN 2A families: C634R (54.6%), C634G S. Tuna1, S. D. Selcuklu2, M. C. Yakicier3, A. E. Erson1; (18.2%), C634F (13.6%), C634Y (9.1%), C634W (4.6%). In two fami- 1Department of Biological Sciences, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, lies with FMTC we found mutations C620R and S891A. RET mutation Turkey, 2University College Cork, Cork, Ireland, 3Department of Molecular Biol- M918T was found in two patients from one family with MEN 2B. More- ogy and Genetics, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. over 61 Russian patients with sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma Genomic instability is a common event in breast cancers. Various (MTC) were tested for the most common MEN 2B and MEN 2A as- chromosomal and segmental loss or amplification regions have been sociated germline RET mutations. As a result, de novo RET mutations detected in primary breast tumors and breast cancer cell lines. Mi- were revealed in 11 individuals with “sporadic” MTC. croRNAs are ~18-24 nt long non-coding RNAs that regulate protein Preventive thyroidectomy was performed in 6 asymptomatic carriers expression by binding to target mRNA sequences in the 3’ untrans- of RET mutations from 5 families with genetically and clinically con- lated regions. A large number of microRNAs are localized to genomic firmed MEN 2A syndrome. Thus molecular analysis enables to identify instability regions in cancer cells. We screened for genomic gain/loss asymptomatic individuals at risk for MTC in early stage and to prevent of 36 microRNA genes localized to common genomic instability re- or cure from cancer. gions in breast cancer cells. Among these, miR-125b-1 is localized to a loss region, 11q24.1, with variable amplification/loss levels. We P06.062 detected fold number decreases compared to an internal PCR control Evaluation of muts based mismatch detection for paralleled in SUM-229, MDA-MB-435 and MDA-MB-361, whereas amplification mutation testing on standard DNA-microarrays was seen in some other cells (T47D, MDA-MB-468). RT-PCR analysis S. Fülöp1, C. Noehammer1, R. Pichler1, M. Hofner1, S. Kappel2, B. Wolf2, D. suggested lack of miR-125b-1 precursor transcript in MCF-7 cells, with Kandioler2, A. Weinhäusel1; no genomic fold number changes. To understand the possible role of 1Austrian Research Centers GmbH – ARC, Health & Environment, Molecular this miRNA in breast cancer cells, we cloned the hairpin structure into Medicine, Seibersdorf, Austria, 2Department of Surgery, Medical University of pSUPER vector to stably transfect MCF-7 cells. Cells surviving antibi-Cancer genetics 0 Vienna, Vienna, Austria. cinoma and 1274 healthy individuals. I171V mutation of NBS1 gene Mutation screenings for confirmation of suspected diagnoses and for was the most frequent and has been found in 23 patients compared verification of carrier status are an essential part of human genetic to only 8 in healthy individuals. Other mutations of the NBS1 gene diagnostics. The to-date “gold standard” in mutation analysis is di- have been observed in lower frequencies. Genotyping data from the rect DNA sequencing, that allows analysis of single gene areas up six polymorphic loci in NBS1 gene, were used to impute haplotypes. to lengths of several hundred bases. Analysis of many gene areas or Two of the evaluated haplotypes were associated with significantly in- several complete genes for diagnostic reasons is very labor-intensive. creased leukemia risk (P=0.0038, P<0.0001). Since DNA was isolated Thus tests enabling paralleled analysis at low cost and high flexibility from non-malignant cells, all mutations found in cancer patients ap- would be favourable. peared to be of germinal origin. It can be concluded that I171V muta- The aim of this work was to evaluate the suitability of the mutation- tion of NBS1 gene is associated with predisposition to malignances specific mutS protein for a DNA-microarray based mutation detection and NBS1 allele I171V may be a general cancer susceptibility gene of method which enables highly-paralleled mutation detection. E. coli low or middle risk. mutS protein recognizes single point mutations, as well as insertions Supported in part by Grant NN407016235. and deletions of up to four base pairs and is thus usable for point mu- tation testing. Using different recombinant mutS-constructs however P06.065 failed reliable mutation-testing on a DNA-microarray. However here- Differential effects of Nucleostemin knocking-down on cell cycle with we provide a convenient control system for testing “Enzymatic arrest and apoptosis in the bladder cancer cell lines 5637 and Mutation Detection” which could be helpful when trying other protein- sW1710 based mutation tests upon DNA-chip hybridization using CEL1 endo- P. Nikpour1,2, S. J. Mowla2, W. A. Schulz3; nuclease, EndoV , bacteriophage resolvase T4 endonuclease VII and 1Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Isfahan T7 endonuclease I. University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department keywords: mutation testing, mutS, microarray of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Sciences,Tarbiat Modares University, P.O. Box: 14115-175, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Urology, Heinrich P06.063 Heine University, Moorenstr. 5, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany. increased risk of mB in heterozygous carriers of NBN gene The recently identified Nucleostemin (NS) gene encodes a nucleolar germline mutations protein expressed mainly in adult and embryonic stem cells, which K. H. Chrzanowska, E. Ciara, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, E. Popowska, W. may interact with p53. Nucleostemin is also thought to regulate the Grajkowska, S. Barszcz, D. Perek, B. Dembowska-Bagińska, E. Kowalewska, proliferation of cancer cells, but the mechanisms involved are poorly A. Czajńska, M. Perek-Polnik, M. Syczewska, K. Czornak, M. Krajewska- understood. Therefore, we have investigated NS expression in a se- Walasek, M. Roszkowski; ries of bladder carcinoma cell lines and in normal uroepithelial cells. The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. High NS expression was found in several bladder carcinoma cell lines, Cerebellar medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common highly malig- but surprisingly moderate expression in normal uroepithelial cell cul- nant, invasive embryonal brain tumor in children. Several signaling tures as well. Knock-down of NS expression by siRNA induced apop- pathways are known to be engaged in hereditary and sporadic MB. tosis significantly and caused a severe decline in cell proliferation in Nibrin, a protein product of the NBN (formerly NBS1) gene is a com- both the 5637 and SW1710 cell lines. However, apoptosis was more ponent of the Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 complex that is critical for sensing strongly enhanced in 5636 cells, with mutant TP53 and RB1 but wild and processing double strand breaks in DNA, and is also required for type CDKN2A/p16INK4A, than in SW1710 cells, with mutant TP53 and the proper initiation of base excision repair. Hypomorphic mutations in CDKN2A but wild type RB1. Moreover, NS-siRNA treated 5637 cells the NBN gene are the cause of Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), accumulated mainly in the G2/M phase, whereas SW1710 cells ar- a severe disease predisposing to different types of cancer, including rested in G0/G1. Our data indicate that NS expression is necessary MB. The aim of our study was to identify NBN gene mutations and for cell proliferation and evasion of apoptosis in bladder cancer cells, to determine their frequency in Polish patients with different types independent of its effect on p53. In other cell lines, suppression of NS of sporadic medulloblastomas. A group of 110 patients with MB was has been reported to cause alternatively G2/M or G0/G1 arrest. Our screened for mutations in the NBN gene by SSCP-PCR followed by data suggest that the precise effect of NS on cell cycle regulation may direct DNA sequencing. Seven heterozygous carriers of two various depend on the functional status of RB1 and CDKN2A/p16INK4A. germline NBN gene mutations (6.36%) were found: four with mutation c.511A>G in exon 5 and three with mutation c.657_661del5 in exon P06.066 6. The risk of medulloblastoma was estimated as 2.89 (for c.511A<G) Functional gene polymorphisms that are strongly associated and 5.08 (for c.657_661del5) times higher than in the general Polish with risk for oral cancer population (p<0.05). Our report is the first to document the frequency C. N. Yapijakis1, Z. Serefoglou1, A. Vylliotis1, S. Spyridonidou1, D. Avgoustidis1, of heterozygous NBN germline mutations in pediatric patients with dif- E. Patsouris1, F. W. Neukam2, E. Vairaktaris1; ferent types of medulloblastoma. Further investigations concerning a 1University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, 2University of Erlangen larger group of patients are necessary to assess the role of germline Medical School, Nurnberg, Germany. NBN mutations in predisposition to childhood medulloblastoma. Recent evidence indicated that gene polymorphisms are associated This study was partially supported by grants from KBN (PBZ-KBN-090/ with increased risk for oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). We in- P05/04-17) and MNiSW (2P05A11829). vestigated the combinatory effect of 31 inherited functional DNA poly- morphisms in genes of factors related to angiogenesis, inflammation P06.064 and thrombosis in an attempt to predict the occurrence of OSCC in NBS gene mutations as a cancer risk factor. Europeans. J. S. Nowak1, I. Ziolkowska1, M. Mosor1, D. Januszkiewicz2; DNA samples were isolated from blood of 162 OSCC patients and 168 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, healthy controls of comparable age, gender, and ethnicity (Greeks and University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Germans). Polymorphisms were investigated in genes that encode: MRE11, RAD50 and NBS1 (MRN) complex is involved in DNA repair cytokines and their receptors (IL-1b,-4,-6,-8,-10,-18, TNF-α,-β, VEGF, and cell cycle checking signaling. Molecular variants of NBS1 gene Leptin, Leptin receptor), matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors may therefore constitue cancer risk factor. Heterozygous carriers of the (MMP-1,-3,-7,-9,-13, TIMP-2), platelet glycoproteins and coagulation NBS1657del5 mutation have been shown to have an increased risk for factors (GPIα, GPIbα, PAI-1, AGT, ACE, TAFI, Thrombomodulin, Pro- melanoma, breast, colon and rectum cancer. Other studies have found tein Z, SDF1, Factors II,V,XII,XIII and MTHFR). A series of multivariate no association between NBS1 gene mutations and lymphomas. The regression models (adjusted for age and gender) was constructed in aim of the study was to analyze the frequency of NBS1 gene muta- order to assess the contribution of homozygous or heterozygous vari- tions by screening all 16 exons of this gene along with polymorphisms ant polymorphic genotypes upon overall, early and advanced stages examination. DNA was isolated from PBL of 135 children with ALL, of OSCC development. 270 women with breast cancer, 176 patients with larynx cancer, 93 The contribution of TNF-α and IL-6 polymorphisms was consistent and with second primary tumors of head and neck, 131 with colorectal car- robust in all regression models. When the mode of inheritance of eachCancer genetics  variant allele was taken into account, five polymorphisms emerged as tional domains, PH domain, leucine-rich repeat region (LRR), PP2C- primary predictors for all OSCC stages: TIMP-2 (OR=26.33), TNF-α like catalytic core and PDZ binding motif of PHLPP gene together with (OR=15.27), IL-6 (OR=8.33), IL-8 (OR=3.54) and IL-10 (OR=2.65). PI3K/Akt pathway genes;Akt-1, PTEN and caspase-3 were examined The contribution of these five factors in the occurrence of OSCC is in pediatric Acute Myeloid Leukemia (pAML) patients.The expression highly significant. Three of them increase risk more than tobacco (8-26 studies were performed by qRT-PCR in 35 pAML patients and in con- times versus 6 times, respectively). Based on these findings, possible trols, CD33+ blasts isolated from healthy bone marrows.The results interactive mechanisms of implicated factors leading to OSCC devel- revealed that Akt-1 was up-regulated in pAML patients (p=0.06).PTEN, opment and an algorithm of risk estimation will be presented. PHLPP and caspase-3 were found to be decreased in pAML patients compared to controls (3 times (p>0.05), 10 times (p>0.05) and 3 times P06.067 (p>0.05) respectively).Expression of PH , PP2C-like catalytic core and COX-2 −765 G > C functional promoter polymorphism and its PDZ binding domains were detected in our study group.Interestingly, association with Oral squamous cell carcinoma. expression of LRR in pAML patients was not detected.Amplification L. Addala1, K. CH2, S. MD1, K. Jamil2; of PHLPP mRNA covering the region between exon 2 to exon 17 in 1Institute of genetics and hospital for genetic diseases, Hyderabad, India, 2Indo pAML samples lacking LRR expression resulted in three different tran- American Cancer Institute and Research Centre, Hyderabad, India. script variants.Direct sequencing results revealed a single nucleotide Cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) is a key enzyme in the conversion of ara- change in exon 5 at position 55.PHLPP functional domain expressions chidonic acid to prostaglandins that has been shown to have a par- were also studied in various tumour tissues (colon, stomach, pancreas ticular importance in the progression of several malignancies including and breast tumours).In tumour samples, LRR and PP2C-like catalytic OSCC. In the current report, we designed a case-controlled study to core expression were lost. PHLPP mRNA transcript variants different evaluate the susceptibility and prognostic implications of the functional than those observed in pAML samples were detected in tumour sam- −765 G > C genetic variation in OSCC patients. A PCR and restric- ples.Western blot analysis results also confirmed the loss of non-trun- tion fragment length polymorphism analysis was used to determine cated PHLPP protein in pAML patients and tumour samples.It can be the polymorphism in Indian population of patients with OSCC (n = 120) proposed that PHLPP gene might act as a tumour suppressor in AML and in healthy control subjects (n = 100). Genotype frequencies of leukomogenesis and tumorigenesis. Cox-2 G765G, G765C and C765C were 77.5%, 15.83% and 6.66% in the cancer patients and 91%, 7% and 2% in the controls, respectively. P06.070 Cox-2 G765C genotype is significantly associated (p-value = 0.04) impact of genetic polymorphisms on a training-induced with OSCC patients when compared with controls. G765C genotype adaptation of the heart (the athlete’s heart) was a 1.48-fold increased risk for OSCC. G765C genotype is statisti- R. Karlowatz1, J. Scharhag2, J. Rahnenführer3, J. Ernst4, W. Kindermann5, K. cally significant with Chewing habitual risk factor (p=0.002). This is the Zang1; first report from India on the studies of COX-2 SNPs in Oral squamous 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Saarland/IGD Saar GmbH, Hom- cell carcinomas and our data suggest that this genetic variant may play burg/Saar, Germany, 2Centre for Sports Medicine, Outpatient Clinic University a role in mediating susceptibility to OSCC cancer. Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany, 3Fakultät Statistik, Technische Universität Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany, 4Department of Sports Medicine, Sportsclinic P06.068 Hellersen, Lüdenscheid, Germany, 5Institute of Sports and Preventive Medicine, Romanian ovarian cancer research for establishing a model of University of Saarland, Saarbrücken, Germany. tumors progression and metastasis evolution Background: Athlete’s heart, an adaptation to long-time and intensive N. Andreescu, M. Stoian, A. Belengeanu, D. Izvernariu, V. Belengeanu; endurance training, shows considerable individual differences. Ge- University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. netic polymorphisms in cardiologic relevant signalling pathways seem In Romania, ovarian cancer is the second most frequent cause of death to have an essential influence on the extent of physiological hypertro- among women consecutive to a malignancy. Due to the lack of clinical phy. simptoms, ovarian cancer is often discover in late stages and it is the Objective: Analysis of polymorphisms in genes of the insulin-like growth gynaecological malignancy with the worst prognosis. Another explana- factor 1 (IGF1) signalling pathway and whose negative regulator myo- tion for this poor prognosis is the absence of screening tests which statin (MSTN), and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), would allow an early diagnose. Early diagnosis makes the difference and their relation to left ventricular mass (LVM) of endurance athletes. up to a 95 percent survival rate if the ovarian cancers are diagnosed in Methods: In 110 elite endurance athletes or athletes with a high an early stage and only 20 percent survival if the patients are in stage amount of endurance training (75 males and 35 females) and 27 con- III or IV. The genetic changes and molecular mechanism underlying trols, which were examined by echocardiographic imaging methods these tumors remain poorly understood. Department of Medical Ge- and ergometric exercise-testing, the genotypes of 16 polymorphisms netics of University of Medicine in Timisoara had initiated a research in 14 analysed genes were determined. Additionally, a mutation screen program for ovarian cancer. In this study are included patients diag- of the MSTN gene was performed. nosed with ovarian tumors in the Western part of Romania. The study Results: The polymorphisms in the IGF1 and the IGF1R gene showed implies DNA ploidy analysis using fluorescence in situ hybridization a significant correlation to the LVM (IGF1: p=0.003; IGF1R: p=0.01). (FISH) correlated with DNA copy number changes detected by com- The same applies to a so far unnoticed polymorphism in the MSTN parative genomic hybridization (CGH) and clinical outcome. The aim gene, whose mutation allele appears to increase the myostatic effect is to develop a model for the progression of ovarian cancer by assess- (p=0.015). Contrary to a pathological hypertrophy, polymorphisms in ing the tumor development and progression from the benign through genes of the RAAS seem to have generally no significant influence on borderline to malignant ovarian tumors and identification of a genetic a physiological hypertrophy. An important exception was a polymor- profile associated with the cancer aggressiveness and metastasis. phism in the aldosterone synthase gene (CYP11B2 C-344T; p=0.02). Moreover, combinations of some polymorphisms showed significant P06.069 synergistic effects on the LVM. Unexpectedly, these effects were only A significant loss of leucine rich repeat domain in a novel detected in male athletes. candidate tumour suppressor gene PHLPP in cancer: conclusions: We argue for the importance of selected polymor- Expression studies phisms in these cardiologic relevant signalling pathways on the degree T. A. Tekiner1, F. Atalar2, A. Karabay-Korkmaz1, S. Anak3, U. Ozbek4; of physiological hypertrophy of male athletes. 1Istanbul Technical University, Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Child Health P06.071 Institute, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul Primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNEt) located in third and University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatric Hematology and fourth ventricles and frontal lobe: case report of a 51-years-old Oncology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul University, Institute of Experimental Medi- woman cal Research (DETAE), Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey. V. Asmoniene1, D. Skiriute1, P. Vaitkiene1, I. Gudinaviciene2, S. Tamasauskas3, PTEN and a novel tumour suppressor, PHLPP are the negative regula- K. Skauminas1,4, V. P. Deltuva1,5, A. Tamasauskas1,5; tors of Akt signalling. In this study, the expression of four major func- 1Laboratory of Neuroscience, Institute for Biomedical Research, Kaunas, Lithu-Cancer genetics  ania, 2Department of Pathology, Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, progression by interfering with microtubule dynamics. Currently drug Lithuania, 3Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania, 4Department of supplementation in cancer therapy has resulted in improved response, Neurosurgery, Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania, 5Depart- by minimising its toxicity. The ω-6 fatty acid conjugated linoleic acid ment of Neurosurgery, Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania. (CLA) has raised interest as an effective tumouricidal agent without Primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is rare but a highly malignant inducing systemic harmful effects. The present study investigates tumor of the central nervous system. PNET is usually described as a whether CLA supplementation would enhance the efficacy of docetax- tumour of children being three fourths of these tumors appear in chil- el in androgen sensitive LNCaP prostate cancer cells in vitro and dren younger than 15 years, and 50% are seen in the first decade of seeks possible genetic alterations in this process. LNCaP cells were life. A second, smaller peak occurs in young adults (aged 21-40 years). exposed to CLA followed by concurrent treatment with docetaxel for PNET is classified into two types, based on location in the body: pe- 24 and 48 hours. The cell viability was determined by MTT assay. Re- ripheral PNET and CNS PNET. It is a term for a group of small, round sults showed that higher concentrations of CLA enhance the efficacy cell tumors of the central and peripheral nervous system thought to be of docetaxel at 48 hour treatment time. Based on the involvement of derived from fetal neuroectodermal precursor cells. NF-κB mediated apoptosis, four genes of this pathway were selected. We report on a 51-years-old woman with primitive neuroectodermal From RT-PCR analysis, it was observed that CLA supplementation re- tumor located in third and fourth ventricles and right frontal lobe. The duced the expression of MAP2K4, MAX, AKT1 and FADD compared to diagnosis was made in accordance with clinic, radiological and labora- the effect of docetaxel on these genes. It is proposed that CLA supple- tory investigations. mentation reduces the proliferatory activities of LNCaP cells possibly Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were immunoreactive for synapto- by docetaxel-induced stress, resulting in the net antiproliferatory activi- physin, chromogranin A, some tumor cells immunoreactive for CD99. ties of docetaxel not being opposed. The notion that supplementation There were no immunoreactive cells for GFAP and vimentin CK7. of chemotherapeutic drugs by fatty acids render cancerous cells to CDKN2A homozygous deletion study: paired blood DNA and PNET tu- undergo cell death more efficaciously, potentially sustains beneficial mor tissue were investigated for CDKN2A deletion. We separately am- prospects in cancer therapy. plified 1α and 2 exons of p16(INK4a) tumor suppressor and exon 1β of p14(ARF) for homozygous deletions. There were no homozygous P06.074 deletions observed neither for p16 (INK4a) nor for p14(ARF) tumor study of gene expression in prostate cancer samples suppressors studied. H. Savlı1, A. Szendroi2, R. Nagy3, I. Romics2, B. Nagy3; All case review will be made in poster. 1Medical Genetics Department & Clinical Research Unit, Kocaeli, Turkey, 2Department of Urology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 3Genetic P06.072 Laboratory, 1st Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis Univer- cYP1B1 polymorphic variants associated with prostate cancer sity, Budapest, Hungary. risk in Bulgaria We determind the changes in gene expression in PCA tissues and R. Kaneva1,2, D. Kachakova1, A. Mitkova1,2, E. Popov3, A. Vlahova4, T. Dikov4, to compare them to those in non-cancerous samples. Prostate tissue S. Christova4, I. Kremensky5, V. Mitev1,2, C. Slavov3; samples were collected by needle biopsy from 21 PCA and 10 benign 1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University - Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department prostate hyperplasic (BPH) patients. Total RNA was isolated, cDNA of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University - Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Depart- was synthesized, and gene expression levels were determined by ment of Urology, Alexandrovska University Hospital, Medical University - Sofia, microarray method (ABI, USA). In the progression to PCA, 738 up- Bulgaria, 4Department of Pathology, Alexandrovska University Hospital, Medical regulated and 515 down-regulated genes were detected in samples. University - Sofia, Bulgaria, 5National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Analysis using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software revealed Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical Unversity - Sofia, Bulgaria. that 466 network and 423 functions-pathways eligible genes were Background: The CYP1B1 gene product is a member of the cyto- up-regulated, and 363 network and 342 functions-pathways eligible chrome P450 enzymes involved in the androgen metabolism and one genes were down-regulated. Up-regulated networks were identified of its tasks is catalysis of testosterone hydroxylation. Several studies around IL-1beta and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) genes. The indicate that common polymorphic variants may increase the activity of NFKB gene was centered around two up- and down-regulated net- the enzyme and have a role in human prostate carcinogenesis. works. Up-regulated canonical pathways were assigned and four of Materials and methods: We have investigated the association with them were evaluated in detail: acute phase response, hepatic fibrosis, prostate cancer (PC) risk of four polymorphisms in exons 2 and 3 of actin cytoskeleton, and coagulation pathways. Axonal guidance signal- CYP1B1 in a case-control study of 114 PC patients and 97 control in- ing was the most significant down-regulated canonical pathway. Our dividuals with benign prostate hyperplasia and normal PSA level. The data provide not only networks between the genes for understanding polymorphisms were genotyped by direct sequencing. the biologic properties of PCA but also useful pathway maps for future Results: The strongest association with PC risk was demonstrated by understanding of disease and the construction of new therapeutic tar- D449D, where the presence of either one (OR=1.4, 95% CI = 0.9-2.1; gets. p=0.052) or two C alleles (OR=1.8; 95% CI = 1.0-3.2; p=0.020) leads to increased risk. The CC genotype occurred in higher frequency in pa- P06.075 tients (50%) then in the controls (35%). Similarly in terms of L432V, the Epigenetic biomarker for the early diagnosis of prostate cancer frequent CC genotype (50% and 37% among patients and controls, re- R. Dumache1, M. Puiu1, B. Bumbacila1, G. Anton2, N. Cucu3; spectively), was associated with more than 1.5 fold PC risk (OR=1.69, 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy ‘’ Victor Babes’’, Timisoara, Romania, 95% CI = 1.0-2.9; p=0.041). The polymorphisms N453S and A119S 2National Institute of Virology, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Bucharest, did not show any significant association with PC risk. Bucharest, Romania. Conclusions: Regarding the androgen metabolism at least several Aim: Prostate cancer is the commonest solid-organ malignancy di- studies have demonstrated the association between one or more ge- agnosed in men, and represents the second cause of cancer related netic variants of CYP1B1 gene and increased PC risk. It appears that death in men. In prostate cancer promoter hypermethylation of the CYP1B1 polymorphisms D449D and L432V are associated with in- glutathione-S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) is the most frequent DNA al- creased PC risk in the Bulgarian population. teration. In our study we want to investigate the potential use of the GSTP1 P06.073 gene hypermethylation as a biomarker for the early detection of pros- Enhancement of the efficacy of Docetaxel with Conjugated tate cancer. Linoleic Acid in LNcaP prostate cancer cells Materials and methods: For this study, we collected tissue and blood S. Kakawand1,2; samples from 29 patients with histologically confirmed prostate adeno- 1University of Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 2Charles University, Czech Republic. carcinoma and 24 patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia. Prostate cancer is among the most commonly diagnosed cancers. The We performed methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) use of chemotherapy in the treatment of prostate cancer has shown for the promoter region of GSTP1 on the collected samples. promising results in improving the overall survival rate. The taxane Results: By methylation specific polymerase chain reaction GSTP1 docetaxel (Taxotere) has proved efficaciously in controlling tumour promoter hypermethylation was not found in blood and tissue samplesCancer genetics  from patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia, but it was found in 25 Università di Milano, Milano, Italy. ( 86,2%) biological samples from patients with prostate adenocarci- Cowden Syndrome (CS) is characterized by multiple hamartomatous noma. and neoplastic lesions. 80-85% of CS patients are reported to carry Conclusions: Analysis by methylation specific PCR of GSTP1 promot- detectable mutations in the PTEN gene. Recently, mutations in SDHB er hypermethylation provides a specific tool for the early molecular and SDHD genes have been described in some PTEN-negative CS diagnosis of prostate cancer in blood and tissue samples. patients. PTEN mutations have been also detected in about 60% of patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba Syndrome (BRRS), whose P06.076 phenotype is partially overlapping that of CS. Y chromosome haplogroup R1a is associated with prostate We describe our preliminary experience of genetic testing in patients cancer risk among macedonian males with features of CS or BRRS. Overall, we tested 15 patients: 4 fulfilled D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, P. Noveski1, N. Matevska2, A. Dimovski2, G. D. the criteria for the diagnosis of CS, 3 were affected by BRRS, whereas Efremov1; the remaining 8 had some criteria for CS and were therefore classified 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre for Genetic as CS-like. Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Mutational analysis of PTEN was performed with automated direct Republic of, 2Faculty of Farmacy, Center for Biomolecular Sciences, Skopje, sequencing using a multistep approach: first, exons 2 to 7 (contain- Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. ing 80% of the described mutations) and their flanking regions were Prostate cancer (PC) is one of the most common male-specific can- analized. If no mutations were detected, the analysis was extended to cers. Its incidence varies considerably between populations. Recent exons 1, 8 and 9 and to the PTEN promoter region. PTEN-negative CS surveys suggest that PC is influenced by both genetic and environ- and CS-like patients were screened for mutations in the 4 coding ex- mental factors, although the etiology of the disease remains unknown ons of SDHD and the 8 coding exons of SDHB and flanking regions. in the majority of cases. Certain Y chromosomal lineages have been Only in one CS patients a PTEN mutation was detected, which had suggested to predispose individuals to prostate cancer in Japanese not been reported before; no PTEN, SDHB or SDHD mutations were population, but no association has been found among Korean and detected in the other CS, in CS-like and in BBRS patients. Based on Swedish patients. The aim of this study was to investigate the asso- these preliminary results, the genetic bases of CS and BBRS in our ciation between Y chromosomal haplogroups and predisposition to population appear to differ from those described in other populations. prostate cancer in Macedonian men. We studied 84 PC patients and 126 males from the general population of Macedonian ethnic origin. A P06.079 total of 28 markers have been studied by multiplex PCR and SNaP- qPcR-HRm : a new approach in the screening of both point shot analysis. Nineteen different Y haplogroups were determined; the mutation and large rearrangement - application to oncogenetic most frequent being I1b-P37b, E3b1-M78, R1a-SRY 1532, R1b-P25 C. Lefol1, E. Rouleau1, L. Demange1, C. Nogues1, V. Bourdon2, F. Coulet3, F. and J2b1a-M241. The frequency of R1a was significantly higher in Soubrier3, H. Sobol2, I. Bieche1, S. Olschwang2, R. Lidereau1; PC patients (20.2%) in comparison with the controls (9.5%) [p=0.027; 1Centre René Huguenin, St Cloud, France, 2Institut Paoli Calmettes, Marseille, OR=2.41 (1.09-5.36)]. When stratified according to age, even stron- France, 3Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France. ger association was observed between haplogroup R1a and prostate In germline oncogenetic diseases, deleterious mutations, point muta- cancer in patients of >65 years of age [p=0.004; OR=3.24 (1.41-7.46)]. tions and large rearrangements are responsible of the inactivation in Our results suggest that Y chromosome haplogroup R1a is associated tumor suppressor genes as BRCA1/BRCA2 in breast cancer or MLH1/ with an increased prostate cancer risk in Macedonian men. MSH2 in colorectal cancer. Until now, two different techniques were required to fully pre-screen those genes. We propose a new approach P06.077 qPCR-HRM that combines quantitative PCR (qPCR) and high reso- multifaceted preventive effects of single agent quercetin on a lution melting curve analysis (HRM). This approach change also the human prostate adenocarcinoma cell line (Pc-3): implications to way to perform high melting curve analysis. We illustrate this with our nutritional transcriptomics and multi-target therapy experience in the MLH1 gene. 76 patients were fully pre-scanned for M. Momeny1, N. Motamed2, N. Kazemialiakbar2, M. Yaseri1, M. Yousefi1, S. mutation in MLH1 including 14 wild-type patients and 62 patients with Hashemi1, M. R. Noori-Daloii1; known mutations (57 point mutations and 5 rearrangements). More- 1Tehran Univ. of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2University over, a blind screening of 55 samples in triplicate was performed to of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. assess sensitivity and sensibility in comparison to dHPLC-MLPA. The aim of the present study is to evaluate the effects of quercetin, a In the 131 patients, all the mutations detected by dHPLC+MLPA, ei- dietary flavonoid, on human prostate adenocarcinoma PC-3 cells. Lac- ther point mutations or rearrangements, were detected successfully tate dehydrogenase (LDH) release, microculture tetrazolium test (MTT with qPCR-HRM. The sensitivity was similar to dHPLC. However, the assay) and real-time PCR array were employed to assess the influ- replicates in qPCR-HRM improve drastically the specificity. In the blind ences of quercetin on cell cytotoxicity, cell proliferation and expression screening, without considering the triplicate, there were 170 false posi- of various genes in PC-3 cell line. Quercetin inhibited cell growth and tives against 6 false positives with the triplicate (from a unique sample proliferation and modulated the expression of genes involved in DNA with obvious DNA quality problems). repair, matrix degradation and tumor invasion, angiogenesis, apopto- With qPCR-HRM, pre-screening for point mutations and large rear- sis, cell cycle, metabolism and glycolysis. More importantly, quercetin rangements are realised in one tube and one step in a single machine inhibited the expression of genes responsible for progression from the without use of an automatic sequencer in the pre-screening process. androgen deprivation-responsive stage to the hormone deprivation re- The replicate approach increase the specifity of the HRM curve analy- fractory phase. In addition, no cytotoxicity of quercetin on PC-3 cells sis. qPCR-HRM outperformed other techniques in term of rapidity and was observed. Taken together, as shown by the issues of the current amount of data provided. study for the first time, the manifold inhibitory impacts of quercetin on PC-3 cells may introduce quercetin as an efficacious “magic shotgun” P06.080 in order to be used in the future nutritional transcriptomic investigations Germline mutation in RAP80 impairs DNA damage response and multi-target therapy to overcome the therapeutic impediments in function crusade against prostate cancer. J. Nikkilä1, K. A. Coleman2, D. Morrissey2, K. Pylkäs1, H. Erkko1, T. E. Mes- sick2, S. Karppinen1, A. Amelina1, R. Winqvist1, R. A. Greenberg2,3; P06.078 1Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Dept of clinical genetics and Biocenter Oulu, Low prevalence of PtEN mutations in a sample of italian University of Oulu, Oulu university hospital, Oulu, Finland, 2Department of patients with cowden or cowden-like syndrome Cancer Biology, Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of L. M. Pradella1, C. Rossi1, A. Selicorni2, L. F. Pennisi1, G. Romeo1, D. Turchet- Pennsylvania School of Medicine., Pennsylvania, PA, United States, 3Depart- ti1; ment of Pathology, Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of 1Cattedra e UO di Genetica Medica, Università di Bologna- Policlinico S.Orsola- Pennsylvania School of Medicine., Pennsylvania, PA, United States. Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 2Ambulatorio di Genetica Clinica,Clinica Pediatrica Background: 5-10% of all breast cancers stem from hereditary pre- disposition to the disease. Mutations in two major susceptibility genesCancer genetics  BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for 20% of familial breast cancers. For fusion protein may act through a cell cycle-mediated deregulation of the remaining 80%, genetic factors are largely unknown. Recently, a proliferation. In order to identify downstream transcriptional targets of new BRCA1-interacting protein, RAP80, was identified. RAP80 plays the PRCCTFE3 fusion protein, we initiated to use chromatin immuno- an important role in BRCA1-mediated DNA damage responses by re- precipitation (ChIP). Specifically, we are employing a recently devel- cruiting BRCA1 to DNA double-strand breaks (DSB). oped variant of this technology, called ChIP-Sequencing, which com- Objective: To investigate whether germline mutations in RAP80 are bines ChIP with massive parallel sequencing to identify and quantify in associated with an increased risk of developing cancer. vivo protein-DNA interactions on a genome-wide scale. The identifica- Methods: Mutation screening was performed by CSGE and direct se- tion of novel PRCCTFE3 transcriptional targets and its implications quencing. For one of the observed alterations also functional studies for our understanding of the role of cell cycle (de-) regulation in renal were performed to assess influence on 1) Ubiquitin binding 2) RAP80 tumor development will be discussed. DSB localization 3) RAP80-BRCA1 complex DSB localization and 4) Genomic instability. P06.083 Results: Mutation screening from 112 index cases of Finnish breast the tyrosine kinase REt interacts in vivo and in vitro with AiP cancer families revealed 10 alterations in RAP80, one of which was a M. Vargiolu1, D. Fusco1, I. Kurelac1, L. F. Pennisi1, E. Mariani1, M. Vidone1, D. novel exonic change. This novel alteration resulted in a dysfunctional Dirnberger2, R. Baumeister2, I. Morra3, A. Melcarne4, R. Rimondini5, G. Romeo1, protein product that displayed significantly reduced ubiquitin binding E. Bonora1; and double-strand break localization after DNA damage. It also im- 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi via Massarenti 9, Bo- paired both BRCA1 and ABRA1 double-strand break recruitment, thus logna, Italy, 2Bio3/Bioinformatics and Molecular Genetics (Faculty of Biology), compromising BRCA1-mediated DNA damage response signaling. A University of Freiburg, Germany, 3Department of Histopathology, Ospedale significant increase in cytogenetically detectable chromosomal aberra- Infantile Regina Margherita, Torino, Italy, 4Department of Neurosurgery, A.S.O. tions, particularly chromatid breaks, was also observed. CTO-CRF-M.Adelaide, Torino, Italy, 5Dept. of Pharmacology, University of Bolo- Conclusions: These results suggest that germline mutations in RAP80 gna, Via Irnerio 48 Bologna, Italy. abrogate DNA damage response function and may be involved in ge- RET is a tyrosine kinase transmembrane receptor expressed in two netic predisposition to cancer. main alternative isoforms: RET9 and RET51. RET transduces a positive signal leading to survival, differentiation or migration in the P06.081 presence of its ligand GDNF, whilst in absence of the ligand, RET is Aberrant methylation of the genes VHL, RASSF, FHIT, SFRP, cleaved generating a proapoptotic fragment which initiates a signalling and CDH in clear cell renal cancer pathway for apoptosis. Hitherto, signal transduction leading to apop- D. S. Mikhaylenko1,2, A. M. Popov3, R. V. Kurynin4, L. E. Zavalishina5, D. V. tosis is still unclear. Zaletayev1,2; We performed a screening to identify the interacting proteins of the 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa- long isoform of RET, using a modified two-hybrid yeast complementa- tion, 2Institute of Molecular Medicine of Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, tion assay, the split-ubiquitin system against a human brain expression Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Medical Radiological Research Center RAMS, library. Obninsk, Russian Federation, 4Clinic of Urology of Sechenov Moscow Medical One of the proteins we identified with this method was the aryl hydro- Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5Hertzen Oncological Research Insti- carbon receptor interacting protein (AIP), a tumor-suppressor protein tute, Moscow, Russian Federation. recently found mutated in pituitary adenoma. We showed that RET-AIP Clear cell renal cancer (CCRC) is the most common tumor of the kid- interaction was maintained both in cell lines of different origin (human ney, 200 thousands CCRC cases are registered worldwide annually. embryonic kidney and neuroblastoma) and in pituitary gland in vivo. In CCRC is characterized by tumor suppressor genes inactivation owing addition, we identified the pro-apoptotic domain of RET as responsible to several mechanisms including methylation. We have conducted the for AIP interaction, regardless of the presence of pituitary adenoma study of methylation of the genes VHL, RASSF1, FHIT, SFRP1, and specific mutations. AIP and RET genes were sequenced in 28 pituitary CDH1 in 123 CCRC for the development of renal cancer diagnostic adenoma but no relevant mutation has been found. Finally, we showed and prognostic criteria. Methylation was detected by methylsensitive that AIP-RET interaction does not require RET kinase activity or kinase endonuclease BstHHI digesting and following PCR, hypermethylated dependent signal transduction and it prevents the formation of AIP- samples were confirmed using bisulphite sequencing. Aberrant meth- survivin complex. The identification of AIP-RET complex represents ylation of VHL was observed in 14.6% (18/123), RASSF1 - 53.7% a starting point for studying key cellular processes involved in RET (66/123), FHIT - 54.5% (67/123), SFRP1 - 34.1% (42/123), and CDH1 induced apoptosis. - 43.1% (53/123) cases. Methylation of at least one gene from these was detected in 85.4% (105/123) samples. CDH1 methylation was as- P06.084 sociated with tumor invasion through the kidney capsule (P = 0.024) ms-mLPA to study the contribution of epigenetic silencing in and metastases in the regional lymph nodes and/or distant metas- Retinoblastoma. tases (P = 0.001). It was found that RASSF1 was methylated more M. Amenduni1, M. Mucciolo1, M. Bruttini1, K. Sampieri1, M. Mencarelli1, M. frequently in primary tumors with grade G than G (P = 0.047). The Epistolato2, P. Toti2, A. Marozza1, F. Mari1, T. Hadjistilianou3, S. De Francesco3, 2 1 genes studied could be used with some others tumor suppressors for A. Acquaviva4, F. Ariani1, A. Renieri1; formation of a diagnostic panel containing the genes frequently meth- 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Department of Human Pathology and Oncolo- ylated in renal cancer, and aberrant methylation of the genes CDH1 gy, Siena, Italy, 3Retinoblastoma Referral Center, Department of Ophtalmology, and RASSF1 could indicate a primary tumor progression on different Siena, Italy, 4Department of Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Reproductive Medicine, stages of CCRC. Italian retinoblastoma registry, Siena, Italy. Recent studies in the field of DNA methylation have lead to the aware- P06.082 ness that epigenetic changes may represent an alternative or comple- Identification of transcriptional targets by ChIP-Sequencing in mentary mechanism to mutational events in tumour progression. In t(X;1)-positive renal cell carcinomas particular methylation of CpG islands in the promoter regions of a large L. Brugmans, L. Hetterschijt, L. Vreede, K. Medendorp, A. Geurts van Kessel; number of tumour suppressor genes is observed in several human Radboud university Nijmegen MC, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. cancers. Previous studies on Retinoblastoma (RB) tissues showed Previously, we and others showed that in a subset of human renal cell frequent hypermethylation of the DNA-repair genes MGMT and MLH1 carcinomas the bHLH-LZ transcription factor TFE3 is recurrently fused and the tumor suppressor gene RASSF1A. Methylation-specific to a novel protein designated PRCC. Subsequently, we established MLPA (MS-MLPA) has been recently described as a method that al- that the resulting PRCCTFE3 fusion product acts as an oncogenic pro- lows the simultaneous identification of epigenetic changes at multiple tein, both in vitro and in vivo. In addition, we found that PRCCTFE3 sites. We applied this technique to study epigenetic changes in 10 RB acts as a more potent transcriptional activator than wild-type TFE3. samples and we compared results to those obtained in normal retina. More recently, a functional cDNA screen revealed that TFE3 over-ex- Tumour tissues showed frequent hypermethylation of MGMT (70%), pression renders cells insensitive to the anti-proliferative effects of the MSH6 (60%), CD44 (50%), PAX5 (50%) and GATA5 (30%). Since G1/S cell cycle regulator pRB. We propose that also the PRCCTFE3 these genes are involved in DNA repair (MSH6), cellular differentia-Cancer genetics  tion (PAX5 and GATA5), and cell-to-cell communication (CD44), their P06.087 epigenetic silencing could play an important role in RB initiation and Diverse functions of slug, a master regulator of Emt, in prostate progression. Therefore this study not only confirms the importance of cancer cell lines MGMT inactivation, but also identifies new interesting candidate genes M. Emadi Baygi1,2, Z. S. Soheili3, A. Dizaji4, W. A. Schulz5; for RB. Aberrant methylation of these factors could play a key role in 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shahrekord tumour development especially in bilateral cases, where chromosomal University, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National Institue of Genetic imbalances are less frequently observed. Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of P06.085 Iran, 5Heinrich Heine University, Dusseldorf, Germany. An sdhd knockout mouse shows no evidence of paraganglioma The transcription factor Slug (SNAI2) is capable of mediating the epi- or pheochromocytoma tumor development but does exhibit thelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is thought to be a crucial peripheral ventilatory insufficiency step in metastasis. There is moreover increasing evidence that this J. P. Bayley, L. Teppema, P. C. W. Hogendoorn, P. Devilee, A. Dahan, P. E. M. factor has additional functions in tumor progression. We have investi- Taschner; gated the effects of siRNA-mediated down-regulation (knockdown) of Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. Slug in prostate cancer cell lines. SDHD is a human tumor suppressor gene and a subunit of succinate Among the prostate carcinoma cell lines, PC-3 and PC3-16 subline dehydrogenase, a component of both the TCA cycle and the electron (kindly provided by the Homburg DPKK group) show the moderate and transport chain. highest expression of Slug. Therefore, Slug knockdown was performed Here we describe a mouse KO of Sdhd as a model for pheochromo- in PC-3 and PC3-16 cells. In each line, efficient down-regulation at the cytoma/paraganglioma with 30 month-follow up, and as a model for mRNA and protein level was achieved.Long-term knock-down of Slug carotid body-mediated peripheral ventilatory insufficiency. expression induced a severe decline in cell proliferation in both cell The absence of live homozygote (-/-) offspring indicates that complete lines, with a prominent G0/G1 arrest in PC3-16 cells. Apoptosis was loss of Sdhd results in embryonic lethality. Knockout of the Sdhd gene slightly enhanced in PC-3 cells only. SNAI2 siRNA-treated cells did did not lead to tumor development at any stage of the normal lifespan not tolerate detachment from the culture plates, probably due to down- of these mice, in contrast to the highly penetrant phenotype in humans. regulation of integrin α6β4. Moreover, suppression of Slug expression A single Sdhd +/- mouse showed unilateral 5-fold hyperplasia of the strongly abolished invasiveness of PC-3 cells. Finally, knock-down of carotid body. Slug expression disturbed both the microtubule and actin cytoskele- Sdhd +/- mice showed no gross physical abnormalities, similar body tons resulting in grossly enlarged cells with a jellyfish-like phenotype. and organ weights to wildtype mice, and no genotype-related pathol- Together, these data suggest that the most pertinent function of Slug ogy. The ultrastructure of the carotid body and adrenal mitochondria in the prostate cancers that express it, is to act as a regulator of cell was normal. adhesion and cell shape maintenance. Breathing in small animals is regulated by central chemoreceptors lo- cated in the ventral medulla, and the peripheral chemoreceptors in the P06.088 carotid bodies. the association of 5a-Reductase type 1 with HBV positive The carotid body is essential to the peripheral ventilatory response, hepatocellular carcinoma (Hcc) risk in male chinese and loss of SDHD may affect carotid body function. We found that the N. L. Tang1,2, J. Jiang1, W. Yeo3, P. Lai4; carotid body-related ventilatory response, the so-called peripheral re- 1Department of Chemical Pathology,The Chinese University of Hong Kong, sponse, is indeed compromised. We show that while the central CO- Hong Kong, China, 2Laboratory of Genetics of disease susceptibility ,Li Ka 2 driven ventilatory response was intact in both wildtype and Sdhd+/- Shing Institute of Health Sciences, Hong Kong, China, 3Department of Clinical mice, the CO -driven peripheral ventilatory response was severely Oncology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 4Depart- 2 compromised in Sdhd+/- mice. ment of Surgery, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. Introduction: Epidemiological studies suggested that male predomi- P06.086 nance of hepatitis B positive hepatocellular carcinoma was associated Differential repair of UVA versus UVB-induced cyclobutane with serum levels of androgens. Although androgen levels are believed pyrimidine dimers in the genome of human keratinocytes to be influenced by genetic factors, there is no definitive information to M. Karbaschi, M. D. Evans, M. S. Cooke; indicate which genetic variations in the androgen metabolic pathway University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. are associated with the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) devel- Worldwide, one in three cancers is skin-related and the WHO expects opment. the skin-cancer epidemic to increase. Solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) Aim: The aim of the present study was to study polymorphisms in by inducing DNA photo-lesions, has become the prime cause of most SRD5A1, a gene related to androgen metabolic pathway in converting skin cancers. These cancers could be prevented if we protect our- testosterone to its more potent biological form, dehydrotestosterone selves from UVR. (DHT),and their association with HCC. UVR comprises three main regions: UVC is absorbed by the ozone Methods: 300 HBV positive HCC male patients and 2000 male Chi- layer and does not affect the skin. UVB is directly absorbed by DNA nese population controls were recruited in this study. Using the In- and induces different forms of lesions like cyclobutane pyrimidine ternational HapMap Phase II data on the Han Chinese (CHB) cohort, dimers (CPDs). In contrast with UVB, UVA is indirectly absorbed by 3 tagging SNPs (rs248807, rs11738248, rs824811) were selected by DNA. UVA is suspected to play a key role in induction of skin tumors spectral analysis. Genotyping of these three SNPs was performed us- and may be even more important than UVB in mutagenesis. CPDs ing Allele Specific Tm-shift PCR method. have been found to be induced in human skin cells exposed to UVA Results and conclusion: The genotype frequencies of rs248807, through a different mechanism but the mechanism of CPD induction by rs11738248, rs824811 followed Hardy Weinberg equilibrium (p>0.05). UVA is not clearly identified. Most sunscreens filter out UVB absorp- The SNP rs11738248 was significantly associated with HCC tion, but they cannot block most of UVA, so they do not help to prevent (X2=10.069, P=0.007) while the association for SNP rs248807 was skin cancer. modest. However, the SNP rs824811 was not in association with HCC A better assessment of the routes by which UVA and UVB induce (X2=0.54, P=0.763). All the result suggests that SRD5A1 gene may as- CPDs in DNA, may lead to prevention of skin cancer. For this purpose sociate with the development of HCC in men. We previously showed in the present study by use of the highly sensitive single cell gel elec- that SRD5A2 isoenzyme was associated with HCC. The results on trophoresis (comet assay) formation and repair rate of UVA-induced another isoenzyme SRD5A1 presented here further confirmed the role CPDs versus UVB-induced CPDs was compared. of androgen metabolites in the carcinogenesis of HBV related HCC. Despite seeing a 10-fold greater dose of UVA, UVB induction of CPD was significantly greater. However, the rate of UVA-induced CPD re- pair appeared to be faster than the rate of UVB-induced CPD repair.Cancer genetics  P06.089 P06.091 molecular genetic investigation in patients with lung cancer: Anti-mUc1 VHH can redirect chimeric antigen receptor (cAR) parallel analysis of STRs in cell-free DNA and SNP polymorfisms cytotoxic effector function within 15q24-q25 region in genomic DNA S. Aghaee Bakhtiari, F. Rahbarizadeh, F. Jafari Iri-Sofla, M. Rasaee; E. Hirmerová1, A. Panczak1, V. Kebrdlová1, A. Hořínek1, J. Homolka2, J. Tarbiat Modares University, Medical Biotechnology department, Tehran, Islamic Štekrová1, M. Kohoutová1; Republic of Iran. 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles Chimeric antigen T cell receptors provide a good approach for adop- University, and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 21st De- tive immunotherapy of cancer, especially in the context of cancerous partment of Tuberculosis and Respiratory Diseases, 1st Faculty of Medicine, cells that fail to express major histocompatibility complex antigen and Charles University, and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. co-stimulatory molecules. Clinical applications of these receptors are Short tandem repeats (STRs) located in/at TP53 (pentaTP53, diTP53), limited, mostly due to xenogenic origin of the antibodies which cause APC (D5S346, D5S318, D5S299, D5S82), FHIT (D3S1300) and VHL immunogenic reactions. VHH are the smallest fragments of antibod- genes (D3S1560) were analyzed in plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA), ies that have great homology to human VH and low immunogenic po- and, in parallel in genomic DNA, four single-nucleotide polymorphisms tential. MUC1 is a highly attractive immunotherapeutic target owing (SNPs) mapping to the region of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor sub- to increased expression, altered glycosylation, and loss of polarity in unit genes on 15q24-q25. Study was conducted to identify risk genetic more than 80% of human malignancies. We used anti-MUC1 VHH as factors in patients with NSCLC (group P), compared to individuals an antigen binding domain, CD28 and CD3ζ as signaling domains and with non-tumor pulmonary diseases (group C), and anonymized blood IgG3 as a spacer in a chimeric receptor construct. This construct was samples from routine laboratory (group A). We have studied loss of transfected to Jurkat cells. The transfected Jurkat cells were exposed heterozygosity (LOH) in total cfDNA amplified by time-release PCR to MUC1 positive MCF7 cells. Then we analyzed the secretion of IL2, with primers for STRs; genomic DNA of the same patient served us proliferation of Jurkat cells and death of MCF7 cells. These data re- as a control. Further, we have introduced snapshot analysis for SNPs vealed that the VHH chimeric receptor can target tumor associated in genes: LOC123688 (rs931794, rs8034191), CHRNA3 (rs1051730) antigen positive cells. Regarding the efficient and specific function of and CHRNA5 (rs16969968), recently shown to be associated with risk VHH chimeric receptor and non immunogenic nature of VHH, these for lung cancer. We found out simultaneous presence of LOH in mul- chimeric receptors might be used as promising candidates for clinical tiple STR loci in group P in contrast to both control groups, this could applications. predicate lung cancer, e.g. in differential diagnostics. The highest sen- sitivity was shown in microsatellite marker D5S82. In addition, there P06.092 were three lung cancer patients where one of two allele of D5S82 or molecular Analysis of t-cell Receptor Gene Rearrangements D5S318 completely disappeared. The analysis of SNPs demonstrated L. K. Joe1, S. R. Berosik1, A. Chhibber1, C. J. Davidson1, R. N. Fish1, S. Hung1, they form haplotypes except in group P, where 6.7 % of chromosomes B. F. Johnson1, J. Lee1, R. A. Padilla1, D. Rodriguez1, A. Sartori1, M. Yamazaki2, were “recombinant”. We followed the incidence of risky alleles of four A. A. Pradhan1, A. C. Felton1; SNPs in all three groups, and compared the structure of data from 1Life Technologies Corporation, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Hitachi High both tests. Technologies, Naka, Japan. Supported by the grant project MŠMT CR MSM0021620808 The evaluation of clonality on the T cell receptor locus can be an im- portant tool in detecting T-cell non-Hodgkin lympoproliferations. The P06.090 locus is comprised of a 160 kb region on Chromosome 7 and has mutations of succinate Dehydrogenase and Fumarate well defined variable (V), joining (J) and constant (C) gene segments. Hydratase. A tcA cycle Gene mutation Database Update Molecular interrogation of the rearrangements in the variable and join- J. Bayley1, P. Devilee1, P. E. M. Taschner1, V. Launonen2, I. P. M. Tomlinson3; ing segments can be used to compare fragment sizes of DNA from 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2University of a normal polyclonal T-cell population (many different sizes) to DNA Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Cancer Research UK, London, United Kingdom. from a clonal T cell population with suspected lymphoproliferations Two enzymes of the tricarboxcylic acid (TCA) cycle, fumarate hydra- (few different sizes). The comparison can be accomplished with PCR tase (FH) and succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), involved in funda- and subsequent fragment size analysis via capillary electrophoresis. mental processes of energy production, are now known to be tumor PCR methods using fluorescent labeled primers designed to anneal suppressors. to the flanking, conserved, regions of interest on the locus have been While deficiencies of FH and SDH(A) result in severe early-onset en- established. We describe new methods used to accomplish the DNA cephalopathy, germline mutations of SDH genes are a major cause of comparison using Capillary Electrophoresis (CE) systems that pro- hereditary paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma, and FH mutations duce consistent results. Use of these CE systems could greatly benefit result in the hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) an individual or association of researchers with multiple instruments in tumor syndrome. many locations. Traditionally, conclusions were drawn by comparing The SDH mutation database (DB) was launched in 2005 and with the the DNA fragments by visual inspection. We demonstrate new soft- inclusion of FH is now the TCA Cycle Gene Mutation Database. The ware analysis methods that allow the scientist to make quantitative TCAC DB is gene-centered and based on LOVD, with each gene hav- conclusions. ing a separate summary page listing general information and provid- ing access to tables containing variant information and various search P06.093 options. The HGVS conform nomenclature provides an accessible re- Presence of activating KRAS mutations correlates significantly source easing the description of new mutations. with expression of tumour suppressor genes DcN and tPm1 in 371 unique variants are currently described in the database. We de- colorectal cancer scribe the current status of each gene and recent developments. V. Mlakar1, G. Berginc1, Z. Štor2, M. Rems3, D. Glavač1; In 2008 the database attracted >75,000 page hits, a doubling com- 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, pared to 2007, and saw an average monthly use by 377 unique IP Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Abdominal Surgery, University Medical addresses. The increasing community use of the TCAC DB indicates Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Department of Surgery, Jesenice Hospi- widespread acceptance and increasing utility. tal, Jesenice, Slovenia. The TCAC DB represents a valuable resource for clinicians, clinical Despite the identification of the major genes and pathways involved in geneticists, and researchers interested in paraganglioma/ pheochro- the development of colorectal cancer (CRC), it has become obvious mocytoma and HLRCC. that several steps in these pathways might be bypassed by other as yet unknown genetic events that lead towards CRC. To improve our understanding of the genetic mechanisms of CRC development, we used microarrays to identify novel genes involved in the development of CRC. Using real-time PCR, we also searched for chromosomal abnormalities within candidate genes and the expression pattern in the case of KRAS mutation. We detected significant previously unde-Cancer genetics  scribed underexpression in CRC for genes SLC26A3, TPM1 and DCN, breast cancer cell lines, finding a low expression in two cell lines char- with a suggested tumour suppressor role. We also describe the corre- acterized by high aggressiveness and metastatic potential. In these lation between TPM1 and DCN expression and the presence of KRAS cells loss of TTP expression correlates with increased IL-8 secretion, mutations in CRC. When searching for chromosomal abnormalities, probably as a result of pathologically stable mRNAs. By sequence we found deletion of the TPM1 gene in one case of CRC, but no dele- analysis of the gene, we identified some genetic polymorphisms which tions of DCN and SLC26A3 were found. We are the first to describe may be associated with TTP disappearance and performed both func- underexpression of three important tumour suppressor genes in cases tional analysis and association studies in a sample of French patients of CRC, thus implicating them in the development of this type of can- affected by breast cancer. cer. Moreover, we found underexpression of the TPM1 gene in a case Our data underline the importance of tristetraprolin in breast carcino- of CRCs without KRAS mutations, showing that TPM1 might serve genesis and show that tumor progression can be achieved by interfer- as an alternative path of development of CRC. On the other hand, ing with physiological mRNA turnover. the correlation of DCN underexpression with the presence of KRAS mutations suggests that DCN expression is affected by the presence P06.096 of activating KRAS mutations, lowering the amount of the important Influence of TYMS expression and genotype on the clinical tumour suppressor protein decorin. outcome of colorectal cancer patients treated with 5- Fluorouracil. P06.094 M. Vignoli1,2, S. Nobili3, C. Napoli3, A. L. Putignano2, M. Morganti3, L. Papi2, R. trefoil Factor (tFF) genetic variation in gastric carcinogenesis Valanzano4, F. Cianchi5, F. Tonelli4, T. Mazzei3, E. Mini3, M. Genuardi2; F. Marín1,2, X. Muñoz1,2, N. García1,2, J. M. Sanz3, M. L. Pardo4, P. Alonso5, G. 1Fondazione Farmacogenomica Fiorgen, Firenze, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Fi- Capellà1, J. M. Ruiz-Liso4, C. A. González2, N. Sala1,2; siopatologia Clinica, Sezione di Genetica Medica, Universita` degli Studi di 1Translational Research Laboratory, Institut Català d’Oncologia (ICO-IDIBELL), Firenze, Firenze, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Farmacologia, Unita` di Chemioterapia, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Unit of Nutrition, Environment and Cancer, Universita` degli Studi di Firenze, Firenze, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia Cancer Epidemiology Program, Institut Català d’Oncologia (ICO-IDIBELL), Clinica, Sezione di Chirurgia, Universita` degli Studi di Firenze, Firenze, Italy, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3Department of Medical Specialities, College of 5Dipartimento di Area Critica Medico Chirurgica, Universita` degli Studi di Firen- Medicine, Alcala University, Madrid, Spain, 4Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, ze, Firenze, Italy. Hospital General, Soria, Spain, 5Servicio de Gastroenterología, Hospital Gen- Thymidylate synthase (TS) expression levels seem to be related with eral, Soria, Spain. clinical outcome and response to 5-FU chemotherapy. Three polymor- The genes encoding the trefoil factor peptides (TFF1, TFF2 and TFF3) phisms have been proposed as modulators of TS mRNA transcription- are clustered in a 55 kb region on 21q22.3. TFFs are a small protein al and translational efficiency: a tandemly repeated sequence (2R/3R) family secreted onto the mucous epithelia that play an important role in the 5’ UTR, a SNP within the 3R allele and a 6 bp deletion in the 3’ in gastrointestinal mucosal maintenance. We have examined whether UTR. genetic variation in these genes is associated with gastric carcinogen- Our aim was to evaluate the influence of TYMS expression and geno- esis. We genotyped five potentially functional SNPs (rs2156310 in type on the clinical outcome of patients treated with 5-FU. TFF1 5’UTR, rs13052596 in TFF2 promoter, rs225334 and rs4920084 We have analysed expression levels in healthy and tumour tissues, in TFF2 3’UTR, and rs11701143 (T36A) in TFF3) and 1 novel insertion the entire coding sequence in DNA from colonic mucosa, and the 5’ polymorphism (c.*68_69InsCTT, in the 3’UTR region of TFF2) in 476 and 3’ UTR in healthy and tumour tissues from 64 CRC patients. patients with gastric preneoplasic lesions followed a mean of 14 years. A statistically significant correlation was observed between tumor TS The Correa’s Index was used to evaluate the progression, regression expression levels and clinical outcome: low TS mRNA levels were as- or stability of the lesions. Two polymorphisms (rs225334 and c.*68_ sociated with longer disease-free-survival (P=0,030) and longer overall 69InsCTT) were also genotyped in 217 cases of gastric cancer (GC) survival (P=0,048), while no significant difference in TS gene expres- and in 891 controls from the EPIC cohort. Heterozygote genotypes sion was observed between 2R and 3R genotypes. Linkage disequi- for rs11701143 (c.106AG) and for TFF2 c.*68_69InsCTT showed librium between the 2R/3R and the 6 bp 3’ UTR polymorphisms was association with lesion progression (OR:2.12, p=0.04 and OR:2.44, detected, with a significant association between the 3RG allele and the p=0.049, respectively) when compared to common homozygotes. Due 6 bp 3’ UTR deletion allele. to their low MAF (0.03 and 0.05, respectively), variant homozygotes These results are in agreement with the growing evidence that the were not observed. SNP rs2156310 (c.-2C>T) was also associated control of TS may require multiple mechanisms acting in close coordi- with lesion progression in the dominant model (OR:1.8, p=0.024). Re- nation with one another and with the suggestion that TYMS genotyping garding association with GC we only found a slightly significant as- alone cannot predict response to 5-FU. sociation between heterozygosis for rs225334 and the diffuse type of GC (OR:0.55, CI:0.3-0.9, p=0.047). Although replication and functional P06.097 studies are needed, these results suggest that variations in TFF may Pharmacogenomic effects of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 have a role in gastric carcinogenesis. on irinotecan-induced drug reaction and serum bilirubin levels. A. Hirasawa1, T. Akahane1, T. Tsuruta1, H. Nomura1, K. Bannno1, H. Tsuda1, K. P06.095 Saito2, T. Zama3, Y. Tanigawara4, N. Susumu1, D. Aoki1; Down-regulation of tristetraprolin, a negative regulator of mRNA 1Dept. Gyne/Obst, Sch. of Med, Keio Univ., Tokyo, Japan, 2Dept. Otolaryngol- stability, in breast carcinogenesis Head/Neck Surg, Sch. of Med, Keio Univ, Tokyo, Japan, 3Dept. Med, Sch. of P. Griseri, K. Essafi-Benkhadir, C. Bourcier, G. Pagès; Med, Keio Univ, Tokyo, Japan, 4Dept. Hospital Pharmacy, Sch. of Med, Keio Institute of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research UMR CNRS 6543, Univ., Tokyo, Japan. Nice, France. Irinotecan is metabolized to active form which is further conjugated Post-transcriptional regulation plays a central role in cell differentiation and detoxified by the UGT1A1 enzyme. The severe toxicities in pa- and proliferation. The functional relevance of this process is highlight- tients who receive irinotecan are related to its genetic variants, and ed by pathologies such as chronic inflammation and cancer, wherein the serum total bilirubin (BIL) levels are useful for the prediction of occurrence tightly correlates with a dysregulation in mRNA stability. adverse reactions to irinotecan. However, the relationship between the Nonetheless only an handful of the regulatory factors involved in this specific UGT1A1 genotype and BIL levels has not yet been confirmed. mechanism have been identified. Among these, Tristetraprolin (TTP) is Then, we studied 443 cases with no history of liver dysfunction to ex- the prototype of a family of RNA-binding proteins with unusual zinc-fin- plore their relationship. Genomic DNAs were extracted from peripheral ger binding domains that binds to the AU-rich sequences in the 3’UTR leukocytes after the informed consent was obtained. The assays for of the genes promoting their physiological decay. VEGF and IL-8, two genotyping the polymorphisms in the UGT1A1 (*6, *27, *28, *60) were main cytokines involved in angiogenesis and metastasis, are specifi- based on either Invader assay or direct sequencing. The frequencies cally regulated by TTP. Here we investigated if TTP could correlate of *28 and *60 variants were much lower than those published results with tumor aggressiveness in breast cancer and if it may represent for whites, while the frequencies of *6 and *27 variants were much a novel prognostic factor for this neoplasia. By quantitative PCR and higher. Furthermore, 89% (24/27) subjects with hyperbilirubinemia Western blot analysis we determined the amount of TTP in different had *6, *28 or *60 variants. This study showed that several UGT1A1Cancer genetics  genotypes were significantly associated with the increased BIL levels. P06.100 These findings will be useful for further pharmacogenomical studies on HSPC300 modifies clear renal cell cancer (RCC) risk in complete adverse reactions to irinotecan. VHL gene deletion cases R. Janavičius1, R. Adomaitis2, F. Jankevičius2, M. Robledo3, L. Griškevičius1; P06.098 1Vilnius university hospital Santariskiu clinics Hematology and oncology center, Uterine leiomyoma with high proliferative index versus Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius university hospital Santariskiu clinics Center of Urol- leiomyosarcoma: analyzes of allelic imbalance ogy, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, A. A. Shikeeva1,2, T. V. Kekeeva1, L. E. Zavalishina1, Y. Y. Andreeva1, G. A. Spain. Frank1; Gross VHL gene deletions are relatively common in Eastern Baltic 1Moscow Herzen Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, Sea region in von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome patients, compris- 2Russian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. ing around 40% of all mutations. There is well documented genotype- Uterine leiomyosarcoma (ULMS) is rare and highly malignant smooth phenotype correlation between particular missense mutations and muscle tumor. Differential diagnosis between uterine leiomyoma with risk of pheochromocytoma, as well as truncating mutations and clear high proliferative index (ULM) and ULMS is one of the basic problems renal cell carcinomas (RCC). Paradoxically, complete VHL gene dele- in pathology for nowadays. The singular morphological differential cri- tions were thought to be associated with relatively mild phenotype, teria is the mitosis index (quantity of mitoses ). suggesting low risk of developing RCC in complete VHL gene deleted We investigated allelic imbalance (AI) to find out genetic differences patients. between ULM and ULMS. Microsatellite analysis was evaluated by Comprehensive VHL genetic testing service and patients surveillance PCR using 4 polymorphic markers for chromosomal regions 3p14, in Lithuania is focused in Hematology, Oncology and Transfusion med- 10q22, 10q23, 10q26 in 14 patients with 23 formalin-fixed paraffin-em- icine center, Vilnius university hospital Santariskiu clinics. VHL gene bedded samples (15 ULMS, 5 ULM, 3 metastatic lymphatic nodules). dosage evaluation by real-time PCR followed by direct sequencing for 10 leiomyoma specimens from patients with benign process were sug- normal gene dose cases is prefered approach. gested as control. We report 3 patients with complete VHL gene deletion and delineate Our results demonstrated AI in ULMS samples with following frequen- clinical phenotype. Unusual severe phenotype with cerebral heman- cies: D3S1295 - 5\14 (35.7%), D10S218 - 6\14 (43%), D10S541 - 6\14 gioblastomas, RCC and multiple renal/pancreatic cysts was observed, (42.9%), D10S1213 - 5\14 (35.7%). Occurrence of investigated genetic comprising to our knowledge the first RCC case in a patient with whole alterations (at least for the one of microsatellite markers) was revealed VHL gene deletion. Additional MLPA and specific multiplex PCR tests in 13 leiomyosarcomas (91%). The AI frequency in ULM samples was revealed intact neighbouring actin regulator HSPC300 gene in this found only for one patient.. family. Our results are in agreement with increasing evidence that This research show that AI analysis may be helpful for accurate exclu- retention of HSPC300 gene is responsible for increased RCC risk in sion between ULMS and ULM though further investigation is needed. gross VHL gene deleted cases. Our findings suggest whole VHL gene Increasing of molecular marker number will be necessary for diagnos- deletion carriers with retention of HSPC300 have the same probability tically challenging cases of uterine smooth muscle tumors. to develop RCC as carriers with partial VHL deletion. HSPC300 testing in gross VHL gene deletion cases is useful approach for the individuali- P06.099 sation of the clinical management for these patients. status of some tumor-suppressor loci in uveal melanoma I. K. Manokhina1, N. V. Sklyarova2, I. P. Khoroshilova-Maslova3, S. V. Saa- P06.101 kyan2, D. V. Zaletaev1; Genetic profiling of Loss of Heterozygosity in Pediatric Tumors 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of Molecular Medicine, I.M. R. A. Padilla1, M. Haruta2, S. R. Berosik1, A. Chhibber1, C. J. Davidson1, R. N. Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Ophthal- Fish1, S. C. Hung1, B. F. Johnson1, M. Kondo1, J. Lee1, A. A. Pradhan1, A. C. mo-oncology and radiology department, Helmholtz Moscow Research Institute Felton1, L. K. Joe1; of Eye Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Department of Anatomical 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Saitama Cancer Center Pathology and Histology of the Eye, Helmholtz Moscow Research Institute of Research Institute, Saitama, Japan. Eye Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis is useful for research regarding Purpose. We investigated a panel of uveal melanomas (UM) for the the study of pediatric tumors such as Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, presence of allelic losses at some chromosomal regions where struc- and neuroblastoma. LOH is the loss of the remaining functional allele tural abnormalities had previously been found, and the methylation of a gene by genetic or epigenetic changes when the other allele is status of tumor suppressor genes supposed to be involved in UM already inactivated, usually the result of an inherited germ-line mu- pathogenesis. tation. Tumor-suppressor genes encode proteins critical to protecting Methods. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at chromosomal regions 1p36, cells from cancer. LOH of these genes is a key event in tumorgenesis. 1p31.3, 3p25.3 (VHL), 3p21.3 (RASSF1A), 3p14.2 (FHIT), 3q26.3 To investigate LOH, specific assays have been developed involving (TNFSF10), 9(p21.2-p21.3) (CDKN2A), 10(q23.2-q23.3) (PTEN), PCR and capillary electrophoresis. The regions of interest are ampli- 13q14.2 (RB1) was investigated by PCR-based microsatellite analysis fied using one fluorescently-labeled and one unlabeled PCR primer for in 107 uveal melanomas. Samples were also analyzed for the methyla- each locus interrogated. Two types of samples are analyzed: genomic tion status of VHL, RASSF1A, FHIT, CDKN2A and RB1 by methyla- DNA isolated from normal cells, and genomic DNA isolated from tumor tion-sensitive restriction enzyme PCR. Clinical and histopathological cells, both from the same individual. We present a new capillary elec- parameters were analyzed together with genetic abnormalities. trophoresis system that can be used for performing research involv- Results. Monosomy 3 was detected in 48 of 107 tumors, and showed a ing routine relative fluorescent quantitation assays. LOH analysis is significant association with the presence of epithelioid cells (P<0.0001) demonstrated by analyzing a variety of pediatric tumor samples. We and ciliary body involvement (P=0.001). Methylation analysis discov- describe the methods used to perform the DNA comparison on a capil- ered frequent methylation of RASSF1A (26 patients, 24%), predomi- lary electrophoresis platform suitable for research in validated environ- nantly in UM without monosomy 3. LOH at all 1p markers was found in ments. This methodology would also be useful to a single researcher 25 samples and a statistically significant association with extrascleral or a consortium of investigators with multiple instruments who require invasion of the tumor was determined (P=0.01). We detected infre- consistent and comparable results from each instrument. quent hypermethylation of CDKN2A and LOH at 9p21.2. Conclusions. We suggest that deregulation of the RASSF1A may be P06.102 involved in tumorogenesis in a significant proportion of uveal melano- Identification of transcription factor ZIC2 as a novel component mas. We point out an association of large-scale 1p deletion with extra- of B-catenin/tcF4 complex scleral invasion of tumor, which is found to be independent of mono- R. Pourebrahim1, E. Bellefroid2, J. Cassiman1, S. Tejpar1; somy 3. Inactivation of CDKN2A and RB1 with promoter methylation or 1KUL, Leuven, Belgium, 2Laboratoire d’Embryologie Moléculaire, Gosselies, LOH is not the major mechanism of the pathogenesis in UM. Belgium. The Wnt/B-catenin pathway plays a critical role in proliferation and dif- ferentiation of epithelial cells of the intestinal mucosa. ZIC2, a memberCancer genetics  of the ZIC gene family, encodes a zinc finger transcription factor which P06.105 is important in neural crest proliferation and differentiation. We iden- Bilateral breast cancer: experience of an out-patient cancer tified ZIC2 as highly expressed gene in subset of colorectal tumors genetics clinic in the United states using microarray validated by QPCR and immunohistochemistry. The C. D. DeLozier1,2,3; expression of ZIC2 was consistent with methylation status of gene pro- 1Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, CA, United States, 2University moter. Here we show that ZIC2 interacts with β-catenin/TCF4-mediated of California, San Francisco-Fresno, CA, United States, 3Saint Agnes Medical transcriptional activation of the β-catenin through binding to C terminal Center, Fresno, CA, United States. domain of TCF4. The zinc finger domain of ZIC2 was found essential These past two years, over 300 patients with breast cancer have un- for this interaction. By using animal cap study on Xenopus, we show dergone risk assessment and genetic counseling in our cancer ge- that Zic2 abrogates the effect of β-catenin on known Wnt target genes, netics clinic, held in the outpatient cancer center of a major private siamois and Xnr3. Moreover, ZIC2 represses the expression of Wnt hospital. Over half have undergone BRCA 1-2 gene analysis; insur- target genes cyclinD1 and c-Myc. Cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry ance restrictions often preclude additional testing. Thirteen women showed an increased fraction of cells in the G1 phase and subsequent with bilateral breast cancer were among these patients referred. We decrease in S phase in ZIC2 transfected cells. This is the first report of reviewed clinical, histological, genetic and demographic characteris- a role for ZIC2 as a repressor of TCF4/B-catenin complex. tics of these women, hypothesizing that those with BRCA mutations might differ from those in whom testing was negative. It was expected, P06.103 based on risk calculation software, that 20-40% of patients would have cytogenetic studies on Breast cancer patients in tamilnadu, BRCA mutations. india. Nine women had metachronous breast cancer, four were synchronous. R. Sangeetha, V. Balachandar, P. Manikantan, S. Mohanadevi, K. Sasikala; Average age at first diagnosis was 42 (range 31-74 years); for the nine BHARATHIAR UNIVERSITY, COIMBATORE, India. with metachronous cancers 1 to 20 years intervened between cancers. Breast cancer is the second most common cancer among women in For 22/26 malignancies the specific histological type was available, India. The focal aim of the present study has been indented to analyze and for 18/26 the estrogen receptor status was known. All 22 of these the chromosomal alterations and micronucleus in different stage of BC were ductal carcinomas; two women had bilateral ductal carcinoma in patients in Tamilnadu population. The present study also aims to inves- situ, two others had one invasive and one in situ malignancy; all oth- tigate whether the CA15.3 level with BC patients exhibit increased CA ers were bilateral and infiltrating. Estrogen receptors were positive in to address this issue. Furthermore, the most of samples were recruited 18 cancers, negative in 4. All women had BRCA 1-2 testing; one had on the basis of family history and identify the genetic defects on BC a truncating mutation in BRCA1, one a truncating mutation in BRCA2 patients. In the present study 63 experimental subjects were selected and a third a missense mutation of unknown significance in BRCA1. on the basis of CA15.3 marker which is the most widely used serum CHEK2 gene sequencing was negative in two. Thus, our hypotheses biochemical tumor marker in breast cancer and equal number of con- about proportion of BRCA carriers and differing histological character- trols were selected and confirmed by CA53 level. istics were not confirmed in this small group of patients. In the present study statistically significant results were obtained in experimentals compared to controls. In the present study deletion P06.106 and translocation were frequently observed in chromosome 1, 11 and the prevalence of mutations in BRcA and NAiP genes in two 17. (46, XX, del (1p-); 46, XX, del (11q-); 46, XX, del (17q-). 46, XX, t common malignancies in Romanian population (1q+;16q- ) ; 46, XX, t (11q+;7p- ) ; 46, XX, t (17q+; 4q- )). Inversion and P. Apostol1, D. Cimponeriu1, M. Toma1, M. Stavarachi1, T. Burcos2, E. Popa2, I. satellite formation (21s+) also frequently observed in experimentals. In Popa2, S. Stanilescu2, L. Gavrila1; MN frequency also showed higher degree in experimentals compared 1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Coltea Hospital, Bucharest, Ro- to controls (P<0.001). mania. In the near future, we can look forward to the identification of novel Mutations in BRCA1 and 2 genes confer a substantial lifetime risk to breast cancer predisposing genes due to rapid advancement of gene breast and colorectal cancer. The disease risk may be increased by discovery technologies. mutations in other genes involved in control of apoptosis (e.g. NAIP). The Identification and functional characterization of such genes will The spectrum of mutation in these genes has been not previously in- have a significant impact on breast cancer research and early detec- vestigated in Romanian patients with breast or colon cancers. tion. Aim. To evaluate the contribution of BRCA and NAIP mutations in pa- tients with breast or colorectal cancer P06.104 Material and methods. We started this study in 2007 by selecting Cau- Evaluation of Autoantibody-serum-Biomarkers for Breast casian patients with familial breast (n=70 women) or colorectal cancer cancer screening. (n=70) from two medical centers from Bucharest. Cancer diagnostics P. Syed1, C. Fürhauser2, S. Winkler1, S. Schönthaler1, R. Stempfer1, C. Nöham- were confirmed by clinical and paraclinical approach. The presence mer1, D. Muhr2, C. Singer2, A. Weinhäusel1; of BRCA1 185 AG, BRCA1 5382 insC, BRCA2 6174 delT and NAIP 1Austrian Research Centers GmbH – ARC, Seibersdorf, Austria, 2Medical Uni- del exon 5 mutations were assessed using commercial kit and clas- versity of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. sical PCR. In addition, the presence of other mutations in several re- Tumor -autoantibodies in patient’s sera are biomarker- candidates for gions from these genes using indirect methods (SSCP and HRM) was minimal invasive screening and diagnosis of autoimmune- as well as tested. cancerous disease. Using serum samples from breast cancer patients Results. We identified the heterozygous BRCA1 5382 insC mutation and controls we performed a candidate marker screen on nitrocel- in three women with breast cancer using both commercial kits and lulose membranes containing 38000 human proteins derived from a classical PCR- RFLP based tests. For other three patients with breast fetal-brain expression library. From the initial screen we identified 642 cancer abnormal pattern of migration in SSCP and HRM method was candidate antigens reactive with serum-antibodies from patients and identified. We also found no mutations in BRCA genes in patients with controls. The respective e. Coli -clones were used to express recom- colorectal cancer. binant proteins and produce targeted protein-microarrays. We set up Conclusion. Our preliminary results showed that BRCA1 5382 insC methods for high throughput recombinant protein expression and pro- could be the most common mutation in women with familial breast can- duction of protein microarrays. Using these protein-chips we optimized cer. The homozygous NAIP deletion is not present in our lots. (Project conditions for suitable detection of serum-auto-antibody profiles using Romania PNII- 42161) only a few micro-liters of patient’s serum. Analysing a test-set comprising sera from benign (n=16) and malign breast nodules (n=24) and from normal controls without any breast nodule (n=20), we could delineate an antigen profile which enabled good distinction between patients with and without nodular disease. However distinction between malign and benign tumors could not be achieved.Cancer genetics 0 P06.107 Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Universitari Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. Large BRcA1 genomic rearrangements in czech high-risk BRCA1 and BRCA2 germ-line mutations predispose to breast and breast-ovarian cancer families ovarian cancer. The multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification M. Lukesova, E. Machackova, J. Hazova, P. Vasickova, M. Navratilova, L. (MLPA) is a method for detecting gross deletions or duplications of Foretova; DNA sequences, aberrations which are commonly overlooked by stan- Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, Brno, Czech Re- dard diagnostic analysis. public. To determine the incidence of large rearrangements in cancer predis- BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutations predispose to breast and position genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 we have analyzed both genes in ovarian cancer. In addition to point mutations, small insertions and 260 individuals from hereditary breast/ovarian cancer families without deletions there are also large genomic rearrangements (LGRs) in deleterious point mutations. BRCA1/2 genes. For detection of these LGRs we used the multiplex A total of 8 pathogenic rearrangements in the BRCAs genes were ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). We have screened for found, accounting for 3.1% of the cases. In two patients from fami- LGRs about 1100 unrelated patients with familial breast and/or ovarian lies with breast and ovarian cancer, one deletion affecting the entire cancer in whom a deleterious mutation in BRCA1 and BRCA2 was not BRCA1 gene was identified (0.8% of mutation-negative BRCA cases). detected. Characterization of the LGRs was carried out by performing For BRCA2 six deletions were detected (2.3%): del ex2, del ex10-12 long-range PCR followed by sequencing. and del ex15-16, this last one observed in four cases. Interestingly, We identified 34 (3,1%) patients with 11 different LGRs (all of them in deletions involving exons 15 and 16 seem to be frequent in our series BRCA1 gene), including a complete deletion of BRCA1 gene. Exis- accounting for 1.5% of all the rearrangements. It is important to note tence of this entire BRCA1 gene deletion was proved by using two al- that four of these six cases with BRCA2 deletions were from families ternative MLPA kits (SALSA P002B and P087) that have different local- with co occurrence of female breast and male breast cancer. ization of ligation probes. In additon - during High Resolution Melting analysis of all BRCA1 gene exons of this patient none polymorphism P06.110 has been detected what shows an evidence of loss of heterozygosity. ten years of BRCA and BRCA molecular diagnosis in LGRs make a significant contribution to the whole amount of disease switzerland causing mutations. In our opinion detection of LGRs in BRCA1 gene P. Maillet, G. Benais-Pont, V. Sciretta, C. Souverain, B. Pardo, M. Khoshbeen- should be a part of routine screening. No LGRs in BRCA2 gene were Boudal, A. P. Sappino; detected yet. Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Swit- Supported by the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: Grant MZ- zerland. 0MOU2005 Since 1999, our ISO certified laboratory is the Swiss reference labo- ratory for BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes analysis. We received samples P06.108 from physicians involved in the Swiss (SAKK) network for cancer pre- High risk BRcA1 and BRcA2 alleles in Estonia; family with a disposition testing and counselling. Here, we describe for the first time rare BRcA2 mutation 10 years of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes molecular diagnosis in 1130 N. Tõnisson1,2, P. Laidre1, I. Lind1,3, M. Kõiv1, K. Sak3, A. Metspalu2,4, K. Õu- individuals from 900 distinct families from Switzerland with a personal nap1,5; and family history suggestive of genetic predisposition to breast/ovar- 1Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2University of Tartu/Estonian Bio- ian cancer. centre, Tartu, Estonia, 3Asper Biotech, Ltd., Tartu, Estonia, 4Estonian Genome Patients from high-risk families recruited from oncogenetics consulta- Project, Tartu, Estonia, 5University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. tions in Switzerland (especially Geneva, Lausanne, Neuchâtel, Sion, We have lately established a hereditary breast and ovarian cancer Zürich, Basel, Bern, Lugano, St Gallen, Aarau) were screened for mu- counselling and genetic testing service. The testing is two-phase. At tations in the entire coding regions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 by PCR- first, cost-efficient arrayed primer extension (APEX) chip is used for DHPLC or recently by PCR-HRM analyses. Abnormal profiles were mutation screening of referring persons with personal or family history characterized by DNA sequencing. Large BRCA1 and BRCA2 rear- of breast and ovarian cancer. If no mutations are found, full sequenc- rangements were analysed by MLPA. ing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes is performed in high-risk patients. In 10 years, patients from 900 different families were screened for By February 2009, 62 persons had been counselled and tested in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. We found 175 mutation carriers (109 the Dept. of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Estonia. 12 (19.4%) BRCA1; 66 BRCA2). Only 6 of these mutations were large rearrange- had high-risk alleles present in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. From nine ments (4 BRCA1; 2 BRCA2). In the same time, 112 unknown variants high-risk alleles known to date in Estonia, five were found: c.300T>G (41 BRCA1; 71 BRCA2), and a large number of BRCA1 and BRCA2 (p.C61G), c.1186delA, c.4154delA, c.5382insC in BRCA1 gene and polymorphisms were also identified. Some of these mutations, un- c.9168insA in BRCA2 gene. known variants and polymorphisms were not previously reported. On We would introduce a family with rare c.9168insA BRCA2 mutation. 230 relatives screened for the mutation found in the family, 106 were According to Breast Cancer Information Core database, this has been carriers. formerly reported only once. A woman with breast cancer diagnosed The frequency of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations (near 20%) in breast at age 66 was counselled. Her sister had got the same diagnosis at 40 and/or ovarian cancer families studied here is in the range observed in years age and ovarian cancer at 45 years; she had died at 50. Their Caucasian families. No mutation seems to prevail in the Swiss popula- father had fell ill with breast cancer at 87. The father and his daugh- tion. ter had both the c.9168insA BRCA2 mutation. The daughters` three descendants were examined and one of them was found to be the P06.111 mutation carrier. The family is ethnic Russian, originating from Moscow mutation screening of BRcA1 exons 2, 11 and 20 in Bulgarian Oblast. breast cancer patients Genetic services are essential for efficient management of hereditary A. V. Mitkova1, R. Dodova2, M. Caulevska2, A. Vlahova3, T. Dikov3, T. Sedloev4, cancer. Sequencing results will be further used for updating the chip A. Jonkov4, I. Kremensky5, S. Christova3, V. Mitev1, R. Kaneva1; according to local profile of risk alleles. 1Molecular Medicine Center and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular Medicine Center, Medical Uni- P06.109 versity, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Pathology, UMHAT “Aleksandrowska”, screening for BRCA1/2 gene large rearrangements in 260 Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Surgery, UMHAT “Aleksan- spanish hereditary breast cancer cases: high occurrence of drowska”, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5University Hospital of OBGYN, deletions in the BRCA gene in male breast cancer patients Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. A. Lasa1, J. Juan1, M. Cornet1, T. Ramón y Cajal2, S. Gutierrez3, E. del Rio1, O. Background: Studies on different populations worldwide demonstrate Diez3,4, M. Baiget1; that germ line mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 cancer susceptible 1Servei de Genètica - Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Servei de Oncolo- genes account for the majority of hereditary breast and ovarian can- gia - Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Vall d’Hebron, Institut d’Oncologia, cers.Cancer genetics  Materials and methods: We have screened index cases from 65 high- tation analyses were formed and analyzed: ovarian cancer without risk breast cancer families for germ-line mutations in exons 2, 11 and BRCA1/2 mutations, BRCA1-associated ovarian cancer and control 20 of the BRCA1 gene. Mutation analysis was performed by direct sample. Several moderate penetrance cancer risk BRCA1/2 variants sequencing using 14 primer pairs covering the coding sequences and were investigated. It was shown that genotype 203A/A in BRCA2 gene their intron-exon junctions. was associated with increased ovarian cancer risk for both sporadic Results: The founder mutations described in Ashkenazi Jews: and BRCA1-associated ovarian cancer (OR=5,8; p=0,003). There 5382insC in BRCA1 exon 20 was observed in 6 patients from fami- was no confirmation of cancer risk modification by genotype 203A/A lies with multiple cases of breast/ovarian cancer. Three of the patients in a samples of patients with sporadic and BRCA1-associated breast have developed both breast and ovarian cancer, two were with early cancer. The results demonstrate that defined genotype on SNPs may onset, and one had both early onset and bilateral breast cancer. In have influence on increasing ovarian cancer risk both sporadic and addition we found one unknown missense alteration in exon 11, codon BRCA1-associated. 1037 (T>C), that leads to replacement of Val with Ala in patient with bilateral breast cancer developed by the age of 45. P06.114 Conclusions: It has been known that Ashkenazi Jews 5382insC found- the effect of cHEK2 missense variant i157t on the risk of breast er mutation is spread all over Central and Eastern Europe ant it is the cancer in carriers of other cHEK2 or BRcA1 mutations most common in breast/ovarian cancer families from Hungary, Poland, J. Lubinski1, C. Cybulski1, B. Górski1, T. Huzarski1, T. Byrski1, J. Gronwald1, T. Yugoslavia, Latvia, Italy, Spain, Greece and Russia. Our results sug- Dębniak1, D. Wokołorczyk1, A. Jakubowska1, P. Serrano Fernández1, T. Dork2, gest that the 5382insC might be also one of the most frequent muta- S. Narod3; tions among breast/ovarian cancer families in Bulgaria. 1Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 2Hannover Medical School, One unknown missense mutation in codon 1037 (T>C)of BRCA1 exon Hannover, Germany, 3Womens College Research Institute, Toronto, ON, 11 was also identified. The possible functional relevance of the muta- Canada. tion will be further studied. Purpose: It is of interest to estimate the breast cancer risks associated with carrying two mutations because this information may be informa- P06.112 tive for genetic counselors and may provide clues to the carcinogenic Descriptive study of French large rearrangements in BRCA process. gene involving the promoting area Experimental Design: We genotyped 7,782 Polish breast cancer pa- E. Rouleau1, A. Briaux1, C. Delnatte2, D. Muller3, S. Mazoyer4, L. Castera5, C. tients and 6,233 controls for seven founder mutations in BRCA1 and Houdayer5, F. Coulet6, V. Bourdon7, S. Krieger8, I. Bieche1, N. Uhrhammer9, A. CHEK2. Hardouin8, Groupe Génétique et Cancer Sein, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet5, R. Lide- Results: Of the 7,782 women with breast cancer, 1091 had one muta- reau1; tion (14.0%) and 37 had two mutations (0.5%). Compared to controls, 1Centre René Huguenin, St Cloud, France, 2CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, the odds ratio for a BRCA1 mutation in isolation was 13.1 (95% CI 8.2 3Centre Paul Strauss, Strasbourg, France, 4UMR 5641 CNRS-Université to 21). The odds ratio was smaller for BRCA1 mutation carriers who Claude Bernard, Lyon, France, 5Institut Curie, Paris, France, 6Hôpital Pitié also carried a CHEK2 mutation (OR = 6.6; 95% CI 1.5 to 29), but the Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 7Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, 8Centre difference was not statistically significant. In contrast, the odds ratio for François Baclesse, Caen, France, 9Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, women who carried two CHEK2 mutations (OR = 3.9; 95% CI 1.5 to France. 10) was greater than that for women who carried one CHEK2 mutation The BRCA1 gene is implied in the breast and ovarian cancer predis- (OR = 1.9; 95% CI 1.6 to 2.1). The odds ratio for women who carried position. 10-15% of deleterious mutations are large rearrangements both a truncating mutation and the missense mutation in CHEK2 was involving one or several exons. In the French BRCA1 database, 28 out 7.0 (95% CI 0.9 to 56) and was greater than for women who carried of 403 deleterious mutations are large rearrangements. The 5’ flanking the truncating mutation alone (OR = 3.3; 95% CI 2.4 to 4.3) or the mis- region of the gene contains a BRCA1 pseudo-gene which could ease sense mutation alone (OR = 1.6; 95% CI 1.4-1.9). rearrangements. Up to now, only three large rearrangements involving Conclusion: Our study suggests that the risk of breast cancer in carri- the promoting area of the gene have been described in the litterature. ers of a deleterious CHEK2 mutation is increased if the second allele In this study, we characterize 18 large rearrangements in this promot- is the I157T missense variant. ing region from French families with a zoom-in dedicated array-CGH (3107 oligonucleotides) and sequence the breaking points. P06.115 We found 11 never described events from 6kb to 238kb. There were Preliminary genetic investigation of high-risk breast cancer 2 deletions from 5’ to promoting region, 13 deletions from 5’ to exon 2 patients in Armenia and 3 deletions from 5’ to other exons (exon 3, 17, full BRCA1). Two D. T. Babikyan, T. F. Sarkisian; families have a rearrangement described in the literature (14kb and Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia. 37kb). A deletion to exon 2 was recurrent in 3 families. Two involved Mutations in high-penetrance genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 are associ- only the promoting area of the gene and not the coding sequence (5kb ated with greater risk for developing breast cancer (BC). The benefit and 209kb). from prevention is not only increased by early detection of BRCA muta- The analysis of the breaking points revealed some redundant break re- tions in cases with strong family history, but also in early onset cases gions which could improve the understanding of those events. Thanks who make up a large fraction of all BC cases. This is the first report to the efficacy of the dedicated array-CGH, the analysis confirms the on preliminary results of high-risk BC cases in Armenia where the inci- diversity and the recurrence of the large rearrangements involving the dence of the disease is the highest in the South Caucasian region. In promoting area. 2008, BC cases with family history or with early onset of the disease (before age 40 y.o.) consisted 6.3% and 25%, respectively, of all BC P06.113 cases, with an increasing incidence of the latter during last two de- the BRcA1/2 mutations and sNPs in ovarian cancer risk cades. In our pilot study we recruited 46 high risk BC cases (18 familial T. Y. Smirnova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, R. F. cases, 3 breast and ovarian cancer cases, 5 bilateral cases, and 20 Garkavtseva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; early onset cases). 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer Using SSCP screening method, we have found 2 BRCA1 missense Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. substitutions in 2 patients (Q356R, S694L) and one synonymous Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes confer increased BRCA1 polymorphism in other 2 patients (L771L). This is the first susceptibility to ovarian cancer. We analyzed BRCA1/2 mutations report of S694V variant previously not reported in other populations among ovarian cancer patients with familial history of breast/ovar- in contrast to Q356R and L771L. It is notable that all carriers of the ian cancer and among unselected on familial history ovarian cancer BRCA1 changes were early onset cases with no family history of BC. patients. Among 101 unselected on familial history ovarian cancer Despite the lack of high sensitivity of the screening assay, the results patients in Russian population there were 17 cases with BRCA1/2 indicate a proportion of early onset BC cases with BRCA mutations mutations (16,8%). In order to find variants that may have influence and the need to include them in the genetic counseling and mutations on ovarian cancer risk three samples of patients on the base of mu- screening procedure.Cancer genetics  P06.116 There were 31 cases of BiBC due to BRCA1/2 mutations among 83 Uptake of BRcA1/2 predictive testing and gender patients (37%). The BRCA1 gene mutations were predominant (27 of L. Denayer1, A. Boogaerts1, K. Philippe1, E. Legius2, G. Evers-Kiebooms1; 31, 87%) with prevailing 5382insC (19 of 27, 70%). The percent of 1Psychosocial Genetics, Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Clinical cases with BRCA1/2 mutations among familial BiBC (53%) was higher Genetics, Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. than among sporadic BiBC (12.5%). The young patients with the first Data concerning male uptake of BRCA1/2 predictive testing and pre- BC onset up to 31 year without BRCA1/2 mutations were investigated test characteristics in comparison to females are scarce. We investi- on TP53 mutations. There were 2 cases with TP53 mutations (50%). gated the cohorts of male and female applicants attending the Center For comparison, among 12 BC cases unselected on BiBC with the of Human Genetics in Leuven during a 10-years period (1998-2007). same age of first cancer onset there was 1 TP53 mutation (8%). It is Considering all unaffected siblings in the family of origin of the predic- not excluded that young age of BiBC onset may be marker of genetic tive test applicants, uptake of predictive testing for BRCA1/2 was 32% connection with inherited TP53 mutations. In part supported by grant in males and 82% in females (p<.001). RFBR N 07-04-01602. Males were significantly older than females. There was a trend (p<.10) that more males than females had adult daughters. As expected, P06.119 breast cancer related distress (IES) was significantly lower in men. A novel BRcA2 mutation detected in a Greek family with an Both males and females were a self-selected group with psychologi- extended family history of breast cancer cally stronger individuals than average (SCL-90, UCL). Men were P. Pitta1, V. Venizelos2, C. Billi1, L. Florentin-Arar1; unanimously motivated (personal relevance of 12 motives rated on a 1Alpha Lab Molecular Biology and Cytogenetics Center, Athens, Greece, Likert scale) by concerns for their daughters, significantly more than 2Breast Cancer Center, Lito Maternity Hospital, Athens, Greece. women. One third of them (versus 12% women) referred to child-bear- Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes account for a ing decisions. large proportion of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers. In our labo- Sixty percent of the adult daughters of mutation carriers (identified by ratory, we routinely investigate BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations by di- a predictive test) had predictive testing versus 15% of adult sons. In rect sequencing of the full coding region and partial intronic regions the group of descendants ‘having been tested or not’ is significantly of the genes. In this report, we present a germline mutation in exon predicted by their own gender and age, but not by the gender of the 14 of the BRCA2 gene which has not been previously reported at the parent with the mutation. BIC. This mutation was found in a healthy 34-year old woman with a It is very likely that the lower uptake of predictive testing in males is strong family history of breast cancer where all females were diag- due to their lower perceived personal risk. nosed with breast cancer: her mother died from breast cancer at the age of 55 (date of onset 52), three maternal aunts were diagnosed P06.117 with breast cancer before menopause, her maternal grandmother and cscE screening for BRcA1 and BRcA2 mutations using the two maternal grandaunts were also affected (date of onset after 60y). BioNumerics® software. The same mutation was found in her only one affected living maternal B. Pot, K. Janssens, L. Vauterin, P. Vauterin; aunt (date of onset 43). Interestingly enough, this patient had a son Applied Maths NV, Sint-Martens-Latem, Belgium. who died from leukemia at the age of 7y. The mutation is a two base Conformation sensitive capillary electrophoresis (CSCE) is a sensitive pairs deletion, BRCA2 c.7032_7033delCA GenBank NM_000059.3, method for mutation scanning (e.g. BRCA1/2 mutation detection). The (p.Asn2346SerfsX13) leading to a change in the translational read- method is more rapid and cheaper than full gene sequencing and uses ing frame of the gene (frameshift mutation) and the appearance of a electrophoretic mobility differences between homoduplex and hetero- premature stop codon, linked to the expression of a truncated protein. duplex DNA. By the use of multi-capillary sequencers, high throughput Considering the age of onset of the disease in most affected women routine diagnostics becomes feasible, but requires the availability of in this family and the number of the affected members we believe that reliable high throughput mutation detection software. this deletion plays an important role in the development of breast can- The BioNumerics® software enables automatic batch import of ABI. cer in this family. FSA files for high throughput processing and provides the necessary database environment as well as an adapted analysis tool for auto- P06.120 matic mutation detection. Single peaks are identified as targets using two distinct origins of 3036delAcAA BRcA2 mutation in a pre-set area, allowing advanced, cost saving, multiplexed settings. castilla-León (spain). Peaks of the sample trace are compared to ‘wild type’ (WT) control M. Infante1, A. Acedo1, E. Sánchez-Tapia2, L. Pérez-Cabornero1, D. J. Sanz1, traces using 5 parameters that examine primary peak shape (SRMS, M. Durán1, E. Lastra3, C. Miner1, R. González-Sarmiento2, E. Velasco1; MAXDIFF, DFH3 and DFH4) and look for secondary peaks (SECPK). 1IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2CIC, Salamanca, Spain, 3Hospital General Yagüe, Per PCR product, polymorphic variants can be defined. WTs can auto- Burgos, Spain. matically be traced by the software, assuring easy accommodation of The distribution of BRCA2 germline mutations in breast/ovarian cancer the software to any lab specific protocol or target. Results of automatic families varies among different populations. Founder mutations have peak matching are displayed in overview reports with color indication been used to explain the high frequencies of disease-associated mu- for reference peaks, positive matches, mismatches, failed peaks and tations in specific human populations, but for characterize a recurrent problem cases. Interactive click and zoom functions allow easy on- mutation as founder it is necessary to demonstrate that it occurred only screen evaluation of (mis)matches. once in history. The 3036delACAA mutation has been found worldwide Results are stored in the database. The system can learn from stored (BIC database). This mutation has been identified in almost 45 non- analyses using build-in tools that scan the database for limits of each related Spanish families, 25 of whom had ancestors in Castilla-León. target. Optimal average parameters can be calculated or set manually. Although this mutation is placed in a potential hot spot mutations re- Recently the protocol was validated by Eurogentest (Mattocks et al., gion we hypothesized a unique origin in our families. in preparation). Twenty-one 3036delACAA positive were genotyped at eight STRs and two SNPs covering 1.34 Mb around the BRCA2 gene. The equation P06.118 G=log δ/log(1-θ) was used for estimate the mutation age in genera- the BRCA1/2 and TP mutations among patients with bilateral tions. The software Quikfold was used to predict secondary structures breast cancer in which the mutation is included. N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lyubchenko2, S. M. Portnoy2, R. F. Two conserved haplotypes were observed in ten (eastern provinces) Garkavtseva2, A. V. Karpukhin1; and nine (western provinces) families, whereas other two families share 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Rus- another different haplotype. The estimated mutation age depends on sian N.N.Blokhin Cancer Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. the haplotype used, resulting in about 95 generations (ten families) In previous work we found that familial breast cancer (BC) with cases or 187 generations (nine families). In silico analysis shows a complex of bilateral breast cancer (BiBC) may have some genetic peculiarities secondary structure where the mutation is located into a hairpin loop in in comparison with BC families without BiBC. Now BiBC as familial so a single-stranded segment exposed to spontaneous mutagenesis. sporadic was investigated on BRCA1/2 and TP53 mutations. The 3036delACAA mutation seems to have multiple occurrences inCancer genetics  the past and it is probably positioned in a hot spot point for mutations. P06.123 The two different haplotypes reflects diverse historical origins in the Identification and characterization of large genomic east and west Castilla-León region. rearrangements in BRCA, BRCA and CHEK genes J. Del Valle1, M. Nadal1, L. Feliubadaló1, R. Cuesta1, E. Tornero1, M. Menén- P06.121 dez1, J. Brunet2, À. Teulé2, G. Capellá1, I. Blanco2, C. Lázaro1; Detection and characterization of new large deletion of exon 3 in 1Programa de Diagnòstic Molecular de Càncer Hereditari, Laboratori de Recer- the BRCA gene among a French breast cancer family. ca Translacional, Institut Català d’Oncologia-IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, D. Muller1, E. Rouleau2, I. Schultz1, C. Andrieux2, O. Caron3, R. Lidereau2, J. Barcelona, Spain, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Programa de Consell Ge- Abecassis1, J. Fricker1; nètic en Càncer, Institut Català d’Oncologia, Hospitalet de Llobregat-IDIBELL 1CRLCC P. Strauss, Strasbourg, France, 2CRLCC R. Huguenin, Inserm U735, (AT, IB) and Girona- IdIBGi (JB), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. Saint Cloud, France, 3Hôpitaux Universitaires, Strasbourg, France. Large genomic rearrangements are estimated to account for about 5- Germ-line mutations in two genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, are 10% of all disease-causing mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in the major contributors to hereditary breast/ovarian cancer. Nowadays, patients with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC). large rearrangements have been described regularly in BRCA1 with To screen for such rearrangements in patients with HBOC, and as a approximately 10-15% of the mutations in this gene. In contrast, large first step in our genetic testing workflow, we use MRC-Holland Multi- genomic rearrangements in the BRCA2 gene have been rarely re- plex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA). We have used ported. this technique in a set of 310 independent patients and we have de- During the comprehensive screening of breast/ovarian cancer families tected 9 different copy number alterations corresponding to 3% of the for germ-line mutation in these genes, we detected a deletion of exon studied samples and about 15% of all identified mutations in BRCA1 3 in BRCA2 in a breast cancer family, using the QMPSF (quantitative and BRCA2 genes in our cohort. As commercial MLPA tests are not multiplex PCR of short fluorescent fragments) and confirmed by MLPA suitable to determine the specific breakpoints or to define the exact (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) methods for detec- extension of the rearrangement, we have applied a set of different tion of large genomic rearrangements. This mutation was character- complementary techniques in order to better characterize these ge- ized by high-resolution oligonucleotide array-CGH technology which netic alterations. We have used long-range PCR amplification, RNA estimated the size of the deleted region and helped to find the break- analysis, SNP array chips, not commercial MLPA probes and FISH point. Precise determination of the size and identification of the break- analysis to fully define the extent and mechanism of each of the identi- point were obtained with a specific PCR and the deleted sequence fied alterations. Briefly, in BRCA1 we have characterized 6 rearrange- was different from previous reports. Moreover, analysis of transcripts ments: deletion of E22, deletion of E9-E24, deletion of E16-E23, dele- revealed the only skipping of exon 3. Since this deletion is in-frame, tion of E1-E13, deletion of E1-E2, duplication of E1-E2. In BRCA2 we the deleterious impact is largely discussed in the literature. Despite a studied a deletion of E15-E16 and a deletion of E1-E24 and in CHEK2 limited number of cases in this family, the segregation data seemed to we have identified a complete gene deletion. In addition, it is worth to be consistent with a causal effect of the mutation. mention that MLPA demonstrated to be useful to identify point muta- In addition to conventional DNA diagnostic testing by sequencing, tions located within probe sequences. familial breast cancer patients can benefit from searching for large rearrangements in the BRCA2 gene. The in-frame deletion of exon P06.124 3 needs additional studies to investigate its contribution to hereditary cost-effectiveness analysis of prophylaxis programme in women breast/ovarian cancer. with a family history of breast cancer and cHEK2*1100delc heterozygosity in the Polish health-care system P06.122 E. Orlewska1, J. Lubinski2, C. Cybulski2; BRCA1/2 screening results: Review of molecular data 1Centre for Pharmacoeconomics, Warsaw, Poland, 2Pomeranian Medical Uni- concerning Portuguese high-risk breast/ovarian cancer families versity, Szczecin, Poland. P. M. Machado1, S. Santos1, S. Fragoso1, S. Bento2, P. Rodrigues2, A. Luís2, A. Aim of the study: economic evaluation of prophylaxis programme start- Opinião2, F. Vaz1,2; ing at 25 years old women with a family history of breast cancer and 1Molecular Biology Department - Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, CHEK2*1100delC heterozygosity versus no prophylaxis. Portugal, 2Breast Cancer Risk Evalution Clinic- Portuguese Institute of Oncol- Methods: Cost-effectiveness analysis was perfomed using modelling ogy, Lisbon, Portugal. technique. Two cohorts were studied: without prophylaxis, and with Introduction: Although BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the genes most fre- prophylaxis. Data on life expectancy, breast cancer risk, efficacy of quently involved in familial aggregation of breast/ovarian cancer, muta- prophylaxis and medical costs were obtained from published lit- tions in other genes like TP53, PTEN, ATM, CHEK2 and PALB2 could eratures. The cohort simulation started with 25-year-old women and also cause breast cancer risks. Taken together, the known suscepti- projected direct medical costs and outcomes over patients lifetimes. bility genes account for less than one third of breast cancer families Effectiveness was measured as life years gained (LYG). Only direct undergoing genetic testing while other gene defects remain to be dis- medical costs (breast cancer prophylaxis and treatment of breast covered [EMQN guidelines 2007]. cancer I-IV stages) were included, assessed from health-care payer Patients and methods: Review of all patients for whom BRCA1/2 perspective and reported in PLN (1 EUR= 4.5 PLN in 2009). 5% and screening is complete. All patients underwent pre and post-test coun- 3.5% discount rate was used for cost and effectiveness, respectively. selling and are pre-screened for the BRCA2 Portuguese founder muta- Sensitivity analyses to treatment patterns, efficacy of prophylaxis and tion [Machado et al, 2007]. Negative patients are further analysed by costs were performed. CSCE and samples with a different pattern are sequenced. Previous to Results: The total lifetime costs/patient were estimated to be 4453 the CSCE optimization, DNA samples were analysed by CSGE. PLN (discounted: 1318 PLN) in no prophylaxis arm and 5380 PLN Results: Two hundred and forty nine families were fully screened for (discounted : 2135 PLN) in prophylaxis arm . The life expectancy gen- BRCA1/2 mutations and 61 positive patients were detected (10 BRCA1 erated with prophylaxis was 75.43 vs. 70.5 for no prophylaxis (with- and 51 BRCA2 mutations, including 28 families with the founder muta- out discounting) and 48.01 vs. 46.79 (discounted), respectively. This tion), which corresponds to a 25% detection rate. The range of muta- results in ICER for prophylaxis of 187.7 PLN/LYG (without discount- tions and sequence variants as well as their frequency in this set of ing) and 672.7 PLN/LY (discounted). Results were robust to sensitivity patients were analysed, allowing for a better characterization of the analyses. breast/ovarian cancer high risk families from the Central and South- Conclusion: Breast cancer prophylaxis programme for women with a ern regions of Portugal. Depending on pedigree reanalysis BRCA1/2 family history of breast cancer and CHEK2*1100delC heterozygosity negative families are being screened for other gene mutations (p53 compared to no prophylaxis improves survival and is highly cost-effec- and PTEN). tive in the Polish health-care system. Conclusion: From 249 Portuguese high-risk families, 61 presented del- eterious BRCA mutations. As expected, several neutral or unknown variants were also detected, posing a significant challenge for coun- selling.Cancer genetics  P06.125 and paraffin-embedded or fresh tissue samples) of breast cancer pa- Identification of a recurrent BRCA1 mutation in a north-eastern tients were done by standard Phenol chloroform method and stored Romanian population in -20ºc .For mutation detection, exons 5-9 amplified by polymerase L. Negura1, E. Carasevici1, A. Negura2, N. Uhrhammer3, Y. J. Bignon3,4; chain reaction (PCR) and then specific electrophoresis (single-strand 1”Gr. T. Popa” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2University “Al- conformational polymorphism SSCP). exandru Ioan Cuza”, Iasi, Romania, 3Centre d’Oncologie Moleculaire “Jean Perrin”, Results: Abnormal movement of PCR products band in SSCP gel that Clermont-Ferrand, France, 4Universite Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France. stained with silver nitrate reported as mutation. We found three muta- Introduction: We started the first characterization of hereditary breast tions (one in exon 5, one in exon 8 and one in exon 9) in patients. and ovarian cancer risk in north-eastern Romania, searching for muta- Discussion: p53 Mutational analysis by PCR/SSCP method deserves tions in the cancer predisposition genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 in high- to be critically studied as a diagnostic criterion in patients with indeter- risk families. minate or suspicious cytology. Validation studies should be performed Patients and methods: We identified and recruited 15 hereditary breast to test p53 mutations, as molecular diagnostic markers in breast cytol- and ovarian cancer (HBOC) families, with at least 3 cases of epithe- ogy specimens Detection of P53 gene mutations can be helpful in pre lial breast or ovarian cancer within the same family line. All patients diagnosis and prevention of breast cancer and so in treatment. These agreed by written informed consent. DNA was extracted from periph- mutations occur in normal or benign breast tissue but resolutions of eral blood. The entire coding sequence of both genes was analysed this role in the pathogenesis of breast cancer will require long-term using amplification and Sanger sequencing. BRCA1 was screened for follow-up studies. large deletions and duplications by MLPA. Multiplex-PCR was used to screen for certain mutations recurring in different populations. P06.128 Results: We observed a recurring BRCA1 mutation in exon 20, Evaluation of epigenetic changes in timP3, GstP1, BRcA1, c.5266dupC. This mutation was found in two different HBOC families, E cadherin and P16 genes in breast cancer tumors and it‘s with different breast/ovarian cancer familial history and without any ap- relation with grade of tumors parent degree of relatedness. S. Alizadeh Shargh1,2, M. Mohaddes Ardebili1, M. Sakizli3, J. Gharesouran1; The C duplication at position 5266 from initiator ATG creates a stop 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Medical codon at position 5484, truncating the BRCA1 protein upstream of the Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University, Chalus, C-terminal BRCT domain. This domain is responsible for molecular Islamic Republic of Iran, 39 eylul university, medical genetics department presi- interactions with BRCA2 and p53, and is involved in transcriptional ac- dent, Izmir, Turkey. tivation. Its deletion can be considered responsible for functional loss Epigenetic changes in breast cancer often occur and mostly happen in of the BRCA1 tumour suppressor in cancer cases. promoter’s CpG islands that affects the genes expression state (mostly Conclusions: This outcome, the first one in Romania, could open the tumor suppressor genes),in this study we performed the evaluation of way for a population study to determine the frequency of c.5266dupC these alterations in GSTP1,P16,BRCA1,E-cadherin and TIMP3 genes in the Romanian population, and for an eventual founder effect. This for methylation pattern and it’s relation with kind and garade of tumor could also develop in Romania the oncogenetic approach and follow- .Total 100 sample: 50 braest cancer patient with different kind of tu- up of BRCA mutations bearers. mors selected and 50 control tissue was obtained from same patient and breast (adjacent area of tumor tissue) after pathological diagnosis, P06.126 and we performed bisulfite sequencing, immunohistochemistry and DNA-methylation changes in metastatic breast cancer western blotting methods for evaluation of promoter methylation pat- M. Hofner1, K. Vierlinger1, A. Kriegner1, C. Nöhammer1, C. Bichler2, D. Kan- tern, gene presence and expression statues respectively. Data analy- dioler2, C. Fürhauser3, C. Singer3, A. Weinhäusel1; ses will perform with cox-regretion statistical methods with (p<0.005) 1Austrian Research Centers GmbH - ARC, Molecular Medicine, Seibersdorf, criteria for significant variations between tumor and normal tissue in Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Vienna, Austria, SPSS.13 version software. Results will show the significant difference 3Medical University of Vienna, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, between methylation pattern in promoter regions and expression state Vienna, Austria. between normal and tumorous tissues and relation with grade and kind Aberrant DNA methylation is an early event during neoplastic transfor- of tumor in epigenetic changes with above mentioned genes. mation. Thus DNA methylation changes might be potent tumormarkers for diagnosis and specific methylation patterns might also be used for P06.129 classification and prediction of disease outcome as well as for the de- Polymorphisms in ERcc2 K751 was Associated with Breast velopment of metastases. cancer Risk To investigate methylation changes on a genome-wide scale we es- M. Hosseini1, M. Houshmand2,3, A. Ebrahimi4; tablished a specific amplification protocol based on methylation-sensi- 1Dept. Science, Islamshahr Branch, Islamic Azad University, Islamshahr,Tehran, tive restriction digestion. This amplification does enrich the methylated Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Bio- DNA and enables whole genome methylation screenings. technology (NIGEB), ,Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Special Medical Center, We used this protocol for analysing the DNA methylation status from Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4National Institute for Genetic Engineering and primary tumors of breast cancer patients with vs. without metastases Biotechnology (NIGEB), Islamshahr,Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. (10y follow up) on Agilent 244k human CpG island microarrays cover- Numerous studies are addressing associations of polymorphisms in ing 27 800 CpG-islands. DNA repair genes and cancer risks [1] because accurate and efficient From those chip-experiments we defined a group of potential marker DNA repair is crucial to genomic integrity and fidelity. genes exhibiting significantly different methylation patterns between ERCC2 are important in DNA nucleotide excision repair and lie on both patient groups and performed KEGG pathway analyses. There chromosome 19q13.3. We genotyped constitutive variants ERCC2 we found enriched numbers of these genes belonging to cellular path- K751Q and R156R in approximately 400 adults with breast adenocar- ways associated with angiogenesis and metastasis. cinoma and 160 controls of Iranian women. Totally 560 Iranian sporadic breast cancer affected women compare to P06.127 control group were studied by PCR-RFLP for ERCC2 variant. the survey of gene mutations in P53 gene in patients of Our results showed that heterozygote genotype ERCC2 (751) has the malignant breast cancer by PcR-sscP method. highest frequency in both groups (21.8 in patients and 8.7 in control M. Mirzaei Abbasabadi; group). Medical University of Rafsanjan, Rafsanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran. The Genotype ERCC2 (751) GT were most risk factor in our population. Background: Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene are the most [GG / TT odds ratio, 5.90 (95% confidence interval; CI, 11.45-12.15) common genetic alterations in human malignancies. These Mutations p=0.001], GG / GT odds ratio, 4.737 (95% CI, 9.03-9.92 ) p=0.029], TT founded 40-50% in breast carcinomas. In the present study, we ana- / GT odds ratio, 5.465 (95% CI, 10.41- 11.45 ) p=0.002]. lyzed P53 gene mutations (exon 5-9) by PCR-SSCP method in 56 We conclude that not only G/G and T/T in our patients was not as- women patients of breast cancer. sociated with breast cancer risk but also there is a relation between Materials and methods: DNA extraction from samples (formalin-fixed presence of G/T and increasing of breast cancer risk.Cancer genetics  P06.130 P06.132 spectrum and incidence of BRcA1 and BRcA2 mutations in the A one step BRcA1 and BRcA2 point mutation and large Republic of ireland - An Audit rearrangement detection using High-Resolution melting curve T. M. McDevitt1,2, M. Higgins1,2, A. Crowley1,2, N. Cody1,2, M. Meany1,2, C. de analysis associated to qPcR analysis (qPcR-HRm) Baroid1,2, M. Adams1,2, C. Nolan3, M. Farrell3, E. Berkeley3, R. Clarke3, P. A. F. Coulet1, F. Pires1, E. Rouleau2, C. Lefol2, C. Colas1, A. Hardouin3, R. Lide- Daly3, A. J. Green1,2, D. E. Barton1,2; reau2, F. Soubrier1; 1National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, 2University College Dub- 1Groupe hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, PARIS, France, 2Centre René Huguenin, lin School of Medicine and Medical Sciences, Dublin, Ireland, 3HOPE Director- Saint Cloud, France, 3Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France. ate, Haematology, Oncology and Palliative Care Service, St James’s Hospital, High resolution melting (HRM) of DNA is a simple method for mutation Dublin, Ireland. scanning which monitors the fluorescence of double strand DNA with Comprehensive mutation screening of BRCA1 and BRCA2 has been saturating dye. Performing HRM on real time thermocycler, enables available to Irish breast cancer families since 2005 via our Centre. We semi-quantitative analysis (qPCR) to be associated to HRM analysis present an audit of the data generated following bi-directional sequenc- for detection of both large gene rearrangements and point mutations ing and MLPA of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in 462 breast/ovarian cancer (qPCR-HRM). We evaluated this method of mutation screening for the patients to date. In total, pathogenic mutations have been identified in two major breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and 154 families (33%). The spectrum of these mutations comprises non- BRCA2. Screening of these two large genes are time-consuming and sense (BRCA1: 21, BRCA2: 3), frameshift (BRCA1: 30, BRCA2: 56), must include exploration of genomic rearrangements that represent 5 splice-site (BRCA1: 7, BRCA2: 2), substitution (BRCA1: 5, BRCA2: 6) to 15% of the alterations observed in these genes. and large deletions (BRCA1: 22, BRCA2: 2). Overall, the incidence of We evaluated the sensitivity of the HRM technology by analysing 201 large deletions was found to be approximately 5% in the patient group known variants scattered over all amplicons of BRCA1 and BRCA2 screened to date, accounting for approximately 15% of the total muta- genes and the sensitivity of quantitative PCR by analysing seven large tion incidence. Variants of unknown significance were identified in 28 gene rearrangements involving exons of BRCA1 or BRCA2; 100% of families and of these, 6 were present with a pathogenic mutation. Eight the variants were detected including rearrangements. Furthermore, a mutations have been identified in more than 3 apparently unrelated retrospective study was done with 44 patients previously BRCA1 test- families: BRCA1: p.E143X (19), c.1294_1333del40 (7), exon 3 dele- ed by DHPLC, all the variants were detected by HRM analysis. Finally, tion (4), exon 21-24 deletion (4); BRCA2: c.8525delC (9), c.983del4 a prospective study was done with 165 patients allowing 22 deleteri- (6), c.2117delC (7). In addition, a large deletion encompassing exons ous mutations, 16 unclassified variants and two large rearrangements 1-23 of BRCA1 has been identified in 4 families. Haplotype analysis to be detected. qPCR-HRM is a simple, sensitive and rapid method for a possible founder effect is underway for some of these recurrent that does not require modified PCR primers. Thus, this method allows mutations. in one step the detection of point mutation and gene rearrangements. Results to date indicate that a significant proportion of hereditary breast/ovarian cancer in Ireland are attributable to mutations in BRCA1 P06.133 and BRCA2 and that large deletions in BRCA1 occur in approximately comparative analysis of BRcA1 gene expression in ovarian 5% of Irish breast cancer families, an incidence that is in line with that cancer tissue and in tumor environment. observed in other populations (2-10%). V. P. Shubin1, A. N. Loginova1, A. N. Gritsay2, A. V. Karpukhin1; 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer P06.131 Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. Prevention or surveillance - a study among BRcA1/2 mutation It is known that BRCA1 gene expression is low in cells of breast can- carriers cer in comparison with normal tissue. These results are considered E. Dagan1,2, R. Gershoni-Baruch1,3; as indication of BRCA1 gene expression significance in breast cancer 1Rambam Health Care Campus, Institute of Human Genetics, Haifa, Israel, development. However data on BRCA1 expression in ovarian cancer 2University of Haifa, Department of Nursing, Haifa, Israel, 3Technion-Institute of tissue not enough. Technology, Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel. We investigated BRCA1 gene expression in samples of ovarian can- This study aimed to investigate the socio-demographic and clinical cer tissues and also in tissues of tumor environment by RT-PCR. characteristics of BRCA1/2 carriers opting for preventive surgeries. Of Comparative analysis of BRCA1 gene expression in the tumor of this 148 BRCA1/2 carriers, 111 (75%) had unilateral breast cancer (BC) and localization and in tissues of tumor environment was conducted for the 37 (25%) were asymptomatic women. The study protocol integrated first time. The BRCA1 expression level was determined comparative socio-demographic and clinical follow-up; and psychological question- to expression of GAPDH gene. Each measerement was repeated 3-5 naires. Prophylactic oophorectomy was reported by 84 (75.7%) and 25 times. For the first time it was shown that in 6 of 10 ovarian cancer (67.6%) unilateral BC patients and asymptomatic women, respectively. samples BRCA1 gene expression was decreased in tissues of tumor Comparable mean ages at oophorectomy (47±9 years) were noted for environment in comparison with tumor tissue. This result is important both BC patients and asymptomatic women. However, different mean in the light of data about decreased BRCA1 gene expression signifi- ages of 44±10 and 33±9 years recorded for BC and asymptomatic sur- cance and also about microenvironment influence on the processes veillance groups, respectively (p<.05). High state of anxiety character- of malignant tumor onset and development. The detection of BRCA1 ized the surveillance group (BC patients-37.6±22.4 and asymptomatic- gene expression in the tissue sample with distant from tumor loca- 43±7.3) compared to the preventive oophorectomy group (BC patients tion is in process now and will be reported. In part supported by grant and asymptomatic carriers 32±8.7). Among BC patients, 47 completed RFBR N 07-04-01602. the study protocol. Of these, seven (15%) underwent contralateral pro- phylactic mastectomy and 12 (25%) performed bilateral mastectomy, P06.134 however, following malignant findings. None of the asymptomatic car- Estrogen receptor-α gene, codon 594 (G3242A) polymorphism riers chose preventive mastectomy. Comparable state of anxiety char- among iranian women with breast cancer acterized all BC groups. Higher BC risk perception was reported by S. Abbasi1, P. Ismail1, C. Azimi2; patients who underwent conservative breast surgery (37%) compared 1Department of Biomedical Siences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, to patients opting for bilateral or contralateral preventive mastectomy University Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia, 2Department of Genetics, Can- (20% and 24%, respectively). Prophylactic oophorectomy reduced the cer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, Tehran University of Medical perceived risk for ovarian cancer to below 5%, however, contralateral Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. preventive mastectomy reduced the perceived risk for BC to 20%. Pro- Evidence suggests that ESR1 gene polymorphism has been found phylactic surgeries reduced the risk perception for breast and ovarian to be associated with breast cancer and clinical features of the dis- cancer, the highest levels of anxiety being predominantly expressed by ease in Caucasians. A case-control study was conducted to establish BC and asymptomatic surveillance groups. a database of ESR1 polymorphisms in Iranian population in order to This study was supported by the Israel Cancer Association, grant compare Western and Iranian distributions and to evaluate ESR1 poly- 20070091-c. morphism as an indicator of clinical outcome. The ESR1 gene was scanned in Iranian patients newly diagnosed invasive breast tumors,Cancer genetics  (150 patients) and in healthy individuals (147 healthy control individu- According to the HER2/CEP17 RATIO, 6 tumors were judged to have als). PCR single-strand conformation polymorphism technology and HER2/neu DNA amplification, with 2 having low-level of amplification direct sequencing was performed. (≥2.2 but <3 folds) and 4 having high-level of amplification (≥3 folds). The frequency of genotype 01 in codon 594 (ACG → ACA), (G3242A), Our results showed significant concordance between FISH and IHC. exon 8 was significantly higher in breast cancer patients (48.0%) than THE HER2/CEP17 RATIO of ≥2.2 was concordant with IHC findings of in control individuals (1.4%; P= 0.001). The allele 1 in codon 594 was 2+/3+ in 60% of carcinomas. High level of amplification was detected significantly more common in breast cancer patients with age at men- in 5 of 8 IHC3+ cases (62.5%), but in only 1 of 2 IHC 2+ cases (50%) arche </=12 (40.8%) than in those which their menstruation began at and 0 of 10 IHC 1+/0 cases. All cases with high level of amplification older than 12 years old (23.9%; p= 0.002). The allele 1 in codon 594 showed an IHC score of 3+ but not all cases with overexpression of exhibited, the greater the frequency, the lesser the likelihood of LN HER2 showed amplification by FISH. Based on these results, we con- metastasis. Our results demonstrated that this particular SNP marker sider FISH to be the gold standard for detecting of HER2/neu status in may increase accuracy in predicting LN. Therefore, this SNP marker breast cancer and were applied in all cases. further increased predictive accuracy in Iranian population. These data suggest that ESR1 polymorphisms are correlated with vari- P06.137 ous aspects of breast cancer in Iranian ESR1 genotype, as determined increased susceptibility for breast cancer development with during pre-surgical evaluation, might represent a surrogate marker to eRF -  GGC allele increase predicting breast cancer in Iranian population. M. Brito1, J. Malta-Vacas1, O. Jean-Jean2, C. Monteiro3; 1Escola Superior de Tecnologia, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Faculdade de Farmácia de P06.135 Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Université Paris 06, Paris, France. Genetic cancer risk modifiers in hereditary breast and/or ovarian The involvement of translation factors in cancer development it is now cancer families widely recognized. Moreover, the components of the translation ma- R. D. Brandão1,2, M. J. Blok1,2, J. Harssel1, A. Romano1,2, C. Schrander-Stum- chinery that are deregulated in cancer cells may become targets for pel1,2, J. Geraedts1,2, M. Zeegers1,3, E. B. Gómez García1,2; cancer therapy. The eukaryotic Release Factor 3 (eRF3) is a GTPase 1Maastricht University Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2GROW - School that associates with eRF1 in a complex that mediates translation ter- for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3School mination. eRF3 first exon contains a (GGC)n expansion coding for of Medicine, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. proteins with different N-terminal extremities. In the present work, we Introduction: Variability observed in penetrance, age of onset, and site show that the longer allele (12-GGC) is present in 5.1% (7/137) of the of the tumor, both among and within BRCA families suggests that, breast cancer patients analysed and is absent in the control population other, low-penetrance, genetic variants modify the cancer risk. (0/135), corresponding to an 18 fold increased risk for cancer develop- Objective: To study the effect of six polymorphisms, recently described ment, as revealed by Odds Ratio analysis. mRNA quantification sug- as being risk modifiers of sporadic breast cancer (BC) or ovarian can- gests that patients with the 12-GGC allele overexpress eRF3 in tumour cer (OC) in BRCA families. tissues relative to the normal adjacent tissues. However, using an in Methodology: We recorded the cancer history (tumor site, age of diag- vivo assay for translation termination in HEK293 cells, we do not de- nosis) of 548 women (293 carriers, 255 non-carriers) from 125 BRCA tect any difference in the activity of the eRF3a proteins encoded by the families (72 BRCA1, 53 BRCA2). The polymorphisms genotyped various eRF3 alleles. Although the connection between the presence were: +331G/A and PROGINS, localized in the progesterone recep- of eRF3 12-GGC allele and tumorigenesis is still unknown, our data tor gene, CASP8 D302H, CASP8 -652 6Nins/del, FGFR2 (rs2981582) suggest that the presence of the 12-GGC allele provides a potential and TNRC9 (rs3803662). Familial clustering was taken into account in novel risk marker for various types of cancer. the statistical analyses. Results: Two polymorphisms modified the risk of OC in BRCA1 and P06.138 BRCA2 families: +331 G/A heterozygous genotype increased the risk molecular epidemiology of breast cancer in the Azores islands: (OR:2.41, 95%CI: 0.98-5.96, p=0.056), while FGFR2 had a protec- Preliminary results for the tsER polymorphism tive effect (OR:0.52, 95%CI: 0.28-0.96, p= 0.037). FGFR2 was also P. Lourenço1, B. Parreira2, M. Lima1, J. Bruges-Armas2; significantly associated with increased risk of bilateral BC (OR:2.67, 1University of the Azores, Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 2Hospital de Santo Espírito/ 95%CI: 1.45-4.92, p=0.002), whereas CASP8 -652 6Nins/del had a SEEBMO, Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal. trend towards a protective effect, restricted to BRCA1 mutation car- The Thymidylate synthase enhancer region (TSER) is an untranslat- riers (OR:0.71, 95%CI:0.48-1.05, p=0.084). Furthermore, PROGINS ed region on the 5’ end of the Thymidylate synthase gene (TYMS), was significantly associated with BC among the BRCA2 non-carriers located on 18p11.32. This region has a polymorphic tandem repeat (phenocopies) (OR:8.17, 95%CI: 2.17-30.76, p=0.002). of 28 bp, with 2 or 3 repeats as the most common alleles. Previous Conclusions: We have found evidence that certain polymorphisms in- studies reported an association between this polymorphism and the volved in hormone mediated cell proliferation and apoptosis modify amount of protein expressed which has an effect on the success of the BC and OC risks in BRCA families. This may be relevant for an the 5-FU-based chemotherapy in cancer. The 5-FU is one of the drugs individual assessment of the most suitable preventive option, among used on the breast cancer therapy. We report the preliminary results those currently available, for each of those patients. of a genotyping survey of 96 Azorean BC and 96 cancer free control individuals. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes and P06.136 genotyped by standard PCR followed by electrophoresis. The allelic Detection of HER-2/neu Gene Amplification in Breast and genotypic frequencies as well as departure from Hardy-Weinberg carcinomas using Fluorescence in-situ hybridization equilibrium were obtained using Genepop software. The current data comparison with immunohistochemical Results were compared with data available from other populations using the T- S. Brahem1, S. Mougou1, M. T. Yacoubi2, H. Elghezal1, A. Saad1; test implemented on SPSS. We identified the alleles TSER*2, TSER*3 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique et de Biologie de la Reproduction, CHU Farhat and TSER*4. Allele TSER*4 was found in both cases and controls. The Hached, sousse, Tunisia, 2Laboratoire d’Anatomie et de Cytologie Pathologi- most common genotype was TSER*3/TSER*3, for cases and controls, ques, CHU Frahat Hached, sousse, Tunisia. but with a higher frequency in controls than in BC patients. Genotypic The aim of our study was to evaluate the value of Fluorescence in-situ frequencies were not in conformity with Hardy-Weinberg expectations. hybridization (FISH) in the determination of her2/neu amplification sta- The comparison between the healthy Azoreans with cancer free in- tus of human breast carcinomas by comparing immunohistochemistry dividuals from other populations showed that our population is more (IHC) results from the same sample. A series of 20 ductal carcinomas similar to Caucasians and Africans than to the Asians. This preliminary were analyzed by FISH for HER2/neu gene and chromosome 17 copy study will be used as stepping-stone for a wider pharmacogenetics number using Vysis Path Vysion Probe and by IHC using a polyclonal study of the BC patients in the Azores. antibody A0485 to HER2 protein in corresponding formalin-fixed, par- affin-embedded tissues sections. HER2/neu protein overexpression of moderate (2+) or high (3+) intensity based on IHC was detected in 10 carcinomas and was 2+ in 2 carcinomas and 3+ in 8 carcinomas.Cancer genetics  P06.139 P06.141 the role of estrogen receptor alpha 5’ UtR methylation in Immune modulators added to 5-fluorouracil therapy - impact on pathogenesis of iranian patients with breast cancer microsatellite unstable colon cancer H. Loghmani Khouzani1,2, M. H. Karbasian3, M. Noruzinia1,2, M. J. Rasaee1, P. B. Wolf1, S. Gruber1, M. Mittlboeck2, F. Wrba3, J. Karner-Hanusch4; Fatehmanesh2, M. Keyhanee2; 1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Research Laboratories, 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Sarem Research Vienna, Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Core Unit for Medical Statistics Center (SARC), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Day hospital, Tehran, Islamic and Informatics, Vienna, Austria, 3Medical University of Vienna, Department of Republic of Iran. Clinical Pathology, Vienna, Austria, 4Medical University of Vienna, Department Introduction: Methylation pattern in promoter region of many genes of Surgery, Vienna, Austria. are proved to be modified in cancers. 5’ UTR of estrogen receptor Background: A significant proportion of CRCs is characterized by mis- alpha has been shown to be differentially methylated in some patients match repair defects, leading to a high mutation rate in repetitive DNA with breast cancer and is believed to be a marker in early diagnosis, sequences (MSI). It has been shown that patients with MSI tumours prognosis and treatment. On the other hand, known genetic causes of had a better prognosis, but benefit from 5-fluorouracil-based chemo- breast cancer like BRCA genes couldn’t explain early breast cancer in therapy was questionable. The aim of our study was to analyse the Iranian patients with breast and/or ovarian cancers. Our objective was effect of immune modulatory substances in addition to 5-fluorouracil to explore the role of epigenetic modification in ERα 5’ flanking region (5-FU) for treatment of stage III colon cancer. in Iranian patients with breast cancer. Material and Methods: 594 patients were prospectively randomized Materials and methods: Methylation Specific PCR on sodium bisulfate into four arms of adjuvant 5-FU treatment: arm 1 - 5-FU alone; arm 2 treated DNAs of peripheral blood and tissue samples from 35 patients - 5-FU plus levamisole; arm 3 - 5-FU plus interferon; arm 4 - 5-FU plus with breast cancer were performed. Primers were selected to be spe- levamisole and interferon. For microsatellite analysis, we used 5-10 cific for 2 known CpG islands in 5’UTR of ERα either for methylated or mono- or dinucleotide repeat markers which were PCR-amplified and unmethylated status. separated on an ABI PRISM® 310 Genetic Analyzer. Frameshift muta- Results: We found that in 53.85% of primary breast cancers CpG is- tions in coding repeats of BAX and TGFß-RII were analyzed similarly. land I is methylated and in 80.77% CpG island II is methylated. The Overall and disease-free survival rates were calculated. methylation status of these CpG islands in blood was 100% and Results and Conclusion: MSI was detected in 7.6% of eligible tumours. 87.88% respectively. Survival rates were not different between patients with stable or un- Discussion: We find a trend to methylation in breast tissue of Iranian stable tumours. Patients with MSI tumours and BAX mutation seemed patients with breast cancer. Our result show a methylation tendency in to benefit from the addition of levamisole to 5-FU. In patients with MSI breast tumors compared to those reported in the literature. We found tumours the cumulatively delivered 5-FU dose per patient demonstrat- a high rate of methylation in peripheral blood which is in concordance ed to have a statistically significant impact on survival. Optimal treat- to other studies. Our results are in concordance to the studies which ment of patients with MSI tumours is still under discussion; additional showed a role of ER alpha methylation in pathogenesis of breast can- markers may improve patient outcome and prevent unnecessary side cer. effects. Prospective studies evaluating molecular markers are neces- sary to identify those patients who may benefit from chemotherapy. P06.140 Association of COX-2 -765G→C promoter variants with colon P06.142 cancer from iran Association of Gstm1, Gstt1, GstP1 and cYP2E1 single S. Basatvat1, F. Biramijamal1, A. Hossein-Nezhad1, K. Shamimi2, G. Irvanloo3, nucleotide polymorphisms with colorectal cancer in iran M. Soltani1, K. Akbari1; S. Ebrahimkhani1, B. Noorinayer1, M. Zali1, K. Ebrahimkhani2, P. Rostami1, B. 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dept. of Surgery, Tehran University Hajikhani3, A. Asgharian4; of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Cancer Institute, Tehran 1Shaheed beheshti university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Zanjan Medical University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. university, Zanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tarbiat modares university, Tehran, Cyclooxygenases-2 enzyme (COX-2) converts arachidonic acid to Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Azad University Tonecabon Branch, Tonecabon, Is- prostaglandins.The COX2 gene plays an important role in inflamma- lamic Republic of Iran. tion and carcinogenesis process. Previous studies indicated that poly- Colorectal cancer a major cause of morbidity and mortality both glob- morphism of this gene is associated with inflammatory diseases and ally and in Iran. The aim of this study was to determine the association several types of cancer. It has been shown that the COX-2 -765G > C between genetic polymorphisms of cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1), promoter polymorphism have lower promoter activity and decreased glutathione S-transferases P1, M1 and T1 (GSTP1, M1, T1) and sus- COX-2 expression. In addition, genetic polymorphisms of the COX- ceptibility to colorectal cancer (CRC). 2 gene could alter the response to Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory Genotyping of CYP2E1 and GSTP1, GSTM1, GSTT1 was performed drugs (NSAIDs). The aim of this study is to determine the association by the use of pyrosequencing. One hundred cases and healthy con- of the COX2 gene polymorphism with development of colon cancer. trols were enrolled into this study. Colorectal cancer is the third cause of the cancer-related death in the Mean GSTT1 polymorphism type was significantly (P < 0.01) higher in world. To understand the etiology of colon cancer in Iran, we initiated cases as compared to controls (P<0.0001; OR, 2.43; 95% CI, 1.47-4) a study to investigate genetic polymorphism (-765G→C promoter vari- on the other hand there is no significant association between GSTM1, ants) of Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) among Iranian colon cancer pa- CYP2E1, GSTP1 and colorectal cancer. tients, the COX-2 -765G > C promoter genotypes were determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) analysis in 16 Iranian colon cancer patients and 193 healthy individuals. The frequency of C allele was demonstrated more among colon cancer patients. Range of C allele frequency was 22.5% in healthy individuals to 50% in patients . Significance difference in COX-2 allele distribution was observed between patients and healthy individuals (P value <0.01). Our findings suggest that COX-2 geno- type may play an important role in colon carcinogenesis among Iranian patients. In addition, according to these results we suggest that the NSAIDs can be used for reduction of colon cancer incidency among Iranian populations.Cancer genetics  GSTs measurement may be useful as a colorectal marker in colorectal (p=0.008) higher anti-HSP70 levels than the non-carriers, while no sig- cancer and biopsies obtained at colonoscopy can be used to measure nificant difference was observed in the controls. The AH8.1 carriers tumor markers. had a significantly higher chance to have high (in the highest quartile >1000 AU/ml) anti-HSP70 serum concentration (age and sex-adjusted OR: 3.21 (1.24-8.51), p=0.016). Interestingly enough this association Percent could be detected only in the 105 male patients (age-adjusted OR: Normal Heterozygote Homozygote Gene Polymorphism control cases control cases control cases 17.1 (2.8-103.9) but not in the 83 female patients (OR: 1.18 (0.33- cYP2E1 AG Exon4 100 95.7 0 4.3 0 0 4.22). These observations indicate that the serum concentration of the AG Promoter Upstream 100 97.1 0 2.9 0 0 autoantibodies to HSP70 is under genetic influence in patients with Gstm1 AT Exon8 87 89.9 13 8.7 0 1.4 colorectal cancer, this association is, however, restricted to men. CGExon8 94.2 97.1 5.8 2.9 0 0 CT Exon8 81.2 88.4 18.8 11.6 0 0 P06.145 GstP1 GA Exon5 47.8 52.2 46.4 40.6 5.8 7.2 A frequent germline EPcAm deletion causes Lynch syndrome by GCExon5 62.3 58 31.9 36.2 5.8 5.8 hypermethylation of the msH2 promoter TC Exon6 54.1 69.6 15.9 29 0 1.4 R. C. Niessen1, R. M. W. Hofstra1, H. Westers1, M. J. Ligtenberg2, P. O. J. Gstt1 AG Exon4 65.7 95.7 4.3 4.2 0 0 Jager1, M. L. de Groote1, M. J. W. Berends1, Y. J. Vos1, H. Hollema3, J. H. AG Exon4 55.1 39.1 34.8 24.6 10.1 36.2 Kleibeuker4, R. H. Sijmons1; CT 3’’ UTR 100 100 0 0 0 0 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of AG Exon4 85.5 75.4 10.1 18.8 4.3 5.8 Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 2Departments of Human Genetics and Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The P06.143 Netherlands, 3Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Groningen, Role of polymorphisms of DNA repair genes and risk of University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 4Department of Gas- colorectal cancer. troenterology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, J. Gil1, A. Stembalska1, I. Laczmanska1, P. Karpinski1, K. Pesz1, P. Leszczyn- Groningen, The Netherlands. ski1, D. Ramsey2, M. Sasiadek1; Recently it was shown that Lynch syndrome can be caused by germ- 1Department of Genetics, Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 2School of line hypermethylation of the MSH2 promoter. In addition, it has been Mathematics and Statistics, Limerick, Ireland. demonstrated very recently that germline deletions of the 3’ region of Despite great progress in the knowledge of the biology of malignan- the EPCAM gene cause transcriptional read-through of EPCAM which cies, the genetic background of most cases of sporadic colorectal can- results in silencing of MSH2 by hypermethylation. We wanted to deter- cer (CRC) cases remains unclear. We focused on polymorphisms in mine the prevalence of germline and somatic MSH2 promoter hyper- DNA repair genes as the modulating factors in CRC-risk. methylation in a large group of Lynch syndrome-suspected patients. We considered genes involved in DNA-repair pathways: BER (OGG1 From a group of 333 Lynch syndrome-suspected patients who had Ser326Cys, XRCC1 Trp194Arg and Arg399Gln); NER (XPA (-4)G/A, been diagnosed with colorectal and/or endometrial cancer, we select- XPC PAT, (11) C/A and Lys939Gln, XPD Ile199Met, Asp312Asn and ed those, who had no MLH1, MSH2 or MSH6 germline mutation and Lys751Gln, XPF Arg415Gln, XPG Asp1104His, ERCC1 C118T); HR ( who lacked MSH2 protein staining in their tumours, or, if staining was NBS1 Glu185Gln, Rad51 135G/C, XRCC3 Thr241Met). unavailable, had tumours with microsatellite instability. Methylation as- The study group consisted of 133 patients diagnosed with sporadic says were performed to test the patients for germline MSH2 promoter CRC, while the control group of 100 elderly non-cancer volunteers. hypermethylation. A subset of patients with MSH2-negative tumours Genotyping was performed by PCR and PCR-RFLP. Fisher’s exact were analysed for somatic MSH2 promoter hypermethylation and sub- test with a Bonferroni correction for multiple testing were used to as- sequently for EPCAM deletions. sess differences in genotype distribution, linkage analysis and statisti- Thirty-six patients were screened for germline MSH2 promoter hyper- cal significance of the correlations. methylation and tested negative. However, three of the eleven patients Our study revealed an association between the CRC-risk and poly- with loss of MSH2 protein in their tumours had somatic MSH2 promot- morphisms in genes involved in NER pathway, with XPC (C/A) poly- er hypermethylation in their tumour, which was caused by a germline morphism as a main alteration. Moreover, our study showed an as- EPCAM deletion. sociation among CRCs characterized by microsatellite instability and The prevalence of somatic MSH2 promoter hypermethylation caused polymorphisms in DNA-repair genes (NER and HR pathways). by germline EPCAM deletions in our selected patient group is 8%. Our results indicate that however, investigated polymorphisms are not Extrapolated to the group of 333 Lynch syndrome-suspected patients a major factor modulating an individual risk of CRC development, a the frequency is 0.9%. More importantly, this deletion accounts for network of genetic alterations may be of crucial importance in this pro- a substantial proportion (9.4%) of the genetically proven Lynch syn- cess. drome cancer cases in our cohort of 333 Lynch syndrome-suspected patients. P06.144 Regulation of the level of a natural autoantibody, anti-HsP70 by P06.146 the 8.1 ancestral haplotype in patients with colorectal cancer involvement of msH6 germline mutations in HNPcc Brazilian G. Füst, J. Kocsis, I. Aladzsity, B. Madaras, J. Laki, É. Tóth, Á. Szilágyi, Z. families Prohászka; F. C. Carneiro, B. C. G. Lisboa, F. O. Ferreira, B. M. Rossi, D. M. Carraro; 3rd Dept Intern Med, Budapest, Hungary. Hospital A C Camargo, São Paulo, Brazil. There are only scarce data on genetic regulation of natural autoanti- Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer syndrome (HNPCC) is as- body production in healthy individuals. Recently we published papers sociated with malfunction of postreplicative mismatch repair (MMR). indicating that levels of some natural autoantibodies is regulated by While the MMR genes MSH2 and MLH1 account for a majority of the IL-6 gene and/or the HLA-DR15 and -DR16 antigens. According HNPCC cases, the involvement of the MSH6 gene is continually ris- to our previous findings the most frequent ancestral extended hap- ing. Altogether, MSH6 mutations account for 5-10% of kindreds in lotype (AH8.1) is a strong risk factor for colorectal cancer. Therefore which MSH2 and MLH1 mutations are excluded. In contrast to HNPCC we decided to compare serum concentration of an IgG type natural families linked to MSH2 or MLH1 mutations, the families associated autoantibody anti-HSP70 in carriers and non carriers of the AH8.1 in with MSH6 mutations often display diverse and less typical clinical cancer patients. Commercial ELISA kit was used for measuring serum features, such as early age at onset and high microsatellite instability levels of the anti-HSP70 autoantibodies. Carriers of the RAGE -429C, (MSI). Therefore, MSH6 mutation families are less likely to fulfil diag- HSP70 1267G, TNF -308A and LTA 252G alleles and C4A*Q0 geno- nostic criteria such as the Amsterdam II criteria (AC II) and the revised type were considered as AH8.1 carriers. The study was performed Bethesda guidelines (rBG), and are being underdiagnosed. The aim in 188 patients with colorectal cancer and 203 healthy controls. Anti- of the present study was to evaluate the contribution of MSH6 germ- HSP70 levels were significantly (p<0.001) higher in the patients than line mutations in brazilian families with suspected Lynch syndrome. in the controls. In the patients’ group AH8.1 carriers had significantly 38 unrelated families (twelve ACI, II and twenty-six rBG)without MLH1Cancer genetics  and MSH2 germline mutation were included in this study. All coding re- P06.149 gions and intron-exon boundaries of MSH6 gene were completely ana- molecular characterization and screening of mismatch repair lysed using direct sequence analysis. We detected 5 MSH6 mutation genes mutations in 667 spanish patients with a familial form of (4 missense and 1 protein-truncating mutations). Although, missense nonpolyposis colorectal cancer variants are labeled as doubtfully pathogenic, clinical data display a E. Sánchez-Tomé1, B. Rivera1, P. Carbonell2, J. Perea3, F. Mercadillo1, J. great resemblance between missense-variant carriers and truncating Benitez1, M. Urioste1; mutation carriers. We conclude that, in all patients suspected to have 1Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 2Uni- HNPCC, MSH6 mutation analysis should be considered. dad de Genética del Hospital La Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain, 3Servicio de Cirugía B del Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain. P06.147 Introduction: Familial aggregation of colorectal cancer (CRC) is esti- Evaluation of mLH1 and msH2 gene mutations in a subset mated to be approximately 15-20% of all CRC. The autosomal domi- of iranian families with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal nant Lynch syndrome (LS) is the most common hereditary CRC (2-7% colorectal cancer (HNPcc) of all cases). Lynch tumours show microsatellite instability (MSI) due to M. Salehi1, S. Amani2, S. Javan1, M. Emami1, M. Salamat1, M. R. Noori Daloii3; aberrant DNA mismatch repair (MMR). The genetic causes are muta- 1Isfahan Univ. of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran Univ. tions in MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2. of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran Univ. of Medical Aims: To characterize the molecular basis of CRC aggregation and de- Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. termine the minimal frequency of LS in a series of Spanish families. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer is the most common form Samples and methods: We studied 667 tumour samples belonging to of hereditary colorectal cancers accounting for 5 to 10% of all colon patients with a suspect of a familial form of CRC and collected clini- carcinoma. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant mode and caused cal and familial data of the index patients and pathological data of tu- by germline mutations in mismatch repair genes (MMR) chiefly MLH1 mours. MSI and/or immunohistochemical expression of MMR proteins and MSH2. was assessed. In cases with MSI and/or lack of expression of at least The lifetime risk of colon cancer in affected persons is 80%. Screen- one MMR protein, we screened MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 genes in pe- ing, prevention strategies and consequently treatment options will be ripheral blood samples for both point mutations and great rearrange- improved by understanding of the genetic basis of this disorder. The ments. aim of this study was to assess mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 genes Results: 182 cases (27.3%) showed MSI and/or lack of the expression in a subset of Iranian HNPCC patients. of MMR proteins. From these cases we have identified 66 families The families that fulfill Amsterdam criteria were selected as HNPCC (36.2%) with alteration in one MMR gene (Table 1). families. Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood of the MLH1 MSH2 MSH6 samples and germline mutations of MLH1 and MSH2 were detected by PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) and DNA Deletereous point mutation 30 19 2 sequencing techniques. Great rearrangement 1 5 Germline mutations were found in 20 cases. Of these mutations, 14 Unknown significant variant 5 3 1 were found in MLH1 and 6 in MSH2 genes thus MLH1 gene had higher Epimutation 1 mutation rate than MSH2. Eighteen out of 20 detected mutations in our Table 1. Distribution of MMR changes population were previously reported and two were novel. Our results demonstrated that mutation range as well as genes in- Comments: Beside these cases, we identified 26 additional families that fulfilled the volved in HNPCC is different from one region to other and character- clinical and molecular criteria of Familial CRC Type X. izing mutations could be very helpful in diagnosis of the at risk indi- Type of mutations and the correlation with clinical and familial data will be presented viduals. in this series of families. P06.148 P06.150 screening for germline mutations of mLH1, msH2, msH6 and Family history compared to age as indicator for msi testing Pms2 genes in slovenian colorectal cancer results in a comparable positive predictive value for Lynch M. Ravnik-Glavac1, G. Berginc1, M. Bracko2, D. Glavac1; syndrome 1University of Ljubljana Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Institute of N. Hoogerbrugge, P. Manders, C. Kets, A. van Remortele, K. Landsbergen, R. Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Willems, D. Bodmer, K. Hebeda, J. van Krieken, M. J. L. Ligtenberg; Microsatellite instability (MSI) is present in more than 90% of heredi- Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. tary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) cases, and is therefore Introduction: Most colorectal tumours that are due to Lynch syndrome a feasible marker for the disease. Mutations in MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 show high microsatellite instability (MSI-high). Clinical geneticists use and PMS2, which are one of the main causes of deficient mismatch MSI tests when a family history is suspected for Lynch syndrome. To repair and subsequent MSI, have been linked to the disease. increase the detection of Lynch syndrome, also pathologists select pa- In order to establish the role of each of the 4 genes in Slovenian tients with colorectal or endometrial cancer for MSI testing in case they HNPCC patients, we performed MSI analysis on 938 unselected CRC are diagnosed younger than 50 years or have a second Lynch associ- patients and subsequently searched for the presence of point muta- ated cancer younger than 70 years (Gut 2005). tions, larger genomic rearrangements and MLH1 promoter hypermeth- Methods: Index patients under suspicion for Lynch syndrome by a clin- ylation in patients with MSI-high tumours. ical geneticist (n=885) or a pathologist (n=406) were tested for MSI. We detected 68 (7.2%) patients with MSI-H tumours, of which 13 pa- When MSI-high, these patients could opt for germline mutation analy- tients (1.4%) harboured germline defects: 7 in MLH1, 5 in MSH2, 1 in sis in MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and/or PMS2. PMS2 and none in MSH6. Twenty-nine germline sequence variations Results: Comparison of the group of patients under suspicion for Lynch of unknown significance and 17 deleterious somatic mutations were syndrome by clinical geneticists or pathologists showed a comparable found. MLH1 promoter methylation was detected in 56% of patients mean age at diagnosis of 49 ± 12 versus 48 ± 13 years (p=0.7), the without detected germline defects and in 1 suspected HNPCC. percentage of MSI tests performed in a colorectal cancer (others main- Due to the specific absence of germline defects in MSH6, we adapted ly endometrial cancer) was 77% versus 96% (p<0.001), and right sided the HNPCC detection strategy for the Slovenian population of CRC colon cancer 69% versus 65% (p=0.9). MSI-high was present in 16% patients, whereby germline alterations should be first sought in MLH1 (144/885) and 18% (74/406) of the tests (p=0.38). MSI-high tumors and MSH2 followed by a search for larger genomic rearrangements were explained by the presence of a germline mutation in 58% and and PMS2 mutations, and when no germline defects are found, muta- 40% (p=0.09), and by hypermethylation of the MLH1-promoter in 21% tion analysis of the MSH6 gene should be performed. Our study dem- and 26% respectively. onstrates that the incidence of MMR mutations in a population should Conclusion: These results underscore that family history taking con- be known prior to the application of one of several suggested strate- tinues to be important for the detection of Lynch syndrome, but that gies for detection of HNPCC. MSI testing based on age only is an excellent alternative, reducing workload for clinical geneticists substantially.Cancer genetics 00 P06.151 P06.153 cancer risks associated with germline mmR gene mutations: MUTYH associated polyposis - variable clinical phenotype and results from a multi-center French study report on novel mutations V. Bonadona1,2, E. Yhuel3, B. Bonaïti4,3, C. Lasset1,2, S. Olschwang5,6, S. M. Morak1, A. Laner2, U. Bacher3, E. Holinski-Feder1,2, German HNPCC Con- Grandjouan7, S. Manouvrier8, B. Buecher9,10, R. Guimbaud11,12, M. Longy13, C. sortium; Noguès14,15, T. Frebourg16,17, The French Cancer Genetics Network, C. Bonaïti- 1University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, Pellié3,18; 2MGZ - Center of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany, 3Department of Stem 1University Lyon 1, CNRS UMR 5558, Lyon, France, 2Centre Léon Bérard, Cell Transplantation, University Cancer Center Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. Lyon, France, 3INSERM U535, Villejuif, France, 4INRA-SGQA, Jouy-en-Josas, To further characterise 215 APC mutation-negative patients with France, 5Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, 6INSERM U891, Marseille, colorectal neoplasias classified in classical, attenuated, or atypical France, 7APHP Cochin, Paris, France, 8CHU, Lille, France, 9Institut Curie, Paris, forms of familial adenomatous polyposis coli (FAP) we performed mu- France, 10Hopital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 11Insitut Claudi- tation screening in the the human Mut Y homologue (MUTYH) gene. us Regaud, Toulouse, France, 12CHU, Toulouse, France, 13Institut Bergonié, The incidence of MUTYH mutations was 15% for biallelic and 3,7% for Bordeaux, France, 14Centre René Huguenin, Saint-Cloud, France, 15INSERM monoallelic mutations. U735, Saint-Cloud, France, 16INSERM U614, Rouen, France, 17CHU, Rouen, We found six novel MUTYH mutations and two novel monoallelic France, 18University Paris-Sud, Villejuif, France. missense mutations of unclassified pathogenicity in attenuated FAP Lynch syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by germ- (AFAP) patients. line mutations of mismatch repair (MMR) genes: MLH1, MSH2 and Most of the MUTYH-associated polyposis coli (MAP) patients (57%) MSH6. Mutation carriers are at high risk for colorectal and endometrial were AFAP patients as expected(19/33), but 10% (3/33) MAP patients cancers, and other rarer localisations: small bowel, urologic and biliary displaying early-onset classical FAP and 18% (6/33) patients with only tract, ovary and stomach. few adenomas at higher age. Biallelic cases had a high incidence of This study aimed to estimate precisely the risk for different tumors in a extracolonic polyposis in 32% (9/25 informative) and colorectal cancer large sample of French families with Lynch syndrome. (CRC) in 33% (11/33) of the cases. A total of 507 pedigrees with a MMR gene mutation (238 MLH1, 239 The clinical picture of MAP ranged from classical FAP or synchronous MSH2, 30 MSH6) and 9834 informative members were ascertained colorectal cancer (CRC) at age 30 years to few adenomas at age 54 from 40 cancer family clinics in France. Cancer risks were estimated years without evidence of CRC, initially suspected for hereditary non- using the GRL method, based on maximum likelihood that corrected poylposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). The mean age of onset was 43 for ascertainment by conditioning on all observed phenotypes. years, with 11 (33%) patients being younger than 40 years of age, indi- The cumulative risks of colorectal cancer by age 70 years were 35.2 cating that the clinical manifestation can be earlier than so far reported. % (95% CI: 24.7-51.3) for men and 31.5 % (19.8-50.5) for women; sig- Monoallelic MUTYH mutation carriers had a positive family history in nificant risk differences were found between mutated genes (p < 0.01). seven of eight cases (86%) overlapping with HNPCC type X. This al- MLH1 and MSH2 mutation carriers were at similar risk for colorectal lows the hypotheses that monoallelic MUTYH mutations might 1) act cancer whereas MSH6 carriers were at markedly lower risk. Risks of as low-penetrance CRC susceptibility modifier and/or 2) cooperate in a endometrial and ovarian cancer were respectively 10.8% (7.6-14.3) disease-causing synergism with mutations in other gene involved e.g. and 4.1 % (2.7-5.5). Estimations for other localisations did not exceed in the BER pathway. 2%. Our results provide evidence for lower risk of colorectal cancer than P06.154 previously published, particularly for MSH6 carriers, but also lower Identification of p53 gene tandem mutation and effect of its risk of endometrial cancer in Lynch syndrome. Their impact on the surrounding sequences during development of colon cancer counselling and management of mutated MMR gene carriers should A. Hossein-Nezhad1, F. Biramijamal1, S. Basatvat1, K. Shamimi2, G. Irvanloo3, be taken into account. K. Akbari1; 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dept. of Surgery, Tehran University P06.152 of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Cancer Institute, Tehran Novel msH6 mutations in HNPcc families with endometrial University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cancer. Mutation in p53 tumor suppressor gene is highly frequent in different M. Durán1, L. Perez-Cabornero1, E. Velasco1, M. Infante1, E. Lastra2, D. Sanz1, cancers. The p53 protein is considered as a key combination in coun- A. Acedo1, J. Cuevas3, L. Hernandez1, N. Martinez1, C. Miner1; tering stress messages such as DNA damage. Prevalence of somatic 1IBGM, valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital General Yagüe, Burgos, Spain, 3Hospital mutations in p53 gene has been reported in many tumors, and he- Comarcal de Medina del Campo, valladolid, Spain. reditary mutations in this gene increase the change of developing a Introduction: Families with germline MSH6 mutations have also shown widerange of cancers. Colorectal cancer is the third cause of the can- different clinical features compared with traditional HNPCC pheno- cer-related death in the world. type, such as later age of cancer diagnosis, lower penetrance, and The aim of the study is to determine p53 gene mutation in developing predominance of endometrial carcinomas. colon cancer among Iranian patients. To understand of the etiology of For women, colorectal cancer risk was significantly lower and endo- colon cancer in Iran, we initiated a study to investigate p53 gene muta- metrial cancer risk significantly higher in MSH6 carriers compared with tions among Iranian colon cancer patients. MLH1 and MSH2 carriers. 32 Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded colon cancerous tissues with Objective: To determine the prevalence of MSH6 (a mismatch repair adenocarcinoma diagnosis (after colectomy) and normal tissue adja- gene) mutations in a cohort of HNPCC families with endometrial can- cent to tumor were collected for analysis from cancer patients in the cer patients. Cancer Institute of Tehran. No patient had been given chemotherapy Patients and Methods: A cohort of 20 HNPCC families who were known or radiotherapy before the operation. The p53 gene mutations were to the Regional Medical Genetic Counselling Unit. determined by direct DNA sequencing after DNA extraction and do- Molecular analysis of DNA in all participants for mutations in MSH6 by ing PCR for each sample. We found a tandem mutation at codon 168 HA-CAE technique and sequencing analysis. (CAC>TAC then TAC>TGC) in tumor tissue. In previous study, we Results: A novel truncating mutation in MSH6 was identified in a wom- showed that surrounding sequences of mutated p53 gene codons (5’- an with breast and endometrial cancer. A novel missense mutation was GT and 5’-GG sequences) are high. In this investigation, our finding identified in two families. No genomic rearrangements in MSH6 were suggested that 5’-GT and 5’-GG surrounding sequences of the mu- identified. tated p53 gene codons may play an important role in developing the Conclusion: MSH6 mutations are more common in HNPCC families p53 gene modification and mutation. This hypothesis needs in vitro with endometrial cancer history. Genomic rearrangements do not con- investigation for confirmation. tribute to a significant proportion of mutations in MSH6, but missense variants are relatively common and their pathogenicity can be uncer- tain.Cancer genetics 0 P06.155 many, 3University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States, New roles for pharmacogenetics in metastatic colorectal cancer 4University Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Mo- G. Previtali1, D. Marchetti1, A. R. Lincesso1, D. Barachetti1, L. Pezzoli1, R. La- lecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck, Austria. bianca2, M. Barberis3, M. Iascone1; PMS2 and its pseudogene PMS2CL, share paralogous exons 9 and 1Genetica Molecolare - USSD Lab. Genetica Medica, Ospedali Riuniti, Berga- 11-15 and are embedded in an inverted duplication on chromosome mo, Italy, 2Dipartimento Oncologico, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy, 3Anatomia 7p22. Sequence exchange between duplicons may lead to functional Patologica, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy. PMS2-“hybrid”-alleles containing PMS2-specific sequence variants at The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays an important role the 5’- and PMS2CL-specific variants at the 3’-ends. The reference se- in tumorigenesis of colorectal cancer. Anti-EGFR monoclonal antibod- quences thus cannot be relied upon to distinguish between gene and ies have been shown to be helpful in the treatment of patients with pseudogene. We previously reported an RNA-based assay that allows metastatic CRC (mCRC). Recent data indicate that kRAS mutations reliable mutation analysis and unequivocal identification of PMS2-“hy- are an independent, negative, predictive marker for response to anti- brid”-alleles. We now found that overall “hybrid” alleles account for one EGFR agents. third of 300 PMS2 alleles in control individuals. Depending on the pop- The aim of this study is to compare sequencing analysis and a com- ulation 14-60% of “hybrid”-alleles carry PMS2CL-specific sequences mercial kit for kRAS mutation detection. in exons 13-15, the remainder only in exon 15. Analysis of associated Genomic DNA was extracted from archival tumour sections of 27 pa- polymorphisms revealed that exons 13-15 “hybrid”-alleles constitute tients affected by mCRC. four different haplotypes but involve the same breakpoint and appear KRAS analysis was carried out by sequencing of exon 2 and real- to trace back to a single ancient founder event. We identified one se- time PCR (commercial kit) to identify somatic mutations located in co- quence variant specific for all exons 13-15 “hybrid”-allele and devel- dons 12 and 13 (Gly12Asp, Gly12Ala, Gly12Val, Gly12Ser, Gly12Arg, oped a simple gDNA-PCR assay that can be used to identify carriers Gly12Cys, and Gly13Asp). In 2 cases DNA was poor and both methods of “hybrid”-alleles with high sensitivity and specificity (100% and 98%, failed, probably due to old-aged. We found 10 mutated cases (10/25, respectively). This test may render PMS2 mutation analysis in diag- 40%): 5 mutations detected by both methods, 3 samples not analys- nostic laboratories more reliable. Exon 13-15 “hybrid”-alleles harbour able by commercial kit and 2 cases mutated for sequencing alone a missense variant of so far unknown functional significance, and we (both Gly13Asp). The remaining 15 cases resulted wt by sequencing used the novel assay to determine “hybrid”-allele carrier frequency in and 6 of these were not analysable by commercial kit (6/15, 40%). colorectal cancer patients. We found no significant difference in allele Our results show that sequencing is the most reliable technique to frequencies between patients and controls, indicating that the mis- detect kRAS mutations. The commercial kit has an elevate rate of fail- sense variant is unlikely to play a major role with regard to colorectal ure (48%) and gives two false negative results. kRAS mutation status cancer susceptibility. might allow the identification of patients who are likely to benefit from anti-EGFR agents and avoid a costly and potentially toxic administra- P06.158 tion of this treatment in nonresponder patients, that can be treated with case report of cRc family with two substitutions in APc gene a different therapy. R. Sitkova1, A. Boday1, K. Kyselova1, P. Falt2, P. Fojtik2, M. Kliment2, P. Ried- lova1, E. Prusova1, S. Tavandzis1; P06.156 1JG Mendel Cancer Centre, Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Digestive Diseases two novel variants of the PML gene in breast and colon cancer Centre, Vitkovice Hospital a.s., Ostrava, Czech Republic. patients Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant in- N. Jurčková1, P. Plevová1, S. Walczysková1, I. Ježíšková1, A. Křepelová2, A. herited disease characterized by the presence of hundreds to thou- Puchmajerová2, L. Foretová3, E. Šilhánová1; sands colorectal adenomatous polyps and several clinical manifesta- 1Faculty Hospital of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 22nd Medical Faculty of tions. FAP is known as a colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk Memorial Cancer Insti- and is caused by a mutation in the tumor-supressor APC gene which tute, Brno, Czech Republic. often leads to creation of truncated APC protein. The PML (promyelocytic leukemia) gene is an important tumor suppres- In this report we demonstrate case of 3 generation family from our sor, that encodes the PML protein. The PML protein is concentrated in group of CRC patients. Proband, 30-year old woman, was involved in special subnuclear structures, the so-called PML nuclear domains and extensive colorectal carcinoma and after detailed clinical examination it plays a role in the formation and stability of these domains. PML har- and pedigree assembly it was confirmed FAP diagnosis. Subsequently monically coordinates and controls transcription, antiviral response, it was performed analysis of APC gene with detection of 2 substitutions DNA damage repair, senescence, induction of apoptosis and growth - causal mutation c.2413C>T (p.Arg805X) and mutation c.7504G>A arrest. We were testing the hypothesis, that germline disruption of the (p.Gly2502Ser) with unexplained influence on FAP genesis. PML gene may predispose to an increased risk of the cancer develop- It occurs comparatively a lot of relatives with various diagnosis of can- ment. We used direct sequencing for mutation screening in 17 colon cer in the proband´s family and there are also 7 children in risk. Our and 22 breast cancer patients. We have found, among others, two aim was to make APC gene analysis of this children and other living novel single nucleotide substitutions, c.83C>T (p.T28I) within exon 1 in proband´s relatives to determine whether this substitions occur on one a 42-years old female breast cancer patient and c.1558C>T (p.P520S) allele of APC gene together or on two alleles separately. This molecu- within exon 6 in a 32-years old male colon cancer patient. We have lar results are important for determination of the FAP manifestation performed a population study in 100 and 214 non-cancer patients, re- risk and for selection of family members for preventive oncological spectively, using the RT-PCR method, in order to detect the frequency monitoring. of these novel variants in general population. None of the variants was found in any non-cancer patients. In conclusion, we have found two P06.159 rare novel missense variants in the PML gene. Their pathogenicity is Zoom-in cGH-array to better characterize germline large uncertain, however, with respect to fact, that they were found only in rearrangements involving APc gene in FAP French families cancer patients, they may be associated with an increased risk of the E. Rouleau1, A. Lagarde2, S. Tozlu-Cara1, V. Bourdon3, C. Andrieu1, T. cancer. Noguchi3, R. Sauvan3, F. Eisinger3, L. Huiart3, R. Lidereau1, H. Sobol3, S. Acknowledgements: The work was supported by IGA MZ &#268;R, Olschwang2; project No. NR/9092-3. 1Centre René Huguenin, St Cloud, France, 2Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM UMR891, Marseille, France, 3Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Département P06.157 d’oncogénétique, Marseille, France. PMS-PMSCL-”hybrid”-alleles containing pseudogene-specific Familial Adenomatous Polyposis is caused by germline mutations in sequence variants have a high prevalence but no apparent the APC gene. Most mutations are point mutations or small insertions/ functional effect on colorectal cancer susceptibility deletions. Six to 12% of FAP patients carry a large deletion within the C. Ganster1, N. Rahner2, L. Messiaen3, J. Necker4, C. Fonatsch1, J. Zschocke5, APC gene, which encompass one to all exons. Until now, most articles K. Wimmer5; reported large deletions without precisely characterize the breakpoints 1Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 2University of Bonn, Bonn, Ger- and/or the mechanism. Here, we aimed to assess the proportion ofCancer genetics 0 germline APC deletions in the French patients affected with classic of the Polish group. Seventeen large rearrangements were found in FAP, and to characterize the different breakpoints. All samples were 29 families. Out of those rearrangements, 8 repeat rearrangements hybridized in a 244k oligonucleotide CGH-arrays. In parallel, we also occurred in 20 families. A problem in fast molecular diagnostics of FAP used a dedicated high-resolution oligonucleotide CGH array to exactly is a high heterogeneity of mutations in the APC gene. It seems that a size the deletions. We screened 126 patients with polyposis without multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification test and searching for any point mutation in the APC gene by using Multiplex Ligation-depen- small mutations by the use of screening methods at the 5’ end of exon dent Probe, and were able to detect 62 large rearrangements (8% of 15 and exons 14, 9, 11, 13, 5, and 3, help to improve the molecular all deleterious mutations). No rearrangement was recurrently found. diagnostics of FAP in Polish patients. In the very large deletions with breakpoints outside the APC gene, the The study was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher size ranged from 50kb to 17Mb. We found 7 hot regions with more than Education project no. N401331936 2 breakpoints within 30kb. Finally, we characterized a new large rear- rangement with an insertion-deletion. High-resolution oligonucleotide P06.162 array-CGH showed clearly its interest in the characterization of large APc gene mutations in iranian patients with familial rearrangements of the APC gene. Screening for APC mutations in FAP adenomatous polyposi (FAP) patients should benefit of this technique to identify precisely the origin P. Rostami, B. Noorinayer, M. Chiani, M. Shahmoradgoli, M. Tashakori, F. and better understand the underlying molecular mechanisms. Ghaderi, S. Ebrahimkhani, M. Ghafar zadeh, M. Soltani, M. Zali; Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Disease, shahid beheshti P06.160 university, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. A remarkable APC mosaicism with two mutant alleles Background: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal S. Baert-Desurmont1, N. Piton1, J. Bou1, J. Tinat1, R. Guimbaud2, J. Selves3, dominant syndrome characterized by development of hundreds to T. Frebourg1; thousands of adenomatous polyps in the colon. In 80-90% of the cases 1Inserm U614, Faculty of Medicine University of Rouen, and Department of of classic FAP, mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) Genetics, University Hospital, Institute for Medical Research, Rouen, France, gene is the cause underlying the syndrome. The molecular epidemi- 2Department of Cancer Genetics, University Hospital and Claudius Regaud ology of the APC gene mutations has not been investigated among Institute, Toulouse, France, 3Department of Pathology, University Hospital, the Iranian patients. In this study we will report on the first systematic Toulouse, France. investigation of the APC gene mutations. It has recently been estimated that APC mosaicism accounts for 11 Methods: Patients with FAP were enrolled into this study through re- % of the sporadic cases of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP). ferral to our genetic counseling clinic. For genetic tests genomic DNA We report a remarkable APC mosaicism characterized by the pres- was extracted from the 10ml of peripheral blood. Specific primers were ence of two mutant alleles. The index case presented a typical form of used to amplify coding regions of the APC gene. Amplicons was bidi- FAP diagnosed at age 29. APC sequencing revealed a heterozygous rectionally sequenced. deleterious mutation within exon 15 (c.2099del, p.Asp700AlafsX18). Results: 25 probands was registered with the mean age of diagnosis This mutation was inherited from his father who presented an attenu- 28.91and 64% male and 36% female. 52% had an autosomal domi- ated form of FAP diagnosed at age 54. Analysis of APC in an index nant pattern of inheritance and 48% had negative familial history. 3 case’s brother detected, unexpectedly, another mutation of unknown nonsense, 3 missense and 2 sense mutations were found. The non- biological significance, affecting the same nucleotide (c.2099A>C, sense mutations were Q264X, Q1303X, S1315X and Q264X. The mis- p.Asp700Ala). Haplotype analysis showed that both mutations were sense mutations were V1822D, E1317Q, N944I and sense mutations on the same paternal allele. In the index case’s father, specific analysis were G1678G and T1493T. of the c.2099 nucleotide by SNaPshot allowed us to detect the wild Conclusion: APC mutations are found among the FAP families in Iran. type and both mutant alleles (c.2099del and c.2099A>C) in lympho- The complete mutational investigation of these families helps in pre- cytes, normal colorectal tissue, adenoma, adenocarcinoma, normal clinical diagnosis of unaffected family members and may lead to po- liver tissue and liver metastasis, indicating therefore a remarkable tential founder mutations underlying this disease in Iran. mosaicism affecting endoderm and mesoderm derivatives. The pres- ence of these two distinct alterations at the same position might be P06.163 explained by two hypotheses: The first one is an early post-zygotic Molecular diagnostics in the Czech FAP families mutation (c.2099del or c.2099A>C) followed by an incorrect repair M. Florianová1, L. Schwarzová1, J. Štekrová1, K. Hirschfeldová1, Z. Kleibl2, V. (c.2099A>C or c.2099del, respectively); the second one is a de novo Kebrdlová1, M. Kohoutová1; pre-zygotic deleterious mutational event (c.2099del) in an index case’s 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine and paternal grand-parent, followed by an incorrect post-zygotic reversion General Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Insti- (c.2099A>C) in the index case’s father. Since sequencing and SNaP- tute of Biochemistry and Experimental Oncology, the First Faculty of Medicine, shot analyses showed that the c.2099del mutation is the predominant Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. mutation, this second hypothesis is the preferred one. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is autosomal dominant syn- drome associated with germline APC mutation with almost 100% risk P06.161 of colorectal cancer. The typical FAP is characterized by hundreds APc gene mutation status in Polish FAP patients to thousands of colorectal adenomatous polyps and by extracolonic A. Plawski1, M. Podralska1, R. Slomski1, M. Skrzypczak1, T. Banasiewicz2, P. manifestations. An attenuated FAP (AFAP) is characterized by less Krokowicz2; than 100 adenomas and later onset of the disease. The mutations in 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, MUTYH gene leads to MUTYH associated polyposis (MAP). MAP is Poznan, Poland. autosomal recessive form of polyposis with manifestation similar to Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is hereditary predisposition to AFAP. occurrence numerous of polyps in the colon and rectum. There is a We analyzed the APC gene for germline mutations in 340 FAP/AFAP high heterogeneity with regard to the number and time of the occur- patients. Mutation screening was performed using DGGE. DNA frag- rence of polyps. FAP is associated with mutations in the APC tumour ments showing an aberrant electrophoretic banding pattern were suppressor gene, which was described in 1991. Since then, many sequenced. In addition, all APC-mutation-negative probands were studies have been done to analyse the distribution of mutations in in- screened for large deletions of the APC gene using multiplex ligation dividual populations and to determine the function of the gene and a dependent probe amplification (MLPA). diagnostic approach to FAP. Here the APC gene was studied with re- We identified 80 germline mutations among 126 unrelated probands spect to the occurrence of small mutations and large rearrangements including large deletions. Nine germline APC mutations detected last in 300 unrelated Polish FAP families. Ninety-seven mutations were year have not been reported yet, which gives evidence of great vari- identified in 164 families. Out of these mutations, 80 were small muta- ability of mutations. tions, including 58 small mutations that were first identified in the Pol- We examined the whole MUTYH gene in 120 APC-mutation-nega- ish population (42 novel and 16 described previously). An increased tive probands, thereto we screened for mutations in the exon 7 and frequency of mutation c.3927_3931delAAAGA was observed in 10% 13 of MUTYH gene in 72 APC-mutation-negative probands. MutationCancer genetics 0 screening was performed using denaturing high performance liquid P06.166 chromatography (dHPLC) or high resolution melting (HRM). Samples interphase FisH detection of prognostically important showing unique profiles were sequenced. chromosomal aberrations in B-cLL We detected 2 patients with biallelic mutation in MUTYH and 6 patients V. Holubova1, M. Stoklasova1, J. Sobotka1, M. Brejcha1, J. Gumulec2, D. with monoallelic MUTYH mutation. Now we have started to test the Adamova3, S. Blahutova3, C. Bodzasova2, E. Bogoczova4, V. Heinzova3, D. presence of MSH6 mutation in carriers of monoallelic MUTYH muta- Janek5, Z. Jehlikova6, D. Klodova1, I. Krajsova7, J. Laska8, N. Petricova9, N. tion. Rytikova9, M. Urbankova6, M. Wrobel1, J. Zivna10, M. Radina1; Supported by the VZ MSM0021620808 of the Czech Republic. 1Mendel Cancer Center, Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Faculty Hospital Ostrava, Czech Republic, 3Silesian Hospital in Opava, Czech Republic, 4Hospital Vitkov- P06.164 ice - Ostrava, Czech Republic, 5Hospital Karvina-Raj, Czech Republic, 6Hos- Breakpoint identification of large STK11 germline deletions in pital Sumperk Inc., Czech Republic, 7Hospital Bruntal Inc., Czech Republic, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome patients using fine-tiling CGH arrays 8Hospital Cesky Tesin Inc., Czech Republic, 9Hospital Krnov, Czech Republic, M. Plasilova1, B. Röthlisberger2, A. R. Huber2, K. Heinimann1; 10Hospital Hranice Inc., Czech Republic. 1Research Group Human Genetics, Division of Medical Genetics UKBB, De- Chromosomal aberrations are independent prognostic factors in B- partment of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2Center of cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL). Cytogenetic abnormalities Laboratory Medicine, Canton Hospital, Aarau, Switzerland. identify groups of patients with different time to progression and overal Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominantly inherited survival. cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by the presence of ham- There are two main risk groups recognized. Low-risk patients with nor- artomatous polyps, mucocutaneous pigmentation, and an increased mal karyotype or 13q deletion as a sole abnormality have excellent risk for malignancies of the colorectum, stomach, pancreas, breast, prognosis. High-risk patients with 11q deletion and particularly 17p and ovaries. It is caused by germline mutations in the serine/threo- deletion do not respond to conventional therapy and tend to have a nine protein kinase 11 (STK11, also called LKB1) tumour suppressor rapidly evolving disease. Prognosis of patients with trisomy 12 is in- gene. Germline STK11 mutations can be identified in 80 to 94% of PJS termediated. patients when combining a screening for point mutations and large Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (I-FISH) is currently pre- deletions using direct sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent ferred molecular-cytogenetic method for identification of the chromo- probe amplification (MLPA), respectively. With the aim to identify large some aberrations in B-CLL. STK11 deletions and simultaneously delineate the breakpoints with The aim of this study was the detection of prognostically important high precision (approx. 100-200bp), we designed a custom fine-tiling chromosomal aberrations in B-CLL patients and comparison of their CGH array with a median probe spacing of 10bp covering the entire prognostic significance with the other biological and clinical factors. STK11 gene including 135 kb of genomic sequence up- and down- We performed I-FISH analysis using a DNA probe set to detect dele- stream of the gene, and applied the technique on 5 SKT11 deletion tions 17p, 11q, 13q, trisomy 12 and translocations involving 14q32 on carriers previously identified by MLPA as well as on 2 mutation-nega- bone marrow and peripheral blood samples of 480 B-CLL patients. tive PJS patients. We will report on the overall accuracy of the fine- Chromosomal aberrations analyzed by I-FISH were found in 73% of tiling CGH array in fine-mapping the breakpoints and thus enabling patients including 54% with single aberration, 17% with two and 2% cost- and time-saving carrier screening of at risk-family members by with three or more aberrations. The most frequent aberration was subsequent PCR-based fragment length analysis/direct sequencing. 13q14 deletion found in 39% of patients, followed by 11q23 deletion in 12%, trisomy 12 in 11%, and 17p13 deletion in 9% of patients. Rear- P06.165 rangement involving 14q32 was found in 1% of patients. Correlations Germline mutations of the STK gene and clinical findings in of I-FISH results and some clinical and laboratory findings will be pre- czech Peutz-Jeghers families sented. P. Vasovcak1, A. Puchmajerova1, P. Plevova2, J. Roubalik3, A. Krepelova1; 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Medical P06.167 School and University Hospital Motol, Praha, Czech Republic, 2Department of Array CGH identifies potential candidate genes in AML without Medical Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 3Digestive en- recurrent molecular and cytogenetic aberrations doscopy Centre, Bata Hospital, Zlin, Czech Republic. S. Breitenfellner1, R. Marschon1, W. Kranewitter1, G. Tschurtschenthaler1, H. Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant inherited Duba2, G. Webersinke1; disorder characterized by mucocutaneous hyperpigmentation and gas- 1Hospital Barmherzige Schwestern, Linz, Austria, 2General Women´s and trointestinal hamartomatous polyposis. PJS patients have increased children´s Hospital, Linz, Austria. risk of developing cancer over the general population, predominantly Introduction: Chromosomal and molecular aberrations are an integral in gastrointestinal tract. Germline mutations in the serine/threonine part of AML classification and influence prognosis and therapy. Never- kinase 11 (STK11) gene have been found to be responsible for the theless AML with none of the classical genetic changes do exist and disease. Here we report clinical findings and molecular analysis of 9 in- one can assume other genetic events in these cases leading to dif- dividuals from 6 Czech families. We analyzed promotor and the entire ferent expression of the disease. Therefore we analyzed AML without coding region including the splice-site boundaries of the STK11 gene recurrent aberrations for possible candidate genes by array CGH. in genomic DNA of the probands by sequencing analysis and multi- Methods: Bone marrow from cytological and immunophenotypical plex ligation probe-dependent amplification (MLPA) assay. By direct confirmed AML patients was analyzed by conventional cytogenetics sequencing of the STK11 gene, we identified two frameshift mutations (GTG-Banding), FISH and PCR methods for typical aberrations indi- (c.350dupT and c.589_597+2del11) in 3 individuals from two families. cated by WHO. DNA from inconspicuous samples was hybridized on The remaining 6 patients were examined by MLPA method and 4 pa- Affymetrix SNP 6.0 Arrays featuring 1.8 million markers, SNPs and tients from two families harboured large deletions (c.-277-?_290+?del CNVs (copy number variations), one half each. The majority of gains and c.-1114-?_1365+?del). No mutation was identified in two patients and losses detected by Affymetrix genotyping console 3.0 were CNVs with sporadic disease. In conclusion, we found germline mutations in and excluded in our study. five familial and two sporadic cases. One patient with frameshift muta- Results: About two thirds of the AML samples show at least one do- tion (c.350dupT) and severe phenotype died due to gastric cancer at main carrying a potential tumor associated gene. These include, for her 29, the other probands were without any malignancy up to date. example, ZBTB16, IL1R2 or EPS8, which are important for regulation This is the first report dealing with PJS patients in Czech Republic. of apoptosis, cell cycle progression, and signal transduction. Chromo- Grant support: VZ MZO 00064203 somal changes leading to the deregulation of the involved pathways may potentially be causative for the development of AML. Conclusions: Array CGH seems to be a potent method for the identi- fication of new candidate genes in AML without recurrent cytogenetic and molecular aberrations.Cancer genetics 0 P06.168 the 13q14.3 deletion (48%), followed by 11q22.3 deletion (11%) and characterization of a novel EtV6-NtRK3 Fusion transcript in trisomy 12 and 17p13.1 deletion (5%, both). Deletion of 13q34 was Acute myeloid Leukemia observed in one patient (2%) and was accompanied with monosomy W. Kranewitter, J. Kralik, G. Tschurtschenthaler, R. Marschon, G. Webersinke; 12, untypical change for CLL. In this group, trisomy 12 was not ob- Hospital Barmherzige Schwestern, Linz, Austria. served as a separate aberration - it was seen only in coexistence with Introduction: ETV6 transcription factor is frequently rearranged in di- 13q14.3 deletion. Moreover, deletion 13q14.3 was frequently associ- verse tumors forming a variety of fusion genes. We could identify a ated with another genetic aberrations (11q22.3, 17p13.1). Molecular- novel ETV6-NTRK3 gene fusion in an AML patient. cytogenetic findings were correlate with disease status (stable versus Methods: AML was diagnosed morphologically and by flow cytometry. progressive), Rai stage and CD38 expression and other clinical and Conventional karyotyping demonstrated a t(12;15)(p13;q25) confirmed laboratory parameters. This results will be presented in the future. This by whole chromosome paints. ETV6 break apart FISH proved an in- is the first evaluation of cytogenetic alterations in the patients with CLL volvement of this gene. 3´RACE-PCR was performed to characterize in our country, showing the presence of typic but also rare and untypic the unknown 3´end of the fusion product. PCR products were subse- chromosomal changes. quently cloned and sequenced. The rearrangement was verified by fusion-specific reverse transcriptase PCR. P06.171 Results: RACE-PCR and sequencing analysis identified NTRK3 (neu- BCR-ABL rearrangement and ‘variant’ Philadelphia chromosome rotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase 3) as in-frame fusion partner of the in chronic myeloid leukemia ETV6 gene. NTRK3 transcripts encode either catalytically active pro- V. Djordjević1, M. Denčić-Fekete1, J. Jovanović2, B. Todorić3, G. Janković1, M. teins or truncated isoforms that lack the intracellular kinase domain. Gotić1; The ETV6-NTRK3 transcript fuses ETV6 exons 1 through 5 with exons 1Institut of Hematology, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institut of Hematology, Belgrade, 13b and 14b of a truncated NTRK3 isoform and encodes a protein that 3Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Serbia. contains the amino-terminal HLH domain of the ETV6 protein and C- Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disorder char- terminal amino acids 529-612 of the NTRK3 protein. acterized by the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) in about Conclusions: We identified a novel ETV6-NTRK3 gene fusion in a pa- 95% of patients (pts). Ph is a result of reciprocal translocation between tient with minimal differentiated AML. Interestingly, this chromosomal the long arms of chromosomes 9 and 22 [t(9;22)(q34;q11)]. About 5% rearrangement is documented in a significant fraction of patients with of Ph-positive CML pts have variant translocations (vPh) which can secretory breast cancer and congenital fibrosarcoma. be divided into a “simple” (22q11 and one additional breakpoint) and a ”complex” (22q11, 9q34 and at least one additional chromosome). P06.169 Difficulties arise if a variant translocation generates “masked” Ph and sibs‘ birth defects in families with acute leukemia also if rearrangements are suboptic. We present cytogenetic findings N. Kitsera1, O. Hnatejko1, R. Polishchuk2; of 34 CML pts with vPh. Cytogenetic analyses were performed on un- 1Institute of Hereditary Pathology, Lviv, Ukraine, 2Regional Specialized Chil- stimulated bone marrow cells. Standard procedures and HG-banding dren’s Clinic, Lviv, Ukraine. technique were used. Five pts (5/34) had simple vPh, while other 29 Clinical and genealogical analysis was conducted in 240 families of pts (29/34) had complex vPh-producing translocations. Reverse tran- the Lviv region (Ukraine) which had two and more children. The basic scription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed in eight group was made with 120 families, which had children with acute leu- pts, in order to detect the expression of BCR/ABL sequence. RT-PCR kemia. Children were treated in hematology department of the Lviv Re- analysis showed a b3a2 fusion transcript in six (6/8) pts, and b2a2 gional children’s specialized clinical hospital 1994 - 2008 concerning. configuration in one patient (1/8). BCR/ABL fusion was not detected The age of children was from 3 months till 16 years (3,8±1,9 years). in one pt (1/8) with simple vPh. Conventional cytogenetics was refined Research carried by a method “ case - control “. Among 120 families by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in one pt. FISH demon- of the basic group, which had the two and more children, we observed strated BCR/ABL fusion gene on a short arm of chromosome 9. Variant 11 families (9,2 %), where, except for cancer at proband, sibs had translocations involving 9p are very rare in CML. In conclusion, applic- birth defects. In control group the birth defects at sibs met in 3 ( 2,5%) ing of molecular analyses (RT-PCR or FISH) beside the conventional cases (P<0,05). karytiping is necessary in diagnosis and more precise understanding Five from among 11 families, in which sibs suffered from BD and leu- biological mechanisms occurring in vPh in CML. kemia, had two children at the moment of research, and both children were ill with the following diseases: Down’s (trisomy 21) syndrome, P06.172 cryptorchidism, congenital heart disease and leukemia (three fami- Impact of interleukin-10, tumor necrosis factor-α and lies), bilateral hydronephrosis. The control group showed BD in two transforming growth factor-β polymorphisms on the incidence male junior sibs (congenital dislocation of left hip joint and cryptorchi- and outcome of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma dism) and in one female senior sib (cleft lip). B. M. Cikota1, O. T. Tarabar2, L. J. Tukic2, A. R. Aleksic3, Z. M. Magic1; More often the birth defects were observed at the senior brothers and 1Institute for Medical Research, Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Serbia, sisters, which did not coincide on localization with cancer in proband. 2Clinic of Hematology, Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute for The increase of BD rate among the sibs of proband having malignant Occupational Health, Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Serbia. tumors can be explained by the combined realization of teratogenic, Background. This study assessed whether interleukin-10 (IL-10) - oncogenic and mutagenic effects upon the action of various environ- 1082A/G, -819C/T and -3575T/A, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) mental factors. -308G/A and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) c10T/C genetic polymorphisms influence the incidence and outcome of diffuse large P06.170 B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). chromosomal abnormalities detected with FisH in the patients Patients and methods. The study included 94 patients with DLBCL with B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia and 60 ethnically matching controls with no lymphoma in family. Ge- M. Dencic-Fekete1, D. Antic1, S. Davidovic-Mrsic2, I. Franic2, N. Kraguljac-Kur- notyping was performed with ARMS-PCR, RFLP and Taqman allelic tovic1, M. Gotic1; discrimination assays, respectively. 1Institute of hematology, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Clinical institute of laboratory diag- Results. In DLBCL group IL-10 -819CC genotype was more (χ2, df=2, nosis, Zagreb, Croatia. p=0.0035) and TNF-αGG less frequent (χ2, df=2, p=0.0052) than in We have analyzed the frequency of genomic aberrations in a series of controls. There was no significant difference in the incidence of re- 44 B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) patients diagnosed in lapse, presence of bulky disease and prognostic group according to our institution, in order to evaluate their prognostic implications. The International Prognostic Index (IPI) in DLBCL patients with different frequency and type of aberrations were examined by interphase fluo- IL-10, TNF-α and TGF-β genotypes, excluding patients with TGF- rescence in situ hybridization technique, using Vysis DNA probes for β c10TT who were the most often scored as “low IPI” (better prog- detecting deletions in 11q22.3, 13q14.3, 13q34 and 17p13.1 regions, nosis) (χ2, df=6, p=0.0146). Patients with IL-10 -1082GG (Logrank and trisomy 12. Our results showed 63.6% of patients with clonal chro- test, p=0.0307), IL-10 -3575TT (Logrank test, p=0.0404) and TNF-α mosomal alterations. The most frequently detected aberration was -308GA+AA (Logrank test, p=0.0184) had longer disease free inter-Cancer genetics 0 val (DFI) than patients with other IL-10 -1082, -3575 and TNF-α -308 of HERG currents displaying fast deactivation kinetics that may be at- genotypes. Also, patients with TNF-α -308GA+AA had better overall tributable to expression of herg1b in cancer cells.These suggest that survival (OS) (Logrank test, p=0.0371) than patients with TNF-α - HERG channel may have an oncogenic potential and herg may be a 308GG. molecular target for both prognosis and pharmacological therapy of Conclusion. Homo- and/or heterozygous carriers of high IL-10 and pAML and solid tumors. TNF-α producer alleles were more susceptible to DLBCL (IL-10 - 819CC, TNF-α -308GA+AA), but they had better DFI (IL-10 -1082GG, P06.175 IL-10 -3575TT, TNF-α -308GA+AA) and OS (TNF-α -308GA+AA). Outcomes of the modulation of htERt gene expression in TGF-β c10TT carriers (low-producer genotype) had better prognosis promyelocytic leukemia as a model according IPI. E. Miri-Moghaddam1, A. Deezagi2, Z. Soheili2; 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB). Zahe- P06.173 dan university of Med, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Regulation of the leukemia associated oncogene and Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of developmental regulator EVi1 by all-trans retinoic acid (AtRA) Iran. S. Bingemann, R. Wieser; Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein complex. It consists of two main Department for Human Genetics, Vienna, Austria. components, telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) and telomer- The EVI1 gene codes for a zinc finger protein with important roles ase RNA (hTR). High telomerase activity is present in most malignant in embryonic development and in myeloid leukemogenesis. It is tran- cells, but it is barely detectable in majority of somatic cells. The di- scribed into several mRNA species with variable 5’-ends. One of these rect correlation between telomerase reactivation and carcinogens has mRNA variants, MDS1/EVI1, gives rise to an EVI1 protein with an ex- been made hTERT a key target for anti-cancer therapeutic studies. tended N-terminus and with functions partially different from those of In this study, we evaluated the ability of the new generation of short the shorter EVI1 protein type. The other EVI1 5’-end variants are most interfering RNA (siRNA) to modulate telomerase activity in the human likely translated into the same protein, i.e. the short EVI1 protein vari- promyelocytic leukemia cell line (HL-60). Data showed that transient ant, but their variable 5’-UTRs can be expected to affect the regulation transfection of the cells by hTERT specific siRNA resulted in %97.2 ± of protein expression. So far all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is the only 0.65 down regulation of the hTERT mRNA content. Whereas hTERT known physiological regulator of EVI1 in mammalian cells. protein level in treated cells were suppressed %49 ±3.47 at 24 hours Using the teratocarcinoma cell line NT-2, we have investigated the in- post transfection. The results of Telomeric Repeat Amplification Proto- duction of EVI1 by ATRA. Time course analyses showed that ATRA col (TRAP) showed that telomerase activity was reduced %86.6 ±1.99. rapidly induces the EVI1 mRNA in NT-2 cells. A maximum is reached Moreover, unlike most previous reports, the pattern of telomere re- after approximately 48 hrs, except for the MDS1/EVI1 mRNA, which striction fragment (TRF) length did not show a significant difference in was noticeably induced only after 48 hrs. This response was already treated cells compared to the control samples. Furthermore inhibition detectable with as little as 10 nM ATRA and affected all EVI1 mRNA of the cell proliferation rate was about %52.8 ± 2.3 and the apoptotic variants, albeit to variable degrees. Using reporter gene assays, an index of leukemic cells was %30.5 ± 1.55. In summary, inhibition of ATRA responsive region of ~200 bp was identified within exon 1a of hTERT exerted a direct antiapoptotic function in HL60 leukemic cells EVI1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments confirmed which was independent of telomere length. It promises the develop- the binding of retinoic acid receptors RAR and RXR to a retinoic acid ment of new generations of drugs for cancer therapy. response element (RARE) in this region. We conclude that the EVI1 gene is a direct target of retinoic acid sig- P06.176 naling and that its regulation via this pathway is mediated through an Detection of two unusual variants of ITPA gene transcript in intragenic RARE. chronic myelogenous leukemia (cmL) patients B. Hassannia1, M. Behmanesh1, M. Akbari2, Y. Nakabeppu3; P06.174 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Tarbiat Modares Univer- Alterations of herg isoform expressions in pediatric acute sity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty myeloid leukemia and solid tumors of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of M. Erdem1, T. A. Tekiner2, A. Fejzullahu2, S. Anak3, U. Ozbek4, F. Atalar5; Iran, 3Division of Neurofunctional Genomics, Department of Immunobiology and 1Yeditepe University, Department of Genetics and Bioengineering, Istanbul, Neuroscience, Medical Institute of, Fukuoka, Japan. Turkey, 2Istanbul Technical University, Molecular Biology and Genetics De- One of the most significant damages to the cells is oxidative deami- partment, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul School of Medicine, nation of DNA and free nucleotides in the cell pool. Incorporation of Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul deaminated nucleotides such as ITP or dITP into DNA or RNA can in- University, Institute of Experimental Medical Research (DETAE), Genetics De- crease the frequency of base substitution mutation or alter their struc- partment, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Child tures. Also, it has been suggested that presence and accumulation Health Institute, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey. of these rough nucleotides can lead to genetic instability which is the Expression of K+ channels encoded by human ether-a-go-go related perquisite of different types of diseases or cancers. Inosine triphos- gene(herg) is reported to be deregulated in cancer cells.We studied phate pyrophosphates (ITPase) encoded by ITPA gene, is responsible the expression levels of herg1 and herg1b by qRT-PCR in 35 pediatric for protecting the cells by omitting deaminated purines from the free acute myeloid leukemia(pAML) patients together with a group of hu- nucleotide pool. The objective of this study was to examine the pos- man tumor samples(n=40) and their healthy counterparts.A common sible dysfunction of ITPA gene activity as an important factor in genetic HERG polymorphism(K897T) was also analyzed in pAML patients.Our background predisposing to chromosomal disorders and malignancies results suggest that herg1 expression is lower in pAML patients com- such as Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML). We studied ITPA pared to the control group which is composed of CD33+ cells isolated gene expression in CML patients and our results showed a significant from healthy bone marrows(2,5fold).Herg1b expression was found reduction of ITPA gene expression in CML patients in comparison to to be higher in pAML patients(20 fold,p<0.01) compared to controls. controls. Also two unusual variants of ITPA transcript in addition to The results of herg1 and herg1b expressions revealed that expression expected transcript were detected in some CML samples. These un- of herg1 was found to be higher in stomach and pancreas tumors, usual variants were cloned and sequenced and their protein structure but lower in colon and breast tumors compared to controls.Though, predicted using bioinformatics software. It revealed that theses vari- increased herg1b expression level was determined in stomach, co- ants have nucleotide deletions in their ORF region. The results of their lon and pancreas tumors while it was determined to be downregu- protein prediction showed that their proteins don’t have the efficiency lated in breast tumors compared to controls.The presence of HERG1 of catalytic activity. According to decreased expression of this gene in and HERG1B was confirmed by western blot analysis.HERG-K897T, patients and presence of these unusual variants; it seems the function known to create a new phosphorylation site for Akt protein kinase, was of ITPase has been altered in CML patients. significantly more common among pAML patients(37%).The study of the effect of K897T on PI3K signaling is ongoing.The increased level of herg1b expression in pAML patients and tumors must be a resultCancer genetics 0 P06.177 Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul Univer- somatically acquired JAK mutations in adult acute sity, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncol- lymphoblastic leukemia ogy, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul University, Institute of Experimental Medical E. Flex1, V. Petrangeli1, L. Stella2, S. Chiaretti3, T. Hornakova4, L. Knoops4, F. Research (DETAE), Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey. Paoloni3, V. Cordeddu1, M. Sanchez1, G. Cazzaniga5, A. Tornesello6, M. Vignet- Constitutive PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling is upregulated by the activat- ti3, J. Renauld4, A. Biondi5, S. N. Constantinescu4, R. Foà3, M. Tartaglia1; ing mutations of receptor tyrosine kinases, autocrine/paracrine secre- 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Università “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, tion of growth factors and estrogens triggering the binding of ERα to 3Università “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 4Université catholique de Louvain, Brux- PI3K and ERβ to AKT.Mutational analysis of FLT3 together with the elles, Belgium, 5Università di Milano Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 6Università Cattolica expression analysis of VEGF receptors, estrogen receptors and IGF del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. system were performed in pediatric AML (pAML) patients and controls, Aberrant signal transduction contributes substantially to leukemogen- CD33+ cells isolated from healthy bone marrows.FLT3/ITD and FLT3/ esis. Here, we report that somatic mutations in the Janus kinase 1 D835 mutations have been identified in 12% and 2 % of 50 pAML (JAK1) gene, which encodes a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase that non- patients respectively.Flt-1 and KDR expression were determined to be covalently associates with a variety of cytokine receptors and plays significantly higher in pAML patients.ERα expression was observed in a nonredundant role in lymphoid cell precursor proliferation, survival 54.5% of the patients where diminished ERβ expression was deter- and differentiation, occur in individuals with acute lymphoblastic leuke- mined.The results of the IGF system genes expression studies indi- mia (ALL). JAK1 mutations were more prevalent among adult subjects cated higher IGF-1 expression(16.3 fold), and significantly lower IGF-2 with T-cell precursor ALL, where they accounted for 18% of cases, and IGF-1R expressions in pAML patients.IGFBP-rP1 expression was and were associated with advanced age at diagnosis, poor response 10.48 fold lower in pAML patients.Expression studies of initiator cas- to therapy and overall prognosis. All mutations were missense, some pases, caspase8 and caspase9 revealed low level of caspase9 and predicted to destabilize interdomain interactions controlling the activity increased level of caspase8(13.6 fold) expression in pAML patients. of the kinase. Three mutations that were studied promoted JAK1 gain IGFBP-rP1 and caspase8 expressions were also evaluated by west- of function, and conferred interleukin 3-independent growth in Ba/F3 ern blot analysis in pAML samples.Upregulation of PI3K/Akt pathway cells and/or interleukin 9-independent resistance to dexamethasone- through altered expression levels of upstream mitogenic growth fac- induced apoptosis in T cell lymphoma BW5147 cells. Such effects tors and their receptors were also confirmed by altered expression were associated with variably enhanced activation of multiple down- levels of Akt downstream genes; c-myc and cyclin D1 as a result of stream signaling pathways. Leukemic cells with mutated JAK1 alleles GSK3ß phosphoinhibition in pAML patients.To our knowledge this is shared a gene expression signature characterized by transcriptional the first data representing the loss of ERβ gene expression in pediatric upregulation of genes positively controlled by JAK signaling. Our find- AML patients.Our study showed that IGF-1 and caspase8 could be ings implicate dysregulated JAK1 function in ALL, particularly of T-cell potential antiapoptotic markers and IGFBP-rP1 a new tumor suppres- origin, and point to this kinase as a target for the development of novel sor in pAML. anti-leukemic drugs. P06.180 P06.178 study of suz12 gene expression in chronic myelogenous study of the effect of mRP1 gene polymorphisms on its mRNA leukemia patient expression in acute leukemic patients M. Ghalandary1, B. Hassannia1, M. Behmanesh1, M. T. Akbari2; S. Rezvani, F. Mahjubi, M. Montazeri; 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Science,Tarbiat Modares University, National Institute of Genetic Engineering&Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, Is- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of lamic Republic of Iran. Basic Science,Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. One of the major problems in treating cancer cells is that they can Polycomb group proteins are transcriptional repressors that play a acquire drug resistance (so called Multidrug Resistance: MDR). There central role in the establishment and maintenance of gene expression are several mechanisms responsible for MDR. One of the most impor- patterns during development. Trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine tant is the overexpression of ABC transporter genes. One of the most 27, mediated by a PcG protein complex consisting of Eed, Ezh2, and extensively studied genes involved in MDR is multidrug resistance pro- Suz12, is integral in differentiation, stem cell self-renewal, and tumori- tein 1 (MRP1). We have shown that the overexpression of this gene is genesis. Deregulated activity of the chromatin remodeling Polycomb associated with the MDR in Iranian leukemic patients. However, MRP1 Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) has recently been shown to be a fre- gene amplification could not be identified in any of those patients. An- quent event in human tumors. Recent study shows that loss of Suz12, a other mechanism is the influence of the MRP1 gene polymorphisms on core component of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2), function the expression level of the gene. enhances hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) activity. Their study suggests We aimed to investigate the possible association between the expres- that PRC2 is required to maintain a specific gene expression pattern sion level of MRP1 and occurrence of MDR in leukemic patients. Fur- in hematopoiesis that is indispensable to normal stem cell function. thermore, we wished to test the hypothesis that MRP1 polymorphisms Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a clonal myeloproliferative would be predictive of MDR in patients with acute leukemia. mRNA disorder of the hematopoeitic stem cell (HSC). level of MRP1 was determined in 111 patients with acute leukemia In this study the expression level of Suz12 gene was compared be- (including 52 patients with AML and 59 patients with ALL) by quan- tween CML patiens and control group. In this report we will present the titative real time RT-PCR and compared to the type of response to obtained results. chemotherapy. We typed G816A,T825C,G2168A,C2217T,G2268A,G1299T,G-260C, P06.181 A-275G MRP1 polymorphisms in those patients classified either drug- Fluorescence in situ Hybridization Analysis of the htERc resistant. We found that high expression of MRP1 was associated with Region in Acute myeloid Leukemia Patients MDR phenotype in both AML and ALL patients. There was no effect of O. Ozer, T. Bulakbasi Balci, Z. Yilmaz, F. I. Sahin; a particular genotype on the expression level of the MRP1 gene. This Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An- could show the lack of dependency of any of these genotypes on the kara, Turkey. chemosensivity in this group of patients. Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein complex consisting of reverse transcriptase (hTERT), proteins (hTP1) and RNA template for telo- P06.179 meric DNA synthesis (hTERC). The telomerase RNA component Expression analysis of the mitogenic growth factor receptors (TERC) gene is located at 3q26. Increased TERC gene dosage has in childhood acute myeloid leukemia; increased Expression of been detected frequently in a variety of human cancers, suggesting Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-1 and the Loss of a growth advantage in cells with increased gene dosage. Amplifica- Estrogen Receptor beta tion was shown by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in differ- F. Atalar1, T. A. Tekiner2, S. Anak3, U. Ozbek4; ent cancers. It has been suggested that the activation of telomerase 1Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Child Health Institute, Pediatric in leukemic cells may be connected with amplification of hTERT and Endocrinology Department, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Technical University, hTERC genes. The aim of this study was to investigate whether thereCancer genetics 0 is hTERC gene amplification detectable by FISH in acute myeloid leu- P06.184 kemia (AML) cells. The bone marrow samples of 23 newly diagnosed chromosomal abnormalities in 50 patients with B-cell chronic adult AML patients were retrospectively analyzed for this study. We did lymphocytic leukemia detected by array comparative genomic not detect a visible abnormality of the 3q region with the previous con- hybridization ventional cytogenetic analyses of the patients. Interphase cells were H. Urbankova, M. Holzerova, R. Plachy, Z. Pikalova, T. Papajik, K. Indrak, M. hybridized with hTERC (3q26) / 3q11 probe (Kreatech, Netherlands). Jarosova; We did not detect amplification of the region in patients. Although it has Department of Hemato-oncology, University Hospital and Palacky University been reported that hTERT gene amplification may partially contribute Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic. to the increased telomerase expression and activity in leukemic cells, B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) is the most common adult it is not possible to make such a conclusion with a small number of leukemia. The progress in molecular genetic characterization of B-CLL patients with the results of the current study, as we did not detect am- confirmed the prognostic role of IgV mutational status, as well as H plified hTERC in our group of patients. chromosomal abnormalities defined by molecular cytogenetic meth- ods. However, besides chromosomal changes with known prognostic P06.182 impact, such as deletions of 6q, 11q (ATM), 13q, 17p (TP53) detected High resolution cytogenetic analysis of a clonal der(2)t(1;2)(q31. routinely, the other additional abnormalities can be found. It is present- 2;q24.1) in an acute myeloid leukaemia ly not clear whether these aberrations have any impact on prognosis G. Gemayel1, A. Aboura2, A. C. Tabet2, M. Maurin2, B. Benzacken2, K. Yakoubi2, and disease progression. To detect abnormalities escaping from rou- A. Baruchel2, J. Marie3, S. Haiat3, B. Riou3, F. Viguie3; tine FISH investigation, we performed array comparative genomic hy- 1Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Robert debré, Bd Sérurrier, France, bridization (arrayCGH) of 50 B-CLL patients diagnosed recently in our 3Hotel Dieu, Place du Parvis Notre Dame, Paris, France. center. The aim of this study was supported by the fact, that gains and A 25-year old woman was admitted for an acute myeloid leukae- losses of genetic material can lead either to oncogenic activation of mia, AML-M2 according to FAB classification. Bone marrow karyo- protooncogenes or to loss of tumor-suppressor genes function, within type at diagnosis showed an unbalanced reciprocal translocation the gained and deleted regions respectively. ArrayCGH revealed copy der(2)(t(1;2)(q?31;q2?3) as sole clonal abnormality, in major part of number changes in 43 out of 50 patients. Except already well known mitoses. This rearrangement was not known as recurrent, leading to changes as 6q- (7 pts.), 11q- (13 pts.), 13q- (28 pts.), 17p- (5 pts.) and a partial trisomy 1q and monosomy 2q of undefinite prognosis. After a +12 (5 pts.), we detected also other recurrent abnormalities as 2p+ (11 primary resistance to induction chemotherapy, a complete remission pts.), 8q+ (4 pts.), 14q- (3 pts.), abnormalities of chromosome 18 (9 was obtained and patient could benefit from a bone marrow transplan- pts.) and others. Cases with detected 6q- were subjected to 32K tiling tation. She is still in remission at 1 year post diagnosis. path chromosome 6 arrayCGH in order to define the minimal com- Breakpoints 1q and 2q of the translocation were precisely defined by monly deleted region more precisely. We will present a summary of CGH array with a Perkin Elmer 5200 BAC clones chip, in order to de- cytogenetic, FISH and arrayCGH findings in 50 B-CLL patients. tect a potential new fusion gene. The study performed from diagnosis This work is supported by grant NR 9484 and MSM 6198959205. bone marrow which contained 61% blast cells, confirmed the 1q and 2q imbalance, with breakpoints at 1q31.2 and 2q24.1. A FISH analy- P06.185 sis was performed with BAC probes of the ship, located the closer chromosomal abnormalities in patients with B-cell chronic from both breakpoints. 2q24.1BAC probe was deleted on der(2) but lymphocytic leukaemia from a single center 1q31.2 BAC probe which covers 3 coding genes was entirely retained C. López González, D. Costa, C. Gómez, A. Varela, N. Villamor, D. Colomer, by der(2). Investigations with other probes covering the breakpoint re- M. Rozman, P. Abrisqueta, E. Montserrat, E. Campo, A. Carrió; gion are in progress. Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. B-Cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) is the most frequent P06.183 leukaemia in the Western world. This pathology is characterized by Detection and Assessment of prognostic significance of ALK the clonal expansion of morphologically mature small lymphocytes. gene rearrangement in NHL patients Convectional cytogenetics shows chromosomal abnormalities in 40- H. F. I. A. Kayed1, Mona Wahba2, Amany Osman2, Manal Ismaeil2, Dina 50% of the cases, whereas FISH can detect about 80% of abnormali- Adel2, Amal Mahmoud1., M. Wahba2, A. Osman2, M. Ismaeil2, D. Adel2, A. ties. The most common chromosomal abnormalities by FISH are del Mahmoud1; 13q14.3 in 50% of the cases, 20% trisomy 12 and less frequently de- 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt. letions of 11q22-23, 17p13 and 6q21. These alterations are associ- The non random genetic aberrations in non Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) ated with clinical course; 17p13, 11q22-23 and del6q are linked with a involving anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene, t(2;5)(p23;q35) shorter survival, followed by trisomy 12 and the normal karyotype and creates NPM-ALK fusion gene, with tyrosine kinase activity respon- del 13q14.3 is associated with favorable clinical course. sible for its oncogenic property; by activation of downstream effectors From a single center, 171 samples with B-CLL have been analyzed us- such as phospholipase C. Thus this work aimed to detect ALK gene ing conventional and molecular cytogenetics. Successful results have (2p23) rearrangement in various types of NHL by conventional cytoge- been achieved in 90% of the cases by conventional cytogenetics and netics (CC) and fluorescence in situ hybridization techniques (FISH), 94% by FISH. The rate of abnormality detections by conventional cyto- and to compare between the results of both techniques. To delineate genetics was 53% (81/154) and 80% (129/161) by FISH. These rates this aim, ALK gene rearrangement was investigated in 25 newly diag- are in accordance with WHO. The results by molecular cytogenetics nosed grade IV adult NHL patients. FISH analysis revealed positive were: 58% of the cases showed del 13q14.3, 22% had deletions of ALK rearrangement in 5 (20%) cases, 4 of them were diagnosed as 11q22-23 and trisomy 12 and deletion of 17p13 had minor frequency, anaplastic lymphoma and one as DLBCL in comparison to absolute 17% and 14% respectively. However, 28% (43/154) of the cases had negative detection of t(2;5)(p23;q35) by CC; proving the superiority of alterations which had not been detected by FISH. FISH in detection of specific genetic aberrations. According to the re- The study of CLL by conventional cytogenetics in all the samples will sults of FISH analysis, patients were divided into: Group I: with normal be discussed to detect more abnormalities. This information will be ALK signals, Group: II with ALK aberrations. useful for the study of other mechanisms implicated in this pathology In conclusion, ALK gene rearrangement was detected in NHL patients and for the obtention of information for prognosis. with different histopathological subtypes, showing maximum expres- sion in ALCL. It was correlated with good patient outcome, indicat- P06.186 ing its importance as an important prognostic factor and its potential cytogenetic studies among iranian patients with blood cancers as a promising target for therapeutic intervention. FISH technique M. Khaleghian1, C. Azimi2, M. Khaleghian2, H. Kousari2; possessed the upper hand in detection of ALK rearrangements as 1Tehran Medical Genetics Laboratory, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of an example of specific targeted aberrations in comparison to CCA. Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, Tehran Univer- Nevertheless, conventional karyotyping remained the cornerstone in sity of Medical Sciences, Islamic Republic of Iran. cytogenetic analysis because of its ability to simultaneously scan for Cytogenetic studies are important diagnostic and prognostic factors various aberrations affecting many chromosomal loci. in evaluating patients with blood cancers. More than half of all leuke-Cancer genetics 0 mias have detectable chromosomal aberrations by karyotypic analy- gression of the disease from the chronic to the accelerated phase (AP) sis. Many chromosomal abnormalities associated with particular sub- and/or blast crisis (BC), clonal evolution with secondary numerical and types of leukemia, and appear to have prognostic significance. It has structural aberrations is frequently observed. These secondary chro- been suggested that some chromosomal abnormalities, such as t(1;3), mosomal aberrations are demonstrable in 80% of cases and consist in t(1;7), t(1;19), t(2;8), t(2;11), t(8;14), t(8;21), t(8;22), t(9;11), t(9;22), some abnormalities being +19, +21, +7, +8, +Ph. t(11;14), t(15;17), del(5), del(7), del(11), del(13) are associated with The aim of our study was to investigate complex chromosomal rear- particular subtypes of leukemia, and some of them are poor prognostic rangements found in the bone marrow cells of 25 patients with CML indicators.Today cytogenetic studies are an important tools which can by cytogenetic and molecular methods; to determine the chromosomal help Clinical Oncologists to predict a good or poor response to treat- parts which are involved in complex chromosomal rearrangements ment in patients with different types of leukemia. We are presenting during progression of the disease. chromosomal studies among 79 patients which referred to our cytoge- Methods: Among 52 patients studied 25 patients were with CML and netic laboratory from Hematologists/Oncologists with the preliminarly complex chromosomal rearrangements (15 males and 10 females). diagnosis of blood malignancies, during the period of one year. The The study took place between 2002-2008. Chromosomal preparations table below shows the number and percentage of abnormal karyo- were made by standard techniques and G-banding with Wright’s stain. types among our patients. We defined as a complex karyotype more then two chromosomal ab- normalities and/or more than three breakpoints. In some patients we Number Number of performed further molecular analyses using real-time RT-PCR. Per Per Disease of Normal Abnormal TOTAL Results: Variant Ph translocations were found in 12 patients, the rest cent cent Karyotype Karyotype of them had a classical Ph translocation associated with additional Acute Lymphoblastic structural aberrations. The most frequent chromosomes involved into 4 50% 4 50% 8 Leukemia complex chromosomal rearrangements were found 11(x3), 17(x6) and Acute Myeloid Leukemia 1 16.7% 5 83.3% 6 19(x3). Chronic Lymphoblastic 5 45.5% 6 54.5% 11 Conclusions: Complex chromosomal rearrangements are associated Leukemia with poor prognosis and the genetic mechanisms are playing a role in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia 5 27.8% 13 72.2% 18 Myelodyspastic Syndrome 11 100% 0 0% 11 the progression to the blastic phase of CML. Lymphoma 0 0% 1 100% 1 Multiple Myeloma 0 0% 3 100% 3 P06.189 Thrombocytopenia & 2 100% 0 0% 2 Emergence of clonal chromosomal abnormalities in Philadelphia Leukopenia Severe Anemia 3 75% 1 25% 4 negative cells of chronic myeloid leukemia following successful Unrecognized 9 60% 6 40% 15 treatment with imatinib TOTAL 40 50.6% 39 49.4% 79 A. Bennour1, H. Sennana1, B. Achour2, Y. Ben Youssef2, H. Bellaaj3, M. El- loumi3, B. Elmeddeb4, A. Khélif2, A. Saad1; 1Cytogenetics department CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department P06.187 of Hematology CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Department of Hematol- Fluorescence in situ Hybridization Results of chronic ogy CHU Hédi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Department of Hematology CHU Aziza Lymphocytic Leukemia Patients Othmana, Tunis, Tunisia. T. Bulakbasi Balci1, O. Ozer1, Z. Yilmaz1, H. Ozdogu2, F. I. Sahin1; Imatinib is a tyrosine kinase-specifc inhibitor used for the treatment 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, of chronic myeloid leukemia(CML),it produces sustained complete he- Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Adult matologic and cytogenetic responseCR in CML patients. Studies re- Hematology, Ankara, Turkey. ported the occurrence of additional cytogenetic abnormalities in Phila- Cytogenetic abnormalities are found in 40-50% of chronic lympho- delphia chromosome(Ph)-negative cells emerging after suppression of cytic leukemia (CLL) patients. Conventional cytogenetics is a basic Ph-positive clone. These abnormalities were described in a relatively method for detecting various abnormalities in CLL. However, conven- high proportion of patients treated with Imatinib, however, the origin of tional cytogenetic analysis is sometimes not successful or does not these abnormalities as well as their biological and clinical significance yield abnormal metaphases because of the low mitotic index of the remain to be clarified. We investigated cytogenetic follow-up features malignant cells. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis is fre- of chronic myeloid leukemia patients who developed abnormalities in quently used to increase the detectability of chromosomal aberrations, Ph-negative cells during imatinib treatment. since nondividing interphase cells can be analyzed in a rapid, sensitive In a cohort of 251patients with Ph-positive CML treated with and accurate way by this method. We evaluated the common recur- Imatinib,5%(n=11) developed clonal chromosomal abnormalities in rent chromosomal aberrations in 68 CLL patients by FISH analysis in Ph-negative cells. The median interval of the first anomaly observa- different combinations of the probes 11q22.3 (ATM) (n= 62), 13q14.3 tion was 15months(range;9-36months), thus, 5patients demonstrated (13S25) (n= 58), CEP12 (n=22) and 17p13.1 (TP53) (n=42). Of the 68 complete CR, 4patients had major CR, and 2patients had minimal CR. patients analyzed by FISH, 35 (51.5 %) had at least one aberration. The most common cytogenetic abnormality was trisomy8, document- Five patients (7.35%) had two abnormalities and one patient (1.5%) ed in 8patients, monosomy7 was observed in one patient, nullisomyY had three abnormalities. The most frequent aberration was 13q14 de- in one patient and unusual translocation t(7;12)(q11;p13) was identi- letion (45.8%), followed by trisomy 12 (27.3%). In 12 patients, all four fied in one patient. After a median follow-up of 28months, cytogenetic probes were analyzed and 10 (83.3%) patients were found to have at evaluation of 6data available, revealed 4patients in complete or major least one abnormality; suggesting that analyzing all four probes might CR, 1patient in minor CR and 1patient in minimal CR. be a better approach in evaluating CLL patients. Chronic lymphocytic Our findings raise the questions of potential adverse cytogenetic leukemia (CLL) has a highly variable clinical course and the genetic events in CML patients with good responses to Imatinib; and also, abnormalities underlying this heterogeneity are frequently being inves- about potential mechanisms underlying the development of second- tigated. Along with the clinical markers, molecular cytogenetics is a ary clonal cytogenetic changes in Ph-negative cells of Imatinib treated valuable tool to help predict the individual prognosis of the patients. patients. Whereas, the answers to these questions are premature and will require further study, including additional clinical and cytogenetic P06.188 follow-up the importance of complex chromosomal rearrangements in evolution of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia P06.190 R. Mihaescu1, G. Cristina1, S. Elena2; Research on chromosomal (chromosomes No. 1-9) aberrations 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2West University of in chronic myelocyter leukemia by mLPA method Timisoara, Romania. C. Kılıncarslan, S. Pehlivan, M. Pehlivan; Background: Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is one of the most ma- Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Gaziantep, Turkey. lignant diseases studied because of the chromosomal aberration in In this study, it is aimed at investigating chromosomal aberrations in bone marrow cells of patients in chronic phase of CML. During pro- Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) and particularly the aberrationsCancer genetics 0 on chromosome regions of nearly 33 genes related with oncogenes tients died with blastic phase, 7 patients evolved to accelerated phase (MYB, MYC, NRAS and etc.), transcription factor (RENT2, NFKBIA and received Imatinib 600 or 800 mg. There are still alive 48 patients, and etc.), signal transmission (PIK3CA, IMPDH1, PTPRD and etc.), 42 in chronic phase. Complete cytogenetic response (CCR) was seen cytokines (IL1, TANK, IL13 and etc.), immune system (TGFBR1, PT- in 34 patients. This patients are monitored at 6 month with standard P4A3) and apoptosis (MOAP1, BAX, PDCD8 and etc.) by method of cytogenetics and molecular anallysis by quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR, MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification). BCR-ABL TagMan). 16 patients lost CCR, in 10 patients accelerated or blastic positive (p210 chimeric protein) 48 patients and 15 healthy individu- phase was seen in bone marrow and blood. Conclusion: Conventional als were included in the study. The aberrations on different regions of cytogenetic monitoring is an important evaluation method of the Ima- 9 chromosomes, which carried 33 genes, were investigated. Results tinib response in CML. It is necesary to complete the evaluation with were analyzed by comparing both among each other and with clinical molecular anallysis that could anounce the disease progresion earlier parameters. As a result of MLPA analyses, duplication was detected in then cytogenetics. fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) gene in 2 CML patients, in inosine 5’ monophosphate dehydrogenase 1 (IMPDH1) gene in 4 CML P06.193 patients and in Postmeiotic Segregation Increased, S. Cerevisiae, 2 Prognostic value of chromosomal aberrations in relapsed (PMS2) gene in 1 CML patient. As a result of comparison with clinical multiple myeloma patients treated by thalidomide parameters, it was understood that presence of duplications reduce K. Beránková1,2, R. Zaoralová1,2, H. Grešlíková1,2, P. Němec1,2, J. Smetana1,2, percentage of survival without progression for 7 years and a significant P. Kuglík2, L. Pour3, L. Zahradová3, M. Krejčí3, M. Holánek3, Z. Adam1,3, R. relationship is found between duplication and the response to imatinib Hájek1,3; therapy in our patient group. In this study, the duplications of 3 genes 1University Research Centre-The Czech Myeloma Group, Brno, Czech Repub- in chromosome 7 and 8 were detected for the first time in CML and it lic, 2Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Institute of Experimental was shown that chromosomes 7 and 8 should be the center of more Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3De- detailed studies. partment of Internal Medicine-Hematooncology and Clinical Hematology, Uni- versity Hospital Brno and Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech P06.191 Republic. cytogenetical follow-up of patients with chronic myeloid We have focused on four structural and one numerical chromosomal leukemia Ph1+, treated with Gleevec - the second report aberration: del(13)(q14) (RB1 gene), del(17)(q13) (p53 gene), t(4;14) C. Gug1,2, M. Cheveresan1, L. Cheveresan1, R. Mihaescu1, M. Delamarian1, I. (IGH/FGFR3 genes), gain/amplification (1q21) (CKS1B gene) and Ionita1, V. Dumitrascu1, A. Isac1, M. Iordache1, H. Ionita1; non-hyperdiploidy. All of these aberrations are known as negative 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, prognostic factors in patients treated by conventional therapy or stem 2Genetics Medical Center “Dr. Cristina Gug”, Timisoara, Romania. cell transplantation. GleevecR (imatinib mesylate) is a potent inhibitor of the protein tyro- The aim of this study is to determine the prognostic value of these sine-kinase formed under the translocation t(9;22), characteristically selected aberrations in relapsed patients treated by novel agent tha- for chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). In our center, the treatment with lidomide. GleevecR received for CML patients has been initiated since the year We have an increasing group of (recently 43) MM patients. Their 2002. This is the second report about the evolution of cases (2004 characteristics at the start of treatment: Average age 68 years, 76 % the first report). 27 patients were included in this study: 15 men and (35/43) were in the clinical stage III. and 84,7 % (39/43) in stage A. 12 women. The average age was: 42.30 years (women), 36.66 years 58,1 % (25/43) patients reached overall response during the follow up (men). The medium duration of the treatment was 20.8 months. We (median 15.6 months). have performed a cytogenetic study in 24-48h nonstimulated cultures For identification of plasma cells in bone marrow samples we have of bone marrow cells from all patients with CML at diagnosis and dur- used the AMCA antibody based imunofluorescent labeling protocol or ing the treatment. The GTG analysis revealed the karyotypes. Cyto- MACS technique. For detection of chromosomal abnormalities the I- genetical evaluation was made 6 months later, during the first year FISH technique has been used. and then every 12 months. We have considered a complete cytoge- Cytogenetic findings: del(13)(q14) was found in 42 % (16/38) patients, netical response (CCR) if there are 0% Ph1+ metaphases, a major del(17)(q13) in 8 % (3/37), translocation t(4;14) in 20 % (7/35), am- cytogenetical response (MCR) if there are less than 35% Ph1+, a mi- plification of 1q21 in 47,2 % (17/36) and non-hyperdiploidy in 60 % nor cytogenetical response (mCR) if between 35-95% Ph1+ and ab- (18/30) patients. sent cytogenetical response if there is 100% Ph1+. At 12 monts 75% Our results suggest that no one of monitored aberrations seems to obtained CCR, 16,66% MCR and 8,33% mCR. At 24 monts, 76,92% have any impact on efficiency of used treatment. It is possible that obtained CCR, 15,38% MCR and 7,69% mCR. At 36 monts, 80% ob- thalidomide overcome the negative impact of cytogenetic aberrations tained RCC and 20% mCR. At the last evaluations, 67,85% obtained except gain/amplification 1q21. We will continue in this research to CCR, 10,71% MCR and 21,42% mCR. Clinical-cytogenetical correla- reach larger data set to confirm or disconfirm our results. tions will be presented in extent. The results confirm the efficiency of Supported by grants LC06027, MSM0021622415, MSM002162434 Imatinib in controlling Ph1+ clone and prove that Imatinib is a first line and IGA NR371-3 treatment option for CML. P06.194 P06.192 MLL amplification in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) treatment with imatinib in chronic myeloid leukemia. the role of S. Izakova1, I. Sarova1, J. Brezinova1, Z. Zemanova2, A. Berkova2, L. Lizcova2, Philadelphia chromosome in monitoring of the therapy J. Maaloufova1, K. Michalova1; H. Ionita, I. Ionita, D. Calamar, M. Cheveresan; 1Institution of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. 2Center of Oncocytogenetics, General Teaching Hospital and 1st Faculty of Background: Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) has substantially im- Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. proved survival with the application of Imatinib, however, the patients Protooncogene activation may be caused by mutation, DNA rear- with advanced CML such as in the accelerated phase (AP), or black rangements or gene amplification, subsequently leading to cell cycle crisis (BC) have bad prognosis even in the era of tyrosine kinase in- disruption and tumorigenesis. Gene amplifications are produced by hibitors. Aims: To analise the hematological and cytogenetic response various mechanisms which often results in overexpression of onco- to Imatinib of chronic phase Ph 1+ CML patients and the importance genic protein. Recent reports have identified transcriptional regulatory of cytogenetic monitoring of those patients. Methods: We analised 58 factor MLL gene amplification as a potential mechanism of leukemo- CML patients diagnosed and treated in the Hematology Department of genesis in hematological malignancies. Timisoara, between 2002 - 2007. Were included in this study 48 pa- The aim of this study was to assess frequency and mechanisms of MLL tients in chronic phase and 10 patients in advanced phase of the dis- amplification in de novo AML and its correlation with clinical features. ease. Response criteria was NCCI evaluated. Patients received 400 During years 2006-2008, bone marrow samples of 86 adult patients mg Imatinib every day. Standard cytogenetics was performed at diag- were examined using conventional cytogenetic analysis and FISH nosis, at 6, 12 and 24 month. Results: Survival at 5 years was: 10 pa- with LSI MLL Dual Color Break Apart Rearrangement Probe (AbbottCancer genetics 0 - Molecular). mFISH/mBAND 11 with the probe kits from MetaSystems vided the patients in two groups according to the culture media used were used to identify the breakpoints and complex chromosomal rear- during the analyses. There were 15 patients for whom uninduced lym- rangements. The MLL gene amplification/duplication was detected in 6 phocyte cultures made in RPMI 1640 containing 10% fetal bovine se- patiens (7%). Of these, 11q partial trisomy was found in two and multi- rum and antibiotics was used and 207 patients for whom bone marrow ple amplification of MLL gene within complex karyotype in two patients, specific commercially available culture media were used. We observed MLL 5‘ end multiple amplification with subsequent insertion into short that culture success rates increased from 66.67% in the first group to arm of chromosome 10 in one patient. Chromosome 11 trisomy was 71.98% in the second group. Also, chromosome quality improved in proved in one patient. The prognosis of patients with MLL amplification the second group enabling detailed chromosome analyses, thus ab- is poor. In our cohort 4 patient died, one is alive seven months after normality detection rates increased to 11.59% from null in the second bone marrow transplantation, another one two months after diagnosis. group, emphasizing the importance of specific culture media. Molecular cytogenetic and clinical data will be presented in detail. Conclusion: MLL amplification/duplication are differentially manifested P06.197 and molecular analyses are needed to clarify all cryptic aberrations clinical and prognostic implication of cytogenetics in the undetectable by conventional techniques. multiple myeloma patients Supported by grants NR9227-3, MZO00023736, NR9481-3, I. Ionita, D. Calamar, D. Oros, M. Puiu, H. Ionita; MSM0021620808. University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania. BACKGROUND: Multiple myeloma (MM) is a malignant neoplasm of P06.195 plasma cells that accumulate in the bone marrow. As in other hema- case report of rare mLL-AF1q fusion resulting from tological malignancies, cytogenetics is becoming a major prognostic t(1;11)(q21;q23) in childhood acute myelomonocytic leukaemia parameter in myeloma. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is A. Divane1, A. Sandu2, G. Paterakis3, N. Georgakopoulos1, M. Moschovi2; more sensitive than conventional cytogenetics for recognizing chro- 1Department of Cytogenetics, Locus Medicus, Diagnostic Centre, Athens, mosomal changes. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical signifi- Greece, 2Hematolgy/Oncology Unit, 1st Dept of Pediatrics, University of Athens, cance and the prognostic role of 17p13 deletions and t(4;14)(p16;q32) “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3G Gennimatas” General in MM patients. METHODS: We analyzed the prognostic value and Hospital, Athens, Greece. the clinical implication of FISH testing in 21 MM patients treated in A 13 month-old girl was admitted to our Unit due to fever (39,50C). On our clinic between January 2006 - May 2008. Patients were tested physical examination, she was in good condition, with pallor. Liver was to detect 17p13 deletions and t(4;14). RESULTS: The positive rates palpable 1cm bellow the costal margin. Facial petechial exanthema of 17p13 del and t(4;14) were 43% (9 patients) and 38% (8 patients) was noticed. respectively. Four patients (19%) had both two abnormalities and 13 Laboratory work-up showed: Peripheral blood tests: Hb 5.9gr/dl, Ht patients (62%) had at least one abnormality. Time to progression and 18.3%, WBCs 56900/mm3, blasts 48%, PLTs 27000/mm3. The bone overall survival was significantly shorter for patients with both t(4;14) marrow aspiration revealed infiltration with blasts 60%. The cerebro- and 17p13 del, than those with del 13 alone (16.6 vs 23.5 month). spinal fluid was normal. Chest X-ray, ultrasound and CT of the abdo- The risk ratio for t(4;14) was greater than for del 13 (2.4 vs 1.4) in men were normal. Serological tests for HSV 1 and 2 were negative, a multivariable analysis and they are relatively independent negative EBV IgG positive, IgM negative and CMV IgG positive, IgM negative. factors for response to therapy. CONCLUSIONS: Interphase FISH is Immunophenotypic analysis of blasts revealed Acute Myelomonocyt a sensitive method to investigate the cytogenetics of MM. Del 17p13 Leukaemia (M5b) CD33+, CD64+, CD15+, CD11b+, CD 4+, cMPO+, and t(4;14)(p16;q32) can be used to predict treatment response and CD56+/-, CD13 +/-. prongnosis. Identifying high-risk patients for more aggressive therapy Conventional and molecular cytogenetics analysis of BM were per- is a criticat step for improving their clinical course. It is of interest how formed. FISH analysis using LSI MLL t(11q23), EVI,inv(3)(q26),t(3;3) could we integrate these cytogenetic abnormalities in the International and LSI PML/RARAt(15;17)(q22;q21.1) revealed rearrangement only Staging System for MM. for the MLL gene in 90.9% of the nuclei that were analyzed. Conven- tional cytogenetic analysis revealed a clone of t(1;11)(q21;q23) on P06.198 both, bone marrow and peripheral blood samples. Amplification 12q12-q15 is associated with adverse clinical She received chemotherapy according to AML-BFM-2004 protocol. outcome in Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma She received cytoreductive prephase with 6-thioguanin and cytarabine V. S. Lestou1,2, L. Sehn2, E. Anastasiadou3, R. D. Gascoyne2, W. L. Lam2, D. E. because of high leukocyte count. Reduction of WBC was observed on Horsman2; the same day. 1Genomedica SA, Piraeus, Greece, 2BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Cana- On day 15 in bone marrow, morphologically, blasts were <10% and da, 3Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens,, Athens, Greece. FISH studies showed 38.5 % MLL positive. MRD was not detected by Amplification 12q12-q15 is one of the most frequently amplified chro- flow-cytometry. mosomal regions in NHL. We have undertaken a comprehensive On day 21 bone marrow was morphologically in remission but FISH analysis of the chromosomal structure of 12q12-q15 in FL and DL- analysis detected 5.7% MLL positive. BCL, using molecular cytogenetic techniques to define the boundaries She continued chemotherapy. On day 49, the bone marrow was in of the amplicon, delineate the minimal core domain, and determine morphological and molecular cytogenetics remission. the genes contained within this segment for correlation with existing expression profile data and clinical outcome. Forty-three NHL cases P06.196 demonstrating 12q+ abnormalities by G-banding were further verified importance of culture medium in multiple myeloma by MFISH analysis. Multicolour band analysis for chromosome 12 was Z. Yilmaz, F. I. Sahin, T. Bulakbasi Balci; used to refine the amplified region to 12q13.1-q14.3, which revealed Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An- a variety of configurations (tandem duplications, ring chromosomes) kara, Turkey. and variable copy numbers (2-8 times). Locus-specific FISH was per- Multiple myeloma (MM) is a disease originating from plasma cells with formed using 17 BAC probes for 12q12-q15 prepared from an RPCI-11 low proliferative index. Plasma cells begin DNA synthesis and cell divi- BAC contig. Five different patterns of duplication or amplification of sion in only advanced stages of the disease. MM is heterogeneous in this region were identified, ranging from whole chromosome trisomy, its clinical and genetic properties and cytogenetic studies are valuable whole arm duplication, to regional duplication of variable size. The bor- diagnostic tools in the disease diagnosis and follow up. Existence or ders of this amplicon extended across the q-arm from centromeric bp absence of chromosome abnormalities is important in predicting the 53889578 to telomeric bp 71883142, corresponding to chromosomal answer to therapy regimens, event free and overall survival of the pa- bands 12q13.1-q14.3. This region of amplification spans ~17.3 Kb, tients. Conventional cytogenetics has been the basic method to evalu- which contains the genes ATF7, CDK2, CDK4, ERBB3, RAP1B, GLI, ate karyotype results of the patients. Thus, culture methods to obtain IFNG, MDM2, SAS and RAB21. The core amplicon, however, was chromosomes are important. In the current study, we compared our only 11.6 Kb long with amplification of SAS, CDK4, RAP1b and MDM2 culture results in 222 MM patients whose bone marrow or peripheral and was involved in all analyzed cases. These results suggest that blood samples were studied between January 2002 and 2009. We di- candidate genes within 12q13-q14.3, such as SAS and MDM2, areCancer genetics  preferentially duplicated or amplified leading to up-regulated expres- P06.201 sion, contribute to tumour progression, and are associated with ad- New variant of BCR/ABL translocation, t(4;9;22) identified at the verse outcome. onset of chronic myeloid leukemia - case report A. Lungeanu1, A. Arghir1, S. Chirieac1, G. Cardos1, M. Ciochinaru2; P06.199 1Victor Babes National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Carol A novel chromosomal translocation t(11;14)(q24.1;q32) Davila” Central Military Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. involving iGH in childhood B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic Variant forms of Philadelphia (Ph) positive patients with chronic my- leukaemia (BcP-ALL) eloid leukemia (CML) characterize ~ 5-12% of cases. The variant E. Tassano, M. Acquila, E. Tavella, C. Rosanda, C. Panarello, C. Morerio; translocations involve one or more chromosomal regions in addition IRCCS Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy. to 9q34 and 22q11. Rearrangements involving IGH gene on chromosome 14q32.3 are well Here we present a variant translocation, t(4;9;22) found in a patient known in mature B-cell malignancies and have been more recently with chronic myeloid leukemia, at the time of initial diagnosis. described in BCP-ALL. IGH translocations are usually reciprocal and Classical cytogenetics and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) bring genes on other chromosomes into close apposition with the IGH with WCP 9(R), WCP 4(G), WCP 22(R), BCR/ABL double fusion locus, where their expression is deregulated due to the presence of (Poseidon-Kreateck) and BAC/cosmid n85a3 (22q13.3), RP11-492I23 potent B-cell-specific transcriptional enhancers. A two-year-old girl was (4p16.3) probes were used to study the mechanism of variant Ph diagnosed with an ALL common type and treated according to AIEOP- translocation. ALL-00 Protocol. Death occurred after four months due to haemato- Philadelphia chromosome was visible in all bone marrow cells by con- logical toxicity. Cytogenetic analysis of PB and BM blasts revealed a ventional cytogenetic analysis and karyotypes showed two other deriv- t(11;14)(q24∼32;q32). FISH analysis with IGH break-apart probe con- ative chromosomes which could not be elucidated by GTG banding. firmed the rearrangement of the IGH locus between chromosomes 11 By RT-PCR, a b3a2 transcript was revealed, with the cDNA amplycon and 14. Cloning by LDI-PCR localized the breakpoint on chromosome shorter (between 300 and 350bp) than positive control (388bp), pos- 11q24.1 within the intronic region 1 of BC089451, a non coding gene. sible the breakpoint is into b3 exon of BCR gene. Quantitative real-time PCR showed over-expression of BLID mRNA, FISH analysis allowed us to establish the following karyotype formula: located 14Kb downstream the BC089451 gene. BLID codes for a pro- 46,XY,t(4;9;22)(q21;q34;q11). ish t(4;9;22) (wcp4+,wcp22+,BCR+, tein containing a BH3-like domain essential for apoptosis. FISH stud- RP11 -492 I 23 +, n 85a3 ;wcp9+,wcp4+,ABL+,BCR-; wcp22+, ies performed with 11 close BACs to confirm the breakpoint junction BCR+,ABL+). identified a 585Kb deletion on der(11), with complete SORL1 loss. The Our results underline the necessity to accomplish the karyotype inves- functional consequence of BLID over-expression due to IGH enhancer tigation by molecular and FISH techniques to prevent the erroneous juxtaposition is currently unknown. Mutational analysis of BLID BH-3 reporting and inappropriate disease management. like domain is ongoing. The translocation to the Ig locus may result not Acknowledgments only in deregulated expression of the incoming oncogene, but also in The authors thank Prof. Dr. Jean-Michel Dupont and Mrs. Dominique mutations due to the action of the Ig somatic hypermutation mecha- Blancho for kindly providing BAC probes and Mrs. Marioara Cristea for nism. In our case, a mutation of BLID in BH3 domain could result in a technical assistance. protein not inducing apoptosis. P06.202 P06.200 Putative association of polymorphisms in DNA repair genes with Four new chromosomal translocation in B-cell chronic cytogenetic subgroups in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia lymphocitic leukemia C. Ganster1, J. Neesen1, U. Jäger2, H. Esterbauer3, C. Mannhalter3, C. Fo- A. Carrió, D. Costa, C. López, A. Arias, A. Varela, N. Villamor, D. Colomer, M. natsch1; Rozman, F. Bosch, E. Montserrat, E. Campo; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Aus- Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. tria, 2Division of Hematology and Hemostaseology, Department of Internal B-cell chronic lymphocitic leukemia (B-CLL) is the most common type Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 3Clinical Institute of of leukemia in the Western countries and is characterized by the clonal Medical and Chemical Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical University of Vienna, expansion of morphologically mature small lymphocytes. Clonal chro- Vienna, Austria. mosome abnormalities in B-CLL are detected in 40-50% of cases by Genetic polymorphisms in DNA repair genes may influence the sus- conventional cytogenetics after mitogen stimulation. ceptibility to different forms of cancer. Therefore we investigated the We report four novel chromosomal translocations identified by conven- association of seven SNPs in five DNA repair genes with the incidence tional cytogenetic in four patients with B-CLL. of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL). We analysed 461 CLL pa- All patients were male. Clinical, laboratory and inmunophenotipic data tients and an equal number of sex and age matched controls using were consistent with B-CLL diagnosis. Cytogenetic studies were car- PCR followed by digestion with restriction enzymes. The odds ratios ried out in peripheral blood (PB) using 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13- (OR) and P-values were calculated by logistic regression analysis. As acetate (TPA) as mitogen. Cultures were maintained for 3 days in CO chromosomal aberrations are important prognostic markers in CLL, 2 atmosphere. we paid particular attention to 133 patients with the favourable cyto- The karyotypes were: genetic aberration del(13q) as sole aberration and 69 patients with Case 1: the unfavourable cytogenetic aberrations del(17p) and del(11q). The 46,XY,t(1;7)(q34;q11)[2]/46,XY[18]. rare genotypes of rs13181 in the nucleotide excision repair gene xero- Case 2: derma pigmentosum D (XPD) and rs25487 in the base excision repair 45,XY,der(7,14,15)t(7;14)(p10;q32)t(7;15)(p10;q10),del(11)(q22q23) gene X-ray repair complementing defective repair in Chinese hamster [2]/44,idem,der(13;14)(q10;q10)[6]/46,XY[11]. cells 1 (XRCC1) occurred significantly more frequently in patients with Case 3: unfavourable cytogenetic aberrations compared to controls: The geno- 46,XY,-8,der(17)t(8;17)(q10;p13)[8]/46,XY[6]. types of rs13181 were differently distributed under the co-dominant Case 4: model (A/A vs. G/G: OR = 2.66, p = 0.024) and those of rs25487 under 46,XY,t(15;22)(q26.1;q11.2)[13]/46,XY[7] the dominant model of inheritance (A/C and C/C vs. A/A: OR = 2.44, A search in the National Cancer Institute Mitelman Database of Chro- p = 0.01). Additionally, significant differences in the genotype distribu- mosome Aberrations in Cancer revealed that none of the transloca- tion of rs13181 were observed between all patients and controls (A/C tions reported herein has previously been described in B-CLL. and C/C vs. A/A: OR = 1.37, p = 0.03). Our results indicate that inborn Cytogenetic analysis of B-CLL patients, despite inherent technical limi- polymorphisms in DNA repair genes may help to predict the outcome tations, has provided important information on disease biology and cli- of CLL. We are verifying them now by correlation with survival data. nical outcome. Thus, B-CLL associated chromosomal aberrations will be identified at increased frequencies, possibly enabling more precise definition of cytogenetic risk subgroups and providing new prognostic markers.Cancer genetics  P06.203 plied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. molecular characterization of turkish patients with familial In recent years, the research and clinical management of cancer have hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis changed and been revised on the basis of genetic features that char- G. Balta, H. Okur, N. Akarsu, S. Unal, A. Gurgey; acterize the specific malignant neoplasm. The KRAS gene is an onco- Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. gene that has established to play a fundamental role in the colonrec- The aim of this study was to elucidate molecular basis of familial hemo- tal cancer therapy. It has been widely attested that novel therapeutic phagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) which has become an important agents, based on monoclonal antibody targeting the epidermal growth health problem in Turkey. Possibly familial HLH 143 Turkish patients factor receptor (EGFR), are effective only in a subset of patients. Acti- with either family history, consanguinity and/or relapses were studied vating mutations in the KRAS gene are found in 30-40% of colorectal for 3 genes and chromosomal locus 9q21.3-q22 described to date. tumours and are associated with poor response to anti-EGFR thera- Haplotype analysis for Perforin gene revealed homozygosity in 36 pies. Thus, the KRAS mutation status can predict which patient may families. Sequencing showed homozygous 5 different mutations in 15 or may not benefit from anti-EGFR therapy. For this reason in 2007 of the families. W374X detected in 9 of the families was first common the European Medicines Agency granted a conditional marketing au- mutation in Turkish population. The mutations G149S was detected in thorization for EGFR therapeutic agents intended for the treatment 2, A91V in 2, V50M in 1, novel A593D in 1 patient and an asemptom- of metastatic colon carcinoma with non-mutated KRAS (Doc.Ref. atic sibling who developed the disease afterwards. In Munc13-4 gene, EMEA/405113/2007). This decision led to the requirement of a KRAS homozygosity/consanguineous common alleles were detected in 29 mutation test in the clinical practice and underlined the need for an families. Sequencing of the gene revealed 6 different mutations in 11 of easy-to-operate test that generates quality-assured, clinical-grade re- the families. R214X, identified in 7 patients from 6 of the families, was sults. In this work we describe an inter-laboratory validation involving second common mutation. Homozygous R1065X, 627delT, L1044R, two laboratories and Applied Biosystems for a KRAS gene sequencing novel 2135-2137delTCG and R414C were observed in the rest 5 fami- protocol. We developed an improved workflow from DNA to data anal- lies. In Syntaxin 11 gene, homozygosity/consanguineous common al- ysis on the latest generation of capillary electrophoresis instruments lele were shown in 26 families. Third common homozygous mutation, with highest level of data quality and accuracy. The protocol has been c369-370delAG/c374-376delCGC, was identified in 7 unrelated fami- performed on 50 paraffin embedded colon rectal cancer samples. lies from distant cities. Haplotype analysis revealed that this mutation emerged from a common ancestor (founder effect). First prenatal di- P06.206 agnosis was given in the gene. In addition, a novel homozgous E206K KRAs mutations in human endometrium. A report on 106 cases. mutation was identified in 2 patients of another family. No homozygos- D. V. Konstantinova1,2, R. P. Kaneva1,2, A. Mitkova1,2, S. Bichev3, R. Dimitrov4, ity was detected for the chromosome 9 genomic locus. This study was S. Ivanov5, E. Tiufektchieva4, I. Kremensky1,3, V. Mitev6; supported by TUBITAK (Project No: 105S396-SBAG 3193). 1Molecular Medicine Center, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Sofia, Bulgaria, 3National Genetics Laboratory, P06.204 Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Clinic of Operative Gynecology, University Hospital of Obstet- Primary myelodisplastic syndromes (mDs)- prognostic impact of rics and Gynecology “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Clinic of Oncogynecol- additional chromosomal aberrations to 5q- ogy, National Centre of Oncology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Department of Chemistry C. Ionita1, D. Calamar1, I. Ionita1, D. Oros1, M. Delamarian2, H. Ionita1; and Biochemistry, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2City Clinical Hos- Endometrial cancer (EC) is one of the most common gynecologic ma- pital, Timisoara, Romania. lignancies in the industrialized world. The majority of cases fall in the Background: Deletion of the long arm of chromosome 5 is the most subgroup having a favorable prognosis, the type I EC. Activating so- frequent chromosomal abnormality in MDS (10-15% of MDS cases). matic mutations in the KRAS gene are common in both type I EC and Patients with del 5q, particularly those with the “5q-syndrome” have a it’s precursor lesion - the endometrial hyperplasia (EH). However, their much better prognosis than other MDS subtypes. Presence of abnor- relation to patient clinicopathological characteristics have remained malities additional to del 5q has been suggested to negatively influ- largely unclear. ence this favorable outcome. Aim:To analyse the prognostic value of We have sequenced exon 1 (containing codons 12 and 13) of the cytogenetics aberrations additional to del (q5) in a cohort of patients KRAS gene in 101 EC and 5 EH samples. with MDS. Methods: We studied 124 MDS patients diagnosed and The mutational frequency was 16 / 101 (15.8 %) in EC cases and 2 treated in the Hematology Department of Timisoara between January / 5 (40 %) in EH cases. None of eight nonendometrioid EC samples 2001 - January 2007. Diagnosis was made according to FAB Group contained a mutation and have not been included in the following com- criteria. FAB subtypes were: 52,1% RA, 12,6% RARS, 17,65% RABE, parisons. In EC, KRAS mutation was assocaited with grade one (6 / 13,45% RABET+, 4,2% CMML.Cytogenetic analysis showed 27 pa- 18; 33.3 %; p = 0.04) and was more frequent in patients staged I/II (15 tients with del (q5). From those, 12 had del (q5) associated with 1 ad- / 82; 18.3 %) and in tumors that had not infiltrated the myometrium (3 / ditional anomaly, 3 patients had 2 anomalies, 4 patients had 3 anoma- 12; 25 %) compared to patients staged III/IV (1 / 11; 9.1 %) and tumors lies and 5 patients had 4 anomalies. Additional anomalies observed in that had invaded the myometrium (13 / 81; 16 %). those patients were: 7 monosomy, 7q, 8, 11 and 13 trisomy. Medium We conclude that KRAS mutations arise very early in the pathogen- survival in this group was 41 month, survival of the patients with iso- esis of EC and that they may contribute to the development of a large lated 5q deletion and only one additional anomaly was 62 month and proportion of low grade, low stage endometrioid endometrial cancer. for the patients with 2, 3 and 4 anomalies was 50, 30 and respectively As the diagnosis of EH is complicated and has often been upstaged to 8 month. Conclusion: Patients with 5q deletion in association with 2 high-grade EC following hysterectomy, the implications of KRAS mu- or more additional chromosomal anomalies have negative prognostic tational analysis should be considered. in global survival compared to those with only one or no aadditional anomaly to 5q deletion. P06.207 sensitive detection of KRAs mutations using mutant-enriched P06.205 PcR and reverse-hybridization teststrips KRAs gene mutation testing - an inter-laboratory validated G. Kriegshaeuser1, B. Holzer2, B. Rauscher1, E. Schuster2, F. Kury1, R. Zeil- workflow for quality - assured, clinical-grade results using linger1,2, C. Oberkanins1; capillary electrophoresis 1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Molecular Oncology Group, R. Petraroli1, A. Ballestrero2, A. Garuti2, I. Rocco2, V. Ludovini3, L. Pistola3, F. Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical University of Vienna, Vi- Bianconi3,4, C. Davidson5, A. Felton5; enna, Austria. 1Applied Biosystems Europe, Rome, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Medicina Interna- The KRAS gene encodes a GTPase, which plays a vital role in cellular Università degli Studi di Genova, Genova, Italy, 3Department of Medical Oncol- signaling processes. Mutated forms of the gene are potent oncogenes ogy , Santa Maria Della Misericordia Hospital, Perugia, Italy, 4Department of and found in many human cancers. KRAS mutations are also predic- electronic and information Engineering Perugia University, Perugia, Italy, 5Ap- tive for the response to cancer therapy with certain anti-EGFR mono- clonal antibodies and tyrosine kinase inhibitors. We have developed a reverse-hybridization StripAssay targeting 10Cancer cytogenetics  mutations in codon 12 and 13 of the KRAS gene. The test is based of lymphocytes treated with aphidicolin to activate breakage at cFS. on PCR in the presence of a wild-type KRAS suppressor (mutant-en- We have determined that FRA14B and FRA14C span large genomic riched PCR), followed by hybridization of PCR products to teststrips regions of 600 kb and 800 kb, respectively. To assess the possible role presenting a parallel array of allele-specific oligonucleotide probes. of these two cFSs in cancer chromosome rearrangements we used The performance of the StripAssay was evaluated on DNA obtained fine-tiling oligonucleotide array CGH with subsequent validation of ob- from cultured cell lines, from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tained results by PCR and FISH. We have detected multiple break- tissue and from stool. Using serial dilutions of DNA from various KRAS- points within FRA14B and FRA14C occurring in cancer samples from mutated tumor cell lines into normal DNA, each of the 10 mutations breast, colon and neuroblastoma. Non-random distribution of breaks was shown to be detectable at levels as low as 1%. along chromosome 14 with preferential involvement of cFS regions DNA samples containing various proportions of mutated KRAS were was demonstrated in different cancer cell lines and primary breast tu- analyzed by the StripAssay in direct comparison to real-time PCR, di- mors. deoxy sequencing and pyrosequencing. While all methods correctly identified samples containing 25% mutated DNA, dideoxy sequencing P07.02 and pyrosequencing failed to detect levels of 12.5% or lower. Both the cytogenetic Effect in Liquidators the Accident at chernobyl NPP StripAssay, as well as real-time PCR, unambiguously identified 10%, E. A. Domina; 5% and 1% of KRAS-mutated DNA in the presence of excess wild-type Institute of experimental pathology, oncology and radiobiology, Kiev, Ukraine. DNA. Objectives: To examine correlative relationship between radiation ef- The simultaneous detectability of 10 different mutations with excellent fect rate cytogenetic and clinical effects in those who participated in sensitivity will make the StripAssay a very useful tool for the assess- liquidation of the consequences of the accident at Chernobyl NPP dur- ment of the KRAS mutation status in cancer patients. (oberkanins@ ing early and remote terms. viennalab.co.at) Methods: cytogenetic (analysis of chromosomes aberrations in cul- ture of human lymphocytes) and statistic (model of spline regression). P06.208 Group of researched was 12 100 liquidators. A detailed analysis of K-ras point mutations in Russian patients Results: The work is aimed at the improvement of biologic (cytoge- with sporadic adenomatous polyps and adenocarcinomas of the netic) dosimetry and indication of radiation affection rate in victims of colorectum radiation. Approximation of dose-effect dependence has been elabo- F. A. Amosenko1, E. L. Korchagina2, T. I. Matveeva1, N. V. Poltavets1, R. F. rated on the basis of chromosomes affection values in culture of hu- Garkavtseva2, A. V. Polyakov1; man lymphocytes and model of spline regression. The proposed model 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2NN differs from the other, based on traditionally used in biologic dosimetry Blokchin Cancer Research Centre, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, linear and linear-quadratic models, in more accuracy of approximation Moscow, Russian Federation. and possibility to predict the effect of transition of calibring curve on To investigate spectrum, frequency and clinical significance of K-ras the plateau. point mutations in colorectal (CR) adenocarcinomas and polyps of Inverse relationship of frequency of malignancies in liquidators of the Russian patients we examined alterations at codons 12 and 13 in pri- consequences of the accident: the highest values are noted at low mary sporadic adenocarcinomas at various stages and differentiation doses (10-50 mGy). Frequency of malignancies decreases with in- from 58 patients, in adenomas with different histology and displasia crease of radiation doses. The obtained data gave grounds for the from 33 patients, and in malignant polyps from 13 individuals. The av- hypothesis that low doses of absorbed radiation are statistically sig- erage age of patients with cancer was 63.2, with adenomas - 58.8, and nificant factor of carcinogenic risk. A conclusion was made that it can with malignant polyps - 62.1. DNA was extracted from surgical mate- be connected with insufficient switching on anticarcinogenic defense rial. The mutations were studied using PCR, SSCP, RFLP and auto- of human organism at a range of low doses. Cytogenetic criteria for matic sequencing. 25 (43.1%) of carcinomas, 16 (48.5%) of adenomas formation of groups of for formation of groups of increased cancer risk and 9 (69.2%) of malignant polyps examined harbored are determined. K-ras mutations. The mutation pattern of K-ras of CR carcinomas was Conclusion: Low doses of absorbed radiation are statistically a signifi- GGT->GaT (32%), GtT (16%), GcT (12%), aGT (8%), tGT (8%), GGC- cant factor of carcinogenic risk. >GaC (20%), cGC (4%); in adenomas - GaT (37.5%), GtT (31.3%), aGT (6.2%), cGT (6.2%), GaC (18.8%); and in malignant polyps - GaT P07.03 (33.3%), GtT (11.1%), tGT (22.3%), GaC (33.3%). Thus the mutation Array-based comparative genomic hybridization profiling profiles of K-ras at codons 12 and 13 in Russian patients are not dif- of diffuse astrocytomas for genomic aberrations linked to ferent from spectrum found in other parts of the world. The relation- prognosis ship between the presence of K-ras mutation in samples and clinico- A. Brockschmidt1, E. Külshammer1, B. Klink2, C. Landwehr1, B. Radlwimmer3, pathological data of the investigated individuals (age at diagnosis, sex, M. Sabel4, J. Schramm5, M. Westphal6, G. Schackert7, J. Tonn8, T. Pietsch9, H. staging of cancer, histology of adenomas, the location of tumours or Berger10, M. Löffler10, M. Weller11, G. Reifenberger2, R. G. Weber1; polyps) were analysed. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Neuropathology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düs- seldorf, Germany, 3German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, P07. cancer cytogenetics 4Department of Neurosurgery, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 5Department of Neurosurgery, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University, Bonn, P07.01 Germany, 6Department of Neurosurgery, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Ger- High-resolution mapping of chromosomal rearrangements at many, 7Department of Neurosurgery, Technical University, Dresden, Germany, common fragile sites on chromosome 14 in tumor cells 8Department of Neurosurgery, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germa- D. Ibragimova, A. Blumrich, L. Brückner, M. Schwab, L. Savelyeva; ny, 9Department of Neuropathology, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University, DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany. Bonn, Germany, 10Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, Common fragile sites (cFS) are regions of genomic instability that are University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 11Department of Neurology, University particularly prone to breakage under conditions partially inhibiting DNA Hospital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. synthesis. These regions are found in all individuals and appear to be The clinical course of patients with diffuse astrocytomas of WHO grade the hotspots of chromosomal rearrangements in cancer and neurologi- II (AII) is highly variable. To identify genomic alterations possibly linked cal diseases. Approximately 90 cFS regions have been cytogenetically to prognosis, we screened 11 AII from patients with a long recurrence identified, but only few of these have been determined at DNA se- free interval (RFI) of 60-144 months (AII-long), 9 AII from patients with quences level and completely characterized. Two aphidicolin-inducible a short RFI of 2-25 months (AII-short), and 12 anaplastic astrocyto- cFS on chromosome 14, FRA14B and FRA14C, are listed in Genome mas (WHO grade III, AAIII) for genomic imbalances by genome-wide Database and located at 14q23 and 14q24.1, respectively. To identify array-based comparative genomic hybridization. The number of ge- the precise genomic position of these cFS, we have performed six- nomic imbalances was higher in AII-short as compared to AII-long, with colour FISH-mapping with BAC-probes on metaphase chromosomes an average of 9.7±1.6 vs. 7.5±2.4 (mean±SEM) alterations per tumorCancer cytogenetics  (range: 3-19 vs. 2-31), and highest in AAIII (mean±SEM: 14.3±3.3, From the 2nd panel of probes there was amplified C-MYC,3q26 and range: 2-47). The following imbalances were identified to be frequent in 5p15.2region. AAIII and more frequent in AII-short as compared to AII-long: Gain on Conclusions: (1)The presence of amplified genes in the PB lympho- 7q (AAIII: 67%, AII-short: 67%, AII-long: 45%), loss on 10q (AAIII: 50%, cytes suggest that there are malignant circulating cells. AII-short: 44%, AII-long: 18%), loss on 14q (AAIII: 50%, AII-short: 33%, (2)During their 2ys follow-up none has developed a definite cancer so AII-long: 18%), loss on 19q (AAIII: 58%, AII-short: 44%, AII-long: 27%), a permanent oncogenic stimulus or other co-factors are required for gain on 20p (AAIII: 42%, AII-short: 33%, AII-long: 18%), gain on 20q neoplastic transformation. (AAIII: 42%, AII-short: 22%, AII-long: 9%), and loss on 22q (AAIII: 33%, (3)The gains of 5p15.2 and 3q26 are interesting given the presence AII-short: 22%, AII-long: 0). In summary, AII from patients with short RFI of the hTRand hTERT genes,which can be the target for amplification seem to contain a higher average number of genomic imbalances per during the transformation of human malignacies. tumor than AII from patients with a long RFI. Furthermore, our data sug- gest that the presence of gains on 7q, 20p and 20q as well as losses on P07.06 10q, 14q, 19q and 22q may be linked to poor prognosis in AII. mosaic isochromosome Xp in a girl with short stature and bone marrow failure P07.04 C. Morerio, E. Tavella, A. Casalaro, C. Dufour, C. Panarello, E. Tassano; Detection of a High incidence of chromosomal Rearrangements IRCCS Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy. in the centromeric Regions of gastric adenocarcinoma subjects A 18-month girl, second daughter of unrelated parents, was diagnosed from coimbatore south india with bone marrow (BM) failure and treated with cyclosporine ad ste- P. Manikantan, V. Balachandar, K. Sasikala, B. Lakshmankumar, S. Moha- roids, with partial response. At 6 years of age, she was referred to nadevi; us for anemia, low white bood cell and platelet counts. BM aspirate Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. showed no blasts or myelodysplasia; bone biopsy showed reduced Gastric cancer is the third most frequent type of neoplasia and the cellularity and megakaryocyte number. Her height was <3rd centile second most important cause of cancer-related death in the world.. To due to partial GH deficiency. MR showed Chiari I malformation. Slight evaluate chromosomal aberrations implicated in gastric carcinogen- somatic dysmorfisms were observed. DEB tests on peripheral blood esis, we analyzed 24 samples of gastric adenocarcinoma by fluores- (PB) lymphocytes and fibroblasts were negative. c-Mpl gene associ- cence in situ hybridization using a chromosome 8 a-satellite probe and ated with amegakaryocytic congenital thrombocytopenia, is not mutat- by direct chromosomal analysis techniques. Trisomy 8 was the main ed. The Q-banded karyotype of PHA-stimulated PB lymphocytes was finding of this study, observed in all cases. There was no significant dif- 46,X,i(X)(p10)[6]/46,XX[43]. Dual color FISH analysis using Xp- and ference between chromosome 8 ploidy and localization, stage, or histo- Xq-arm partial paints confirmed the staining of the entire two isochro- logical type of adenocarcinoma in the experimental subjects. The high mosome p-arms and revealed a subtle q-arm signal in the centromer- incidence of alterations we found in chromosome 8 may be a regional ic region. Compared to the normal X, the size of centromere signal characteristic, related to the high incidence of this neoplasm in gastric (DXZ1 coupled with STS Xp22.3) was larger, suggesting an isodicen- adenocarcinoma and a strong influence of external factors, such as tric chromosome. FISH with subtelomeric Xpter (RP11-215A12) probe food habits. This aberration may comprise a cytogenetic subgroup of and RP13-216E22 BAC probe, which specifically hybridizes to the this neoplasm. Additional investigations are necessary to confirm the XIST locus on Xq13.2, showed the absence of the inactivation center involvement of chromosome 8 and to identify genes in this chromo- on i(X)(p10). Subtelomeric Xpter FISH analysis on BM cells demon- some related to gastric carcinogenesis. An increased copy number of strated three signals in 11/300 nuclei. Fibroblast karyotype was 46,XX. chromosome 8 needs to be better investigated in other stages of gas- Uncommon acquired i(X)(p10) associated with hematologic disorders tric neoplasias, to clarify whether it is an etiologic cause of malignant as well as one case of constitutional mosaic i(X)(p10) in a girl with transformation or a consequence of the proliferation process. failure to thrive and thrombocytopenia have been reported in the lit- erature. Our case seems to confirm the i(X)(p10) involvement in bone P07.05 marrow failure. the development of HPV cervical cancer is associated with the involvement of multiple genes P07.07 S. N. Kokkinou, K. Tzanidakis, A. Lindou; Alterations in p16 and p53 genes and chromosomal findings in Cytogenetic Unit, Sismanoglion General Hospital, Halandri, Greece. patients with lung cancer:FisH and cytogenetic study Introduction: Cervical cancer is a worldwide disease and infection with O. Demirhan1, D. Tastemir1, S. Hasturk2, S. Kuleci2, I. Hanta2; high-risk human papillomavirus(HPV)is the major risk factor of it’s de- 1Çukurova University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Medical Biology and Genet- velopment. ics, Adana, Turkey, 2Çukurova University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Chest Aim Of The Study: In cervical cancer of HPV infected women the Diseases, Adana, Turkey. ATM,p53,EGFR,HER-2/TOP2A genes,are involved and affect the out- Cromosomal aberrations and genes instability are two factors related come of the disease. to the genetic instability of cancer cells. A loss of tumor suppressor Recently two human telomerase gene locus,the hTERT(5p15.2)and function of p16 and p53 are the most common event leading to the hTERC(3q26)play a critical role. development of human cancers. Cromosomal abnormalities with lung Patients: Twenty women 22-51ys were transferred to Cytogenetic unit. cancer may provide a valuable clue to the identification of target loci All they had a family history of breast/ovarian cancer and they had a and successful search for major genes. The aim of this study was to chronic cervical inflammation. investigate alterations of p16 and p53 genes and chromosomal aber- They got a new PAPtest looking for the presence of oncogenic HPV rations in patients operated on for small cell and non-small cell lung infection. cancer by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and cytogenetic Methods: Peripheral blood lymphocytes(PB )were cultured using studies. We performed cytogenetic analysis by G-banding in 18 cases. standard techniques.Thirty GTG banded metaphases were analyzed FISH with p16 and p53 gene probes were used on interphase nuclei to (ISCN2005). For FISH we used 2 panel probes(1)LSI HER-1,HER2/ screen the lung. We observed a high frequency the loss of p16 gene TOP2A/ in 44% and p53 in 39% of our cases with LC. Structural aberrations CEP17,LSI p53,ATM(VYSIS). predominated and usually consisted of deletions, breaks and fragilities (2)hTERT(5p15)/EGRI(5q31)and hTERC(3q26),C-MYC(8q24),SE of various chromosomes. Chromosomes 3 and 1 were found to be triple color probe(KREATECH). most frequently involved in structural abnormalities followed by chro- Two hundred interphase nuclei were counted for any single probe in mosomes 6, 9 and 8. Otozomal aneuploidies were also observed to be all. most frequent. Expressed FSs were a significantly higher frequency of Results: High riskHPV16/18 was detected in the 2youngest pts,the in- seven FS at 3p14, 1q21, 1q12, 6q26, 8q22, 8q24 and 9q13. Our data termediate risk 35/39in10 and the low risk type 6/11in 8. confirmed that DNA damage and genomic instability may be contribut- The karyotypes looked normal. ing factors to the mutation profile and development of lung cancer. The In all there were circulating cells with amplification of EGFR,HER-2/ smokers who developed lung cancer also express a high frequency TOP2A gene,and deletion of p53/ATM gene. the loss of p16 and p53, and the chromosomal aberrations.Cancer cytogenetics  P07.08 P07.10 molecular cytogenetic study of oligodendroglial tumors Value of combined array cGH and conventional cytogenetic L. Lizcova1, Z. Zemanova1, F. Kramar2, S. Ransdorfova3, P. Hrabal4, K. Micha- analysis for a precise characterization of childhood and adult lova1; solid tumors 1Center of Oncocytogenetics, General Teaching Hospital and 1st Faculty of E. Stejskalova1, H. Urbankova2, J. Malis1, K. Pycha3, L. Krskova4, R. Kodet4, Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Neuro- M. Jarosova5; surgery, Central Military Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles Univer- 1Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Prague, Czech Republic, sity, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Hematology and Blood Tranfusion, 2Department of Hemato-oncology, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 3Department of Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Pathology, Central Military Hospital, Pediatric Surgery, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Pathology and Mo- Prague, Czech Republic. lecular Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Department of Hemato-oncology, In oligodendroglial tumors, loss of genetic material on chromosomomes Olomouc, Czech Republic. 1p and 19q has been shown to predict better therapeutic response and Genetic information has become important to pathologists for the dif- longer survival. However, the significance of additional chromosomal ferential diagnosis of solid tumors. Chromosomal aberrations indicat- aberrations has not been considered. ing an unfavorable prognosis are of clinical value. Microarray Com- For detection of the 1p36 and 19q13 deletion and other chromosomal parative Genome Hybridisation (arrayCGH) allows for the detection of rearrangements in oligodendroglial cells, we performed dual-color copy number changes throughout the entire genome at a resolution interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (I-FISH) with locus-spe- that far exceeds that of cytogenetics. ArrayCGH studies, especially of cific DNA probes (Abbott Laboratories), 200 isolated whole cell nuclei pediatric solid tumors, are still scarce. (prepared from fresh non-fixed tumor tissue) were analyzed for each We have analysed 48 patients using array CGH, conventional cyto- probe. genetics combined with FISH and, where possible, M-FISH. We have We examined 35 patients with histologically confirmed oligodendrog- correlated our findings with standard morphological histopathological lial tumors (10x oligodendroglioma, 19x anaplastic oligodendroglioma, analysis and clinical features. 6x anaplastic oligoastrocytoma). Deletion of 1p36 and 19q13 region With this combined approach we have detected non random ab- was detected in 28 cases (80%). In 12 of them combined deletion was errations involving 1q and 2q, +8, +20, a t(1;6)(q21;q26) and a found as a sole cytogenetic abnormality. Median of progression free der(4)t(1;4)(q25;q34) characterising hepatoblastomas; 1q gain, survival (PFS) in this group was 47 months and only one patient died. del(1p), monosomy 22, aberrations involving 16(q13-qter), i(7)(q10) In other 16 cases additional chromosomal rearrangements typical for and a previously not published t(2;8)(p1.5;q22.3) in nefroblastomas high-grade gliomas were proved. In these patients significantly worse (Wilms) tumors. ArrayCGH has been useful in the detection of karyo- PFS was conferred (27 months, 6 patients died). type abnormalities that were not detected by conventional cytogenet- Genetic studies increase our understanding of oligodendrogliomas. ics, some of them having prognostic impact. Samples that have failed Although, deletion of 1p/19q was shown as a powerful favourable to grow in culture, for example osteosarcoma, or with a seemingly nor- prognostic marker, our study demonstrates that prognosis is influ- mal karyotype, could be analysed by arrayCGH with valuable results. enced by additional chromosomal aberrations. Further comprehensive Our findings bring further evidence regarding typical hepatoblastoma whole-genome analyses of larger series with sufficient follow-up are abnormalities, so far scarcely reported, with array CGH analysis refin- needed to prove real prognostic significance and nonrandomness of ing the resolution of conventional cytogenetics. The detected changes these aberrations. in the series of nefroblastoma patients support the already existing Supported by MZO VFN2005 and MSM LC535 evidence concerning prognostic significance of chromosomal aberra- tions in this tumor. Array CGH analysis may broaden the spectrum of P07.09 detected changes and provide results even in negative or difficult to Retinoblastoma in monozygotic twins due to deletion of Rb gene grow in vitro samples. O. Messina1, M. Arroyo2, F. Perez2, L. Gonzalez2, S. Cuevas3; 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico d.f., Mexico, 2Hospital General de Mexico, P07.11 Mexico D.F., Mexico, 3Hospital General de Mexico, Universidad Nacional Au- Analysis of cancer genes in histopathologically tumour-free tonoma de Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico. surgical margins in patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma Retinoblastoma (Rb) is the most common malignant tumor of the de- J. M. Milasin, D. Jelovac, M. Manasijevic, B. Nesic, B. Popovic, B. Ilic, V. Kon- veloping retina in children and occurs between 1 in 13,500 and 1 in stantinovic; 25,000 new born. In general, diagnosis is done at age of 12 month in School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia. bilateral cases and at age of 18 months in unilateral cases. Leukocoria, Oral cavity cancer is the sixth leading cancer worldwide and more strabismus, unilateral mydriasis and heterochromia are the presenting than 90% of malignant neoplasms of the oral cavity are squamous clinical characteristics. Sixty percent of cases are nonhereditary and cell carcinomas. 10-30% of patients with oral squamous cell carci- unilateral, 15 percent are hereditary and unilateral and 25 percent are noma (OSCC) develop local recurrences despite seemingly adequate hereditary and bilateral. There are few cases of monozygotic twins tumour resection and the incidence of metastasis is high. As p53, c- with retinoblastoma. In the present study we analyzed monozygotic Erb and c-Myc mutations have been considered as molecular changes twins with retinoblastoma in which only one of them was affected. DNA typical of cancer cells, their presence, if any, in histopathologically free from leukocytes was obtained with conventional methods. Monozy- tumour margins, could be of great importance for the recurrence risk gosity was confirmed through GeneScan. Cytogenetic analysis was evaluation. The aim of this study was to determine the incidence of performed with conventional methods. FISH analysis was done with p53, c-Myc and c-Erb mutations in tumour margins, considered normal the cDNA LSI RB1 probe in leukocytes and oral cells of both twins and from a histologic point of view. DNA was obtained from 40 mucosa their parents and in retinal tissue of affected twin. FISH analysis in 500 specimens, confirmed by a pathologist as free of neoplastic cells. P53 cells of affected twin showed: a) two copies of the RB1 gene in 20% of mutations were studied by PCR-SSCP, and sequencing, while differ- retinal tissue and in 92% of leukocytes; b) one copy of the RB1 gene ential PCR was used for the detection of c-Myc and c-Erb B2 amplifica- in 56% of retinal tissue and in 8% of leukocytes and c) no copies of tion. A relatively high incidence of genetic lesions was detected: 11 out the RB1 gene in 24% of retinal tissue. FISH analysis in leukocytes and of 40 patients (27.5%) harboured p53 mutations, 5 (12.5%) had c- Erb oral cells (500 cells) of both parents and the non-affected twin showed B2, and 7 (17.5%) had c-Myc amplification. A close follow-up of these no deletion of 13q14. We concluded that mutation in the twin with Rb patients is planned. occurred in a post-zygotic event. Local and distant spread has been a major challenge for a success- ful cancer treatment. It is considered that verification of tumour-free resection margins by conventional histopathological examination is not sufficient. Molecular analysis of margins, targeting cancer genes, could enable the selection of OSCC patients at higher risk for tumour recurrence.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  P07.12 ronmental factors. Incorporating these quantitative variables into link- Screening of TERC gene amplification as an additional genetic age analysis as well as localizing two linked disease loci simultaneous- diagnostic test in detection of cervical pre-neoplastic lesions ly could therefore improve the efficiency in mapping genes. Previously, N. Kokalj Vokac, T. Kodric, A. Erjavec Skerget, A. Zagorac, I. Takac; we proposed a robust multipoint Identity-by-Descent (IBD) approach University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. to estimate a disease locus using affected sib pairs with incorpora- The aim of the current study was to present TERC gene amplification tion of a quantitative covariate. In the present study, we extended this as possible diagnostic marker for use in routine cytological screening approach to simultaneously estimate two linked loci using different to improve the accuracy of conventional screening procedure in detec- types of affected relative pairs (ARPs). We showed the efficiency was tion of cervical pre-neoplastic lesions. enhanced by localizing two disease loci simultaneously and by using Cervical smears were screened and classified as low-grade squamous relative pairs than using affected sib pairs alone after incorporating a intraepithelial lesions (LSIL) and high-grade squamous intraepitheli- quantitative covariate through parametric or non-parametric modeling. al lesions (HSIL). From the same specimens FISH procedure using In addition to help identify factors associated with the disease and to TERC-specific DNA probe was performed. Copy number enumera- improve the efficiency in estimating disease loci, this extension also tion for TERC gene was evaluated. More than 2 signals per cell were allows us to account for heterogeneity in risk ratios for different ARPs. considered as TERC positive case. In cervical smears graded after The collaborative study on the genetics of alcoholism (COGA) data conisation as CIN1, no TERC positive cases were found in either LSIL released for GAW14 was used to illustrate the application of this ex- or HSIL. Neither was TERC amplifications found in LSIL cases with tended method. The quantitative variable “maximum number of drinks histological results CIN1 and CIN 2. Amplifications of the TERC gene in a 24 hour period” was incorporated into the linkage mapping when first appeared in HSIL cases with CIN2 histology. In the group of CIN3, searching for two linked disease loci simultaneously using affected TERC positive cases were present in LSIL and HSIL. In these, there relative pairs. This example illustrated that the efficiency in estimating were no statistically significant differences between TERC positive disease loci was enhanced by incorporating a quantitative covariate, and TERC negative cases. Statistically significant differences in TERC by using all relative pairs as well as by mapping two linked loci simul- positive cases were found between LSIH and HSIL without regard to taneously. the CIN grade. From the results obtained, it can be concluded that TERC gene am- P08.03 plifications inevitably lead to a high risk of CIN3 in both LSIL and HSIL Alcoholism and genetic polymorphisms of gabaergic system: an after cytological smear examination. A high CIN is not necessarily cor- experimental sNPstream study related with TERC amplification, but a positive TERC result certainly M. Tucci1, C. Terranova1, M. Curtarello1, L. Barzon2, G. Palu2, G. Forza1, S. demands a high CIN classification. Ferrara1; 1Section of Legal Medicine - University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Department P08.01 of Histology, Microbiology and medical Biotechnology - University of Padova, contribution of AcE i/D polymorphism to the risk of end stage Padova, Italy. renal disease in Romanian population Previous studies have advanced the hypothesis that gamma-amino- N. M. Panduru1, D. Cimponeriu2, P. Apostol2, M. Stavarachi2, M. L. Toma2, M. butyric acid (GABA) is associated to alcohol use disorder (abuse and Mota3, E. Mota3, C. Serafinceanu1, M. Panduru2, D. M. Cheta1; dependence). This association is suggested by studies that link alco- 1IDNBM, Bucharest, Romania, 2Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, hol to withdrawal tolerance, and the symptoms that define alcohol use 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy Craiova, Craiova, Romania. disorder. The aim of our study was to examine single nucleotide poly- Introduction: End stage kidney disease (ESRD) is due to diabetes, hy- morphisms (SNPs) in the glutamate decarboxylase (GAD) 67 gene, pertension, glomerulonephritis and cystic kidney disease. All this dis- the rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of GABA, associated with eases seems to be connected with a genetic background which is pre- alcohol abuse. disposing to the development of the disease. Because diabetes and The research has been structured as a case-control study. The to- hypertension are the first two causes for ESRD and rennin angiotensn tal cohort analyzed was 283 individuals, 107 of which were alcohol system has a important role in pathogenesis of this affection, ACE dependent according to the DSM IV TR criteria and 176 controls re- polymorphisms, specially ACE I/D have been extensively studied. cruited from blood donors. The study protocol has been approved by Aim: The aim of the present study is to evaluate the contribution of Ethical Committee. ACE I/D polymorphism to the risk of development of ESRD in diabetic Specifically we analyzed 26 SNPs localized in the coding and in and non-diabetic Romanian population. the untranslated regions of the GAD 67 gene with the GenomeLab Material and method: Clinical data and blood sample were collected SNPStream Genotyping System. Our preliminary results show a sig- from 321 Romanian type 1 diabetic patients, after inform consent. The nificant difference in genotype distribution of one SNP (rs 11542313) patients were divided in three groups 1-healthy controls (119 patients), localized in the exon 3 of the GAD 67 gene that is responsible for a 2-ESRD due to other causes except diabetes (119 patients), 3-ESRD silent mutation HIS-HIS (p=0.0015). In order to clarify the meaning of with diabetes (83 patients). Genomic DNA was extracted from periph- this association, further genetic analysis are being undertaken. In par- eral blood leucocytes using commercial kits and the ACE I/D polymor- ticular, we are investigating other genetic polymorphisms up and down phism was assessed by PCR-RFLP. stream from rs 11542313 that could interfere with splicing and/or GAD Results: The sample population is in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. 67 mRNA stability. The DD genotype was found in 36,13% in non-diabetic subjects and 32,25% in diabetic subjects comparative with 31,09% in healthy con- P08.04 trols. The ID genotype frequency was 49,57% in healthy controls, Association analysis of sNPs in the APP, RUNX1 and DiRK1A 48,75% in non-diabetic patients with ESRD and 53,01% in diabetic genes on chromosome 21 with late-onset of Alzheimer‘s disease subjects with renal insufficiency. in a sample of mexican patients Conclusions: The DD genotype does not seems to confer a high risk C. V. Venegas1, F. Fernandez2, F. Mena2, L. Gutierrez3, O. Rosas4, Z. Najera5, for renal insufficiency in diabetic patients (OR=1,068, CI=95%) and in S. Kofman6; non-diabetic patients (OR=1,253, CI=95%). The heterozygote geno- 1Hospital General de Mexico. Facultad de Medicina. Universidad Nacional types had a smaller risk for ESRD. Autónoma de México, Mexico. D.F, Mexico, 2Hospital General de Mexico, Mexi- co. D.F, Mexico, 3Servicio de Geriatría, Instituto Nacional de la Nutrición y Cien- P08.02 cias Médicas, Mexico, 4Servicio de Geriatría, Instituto Nacional de la Nutrición y incorporating Quantitative covariates into simultaneous Ciencias Médicas, Mexico. D.F, Mexico, 5Facultad de Ciencias, UNAM, Mexico. Localization of two Linked Loci Using Affected Relative Pairs D.F, Mexico, 6Hospital General de Mexico, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Y. Chiu1, J. Chiou2, L. Chun-Yi1; Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico. D.F, Mexico. 1National Health Research Institues, Zhunan, Taiwan, 2Academia Sinica, Taipei, Background: The β Amyloid precursor protein (APP), Runt-related Taiwan. transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) and dual-specificity tyrosine (Y) phos- Many dichotomous traits for complex diseases are often involved more phorylation-regulated kinase 1A (DYRK1A) genes are strong positional than one locus and/or associated with quantitative biomarkers or envi- and biologic candidates for late-onset Alzheimer disease (LOAD) sus-Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  ceptibility. These genes are located on chromosome 21q21.3-22.13, mation of senile plaques, a pathological hallmark of AD. Consequently, and showed linkage for LOAD. Additionally, recent studies indicate that any variations in LRP gene will lead to a defect in clearance of LRP variants in the promoter of the APP gene could up-regulate the APP high affinity ligands, as the LRP-associated protein gene (LRPAP1). gene expression and that DYRK1A could be a key molecule bridg- Taken together, these data suggest that LRPAP1 could be involved ing between β -amyloid production and tau phosphorylation. Sev- in the clearance of β-amyloid, and genetic variation at this gene could eral polymorphisms of these genes have been analyzed, however a modulate the rate of plaque formation. The association of the C766T systematic meta-analysis of this SNPs in previous association stud- polymorphism in exon 3 of the LRP gene with AD is discussed contro- ies, suggested that only (APP=rs364048), (RUNX1=rs4816501) and versially. Here, we analyzed this LRP variation and the association of (DIRK1A= rs2835740) are true allele risk with OR>1.80. Materials and intron 5 LRPAP1 (37 bp insertion/deletion) polymorphism in a number Methods: A case-control study was design to evaluate the possible of sAD patients and controls from the same white population (Southern association between these SNPs with LOAD in Mexican patients. We Italy). No statistically significant differences were found in LRP1 and studied 58 patients with LOAD and 70 sex and age-matched controls LRPAP1 genotype and allele frequencies between the AD sample and subjects. We analyzed alleles and genotype distributions for APOE controls. Together, the findings do not support a strong correlation of (ε2/ε3/ε4), (-955A/G) of the APP promoter, (C/T) of the RUNX1, and the exon 3 LRP and intron 5 LRPAP1 polymorphisms with AD, indicat- (T/C) of the DIRK1A. Results: We found different genotype frequen- ing that these variations only represent a minor risk factor for AD. cies for all SNPs analyzed between cases and controls. Association was observed for the APOE ε4 allele (OR =1.65), AA genotype of APP P08.07 (OR =1.67), TT genotype of RUNX1 (OR=1.24) and CC genotype of Detecting recessive loci using very distant consanguineous DIRK1A (OR =1.24). Conclusions: These data suggest a genetic as- relationships in a case study (AmRF) sociation between these genotypes with LOAD in Mexican popula- M. Bahlo1, C. J. Bromhead1, M. A. Bayly2, L. M. Dibbens2, S. F. Berkovic3; tion. Our results differ from studies performed in other populations. 1Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Australia, 2Wom- Acknowledgements: This work was supported in part by CONACyT en’s and Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, Australia, 3Austin Health and Northern (2004-C01-129) and UNAM (SDEI. PTID.05.5) Health, Heidelberg, Australia. We recently identified a novel epilepsy gene for Action Myoclonus Re- P08.05 nal Failure Syndrome using just three unrelated affecteds. Only one Analysis of PiN1 genetic variation in Alzheimer’s disease affected was known to be the offspring of a consanguineous relation- A. Maruszak1, K. Safranow2, K. Jakubowska3, M. Olszewska2, B. Kijanowska- ship. We identified an additional consanguineous relationship, which Haładyna4, K. Gustaw5, D. Chlubek2, M. Barcikowska1, C. Żekanowski1; was not known, for one of the other affecteds. Since publication of this 1Department of Neurodegenerative Disorders, Mossakowski Medical Research gene we have identified mutations in a further ten patients displaying a Centre, Warsaw, Poland, 22. Department of Biochemistry and Medical Chem- total of ten different mutations in this gene. istry, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 3Department of Bio- Simplified Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) to identify identity by de- chemistry and Medical Chemistry, Pomeranian Medical University,, Szczecin, scent (IBD) sharing between distantly related individuals have recently Poland, 4Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 54. Alzheimer’s been proposed. These methods can be viewed as halfway points be- Research Unit, Institute of Agricultural Medicine, Lublin, Poland. tween pedigree-free homozygosity by state sharing methods and full Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is one of the most common multipoint mapping and can assess sharing in very deep consanguine- neurodegenerative disorders. As PIN1 plays a significant role in the ous loops due to the availability of the much higher density SNP chip brain and the influence of PIN1 genetic variants in Alzheimer’s disease mapping data. remains unresolved, we performed an exhaustive analysis of PIN1 in These new approaches are promising but have not been applied to the Polish cohort. many case studies. We have applied these methods to our AMRF co- Methods: 111 late onset (AAO: 73.2±5.0 years, range 66-88; 69.4% hort where we know that the mutations lie in the gene SCARB2. This females) and 49 early onset AD patients (AAO: 52.6±9.8 years; 57.1% allows assessment of their potential in identifiying new susceptibility females) were recruited. The control group consisted of 104 healthy, loci for rare recessive diseases genome wide with just single cases non-demented individuals (mean age: 75.1±5.2 years, range: 68-90; known, or inferred to be, the offspring of distant consanguineous re- 71.15% females). We performed sequencing and/or dHPLC of PIN1 lationships. promoter and coding region in the studied groups and real-time PCE to quantify PIN1 expression in the patient with c.58+64C>T substitution. P08.08 Results: Genotype, allele and haplogroup frequencies of common AcE i/D polymorphism is associated with abdominal aortic PIN1 polymorphisms were similar in LOAD and EOAD patients in aneurysm comparison with the controls. However, we identified four novel PIN1 I. Novakovic1, D. Cvetkovic2, N. Maksimovic1, S. Cvetkovic3, L. Davidovic3; mutations (g.9805833T>C, c.24C>T, c.58+64C>T, c.382+105C>T) in 1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Bel- early-onset AD patients (EOAD). c.58+64C>T substitution was also grade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, present in two late-onset AD patients (LOAD). None of the novel vari- 3Vascular Surgery Clinic, Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases, Clinical Center ants was detected in the control group. of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. Conclusions: Although analyzed common polymorphisms are not as- The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between the sociated with AD in the Polish cohort, further studies are required to polymorphism in angiotensin converting enzyme gene (ACE, I/D) and resolve whether rare PIN1 mutations could contribute to AD etiology. abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA), a common vascular disease with high fatality rate. Previous studies have already pointed out that the P08.06 genes of the RAS system may have a significant role in AAA forma- Variations in two lipid metabolizing genes and susceptibility to tion. sporadic Alzheimer’s disease The study included a total of 127 unrelated individuals: 63 patients with V. Andreoli1, F. Trecroci1, A. La Russa1, R. Cittadella1, P. Spadafora1, G. Di AAA (56 males and 7 females, median age 69, range 32-84), and 64 Palma1, M. Caracciolo1, A. Quattrone1,2; healthy controles comparable for sex and age. Out of 63 patients who 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Pianolago di underwent surgery, 33 were with ruptured aneurysms (RA) and 30 with Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catan- nonruptured, asymptomatic aneurysms (NRA). They were genotyped zaro, Italy. for the ACE I/D polymorphism by standard PCR analysis. Allele and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia. Cur- genotype frequencies were compared between patients and controls rently, the apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele is the sole identified ge- using Chi-square test, and Kruskal-Wallis test was used to examine netic risk factor for sporadic AD (sAD) but the underlying mechanism differences in aneurysm diameter between genotypes. is not understood. One hypothesis to explain how the ε4 allele might ACE D allele was significantly more frequent in AAA patients com- affect increase AD risk in humans relies on an interaction between pared to the healthy controls (0.722 vs. 0.578, p=0.016). The genotype APOE and its receptors. Particularly, the low density lipoprotein recep- distribution of ACE I/D was significantly different between patients and tor-related protein (LRP1) is the main APOE receptor in the brain. LRP controls, but not between RA and NRA group. Significant association mediates clearence of β-amiloid aggregates of which lead to the for- was found between DD genotype and the presence of AAA (OR DDStatistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  vs. ID+II= 2.897, 95% CI 1.409-5.955, p=0.003). Average aneurysm P08.11 diameter was largest in patients with DD genotype (82.46 ± 3.3 mm) Identification of genes regulated by disease associated SNPs in compared to ID and II genotypes, but the difference was not statisti- gene deserts cally significant (H=4.71, p=0.09). U. Potočnik1,2, K. Repnik1, M. Dean3; Conclusion: our results show significant association between ACE DD 1Medical faculty, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Faculty for chemistry and chemical en- genotype and susceptibility to AAA. gineering, Maribor, Slovenia, 3NIH-National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD, United States. P08.09 Genome wide association studies in complex diseases such as asth- APOc3 Gene -482 c>t Polymorphism and Plasma triglyceride ma and inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) revealed in many candi- Levels in a turkish Population date chromosomal regions SNPs and haplotypes most significantly E. Taskin1,2, H. Bagci1,2, K. Cengiz3,2; associated with disease are located in non-coding regions or even in 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Samsun, Turkey, 2Ondokuz “gene deserts” suggesting SNPs in non-coding regions play important Mayis Univercity, School of Medicine, Samsun, Turkey, 3Department of Nephrol- role in complex diseases. ogy, Samsun, Turkey. We have developed approach for identification of functional SNPs Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the leading cause of death in the in cis-elements associated with allele specific expression in disease United States and in Europe. Elevated plasma concentrations of tri- candidate regions. In this approach we initially correlated our gene glycerides is an independent risk factor for CAD. APOC3 is a mem- expression data we have obtained from more than 500 lymphoblastoid ber of apolipoprotein gene family. Several studies demonstrated that cell lines from CEPH families to public released International HapMap -482 C>T single nucleotide polymorphism within the insulin responsive project genotype data preformed on the DNA isolated from the same element in the promoter of APOC3 gene is associated with elevated CEPH cell lines. We have confirmed genotype-gene expression cor- plasma triglyceride levels. relation resulting from lymphoblastoid CEPH cell lines in blood lym- We investigated the distribution of APOC3 gene -482 C>T polymor- phocytes isolated from patients trios using quantitative transmission phism in 67 hypertriglyceridemic patients and 147 age and sex matched disequilibrium test (qTDT). In addition we confirmed genotype-gene controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood by salting out expression correlations in patients tissue biopsies where available. method. The polymorphism was analyzed using polymerase chain re- The SNPs most significantly associated with altered gene expression action (PCR) - restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) assay. were used for disease association study in patients and controls. We Genotype and allele frequencies and their associations with CAD risk, have applied our approach to Slovenian IBD and asthma cohorts each demographic factors, and smoking status were investigated. consisting of more than 400 patients and matching healthy controls The percentages of the CC, CT, and TT genotypes were 34.3%, and among others confirmed PTGER4 gene as best candidate gene in 10.4%, 55% for the patients and 46%, 8.2%, 45.6% for the controls, 5p13.1 IBD candidate region. respectively. There was no significant association between the APOC3 -482C>T polymorphism and plasma triglyceride levels in the studied P08.12 population. (OR=1.39, %95 CI=0.89 - 2.18, P= 0.131). the LKB1-AmPK-tORc2 signaling pathway and its contribution with development of type 2 diabetes in Japanese P08.10 M. Shahdinejad Langroudi1, B. Rahmati1, P. Keshavarz1, M. Itakura2; Genome-wide association of pulse wave analysis phenotypes in 1Guilan University of Medical Science, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Institute two isolated populations for Genome Research, The University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. C. S. Franklin1, R. A. Payne1, S. H. Wild1, O. Polasek2, I. Kolcic2, V. Vitart3, C. The LKB1-AMPK-TORC2 signaling pathway controls glucose homeo- Hayward3, C. McEniery4, J. Cockcroft5, K. O’Shaughnessy4, I. Wilkinson4, A. F. stasis in the liver, and mediates therapeutic effects on insulin sensitiz- Wright3, I. Rudan6,7, H. Campbell1, D. J. Webb1, J. F. Wilson1; ing antidiabetic agents.We hypothesized that genetic polymorphisms 1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2University of Zagreb, of the STK11, PRKAA2 (encoding AMPK α subunit) and CRTC2 (en- 2 Zagreb, Croatia, 3MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, coding TORC2) could influence the susceptibility to T2D. We screened 4University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5University of Wales, exons, untranslated regions and exon-intron boundary of STK11 and Cardiff, United Kingdom, 6University of Split, Split, Croatia, 7University Hospital CRTC2 and genotyped in 1787 Japanese subjects. Additionally, the “Sestre Milosrdnice”, Zagreb, Croatia. previously described association between the PRKAA2 haplotype and Pulse wave analysis (PWA) using the SphygmoCor system is a non- T2D was tested for replication. According to single locus association invasive applanation tonometry-based method of recording the pulse test, an intronic SNP in the STK11 (rs741765; OR 1.33, 95% CI 1.05- pressure waveform in a peripheral artery. The corresponding central 1.67, p = 0.017, under a recessive genetic model), and a non-syn- pressure waveform can be derived from the measured radial wave- onymous SNP in the CRTC2 (6909C > T: Arg379Cys; OR 3.01, 95% form. The shape of this wave contains information on cardiac contrac- CI 1.18-7.66, p = 0.016, under a dominant model) showed a nominal tility and the size, speed and shape of wave reflection, which are in significant association with T2D. In PRKAA2, two non coding SNPs, turn determined by factors like arterial stiffness. A number of PWA pa- rs1418442 (previously been reported to be associated with serum rameters including the augmentation index are associated with classi- cholesterol in Caucasian females) and rs932447 were associated cal cardiovascular risk factors and events. We have measured a range moderately with T2D (OR 0.62, 95% CI 0.40-0.96, p = 0.030, under of PWA phenotypes in samples from two island isolates; the Orkney a recessive model). Haplotype analysis showed that only in STK11, Isles in Scotland (540 subjects) and the Croatian island of Korcula one haplotype containing the minor T allele of rs741765 was slightly (480 subjects). All samples were genotyped at 318,000 SNP markers associated with T2D (P=0.04). The association of PRKAA2 haplotype using Illumina beadchips. Association tests were performed separately reported previously in Japanese was not replicated in our samples. in the two populations using a genomic kinship method to correct for Among the three genes investigated herein, gene-gene (SNP-SNP) in- the close relationships among participants. Meta-analysis of these teraction studies provided evidence for an interaction between STK11 data identified seven separate genomic regions showing novel associ- and CRTC2 influencing susceptibility to T2D. In conclusion, we found a ations (up to P = 3 x 10^-8), with one or more of the PWA phenotypes, weak evidence that STK11, PRKAA2, or CRTC2 polymorphisms con- including central augmentation pressure and time delay from incident tribute to the susceptibility to T2D in Japanese. to reflected wave. Replication has been sought in 3000 independent samples from the Anglo-Cardiff Collaborative Trial (ACCT). Several P08.13 genes and potential regulatory regions which have not previously been On the value of family data in genome-wide association studies associated with haemodynamic traits have been identified here and for quantitative traits therefore warrant further study. A. Saint-Pierre, M. Martinez; Inserm, Toulouse, France. GWAS of quantitative traits are typically done using population-based samples of subjects that are, most often, ascertained irrespective of their trait values or of the trait distribution in their relatives. It is well known, however, that greater power can be achieved in genetic pop-Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  ulation-based studies by selecting subjects from the tails of the trait and Allergy Biederstein, Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Munich, Germany. distribution. Family-based study designs have not been the design of The discovery of null mutations in the gene encoding the key epi- choice mainly because of the reduced power of the orthogonal-based dermal protein filaggrin (FLG) as a major risk factor for eczema and association tests. Association testing in family data can be performed related asthma represents a milestone towards the understanding of under alternative methods, as the Measured Genotype test that has an important genetic mechanism in these complex diseases. Studies been shown to outperform orthogonal-based tests. Therefore, asso- published to date demonstrate differences concerning study design ciation designs based on family data can prove to be of more value and strength of associations and reported conflicting results on the than assumed, especially for replicating and/or following-up results impact of FLG in asthma. from population-based association results. We conducted a meta-analysis of 24 studies on common FLG muta- Here, our main aims are to evaluate the performance of association tions and AE involving 6448 AE cases, 26787 controls and 1993 AE designs using either population-based data only or combining both families as well as 17 studies involving 3138 cases, 17164 controls population and family data in a multi-stage approach. A two-stages and 4 family studies including 1511 affected offspring on asthma. Odds association study is designed. The first stage uses population data ratios (OR) for case-control studies ranged from 1.69 to 11.56 with an to identify the set of SNPs positively associated to the trait at a given overall OR of 3.39 (95%CI=2.73-4.23), while family studies showed nominal significance. These positive SNPs are tested for replication more homogeneous results. FLG mutations are also significantly as- in a second stage that uses either population or family data. We de- sociated with asthma with an overall OR of 1.48 (95%CI=1.32-1.66). veloped a simulation study to estimate type I and type II error rates of While strong effects for the compound phenotype “asthma + AE” with these two association designs. The data were simulated under varying an OR of 3.29 (95%CI=2.84-3.82) were observed, there appears to be conditions according to (1) the criteria used to ascertain the (popula- no significant association with asthma in the absence of AE. tion or family) data; (2) the effect sizes of the functional variant; (3) trait This meta-analysis summarizes the strong evidence for a high risk for heritability. AE conferred by FLG null mutations, and refines the risk profiles of FLG alleles suggesting an association with both more severe disease P08.14 and a dermatologist diagnosis. The results clearly indicate that FLG common variants of tAc3 and tAc4 tachykinin genes and null alleles are a robust risk factor in determining genetic predisposi- susceptibility to asthma tion to asthma, and suggest that FLG deficiency might help define the T. E. Klassert1, M. Pino-Yanes2,3, T. A. Almeida1, L. Candenas4, F. Pinto4, M. endophenotype of asthma linked with eczema. Hernández1, C. Flores2,3, B. Esquivel5, J. J. Sanchez6; 1Instituto Universitario de Enfermedades Tropicales de Canarias, La Laguna, P08.16 Spain, 2Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario NS de Candelaria, Glucocorticoid receptor gene polymorphisms associated with Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 3CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Insti- bronchial asthma in children tuto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 4Instituto de Investigaciones Químicas, M. V. Zhdanova, P. B. Glazkov, G. A. Novik, V. I. Larionova; CSIC, Sevilla, Spain, 5Sección de Citogenética, Hospital Universitario de Saint-Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Fed- Canarias, La Laguna, Spain, 6Instituto Nacional de Toxicología y Ciencias Fo- eration. renses, La Laguna, Spain. Objective: The authors hypothesized that glucocorticoid therapy ef- Asthma is a complex disease resulting from both genetic and environ- ficacy might be associated with polymorphisms in the glucocorticoid mental factors. Its pathological features involve an intricate interplay receptor (GR) gene. We compared clinical course of asthma among between different cell types including those from lung and also inflam- children with different genotypes of BclI and Tth111I polymorphisms of matory and immune cells. In humans, tachykinins and their receptors the GR gene. In children with difficult asthma we investigated exon 2 are expressed in many of these cells and have been shown to be of the GR gene by sequencing. involved in airway hyperresponsiveness, broncoconstriction, edema, Methods: Study group consisted of 485 children (age 2-17) with and mucus secretion. asthma; control group consisted of 151 healthy children. The BclI and The aim of this study was to investigate a possible association be- Tth111I polymorphisms were detected by PCR-RFLP. We studied exon tween eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of two tachyki- 2 by sequencing in group of 24 patients with difficult asthma. nin genes, TAC3 and TAC4, and asthma susceptibility. A case-control Results: We not found differences in allele and genotype frequencies study was performed in the Canary Islands population (Spain), where of BclI variant in asthma patients and controls. Genotype TT of Tth111I asthma prevalence has been estimated to be much higher than in con- polymorphism was rare in girls with asthma compared to boys with tinental populations. The investigation was conducted on 102 patients, asthma and healthy girls. with clinically defined asthma, and on 100 healthy subjects. Genotyp- However, the clinical characteristics of patients (severity of exacerba- ing was done by multiplex polymerase chain reaction and a subse- tion, tests for bronchial hyperreactivity, lung function data, IgE levels, quent single base extension assay (SNaPshot®). dynamics of clinical symptoms, level of asthma control via inhaled GC) Nominal significance was observed for two SNPs, one in the TAC3 showed that children carrying BclI CC genotype and Tth111I CC geno- gene conferring asthma protection (Odds ratio [OR]: 0.46; 95% Con- type have more mild clinical presentations of asthma than G-allele or fidence Interval [CI]: 0.22-0.97; p=0.038), and another one in TAC4 T-allele carries.We found that genotype CT of Tth111I polymorphism associated with an increased risk for asthma (OR: 1.94; 95% CI: 1.06- was more frequent in 24 children with difficult asthma compared to 3.54; p=0.03). children with severe asthma. Although this study is currently ongoing, these results suggest a pos- Among 24 children with difficult asthma 3 previously reported polymor- sible role for common variants of the TAC3 and TAC4 genes in asthma phisms (198G>A, 200G>A, 1220A>G) were found in exon 2. susceptibility in the Canary Islands population. Conclusion: GR gene polymorphisms linked with levels of asthma se- verity and inhaled glucocorticoids therapy efficiency in children with P08.15 asthma. meta analysis of filaggrin polymorphisms in eczema and asthma: robust risk factors in atopic disease P08.17 E. Rodríguez1, H. Baurecht2, E. Herberich2, S. Wagenpfeil2, S. J. Brown3, H. J. TGF-β1and TGF-β3 are upregulated in lung of toxic inhaled Cordell4, A. D. Irvine5, S. Weidinger6; patients, and improve effeocytosis and survival time 1Helmholtz Zentrum München and ZAUM-Center for Allergy and Environment, A. Arzan Zarin1, M. Behmanesh1, M. Tavallaei2, M. Ghanei3; Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Munich, Germany, 2Institute for Medical 1Department of Genetics, School of Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Teh- Statistics and Epidemiology, Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Munich, Ger- ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Research Center, Baqiyatallah Medical many, 3Department of Dermatology, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Research Center for Tyne, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Chemical Injuries, Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 5Department of Paediatric Dermatolo- Republic of Iran. gy, Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 6Department of Dermatology During Iraq imposed war on Iran, thousands of Iranians were exposed to toxic inhalants, and survived people suffer from respiratory disease, Bronchiolitis Obliterans (BO). Most recently it has been indicated thatStatistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 0 TGF-β improve the efficiency of efferocytosis (engulfment of apoptotic stances. When populations differ in allele frequency and disease prev- cells by phagocytes followed by cell replacement to maintain homeo- alence, population admixture could occur, but we could not find how stasis) in lung, and several lung diseases, including Asthma, Chronic this would cause such a general pattern. Obstructive Pulmonary Disease(COPD) and Cystic Fibrosis (CF) re- Exploration of existing SNP datasets confirmed that no general pro- sult from impaired efferocytosis. In order to clarify the significance of cesses of drift and migration of European populations produce such each of TGF- β isoforms in lung disease of people poisoned by toxic patterns. This suggests that disease alleles experience specific pro- inhalants, we examined the mRNA expression for TGF- β 1, TGF- β 2 cesses that do not apply to the majority of random SNPs and TGF- β 3 in lung biopsies of chemical injured patients, and com- The observations should warn investigators that non-replication or pared it with non-injured people. Lung samples were collected from even a reversal of the OR is possible -especially if the allele frequency both groups using small pinchers attached to a long cable threaded of the marker in controls is larger than that of the original publication- through the bronchoscope. Total RNA was extracted, cDNA libraries and need not invalidate the initial observation. were constructed, and Semiquantitative RT-PCR was performed us- ing GAPDH gene as internal control. Our result indicated that level P08.20 of TGF- β 1and TGF- β 3 mRNA was significantly higher in chemical Do HOXB9 and cOL1A1 genes play a role in congenital gas injured patients than non-injured group (p<0.05). The expression dislocation of the hip? study in a caucasian population of TGF- β 2 gene was too low to be quantified by RT-PCR method in K. Rouault1,2, V. Scotet1, S. Autret1, F. Gaucher3, F. Dubrana4, D. Tanguy5, C. both of the groups. Hereby we suggest that TGF-β1and TGF-β3 but Yaacoub El Rassi6, B. Fenoll7, C. Ferec1,2; not TGF-β2 may improve the efferocytosis and play a role in airway 1INSERM U613, Brest, France, 2CHU Brest, Hop Morvan, Laboratoire de remodeling and lung homeostasis in chemical injured group. These génétique moléculaire, Brest, France, 3Hôtel Dieu, Service de chirurgie ortho- properties of TGF-β are consistent with long time survival of chemical pédique, Pont-l’abbe, France, 4CHU Brest, Hop La Cavale Blanche, Service de injured people suffering from BO. chirurgie orthopédique, Brest, France, 5Centre de Perharidy, Service de médi- cine physique et de réadaptation, Roscoff, France, 6CH Quimper, Service de P08.18 chirurgie orthopédique, Quimper, France, 7CHU Brest, Hop Morvan, Service de A genome wide search for genetic determinants of fibrinogen chirurgie pédiatrique, Brest, France. levels reveals a candidate gene on chromosome 12 and a new Congenital dislocation of the hip (CDH), which is one of the most com- sex-related locus con chromosome 17 mon congenital skeletal disorders, corresponds to an abnormal seat- I. Arbesu Cruz1, M. Sabater-Lleal1, A. Buil1, L. Almasy2, S. López1, L. Rib1, J. ing of the femoral head in the acetabulum. It is commonly admitted that Souto3, J. Blangero2, J. Fontcuberta3, J. Soria1; CDH presents a genetic component. However, little is known about 1Unit of Genomics of Complex Diseases, Institut de Recerca de l’Hospital de the genetic factors involved. This study aimed to determine the role Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, of two potential candidate genes on chromosome 17 in CDH: HOXB9 San Antonio, TX, United States, 3Haemostasia and Thrombosis Unit. Hospital (involved in limb embryonic development) and COL1A1 (involved in de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. joint laxity). We set up a case-control association study (239 cases Introduction: High plasma levels of fibrinogen are well-established risk and 239 controls) in western Brittany (France) where CDH is particu- factors for cardiovascular disease. These levels are influenced largely larly frequent. The set of informative single nucleotide polymorphisms by genetic factors, with a heritability ranging from 20-40%. However, (SNPs) in each gene was selected using Tagger and genotyped using only some polymorphisms in the fibrinogen structural genes have been the SNaPshot method (n=2 and n=10 respectively). The association reported, which explain a small proportion of the genetic variability. was tested both through single-locus and haplotype-based analyses, Material and methods: we performed a Genome Wide Scan (GWS) for using SAS and Haploview software. In addition, we carried out the fibrinogen levels in 21 families from the GAIT project using 500 micro- transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) with the same polymorphisms satellites scattered throughout the genome. We fine-mapped 2 regions from a sample of 81 trios (i.e. 81 patients included in the case-control that showed a clear linkage signal with fibrinogen levels with extra study and their both parents). The case-control study revealed no sig- SNPs. (1.195 SNPs on Chromosome 12, and 667 SNPs on Chromo- nificant association between CDH and the tagSNPs selected in both some 17). Analyses were performed in male and female separately. HOXB9 and COL1A1. Moreover, the TDT did not reveal distortion in al- Results: We found one significant linkage signal on chromosome 12 lelic and haplotype transmission of the studied markers. Our study did (LOD=2.1; nominal p= 0.00094), and one on chromosome 17, only de- not support an association between HOXB9 and COL1A1 and CDH in tected in females (LOD=3.2; nominal p= 0.00003). 2 SNPs, localized our population. These negative findings were obtained by population- on the TCF1 gene, showed a statistically significant association with fi- and family-based designs. Analysis of the genetic component of CDH brinogen levels on chromosome 12. This gene codifies for Hepatocyte should focus on other candidate genes. Nuclear Factor 1 implicated on transcription of alpha and beta chains of fibrinogen. 8 SNPs have shown a statistically significant association P08.21 with fibrinogen levels on chromosome 17. Distribution of 35delG “silent” mutation in the GJB2 gene among Conclusion: Looking at these results, TCF1 is postulated as the re- healthy population in Northwest region of Russia sponsible gene for the linkage signal on chromosome 12. On chromo- S. G. Zhuravskii1, S. A. Ivanov1, A. E. Taraskina1, O. V. Grinchik1, A. A. Kurus1, some 17, we have enclosed a 10 Mb region which contains several A. M. Melnik1, K. V. Nourski2, T. Sathiyaseelan3; interesting hormone-related genes which could explain the female- 1St.Petersburg I.P.Pavlov State Medical University, St.Petersburg, Russian specific signal in this region. Federation, 2University Of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 3University Of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. P08.19 Present literatures demonstrate that more than half cases of congeni- selection and migration as possible causes of failure of case- tal hearing impairment with an occurrence of 1 in every 750-1000 new- control study replications borns are associated with hereditary pathology, where Connexin 26 C. G. F. de Kovel, B. P. C. Koeleman; (GJB2) gene mutations seem to be the main molecular-genetic cause UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. for the nonsyndromic heraring loss. Replications of genetic association studies for human disease often Of these, the most common cause of autosomal recessive hearing give variable results. Stimulated by a recently described geographic loss is 35delG mutation, which is responsible for 70% of prelingual cline in odds ratios, we investigated fifteen sets of at least seven rep- hearing loss cases among caucasians. The average carrier frequency licates of the same allele-disease case-control studies and found a of 35delG among the healthy European population is about 1.26 % in striking pattern: odds ratios generally decline with increasing frequen- Northern Europe and 2,85% in Southern Europe. Although GJB2 gene cy of the marker allele. The OR even flips from risk to protective in mutation has been widely studied throughout the world for over 15 seven out of fifteen sets. years, Russia is still at the early stages of analyzing this mutation. We investigated whether this could be a sampling artefact or the re- Distribution of 35delG (GJB2) mutation among the population in the sult of population processes, such as drift, selection or migration. Drift Northwest region of Russia was investigated in this study. appears unlikely to have created these patterns. Both selection and Presence of the 35delG mutation in the GJB2 gene was detected by migration can cause the observed pattern, but only in specific circum- PCR in 1153 healthy slavic origin individuals (603 male and 550 fe-Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  male), residing in northwestern cities of Russia (St. Petersburg, Pskov, P08.23 Arkhangelsk and Kaliningrad), and a high frequency heterozygous Role of cytochrome P450 2c19 genetic polymorphisms on carriers of this mutation was revealed (5,5%; 4,7%; 5% and 7,5% cor- therapeutic efficacy of omeprazole in Iranian patients with respondingly). erosive reflux esophagitis This is the first study where the distribution of 35delG heterozygous N. Zendehdel1, F. Biramijamal1, A. Hossein-Nezhad1, N. Zendehdel2, M. carrier was analyzed among healthy Northwest population of Russia. Doughaiemoghaddam3, H. Sarie3, A. Pourshams4; The obtained data suggest that the distribution of «silent» mutation in 1National Institue of Genetic Engineering, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, the northwest region of Russia significantly exceed the known Euro- 2Internal Medicine Department,Shahid beheshti university(MC), Tehran, Islamic pean data. Republic of Iran, 3Fayyazbakhsh Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Digestive Disease Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P08.22 GERD is characterized by the reflux of stomach acidic contents to Genotype and phenotype testing of cYP2D6 gene in 91 patient esophagus. Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) such as omeprazole are treated with Paroxetine the most effective agents available for the treatment of GERD. Cy- E. Flodrova1,2,3, J. Jurica4, R. Bartecek2,3, R. Gaillyova1,3, A. Zourkova2,3; tochrome p450 2c19 (CYP2c19) enzyme is responsible for metabo- 1Faculty Hospital, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Faculty lism of omeprazole. Two common polymorphisms of cyp2c19 (G>A Hospital, Psychiatric Clinic, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk University, Faculty substitutions at codons 212, 227) decrease the enzyme activity. Indi- of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Faculty, of Medicine, Dept. of Pharmacol- viduals with different genotypes can be divided to extensive metabo- ogy, Brno, Czech Republic. lizers (EMs) and poor metabolizers for omeprazole. This study was The gene CYP2D6 encodes enzyme involved in biotransformation of conducted to investigate the effect of cyp2c19 gene polymorphisms on psychotropics in psychiatric treatment. The Caucasian population has omeprazole efficacy in relation to clinical and histological response to been grouped in according to the enzymatic activity as poor, intermedi- treatment in Iranian patients with reflux esophagitis (RE). ate, effective and ultrarapid metabolizers. The determination of meta- Eighty two Iranian patients with RE were enrolled in the study and un- bolic activity prior the dose adjustment could be really useful in some derwent treatment with omeprazole 20mg/bd for 4 weeks. The grade of cases. esophagitis was detected by endoscopy. Severity of symptoms, were The methodical approach of genotyping is based on long PCR and assessed in the beginning and end of treatment. Cyp2c19 genotype subsequent sequencing. These standard methods are combinated was detected by RFLP method. with RealTimePCR and High Resolution Melting analysis (HRM) us- The rate of complete clinical response to treatment with omeprazole ing Light Cycler 480 System. Recently is possible to detect the most (20mg/bd) was 95 %( 95% CI, 86%-103%) in heterozygous extensive frequent null alleles 3* 4* 6* 7* and 8*. Allele 5* could be detected by metabolizer (hetero-EMs) group, that was higher as compared to the using agarose electrophoresis or UPL probes. HRM analysis has been homozygous extensive metabolizer (homo-EM) group [43 %( 95% CI, performed for the most frequent SNP´s in CYP2D6 gene as a fast 32%-54%)].(P<0.001) Cyp2c19 polymorphism influences the efficacy cheap and reliable method for pre-genotyping. of omeprazole in Iranian patients with RE. The clinical response and O-demethylation of dextromethorfan was used for metabolic activity endoscopic improvement of esophagitis are independent from each assesment. The concentrations of marker and metabolite in the urine other in response to treatment with the same dosage of omeprazole, were determined by HPLC assay. The phenotypes PM and EM were but they are both influenced by the cyp2c19 genotype status. distinguished by using 0,3 antimode. The clinical data were analyzed and compared with genotype and phe- P08.24 notype result. TGF-β codon 25 Polymorphism and the Risk of Graft-Versus- This paper provides an overview of current technologies available for Host Disease after Allogenic Haematopoietic stem cell CYP2D6 genotype and phenotype testing and the result of testing of transplantation the group of 91 patients, treated with Paroxetine. A. Rashidi–Nezhad, C. Azimi, K. Alimoghaddam, A. Ghavamzadeh, P. Izadi, The effect of Paroxetine treatment on CYP2D6 is summarized in Table M. Sobhani, A. Ali-Reza, A. Hossein-Nezhad, M. Noori–Daloii; 1. Tehran Univ. of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Supported by research project MSM 0021622404 (2005 - 2011) Certain cytokine genotypes are associated with acute graft versus host Frequency of disease (aGVHD) after bone marrow transplantation (BMT). The pres- Genotype Phenotype Number of patients MR>0,3 PM MR<0,3 EM phenotypes ent study aimed to determine existing association between TGF-β1 *1*1 EM 31 50 55% 19 23 12 27 codon 25 polymorphism and aGVHD after HLA-identical sibling BMT *2*1 8 1 7 in the Iranian population. In a retrospective case-control study, 172 *2*2 1 0 1 subjects including 86 Iranian HLA-identical sibling BMT donor/recipient *1*9 2 0 2 pairs were recruited. All of the patients were affected by haematologi- *2*9 1 0 1 cal malignancies (AML=40, ALL=25 and CML=21). PCR-SSP method *1*41 2 0 2 was performed to determine TGF- β1 codon 25 G/C polymorphism *2*41 2 2 0 genotypes. The frequency of TGF- β1 codon 25 GG, GC and CC geno- *1*10 2 0 2 types among all subjects were 77.3%, 21.5% and 1.2% respectively. *2*10 1 1 0 Recipients with the GG genotype developed severe aGVHD signifi- *1*4 IM 15 34 37,40% 7 21 8 13 cantly more than those with CC or GC genotype (Odds Ratio =12.133, *2*4 5 2 3 P=0.015). Genetic background of TGF-β1 may be involved in aGVHD *33*4 1 1 0 development and/or severity in HLA-matched sibling BMT in Iranian *10*4 4 3 1 population. *41*4 1 1 0 Key words: cytokine gene polymorphism • SNP • TGF-β1 • BMT • *41*8 1 0 1 aGVHD *41*3 1 1 0 *41*5 1 1 0 P08.25 1*5* 5 5 0 Analysis of Dopamine receptor genes (D1- D5 ) expression on *4*4 PM 3 7 7,70% 3 6 0 1 human peripheral blood Lymphocytes(PBL) in Rheumatoid *5*4 2 2 0 Arthritis( RA) *3*4 1 0 1 M. Sadeghi Koupaei1, G. Ahangari1, S. Shahindokht2, S. Nazari3; *3*5 1 1 0 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Univercity of Shaheed Beheshti, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medical Univercity of Shaheed Beheshti, Mofid Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Recent studies reveal that immune cells can also synthesize catechol- amines and that catecholamines can regulate immune functions. In addition, lymphocytes express the enzymes for synthesis of catechol-Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  amines and the enzymes for their degradation. These endogenous ENPP1) gene influences insulin resistance, obesity and risk of type 2 catecholamines synthesized by immune cells can regulate immune diabetes .However conflict association results are reported in different functions, including cellular proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and population. We previously found no evidence for association of K121Q cytokine production. In vitro, dopamine inhibits the proliferation of acti- polymorphisms with risk of type 2 diabetes and obesity in a Japanese vated T cells and their cytokine secretion. population. This study for first time was carried out in samples of Jap- Changes in the dopamine system are influenced not only by dopamine anese to explore the key role of other previously reported polymor- itself, but also by dopamine receptors that are encoded by five dif- phisms and haplotypes containing K121Q variant with risk of type 2 ferent dopamine receptor genes (DR1-DR5). .Metabolic abnormalities diabetes. To accomplish this, we genotyped the rs997509, rs1799774 of catecholamines in immune cells could be related to autoimmune (IVS20delT-11) and rs7754561 (A/G_1044TGA) polymorphisms for as- disease. Several observation indicate that catechoamines and their sociation analysis in 911 type 2 diabetic patients (459 female/452male) receptors may play a part in the pathogenesis of chronic inflamma- and 876 control subjects (430 female/446 male) using TaqMan assay. tory conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We have therefore According to single locus association test, in IVS20delT-11, we identi- asked whether changes in the dopaminergic system are associated fied a significant association of delT allele with type 2 diabetes in Japa- with RA. nese (adjusted odds ratio, 1.50; 95% confidence interval, 1.15-1.99); In the present study, we investigated dopamine receptor gene ex- p=0.0002). In a haplotype association analysis, we failed to find any pression in PBMCs of 40 RA patients and 40 healthy individuals by significant association between Q-delT-G haplotype and type 2 dia- RT-PCR. Quantitative gene expression analysis was made by real- betes (p>0.05). A subanalysis of subjects depending their body mass time-PCR using primer pairs specific for the five dopamine receptors index (BMI) status revealed no significant impact of the 3 polymor- and beta-actin as internal control. We found that all types of dopamine phisms and Q-delT-G haplotype on obesity. In conclusion our study receptors are present in lymphocytes of normal individuals and RA pa- indicated the potential role of an intronic polymorphism IVS20delT-11 tients. However, a significant difference of DR2 and DR4 gene expres- with type 2 diabetes and no evidence of SNPs and haplotype associa- sion profiles was seen in RA, as compared to healthy individuals. We tion of ENPP1 gene with obesity in Japanese conclude that there is a quantitative significant difference of dopamine gene receptor expression in RA. P08.28 mEFV genotyping for diagnostics and treatment of FmF P08.26 T. F. Sarkisian, H.S. Hayrapetyan, G.R.Shahsuvaryan, A.R.Yeghiazaryan; mutation analysis of the human fatty acid amide hydrolase gene Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia. and the risk of drug addiction FMF (Familial Mediterranean Fever) is characterized by recurrent, R. Kodiappan1, R. Rosli1, L. Rampal2, S. M. Sidik3, L. K. Hwa4; short (2-4 days) episodes of fever, accompanied by severe pain in the 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of abdomen, chest or joints, and sometimes associated with erysipelas- Medicine and Health Sciences, University Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, like erythema. The most severe complication is progressive renal amy- Malaysia, 2Department of Community Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health loidosis (RA). FMF is caused by a number of mutations in the MEFV Sciences, University Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia, 3Depart- gene located on chromosome 16p, encoding pyrin protein, which nor- ment of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University Putra mally acts as a mediator in control of inflammation. Molecular genetic Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia, 4Division of Molecular Medicine, The analysis significantly improves early and correct diagnosis of FMF, and Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, University of Melbourne, allows to commence lifelong treatment of affected individuals with col- Australia. chicine. Frequency of the mutations of MEFV gene is extremely high in Addiction to illicit drugs is a neurobehavioral disorder of complex ori- Armenian population. We have reported about the molecular diagnos- gins. Although social and psychological factors contribute to addiction, tics of more than 10000 FMF patients in Armenians. genetic factors explicitly weigh in. To understand the role of genetic In our FMF patients the colchicine largely prevents the development variations in vulnerability to drug addiction, the nature of population of attacks and renal amyloidosis (RA). Adequate colchicinotherapy genetics has to be characterized by identifying the single nucleotide delays RA progression in FMF/RA patients. In a few cases the effect polymorphisms (SNPs) in candidate genes and performing associa- of colchicine remains controversial. We confirm, that genotyping is tion studies. Here, we investigated the SNPs in the coding regions of assisting in prediction of the response to colchicine treatment. FMF the fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) gene which encodes the prin- homozygous patients for M694V mutation present a more severe phe- cipal endocannabinoid-inactivating enzyme. A missense mutation in notype and show a limited response to colchicine at a nephrotic stage this gene, c.385C>A, has been reported to contribute to the functional of RA. In contrast, FMF patients with other genotypes still have a good alteration in the endocannabinoid system. Although a link between this chance to ameliorate of the nephrotic syndrome and to maintain renal polymorphism and drug abuse among white ancestral subjects has function. been reported, the specific allelic frequencies often vary in different Conclusion: According to our results, the genotyping is recommended populations. Hence, to explore this hypothesis in Malaysian subjects, for all siblings of FMF patients and to search for other autoinflamma- we conducted a case-control study which included 80 drug addicts and tory periodic fever syndromes among patients with specific clinical 80 healthy controls. DNA sequencing analysis revealed a significant symptoms but without MEFV mutations. (p<0.01) association between the 385A/385A genotype and drug ad- diction amongst Malaysian individuals. In addition, using high-resolu- P08.29 tion melt analysis several other novel SNPs within this gene were also GAA Repeat Polymorphism and Cytogenetic findings in Turkish uncovered. One of these novel FAAH SNPs resulted in the substitution Friedreich’s Ataxia Patients of an amino acid residue in the Src homology 3 binding domain (SH3). F. Koc1, M. Yilmaz2, A. Guzel2, S. Kocatürk Sel2, H. Kasap2; Transfection experiments have demonstrated that this proline-rich re- 1Cukurova University School of Medicine Department of Neurology, Adana, gion deleted amidase was enzymatically inactive. Collectively, these Turkey, 2Cukurova University School of Medicine Department of Medical Biol- findings support the concept that genetic mutations in FAAH may con- ogy and Genetics, Adana, Turkey. stitute important risk factors for functional abnormalities in the endog- Friedreich ataxia (FA), a progressive heredodegenerative disorder, is enous cannabinoid system and drug addiction. one of the most common form of autosomal recessive ataxias. FA is the result of a gene mutation at the centromeric region of chromosome P08.27 9 (9q13-21.1) which is the site of the gene encoding for the 210-amino- ENPP1 gene variants have a strong impact for risk of type 2 acid protein frataxin. diabetes but not on development of obesity in Japanese Results of GAA repeat polymorphism in 61 family members of 30 typi- B. Rahmati1, M. Shahdinejad Langroudi1, P. Keshavarz1, A. Abbaspour1, M. cal FRDA patients were reported. GAA triplet repeat size ranged from Itakura2; aproximately 7 to 34 in normal alleles and from 66 to 1300 in mutant 1Guilan University of Medical Science, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Institute alleles. Fourty six patients were homozygous for GAA expansion and for Genome Research, The University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. size of expanded alleles differed from 425 to 1300 repeats. Children Previous studies have demonstrated the K121Q polymorphisms in 2 and 6 years old of one family had homozygous GAA expansions the plasma cell membrane glycoprotein-1 (PC-1, recently known as reaching 925 repeats. All 30 families studied had at least 1 afflictedStatistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  child and 9 parents and 2 siblings were carrier (heterozygous) with The developed model is implemented as an autonomous software mutant alleles ranging from 66 to 850 repeats. Family studies con- system, with a simple interface that supports data input and storage, firmed the meiotic instability and stronger effect of expansion in the as well as visualization unit, providing automatic display of genogeo- smaller alleles on phenotype and a negative correlation between GAA graphic maps reflecting the incidence of hereditary diseases within the repeat expansion size and onset-age of the disease. In additionaly; population under study, based on the data entered by the user. In nineteen FA patients (11 males and 8 females) with the age range of 6 to 34 years (mean 22.26 ± 7.06 ) and their relatives with the age P08.32 range of 4-72 years (mean 34.6 ±17.9), cytogenetic studies were per- Genome-wide linkage scan of human cognitive abilities in a formed. Three of them had different cytogenetic findings which were large Dutch pedigree 46,XY,Yqh+, 46,XX,t(7;15),(q34;q21), 46,XY,inv(9)(q21;p12). I. Zorkoltseva1, M. Schuur2,3, A. Kirichenko1, J. van Swieten3, I. de Koning3, B. Oostra2, Y. Aulchenko1,2, T. Axenovitch1, C. van Duijn2; P08.30 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Depart- GABRG2 and ADH polymorphisms in alcohol dependence ment of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The E. O. Aktas1, E. Senol1, A. Kocak1, H. Ak Celik2, H. H. Aydin2, H. Coskunol3, A. Netherlands, 3Department of Neurology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Berdeli4; Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 1Ege University School of Medicine Department of Forensic Medicine, Izmir, We performed a genome-wide multipoint linkage analysis of normal Turkey, 2Ege University School of Medicine Department of Biochemistry, Izmir, variation of cognitive function in an extended pedigree from the Eras- Turkey, 3Ege University School of Medicine Department of Psychiatry, Izmir, mus Rucphen Family study. The study included 2883 subjects (mean Turkey, 4Ege University School of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, age 48) characterized by eight cognitive tests. The test battery was de- Turkey. veloped to target endophenotypes for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) but as Our study aimed to investigate role of GABRG2 and ADH gene poly- expected for endophenotypes may also involve other disorders. Four morphisms in patients who had alcohol dependence. In the literature, composite scores for visuospatial ability, memory, executive function there are controversial results on the role of these gene polymorphisms and global cognition were constructed. Pedigrees were split to the in alcohol dependence. We think that, difference in population groups maximum bit-size of 18 and non-parametric linkage analysis was per- and selective inclusion criteria for alcohol dependence may affect re- formed using MERLIN. Analysis was performed in the total population, sults. Thus, we studied GABRG2 and ADH gene polymorphisms in and after stratification for age. Highest LOD scores were obtained in Turkish population. the analysis of persons <50 years old. In this group visuospatial ability 150 volunteers with no physical or psychological/mental diseases demonstrated linkage to 1q (LOD=3.12) and 10q (LOD=2.39); mem- history and 100 patients who admitted to Ege University Alcohol De- ory to 11q, 12p, 12q and 14q (LODs between 1.96 and 2.53); execu- pendence Unit between years of 2005-2006 enrolled to the study. We tive function to 2q, 5q, 12q, 19q (LODs from 1.89 to 2.92) and global found, significant increase in T allele and TT genotype in GABRG2 cognition linked to 9p and 12p (LODs of 2.97 and 1.88, respectively). polymorphism in patients compared to healthy controls. Moreover, Locus 12p was the same for memory and global cognition and locus significant differences were also determined for ADH1 Arg allele and 12q overlapped for executive function and global cognition. Our scan Arg/Arg genotype. showed linkage of cognitive functions to known loci of AD: 19q (APOE Compared to previously studies, we found more profound connection region), 1q (PSEN2), 2q14 (IL1B), 9p (AD11 locus), 10q (PLAU), 11q between alcohol dependence and GABRG2 gene polymorphism. Alco- (SORL1), 12p (OLR1), 12q (MAPT), and schizophrenia: 1q (PLXNA2), hol dependence is an important health problem depends many genetic 11q (DRD2), 2p (GRIN2B), 12q (DAO). Overlap of linkage regions be- and environmental factors but we think that it is possible to interpreta- tween the cognitive functions analyzed and Alzheimer’s disease and tion genetic risk for developing early diagnostic methods and treatment schizophrenia prove that the cognitive abilities prove to be powerful strategies by comprehensive linkage and association studies. endophenotypes. P08.31 P08.33 the mathematical model of prediction of genetic targets in a Public interest and expectations concerning commercial limited amount of their measurements genotyping and genetic risk assessment A. B. Vekshina1, R. A. Zinchenko2, V. N. Evdokimenkov1, T. Mamedov3; O. A. Makeeva, V. V. Markova; 1Moscow Aviation Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre for Research Institute of Medical Genetics SB RAMS, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian In the scientific world there is no current agreement about the utility of Federation, 3Bauman Moscow State Technical University, Moscow, Russian predictive genetic testing for multifactorial diseases. Nonetheless it is Federation. already being commercialized by a number of companies who provide Pattern studies of genetic processes of the Russian populations and direct-to-consumer genetic diagnostics. ethnic groups, is one of the problems of medical genetics. Genogeo- We interrogated 2000 of Russian respondents about their desire to es- graphic maps today have become well-designed chart patterns, re- timate their genetic risk for future diseases, their willingness to change flecting genogeographic structure and epidemiology of hereditary dis- lifestyles if the tests suggested a high risk of a disease, and a num- eases. ber of other related questions. We have revealed extremely high level The specialists of the Medical Research Centre for Medical Genetics of interest regarding new genetic developments and steady desire of developed a mathematical model that provides a forecast incidence people to learn more about their inheritance. Most people would agree of a wide range of hereditary diseases within the studied population. to undergo genetic testing for common diseases. An absolute majority As a basis for developing the model they employed the experimental of respondents (89%) stated they will change their lifestyles in order results of population studies of Kirov, Kostroma, Bryansk, Tver, Ros- to avoid a disease if there was a high risk. Our data confirms that tov, Arkhangelsk, Krasnodar Region, the Republic of Mari EL, Adygea, lay people have highly overestimated expectations about the use of Chuvashia and Udmurtia. The software developed from the known genetic technologies with respect to common diseases. Thus, 70% of analogues has the following major points: the survey participants agreed with the statement that genetic tests -flexible structure with the possibility of automatic adaptation of the should be extensively promoted and 81% agreed that knowing genetic model prediction, depending on the number of settlements, where the mechanisms of diseases will help people to live longer and same pro- population-genetic studies were carried out; portion of respondents thinks that knowing their own genetic variants -the possibility of calculating the predicted prevalence of hereditary allows people to control their lifestyle easier. diseases for each municipality of the population under study, consider- The high level of public interest to personal genetic testing is promot- ing its geographical location and population number; ing genetics commercialization. It is becoming clear that consumers -nonequilibrium of the data, involved as “strong” values in the model of genetic diagnostics’ services will define the pace of acceptance of prediction, taking into account the geographic and population prox- genetic applications into medicine and other spheres of life. imity of the settlement, for which the forecast is performed, and the settlements, where the experimental population-genetic studies were conducted.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  P08.34 is determined by the balance between production and elimination. comprehensive approach to investigate the genetic basis of The kidney plays a main role in uric acid elimination. The transport- hereditary hearing loss in iranian population ers for uric acid have been identified such as URAT1, OAT1, OAT3 H. Najmabadi1, C. Nishimura2, N. Meyer2, T. Yang2, N. Bazazzadegan1, Y. Riaz- and MRP4. Several recent genome-wide association studies identified alhosseini1, G. Asaadi Tehrani1, A. Daneshi3, M. Farhadi3, S. Yahyavi1, P. Imani1, associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the A. Anousheh1, A. Nazeri1, K. Jalalvand1, M. Malekpour1, N. nikzat1, S. Arzhan- other transporter genes, SLC2A9, SLC17A3 and ABCG2, and serum gi1, S. Azimi1, F. Larti1, Z. Fattahi1, M. Babanejad1, K. Kahrizi1, R. J. H. Smith2; uric acid concentration and gout. For evaluation of influence of ABCG2 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- on serum uric acid concentration, we identified the frequency of SNPs ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research in ABCG2 gene of 198 Japanese hyperuricemic patients. As a result, Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, IA, United the frequency of some SNPs has been higher than that of Japanese States, 3Research Center of Ear, Nose, Throat, and Head and Neck Surgery, population. It suggests that the functional variation of ABCG2 due to Iran university of Medical sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the SNPs influences serum uric acid concentration. Genetic testing for deafness in Iran is well established. The population is extremely heterogeneous, which means that ethnic-specific data are P08.37 required. We have generated much of these data by screening over Allele frequency of two autosomal stR loci FGA and D7s820 in 2000 families segregating autosomal recessive non-syndromic deaf- iranian population ness (ARNSD). All patients were screened for mutations in GJB2 and M. Sharafi Farzad1, S. Kiyanfar1, Z. Shahab Movahed1, S. Mousavi1, S. Ze- GJB6 (DFNB1), and if no mutations were identified, haplotypes were inali2; reconstructed by typing three short tandem repeat polymorphisms 1Kawsar Genomics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Pasteur flanking 22 known ARNSD loci. In a subset of families, genome-wide institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. linkage analysis was completed. Our data show that 16.7% of the Short tandem repeat (STR) genetic loci were assigned for use in foren- Iranian population with ARNSHL segregates mutations in GJB2. The sic investigation. Allele frequency of two autosomal STR loci FGA and most prevalent mutation in this gene was 35delG, although 34 different D7S820 were determined in Iranian population. mutations have been identified of which seven are common. We have DNA from 579 or 556 unrelated individuals were analyzed for D7S820 also identified a novel GJB2 mutation in an endogenous population and FGA markers respectively. Extracted DNA were amplified by us- segregating ADNSHL in village in northern Iran. In approximately 30% ing AmpF STR Identifiler Kit and 3130 Genetic Analyzer from ABI of families, we have been able to establish a genetic cause for deaf- (US). Allele frequencies and forensic efficiency parameters such as ness. Over half have mutations in GJB2, and followed by mutations Heterozygosity (H), Polymorphism Information Content (PIC), Power in SLC26A4, TECTA and USH1C . We have also found mutations in of Discrimination (PD), Propability of Match (PM), Power of Exclusion PJVK, TMC1, USH1C, OTOF, MYOVIIA and VLGR1. Lastly, we have (PE), and typical Paternity Index (PI), were calculated using the Pow- described a new syndrome, a contiguous gene deletion syndrome that erstatsV12.xls software (Promega, US). involves both deafness and infertility in males (DIM Syndrome). These A total of 11 alleles for D7S820 and 13 alleles and 9 iteralleles for FGA data from the Iranian population attest to its diversity and contribute to could be observed. In the case of FGA, allele 23 showed the high- the current body of knowledge regarding the deafness of genetics. est frequency (18.2%) and alleles 16, 28 and interalleles 18.2, 31.2 had the lowest frequencies (0.1%). Allele range in FGA was from 16 P08.35 to 31.2 repeats with lower match propability (MP=0.034) compared Evidence for genetic heterogeneity of bipolar disorder according with D7S820 (MP=0.066). In D7S820 marker the highest frequency to age at onset in 2q14 (25.9%) was belonged to allele 11 and the lowest frequencies (0.1%) M. Dizier1, F. Mathieu2, European Collaborative Study of Early-Onset BPAD; were found to be for repeats 29, 30. Also the highest PD (0.966) and 1INSERMU535, Villejuif, France, 2INSERMU955, Créteil, France. PE (0.658) belonged to FGA. We also observed several interalleles for The aim of the present study is to perform a fine mapping of 8 regions FGA marker. But there was not any evidence of interalleles for D7S820 previously identified by a genome-wide linkage analysis in European locus.The results indicated that the both loci were in Hardy-Weinberg families ascertained through an early onset bipolar affective disorder equilibrium. (BPAD) type I proband (Etain et al., 2006). Early age at onset was de- fined as an age at first thymic episode below 21 years. The initial sam- P08.38 ple of 70 families was extended to 120. Probands were early onset bi- A genetic study of the VWA and tHO1 short tandem repeat polar type I patients and affected sibling were either early onset BPAD systems in iranian population type I patients, later onset of BPAD type I or early onset BPAD type II). S. M. Z. S. Kiyanfar, S. Kiyanfar; Since presence of genetic heterogeneity of BPAD may exist accord- Kawsar Genomics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ing to the phenotypic heterogeneity of siblings, the Predivided Sample Several STR markers have been investigated to be routinely used for Test and the Maximum Likelihood Binomial methods were used to test forensic purposes. Allele frequencies of the two short tandem repeats genetic heterogeneity using 138 independent affected sib-pairs. Of (STRs) namely VWA and THO1 were determined in Iranian popula- the 8 regions of linkage suggested by our previous genome scan, six tion. DNA from 573 or 596 unrelated individuals were analyzed for regions (2q14, 3p14, 5q33, 7q36 16p23 and 20p12) remained linked THO1 and VWA markers respectively. Extracted DNA were amplified to BPAD. Regions (2p21 and 10q23) were not confirmed. A genetic by using AmpF STR Identifiler Kit and 3130 Genetic Analyzer from ABI heterogeneity was revealed between early and late onset BPAD type I (US). Allele frequencies and forensic efficiency parameters such as in the 2q14 region (p=0.0001) using the two methods. For BPADI sib- Heterozygosity (H), Polymorphism Information Content (PIC), Power pairs concordant for early age at onset, parental allele sharing propor- of Discrimination (PD), Propability of Match (PM), Power of Exclusion tion is higher (0.58) than for discordant pairs for age at onset, i.e. late (PE), and typical Paternity Index (PI), were calculated using the Pow- onset BPADI (0.28). All these results show for the first time the underly- erstatsV12.xls software (Promega, US). ing genetic heterogeneity in bipolar affective disorder and validate the A total of 16 alleles for VWA and 16 alleles for THO1 could be observed. age at onset as a relevant factor in its genetic vulnerability. In the case of VWA, allele 17 showed the highest frequency and alleles 8, 9, 9.3, 10,11,12,15.2 had the lowest frequencies. Allele range was P08.36 from 8 to 20 repeats with higher match propability (MP=0.083) com- Frequency of single nucleotide polymorphisms in ABCG gene pared with THO1. in Japanese hyperuricemic patients In THO1 marker the highest frequency was belonged to allele 6 and K. Ichida1,2, H. Matsuo3, N. Shinomiya3, T. Hosoya2; the lowest frequencies were found to be for repeats 5,13,17. Also the 1Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan, 2Jikei Uni- highest PD and PE belonged to THO1. We also observed several in- versity School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 3National Defense Medical College, teralleles for both markers. In this study both loci provided allelic fre- Tokorozawa, Japan. quencies of high heterogeneity to use them for forensic and related Gout is a heterogeneous diseases resulting from tissue deposition of purposes. uric acid crystals, based on hyperuricemia. Uric acid is the end prod- uct of human purine metabolism and serum uric acid concentrationStatistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  P08.39 P08.41 Leptin and leptin receptor gene variation and human obesity Analytic approaches to power estimation for linkage analysis of Ž. Tomas1, N. Smolej Narančić1, M. Barbalić1, M. Zajc1, T. Škarić-Jurić1, P. large pedigrees Rudan1, I. Rudan2,3, H. Campbell3, A. F. Wright4; G. R. Svischeva, T. Axenovich; 1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Croatian Center for Institute of Cytology and Genetics of Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy Global Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Split, Split, Croatia, 3Com- of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. munity Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Medical School, Edinburgh, The variance-components method is widely used for linkage map- United Kingdom, 4MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, Edin- ping of quantitative trait loci. Estimation of power for this method is burgh, United Kingdom. based on asymptotic approximation of distribution of likelihood ratio Leptin is a protein hormone with important role in regulation of body statistics to a non-central chi-squared distribution described by a non- weight, metabolism, reproductive function, modulation of immune re- centrality parameter (NCP). Therefore, evaluating the power can be sponse and angiogenesis. As a regulator of body weight, it operates by reduced to an estimation of the NCP. For small pedigrees, the NCP inhibiting food intake and stimulating energy expenditure and its con- can be analytically expressed by simple formulas. For large pedigrees, centration in the blood serum is proportional to the amount of body fat. analytical formulas cannot be deduced because the expectation of the Polymorphic leptin and leptin receptor genes have often been inves- test statistics must be estimated for all possible genotype vectors, the tigated as possible factors associated with human obesity. We tested number of whose grows exponentially with increasing pedigree size. polymorphisms G-2548A in the promoter region and A19G in exon 1 Recently Williams and Blangero (1999) and Rijsdijk et al. (2001) have of the leptin gene and polymorphisms G-1041A in the promoter region, suggested ways of approximating the NCP by the sum of NCP values Arg109Lys in exon 4 and Arg223Gln in exon 6 of the leptin receptor for all pairs of relatives. Expectation of the NCP for any related pair gene for association with leptin concentration and obesity. Allelic fre- may be calculated analytically. The effectiveness of this approach was quencies of these polymorphisms show inter-poplational variation. A demonstrated for small pedigrees. We have investigated using this ap- population-based association study was conducted in the population proach for analysis of large pedigrees. We have compared two ways isolate of the Eastern Adriatic island of Vis, Croatia (N=243, age 22- of the analytical NCP approximation showing their equivalence, and 85 yrs). Obesity was defined as BMI≥30 kg/m2. Leptin concentration investigated the accuracy of the analytical NCP estimation for three was significantly higher in the obese (65.3 ng/ml), than in the non- large pedigrees and for wide set of models of quantitative trait inheri- obese (19.9 ng/ml) and in women (44.6 ng/ml) compared to men (13.8 tance. We have demonstrated that sample size estimated by the NCP ng/ml). The results indicated significant association of -2548G variant approximation was slightly overstated (up to 8 %) as compared with and leptin concentration in men (p=0.013). No association of the other sample size calculated through the exact NCP value. This overestima- studied polymorphisms with leptin concentration was found, and none tion was the same for large and small pedigrees. So, a special correc- of the studied polymorphisms showed association with obesity (with tion could be introduced to obtain unbiased estimation of the NCP. leptin concentration, sex and age as covariates). The lack of asso- ciation could be due to the complex pathogenesis of obesity, which P08.42 involves a number of genetic and environmental factors. Evidence for a susceptibility locus for ménière’s disease on chromosome 12p12.3. P08.40 D. Gabriková1,2, J. Klar1, C. Frykholm3, U. Friberg3, S. Lahsaee1, M. Entesar- statistical properties of tests of association performed on ian1, N. Dahl1; mixtures of singletons and related individuals: effects of the 1Dept. of Genetics and Pathology, The Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, nonorthogonality of linkage and LD parameters on type i error Uppsala, Sweden, 2Dept. of Biology, Faculty of Humanities and Natural Scienc- and power es, University of Prešov, Prešov, Slovakia, 3Dept. of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala T. Hiekkalinna1,2, L. Peltonen3,2, J. Terwilliger4,2; University, Uppsala, Sweden. 1National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute for Mo- Ménière’s disease (MD) is a disorder of the inner ear characterized lecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 3Welcome Trust Sanger by episodes of vertigo, tinnitus and fluctuating sensorineural hearing Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Department of Genetics and loss. Most MD cases are sporadic but 5-15% of patients are familial Development, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States. following an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance with incomplete The current trend in mapping of the complex diseases is genome-wide penetrance. The genetic cause of the disease remains unknown. We association by analyzing anonymous SNP markers in cohorts of un- have previously identified a candidate region for MD on 12p12.3 from related cases and controls. A motivation for this is that unrelated indi- a linkage analysis in three large Swedish pedigrees. Interestingly, af- viduals sharing some phenotype are much easier to collect than large fected individuals of two families share a single haplotype within the families with multiple affected persons, when the genetic portion of the linked region, suggesting a possible ancestral mutation. phenotypic etiology is incomplete. To further clarify the role of chromosome 12p in MD we genotyped 15 In this study, we examined the statistical properties of several com- Swedish families with familial cases of the disease. We analyzed 11 monly used family-based association tests in genetic epidemiology as polymorphic marker loci over a 2Mb region in samples from affected to their performance using real-life mixtures of families and singletons individuals and healthy control subjects. The results revealed asso- taken from our own migraine and schizophrenia studies. We simulated ciation of 5 polymorphic marker alleles to MD (P<0,05). Moreover, a a disease conditional on the known phenotype structures in these ped- core haplotype spanning 700 kb showed strong association with the igrees under a variety of inheritance models in which one variant in a disease (P=0,0041). In conclusion, our results indicate a susceptibility given gene region influences the trait to some degree. locus for familial MD in the 12p12.3 region. The results of our study showed the in virtually every situation, the full likelihood-based methods outperformed the simpler “data structure- P08.43 motivated” tests. In truth we never know the true analysis models, so matrix metalloproteinase 9 -1562 c/t gene polymorphism we noticed that the power of a joint-test of linkage and association and susceptibility to abdominal aortic aneurysm or aortoiliac was robust to model errors (so long as the analysis model is overly occlusive disease determined), the test of association conditional on linkage can have A. Korcz1, J. Mikolajczyk-Stecyna1, M. Gabriel2, G. Oszkinis2, K. Pawlaczyk2, difficulty parsing the signal from LD and linkage satisfactorily under M. Zowczak-Drabarczyk2, R. Slomski1; certain analysis options, owing to the nonorthogonality of those pa- 1Polish Academy of Sciences, Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, rameters. A simulation-based as well as formal analytical description 2Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. and explanation will be presented, along with discussions of bias-cor- Objective: Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) and aortoiliac occlusive rection methods to restore the validity of this family of powerful and disease (AIOD) are the most frequent reasons for vascular surgery highly sensitive tests. procedures within abdominal cavity. Genetic factors responsible for individual risk of development of these diseases are little known. Both AAA and AIOD are considered to have multifactorial etiology. Although these diseases are distinct pathological processes however they have common risk factors and location. Involvement of various matrix metal-Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  loproteinases is considered to be very important in the pathogenesis controls (X2=0.695; p=0.405). of these diseases. Matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) was shown to Conclusions: be implicated in the pathogenesis of AAA and functional polymorphism Mathematic analyze of obtained data demonstrates statistically sig- in the promoter region (-1562 C/T) of the MMP-9 gene was reported nificant differences between PMD and control MTHFR genotypes. to be associated with AAA in single report. The purpose of the present Frequency of MTHFR C677T was higher in control group. Whereas study was to determine if there is an association between the MMP9 in PMD patients more often MTHFR C677C allelic variant. This study -1562 C/T genotype and susceptibility to abdominal aortic aneurysm or needs to be continued with MTHFR A1298C, MTRR A66G and MTR aortoiliac occlusive disease in Polish patients. A2756G allelic variants for learning compound effect. Methods: Based on the PCR-RFLP analysis MMP9 genotypes were determined in three selected groups: 182 patients with AAA and 205 P08.46 patients with AIOD who underwent surgery; 200 healthy individuals Genetic heterogeneity of multiple self-Healing squamous from control group. Genotypes were compared with demographic and Epithelioma in a tunisian family not linked to chromosome 9 clinical data of subjects and analyzed in relation to risk factors. (9q22.3-q31) Results: There were no significant differences in MMP9 -1562 C/T O. Mamaï1, M. Gribaa1, L. Bouzouffara2, L. Adala1, I. Ben Charfeddine1, T. Ben genotype frequencies between AAA patients, AIOD patients and con- Lazreg1, A. Mili1, M. Denguezli2, A. Saad1; trol subjects. 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, de Génétique moléculaire et de Biologie de Conclusion: No association of MMP9 -1562 C/T gene polymorphism la, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service de Dermatologie et de Vénérologie. CHU Farhat with abdominal aortic aneurysm or aortoiliac occlusive disease was HACHED. Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia. found. Multiple self-healing squamous epithelioma (MSSE), also known as Ferguson-Smith Disease, is a rare genodermatosis with an autoso- P08.44 mal dominant inheritance. Affected patients suffer from recurrent skin No association between myeloperoxidase G-463A polymorphism lesions, which clinically and histologically resemble to keratoacan- and rheumatoid arthritis in turkish Patients thomas or well-differentiated squamous cell carcinomas, but with a S. Pehlivan, A. Aydeniz, T. Sever, O. Altindag, S. Oguzkan-Balci, T. Harunlar; spontaneous regression, leaving only atrophic scars. This disease has Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Gaziantep, Turkey. been linked to 9q22.3-31 locus between D9S197 and D9S1809 mark- Myeloperoxidase (MPO) has been involved in the pathogenesis of ers. This region has a size of 4 cM (2.05 Mb). several diseases such as Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) through excessive Here we investigate a five generation Tunisian family in which 7 mem- production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) as well as through its bers are affected by MSSE. A detailed disease history with particular genetic polymorphism. We examined whether G-463A polymorphism attention to the age of onset, distribution, and clinical course of their of Myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene was associated with RA. skin lesions were noted and a full clinical examination was performed Exactly, 75 patients with RA and 150 healthy control subjects were for every patient. Haplotype analysis, using six polymorphic short tan- included in this study. The genotyping was determined by polymerase dem repeat markers in 9q22.3-31 locus, doesn’t find any commune chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism method. The haplotype segregating with MSSE in this family. So that proposes the association between these SNP and RA was analyzed using chi- existence of at least one other locus linked with this disease and sug- square test and de-Finetti program. gests its genetic heterogeneity feature. MPOG-463A genotype distributions and allele frequency of RA pa- tients were not significantly different from healthy controls. In addition, P08.47 it was also determined that there was no deviation from Hardy-Wein- A novel syndromic neuro-ichthyosis maps to chromosome berg Equilibrium in any groups (p>0.05). Xq22-24 Whether there was an association between MPOG-463A gene poly- T. Pippucci1, P. Magini1, M. Vargiolu1, D. Turchetti1, C. Graziano1, E. Pompilii1, morphism and RA was investigated for the first time in this study in E. Malaspina2, L. Mazzanti3, R. Bergamaschi3, G. Pilu4, G. Cenacchi5, E. Fran- literature and it was demonstrated that it did not exist in the Turkish zoni2, G. Romeo1, M. Seri1; RA patients. It was planned to investigate the other polymorphisms of 1Dipartimento di Scienze Ginecologiche, Ostetriche e Pediatriche, U.O. Gene- MPO gene in the future. tica Medica, Bologna, Italy, 2Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Policlinico Sant’Orsola- Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 3Ambulatorio di Auxologia, Sindromologia e Sindromi P08.45 Rare, Policlinico Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 4Medicina dell’età pre- Folate pathway gene polymorphisms and development of natale, Policlinico Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 5Anatomia e Istologia, myopathyc process in PmD patients (moldavian population) Policlinico Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. E. V. Scvortova1,2, V. C. Sacara1; The term neuro-ichthyosis refers to a clinically and genetically hetero- 1Centre of reproductive health and medical genetics, Chisinau, Moldova, Re- geneous group of syndromes in which ichthyosis can be found in as- public of, 2University of Academy of Science, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of. sociation with various neurological disorders, spanning from mental re- Background: tardation to spasticity, epilepsy, polyneuritis and pyramidal tract signs. During literature analysis we have found hypothesis that frequency of These syndromes are very rare; despite of the fact that they could MTHFR C677T mutation in it’s heterozygous state had a tendency to cluster into families, many still lack a locus assignment. For some of increase due to it’s positive effect on some diseases, that lead to in- the forms for which a locus has been recognized, the disease gene has creased survival of carriers. We set up that in Moldavian population, been identified. The mode of inheritance could be either autosomal or PMD patients with different clinical features and severity of pathology X-linked, dominant or recessive. Generally, X-linked ichthyosis is due process. Main goal of present study was to determine if there is an to steroid sulfatase deficiency, which is determined by deletions of the interaction between MTHFR polymorphism and development of my- STS gene on chromosome Xp22. Here, genetic mapping of a novel opathyc process. form of X-linked ichthyosis undue to STS deficiency is reported. We Materials and methods: performed an X chromosome linkage analysis with 31 markers on 16 110 subjects were genotyped for the MTHFR 677 variants, among DNA samples. A clinical picture of ichthyosis, agenesia of corpus cal- them 55 patients with PMD and 55 age-matched healthy control sub- losum (ACC), microcephalia, seizures, mental retardation and spastic jects. Blood samples were collected and DNA was isolated from pe- tetraparesis characterized the proband and his 1st degree cousin died ripheral blood leukocytes. MTHFR variant alleles were determined by at age 6. Intriguingly, mother of this latter child interrupted a second a PCR-RFLP. Detection of the MTHFR C677T was performed accord- pregnancy in the second trimester, and phoetus showed clear hyper- ing original protocol with primers from Alpha DNA. Statistic analyze keratosis and complete ACC. The two affected males and the fetus was performed in SISA program. inherited the same haplotype on chromosome Xq22-24; multipoint Results: linkage analysis yielded LOD scores of 2.06 in this region, containing We have found that MTHFR C677C allele presents among 38 (69.1%) 230 genes. An array-CGH scan on the proband at a 20 kb resolution PMD and 22 (40.0%) controls (X2=9.39; p=0.002), the C677T geno- demonstrated that no copy number variations occurred. Mutational type among 11 (20.0%) PMD, 24 (43.6%) controls (X2=7.08; p=0.007), screening of the Xq22-24 genes expressed in skin is in progress. and the T677T allelic variant was observed 6 (10.9%) PMD, 9 (16.4 %)Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  P08.48 versity Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 3Academic Center Genetic polymorphism in the matrix metalloproteinases genes for Dentistry, VU, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Operative and risk of occupational chronic bronchitis Dentistry and Periodontology, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, O. Tselousova1, G. Korytyna1, L. Akhmadishina1, T. Victorova1,2; Kiel, Germany, 5Department of Periodontology, Operative and Preventive Den- 11Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir tistry, Bonn, Germany, 6University Medical Center Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden, State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Germany, 7Department of Preventive Dentistry and Periodontology, Munich, Active occupational exposure to respiratory irritants is the major risk Germany, 8Departement of Periodontology, Academic Centre for Dentistry Am- factors for occupational chronic bronchitis (OCB), but OCB develops sterdam (ACTA), VU, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. in some workers. It’s suggested a significant genetic role. Matrix metal- Periodontal diseases are complex inflammatory diseases and affect loproteinases (MMPs) are proteolytic enzymes associated with inflam- up to 20% of the worldwide population. An unbalanced reaction of the mation and airway remodelling in respiratory diseases. The aim of this immune system to microbial pathogens is considered the key factor in study was to investigate the role of MMPs polymorphisms in the devel- the development of periodontitis. Defensins have a strong antimicro- opment of occupational chronic bronchitis in workers frome Russia. bial function and are important contributors of the immune system in The MMP1 (interstitial collagenase), MMP9 (gelatinase B) and MMP12 maintaining health. We present the first systematic association study (macrophage elastase) were genotyped by PCR-RFLP analysis in 110 of DEFB1. Using a tagging SNP approach including described promot- workers with OCB and 157 healthy workers. er SNPs of DEFB1, we investigated the associations of the selected The overall, the genotype distribution and the allele frequencies of variants in a large population (N = 1,337 cases and 2,887 ethnically polymorphisms G(-1607)GG of MMP1 gene, A(-82)G of MMP12 gene matched controls). The 3’UTR SNP rs1047031 showed the most sig- and C(-1562)T of MMP9 gene didn’t significantly differ in groups (all nificant association signal for homozygous carriers of the rare A allele P values are above 0.05). The most common MMP1 genotype was (P = 0.002) with an increased genetic risk of 1.3 (95% confidence in- GG/GG in the patients with OCB (60.26%). The MMP9 frequency dis- terval 1.11-1.57). The association was consistent with the specific peri- tribution CC genotype was similar in the workers with OCB and in the odontitis forms chronic periodontitis (odd’s ratio = 2.2 [95% confidence healthy subjects (80.91% and 73.95%, respectively). The frequency of interval 1.16-4.35], P = 0.02), and aggressive periodontitis (odd’s ratio MMP12 AA genotype between the workers with OCB (75.73%) and the = 1.3 [95% confidence interval 1.04-1.68], P = 0.02). Sequencing of healthy workers (72.61%) was not significant. regulatory and exonic regions of DEFB1 identified no other associated Our results show no significant difference between the workers with variant, pointing to rs1047031 as likely being the causative variant. occupational chronic bronchitis and the healthy workers for MMPs. Prediction for microRNA targets identified a potential microRNA bind- It’s needed more studies to define genetic risk factors for occupational ing site at the position of rs1047031. chronic bronchitis. P08.51 P08.49 Pharmacogenetic investigation in complex traits using Genome Genome-wide parametric linkage analysis of adult height Wide Association study T. I. Axenovich1,2, I. V. Zorkoltseva1, N. M. Belonogova1,2, A. V. Kirichenko1, B. E. Salvi1, C. Barlassina1, L. Citterio2, C. Lanzani2, S. Lupoli3, F. Torri1, A. Orro4, A. Oostra3, C. M. van Duijn3, Y. S. Aulchenko1,3; C. Cosentino1, F. Taddeo1, V. Tieran1, D. Cusi5, G. Bianchi2, F. Macciardi1; 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Novosi- 1University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2University Vita Salute San Raffaele, Milan, birsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Erasmus MC Rotter- Italy, 3INSPE, HSR Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 4Institute of Biomedical Tech- dam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. nologies, CNR, Segrate, Milan, Italy, 5San Carlo Borromeo Hospital, Milan, Italy. Despite extensive research of genetic determinants of human adult Pharmacogenetic association studies help to identify DNA variants height, the current knowledge allows us to predict only a small portion which impact on the individual response to drugs. The knowledge of of the trait’s genetic variation. In this study we analyzed 2940 geno- sample variability in drug response can allow to personalize drug dos- typed and phenotyped individuals in a large pedigree including more ing and treatment regimes. The fundamental question concerns wheth- than 23000 members in 18 generations. The pedigree was derived er it is possible to differentiate the patients with potentially responses from an isolated Dutch population, where genetic heterogeneity is ex- to the treatment (R) from those with the greatest risk of no response pected to be low and linkage disequilibrium to be extensive. (NR). Our approach to these questions is to identify SNPs that segre- Complex segregation analysis confirmed high heritability of adult gate with drug efficacy either in candidate genes (CG) that relate to the height, and suggested involvement of a major gene in the control of mechanism of action of the drug or in other DNA regions detected with height in this population. The estimates obtained from complex seg- a Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS). SNPs identified from CG regation analysis were used to perform parametric linkage analysis. or GWAS could allow NR to be excluded from subsequent clinical trial Parametric linkage analysis indicated at least four suggestive and studies, therefore allowing enriched, smaller, faster, less expensive three genome-wide significant loci. Significant peaks were located at clinical studies on patients with a better chance of responding favor- the chromosome regions 1p32.2 (LOD score = 3.35), 2p16.3-21 (LOD ably. Here, we present an example of this approach: we adopted a score = 3.29) and 16q24.1-24.2 (LOD score = 3.94). First peak was genetic association design, where the phenotype of interest was mea- close to already known candidate gene COL9A2. The second peak sured as a quantitative trait and the variables affecting the distribution was in the middle of neurexin 1 gene (NRXN1), which is expressed of the phenotype are the SNPs, the therapy and the SNP*therapy in- in hypothalamic area and may influence growth hormone production. teraction. Once we identified those genes, we developed an algorithm The locus 16q24.1-24.2 showing the strongest linkage signal was not to detect the genotypic profiles that best discriminate R from the NR. mapped earlier as contributing to population diversity of human stat- In a final step, we merged the best predictive SNPs found from our ure. GWAS strategy with those from a CG approach. Both categories of Despite of relatively small number of genotyped and phenotyped indi- SNPs convey a specific predictive power that is magnified by their joint viduals a genome-wide parametric linkage identified four loci with sug- integration into a unified model. gestive linkage and three with significant linkage. This demonstrates high power of the used approach, which combines advantages of ge- P08.52 netically isolated population, large pedigree and parametric methods The hereditary risk factors of socially significant multifactorial of linkage analysis. diseases O. A. Gra1,2, Z. M. Kozhekbaeva2,3, D. V. Gra4, M. D. Fedorova4, O. I. Skot- P08.50 nikova5, N. P. Kisseljova4, F. L. Kisseljov4, I. V. Goldenkova-Pavlova2, T. V. A 3’UtR transition within DEFB1 is associated with chronic and Nasedkina1; aggressive periodontitis 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian Academy of Sciences, Mos- G. M. Richter1, A. S. Schäfer1, M. Nothnagel2, M. L. Laine3, A. Rühling4, C. cow, Russian Federation, 2Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Acad- Schäfer5, N. Cordes4, B. Noack6, M. Folwaczny7, J. Glas7, C. Dörfer4, H. Dom- emy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute for Human Genom- misch5, B. Groessner-Schreiber4, S. Jepsen5, B. G. Loos8, S. Schreiber1; ics, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States, 1Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, University Medical Center Schleswig- 4Institute of Carcinogenesis, N. N. Blokhin Cancer Research Centre, Russian Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Informatics and Statistics, Uni- Academy of Medical Science, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5The Central Sci-Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  entific Research Institute of Tuberculosis, Department of Health Care, Moscow, P08.54 Russian Federation. Functional variant of the PtPN22 gene associated with Graves‘ The predictive diagnostics of socially significant diseases with a mul- disease predisposition in slovenian population tifactorial etiology becomes more significant due to worsening of eco- A. Bicek, B. Krhin, S. Hojker; logical conditions and increasing of the number of chronic patholo- University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Department of nuclear medicine, Zaloska gies. cesta 7, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. We developed Pharmagen-biochip for the polymorphism analysis in Recent findings have demonstrated that the single nucleotide poly- the candidate genes controlling the biotransformation system and morphism 1858C>T in the PTPN22 (protein tyrosine phosphatase the NAT2-biochip for the analysis of all significant variants in NAT2 nonreceptor 22) gene has functional relevance and is associated with gene. Our analysis has revealed genetic risk factors for development a variety of autoimmune diseases. The aim of this study was to as- of several multifactorial pathologies: childhood acute leukemia (poly- sess the role of the PTPN22 1858C>T polymorphism in the genetic morphic variants of genes GSTT1, GSTM1, NAT2 and MTRR), leuke- predisposition to Graves’ disease (GD) in Slovenian population. We mia and lymphoma in adults (polymorphic variants of genes CYP1A1, analyzed a case-control cohort composed by 100 patients with Graves’ GSTM1 and CYP2C9), and the lung diseases in children and adults disease and 100 healthy controls. The PTPN22 1858C>T genotyping (polymorphic variants of genes CYP2C9, GSTT1, GSTM1 and NAT2). was performed by TaqMan 5′ allelic discrimination assay. The allele The analysis of genes predisposing to cervical cancer has defined distributions followed the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. CC genotype risk factors of oncopathology development (polymorphic variants of was found in 71 patients and 88 controls, CT genotype in 27 patients genes CYP1A1, GSTM1, MTHFR and NAT2). In addition, it has been and 11 controls, and TT genotype in 2 patients and 1 control. Results showed that polymorphic variants of CYP1A1, GSTT1, GSTM1 and were further analyzed by Fisher’s exact test. Allele and genotype fre- NAT2 genes may consider as predictive markers for risk of relapse quencies of the PTPN22 1858C>T polymorphism between patients in childhood acute leukemia and could be used to individualize the and controls were compared. Significantly different allele and geno- standard therapy. type distribution was observed. The p-value for GD susceptibility was Our results show the importance of the genetic risk factors analysis 0.0046 for patients carrying T allele (CT+TT) compared to controls. As in multifactorial diseases and the utility of biochips as genotyping in- allelic variation of 1858C>T polymorphism could alter T - cell signaliza- strument in preclinical diagnostics and personalized medicine for indi- tion we believe that PTPN22 gene holds a disease-predisposing allele vidual adjustment of drug dosage in clinic. that contributes to development of GD. Therefore, our data suggest The work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Re- that the PTPN22 1858C>T single nucleotide polymorphism has an ef- search (projects no. 06-04-49771 and 08-04-12225) and the Founda- fect on GD susceptibility in Slovenian population. tion for Assistance to Small Innovative Enterprises (project no. 9194). P08.55 P08.53 molecular diagnosis of known recessive ataxias by Recurrent oncostatin m receptor gene mutations and haplotype homozygosity mapping with sNP arrays association in primary cutaneous amyloidosis in taiwan D. H’Mida-Ben Brahim1, A. M’Zahem2, M. Assoum1, Y. Bouhlal3, F. Fattori4, M. Lin1,2, D. Lee3, T. Liu4, Y. Lin5, S. Chen1, Y. Chang6, J. A. McGrath7, S. Tsai8,5; M. Anheim1, L. Ali-Pacha5, C. Lagier-Tourenne1, N. Drouot1, C. Thibaut1, T. 1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2De- Benhassine6, Y. Sifi2, J. Poujet7, A. Hamri2, F. Hentati3, R. Amouri3, F. Santorelli4, partment of Medical Research & Education, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, M. Tazir5, M. Koenig1; Taipei, Taiwan, 3Department of Dermatology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Ben Badis, Con- Taipei, Taiwan, 4VYM Genome Research Center, National Yang-Ming Univer- stantine, Algeria, 3Institut de Neurologie, Tunis, Tunisia, 4Molecular Medicine & sity, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Dept. of Neurosciences IRCCS Ospidale. Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy, 5Service Sciences, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 6Department of Der- de Neurologie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Mustapha, Alger, Algeria, 6Institut matology, Faculty of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, Pasteur, Alger, Algeria, 7Hopitaux Universitaires de Marseille, Marseille, France. 7St John’s Institute of Dermatology, Division of Genetics and Molecular Medi- The diagnosis of rare inherited diseases is becoming increasingly dif- cine, The Guy’s, King’s College and St Thomas’ School of Medicine, London, ficult as an increasing number of affections appears to have multigenic United Kingdom, 8Division of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health inheritance. Multigenic inheritance applies for the recessive progres- Research Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan. sive ataxias, for which 12 genes have been identified. We used ho- Primary cutaneous amyloidosis (PCA) is characterized by severe itch- mozygosity mapping of patients with recessive ataxia and born from ing, maculopapular lesions, pigmentation, and amyloid deposits in the consanguineous parents, as a guide for identification of the defective dermal papilla. The disease is relatively common in Southeast Asia locus. Patients from 97 families were analysed with GeneChip Map- and South America. Previously, we reported familial clustering and ge- ping 10K or 50K SNP Affymetrix microarrays. We identified six families netic heterogeneity of PCA and mapped the condition to 5p13.1-q11.2 homozygous for regions containing the ARSACS gene, two families in a subset of pedigrees from Taiwan. A gene within this region, OSMR, homozygous for the ataxia-telangiectasia gene, two families homozy- has recently been found to harbor mutations in familial cases. Here, gous for the AOA1 gene, and one family homozygous for the AOA2 we investigated 29 PCA pedigrees and found that 10 had heterozy- gene. A mutation was identified in all families homozygous for the AR- gous missense mutations in OSMR, all of which occurred within the SACS, AOA1 or AOA2 loci, and in only one of the two families homo- fibronectin type III-like repeat domains of the encoded OSMRβ protein: zygous for the A-T locus. The family without a mutation in the ATM p.D647V (1 family), p.P694L (6 families), and p.K697T (3 families). gene was not reminiscent of A-T, as alpha-foetoprotein was normal in The mutation p.P694L was associated with the same haplotype in 5 of all 4 patients who had onset of ataxia at 8 years and absent reflexes. 6 families. This particular mutation and haplotype were also detected However, the LOD score in favor of linkage for the 11q22.1-q23.1 re- in 2 sporadic cases of PCA, suggesting a common ancestral origin. gion was 3.2 and no other region of the genome was consistent with No mutations in OSMR were identified in the other 19 pedigrees with linkage for this family, suggesting that a second ataxia gene is present familial PCA or in 89 sporadic cases of PCA, findings consistent with in this interval. While the use of homozygosity mapping was very ef- other disease-associated genes or perhaps non-genetic causes in fective at pointing to the correct ataxia gene, it also suggests that the some individuals. Our study provides insight about the complex ge- majority of recessive ataxia cases are caused by mutations either in netic etiology of PCA and shed light on cytokine receptors and PCA the recently identified genes or in genes yet to be identified. pathogenesis. P08.56 Pharmacogenomic study of drug transporters CYPA, CYPA and ABCB on cyclosporine A and tacrolimus with allograft rejection in renal transplant recipients of north india R. Singh, A. Srivastava, R. D. Mittal; Sanjay Gandhi PGI, Lucknow, India. Background: Calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine (CsA) and tacrolimus (Tac), substrates of cytochrome P-450 3A (CYP3A) subfamily and ATPStatistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods  binding cassette subfamily B member 1 (ABCB1) are associated with of 22 women with spontaneous singleton pregnancy. Serum markers wide inter-individual heterogeneity in oral bioavailability. We therefore, (PAPP-A and free β-HCG) and fetal nuchal translucency (NT) thick- investigated pharmacogenomic associations in CYP3A4, CYP3A5 and ness were measured at 10+0 to 13+0 weeks of pregnancy. All the ABCB1 genes with allograft outcome in a cohort of 297 renal trans- women with twins underwent chorionbiopsy due to increased NT thick- plant recipients. ness or increased maternal age. Methods: 224 patients on CsA and 73 patients on Tac based immuno- Results: Differences in the median of PAPP-A were significantly lower suppression regimen were genotyped for single nucleotide polymor- in singletons (1.09; 0.27 - 2.48) vs multiple pregnancies (2.69; 0.76 phisms (SNPs) in CYP3A5 (CYP3A5*2, CYP3A5*3 , CYP3A5*4), CY- - 6.19), p<0.0001 whereas the difference in the level of free β-HCG P3A4 (CYP3A4*1B, CYP3A4*6, CYP3A4*18) and ABCB1 (-129T>C, in singleton pregnancies were statistically not significant (1.08; 0.24 1236C>T, 2064-76T>A, 2677G>T, 3435C>T) and correlated with CsA/ - 5.32) compared to twins (1.87; 0.64 - 5.16), p<0.132. Cytogenetic Tac dose requirement (mg/kg/day) and dose adjusted CsA (C)/Tac analysis of the 44 embryos had revealed 2 cases of aneuploidies - tri- 2 (T) blood levels (concentration/dose ratio) at 1month and 3months somy 21, trisomy 18. Both morthers were under the age of 35 years. 0 post transplantation. The elective reduction of the affected embryos was performed without Results: Daily dose requirements were 10-22% and 20-40% higher complications. for CsA and Tac, respectively, in CYP3A5*3 *1/*1 genotype patients Conclusions: Twin pregnancies have shown a significantly higher lever as compared to *3/*3 patients at 1 and 3 months post transplanta- of PAPP-A compared to singleton pregnancies. A further research is tion. Significant correlation of CYP3A5*3 with dose adjusted levels of needed to investigate the diagnostic efficiency of currently used serum CsA (r2=0.047, p=0.001) and Tac (r2=0.278, p<0.001) were observed markers of aneuploidies in twin pregnancies. at 1 and 3months. The dose-adjusted levels were also lower in ABCB1 c.2677G>T GG genotype (CsA, C p=0.032; Tac T, p=0.001) suggest- P08.59 2 0 ing that for a given dose their CsA/Tac blood concentration was lower. Region wide association study of human chromosome 15q14- The GG genotype was further associated with lower allograft survival 22.1 locus with type 2 diabetes in Japanese as indicated by Kaplan-Meier analysis (p=0.007). P. Keshavarz1, Y. Yamaguchi2, B. Rahmati1, M. Shadinejad1, A. Abbaspour1; Conclusion: Identification of CYP3A5*3 *1/*1 and ABCB1 2677GG 1Guilan University of Medical Science, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Institute patients with significantly lower dose-adjusted concentrations suggest for Genome Research, Tokushima, Japan. the requirement of higher CsA/Tac dose to reach therapeutic concen- Several previous linkage scans in type 2 diabetes (T2D) families in- trations. The study may supplement pre-transplant pharmacogenomic dicated a putative susceptibility locus on chromosome 15q14-22.1, information for individualizing immunsuppressant doses. while the underlying gene for T2D has not yet been identified. The presence of T2D disease susceptibility variant(s) was assessed in P08.57 the 21.8 Mb region between D15S118 and D15S117 in a Japanese Association study of HLA-DRB1 alleles with Rheumatoid population using a region-wide case-control association test. A two- Arthritis in tunisian patients stage association test was performed using Japanese subjects: The M. Ben Hamad1, N. Mahfoudh2, S. Marzouk3, G. Chabchoub1, Z. Bahloul3, F. discovery panel (Stage 1) used 372 cases and 360 controls, while an Fakhfakh1, H. Ayadi1, H. Makni2, A. Maalej1; independent replication panel (Stage 2) used 532 cases and 530 con- 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine,Faculté de Médecine, sfax, trols. A total of 1,317 evenly-spaced, common SNP markers with minor Tunisia, 2Service du Laboratoire, CHU Hedi Chaker, sfax, Tunisia, 3Service de allele frequencies > 0.10 were typed for each stage. Captured genetic Médecine Interne, CHU Hedi Chaker, sfax, Tunisia. variation was examined in HapMap JPT SNPs, and a haplotype-based Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disease charac- association test was performed. SNP2140 (rs2412747) (C/T) in intron terized by progressive joint destruction and autoantibody formation. 33 of the ubiquitin protein ligase E3 component n-recognin 1 (UBR1) Auto-antibodies elaborated include anti-citrullinated protein/peptide gene was selected as a landmark SNP based on repeated significant antibodies (ACPA) and anti-rheumatoid factor (RF). Both genetic and associations in Stage 1 and Stage 2. However, the marginal p value environmental factors, and their interaction, play a role in the devel- (p = 0.0043 in the allelic test, OR = 1.26, 95% CI = 1.07-1.48 for com- opment of RA. A common set of alleles at the HLA-DRB1 locus (the bined samples) was weak in a single locus or haplotype-based asso- shared epitope alleles) has been associated with RA in populations ciation test. We failed to find any significant SNPs after correcting for with white European and Asian ancestry. The aim of this study is to multiple testing. The two-stage association test did not reveal a strong investigate the involvement of HLA-DRB1 alleles in the susceptibility association between T2D and any common variants on chromosome to RA in the Tunisian population. A set of 143 RA patients and 123 Tu- 15q14-22.1 in 1,794 Japanese subjects. A further association test with nisian controls was analyzed for HLA-DRB1 alleles using polymerase a larger sample size and denser SNP markers is required to confirm chain reaction/sequence specific primers (PCR/SSP). Association was these observations. assessed based on the χ2 test and odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confi- dence intervals (CIs). Our results showed a higher frequency but non P08.60 significant association of HLA-DRB1*04 and HLA-DRB1*10 alleles Genetic association between single nucleotide polymorphisms in patients compared to the controls (23.43% versus 16.26%, 6.64% of PAX and systemic lupus erythematosus in Hong Kong versus 2.44%; respectively). However, the stratification of our patients chinese according to immunological and clinical data showed a significant dif- Y. K. Chang1, W. Yang2, D. Ying2, C. C. Mok3, T. M. Chan4, R. W. S. Wong4, K. ference of HLA-DRB1*04 allele in the subgroup of patients with ACPA W. Lee5, M. Y. Mok4, S. N. Wong6, I. O. L. NG7, T. L. Lee2, M. H. K. Ho2, P. P. W. (p = 0.023; OR= 2.08; CI= [1.31-3.3]) and the subgroup of patients Lee2, W. H. S. Wong2, C. S. Lau4,8, P. C. Sham9, Y. L. Lau2; c with RF (p = 0.023; OR= 2.09; CI= [1.31-3.34]). Moreover, the sub- 1Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, c division of patients according to sex, extra-articular involvement and LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong radiographic damage showed no significant difference (p>0.05). Our Kong, 2Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary results indicated that the HLA-DRB1*04 allele was significantly associ- Hospital, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 3Department ated with RA susceptibility in both subgroups with ACPA and RF. of Medicine, Tuen Mun Hospital, New Territory, Hong Kong, 4Department of Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 5Depart- P08.58 ment of Medicine, Pamela Youde Nethersole Eastern Hospital, Hong Kong, Comparative analysis of the first trimeser serum markers’ levels 6Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Tuen Mun Hospital, New in twin and singleton pregnancies Territory, Hong Kong, 7Department of Pathology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The D. T. Tursunova, N. A. Karetnikova, E. A. Goncharova, V. A. Bakharev; University of Hong Kong, 8Division of Medicine & Therapeutics, Ninewells Hos- Research Center for obstetrics, gynecology and perinatology, Moscow, Russian pital & Medical School, Dundee, DD1 9SY, Tayside, UK, Austria, 9Department Federation. of Psychiatry, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong. Objectives: to look at the differences in the serum markers’ level be- Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a prototypic autoimmune dis- tween singleton and multiple pregnancies. ease characterized by heterogeneous manifestations and involvement Methods: in total 22 women in the age of 24 to 41 years old with twin of complex genetic and environmental components. Our genome-wide pregnancy were recruited in the study group. Control group consisted scan with 314 cases and 920 controls by Illumina 550K bead-chip hasStatistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 0 revealed that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of a novel gene, multifactorial traits associated with any given chromosomal abnormal- PAX5, confer association with SLE (P < 5 x 10-3 in basic allelic test). ity. Moreover, such a database will greatly assist genetic counseling Among all susceptibility SNPs, rs7859667, rs280025 and rs2812324 efforts. confer independent contribution upon logistic regression and condi- To date, we have surveyed 1529 hospital contacts involving transloca- tional haplotype-base analysis (P < 0.05), whose risk alleles constitute tions or inversions consisting of 395 families plus singletons. We are a risk haplotype locating upstream of PAX5 (P = 2.05 x 10-4). Further, already breakpoint mapping three families providing potential short- rs7859667 is selected for replication in 754 SLE samples and 1032 cuts in the identification of disease genes. controls by TaqMan, and the association is validated (OR = 1.16, P = Some interesting families 0.012). The joint analysis of gene chip and replication data reveals SLE Chromosomal association with an OR of 1.18 and P value of 5 x 10-3. Fine mapping Family Trait Carriers Traits of the carriers abnormality of PAX5 locus has been performed by selecting tag SNPs from 100kb 2 with specific delay, 1 with dyslexia, 2 with learning 5 t(1;12) Specific delay in development 6 downstream to upstream of the gene and the genotyping results are difficulty pending. PAX5 encodes a B-cell-specific activator protein that binds Dyspractic developmental 29 t(2;18) 7 3 with speech difficulty, 1 with dyslexia to promoters of the CD19 gene, BLK, and to regulatory regions of the speech disorder 3 with fibroma molle (+ 1 patient with chromosome immunoglobulin heavy chain locus, affecting B cell development and 82 t(5;12) Fibroma molle in palate 3 status unknown) proliferation. Thus genetic and biological evidence are both suggesting 107 inv 8 Borderline mentalretardation 16 11 with borderline mental retardation a genuine association between PAX5 and SLE. 1 aortic dilation (+ 2 patients with chromosome status 128 t(10;11) Aortic dilatation 2 unknown ) P08.61 207 t(4;12) Height 2 2 with growth disturbance (+ 1 individual with chromo- some status unknown) tNF a (-308G/A) promoter polymorphism in systemic sclerosis patients from Romania P08.63 R. Sfrent-Cornateanu1, O. M. Popa1, D. Opris2, F. Berghea2, C. Mihai2, R. Polymorphisms in KLF11 gene and development of type 2 Ionitescu2, C. Bara1, M. Dutescu3, R. Ionescu2; diabetes in Japanese 1Department of Immunology and Physiopathology, Carol Davila University of A. Abbaspour1, T. Tanahashi2, P. Keshavarz1; Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2Research Centre of Rheumato- 1Guilan University of Medical Science, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Institute logic Diseases, Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, for Genome Research, The University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. Romania, 3Prof C.T. Nicolau National Hematology Institute, Bucharest, Roma- Kru¨ ppel-like factor 11 is a pancreatic transcription factor whose activ- nia. ity induces the insulin gene. In North European populations, its com- Background: It is shown that TNFα participates in activation of vas- mon functional variant Q62R (rs35927125) is a strong genetic factor cular endothelium, regulation of immune response and metabolism of for Type 2 diabetes (P=0.00033, odds ratio for G allele=1.29, 95% CI the connective tissue by modulation of fibroblastic function. Systemic 1.12-1.49). We examined the contribution of KLF11 variants to the sclerosis (SSc) patients exhibit a systemic and local rise of TNFα con- susceptibility to Type 2 diabetes in a Japanese population. By re-se- tent. This rise contributes to SSc progression development of fibrosing quencing Japanese individuals (n=24, partly 96), we screened all four alveolitis and skin fibrous alterations in Raynaud’s syndrome. exons,exon/intron boundaries and flanking regions of KLF11 Verified Objectives: The aim of this study was to investigate one of TNFα most single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in 731 ini- studied promoter polymorphism (-308 G/A) in SSc patients from Ro- tial samples (369 control and 362 case subjects). Subsequently, we mania. tested for association in 1087 samples (524 control and 563 case sub- Methods: 37 unrelated patients with SSc diagnosed by a qualified jects), which were collected in different districts of Japan from the initial rheumatologist (35/2 F/M) and 67 healthy unrelated organ donors samples. We identified eight variants, including a novel A/C variant (41/26 F/M) were typed for TNFα -308G/A polymorphism (rs 1800629) on intron 3, but no mis-sense mutations. In an association study, we by TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay C_7514879_10 (Applied Biosys- failed to find any significant result of SNPs (minor allele frequency 8.2- tems, USA). 46.2%) after correcting for multiple testing. Similarly, no haplotypes Results: The observed genotypes for the TNFα-308G/A polymorphism were associated with Type 2 diabetes. It is notable that the G allele (2.70% AA, 13.51% GA, 83.78% GG in SSc patients, respectively in rs35927125 was completely absent in 1818 Japanese individuals. 4.47%AA, 19.40%GA, 76.11%GG in controls) showed no departure Genetic variants in KLF11 are unlikely to have a major effect of Type 2 from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE). diabetes in the Japanese population, although they were significantly Conclusion: The present study shows no departure from HWE in SSc associated in North European populations. These observations might patients from Romania and no potential association of investigated al- help to determine the role of KLF11 variants in Type 2 diabetes in dif- lele with the susceptibility to this disease. In order to improve the sta- ferent populations. tistical power of this study, a larger number of patients may be required to verify this conclusion. P08.64 Identification of genetic susceptibility markers of the TPH1 gene P08.62 for unipolar depression translocations and inversions in Finland T. Noskova, E. Khusnutdinova; T. Reinikainen1, M. Pöyhönen2,3, K. O. J. Simola4, K. Aittomäki3, R. Salonen5, L. 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Centre RAS, Ufa, Rus- Peltonen1,6, T. Varilo1,2; sian Federation. 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, National Institute for Health and The tryptophan hydroxylase isoform 1 (TPH1) gene is of interest with Welfare and University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Dept. of Medical Genet- respect to the risk of unipolar depression (UD) as it expresses a bio- ics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki synthetic enzyme for serotonin in the brain during development. Previ- University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept. of Pediatrics, Tampere ous studies showed that the TPH1 gene to be associated with suicidal University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 5Dept. of Medical Genetics, Väestöliitto, behavior, bipolar disorder. This study examined association of the poly- Helsinki, Finland, 6Welcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United morphisms A218C in intron 7 and A-6526G in the promoter region of Kingdom. TPH1 gene with UD in patients from Russian. Samples of 201 patients Finland is acknowledged of its high standard of clinical medicine and in and 270 healthy volunteers were investigated using PCR method and the disease gene hunt of its founder populations. What is perhaps not subsequent enzyme digestion. We found significant differences in the so well recognized is that Finland has probably the most comprehen- genotype frequencies distribution (χ2=11.43,P=0.003) of the A218C sive health registers and records: hospitalizations, surgeries, chronic polymorphism between patients and control groups. An increase of the diseases, and prescriptions etc. have been filed for decades. *A/*A genotype (OR=1.91,95%CI1.18-3.1) frequency and decrease of Relying on this infrastructure we are gathering information on ~ 3000 the *A/*C genotype (OR=0.55,95%CI0.38-0.81) frequency were reg- known reciprocal balanced translocations and inversions to a national istered in the depressive group compared to those in the control one. database (www.fintransloc.org). By analyses of the medical records There were no statistical differences registered between UD patients and by searches of national registers, we are obtaining novel informa- and healthy controls in the genotypic and allelic distribution of the A- tion of not only monogenic traits with unidentified mutations, but also of 6526G polymorphism investigated. Maximum likelihood analysis ofComplex traits and polygenic disorders  haplotype distribution demonstrated the presence of linkage disequilib- P08.67 rium between the A218C and A-6526G polymorphisms both in control Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism and bone mineral subjects (D’=0.85) and in cases (D’=0.60). Analysis of distribution of density in children with intensive caries in st.Petersburg. the haplotype frequencies revealed significant difference between de- D. A. Kuzmina1, D. A. Tyrtova1, L. V. Tyrtova1, M. N. Ostroumova2, M. M. pressive and healthy subjects (χ2=10.06,df=3,p=0.02). Further analy- Mnuskina3, V. I. Larionova1; sis showed decrease of the haplotype AG (OR=0.35,95%CI0.17-0.74) 1State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Di- in patient compared to control one. Our findings indicate the contribu- agnostic Center N 1, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Diagnostic Center tion of the TPH1 gene to susceptibility for UD. The research supported N 1, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. by the Russian Humanitarian Research Fund (#08-06-00579a) and BACKGROUNDS: Low bone mineral density (BMD) for chronologi- Russian Science Support Foundation. cal age, is well-known phenomena in children with intensive caries (IC). The bone abnormalities in these patients include rampant dental P08.65 caries, extensive caries, and hypoplasia of the enamel, bone miner- Uniparental Disomy Analysis Using Linkage mapping set alization disturbances and growth retardation. Previous studies have markers suggested an effect of vitamin D receptor (VDR) alleles on bone min- J. Lee, A. Chhibber, B. F. Johnson, C. M. Davidson, D. Rodriguez, A. A. Prad- eralization (peak bone mass) and metabolism in patients with intensive han, R. A. Padilla, R. N. Fish, S. R. Berosik, S. Hung, L. K. Joe, A. C. Felton, caries. R. Petraroli; OBJECTIVE: to investigate the relationship between VDR gene poly- Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. morphism and BMD in IC children. In a departure from classical Mendelian genetics, there are a few im- PATIENTS AND METHODS: 82 IC children. Average age was 11.7±2.3 printed genes that are only expressed from the allele inherited from years. In all children we evaluated some markers of bone metabolism, one parent. Uniparental disomy (UPD) occurs when an individual in- osteocalcine, calcitonin, parathyroid hormone and markers of bone herits both copies of a chromosome pair from only one parent and no mineralization, Ca, Ca2+, phosphate, and total alkaline phosphatase. copies from the other parent. Individuals with UPD that have a defi- TaqI and ApaI polymorphism of the VDR gene was tested by PCR. ciency in the expression of imprinted genes on Chromosome 15 are BMD was identified by dual-energy X-ray absorbtiometry of lumbar subject to two genetic disorders, Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and spine. Low BMD for chronological age was detected if Zscore <-2,0 Angelman syndrome (AS). One method used to determine the pres- SD, in accordance to International Society for Clinical Densitometry. ence or absence of the maternal or paternal chromosome is to interro- RESULTS: we have identified patients with normal BMD - 42 and gate the DNA from the individual and both parents by microsatellite or 40 patients with low BMD. We have revealed a significant difference STR (Short Tandem Repeat) analysis with fluorescently labeled prim- in VDR genotype distribution between patients with normal and low ers. We demonstrate new methods to compare the DNA via fragment BMD. TagI polymorphisms VDR were as follow TT-45.0% and 21.4%, analysis by capillary electrophoresis (CE). Such methods could help Tt-47.5% and 61.9%, tt-7.5% and 16.7% (p<0,01). ApaI polymorphism in producing consistent results across a wide range of laboratory en- VDR were as follow AA - 5.0% and 26.2%, Aa-55.0% and 50.0%, aa- vironments. We also present a software analysis procedure to rapidly 40.0% and 23.8%, respectively (p<0,01). generate results and draw conclusions. CONCLUSION: children with intensive caries with TT and aa geno- types of VDR have low BMD. P08.66 Genetic analysis of iranian families with Usher syndrome type 1, 2, 3 P09. complex traits and polygenic disorders K. Kahrizi1, G. Asaadi Tehrani1,2, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Mohseni1, K. Jalal- vand1, S. Arzhangi1, R. J. H. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1; P09.001 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation clinical and molecular characterization of patients with acute Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Department, Science and toxic hepatitis Research Unit , Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Mo- L. Piekuse1, J. Keiss2, A. Černušenko2, B. Lace1; lecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories , Department of Otolaryngology 1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2Latvian Infectology Centre, Riga, Lat- Head and Neck Surgery , University of Iowa, IA, United States. via. Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive disorder with Detoxifinig enzymes activity changes can induce acute toxic hepatitis sensorineural hearing loss, retinitis pigmentosa and in some cases (ATH). One of the most frequent ATH causes is alcohol. vestibular dysfunction. At least 13 chromosomal loci are assigned to Aims. Indentification of the most relevant gene polymorphisms (gene three clinical USH types, namely USH1A-H, USH2A-D and USH3A. UGT1A1 allele UGTA1A*28, GSTT1 and GSTM1 null genotypes, The gene products of nine identified USH genes belong to different GSTP1 - A313G, GSTA1 - C69T) in ATH patients and control group. protein classes and families. There are five known USH1 molecules: Material:51 ATH patients and 224 individuals in control group. myosin VIIa (USH1B); cadherin 23 (USH1D) and protocadherin 15 Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted and polymorphisms were ana- (USH1F); harmonin (USH1C) and SANS (USH1G). In addition, three lyzed using multiplexPCR, PCR-RFLP,sequencing. USH2 genes and one USH3A gene have been identified. The three Results. Frequencies of polymorphisms in ATH; control group (p val- USH2 genes code for the transmembrane protein USH2A (usherin); ue) are following: UGT1A1*28 - 0.38; 0.41 (p=0.43), 69T 0.46;0.34 the G-protein-coupled 7-transmembrane receptor, VLGR1b (USH2C); (p=0.042), 313G - 0.32; 0.37 (p=0.79), GSTT1 null genotype 0.14; and (WHRN) USH2D. The USH3A gene encodes clarin-1. Worldwide 0.10 (p= 0.47), GSTM1 null genotype 0.65; 0.56, (p= 0.270). USH1 and USH2 account for most Usher syndrome cases with rare Clinical outcome-13 patients (25%) died of liver failure. Difference be- occurrences of USH3. In the present study, we determined haplotype tween patient groups, one - patients who died, in other who survived, segregation in 33 consanguineous Iranian families using short tandem molecular data was following - UGTA1A*28 - 0.30;0.40 (p= 0.62), repeat polymorphic markers to examine all identified loci for USH1 GSTA1 69T 0.38;0.49 (p=0.62), GSTP1 313G 0.27;0.36 (p=0.71), (USH1A, USH1B, USH1C, USH1D,U SH1E, USH1F, USH1G), all loci GSTT1 and GSTM1 double null genotype 0.15;0,0 (p=0.014). In pa- for USH2 (USH2A, USH2B, USH2C, USH2D) and USH3A . We found tients medium level of total bilirubin was 434 ± 203 mol/l - patients who 10 families demonstrating haplotype segregation consistent with link- has no UGT1A1*28 allele medium bilirubin level was 360±187 mol/l age to one of the loci related to USH1 or USH2: three families linked (with UGT1A1*28 476 ±202 mol/l (p= 0.057)). Total bilirubin level in to USH1D, two families linked to USH1B and USH2C, and single patients with 313G allele was higher (471 ± 174 mmol/l), comparing families linked to USH1C, USH1F and USH2A. Identified mutations with those who were 313A homozygous (p=0.08). have included: MYO7A, R150X; VLGR1b, (g.371657_507673del) and Conclusions. GSTA1 69T allele is more frequent in ATH patients than Arg155X. Mutation analysis of the other genes is being completed. in control group. UGTA1A*28 and 313G allele has impact to bilirubin This study suggests that mutations in CDH23, MYO7A and VLGR1b level in ATH patients. GSTT1 and GSTM1 null genotypes could pro- are major components to Usher syndrome in the Iranian population. mote lethal outcome in acute toxic hepatitis.Complex traits and polygenic disorders  P09.002 nor allele had on average 8.75 mg/dL lower total cholesterol levels the role of Y chromosome in male susceptibility to ADHD and (p=0.00006), 7.79 mg/dL lower non-HDL cholesterol levels (p=0.0004), schizophrenia 4.91 mg/dL lower LDL cholesterol levels (p=0.007) and 9.01 mg/dL E. Stergiakouli, H. Williams, K. Langley, A. Thapar, M. Owen; lower triglyceride levels (p=0.006). Moreover, the rs738409 variant is Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. strongly associated with the liver enzymes ALT and AST, following a Many psychiatric disorders display distinct sex differences. Men are recessive model.Discussion. In conclusion, our study suggests that more likely to be affected by neurodevelopmental disorders, such as adiponutrin is related to processes of lipid and energy metabolism with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and schizophrenia. a special focus on apolipoprotein B-containing lipoproteins, as well as ADHD is a childhood disorder characterised by inattention, overactiv- hepatic dysfunction. ity and impulsiveness. The disorder affects males more than females at a ratio of 4:1. In schizophrenia, the age of onset in men is signifi- P09.004 cantly earlier (21 years) than for women (25 years). The disorder is Dystrobrevin binding protein 1 gene (DTNBP) and bipolar more severe in male patients and they generally have more negative disorder: the results of a meta-analysis symptoms. D. Gaysina1,2, G. Breen2, I. Pedroso2,3, P. McGuffin2; To elucidate the genetic causes of sex differences we choose to study 1MRC Unit for Lifelong Health and Ageing, London, United Kingdom, 2MRC the Y chromosome. Y chromosome variants appropriate for U.K. pop- SGDP Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, London, United Kingdom, 3NIHR Biomedi- ulations were genotyped in a sample of 210 cases with ADHD, 310 cal Research Centre for Mental Health, South London and Maudsley NHS cases with schizophrenia and 700 U.K. controls. Although our case- Trust, London, United Kingdom. control study did not reveal any association of Y chromosome hap- Recent studies suggest an overlap in genetic susceptibility of schizo- logroups with either ADHD or schizophrenia, a modifying effect of Y phrenia and bipolar disorder (BD). There is some evidence for as- chromosome on ADHD was shown. Scores of performance IQ and full sociation between the DTNBP1 gene with schizophrenia and to date scale IQ were found to be increasing as Y chromosome haplogroups there have been five association studies of DTNBP1 and BD pub- became more recent evolutionary. lished: Raybould et al (2005), Breen et al (2006), Joo et al (2007), Pae et al (2007), and Gaysina et al (2008). The main limitations of these Performance IQ (p=0.014) studies are an impossible direct comparison of risk alleles/haplotypes Haplogroups (from most ancient to most recent evolutionary) N Mean due to different marker sets used and their insufficient sample size. 1 59 87.3 To deal with these problems we imputed the genotypes for Hapmap 2 108 91.1 SNPs for samples used in studies by Breen et al. (2006) and Gaysina 3 35 95 Full Scale IQ (p=0.024) et al. (2008). Accuracy over 90% of imputed data makes them ap- Haplogroups (from most ancient to most recent evolutionary) N Mean propriate for analyses of genotypes and alleles, but not haplotypes. 1 59 86.2 If the data were available from three or more studies we performed a 2 108 89.3 3 35 92.6 meta-analysis of DTNBP1 alleles combining odds ratios and using a fixed-effect model. Seven SNPs were available for the meta-analyses: To sum up, Y chromosome haplogroups might not have a main effect on ADHD or rs2619538, rs2619522, rs760761, rs2005976, rs1011313, rs3213207 schizophrenia but they have a modifying effect on ADHD since more ancient hap- and rs2619539. Our results support the association of rs760761 (T logroups are associated with lower performance IQ. Moreover, our results on 1220 allele: P (Z)=0.012, OR=1.22, 95%CI 1.04-1.42) and rs3213207 (G al- individuals provide an insight into the population structure of U.K. Y chromosome lele: P (Z) =0.013, OR=1.24, 95%CI 1.05-1.46) of the DTNBP1 gene in haplogroups. vulnerability to BD. We are currently running meta-analyses based on Bayesian method which allows combining data of genetic association P09.003 studies with different sets of markers (Verzilli et al, 2008). The data will Genetic variation within adiponutrin is associated with be presented during the conference. lipoprotein metabolism and liver function B. Kollerits1, S. Coassin1, S. Kiechl2, S. C. Hunt3, A. Döring4, C. Lamina1,4, B. P09.005 Paulweber5, I. M. Heid4,6, J. Willeit2, A. Brandstätter1, T. D. Adams3, F. Kronen- DNA-variants of the properdin gene are not associated with AmD berg1; S. Seitsonen1, S. Torniainen2, M. Ihalainen2, P. Onkamo3, S. Meri4, I. Im- 1Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular monen1, I. Jarvela2; and Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 1Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Medical 2Department of Neurology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Biological 3Cardiovascular Genetics Division, University of Utah School of Medicine, and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Depart- Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 4Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, ment of Bacteriology and Immunology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. Germany, 5First Department of Internal Medicine, St. Johann Spital, Paracelsus Purpose. Several variants in the complement cascade genes (comple- Private Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 6Institute of Information ment factor H [CFH], C2, C3, CFB) have been reported to associate Management, Biometry and Epidemiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of with age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Of them, a member Munich, Munich, Germany. of the complement alternative pathway, CFH, represents the highest Objective. Adiponutrin (PNPLA3) is a predominantly liver-expressed risk. Since properdin is also an important protein in this pathway, we transmembrane protein with phospholipase activity regulated by fast- analysed whether DNA-variants in the properdin gene at Xp11.4 are ing and feeding. Recent genome-wide association studies identified associated with AMD. adiponutrin to be associated with hepatic fat content and liver func- Methods. The coding region and splice sites of the properdin gene tion, indicating that adiponutrin might be involved in hepatic lipoprotein were sequenced in a total of 223 Finnish patients with AMD (151 spo- metabolism. We aimed 1) to elucidate the association of common vari- radic cases [68% women] and 72 familial cases [71% women]). Con- ants within adiponutrin and parameters of lipoprotein metabolism and trols were 86 age-matched non-AMD patients (81% women) with no 2) with liver function in up to four independent West-Eurasian study large drusen and no or minimal focal pigmentary abnormalities. populations including up to more than 6000 individuals. Results. A total of four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were Methods. This study is based on the population-based Bruneck Study detected in the properdin gene. Three of the SNPs ( D55H in exon 3, (n=800), the population-based KORA F3 Study (n=1644), the SAPHIR D299N in exon 7 and P394S in exon 9) were infrequent (in 5 patients Study (n=1738) from Austria based on a healthy working population, and controls in total). The fourth SNP, rs1048118 in exon 10, was more and the Utah Obesity Case-Control Study (including 1037 severely frequent, but was not associated with AMD either in men or in women obese individuals (average BMI 46.0 kg/m2) and 827 controls from the in our preliminary analyses. same geographical region). Conclusions. None of the variant in the properdin gene was associated Results. We observed a strong recessive association of a common with AMD, suggesting that properdin, though a member of alternative nonsynonymous variant within adiponutrin (rs738409, exon 3) with pathway, does not play as important role as CFH in the pathogenesis age- and gender-adjusted lipoprotein concentrations which was not of AMD. caused by an impaired liver function: homozygote carriers of the mi-Complex traits and polygenic disorders  P09.006 P09.008 Association of ADH genes variation with alcoholism risk in three study of association between ApoE genotype and cognitive populations from Russia performance in young adults G. G. Faskhutdinova, A. Kazantseva, E. Khusnutdinova; N. Maksimovic1, E. Stefanova2, I. Novakovic1, T. Stojkovic2, M. Bajcetic3, T. Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. Damnjanovic1, B. Jekic1, L. Lukovic1, B. Popovic4, V. Kostic2; Alcoholism (alcohol dependence) is a common, complex disease, with 1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute significant genetic contribution to the risk. Alcohol is primarily degrad- of Neurology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute of Histology, ed by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and genetic variations affecting School of Medicine, Belgrade, 4School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia. the rate of alcohol degradation were found in ADH genes. It is well known that presence of ApoE ε4 allele is strongly associated We designed a classical case-control association study for 5 poly- with early onset and rapid course of Alzheimer dementia. Although the morphisms in Class 1 ADH genes: ADH1B Arg47His (rs1229984), exact role of ApoE in dementia is not clear, recent data suggest both ADH1B RsaI (rs2066701), ADH1C HaeIII (rs1693425), ADH1C EcoRI direct and indirect mechanisms. In addition, association between ApoE (rs1789920), and ADH1C Ile349Val (rs698). We recruited 303 men with genotype and cognitive performance in whole population varies at dif- ICD-10 alcoholism diagnosis (112 Russians, 91 Tatars, 100 Bashkirs ferent ages, and impact of ApoE ε4 allele on brain function in young from Volga-Ural region of Russia) and matched control groups typed persons is still controversial. for the above-mentioned gene variants using PCR-RFLP technique. The aim of our study was to determine ApoE genotypes in a group We observed all SNPs to be in strong linkage disequilibrium in con- of healthy young adults and to investigate association of determined trols, cases and the overall sample in all studied populations. genotypes with their cognitive performances. Haplotype analysis of 2 SNPs in ADH1B gene showed significant asso- Our study was carried out on 548 students of School of Medicine, ciation of ADH1B*Arg*T haplotype with alcoholism (p<0.05, OR=1.60) Belgrade. ApoE (ε2/ ε3/ ε4) polymorphisms were determined by poly- in Russians. Analysis of 3 polymorphisms in ADH1C gene revealed merase chain reaction (PCR) and RFLP analysis on polyacrylamide that in Tatars the frequency of individuals carrying ADH1C*T*G*G gel. Cognitive screening was performed by means of Mini-Mental haplotype was significantly higher in the group of alcoholics compared State Examination (MMSE). to healthy controls (p<0.05, OR=4.93). In Bashkirs the frequency of We detected ε2/ε3 genotype in 55 (10,0%), ε2/ε4 in 6 (1,1%), ε3/ε3 in haplotype ADH1C*G*G*A was significantly increased in patients with 426 (77,74%), ε3/ε4 in 57 (10,4%) and ε4/ε4 in 4 (0,73%) students. alcoholism compared to control individuals (p<0.05). Further analysis Statistical analysis showed significantly lower MMSE score in persons demonstrated association of this haplotype with the risk of alcoholism caring ε4 allele either in homozygous or in heterozygous state. Our in Bashkirs (OR=12.20). results suggest that ApoE genotype has significant role in cognitive Our findings indicate the contribution of ADH1B and ADH1C genes to performance even at young age. susceptibility for alcoholism in three populations form Russia. Further investigations of these genes in different phenotypic groups are nec- P09.009 essary.This work was supported by Russian foundation for humanities Towards a finer evaluation of the role of IL2RA in Multiple grant (08-06-00579a). sclerosis M. C. Babron1,2, H. Perdry1,2, I. Cournu-Rebeix3,4, B. Müller-Myhsok5, B. Fon- P09.007 taine3,4, F. Clerget-Darpoux1,2; Functional variants of the serotonin receptor type 3A and B gene 1INSERM UMRS535, Villejuif, France, 2Univ Paris Sud, Villejuif, France, 3IN- are associated with eating disorders SERM UMRS546, Paris, France, 4Univ Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, C. Hammer1, J. Kapeller1, M. Endele1, C. Fischer1, J. Hebebrand2, A. Hinney2, 5Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. S. Friedel2, M. Gratacòs3, X. Estivill3,4, M. Fichter5, F. Fernández-Aranda6, S. IL2RA on chromosome 10 is a well-established risk factor for Multiple Ehrlich7, G. Rappold1, B. Niesler1; Sclerosis (MS). First found in a genome-wide study of UK and US 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Department of Child families (IMSGC, 2007), it has been replicated in several European and Adolescent Psychiatry, Duisburg-Essen, Germany, 3Genes and Disease populations (Weber, Fontaine et al, 2007; Matesanz et al 2007; IMS- Program Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG-UPF), Barcelona, Spain, 4De- GC, 2008). However, all these studies focused only on single SNP as- partment of Health and Experimental Life Sciences, Pompeu Fabra University sociation. So, the odds-ratios reported in the literature do not correctly (UPF), Barcelona, Spain, 5Klinik Roseneck, Prien am Chiemsee, Germany, reflect the differential genotypic risks attributable to IL2RA as a whole. 6Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital of Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain, In order to better discriminate the relative risks attributable to IL2RA 7Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psycho- genotypes, we undertook finer mapping of this gene in the REF- therapy, Charité, Berlin, Germany. GENSEP collection of 563 trio families with 28 tagSNPs. A 10-SNP As a key player in modulating both human physiological and behav- subset, at the 5’ end of the gene was retained as showing the best ioural functions including anxiety, perception and in particular appetite, contrast between cases and controls. All combinations of SNPs within serotonin is likely to be involved in the aetiology of eating disorders. this subset were tested for association. This procedure led to retain a Bulimia nervosa patients have been effectively treated with the se- combination of 2 SNPs, rs3118470 and rs2256774, Note that, taken lective 5-HT3 antagonist ondansetron. This triggered our interest in individually, rs2256774 was not shown to be associated. However, it investigating the putative role of variants in the 5-HT3 receptor genes strongly reinforces the association signal observed with rs3118470. HTR3A and HTR3B in the susceptibility to bulimia nervosa (BN) and This 2-SNP combination corresponds to 10 distinct phased genotype anorexia nervosa (AN) by direct sequencing. 265 patients with AN and possibilities, the relative risks of which range from 1 to 3.34. 91 patients with BN as well as 191 healthy controls served as a pilot Simultaneous analysis of variants in a given gene provides an impor- study group for mutational analysis. We found the coding HTR3B vari- tant information on its role in the etiology of a complex disease such ant p.Y129S (rs1176744, P = 0.004, OR = 2.06) and the 5’UTR resid- as MS. However, it is only a preliminary step towards bridging the gap ing HTR3A variant c.-42C>T (rs1062613, P = 0.008, OR = 5.31) to be between the association signal to the evaluation of the gene effect, associated with the restrictive subtype of anorexia nervosa (ANR). An and towards understanding the full biological pathway. intronic HTR3A variant, IVS1-19G>A (rs1176722), was identified to be associated with the ANR (P = 0.002) as well as the BN purging subtype P09.010 (BNP, P = 0.005). Furthermore, the association of HTR3B p.Y129S catecholamine O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene with ANR was confirmed in an independent Spanish study group of 78 polymorphisms are not associated with multisomatoform patients with AN and 331 controls (P = 0.034, OR = 2.26). Hence, our disorder (msD) in a group of German msD patients and healthy study provides first evidence for an involvement of serotonin receptor controls type 3 variants in the aetiopathology of eating disorders in humans. J. Jakobi, M. Bernateck, M. Karst, A. Tran, L. Holm, L. Volkmann, D. Buers, M. Stuhrmann; Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Background: Multisomatoform Disorder (MSD) is characterized by the presence of 3 or more medically unexplained, currently bothersome, physical symptoms with an at least 2 year history of somatization. TheComplex traits and polygenic disorders  ethiopathology of MSD is largely unknown, but genetic disposition strong association with 17q21 locus including the ORMDL3 gene. This may be one of several risk factors. Since pain is a major symptom of finding has been already replicated in different populations. MSD, and polymorphisms in the catecholamine O-Methyltransferase The association of 4 SNPs (rs8067378, rs7216389, rs3859192, (COMT) gene are associated with COMT enzymatic activity and pain rs11650680) in the candidate locus with susceptibility to asthma was sensitivity, we assumed that COMT polymorphisms could be associ- investigated in Italian families with young asthmatic individuals (<16 ated with MSD. years old). Probands: 147 patients with MSD and 94 age and gender matched A family-based data set composed of 211 Italian families ascertained healthy controls participated in this study. The inclusion criteria for through an allergic asthmatic child was analyzed (previously described: MSD were in accordance to the structured clinical interview (SCID) of Malerba J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001; 107: 654). the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM IV). Single SNP and haplotype analyses were computed using the comput- Genotyping: DNA from EDTA blood was genotyped for single nucle- er program UNPHASE. Single SNP analyses and haplotype analyses otide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the COMT locus by polymerase considering the 4 SNPs did not show significant result, but a significant chain reaction (PCR) and restriction enzyme analysis. The distribution association for haplotype rs7216389-rs3859192 T-C and asthma was of COMT SNP alleles, genotypes and haplotypes was compared be- found (global test p=0.007; OR=1.59 p=0.008). tween patients and controls. In conclusion, we confirm the association of 17q21 region with young Results: None of the investigated SNPs, including the functionally rel- asthmatic individuals in a different population, and we extend it to OR- evant common SNP in codon 158 (Val158Met), showed a statistically MDL3 gene marker haplotypes. significant allelic, genotypic or haplotypic association with MSD. Discussion: In previous studies, convincing evidence was obtained for P09.013 a contribution of single SNPs and SNP haplotypes of the COMT locus Polymorphisms of AcE and tFAm genes and left ventricular to differences in the human experience of pain and to the risk of devel- remodeling in athletes oping temporomandibular disorder (TMD). In contrast to these studies, S. B. Goriyeva1, I. I. Ahmetov1, I. V. Astratenkova2, O. L. Vinogradova1; COMT polymorphisms do not seem to play a relevant role as major 1SRC Institute for Biomedical Problems, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2St genetic risk factors for MSD. Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian Federation. P09.011 Left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy in endurance-oriented athletes is Association analysis of xenobiotic-metabolizing gene generally understood to be a limiting factor for improving maximal polymorphisms with asthma in Volga-Ural region of Russia oxygen uptake. LV growth is regulated by several independent sig- Y. Fedorova1, A. Karunas1, N. Ramazanova2, O. Gra3, I. Goldenkova-Pavlova3, naling pathways. These include pathways involved with the RAAS E. Khusnutdinova1; (rennin-angiotensin-aldosterone system), PGC1/TFAM (mitochondrial 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir biogenesis, fatty acid oxidation), etc. Several studies demonstrated Medical State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Vavilov Institute of General an association between LV hypertrophy and the presence of ACE DD Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. genotype. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is essential for Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways in which mtDNA transcription and replication. Myocardial mtDNA copy number many cells and cellular elements play a role. The pathogenesis and and TFAM expression both decreased in several cardiac diseases. etiology of asthma are very complex. Some studies have shown an However, the functional significance of TFAM has not been estab- association between asthma and polymorphisms of enzymes that lished in LV growth. The purpose of the study was to investigate ACE play an important role in the biotransformation of xenobiotics. Using I/D and TFAM Thr12Ser polymorphisms for association with echocar- allele-specific hybridization on the biochip we have investigated the diographic measures in female athletes. Fifteen elite female athletes allele and genotype distribution of 13 polymorphisms in eight genes (all-round speed skaters and rowers) were studied. ACE and TFAM (CYP1A1, CYP2D6, GSTT1, GSTM1, MTHFR, NAT2, CYP2C9 and gene polymorphisms were determined by PCR-RLFP. Echocardiog- CYP2C19). The study was performed in 264 patients with bronchial raphy was performed for the measurement of left ventricular mass, asthma and 201 nonasthmatic individuals from Volga-Ural region of wall thickness, dimensions and function. We found that LV mass was Russia. Biochips were prepared in Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Bi- significantly greater in TFAM SS homozygotes than in T allele carriers ology, Russian Academy of Sciences (Biochip-IMB, Russia). Significant (SS - 200 (26) g, ST - 149 (30) g; P=0.034). Furthermore, the inter- differences in NAT2 allele and genotype frequencies have been found ventricular septal wall thickness was biggest in ACE DD homozygotes between asthma patients and control group of Russian ethnicity. The than in I allele carriers (DD - 0.88 (0.15) cm, ID - 0.83 (0.16) cm, II - 0.7 frequency of slow *5/*5 genotype was lower in asthma patients than in (0) cm; P=0.047). In conclusion, ACE II (with lower ACE activity) and healthy subjects (OR=0,49; 95%CI 0,26-0,92; p=0,026). On the con- TFAM ST (with higher transcription activity) genotypes are associated trary the Tatars had significant higher frequencies of *5 allele and *5/*5 with lower risk for development of left ventricular hypertrophy in female genotype of NAT2 gene in patients than in control group (OR=1,54; athletes. 95%CI 1,01-2,35; p=0,045; OR=3,29; 95%CI 1,31-8,23; p=0,008). It is known that polymorphic NAT2 status varies widely between individuals P09.014 and ethnic groups. Both rapid and slow N-acetyltransferase genotypes Genetic predisposition of young athletes to metabolic disorders have been associated with the risk of several diseases in a number A. A. Topanova, N. D. Golberg, R. R. Dondukovskaya, I. I. Ahmetov; of populations. These observations, together with ethnic variation in St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian the ratio of slow and rapid acetylators, suggest that NAT2 genotypes Federation. may partially explain asthma risk in different populations in Volga-Ural The purpose of the present work was to estimate the risk for devel- region of Russia. opment of metabolic disorders (type 2 diabetes, coronary heart dis- ease, obesity) by detecting polymorphisms of genes in young Rus- P09.012 sian athletes. Two hundred and thirty two sub-elite and elite athletes ORmDL3 haplotype is associated with asthma in an italian (118 bicyclists, 75 wrestlers and 39 rowers; 13-20 yr) were participated familial collection. in the study. Polymorphisms of PPARA (intron 7 G/C), PPARG (Pro- M. D. Bettin1, G. Malerba1, N. Klopp2, E. Rodriguez2, H. Grallert2, N. Linde- 12Ala), UCP2 (Ala55Val), UCP3 (-55C/T); genes were determined by mann2, L. Xumerle1, R. Galavotti1, C. Bombieri1, E. Trabetti1, T. Illig2, P. F. Pig- PCR-RLFP. The concentration of triglycerides, total cholesterol and natti1; cholesterol of high density lipoproteins, glucose, glycated hemoglo- 1Section of Biology and Genetics, Department of Mother and Child, Biology-Ge- bin and homocysthein were determined in serum after 12-hour over- netics, Verona, Italy, 2Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, night fasting. We found that 33.2% of young athletes had a high risk München, Germany. for development of cardiovascular disorders, type II diabetes, obesity Asthma is a complex disease with genetic and environmental compo- and atherosclerosis. None of the studied biochemical parameters and nents. anthropometric measures was associated with genotypes, indicating In 2007 the first Genome Wide Association study for asthma in English that high physical activity regardless of the carriage of unfavorable and German subjects (Moffat MF, Nature 2007;448:470) reported a genotypes may improve metabolic profile of athletes. Evaluation ofComplex traits and polygenic disorders  young athletes’ nutrition status showed that the level of dietary fat was and FLG. 30% of total energy intake due to fat-rich diet and low carbohydrate The SPINK5 420LysSer mutation confers a risk of eczema when ma- consumption. There was a deficiency in A, B1, B2, B6 vitamins and ternally inherited but is not a major eczema risk factor. The KLK7 in- calcium intake, whilst cholesterol consumption was high in athletes. In sertion appears to confer no risk of eczema. We found no interaction conclusion, combining information from several known common poly- between the SPINK5 risk allele or the putative KLK7 risk allele and morphisms allows the identification of athlete subgroups (33.2% in our FLG mutations. study) with markedly differing risks of development of metabolic disor- ders. High physical activity, rational nutrition of athletes and well-bal- P09.017 anced diet are important factors which may modulate negative effects Monogeneous inheritance in ADHD? Report from a fine-mapping of unfavorable genotypes. study M. K. Lin1, H. Palmason1, C. Freitag2, C. Seitz3, T. J. Renner4, M. Romanos4, S. P09.015 Walitza4, C. Jacob5, K. P. Lesch5, J. Meyer1; NFAtc4 Ala160Gly polymorphism and elite power athlete status 1Institute of Psychobiology, Dept of Neurobehavioral Genetics, Trier, Germany, J. V. Shikhova, I. I. Ahmetov, V. A. Rogozkin; 2Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main, Dept of Child and Adolescent Psy- St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian chiatry, Frankfurt, Germany, 3Saarland University Hospital, Dept of Child and Federation. Adolescent Psychiatry, Homburg, Germany, 4University of Wuerzburg, Dept of The nuclear factor of activated T-cell (NFAT) family of transcription fac- Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Wuerzburg, Germany, tors contributes to the development of several organ systems. Muta- 5University of Wuerzburg, Dept of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Wuerzburg, tion of NFAT genes affects the development of endothelial cells, skele- Germany. tal myoblasts, chondroblasts, keratinocytes, and adipocytes. NFATC4 Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neuropsychiatric effects changes in gene expression during hypertrophy and fiber-type disorder characterized by symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity and switching in cardiac and skeletal muscle. We have recently shown that increased impulsiveness. Despite many studies over the last decades, Gly160 allele of the functional Gly160Ala polymorphism in NFATC4 is the etiology of ADHD remains unknown. Eight large ADHD-affected associated with increased proportion of fast-twitch fibers of m. vas- families were recruited for this study. These families were recruited tus lateralis in athletes. As muscles of elite sprinters and weightlifters in a multicenter collaboration study conducted by three clinical units predominantly consist of fast-twitch fibers, we therefore speculated of child and adult psychiatry (University of Trier, Homburg/Saar, and that NFATC4 Gly/Gly homozygotes should be more prevalent within Wuerzburg). They comprised of 191 individuals, of which 95 were af- a group of power-oriented athletes. We have tested this hypothesis in fected with ADHD. a case-control study of 91 Russian power-oriented athletes and 1113 Fine-mapping of the significant loci reported in a recent paper (Ro- controls. Cases consisted of elite athletes involved in jumping events, manos et al, 2008) of a genome-wide linkage study of the eight large speed skating (500-1000 m), swimming (50-100 m), throwing events familes was carried out. Using genetic data derived from related indi- and weightlifting. NFATC4 gene Gly160Ala polymorphism was deter- viduals within each of the large families, an attempt is made to identify mined by PCR-RLFP. We found that the frequencies of Gly/Gly geno- predisposing chromosomal regions in these families. type (36.3% vs. 19.9%; P=0.0005) and Gly allele (59.3% vs. 44.1%; From the preliminary results, in one of the large families, a 20 cM in- P<0.0001) were significantly higher in athletes than in controls, indi- terval on chromosome 18 was narrowed down to 18q11- 18q21. All cating that Gly allele has favorable effect on power performance. In affected individuals in this family share the same haplotype. conclusion, NFATC4 Gly160Ala polymorphism is associated with elite ADHD is believed to be a complex, polygenic disease in which many power athlete status. genes of small effect contribute to disease susceptibility. However, there may be monogeneous Mendelian inheritance in large families. P09.016 Currently, interesting candidate genes in the narrowed down region of Analyses of the individual and aggregate genetic contributions chromosome 18 are being selected for further functional studies. of previously identified polymorphisms of SPINK5, KLK7 and FLG to eczema risk P09.018 H. Baurecht1,2, E. Rodríguez3, H. Wichmann2, S. Wagenpfeil1, S. Weidinger4,3; A 2.2mb microduplication in 1q42.2 including DISC in 2 1Institute for Medical Statistics and Epidemiologiy, Technische Universität brothers with autism and mild mental retardation München, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum A. Crepel1, J. Breckpot1, J. Fryns1, J. Steyaert2, K. Devriendt1, H. Peeters1; Munich, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Division of Environmental Dermatology and 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Dept. Child Psychiatry, Leu- Allergy, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich and ZAUM-Center for Allergy and Environ- ven, Belgium. ment, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 4Department of A growing number of copy number variations (CNV) are detected in Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, Technische Universität München, Munich, individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders. However, the interpre- Germany. tation is not always straightforward. Polymorphisms in the serine protease inhibitor gene serine peptidase We describe the identification and delineation of a 2.2Mb microdupli- inhibitor Kazal type 5 (SPINK5) and the serine protease kallikrein-re- cation in 1q42.2 in 2 brothers with autism and mild mental retardation. lated peptidase 7 (KLK7) appear to confer risk to eczema in some co- The duplication was detected by Array-CGH with clones from the 1 Mb horts, but these findings have not been widely replicated. These genes BAC/PAC clone set (Sanger Institute Hinxton, UK). The aberration was encode proteins thought to be involved in the regulation of posttransla- further delineated to 2.2Mb with a full-tiling BAC array. By means of tion processing of quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) the breakpoints of the duplication filaggrin (FLG), the strongest identified genetic risk factor for eczema were mapped and segregation in the family was investigated. qPCR to date. was used to screen 260 patients with autism for DISC1 duplications. We sought to clarify the individual risk of eczema conferred by the The 2.2Mb duplication was present in the proband, his affected brother SPINK5 polymorphism rs2303067 and a previously described inser- and the apparently unaffected father and paternal grandmother. Since tion in the 39 untranslated region of KLK7 and to examine potential this duplication was not present in 1577 Belgian persons, it was con- epistatic effects between these variants and FLG mutations. sidered as a rare variant. Within this region the most interesting gene We examined the effects of these polymorphisms and FLG in 486 Ger- with respect to autism is DISC1 (disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1) since man families, it is known to be involved in schizophrenia and has recently been as- 287 German and 418 Irish/English eczema cases (n for 3 genes: 1191 sociated to autism and bipolar disorder. A group of 260 patients with vs 4544 controls). We then additionally studied the SPINK5 polymor- autism was studied for the occurrence of DISC1 duplications, but no phism and FLG mutations in 1583 eczema patients from the ALSPAC additional duplications were found. study (n for 2 genes: 2774 vs 10,607 controls). This study is a typical illustration of the difficult interpretation of causal- No association was seen with the SPINK5 or KLK7 variants in the ity of a rare variant in neuropsychiatric disease. We conclude that the case-control analysis; however, a weaker effect was observed for the DISC1 duplication is a rare variant that probably confers susceptibility SPINK5 variant with maternal transmission in the family study. No in- for autism in the current family. teractions were seen between the polymorphisms in KLK7, SPINK5,Complex traits and polygenic disorders  P09.019 Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Role of serotonin transporter promoter length polymorphism in Copy number variation (CNV) in the human genome is very common autism: A south African population based study and may play an important role in disease susceptibility. The role of Z. Arieff, M. Kaur, H. Gameeldien, M. Davids; CNVs in bipolar disorder (BD) has been largely unknown, in contrast to University of the Western Cape, Bellville, South Africa. other common neuropsychiatric disorders, such as autism and schizo- The serotonin transporter promoter length polymorphism (5-hydroxy- phrenia, where a clear role for CNVs has been established in multiple tryptamine transporter length polymorphism, 5-HTTLPR) has long publications. been implicated in autism and other psychiatric disorders. The use of The objective of the current study is to determine whether large selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) have shown to have (>100kb) and rare (found in <1% of the population) CNVs play a role a positive effect in treating some symptoms of autism. The effects of in the susceptibility to BD. these drugs vary in individuals due to the presence of S or L alleles We performed a genome-wide survey for CNVs in 1697 BD patients of 5-HTTLPR. Studies performed on various autistic populations have and 2806 healthy controls from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Con- found different allele frequencies for the L and S alleles. In the present sortium, using the Affymetrix 500K array. study, allelic frequencies and genotypes of 110 South African (SA) au- The total burden of CNVs was not increased in patients when com- tistic individuals (21 African, 48 Mixed and 41 Caucasian) were deter- pared with controls. These results are in contrast with those obtained mined and compared with the matching SA ethnic control populations. for schizophrenia patients analysed with the same methods in other The S/S genotype was found to be highly significantly associated with studies, including those in our department, where we found an excess all the SA autistic ethnic populations namely, Caucasian, χ2 = 11.078; of CNVs >1Mb in size, when compared to both to the bipolar patients, Mixed, χ2 = 18.512 and total group, χ2 = 46.712 (df = 2; p < 0.001). or the same group of controls. A highly significant increase in the S allele of the Mixed autistic group These results suggest that large rare CNVs may not play a substantial ( χ2 = 14.877, p < 0.001, df = 1) and the total autistic group ( χ2 = role in developing BD, unlike their confirmed role in schizophrenia and 17.742, p < 0.001, df = 1) was found when compared to the matching autism. This probably reflects the complex nature of the underlying control groups. The comparison of our data with studies of other au- genetic components leading to susceptibility to BD, involving many tistic populations round the world showed highly significant differences genes and genetic variants. CNV platforms with higher resolution and in allele numbers to French, Germans, Israelis, Portuguese and the quality should be used to investigate the role of smaller CNVs in BD. Americans (p < 0.005). It was less significant for the second French group, Japanese and Korean populations (p < 0.05) and no difference P09.022 was observed between the Indian autistic population. This is the first Genes for elite bodybuilder status SA study of autistic individuals of different ethnic backgrounds show- I. I. Ahmetov, A. M. Hakimullina, S. E. Khalchitskiy, R. R. Dondukovskaya, V. ing significant differences of the allele and genotype frequencies of the A. Rogozkin; 5-HTTLPR. St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian Federation. P09.020 Genetic influence on power performance and extremity circumfer- Identification of novel X-linked functional variants associated ences is suggested by family and twin studies. The aim of the present with autoimmune thyroid diseases study was to reveal an association between AMPD1 (regulates AMP S. I. Gulsuner1, S. Gullu2, T. Ozcelik1; metabolism) C34T, PPP3R1 (involved in hypertrophic response) 5I/5D, 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University Faculty of PPARG (regulates lipid metabolism) Pro12Ala, VEGFA (activates an- Science, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseas- giogenesis) G-634C gene polymorphisms and several physiologic es, Ankara University, School of Medicine, Sihhiye, Ankara, Turkey. and anthropometric parameters in bodybuilders. The study involved Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) are more prevalent in females. 21 highly elite male bodybuilders (World and Europe Championship We observed that a significant proportion of females diagnosed with winners and participants). Subjects were questioned about their best AITDs display extremely skewed X chromosome inactivation (XCI) ra- results in powerlifting squat, bench press and deadlift. For muscular- tios in their blood cells (Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 14; 791-97, 2006). “Loss of ity estimation four extremity circumferences were measured: extended mosaicism” for X-linked gene expression could be the first step of the upper arm (EAC), forearm (FC), calf (CC), and thigh (TC). Genotyp- cellular events that lead to the breakdown of self-tolerance in females. ing for the gene variants was performed by polymerase chain reac- We propose that co-inheritance of two distinct events on the X: muta- tion and restriction enzyme digestion. We found that VEGFA C allele tions that cause skewed XCI, and heterozygosity for non synonymous (with higher transcriptional activity) carriers exhibited the greatest rela- polymorphisms in as yet unknown but critically important genes could tive muscle mass (CC/GC - 57.9 (3) %, GG - 53.9 (4.2) %; P=0.03). contribute to autoimmune processes. This hypothesis was tested with PPP3R1 5D allele (known as hypertrophy-related allele) was associ- a custom made Affymetrix 5K microarray that we designed, which con- ated with biggest values of EAC (5I/5D - 44 (5.5) cm, 5I/5I - 38.9 (3.7) tained all known coding SNPs on the X, as well as intronic SNPs with cm; P=0.029). AMPD1 CC homozygotes demonstrated greater results high heterozygosity ratios. In addition, 166 autoimmunity associated in deadlift than carriers of mutant (null) T allele (CC - 245 (42) kg, CT autosomal SNPs (Nature 447; 661-78, 2007; Nat. Genet. 39; 857- - 180 (0) kg; P=0.049). Thus, the presence of AMPD1 C, VEGFA C and 64, 2007) were printed on the same microarrays. 84 female patients PPP3R1 5D alleles are associated with greater power performance and 248 female controls with known XCI profiles were genotyped. and muscle mass gain in elite bodybuilders. The strongest associations were at nonsynonymous SNPs in TFDP3 [OR: 3.44(95% CI:1.62-7.29; p=0.00067)], ZMAT [OR: 2.22(95% CI: P09.023 1.23-3.66; p=0.003)], and C1GALT1C1 [OR:2.59(95% CI:1.16-2.59; Analysis of variation in the canine melanocortin-4 receptor gene p=0.006)]. Autosomal SNPs with significant associations were in (mcr) SH2B3 [OR:2.03(95% CI: 1.42-2.91; p=000088)] and C12orf30 [OR: L. van den Berg1,2, S. M. van den Berg3,4, E. E. C. P. Martens3, H. A. W. Haze- 1.99(95% CI: 1.39-2.85; p=0.00016)]. We note that X-linked SNPs winkel3, N. A. Dijkshoorn5, H. A. Delemarre-van de Waal1, P. Heutink6, P. A. J. reported here were not represented in the commercially available ge- Leegwater3, H. C. M. Heuven3; nome-wide association study platforms. These results suggest that the 1Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Department X chromosome could be critically important in female predisposition to of Human Genetics, Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, Leiden, The Nether- AITDs. This work is supported by TUBITAK-SBAG-3334 grant. lands, 3Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion animals, Utrecht Univer- sity, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 4Faculty of Behavioral Sciences, University of P09.021 Twente, Twente, The Netherlands, 5Orthopedic Research Foundation, Dieren- copy Number Variation in Bipolar Affective Disorder artsenpraktijk Dijkshoorn, Zeist, The Netherlands, 6Department of Clinical Ge- D. Grozeva1, G. Kirov1, N. Norton1, D. Ivanov2, M. Owen1, M. O’Donovan1, N. netics, section Medical Genomics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Craddock1; The Netherlands. 1Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United The melanocortin-4 receptor plays a central role in the regulation of Kingdom, 2Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Psychological energy balance in humans and other species. Rare mutations in the coding region of the gene encoding this receptor (MC4R) are the lead-Complex traits and polygenic disorders  ing cause of monogenic obesity in humans. Common variants at this into potentially pathogenic networks, suggests important dysfunction locus are associated with body mass index in the general human pop- of processes related to cell-cell communication, intracellular signaling, ulation. We hypothesized that common variants in the canine mc4r are ubiquitin-proteasome system, cell cycle and apoptosis and extracel- associated with canine body mass. A cohort of 195 Golden Retriever lular matrix. These genes could be classified into 11 KEGG pathways dogs was used to investigate this hypothesis. The familial relation- and associated to 9 Gene Ontology terms related to the networks. ships, weight, length and height of these dogs were available. From Conclusions: Our study reconstructs the participation of different bio- these variables, we calculated a body index score as weight / (length logical networks in the development of the intestinal lesion in celiac * height). The estimated heritability was 0.35 (s.e. 0.25) for weight, disease. Comprehensive analysis of expression profiling results at the 0.15 (s.e. 0.21) for length, 0.32 (s.e. 0.26) for height, and 0.16 (s.e. network level provides a more accurate picture of the events that lead 0.26) for body index score. We sequenced mc4r in 23 unrelated dogs to the disease, and could guide towards novel functional candidates from the cohort and detected four common polymorphisms: c.637G>T, responsible for genetic susceptibility, helping to avoid negative results c.777T>C, c.868C>T, and c.*33C>G. Two of these were predicted to derived from candidates that were selected on the basis of altered be deleterious by an in silico analysis using Polyphen. These polymor- expression levels in single-gene approaches. phisms were subsequently genotyped in the complete cohort. Associa- tion results of mc4r genotypes and haplotypes will be presented for P09.026 the four phenotypes weight, length, height, and body index score. We investigation of three candidate genes in the cleft lip and/or will also discuss our findings in the light of species-differences in the palate patients group of Lithuania regulation of energy balance. L. Ambrozaityte1,2, A. Matuleviciene1,2, V. Kucinskas1,2; 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius, P09.024 Lithuania, 2Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. Novel extreme homozygote haplotypes at the human caveolin 1 Research of cleft lip and/or palate (CLP) is under thorough investiga- gene upstream purine complex in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease tion in Lithuania for the past decade. There are DNA samples of 140 M. Zarif Yeganeh1, A. Mirabzadeh2, H. Khorram Khorshid1, K. Kamali3, Y. Hesh- triads (child with nonsyndromic CLP and both his/her parents) and 250 mati1, E. Gozalpour1, K. Veissy1, M. Olaad Nabi1, H. Najmabadi1, M. Ohadi1; probands in total collected in the Lithuanian CLP Biobank. 1Genetic Reseach Center , University of Social Welfare Sciences and Reha- According to the results of the metabonomial analysis of databases bilitation, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Razi Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Re- the strongest CLP candidate genes were grouped according to their public of Iran, 3Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public interplay, to the pathology and to the functional pathways they appear HealthTehran university, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. in. Having complemented results of the association studies for five Aberrant expression of the caveolin-1 (CAV1) gene is associated with microsatellite markers in TGFA, TGFB3 and BCL3 genes in the Lithu- Alzheimer’s disease (AD) brain. We report a novel polymorphic purine anian group of CLP triads, individuals of 104 Lithuanian CLP triads stretch of GGAA and GAAA motifs located at between 1.8 kb and 1.5 were genotyped for 50 SNPs within and outside TGFA, 11 SNPs within kb flanking the CAV1 gene, whose alleles and genotypes are associ- and outside TGFB3 and 8 SNPs within and outside BCL3 using ar- ated with late-onset AD. Over one hundred haplotypes were detected rayed primer extension - based genotyping technology on CLP DNA in the cases and controls as a result of the three polymorphic mo- microarray. tifs. Extreme haplotypes were observed in the patients (n=240) that Statistical genetic analysis for association testing was performed by were non-existent in the controls (n=250)(p<0.0006, OR= OR=15.42, using transmission disequilibrium test - ETDT for microsatellite mark- CI 2.1-118.2). The overall homozygosity rate for haplotypes was esti- ers analysis and TDT/S-TDT for SNP analysis. But no statistically mated at 0.14 in the AD group versus 0.04 in the controls (p<.0004, significant results were found for SNPs in TGFA, TGFB3 and BCL3 OR = 3.68 CI 1.74-7.95). We propose that there is a window for the genes. length of motifs and haplotypes in the controls. Shorter and longer mo- Thus the current results indicate that TGFA, TGFB3 and BCL3 genes tif and haplotype lengths and homozygosity for those haplotypes were are of minor importance to the impact towards the development of cleft linked with AD in our study. Our findings elucidate novel predisposing lip and/or palate in the population of Lithuania. haplotypes at the CAV1 gene purine complex, and confirm the role of The Lithuanian CLP Biobank is constantly being supplemented by new this region in the etiopathophysiology of late-onset AD. cases and further novel and earlier applied assays are being carried The polymorphic motifs GGAA and GAAA are binding sites for the out to investigate the pathogenesis and aetiology of CLP in the popula- transcription factor families, Ets and IRF, and are strictly conserved tion of Lithuania. in distantly-related non-human primates, implying likely functionality for those sequences. Remarkably, the interaction of the Ets and IRF P09.027 family members has been reported in several studies. The effect of this Significant association between IRF6 gene and nonsyndromic highly complex sequence on the expression of the gene remains to be cleft lip with or without cleft palate in Latvian population clarified in the future studies. I. Prane1, B. Lace1, A. R. Vieira2, I. Akota3, B. Barkane3, A. Krumina1; 1Department of Molecular biology and genetics, Riga Stradins University, Riga, P09.025 Latvia, 2Department of Oral Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, Potentially pathogenic networks in celiac disease: long-term and United States, 3Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Institute of Sto- acute effects of gliadin on small intestine of patients matology, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. A. Castellanos-Rubio1,2, I. Santin1,3, A. Martin-Pagola1, I. X. Irastorza4, L. Background: Cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CLP/CL/CP) is one Castaño1,3, J. Vitoria4,3, J. Bilbao1,2; of the most common birth defects, but its etiology is largely unknown. 1Immunogenetics Lab, Hospital de Cruces, Cruces-Barakaldo, Spain, 2Depart- It is very likely that genetic and environmental factors contribute to ment of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology, University of this malformation. Mutations in the IRF6 (interferon regulatory factor 6) the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of the gene have been shown to be the cause of Van der Woude syndrome, Basque Country, Leioa, Spain, 4Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit, Hospital de a dominant disorder that has CLP/CL/CP as a common feature. It has Cruces, Cruces-Barakaldo, Spain. been reported that genetic polymorphisms at the IRF6 locus are as- Background: Celiac disease is a complex, immune-mediated intoler- sociated with nonsyndromic CLP/CL/CP, with stronger association in ance to gliadin that develops in genetically susceptible individuals. several populations. Although the main driving force of the disease is an aberrant immune The aim of the study was to evaluate the relevance of IRF6 gene in response, several other pathogenic mechanisms must also be in- development of nonsyndromic orofacial clefts. volved. In order to describe at a network level the alterations provoked Materials and methods: Seven SNPs (rs2073487, rs4844880, by a gliadin insult on the intestinal mucosa of patients, we compared rs2013162, rs2235371, rs658860, rs642961, rs861019) in the IRF6 expression profiling results of biopsies from active and treated pa- gene were analyzed with Real-Time PCR technique for allelic asso- tients (long-term effects of gliadin), and of biopsies from gluten-free ciation with nonsyndromic CLP/CL/CP in 83 complete case-parent/sib diet treated patients that were incubated in vitro with or without gliadin trios and 24 incomplete case-parent trios from Latvia. Observed data (acute effects). Results: Integration of the 1.647 and 96 significantly were analyzed with transmission disequilibrium test using family based altered transcripts identified in the long-term and acute experiments association test (FBAT) software.Complex traits and polygenic disorders  Results: Significant association between analyzed IRF6 gene SNPs P09.030 was found in different study groups. In patients with CLP/CL four of Large cNVs are involved in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia seven SNPs showed significant association with P value < 0.05. CP pa- G. Kirov, D. Grozeva, N. Norton, D. Ivanov, K. Mantripragada, P. Holmans, N. tient group showed the stongest association with two SNPs (rs658860, Craddock, M. Owen, M. O’Donovan; rs642961), P value < 0.001. Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Conclusion: Obtained results showed IRF6 gene as important contrib- We investigated the involvement of rare (< 1%) CNVs in 471 cases uting factor in CP etiology with some impact on CLP/CL patients what of schizophrenia recruited in the UK, and 2792 controls from the UK, allow us to hypothesize that IRF6 gene possibly is one of the major used by the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. All samples gene in the development of isolated cleft palate. had been genotyped with the Affymetrix GeneChip 500K Mapping Ar- ray. We accepted only CNVs >100kb identified independently on both P09.028 arrays (Nsp and Sty), with at least 10 SNPs each. Large CNVs >1Mb Cleft palate caused by 12q24.33 amplification were 2.26 times more common in cases (p=0.00027), with the effect L. Desmyter1, A. Ghalamkarpour1, M. Ghassibe1, H. Antoine-Poirel2, C. coming mostly from deletions (OR=4.53, p=0.00013) although duplica- Labrèze3, F. Morice-Picard4, M. Vikkula1; tions were also more common (OR=1.71, p=0.04). Two large deletions 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Brussels, Bel- were found in two cases each, but in no controls (Fisher Exact Test gium, 2Centre de Génétique Médicale - Secteur Hématologique, Cliniques p=0.02): a deletion at 22q11.2 known to be a susceptibility factor for universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 3Unité Dermatologie Pédiatrique, schizophrenia, and a deletion on 17p12, at 14,0-15,4Mb. The latter is Hôpital Pellegrin Enfants, Bordeaux, France, 4Unité de Génétique Médicale, known to cause hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. (HNPP). Another large deletion affects neurexophilin (NXPH2), a gene Orofacial clefts are the most frequent craniofacial malformations in hu- that interacts with neurexins. NRXN1 was also disrupted by deletions mans. Occurrence estimates range between 1/500 and 1/2500 births in one case and three controls (0.2% vs 0.1%, p=0.5). for cleft lip with or without palate (CL/P) and around 1/2000 births for One large duplication on 16p13.1, between 15,0 and 16,2Mb, was cleft palate only (CPO). The majority of clefts are isolated, nonsyn- found in three cases and six controls (0.6% vs 0.2%, p=0.13). It has dromic. The remaining syndromic cases are subdivided into categories been previously implicated as a susceptibility factor for autism by Ull- on the basis of chromosomal abnormalities, Mendelian single gene mann et al (2008). The largest duplication, of 5Mb, was in a schizoaf- syndromes, teratogenic effects and of unknown cause. We performed fective case and involved the Prader-Willi/Angelman Syndrome critical chromosomal and molecular karyotyping using Affymetrix GeneChip region, and is a known susceptibility factor for autism. SNP chips on a total of 200 individuals with CL/P or CPO. In one fe- This study confirms the involvement of rare and large CNVs in the male patient we observed a 3Mb duplication encompassing the region pathogenesis of schizophrenia. 12q24.3-qter and a 1Mb deletion of the telomeric part of the 22q13.3 region. The girl was the only affected member of the family and pre- P09.031 sented congenital progressive lymphedema, hypotonia, mental retar- No association of polymorphisms within the cD44 gene and the dation, facial dysmorphism and CPO indicative of a 22q13 deletion coeliac condition syndrome, also known as the Phelan-McDermid syndrome. Interest- C. Vidal1,2, A. Xuereb-Anastasi1, C. A. Scerri3; ingly she had CPO, a feature not linked to this well characterized syn- 1Institute of Healthcare, Msida, Malta, 2Department of Pathology, Msida, Malta, drome. We hypothesize that the presence of CP is due to the trisomy 3Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, Msida, Malta. 12qter. This locus has not been incriminated in CL/P nor CPO before. Coeliac disease is a complex disorder characterised by inflammation, This study shows that molecular cytogenetics is a valuable tool for the villous atrophy and hyperplasia of the intestinal mucosa in genetically identification of new genes related to complex diseases. susceptible individuals, upon exposure to dietary gluten. Sequencing of the CD44 gene at locus 11p13-12, revealed a number of sequence P09.029 variants, one of whom (rs1071695) was linked with an inherited haplo- FAF1 is Associated with cleft Palate and Pierre Robin sequence type identified in a previous linkage study. M. Ghassibe1, L. Desmyter1, B. Bayet2, N. Revencu1, R. Vanwijck2, M. Vikkula1; Three single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs1071695, rs3736812, 1de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 2Centre Labiopalatin, Cliniques universi- rs1467558) within the CD44 gene were tested by restriction fragment taires St Luc, Brussels, Belgium. length polymorphism in a group of coeliac individuals (n=92) and con- Nonsyndromic clefts occur in a wide geographic distribution with an trols (n=248). The mean age at diagnosis for the coeliac group was average prevalence of 1/700. Genetic factors involved in cleft lip and 34 years, with the predominant presenting symptoms being gastroin- palate (CL/P) are thought to be different from those having a role in testinal. cleft palate only (CPO). We have recently reported FAF1 as a new Genotype frequencies observed for all three polymorphisms studied gene responsible for CPO and Pierre Robin sequence (PRS). More- were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p>0.05). When testing for link- over, we showed that Faf1 is needed for craniofacial development in age disequilibrium (LD) between polymorphisms within the control human, mouse and zebrafish. group the rs1071695 variant in exon 3 was in LD with rs3736812 in In order to replicate our positive association study, we conducted TDTs exon 4 (p=0.004) but not with rs1467558 in exon 11. The latter, was in an independent series of 160 European families with CL/P. The in LD with rs3736812 (p=0.003). In the celiac group, LD was only ob- same FAF1 variant as in our first study was genotyped. In the replica- served between rs3736812 and rs1467558 (p=0.036; Fisher’s exact tion, FAF1 showed positive tendency for association only in the CPO/ test). No significant association of individual polymorphisms or com- PRS subgroup (p=0.09). Pooling together our 500 patients reinforced bined genotypes was observed with the coeliac condition in the stud- the earlier association, giving a more stringent p-value of 0.001 for the ied population. Also no significant association was observed between CPO/PRS subgroup. In order to identify other genes contributing to constructed haplotypes and the coeliac condition (χ2=4.56; p=0.713; the occurrence of this multifactorial condition, we are testing in parallel df=7). No association with coeliac was observed between any of the association of IRF6 and SATB2, two cleft genes, to the cleft condition studied SNPs, including the linked variant identified by linkage, in this in our 500-patient cohort. Preliminary results suggest that, contrary to population based study. FAF1, IRF6 predisposes to CL/P, but not to CPO. This illustrates the benefit of testing greater number of patients in P09.032 complex diseases in order to well delineate the true predisposed sub- Novel insights into pathogenesis of coeliac disease: a second groups. Moreover, it confirms that FAF1 and IRF6 play a role in the genome-wide association study occurrence of isolated complex clefts, but most likely in distinct path- G. Trynka1, P. C. Dubois2, J. Romanos1, L. Franke1, A. Zhernakova3, V. M. ways. Wolters4, G. A. Heap5, K. A. Hunt5, R. J. Houwen4, C. J. Mulder6, R. Gwilliam7, P. Saavalainen8, D. Barisani9, M. T. Bardella10, P. Deloukas7, R. McManus11, D. A. Van Heel5, C. Wijmenga1,3; 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 2Institute of Cell and Molecular Science,Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom, 3Depart-Complex traits and polygenic disorders  ment of Biomedical Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The P09.034 Netherlands, 4Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, University Medical sp1-binding site polymorphism of cOL1A1 gene, juvenile Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 5Institute of Cell and Molecular Sci- idiopathic arthritis course and bone metabolism ence, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United M. V. Moskalenko1, M. M. Kostik2, G. S. Demin1, M. N. Ostroumova3, M. M. Kingdom, 6Department of Gastroenterology, VU Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Mnuskina3, L. A. Scheplyagina4, V. I. Larionova2; The Netherlands, 7Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United 1Gene, Ltd., Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State Kingdom, 8Department of Medical Genetics, and Research Program of Mo- Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3City’s Di- lecular Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 9Department of Ex- agnostic Center for Adults N1, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Scientific perimental Medicine, University of Milano Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 10Fondazione and Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, Moscow, Russian Federation. 11Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. Objectives: To detect an association between the alpha 1 chain of colla- Coeliac disease (CD) is a common, complex trait with high heritabil- gen type 1 (COL1A1) gene Sp1-binding site polymorphism and juvenile ity and strong association to the HLA locus. In the first genome-wide idiopathic arthritis (JIA) course and bone mineralization in JIA patients. association study (GWAS) we found 10 new loci and pointed to the Study Population: 192 children with JIA (81 boys and 111 girls). The altered innate and adaptive immunity pathways in CD. There is a re- average age was 11.22±4.43 years. markable overlap between these loci and those known to be involved Methods: In all children we checked more than 20 clinical and laborato- in other inflammatory disorders. rial arthritis activity parameters, such as the time of visual activity score We aimed to expand the number of samples and single nucleotide (VAS), Ritchie arthicular index (RAI), DAS, DAS28, Shteinbroker index, polymorphisms (SNPs) tested in this GWAS. We expanded our co- platelets and leucocytes count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). hort to 4,200 cases and 10,500 controls, originating from four Euro- Bone mineralization of lumbar spine (L1-L4) was assessed by dual- pean populations and genotyped for the Illumina 550K tag SNP set. energy X-ray absorbtiometry with pediatric referral database. About 10 We are currently integrating the data and performing a meta-analysis. bone metabolic markers, such as total Ca, Ca/P and Ca++/P ratios, Validation of the most significant SNPs will be carried out in CD and total alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcine, C-terminal telopeptides and in samples from patients with inflammatory bowel disease, multiple parathyroid hormone also were determined. Molecular testing of Sp1 sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis. We also extend the analysis of ge- COL1A1 polymorphism (rs1800012, +2046G>T) was carried out by netic variation from SNPs to common copy number variants (CNVs). polymerase chain reaction followed by Bse1I enzymatic restriction. We used custom, high-density Illumina Human-670 Quad Genotyping Results: We did not reveal any differences in polymorphic Sp1 al- BeadChips, enriched for a novel set of 120,000 CNV probes capturing leles and genotypes distribution between children with normal and low 5,000 common heritable CNVs. We are now applying different CNV BMD. Girls with GG genotype of Sp1 COL1A1 polymorphism had low- algorithms, including TriTyper and PennCNV. er ESR (p=0.01), platelets (p=0.03), higher Hb (p<0.05) and Ca/P ratio GWA studies in other autoimmune diseases (e.g. type 1 diabetes, (p=0.03) compared to girls carrying T allele (GT and TT genotypes). Crohn’s disease) have shown that enlarging the sample size enabled Boys with GG genotype had lower RAI (p=0.04), VAS (p=0.02) and many more risk variants to be identified. We expect to double the num- DAS (p=0.04) compared to boys carrying T allele. ber of genetic variants and gain novel biological insights into the patho- Conclusion: In our study we have revealed an association between genesis of CD by discovering further SNP risk variants and, for the first Sp1 polymorphism of the COL1A1 gene and biomarkers of inflamma- time, performing CNV analysis in coeliac disease. tory activity in children with JIA juvenile idiopathic arthritis. P09.033 P09.035 several genes on chromosome 4q27 are involved in coeliac cOL1A1 PcOL2 polymorphism, juvenile idiopathic arthritis Disease susceptibility course and bone metabolism H. Perdry1,2, M. P. Sperandeo3, G. Turner4, M. C. Babron2,1, A. W. Ryan4, R. G. S. Demin1, M. M. Kostik2, M. V. Moskalenko1, L. A. Scheplyagina3, V. I. Lari- McManus4, F. Clerget-Darpoux2,1, L. Greco3; onova2; 1Univ. Paris-Sud, Villejuif, France, 2INSERM UMR 535, Villejuif, France, 3Uni- 1Gene, Ltd., Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State versity of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy, 4Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Scientific Ireland. and Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Association between Coeliac Disease (CD) and SNPs in the 4q27 re- Moscow, Russian Federation. gion, containing the KIAA1109, TENR, IL2 and IL21 genes was de- Objectives: The aim of our study was to detect an association between tected in British coeliac cases and controls and confirmed in Dutch and the alpha 1 chain of collagen type 1 (COL1A1) gene PCOL2 polymor- Irish collections [van Heel et al. 2007]. phism and juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) course and bone mineral- To better understand how this region is involved in susceptibility to ization in JIA patients. CD, five SNPs were studied in Italian 407 CD cases and 406 controls. Study Population: 192 children with JIA (81 boys and 111 girls). The The Combination Test [Jannot et al, 2003] was applied to select the average age was 11.22±4.43 years. subset of SNPs showing the most significant difference in the geno- Methods: In all children we checked more than 20 clinical and labora- typic distribution between patients and controls. The best discrimina- torial arthritis activity parameters, such as visual activity score (VAS), tion is obtained though the joint information of 3 SNPs, one located in Ritchie arthicular index (RAI), DAS, DAS28, Shteinbroker index, al- KIAA1109, the other two on each side of IL21. The range of the relative bumin, γ-globulins, platelets and leucocytes count. Bone mineraliza- risks of the 3-SNP genotypes is very impressive, one genotype confer- tion of lumbar spine (L1-L4) was determined by dual-energy X-ray ring 9 times more risk than the least at-risk. Our result strongly sug- absorbtiometry with pediatric referral database. About 10 bone meta- gests that several genes in 4q27 are involved in CD susceptibility. The bolic markers, such as total Ca, Ca/P and Ca++/P ratios, total alkaline probable role of KIAA1109 and IL21 is also supported by expression phosphatase, osteocalcine, C-terminal telopeptides and parathyroid studies showing a difference of mRNA levels between CD cases and hormone also were assessed. Molecular testing of PCOL2 COL1A1 controls for these two genes. polymorphism (rs1107946, -1997G>T) was carried out by polymerase The importance of the 4q27 region in auto-immunity is well estab- chain reaction followed by PsyI enzymatic restriction. lished. The difficulty of identifying causal genotypic variations is illus- Results: We did not reveal any differences in polymorphic PCOL2 al- trated by the problems encountered in disentangling the HLA compo- leles and genotypes distribution between children with normal and low nent of most auto-immune diseases. The modelling of the 4q27 region BMD. Girls with GG genotype of the PCOL2 COL1A1 polymorphism is likely to also be a long quest, not to mention the added complexity of had lower Ca/P (p<0.05) and Ca++/P ratios (p<0.05) compare with uncovering its interaction with other genes involved in the pathological girls, carrying T allele (GT and TT genotypes). Boys with GG geno- pathway(s). type had lower albumin (p<0.05) and higher platelets (p=0.04), PTH (p<0.05) and γ-globulins (p=0.03) compared to boys carrying T allele. Conclusion: We have revealed an association between PCOL2 poly- morphism of the COL1A1 gene and biomarkers of inflammatory activ- ity and bone metabolism in children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 0 P09.036 P09.038 Lack of association between neprilysin (NEP) gene Detection and quantification of intestinal mucosa associated polymorphisms and complex Regional Pain syndrome (cRPs) Escherichia coli in crohn`s disease patients by multiplex real in a German cohort time PcR K. Huehne1, U. Schaal1, S. Leis2, T. Geisslein1, B. Rautenstrauss3, F. Birklein4, J. Šimenc, U. Potočnik; C. Maihöfner5, A. Winterpacht1; University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen, Ger- Inflammatory bowel diseases encompasses Crohn`s disease and ul- many, 2Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Salzburg, Austria, 3MGZ, cerative colitis, which are exhibited as chronic intestinal inflammation Medical Genetics Center, Munich, Germany, 4Department of Neurology, Pain of unknown etiology. Resident bacterial flora plays a pivotal role in Research Unit, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 5Department of Neurol- the disease development and perpetuation of inflammation. In several ogy, University Hospital Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. recent studies Escherichia coli has been suggested as a key feature of Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS) is a chronic neurological Crohn`s disease, with increased concentration in the intestinal mucosa disorder chracterized by disabling pain, swelling and impairment of tissue. Previous studies, based on plate enumeration had implied a motor function. The disorder usually develops after minor trauma or correlation between the amounts of tissue associated Escherichia coli surgery. Patients with CRPS reveal enhanced sensitivity to experimen- and a form or phase of the disease. On the other hand, 16S rDNA tally applied substance P (SP), a neurokinin responsible for neurogenic gene real-time PCR quantification studies of entire Enterobacteria- inflammation. The extended sensitivity is even present at symtom-less ceae family showed contradictory results, with no change or reduction stages of the disease. A genetic background for the disease is as- of enteric bacteria in Crohn`s disease tissue. In the present study, we sumed based on some familial cases and studies describing associa- applied multiplex PCR for relative quantification of Escherichia coli in tion of HLA antigens and CRPS. A functional candidate gene approach the Crohn`s disease patients and patients with polyps. A region of 16S prompted us to determine whether neprilysin (NEP) as a SP degrading rDNA gene was amplified with a single broad range primer pair, target- endopeptidase influences disease susceptibility in a German cohort of ing Proteobacteria with two hydrolysis probes; Escherichia coli specific patients. DNA was obtained from 325 CRPS patients and 376 controls. and universal probe for normalization. Normalized values of Escher- Initially, we demonstrated association of a GT- repeat polymorphism chia coli amount between healthy and inflamed mucosa of Crohn`s in the promoter region of NEP with CRPS (p < 0.05). To confirm this patients were compared and no statistical significant difference was result, 21 SNPs throughout the NEP gene region were genotyped us- found (p=0,754). Then amount of Escherichia coli between Crohn`s ing allelic discrimination taqman assays. No significant differences in disease mucosa and healthy mucosa of polyposis patients was com- genotype frequencies were observed between controls and CRPS pa- pared and significant reduction of Escherichia coli was found (p=0,04). tients. In conclusion, our study did not reveal any association between Finally, amount of Escherichia coli between healthy tissue and polyps NEP polymorphisms and CRPS. In addition, our data demonstrate the from polyposis patients showed significant reduction of Escherichia limitations of candidate gene association studies relying on single as- coli in polyps as compared with healthy tissue (p=0,032). sociated polymorphisms. P09.039 P09.037 Analysis of three polymorphisms in TNF-alpha gene: c.-857c>t, A high diploid copy number of the beta-defensin cNV associates c.420c>t, c.750A>t, among Polish patients with crohn’s with severe cOPD disease. H. Nuytten1, D. Lieven2, K. Nackaerts2, S. Vermeire2, J. Cassiman1, H. Cup- L. Jakubowska-Burek1,2, M. Kucharski1, M. Kaczmarek3, J. Hoppe- pens1; Gołębiewska3, O. Zakerska3, K. Linke1, M. Drews4, R. Słomski5,6, R. Marciniak4, 1K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2University Hospital of Leuven, Leuven, Bel- A. Dobrowolska-Zachwieja1; gium. 1Department of Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Internal Diseases, Uni- Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is characterized by versity School of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Postgraduate Studium airflow limitation that is not fully reversible. Smoking is a major environ- of Molecular Medicine, Warsaw, Poland, 3Institut of Human Genetics, Polish mental risk factor for developing COPD, but not all smokers develop Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of General, Gastroentero- COPD. Linkage studies have shown that the chromosomal 8p23 re- logical and Endocrinological Surgery, University School of Medical Sciences, gion, where the defensin repeat region is located, is linked with sus- Poznan, Poland, 5Department of Biochemistry and Biotechology, University of ceptibility to airflow obstruction. The beta-defensin CNV is polymor- Life Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 6Institut of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of phic between individuals and therefore the dosage of these defensin Sciences, Poznań, Poland. genes/proteins varies. Crohn’s disease (CD) together with ulcerative colitis (UC) belongs to The aim of this study was to investigate whether the diploid beta-de- inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). Etiology of the CD is still unknown fensin copy number associates with COPD. but it is suspected that genetic, environmental and immunological fac- We developed a real time PCR assay to quantify the number of beta- tors play a major role in the background of CD. Currently, the morbidity defensin repeats in this region. For this purpose we generated 4 con- in the European Union oscillates around 5 new cases per 100,000 catemeric constructs with 1 copy of DEFB1 and a particular number of people per 1 year and it is still higher. DEFB4 copies, which ranged from 1 to 4 copies. Using these controls During last few years some genes of predisposition to CD were local- as standards, the number of defensin repeats could be accurately de- ized, including the most significant locus - pericentromeric region of termined in DNA samples. chromosome 16 (16p12-q13), called IBD1 and CARD15/NOD2 gene The diploid beta-defensin copy number was determined in 110 severe in this region. Numerous studies showed that polymorphisms in this COPD patients, 149 age-matched smoking control individuals, and gene are associated with susceptibility to CD. Other studies implicate 121 adult control individuals. The severe COPD group had a mean regions: 12p13 (IBD2), 6q13 (IBD3), 14q11 (IBD4) or 5q31 (IBD5). diploid beta-defensin copy number of 5.1, the two control populations One of the genes investigated in the field of Crohn’s pathogenesis was had a mean copy number of 4.3. The T-test P-values comparing the also TNF-alpha gene. COPD patients with the control populations were 4*10-14 and 8.2*10- The aim of this study was to analyze three SNPs within the TNF-alpha 8 respectively. The distributions in the two control populations were gene: c.-857C>T, c.420C>T, c.750A>T. equal (P-value = 0.8). A strong association between the diploid beta- Investigated group consisted of 96 Polish patients with CD and apropri- defensin copy number and the diagnosis of severe COPD was thus ate population group. Genotyping was performed by pyrosequencing. found with an Odds ratio of 5 (95% CI 2.57-8.78). We did not observed any variation among Polish patients with CD and population. We concluded that polymorphisms: c.-857C>T, c.420C>T, c.750A>T cannot be used as markers of Crohn’s disease susceptibility in Polish population.Complex traits and polygenic disorders  P09.040 1National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2BGS, University of Helsinki, DEFA1/DEFA3 G3400A variation in patients with vesico-ureteric Helsinki, Finland, 3The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, reflux United States, 4Dept. of Neurology, Helsinki Univ. Central Hospital, Helsinki, B. Zagradisnik, N. Marcun Varda, K. Zerjavic, S. Stangler Herodez, A. Grego- Finland, 5Central Hospital of Seinajoki, Seinajoki, Finland, 6Dept. of Neurol- ric, N. Kokalj Vokac; ogy, Tampere Univ. Central Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 7Dept. of Neurology, University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. Kuopio University Central Hospital, Kuopio, Finland, 8Center for Human Genetic Primary congenital vesico-ureteric reflux (VUR) is a very common Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 9Dept. urogenital tract disorder. It represents a major risk factor for recurrent of Neurology, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 10Well- urinary tract infections. VUR is considered a complex trait and among come Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, MA, United States. possibly many implicated genes may be several that influence infec- Prevalence of multiple sclerosis (MS) in the Southern Ostrobotnia (SO) tious agent defense. Therefore it may be plausible to assume an as- sub-isolate region of Finland is two-fold compared to other populations sociation between VUR and genetic variations in genes with antimicro- of Northern European descent. We used genealogical information bial functions, Such genetic variations may not necessary contribute to reaching up to 15 generations back to construct two regional “mega- the development of VUR but may affect the course of the disease. This pedigrees”. We hypothesize that one or more variants predisposing to study analyzed DEFA1/DEfA3 G3400A variation in the alpha defensin MS may be regionally enriched and these pedigrees can be used to locus for possible association with VUR. identify new MS loci using a genome wide SNP screen. Genotyping was done in 178 children diagnosed with primary congeni- 68 MS cases from Southern Ostrobotnia were genotyped using the tal vesico-ureteric reflux and in 300 healthy controls with no medical Illumina 317K HumanHap panel and 136 IBS matched population record of reflux. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood sam- samples were used as controls. A five SNP sliding window haplotype ples using standard methods. The G3400A variation was detected with analysis on a previously indentified 5p12-14 linkage region (Kuok- PCR-RFLP (HaeIII) using agarose gel electrophoresis. kanen et al. 1996) revealed three associated loci with p-value ≤10-4. A statistically significant overrepresentation of patients with DEFA3 One of the regions identified, C7-FLJ40243 locus, showed association 3400A variant was observed when compared with the control group. in an independent replication set from the SO region (p<10-5) (Kallio However the frequencies of both variants did not differ significantly et al. 2009). between tested groups.. Genome-wide single SNP association analysis revealed 28 loci with Our results indicate that G3400A variation in the DEFA1/A3 alpha-de- p<10-4, including the HLA-locus. The replication of the loci in an in- fensin locus may be associated with VUR. Such variations in alpha dependent set of 753 cases and 1029 controls from Finland revealed defensins may increase the susceptibility of patients with VUR to uri- two associated SNPs outside the HLA locus on 16q21 and 17q21.2, nary tract infections and are probably not involved in the development and the 17q locus was further replicated using data available from the of VUR itself. Further analysis that would include other elements of a meta-analysis of six GWA study sets from 4 populations (2624 cases, complex structured alpha defensin locus are needed to validate a pos- 7220controls from US, UK, Netherlands and Switzerland) (p<10-4) re- sible role for alpha defensins in patients with VUR. sulting in a combined p-value of p< 5.49x10-6. Further validation of the single SNP associations is ongoing in a Nordic MS cohort. This exem- P09.041 plifies the power of population isolate in identifying disease variants changes in gene expression after diabetogenic stimulation predisposing to MS across populations. analyzed by using DNA microarrays and pathway analysis (GeneGo, metacore), a family case report P09.043 Z. Halbhuber1, M. Hubackova2, M. Krivjanska1, K. Stechova2; Polymorphisms of genes and physical performance in divers 1Central European Biosystems Ltd, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty of E. V. Linde1, I. I. Ahmetov2, A. G. Fedotova1, A. M. Hakimullina2; Medicine of Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech 1The Russian State University of Physical Culture, Sports and Tourism, Mos- Republic. cow, Russian Federation, 2St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, Diabetes mellitus is a disorder of metabolism that manifests itself as St Petersburg, Russian Federation. type I or type II. The Type I (T1D, the object of this study) is caused The aim of the study was to investigate gene polymorphisms for as- by destruction of the insulin-producing beta-islet cells of the pancreas. sociation with physical performance in Russian elite and sub-elite The aim of our study was to monitor in vitro changes in gene expres- male divers. Aerobic and anaerobic performance parameters were sion in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) after stimulation evaluated by treadmill and Oxycon mobile Gas Analyzer. We analyzed with diabetogenic autoantigens within one family related to different five candidate genes of which PPARA, PPARG and PPARD genes manifestation of the T1D. The situation was very exciting due to family regulate lipid and glucose metabolism of skeletal muscle and heart, structure which includes identical quadruplets. PBMCs were divided VEGF regulates angiogenesis, while mitochondrial DNA replication is into equal halves and one half was stimulated using derived syntetic under control of TFAM (transcription factor A, mitochondrial). PPARA peptides. After RNA isolation, amplification and fluorescent labeling, intron 7 G/C, PPARD +294T/C, PPARG Pro12Ala, TFAM Thr12Ser, the samples were competitively hybridize on the high density whole- VEGF C-2578A gene polymorphisms were determined by PCR-RLFP. genome microarray HOA (PhalanxBiotech). Hybridized slides were We found that PPARA C allele was significantly associated with in- scanned and analyzed using GeneSpring GX (Agilent) and Pathway creased body weight of athletes (GC - 92.3 (7.3) kg, GG - 75.9 (4.6) analasis software MetaCore (GeneGo). The microarray part was done kg; P=0.0045). Furthermore, there was an interrelation between TFAM as a service in microarray facility of Central European Biosystems Ltd. Thr (Ser/Ser - 569 (43) sec, Ser/Thr - 623 (35) sec, Thr/Thr - 637 sec; We identified genes differentially expressed in each group according r=0.71, P=0.037) and PPARD C (TT - 568 (42) sec, TC - 628 (27) to T1D occurence and family status. In accordance with previously sec; P=0.044) alleles with high values of test working time. Addition- published results we found out the similar expression pattern between ally, PPARA G (GG - 53 (1.8) ml/min/kg, GC - 48.5 (3.2) ml/min/kg; basal expression and expression in stimulated samples depending P=0.032), PPARG Ala (Pro/Pro - 49.2 (3.4) ml/min/kg, Pro/Ala - 52.9 on the diabetes development. It seems that the down or up regula- (1.1) ml/min/kg, Ala/Ala - 54.5 ml/min/kg; r=0.74, P=0.025) and VEGF tion hit different genes in almost the same metabolic pathways. The C (AA - 47.3 (3.8) ml/min/kg, AC - 51.4 (2.7) ml/min/kg, CC - 53.7 (1.1) study confirms that there can be find differential expression pattern ml/min/kg; r=0.71, P=0.037) alleles were correlated with high values of and markers which preveal risk of diabetes. VO2max. In conclusion, PPARA, PPARD, PPARG, TFAM and VEGF This work was supported by grant NPVII 2B06019 from The Ministry of gene polymorphisms are associated with physical performance in div- Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic. ers. P09.042 P09.044 Use of a Genetic isolate to identify Disease Variants: a new impact of the KDR gene His472Gln polymorphism on endurance- multiple sclerosis locus on 17q21.1 related phenotypes V. Leppä1,2, E. Jakkula1,3, J. Saare1, S. Kallio1, P. Tienari4, K. Koivisto5, I. A. M. Hakimullina1, I. I. Ahmetov1, D. V. Popov2, E. V. Lyubaeva2, S. S. Mis- Elovaara6, M. Reunanen1, T. Pirttilä7, S. Purcell3,8, P. De Jager3,9, D. Hafler3,9, A. sina2, O. L. Vinogradova2, A. G. Williams3, V. A. Rogozkin1; Palotie1,10, M. Daly3,8, L. Peltonen1,10; 1St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, RussianComplex traits and polygenic disorders  Federation, 2SRC Institute for Biomedical Problems, Moscow, Russian Federa- of both Parkinson’s disease (PD) and essential tremor (ET). We as- tion, 3Manchester Metropolitan University, Alsager, United Kingdom. sayed the FMR1 premutation genotype in 203 PD patients, 30 ET pa- Kinase insert domain receptor (KDR or VEGFR2) is essential to induce tients and 370 healthy subjects. We also included two parkinsonian the full spectrum of VEGF angiogenic responses to aerobic training. patients from a fragile X mental retardation pedigree, and two cases In the present study, we examined the impact of the KDR gene His- with intention tremor and postprandial hypotension. All participants 472Gln polymorphism on elite athlete status, endurance performance had the same ethnic background and gave informed consent. We did and muscle fibre type composition. Four hundred and seventy one not found FMR1 premutation genotype in any patients with PD and Russian athletes were prospectively stratified into four groups accord- ET or in any healthy controls. There were 17 distinct alleles, ranging ing to event duration, distance and type of activity, covering a spectrum from 19 to 37 CGG repeats. On the contrary, the two subjects with par- from the more endurance-oriented to the more power-oriented. KDR kinsonian symptoms and family history of fragile X syndrome carried, genotype and allele frequencies were compared to 603 controls. To respectively, 57 and 90 CGG repeats. Concerning the two subjects examine the association between KDR and fibre type composition, with intention tremor and postprandial hypotension, one of them had vastus lateralis muscle biopsies were obtained from 45 physically ac- 73 CGG repeats and the second one was an uncommon mosaic for tive healthy men and 23 all-round skaters. In addition, 76 competitive a premutation (90 CGG rep) and a normal-size allele. The wide and rowers performed incremental endurance exercise to allow analysis variable FXTAS phenotype overlaps the clinical features of many neu- of genotype associations with exercise responses. We found that the rological diseases, making diagnosis of this disorder difficult without frequency of the KDR 472Gln allele was significantly higher in endur- molecular analysis. Our data show that premutated alleles are rare in ance-oriented athletes compared to controls (36.8% vs. 27.4%, P = PD as well as in ET. Thus the presence of postprandial hypotension or 0.0006). Absolute and relative VO2max were significantly greater in a positive family history of fragile X syndrome, beside the peculiar T2- the KDR 472Gln allele carriers compared with the His/His homozy- hyperintense signal in middle cerebellar peduncles, can be considered gotes of male and female rower groups, respectively. Genotype-spe- an important indication for FMR1 expansion genetic testing. cific differences were found for the proportion of slow-twitch fibres in both athletes and controls, which was ~10.1% and ~7.4% higher in the P09.047 His/Gln and Gln/Gln genotypes than in the His/His genotype group, EsR1, LPL and APO E gene variants in relation to lipid status respectively (P < 0.05). In conclusion, we have shown that variation in and obesity in young healthy subjects the KDR gene is associated with elite athlete status, endurance perfor- J. Sertic1, L. Juricic1, H. Ljubic1, N. Bozina1, B. Jelakovic2, Z. Reiner2; mance of athletes and muscle fibre type composition. 1Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis, Zagreb University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Medicine, Zagreb University Hospital Center, P09.045 Zagreb, Croatia. Novel progranulin mutations : screening for PGRN mutations in Background. Human obesity is a multifactorial syndrome influenced by a series of frontotemporal lobar degeneration cases both environmental and genetic factors. Among gene variants found to I. Manna1, C. Cupidi2, L. Vena1, V. Navarra2, S. Realmuto2, C. Cerami2, F. Pic- be involved in body weight regulation and development of obesity, par- coli2, T. Piccoli2, A. Quattrone1,3, A. Gambardella1,3; ticular attention has been paid to polymorphisms in genes related to 1Institute of Neurological Sciences CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of adipogenesis, energy expenditure, and insulin resistance. We explored Clinical Neurosciences, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 3Department of the association of genetic polymorphisms of: PPARG2,Pro12Ala; adi- Neurology, University “Magna Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy. ponectin (ADIPOQ -11391G>A and 11377C>G) ; IL-6-174G>C; es- Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is a clinically and geneti- trogen receptor (ESR1alfa-TA): APOE ; ACE (I/D); MTHFR-677C>T; cally heterogeneous syndrome. Mutations in two genes, Microtubule- LPL (PvuII+/-), with clinical variables: gender, age, BMI, and biological Associated Protein Tau (MAPT) and Progranulin (PGRN) have been variables: triglycerides, cholesterol, HDL, LDL, CRP, homocysteine, linked to this disorder. We looked for PGRN mutations in a series of glucose, in 105 healthy young subjects, (20-35 y) of Croatian origin. FTLD patients to evaluate the frequency of PGRN mutations in both Methods. Genotyping of PPARG2, IL-6, ACE, LPL was performed by sporadic and familial FTLD. Seventeen patients affected by FTLD PCR-RFLP, APOE, MTHFR, ADIPOQ, by real-time PCR and ESR1alfa were subjected to a clinical study and neuroimaging investigations. by capillary electrophoresis. Associations were performed of alleles, DNA analysis was carried out to investigate the PGRN gene. In ad- genotypes and haplotypes with biological variables. dition, DNA analysis was carried out in 100 healthy neighbor unre- Results. BMI was increased (>25) in 23% of subjects. Increased cho- lated individuals. We identified three novel pathogenic mutations in lesterol values (>5.0 mmol/L) were found in 23% of subjects, LDL the PGRN: a missense mutation in exon 10 (c.1196 A/T, p.Asp399Val), (>3.0 mmol/L) in 23%, triglycerides (>1.7 mmol/L) in 11.4% of sub- and two different frameshift mutations: p.Gly338GlyfsX22 and p. Val- jects. We found statistically significant differences in subjects’ weight 516GlyfsX31, resulting from a nucleotide deletion in exon 9 (c.1014 (p=0.015), BMI (p=0.023), and hip/waist ratio (p=0.015) in regard to del G) and a nineteen nucleotide deletion in exon 11(c. 1547_1565 their diet type; subjects with Mediterranean diet had the lowest values del TGAAGGACGTGGAGTGTGG) respectively. The carriers of compared to continental and mixed diet. Significant associations were Asp399Val and Val516GlyfsX31 were affected by frontal variant of found for: LPL (PvuII+) genetic polymorphic variants and abdominal FTLD, while the carrier of Gly338GlyfsX22 was affected by a cortico- obesity (p=0.018); APOE4 variant and high LDL (p=0.0017); ESR1-L basal syndrome. The carrier of Val516GlyfsX31 had a familial history allele and hipercholesterolemia (p= 0.023). for dementia, while the other subjects were sporadic. The mutations Conclusions. LPL, APO E and ESR1 genetic polymorphic variants rep- were absent in all the healthy controls. Moreover, four sequence varia- resent predictive genetic risk markers for lipid status and obesity in tions were detected in 11 patients. We disclosed an association be- young healthy subjects. tween the functional polymorphism 3’UTR +78 C/T at exon 12 and a non-fluent aphasia syndrome, reported in 4 out of the 8 carriers. Three P09.048 novel pathogenic PGRN mutations were found in 18% of the patients, A genome wide analysis identifies genetic variants in the RELN suggesting a role as major cause of FTLD in our series. gene associated with otosclerosis I. Schrauwen1, M. Ealy2, M. J. Huentelman3, M. Thys1, N. Homer3, K. Vander- P09.046 straeten1, E. Fransen1, J. J. Corneveaux3, D. W. Craig3, M. Claustres4, C. W. Fragile X premutation alleles in movement disorders Cremers5, I. Dhooge6, P. Van De Heyning7, R. Vincent8, E. Offeciers9, R. J. H. D. Civitelli1, E. V. De Marco1, P. Tarantino1,2, F. E. Rocca1,3, G. Provenzano1,2, Smith2, G. Van Camp1; V. Scornaienchi1, V. Greco1, F. Annesi1, W. Sproviero1,3, G. Annesi1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, wilrijk, Belgium, 2University of Iowa, 3Transla- 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), tional Genomics Research Institue (TGen), 4Université Montpellier, 5University Italy, 2Department of Neuroscience, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, Policlinico Medical Center St.-Radboud, 6University Hospital of Ghent, 7University Hospital Universitario, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University of Magna Grae- of Antwerp, 8Jean Causse Ear Clinic, 9St.-Augustinus Hospital Antwerp. cia, Catanzaro, Italy. Otosclerosis is a common form of hearing loss characterized by abnor- The fragile X-associated tremor/ ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) predomi- mal bone remodelling in the otic capsule. The etiology of the disease nantly occurs in man carrying FMR1 gene premutation alleles (55- 200 is largely unknown, and both environmental and genetic factors have CGG rep) over age 50. Many associated symptoms overlap with those been implicated. To identify genetic factors involved in otosclerosis,Complex traits and polygenic disorders  we used a case-control discovery group (604 samples) to complete a difficulty in mastication and speech, together with limited lip closure genome-wide association (GWA) study with 555,000 single nucleotide related to the clinical outcomes of syndrome. polymorphisms (SNPs) utilizing pooled DNA samples. By individual The aim of reporting this case is to detail the first widely determined genotyping of the top 250 SNPs in a stepwise strategy, we identified periodontal abnormalities of a rare syndrome and in DNA by investigat- two highly associated SNPs that replicated in two additional indepen- ing cytokine and MIF (-173) genotype. dent populations (replication set1: 784 samples; replication set2: 935 Genomic DNA was extracted from mononuclear cells obtained from samples). We then genotyped 79 tagSNPs to fine map the genomic EDTA-treated peripheral venous blood using the salting out method regions defined by the associated SNPs. The region with the strongest techniques. Cytokine ( IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ, TGF-ß1, TNFα ) genotyping association signal (pcombined=6.23x10-10; OR:1.52), is on chromo- was performed by the polymerase chain reaction sequence-specific some 7q22.1 and is located in the gene Reelin (RELN), a gene known primer method. The MIF genotyping was determined by polymerase for its role in neuronal migration. Evidence for allelic heterogeneity was chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism method. found in this region. We confirmed expression of RELN in the inner These results are the first detailed genetic study data pertaining to ear and in stapes footplate specimens. Consequently, we genotyped 7 HSP in literature. The TGFß1 (codons 10 and 25) and IL-6 (-174) poly- SNPs in this region in 4 additional small European populations (1095 morphisms were detected as high expression while TNFα (-308, -238, samples total). Several SNPs replicated in the populations separately. -857) was detected as low expression. In addition, the IL-10 (-592, However, the power of these populations is small, but when combining -819, -1082) and INFγ (+874) were intermediate expressions and GC all 4 populations, 6 of the 7 SNPs replicated again in the same direc- genotype in the MIF (-173) gene. tion as in the previous populations (pcombined=5.25x10-6). In conclu- sion, we provide evidence that implicate RELN in the pathogenesis of P09.051 otosclerosis. These results point towards a possible new function for Heroin dependence is associated with dopamine D2 receptor RELN in bone metabolism. taqi polymorphisms A. Vereczkei1, Z. Demetrovics2, M. Sasvari-Szekely1, C. Barta1; P09.049 1Institute of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry, Sem- Headache epidemiological study: do different diagnosis criteria melweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Institute of Psychology, Eotvos Lorand make a difference? University, Budapest, Hungary, Budapest, Hungary. C. Lemos1, A. Sousa1, J. Sequeiros1, J. Pereira-Monteiro2; Heroin dependence is a serious social and public health problem. 1IBMC and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 2HGSA and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal. Substance misuse is thought to be influenced by multiple genetic and Headache is a common disorder and a public health problem. Genetics environmental factors. The genetic predisposition presumably consists of headaches (especially in migraine’s field) had some improvements of several genetic risk factors with small individual effect. The dopami- in last years, but is still difficult to establish genotype-phenotype cor- nergic pathway is a part of the brain reward system, therefore the do- relations. A major issue is thus the correct definition of the phenotype. pamine receptors are the main candidate genes of addiction. Our aim The “International Headache Society” classification published in 1988 was to determine specific dopaminergic risk and/or protective factors led to a major development headaches’ diagnosis. Its revision in 2004 in the background of heroin addiction. aimed to improve clinical diagnosis however, its consequence on epi- In our case-control study 300 heroin dependent subjects and 555 sex- demiological data is so far unknown. matched healthy Caucasian (Hungarian) individuals were genotyped We assessed if the application of the new criteria to data from a previ- for polymorphisms of the dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2), dopamine ous headache epidemiological study (from 1995) changed significantly D4 receptor (DRD4), dopamine transporter, and the catechol-o-methyl headaches’ diagnosis. transferase genes. The chance-corrected agreement rate (Cohen’s Kappa) was used to The TaqI polymorphisms of the DRD2 gene were associated with compare the ICHD-I and ICHD-II criteria and to evaluate the agree- heroin dependence. The minor A1-allele of the TaqIA polymorphism ment between the two classifications regarding 1) primary and com- was increased (p = 0.0014) and the A1A1 genotype was two times bined headaches, and 2) frequency of migraine and tension-type more frequent (p = 0.0076) among the cases. Also the minor B1 (A-al- headache in the population. lele) of TaqIB polymorphism was associated with heroin dependence: Lifetime prevalence of headaches was 88.6% (1780/2008 individu- both B1-allele and B1B1 and B1B2 genotypes were overrepresented als). Applying ICHD-II (2004) criteria, 84.7% had primary headaches among heroin users (p = 0.0007, p = 0.0036, respectively). However, (80.4%- in ICHD-I (1988)) whereas 6.0% had secondary headaches the TaqID allele- and genotype-frequencies were not significantly dif- (6.0%) and 9.3% combined headaches (13.6%). ferent between the case and the control groups. We found a chance-corrected agreement rate of 78% for primary and Our results indicate that the DRD2 TaqIA and TaqIB polymorphisms combined headaches, of 91% for frequency of migraine and of 95% for contribute to the genetic risk of heroin dependence in Hungarian indi- frequency of tension-type headache (P<0.001). viduals. These results also support the widely accepted notion about Regarding clinical implications, ICHD-II, by creating new subgroups, the involvement of DRD2 in substance misuse. allowed the decrease of the uncertainty of probable headache diag- nosis. P09.052 The ICHD-II criteria may have relevant clinical implications but do not Identification of novel proteins interacting whit the RET9 change remarkably epidemiological results. These are important to receptor using the “split-Ubiquitin Yeast two Hybrid system” obtain accurate headache diagnosis in further epidemiological studies E. Mariani, D. Fusco, E. Bonora, M. Vargiolu, M. Vidone, G. Romeo; and to perform genotype-phenotype correlations. U.O Genetica Medica Bologna, Bologna, Italy. The proto-oncogene RET encodes a transmembrane receptor tyrosine P09.050 primarly expressed in neural crest-derived and urogenital cells. Two Analysis of cytokine polymorphisms in a patient with Hereditary main isoforms of RET are generated by alternative 3’ splicing: the long sclerosing Poikiloderma of Weary and short RET isoforms (RET51 and RET9), which differ by 51 and 9 K. Erciyas1, S. Inaloz2, S. Pehlivan3, A. Erciyas4, T. Sever3; amino acids in the C-terminus. RET51- and RET9-associated signal- 1Gaziantep University, Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Periodontology, ing complexes are markedly different, suggesting that distinct isoforms Gaziantep, Turkey, 2Gaziantep University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of can exert different physiological functions. Dermatology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3Gaziantep University, Faculty of Medicine, Loss-of-function mutations of RET have been associated with Department of Medical Biology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 4AFE, Clinical of Orthodon- Hirschsprung disease, a developmental enteric nervous system de- thy, Gaziantep-TURKEY., Gaziantep, Turkey. fect. Mutations and rearrangements with a gain-of-function effect re- Hereditary sclerosing poikiloderma of Weary (HSP) is a rare syndrome sult in thyroid cancer (Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2A-MEN2A- characterized by generalized poikiloderma with accentuation in flex- and 2B-MEN2B-, Familial Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma-FMTC- and ural regions, sclerosis of palms and soles, linear hyperkeratotic and Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma- PTC-). sclerotic bands in the axillae and antecubital and popliteal fossea, To shed light on the molecular mechanisms of RET9-associated dis- clubbing of the fingers, and tissue calcinosis as a late manifestation eases, we performed a screening to identify the interacting proteins of in one patient. This report presents a patient with HSP, suffering from RET9, using a modified two-hybrid yeast complementation assay, theComplex traits and polygenic disorders  “Split-Ubiquitin Yeast Two Hybrid System”. P09.055 The approach of the “Split-Ubiquitin Yeast Two Hybrid System” is a GWAS in Sardinians reveals novel loci for levels of inflammatory novel method capable to identify interactions between transmembrane biomarkers proteins or between a transmembrane protein and a cytoplasmic pro- S. Naitza1, J. Strait2, P. Scheet3, S. Sanna1, E. Porcu1, T. Tanaka4, M. Dei1, S. tein. This method allowed us to identify ten proteins potentially inter- Lai1, F. Busonero1, A. Maschio1, G. Usala1, N. Olla1, L. Crisponi1, G. Basciu1, D. acting with RET9. D. Taub4, E. Lakatta2, D. L. Longo4, A. Cao1, L. Ferrucci4, G. R. Abecasis5, D. After confirming these interactions by co-immunoprecipitation assay in Schlessinger2, M. Uda1; mammalian cell lines, the pathways involving RET9 and these proteins 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia (INN), Monserrato (CA), Italy, will be studied. Interestingly, these genes might be considered as good 2Gerontology Research Center, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, candidates as modifier genes in the pathogenesis of RET9-associated United States, 3University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Department diseases. of Epidemiology, Houston, TX, United States, 4Clinical Research Branch, Na- tional Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5Center for Statistical P09.053 Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, study of genetic predisposition to severe course of iBD United States. A. Nelke1, M. Podralska2, M. Skrzypczak2, P. Krokowicz1, E. Czkwanianc3, I. Inflammatory biomarkers, including Interleukin-6 (IL-6), C-reactive Kubinska3, R. Slomski2, W. Meissner1, A. Plawski2; protein (CRP), Monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), are primarily 1University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, produced in response to tissue injury, infection or inflammation during Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital, Lodz, Poland. both acute phase and chronic inflammatory processes. Serum levels Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is characterized by chronic relaps- of these markers as well as values of erythrocyte sedimentation rate ing inflammation in gastrointestinal tract. This autoimmune disease is (ESR) are used for the diagnosis and management of different inflam- dived into two main subtypes Crohn disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis matory conditions, and provide insights into atherosclerosis, a chronic (UC). The genetic bases of predispositions have been still studied. In inflammatory disease associated with cardiovascular risk, which is the our 160 severe IBD patients with average age of diagnosis 26 years, leading cause of morbidity and mortality in western countries. Identi- the youngest patient was diagnosed when was 3 years old and the fying the genes influencing inflammatory biomarkers could help un- oldest one was diagnose at the age of 69. In this group we investigated derstanding the genetic determinants of cardiovascular disease (CVD) frequency of alleles in NOD2/CARD15 gene and 15-PGHD gene. The and predicting individual CVD risk. To identify genetic factors for circu- 15-PGHD gene codes dehydrogenase which is a prostaglandin-de- lating levels of inflammatory biomarkers we have conducted a genome- grading enzyme and acts as an antagonist to enzyme called cyclooxy- wide association scan (GWAS) in 4,305 Sardinian volunteers from the genase 2. We also studied frequency of haplotype in q31 region on 5th SardiNIA project. Using 356,359 autosomal SNPs that passed quality chromosome. We estimated frequency of alleles SLC22A4 1672T and controls, we imputed an additional ~2 million SNPs using the HapMap SLC22A5 / T207C. In studied group we observed increased frequency CEU haplotypes as reference panel. We evaluated the additive effect of INV4+39C>T homozygotes in group of patient under 18 years old of imputed and genotyped SNPs using a family-based association test, with UC (12%) in comparison to adult patients where the INV4+39C>T adjusting the model for covariates. GWAS confirmed a previous locus homozygotes were not been observed. The frequency of A at position for CRP (CRP gene) and revealed new loci associated with serum 168 in PGDH gene were higher in patient under 18 years old (49%) IL-6, MCP-1 levels and measures of ESR above genome-wide signifi- than in adult patients 34%. In Nod2 gene we observed statistically sig- cance threshold (p=5x10-8). We confirmed association of top markers nificant differences of frequency of P268S, R702W and 2030insC in in an independent sample of 1862 Sardinians (combined p-values for group of patient with severe course of IBD in comparison to unselected IL6 <1x10-22, CRP <1x10-17, MCP-1 <1x10-52 and ESR p<1x10-13). IBD patients and control group Replication in 1200 individuals from the InChianti and 800 from the The study was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher BLSA studies is ongoing. Preliminary data support our initial findings Education projects no. 2P05A06929 and N402 209835 for associated SNPs. P09.054 P09.056 Association of FcER1A and RAD50 polymorphisms with serum Replication of Signals from Recent Inflammatory Bowel Disease igE levels, asthma and rhinitis. Genome Wide scans in a Lithuanian cohort G. Malerba1, M. D. Bettin1, N. Klopp2, E. Rodriguez2, H. Grallert2, N. Linde- J. Sventoraityte1, A. Franke2, A. Zvirbliene1, G. Kiudelis1, L. Kupcinskas1, S. mann2, L. Xumerle1, R. Galavotti1, C. Bombieri1, E. Trabetti1, T. Illig2, P. F. Pig- Schreiber2; natti1; 1Department of Gastroenterology, Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, 1Section of Biology and Genetics, Department of Mother and Child, Biology Lithuania, 2Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian Albrechts University, and Genetics, Verona, Italy, 2Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum Kiel, Germany. München, München, Germany. Introduction: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), ulcerative colitis (UC) Recently genetic polymorphisms in the gene encoding the alpha chain or Crohn disease (CD), are chronic gastrointestinal inflammatory dis- of the high affinity receptor for IgE (FCER1A), in the RAD50 gene, and orders with a complex genetic background. The number genetic varia- in STAT6 gene, were associated with total serum IgE levels (Weiding- tions conferring to IBD susceptibility increased over the past few years eret al, PLoS Genet. 2008; 4:e1000166). after the introduction of genome-wide association scans (GWAS). In order to assess these results in the Italian population, the asso- Aim: To perform a comprehensive association analysis of genetic ciation of the most significant reported SNPs (rs2511211, rs2427837 markers reported by the two previous GWAS studies [1,2] to further in FCER1A gene; rs2706347, rs3798135, rs2040704, rs7737470 in characterize the CD and UC associations in a Lithuanian case-control RAD50 gene, and rs12368672, rs11172106, rs12309413 in STAT6 sample set. gene) with serum IgE levels asthma, bronchial hyper-responsiveness, Material And Methods: A set of 43 SNPs from three different categories skin prick test, and rhinitis was investigated. were selected: (1) 6 SNPs reported by Rioux et al.; (2) 12 SNPs - ‘non- 211 Italian families ascertained through an allergic asthmatic child converging’ CD markers and (3) 25 SNPs -‘converging’ CD markers were analyzed. reported by WTCCC and replicated by Parkes et.al.. They were geno- Single SNP analysis was computed using the computer program sibling typed in a cohort of 152 UC, 73 CD patients and 249 unrelated healthy disequilibrium test (SDT). controls using SNPlex genotyping technology (Applied Biosystems, IgE levels were significantly associated with rs2511211 of FCER1A USA). Assessment of all SNPs and single-marker association analysis gene (p= 0.02), and with rs2706347 and rs2040704 of RAD50 gene (p= were performed using the program Haploview 4.0. 0.01, p= 0.03 respectively). Moreover, rs2511211 in FCER1A was asso- Results: Single-marker analysis revealed marginal associations be- ciated also with rhinitis (p=0.007), and rs7737470 in RAD50 with asthma tween IBD and genetic variants from category (2) and (3): CD and (p=0.01). None of the STA6 analysed SNPs showed significant results. rs17419032 (locus: 1q32.1; p=4.96x10-2) and rs9993022 (locus: In conclusion, the association of FCER1A and RAD50 gene polymor- 4q13.1; p=4.78x10-2); UC and rs10883365 (gene: NKX2-3; p=2.67x10- phisms and total serum IgE levels was confirmed in a different popula- 2), rs17419032 (locus: 1q32.1; p=3.44x10-2), rs12529198 (gene: tion, and it was extended to asthma ad rhinitis phenotypes. LYRM4; p=3.22x10-2, OR=0.37 (95%C.I.: 0.15-0.93)) and rs9895062Complex traits and polygenic disorders  (gene: STX8; p=9.64x10-3, OR=0.34 (95%C.I.: 0.16-0.78)). 0,035, OR=1,599). This results suggest IL23R plays important role in Conclusion. We replicated genetic associations for CD with 4q13.1, IBD pathogenesis in Slovenian patients. UC with NKX2-3, LYRM4, STX8, both subtypes with 1q32.1. References: P09.059 1.Rioux, J.D. et al. Nat. Genet. 39, 596-604 (2007). Expression paterns and biochemical abnormalities in the insulin 2.Parkes, M. et al. Nat. Genet. 39, 830-832 (2007). signalin pathway components in girls with hyperandrogenism and insulin resistance P09.057 G. Queipo1, N. Garibay2, A. Olivares3, Y. Pastrana1, N. Najera1, J. Castillo3, S. Clinical significance of NOD2/CARD15 and TLR 4 gene SNPs in Kofman-Alfaro1; inflammatory bowel disease. 1Hospital General de Mexico-Facultad de Medicina UANM, Mexico City, L. Rigoli1, C. Romano1, R. A. Caruso2, C. Di Bella1, V. Procopio1, G. Lo Giudi- Mexico, 2Hospital Infantil de Mexico Federico Gomez, Mexico City, Mexico, ce1, M. Amorini1, L. Grasso1, P. Romeo1, F. Pugliatti1, C. Cuppari1, G. E. Cala- 3CINVESTAV Insituto Politecnico Nacional, Mexico City, Mexico. brò1, C. Salpietro1, W. Fries3; Background: Previous studies in adults report that insulin signaling 1Department of Pediatrics-Policlinico Universitario, Messina, Italy, 2Department abnormalities in the muscle of patients with hyperandrogenism can of Human Pathology-Policlinico Universitario, Messina, Italy, 3Department of predict glucose intolerance and type 2 diabetes. The aim of the current Medicine-Policlinico Universitario, Messina, Italy. study was to describe these abnormalities in girls and adolescents with Background: To evaluate the role of genetic factors in the pathogen- hyperandrogenic states. esis of Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), we investi- Methods: We analyzed girls with clinical/biochemical hyperandrogen- gated the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of NOD2/CARD15 ism. Patients were classified as (1) hyperandrogenic (N=7) if they had (R702W, G908R and L1007finsC), and Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) a history of precocious pubarche or hirsutism and biochemical hyper- genes (D299G and T399I) in a selected inflammatory bowel disease androgenism, and (2) those with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) (IBD) population coming from Southern Italy. (N=13) according to Rotterdam criteria. Analysis of anthropometric Methods: Allele and genotype frequencies of NOD2/CARD15 (R702W, (Body mass index [BMI], Waist circumference [WC]) and laboratory G908R and L1007finsC) and TLR4 (D299G and T399I) SNPs were data (fasting insulin, OGTT, lipid profile, blood pressure) were ana- examined in 133 CD patients, in 45 UC patients, and in 103 healthy lyzed. Muscle biopsies were obtained from vaste externe and IRS-1, controls. IRS-2. GLUT-4 expression was measured by RT-PCR in vivo and after Results: NOD2/CARD15 R702W mutation was significantly more fre- primary miocytes cultures. Biopsies from non-obese non-hyperandro- quent in CD (9.8%) than in controls (2.4%, P = 0.001) and in UC (2.3%, genic and metabolic stable adolescents were used as controls (N=6). P = 0.03). No significant difference was found between UC patients Results: IRS-1 and IRS-2 expression was significantly different in and control group (P > 0.05). In CD and UC patients, no significant as- cases versus controls (p<0.01). GLUT-4 expression did not show dif- sociation with G908R variant was found L1007finsC SNP showed an ferences between the groups. HDL-cholesterol was significantly lower association with CD (9.8%) in hyperandrogenic compared to PCOS girls (p<0.05). There were no compared with controls (2.9%, P = 0.002) and UC patients (2.3%, P significant differences between both hyperandrogenism groups in the = 0.01). Moreover, in CD patients, G908R and L1007finsC mutations prevalence of insulin resistance indexes and metabolic syndrome. were significantly associated with different phenotypes compared to Conclusions: Overexpression of IRS-1 and IRS-2 was persistently CD wild-type patients. No association of IBD with the TLR4 SNPs was detected in the overall sample of hyperandrogenic girls compared to found in either cohort (allele frequencies: D299G-controls 3.9%, CD controls. Impaired insulin action involves posttranslational modification 3.7%, UC 3.4%, P > 0.05; T399I-controls 2.9%, CD 3.0%, UC 3.4%, of signaling molecules, most likely including altered phosphorylation of P > 0.05). IRS-1 and IRS-2 substrates. Conclusion: These findings confirm that, in our IBD patients selected from Southern Italy, the NOD2/CARD15, but not TLR4 SNPs, are as- P09.060 sociated with increased risk of CD. ABCB4 mutations or rare variants are identified in intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (icP) with small differences in P09.058 patients with high and normal serum levels of gamma- High resolution melting curve analysis for high-throughput sNP glutamyltranspeptidase (γGT) activity genotyping in iL23R and NOD2/cARD15 genes D. Degiorgio1, C. Colombo2,3, B. Acaia4, S. Saino4, B. Bottani4, M. Castagni1, M. M. Mitrovic, U. Potocnik; Seia1, L. Costantino1, L. Porcaro1, V. Paracchini1, S. Nozza4, D. A. Coviello1; Medical faculty, Maribor, Slovenia. 1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Po- Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis is important tool in liclinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Centro Fibrosi Cistica, Fon- the studies of genetic factors associated with complex diseases and dazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, genetically influenced response to drug therapy (pharmacogenetics). Milan, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, We developed a HRM method for NOD2 (rs2066845, rs2066844, Italy, 4Patologia della Gravidanza, II Clinica Ostetrica, Fondazione IRCCS, rs2066847) and IL23R (rs7517847) genes, associated with inflamma- Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy. tory bowel diseases (IBD). In this study, we demonstrate, that HRM is Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is a liver disorder with mul- simple, fast and reliable method (95% confidence) for genotyping clini- tifactorial etiology that appears during late pregnancy; it is character- cal samples. HRM analysis is an efficient method for SNP detection ized by maternal pruritus and by biochemical laboratory abnormalities, and/or genotyping, where homozygotes (GG and TT) were determined including normal or high serum gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (γGT) with »Tm calling method« differed by 0,53°C for IL23R gene and by levels. Within 2 to 3 weeks after delivery there is a spontaneous relief 0,1°C, 0,61°C in 0,45°C for NOD2gene SNPs rs2066845, rs2066844, of signs and symptoms but ICP is associated with increased fetal dis- rs2066847, respectively. Difference between homozygotes and hetero- tress, preterm delivery and stillbirth occurring near term. The genetic zygotes was easily distinguishable by different melting curve shapes aetiology of ICP is heterogeneous because heterozygous mutations with »gene scanning method«. in at least three different genes encoding proteins involved in bile for- Additionally, we genotyped 345 Slovenian healthy controls and 295 mation have been described. Although serum γGT levels have been IBD patients including 195 with Crohn’s disease (CD) and 136 with ul- considered a marker to differentiate between ICP with high γGT due to cerative colitis (UC) for rs7517847 polymorphism in IL23R gene using ABCB4 gene mutations and ICP with normal γGT caused by mutations standard RFLP and optimized HRM methods. We found strong statis- in others two genes (ATP8B1 and ABCB11), a few studies also have tically significant association of IL23R polymorphism with Slovenian reported ABCB4 mutations in ICP women with normal γGT values. Be- CD patients. Allele frequency of minor allele G was 0,46 in controls tween August 2005 and December 2008, we enrolled 72 women with and was reduced to 0,33 in CD patients (p<0,001, OR=0,588). The ICP phenotype (10 with high γGT serum levels) and all the 27 coding frequency of G/G genotype carriers was lower in CD patients (8,2%) exons of ABCB4 gene were sequenced. In thirteen patients (18%), than in controls (18,6%, p=0,002, OR=2,558). We found slightly less 2/10 with high γGT and 11/62 with normal γGT, we identified 15 hetero- significant association between IL23R polymorphism and Slovenian zygous mutations or rare variants: 9 cause single amino acid change, UC patients. Carriers of T/T genotype have higher risk for UC (p= 4 cause plausibly mRNA misprocessing and 1 causes truncated pro-Complex traits and polygenic disorders  tein. Our finding indicate that ABCB4 mutations seem to predispose to sociation with TF variants. In addition, a strong association between ICP phenotype in less than 20% of the affected women, irrespective a locus on chromosome 11 and the soluble transferrin receptor was of serum γGT levels. found. Further association signals were detected that had p-values in the range of 10-7. Replication analysis which is currently ongoing will P09.061 show whether these signals can be confirmed in independent popula- Variation in the interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 3 gene tion samples. and susceptibility to sepsis induced-acute lung injury C. Flores1,2, M. Pino-Yanes1,2, T. Paula3, L. Perez-Mendez1,2, E. Espinosa4, A. P09.063 Corrales1,2, R. Sanguesa4, M. Hernandez5, A. Muriel6, M. Muros1,7, J. Blanco1,6, A coding variant in the serotonin receptor 3c subunit is J. Villar1,8; associated with diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome 1CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Spain, 2Research Unit, Hospital J. Kapeller1, L. A. Houghton2, J. Walstab3, H. Bönisch3, G. Rappold1, B. Universitario NS de Candelaria, Spain, 3Department of Environmental Health, Niesler1; Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States, 4Department of 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Neurogastroenterology Anesthesia, Hospital Universitario NS de Candelaria, Spain, 5Department of Unit, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Phar- Genetics, Universidad de La Laguna, Spain, 6Intensive Care Unit, Hospital macology and Toxicology, Bonn, Germany. Universitario Rio Hortega, Spain, 7Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Hospital Serotonin type 3 (5-HT) receptor antagonists are beneficial in some 3 Universitario NS de Candelaria, Spain, 8MODERN, Research Unit, Hospital but not all patients with diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome Universitario Dr. Negrin, Spain. (IBS-D). As we recently found variants of the 5-HT subunit genes 3 Sepsis is the most common cause of acute lung injury (ALI), organ HTR3A and HTR3E to be associated with IBS-D, the aims of this study dysfunction and death in critically ill patients. The Toll/NF-κB signaling were to investigate whether variants of the HTR3C subunit gene may pathway has a key role in the immune response to infections. Variants also contribute to the IBS phenotype and to perform pharmacologi- in two genes encoding for interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinases cal analyses to provide insight into the functional consequences of re- (IRAKs) modify the immune response to pathogens and associate with spective variants. increased risk for severe complications during sepsis. Based on gene HTR3C genotyping in a pilot study cohort of 197 IBS and 100 healthy expression data, showing up-regulation of IRAK3 in both animal mod- subjects revealed the c.489C/c.489C genotype of the HTR3C c.489C>A els of sepsis and in septic patients, here we explored whether common (rs6766410, p.N163K) coding variant to be associated with female variants of this gene were associated with susceptibility and outcomes IBS-D (P= 0.0019; OR = 4.98 CI = [1.75-14.16]), whereas no associa- in severe sepsis. We re-sequenced 23 kb non-repetitive regions of the tion could be found in males. Calcium influx analyses of the 5-HT 3A/C gene in 32 Spanish samples, and selected a set of 7 tagging SNPs p.163N and 5-HT p.163K receptors resembling the homozygous 3A/C (tagSNPs) that efficiently captured common variation in the popula- genotypes revealed identical potencies of 5-HT and two 5-HT antago- 3 tion. To test the association, tagSNPs were genotyped in 214 severe nists. However, 5-HT showed decreased efficacy at 5-HT p.163N 3A/C sepsis cases and 336 population-based controls using the MassAr- (78.1 ± 5.9 %) compared with 5-HT p.163K (100 %, P < 0.01, n = 14) 3A/C ray® iPLEX Gold (Sequenom Inc.). One tagSNP showed a significant receptors and radioligand binding assays revealed a reduced B for max association with ALI (p=0.005), and remained significant after multiple the 5-HT p.163N (86.2 ± 3.7 %) compared with the 5-HT p.163K 3A/C 3A/C testing adjustments. Indirect testing of untyped alleles revealed two receptor (100 %, P <0.05, n = 6). The decreased 5-HT p.163N 5-HT 3A/C correlated SNPs (r2=0.85) from the 5’ flanking region of the gene as- maximum response, most likely caused by reduced cell surface ex- sociated with ALI (permuted p=0.02), that were validated by further pression of the mature receptor in comparison to the 5-HT p.163K 3A/C genotyping and direct testing (p<0.05). A TRANSFAC-based explora- receptor, may result in altered 5-HT receptor signal transduction in 3 tion predicted one of them (-1464A/G, MAF=0.25) to be located within the enteric and central nervous system and thereby contribute to the a human-mouse conserved FOXP3 transcription factor binding site. pathophysiology of IBS-D. This supports that common variation in IRAK3 gene might be a novel determinant of severe sepsis outcomes. P09.064 Supported by grants from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innova- An aquired JAK2 V617F mutation in patients with tion SAF2004-06833 and EMER07/001. hypercoagulability disorder K. Žerjavič, B. Zagradišnik, L. Lokar, N. Kokalj Vokač; P09.062 University Medical Center Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. Genome-wide association study of iron parameters The pathogenesis of venous thrombosis is multifactorial, involving ac- K. Oexle1, C. Gieger2, M. Bruegel3, A. Doering2, G. M. Fiedler3, T. Illig2, P. Li- quired and genetic factors. Recently described acquired gain-of-func- chtner4, B. Müller-Myhsok5, J. Thiery3, H. E. Wichmann2, J. Winkelmann1,6, T. tion mutation in the JAK2 gene causing dysregulated proliferation of Meitinger1,4; hematopoietic precursors that results in increased number of periph- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Krankenhaus rechts der Isar, Technische Uni- eral blood cells, the major feature of polycythemia vera and essential versität, München, Germany, 2Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum thrombocythemia, and has been identified as a potential risk factor for München, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Univer- thromboembolic events. We therefore investigated whether the preva- sitätsklinikum, Leipzig, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz lence of the JAK2 V617F mutation vary significantly in different clinical Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 5Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, groups of patients with venous thrombosis. München, Germany, 6Department of Neurology, Krankenhaus rechts der Isar, Samples of genomic DNA were extracted from peripheral venous Technische Universität, München, Germany. blood. An allele specific PCR and agarose gel electrophoresis were Serum iron parameters indicate the availability of and/or the demand used for the detection of the JAK2 V617F mutation. Specific discrimi- for iron in the body. Heritability measures of these parameters range nation of the JAK2 V617F allele was achieved by using locked nucleic between 23% (Fe) and 66% (transferrin; Whitfield et al 2000). In case acid (LNA) nucleotide incorporated in one primer to obtain sufficient of serum transferrin, 40% of the genetic variance has been attributed allele specificity of amplification. to variants in the transferrin gene TF and the hemochromatosis gene We collected 508 patients with hypercoagulability disorder and 5000 HFE (Benyamin et al 2009). In order to identify further genetic variants apparently healthy individuals as the controls. Among patients with hy- of iron homeostasis we determined serum iron parameters (Fe, ferritin, percoagulability disorder, eight (1,6 %) carried the JAK2 V617F muta- transferrin, soluble transferrin receptor, ferritin index, transferrin satu- tion. Five of them had diagnosed deep venous thrombosis of lower ration) in two population samples from Southern Germany (KORA- extremity or extremities, two patients had cerebrovascular accidents, gen). These samples comprise 1644 and 1953 subjects from the and one had pulmonary embolism. Five (0,1 %) members of a control general population that have been genotyped on Affymetrix 500K and group carried the JAK2 V617F mutant allele. 6.0 platforms, respectively. A genome-wide association study (GWAS; We have found statistically significant higher prevalence of the JAK2 linear regression on allele dosage with age and sex as covariates) V617F mutation among the patients with hypercoagulability disorder reproduced the association of iron parameters with the HFE variant in comparison with a control group. The presence of the JAK2 V617F C282Y. The highest significance was obtained for the transferrin satu- may represent a potential risk factor for the development of venous ration phenotype. Analyzing transferrin also reproduced the known as- thrombosis.Complex traits and polygenic disorders  P09.065 for Molecular Medicine, Helsinki, Finland, 3National Institute for Health and A study of Kashin-Beck Disease in the homogeneous population Welfare, Department of Chronic Disease Prevention, Helsinki, Finland, 4Finnish of tibet in china National Institute of Occupational Health, Oulu, Finland, 5Department of Clinical R. S. Gunasekera1,2, J. Cokenour1, P. Sen3, D. Heath4, M. Han5; Sciences/ Obstetrics and Gynecology, Oulu, Finland, 6National Public Health 1University of Houston-Victoria, Victoria, TX, United States, 2Humanitarian Solu- Institute and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 7Department of Health and tions, Inc., Pearland, TX, United States, 3Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Functional Capacity, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 8MRC TX, United States, 4Innovative Humanitarian Solutions, Inc., Pearland, TX, Centre of Causal Analyses in Translational Epidemiology, University of Bristol, United States, 5ProHealth Physicians, Manchester, CT, United States. Bristol, United Kingdom, 9Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Me- Kashin-Beck disease (KBD) is an osteoarthropathy which manifests in tabolism, Oxford, United Kingdom, 10The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human children marked by dramatically low levels of serum selenium, iodine, Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 11Department of Epidemiology and Public bone and joint deformity, and limited mobility. The disease is endemic Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 12Institute of Health to rural Tibet, China; North Korea, and Siberia. Early investigations had Sciences, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 13FIMM, Institute for Molecular led to the hypothesis that the disease was due to dietary factors, due Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Finland. to deficiencies in certain essential nutrients in high plateaus. However, The global prevalence of obesity, usually indexed by body mass in- supplementation of the deficient trace minerals conducted by others dex (BMI) cut-offs, has increased significantly in the recent decades, has had no positive effect on affected persons. Our group has be- mainly due to positive energy balance. However, the impact of a selec- gun investigations to the possibility that genetic elements may also be tion for specific genes cannot be excluded. Here we have tested the involved with possible environmental effects in-utero. Pedigree stud- association between BMI and one of the best known genetic variants ies were conducted on 200 individuals in nuclear families with clinical showing strong selective pressure: the functional variant in the cis- symptoms. Patients observed ranged from 6 to more than 60 years. regulatory element of the lactase gene. We tested this variant since it KBD was diagnosed when an affected person had persistent pain, is presumed to provide nutritional advantage in specific physical and restricted mobility, or deformity of the knees, ankles, elbows, wrist, in- cultural environments. We found that the variant responsible for lac- terphalangeal joints, hips, or shoulders, in the absence of trauma. Pre- tase persistence among Europeans was also associated with higher liminary analysis suggests KBD having an autosomal recessive pat- BMI in a Nordic population sample (p = 1.3*10-5) of 15 209 individuals, tern of inheritance in most families with a possible higher penetrance in the size of the effect being close to that of FTO. We tested the effect women. Occurrence of the disease exhibits familial aggregation while of population stratification and concluded that the association was not suggesting the form of inheritance polygenetic, and due to multifacto- due to population substructure. rial factors. Initial studies further suggests that deficiencies in selenium and iodine may not be causal, but markers of an underlying condi- P09.068 tion of extreme oxidative stress brought on by reactive oxygen species Association between copy number variation of glycogen acting to inhibit proper mesenchymal cell and bone development by synthase kinase 3 beta / Nr1i2 and major depression apoptosis. This study attempts to describe pedigree investigations and Z. Elek1, E. Szantai1, R. Nagy1, G. Faludi2, A. Sarosi2, M. Sasvari-Szekely1; nutritional genomics of the disease. 1Department of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemis- try, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department of Clinical and P09.066 Theoretical Mental Health, Kútvölgyi Clinical Center, Semmelweis University, Association of the AcE and BDKRB2 gene polymorphisms with Budapest, Hungary. physical performance of kayakers Copy number variation (CNV) or copy number polymorphism (CNP) is E. B. Akimov, I. I. Ahmetov, D. V. Rebrikov, A. G. Tonevitsky; a novel approach in candidate gene studies. Recently, glycogen syn- All-Russian Research Institute of Physical Culture and Sports, Moscow, Rus- thase kinase 3 beta (Gsk3β) and its adjacent gene, Nr1i2 (pregnane X sian Federation. receptor isoform) has been reported to associate with bipolar depres- Circulating angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE) exerts a tonic regu- sion (Lachman et al, 2007. Here we present a case - control study latory function in circulatory homeostasis, through the synthesis of va- of 216 patients with major depression and 175 controls, involving the soconstrictor angiotensin II, which also drives aldosterone synthesis, chromosomal region of glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (Gsk3β) and and the degradation of vasodilator kinins. A polymorphism in intron 16 its adjacent genes, Nr1i2 and C3ORF15. The gene dosage has been of the human ACE gene has been identified in which the presence (I al- measured by Taqman (Applied Biosystems) real time PCR systems, lele) rather than the absence (D allele) of a 287 bp Alu-sequence inser- as well as by conventional PCR and capillary electrophoresis. In ac- tion fragment is associated with lower serum and tissue ACE activity. cordance with the previously published results, the variations in the Bradykinin is a potent endothelium-dependent vasodilator and acts via copy number of the above genes seem to be very rare, although an the bradykinin B2 receptor (encoded by BDKRB2). The absence (-9), accumulation of increased copy number has been found in the patient rather than the presence (+9), of a 9 bp repeat sequence in exon 1 has group (4/216 vs. 1/175). On the other hand we did not find any deletion previously been shown to be associated with increased gene transcrip- of these genes in our samples. Taking together the published results of tion and higher BDKRB2 mRNA expression. The aim of the study was Lachman et al. and ours, amplification of this region seems to have a to find interrelation between ACE and BDKRB2 gene polymorphisms significant (p=0.006) increase among patients with major depression. and physical performance of elite Russian kayakers. Genotyping was performed by RT-PCR. Physiological parameters were evaluated by P09.069 Kayak Ergometer and MetaLyzer II Gas Analyzer at the beginning and Significant associations between AKT1 SNP markers and Major at the end of preparation period. Maximal oxygen consumption was Depressive Disorder in the chinese population increased by 12.7% and 14.8% in males and females, respectively. Z. Z. Zhao1, X. Q. Chen2, D. Q. Li1, M. J. Wang1, M. Ai1, N. Chen2, J. M. Chen1, Furthermore, the ventilation volume (VE) was decreased by 9.6% in X. M. Li1, L. Kuang1; males. The total number of ACE I and BDKRB2 -9 alleles, favorable for 1The First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China, endurance performance, was negatively correlated with VE values in 2West China Hospital, West China Medical School, Sichuan University, Cheng- males (p=0.0074) and females (p=0.017), indicating that these alleles du, China. are associated with the improvement of work economization of respira- Background: V-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homologue 1 tory muscles (one of the indicators of aerobic capacity). (AKT1) is a serine/threonine kinase. Abnormality of AKT1 is involved in various diseases, including mental disorder. Recent evidence sug- P09.067 gests that the Variation in AKT1 gene has been associated with schizo- European Lactase Persistence Allele is Associated With phrenia, Parkinson’s disease and type II diabetes. But the relation- increase in Body mass index ship of AKT1 gene variation in depression is unknown. The aim of the J. A. Kettunen1,2, K. Silander2,3, O. Saarela3, V. Anttila1, J. Laitinen4, A. Har- present study was to investigate the potential role of variability within tikainen5, A. Pouta5,6, P. Lahermo2, S. Männistö3, A. Jula7, J. Virtamo3, V. Sa- AKT1 gene polymorphisms as a risk factor for major depressive dis- lomaa3, G. Davey Smith8, M. I. McCarthy9,10, M. Järvelin11,12, M. Perola13,3, L. order (MDD). Peltonen1,2; Method: We performed a case-control association analysis of AKT1. 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2FIMM, Institute Five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) according to the origi-Complex traits and polygenic disorders  nal study were genotyped among 127 MDD (DSM-IV criteria) and 127 lotype analysis revealed seven haplotype blocks in all tested groups of healthy controls from the Chinese population. Samples were investi- patients compared to healthy controls. None of frequencies of haplo- gated by using PCR-RFLP. types differed significantly. Results show that IKBKE gene from 1q32 Results: There were a positive association of allele T of the marker chromosomal region may possibly be related to mood and anxiety dis- SNP3 with MDD (rs3730358, p = .024). Haplotype analysis showed orders. that the frequency of a four-AKT1 SNP1/2/3/4 haplotype (AGTG) was significantly higher in MDD patients (0.054) than that of controls P09.072 (0.011) (p = .011). Failure to detect microduplication 22q11.2 among a group of Conclusion: Our study provides support for the hypothesis that AKT1 schizophrenia patients with multiple Ligation Dependent Probe is a susceptibility gene for MDD. Amplification (MLPA) E. Nourian1, M. Noruzini2, H. Galehdari3, M. Sadeghizadeh1, M. Behmanesh1; P09.070 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Teh- Genotyping of the serotonin transporter promoter polymorphism ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medical in a Dutch major depression cohort Sciences, Shahid Chamran University, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3De- E. C. Verbeek1, M. R. Bevova1, P. Rizzu1, P. Heutink1, W. J. Hoogendijk2; partment of Medical Genetics ,Faculty of Medical Sciences, Shahid Chamran 1Department of Medical Genomics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, University, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. The Netherlands, 2Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center, Chromosome aberrations have long been studied in an effort to identi- Amsterdam, The Netherlands. fy susceptibility genes for schizophrenia. Chromosome 22q11.2 micro- Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is a psychiatric disorder with high deletion is associated with DiGeorge and Velocardiofacial syndromes public health significance: it is currently the leading cause of disease (DG/VCF) and provides the most convincing evidence of an associa- burden in western civilization and the fourth cause on a global scale. tion between molecular cytogenetic abnormality and schizophrenia. In People suffering from MDD show persistent dysphoria and additional addition, this region is one of the best replicated linkage findings for cognitive symptoms. schizophrenia. Recently, the reciprocal microduplication on 22q11.2 Various theories about the causes of MDD exist and a genetic compo- has been reported as a new syndrome. Preliminary data indicates that nent is recognized in most of them. However, in complex disorders it is individuals with these duplications also suffer from neuropsychiatric a challenge to discover high impact mutations and polymorphisms. disorders. In this study we have investigated the appropriateness of A genetic region that has been investigated in relation to neuropsy- testing schizophrenia patients for the 22q11.2 microduplication. We chiatric disorders is serotonin-transporter-linked polymorphic region used multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to mea- (5-HTTLPR). Serotonin itself has been implicated in the cause of MDD sure copy number changes on the 22q11.2 region in a sample of 120 and thus regulation of serotonin availability by the serotonin trans- patients with schizophrenia. Our results corroborate the prevalence of porter provides a region of interest. The 5-HTTLPR has a long vari- the 22q11.2 microdeletion in patients with schizophrenia and clinical ant and a short variant, where a deletion has taken place. Within the features of DG/ VCFS and do not suggest an association between deleted region a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) can be found, 22q11.2 microduplication and schizophrenia. rs25531. This SNP has also been investigated in relation to psychiatric illnesses, including MDD. Many of these studies are limited by a small P09.073 sample size and might therefore not find verifiable associations. Role of the Estrogen Receptor (EsR1 Pvuii and EsR1 325 c>G) In this study we use the MDD-cohort (3840 samples) of the genetic as- and Progesterone Receptor (PROGiNs) polymorphisms in sociation information network (GAIN) to unearth possible associations genetic susceptibility to migraine in a North indian Population between MDD and the 5-HTTLPR. G. Joshi, S. Pradhan, B. MITTAL; The region consists of repeats and has a high GC-content. For deter- Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, LUCKNOW, India. mining a long or short genotype we use fluorescent primers to amplify We aimed to explore the single-locus, haplotype, epistasis patterns and the region and separate products with capillary electrophoresis. MspI contribution of ESR1 PvuII (rs2234693), ESR1 325 C>G (rs1801132) was used to distinguish different genotypes of rs25531. and PROGINS (rs1042838) polymorphisms in genetic susceptibility to migraine by analyzing 613 subjects consisting of 217 Migraine pa- P09.071 tients, 217 Healthy controls (HC) and 179 patients with Tension Type Relationships between genes of interleukin 10 gene cluster and Headache (TTH). Entire data was analyzed by taking Bonferroni cor- mood and anxiety disorders rected P value into account. We found significant association of TT K. Koido1, T. Eller1, K. Kingo1, S. Koks1,2, T. Traks1, J. Shlik3, V. Vasar1, E. Va- genotype (OR=3.458; CI=1.757-6.806; P value=0.0003) and T allele sar1, E. Maron1,4; (OR=1.729; CI=1.309-2.284; P value=0.0001) of ESR1 PvuII SNP with 1University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian University of Life Sciences, Tartu, migraine when compared with HC. Significant association was seen Estonia, 3University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 4North Estonian Regional only in female migraine patients. Moreover, higher risk of TT genotype Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia. and T allele was limited to migraine with aura (MA) than migraine with- Major depressive disorder (MDD) and panic disorder (PD) belong to out aura (MO). In case of ESR1 PvuII, risk in migraine patients could the most prevalent mental diseases, affecting respectively 10% and fit in the recessive model, but no risk was observed when TTH patients 3% of general population. Alterations in immune system have been were compared with HC. However, in ESR 325 G>C polymorphism, no implicated in the onset and development of MDD and PD. We studied significance was seen in any of the models. In PROGIN polymorphism, the relationship between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of significant low risk at genotypic and allelic levels was seen when mi- genes from interleukin 10 (IL10) chromosomal region 1q32 and MDD graine patients were compared with HC. ESR1 PvuII TT * ESR1 325 and PD. The association study design was used: 38 SNPs from 10 C>G CG genotype, PROGINS A1A2 * ESR1 325 C>G CG genotype genes and regions between them of IL10 gene cluster were analyzed and ESR1 PvuII CT * PROGINS A1A2 interacted significantly, but the in 522 unrelated patients and in 356 healthy control subjects. All sub- significance was lost after Bonferroni correction. In conclusion, ESR1 jects were individuals of Caucasian origin living in Estonia. Patients PvuII polymorphism is a significant risk factor for migraine particularly were divided into two groups according to diagnosis: comparison of in females and MA patients, but, ESR 325 C>G and PROGINS poly- allelic frequencies was performed between control group and MDD morphisms are not associated with migraine susceptibility in North In- patients (n=313), PD patients (n=209), and the whole patient group dian population. (n=522). Both MDD and PD groups included ‘pure’ phenotypes as well as phenotypes comorbid to other mood and anxiety disorders. SNPlex P09.074 Genotyping System was applied for genotyping, following association Association of a non-coding mtDNA polymorphism with and haplotype analyses with Haploview program. Association analysis longevity in Russian population of 38 SNPs revealed the most prominent relationship between MDD, T. V. Zheykova1, M. V. Golubenko1, O. Y. Bychkova1, O. A. Makeeva1, S. V. PD, and the whole patient group and SNP (rs1539243) in IKBKE gene Buikin1, V. N. Maximov2, M. I. Voevoda2, V. P. Puzyrev1; (inhibitor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cells, kinase 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute for Thera- epsilon) (allelic p values 0.02, 0.0009, and 0.0011, respectively). Hap-Complex traits and polygenic disorders  py, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. between MTHFR C677T and TGF-beta C-509T polymorphisms and Due to key role of mitochondria in cell energy production, mitochondrial renal failure in diabetic patients. DNA is considered as candidate locus for different common diseases Clinical information and biological samples were collected from dia- as well as for predisposing to longevity. Some associations of different lyzed patients with type I diabetes (n=116, male: 56%, dialysis: 1,6±0,8 mtDNA haplogroups with longevity were shown in European popula- years), type II diabetes (n=123, male: 55.28%, 2,4±1,2, dialysis: tions. To explore possible associations of mtDNA polymorphisms with 2,3±1,2 years) or chronic glomerulonephritis (n=121, male: 49.58%, longevity in population of Siberian part of Russia, we have studied dialysis: 1,7±0,9 years) and from healthy subjects (n=494, fasting gly- mtDNA in samples of long-livers (>90 years old) from Tomsk and No- cemia 93.2±8.2 mg/dl). Healthy subjects were selected to be matched vosibirsk (N=235) by sequencing HVS1 region and restriction analysis for age and gender with patients. All subjects selected for this study for haplogroup assignment. We have compared frequencies of main were unrelated Romanian Caucasians. European haplogroups (H, H1, U4, U5, K, J, T) and some frequent Blood samples from all subjects were used for DNA extraction. DNA polyphyletic HVS1 polymorphisms (16189, 16311, 16362, etc) in long- samples were used for genotyping TGFb -509 and MTHFR C677T livers group with mtDNA data on Tomsk population. No significant dif- polymorphisms using PCR and PCR RFLP methods. ferences were found for haplogroups, as well as for big clusters (J+T, In the case of MTHFR C677T the distribution of genotypes remains U, H+HV+V). At the same time, the long-livers had higher frequency significant only when T2DM patients and controls were compared of T16189C polymorphism (21.3% comparing to 12.2% in population, (p=0,019). The results showed no association between TGFbeta and P=0.04). There was no difference between long-livers and population the risk for renal failure in diabetic or nondiabetic patients (OR~1). in “haplogroup composition” of the 16189C group (main contributors In conclusion, our study demonstrates: were haplogroups H1 and U5). T16189C variant is known as associ- 1. The MTHFR C677T is associated with ESRD in type 2 diabetic pa- ated with diabetes in adults, increased body mass index and insulin tients.2. TGF-beta genotypes are not significant risk factors for devel- resistance. In contrast, our results suggest that this variant may have opment of ESRD. also positive influence on fitness, thus favoring for longevity. The study (Project: Romania, PNII-IDEI, code 2150) was supported by RFBR grant 07-04-01526a. P09.077 P09.075 An investigation of polymorphisms in ctLA-4 gene for infant c677t genotype of the mtHFR gene as a risk factor non- association with multiple sclerosis in iranians syndromic cleft lip with/ without palate M. R. Noori-Daloii, A. Heidari, M. Keramati-Pour, A. Rashidi-Nejad, A. K. Ulucan1, D. Kirac2, T. Akcay3, D. Javadova4, G. Koc4, D. Ergec5, A. I. Amirzargar, A. Sahmani; Güney4; Tehran Univ. of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Marmara University, Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Medical Biology and Multiple sclerosis (MS), a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- of the central nervous system is believed to have a T cell-mediated ment of Biochemistry, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Marmara University, Faculty of Medi- autoimmune etiology. The cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) cine, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Marmara Uni- gene is a strong candidate for the involvement in autoimmune dis- versity, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, eases. To examine the genetic association of the CTLA-4 gene locus 5Maltepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and with MS, in a case-control design, we analyzed three single nucleotide Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey. polymorphisms (SNPs) of the CTLA-4 gene including -318 C/T, +49A/ 5,10- Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene is located G and CT60 in 135 unrelated Iranian relapsing-remitting MS patients on 1p36.3 and involved in folate metabolism. It has two common gene and 135 healthy subjects using PCR-RFLP method. The overall geno- variants, C677T and A1298C. C677T homozygosity is associated with type frequencies of -318 CC, CT and TT were 79.6%, 18.9% and 1.5%, several congenital anomalies, mostly neural tube defects. Non-syn- respectively. Regarding the +49A/G SNP the overall genotype frequen- dromic cleft lip with/without palate (NSCLP) is one of the most com- cies for AA, AG and GG were 29.6%, 53% and 17.4%, respectively and mon congenital anomalies, with a prevalance of 1/1000 in Caucasians. for CT60 SNP the overall genotype frequencies for AA, AG and GG It is a multifactorial pathology affected from different loci and genes, were 19.3%, 50.7 and 30%, respectively The distribution of CTLA-4 environmental factors also implicated in NSCLP. To date C677T, in the (-318 C/T) genotype and allele frequencies did not significantly differ terms of NSCLP and MTHFR, has either conflicting results or couldn’t between MS patients and healthy subjects. In conclusion, there may be replicated properly. Our aim is to determine a relation between in- not be any association between CTLA-4 gene polymorphisms and MS fants’ MTHFR C677T polymorphism and (NSCLP) in Turkish popula- development. tion. Key words: Allelic association; CTLA-4; multiple sclerosis; RFLP; Sin- We have established 100 NSCLP patients without any family history gle nucleotide polymorphism of CLP and 100 controls. PCR- RFLP method was performed for the determination of MTHFR gene by using specific primers and Hinf I P09.078 restriction enzyme. Polymorphisms of hemochromatosis and transferrin genes in CC (wild type) frequencies were %39 and %41 in NSCLP patients and multiple sclerosis controls respectively. %43 of the patients and %47 of the controls were N. Starcevic Cizmarevic1, S. Ristić1, L. Lovrečić2, J. Sepčić3, B. Brajenović- CT and %18 of the patients and %12of the controls were TT (mutant) Milić1, A. Buretic Tomljanovic1, M. Kapović1, B. Peterlin2; for the MTHFR C677T allele. 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Rijeka, No statistically significant differences were detected between study Croatia, 2Division of Medical Genetics, UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Postgradu- and control groups. Our study suggests that only MTHFR C677T ge- ate Study, School of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia. notyping in infants may be a useless approach to suggest as a risk Recent evidence has indicated a role for iron dysregulation in dis- factor for NSCLP in Turkish population. ease pathogenesis. We tested the hypothesis that polymorphisms in HFE (C282Y and H63D) and TF (C1 and C2) genes, and interactions P09.076 among these polymorphisms, influence predisposition to and clinical the mtHFR c677t polymorphism increase the risk for renal presentation of multiple sclerosis (MS). involvement in type 2 diabetic patients Three hundred and sixty-eight MS patients and 368 healthy controls D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, M. Stavarachi1, M. Toma1, I. Radu1, A. Craciun2, were genotyped by PCR-RFLP method. N. Panduru2, C. Serafinceanu2, L. Gavrila1; Statistically significant higher frequency of the C282Y mutation car- 1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2N Paulescu Institute, Bucharest, riers was observed in patients with secundary-progressive or relaps- Romania. ing-remitting MS (7.7%) than in the control group (3.8%) (p=0.026). A Renal disease is one of the most common complications of diabetic significantly earlier age of onset was found in carriers of the C282Y patients. Many studies suggest that MTHFR (Methylentetrahydrofolate mutation (p=0.035). The frequency of H63D homozygotes was higher reductase) and TGF-beta polymorphisms increases the risk for renal (2.8%) in control group than in MS patients (0.7%) with borderline sig- involvement in diabetic patients. nificance (p=0.050). We found no corelation between H63D mutation The purpose of this case-control study was to estimate the association and disease behavior (p>0.05). We were unable to detect significantComplex traits and polygenic disorders 0 differences (p>0.05) in the frequencies of TF C1/C2 genotypes and al- genes in the HLA system, specific susceptibility loci were unknown or leles between MS patients and controls, and we found no differences unconfirmed yet. In recent studies in some countries it has shown that in clinical parameters in carriers of the C2 allele. allelic association of polymorphisms in the gene encoding Interleukin 7 Our results indicate that C282Y mutation may be risk factor with re- receptor α chain (IL7Rα) is a significant risk factor in MS. In this study spect to MS susceptibility and probably a good predictor for early onset we investigated the expression and possible related haplotypes of five of MS. The possible protective effects of H63D polymorphisms was SNPs in IL7Rα gene with MS in a population from Iran. less pronounced. Regarding MS susceptibility or disease progression In this study we performed expression analysis of IL7Rα gene by no gene-gene interaction between HFE and TF could be established. semi quantitative RT-PCR in MS patients and controls using special designed primers to distinguish the expression level of soluble and P09.079 trans- membrane isoforms. In addition we did genotyping of three Association study of the interleukin-2/interleukin-2 receptor SNPs in promoter region and two SNPs in inside of the gene to figure alpha (iL2/iL2RA) system with multiple sclerosis out the possible haplotype patterns. Our result shows that the IL7Rα F. Matesanz1, M. Fedetz1, D. Ndagire1, A. Catalá-Rabasa1, Ó. Fernández2, A. expression of soluble isoform is higher than trans-membrane isoform Alcina1; in MS patients in compare to control group. Our data also indicated 1Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López Neyra, CSIC, Armilla/Granada, that some special haplotypes are more frequent in MS patients than Spain, 2Hospital Carlos Haya, Málaga, Spain. to controls. IL2/IL2RA system is involved in T helper and T suppressor cell activ- ity and has a major role in the immune response and in the control of P09.082 autoimmunity. It has been reported association of the IL2 and IL2RA TNF-α promoter polymorphisms in multiple sclerosis: no loci with several diseases as type 1 diabetes (T1D), celiac disease and association with -308 and 238 alleles, but the -857 alleles in multiple sclerosis (MS) in independent studies. This overlap of risk loci associated with the disease in turkish patients among autoimmune diseases raises the possibility of sharing common A. Akcali1, S. Pehlivan2, M. Pehlivan3, T. Sever2, P. Akgul1, M. Neyal1; or distinct pathological mechanism that has to be deciphered. We per- 1Gaziantep University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Gazian- formed a case-control association study in MS with 805 patients and tep, Turkey, 2Gaziantep University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 952 matched Caucasian controls from the South of Spain with several Biology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3Gaziantep University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- polymorphisms in these loci. We have found differences between the ment of Hematology, Gaziantep, Turkey. polymorphisms associated and risk alleles among all of them. Our re- Dysregulation in the expression of pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines sults replicate and extend the association found in the IL2/IL2RA loci is one of the milestones in multiple sclerosis (MS) development and with MS. These differences with other diseases may reflect distinct progression. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF- α), a proinflammatory cy- roles that such gene variants may have in these pathologies. tokine is believed to play an important role in MS pathogenesis. The objective of this study is to investigate the association between TNF-α P09.080 promoter region (TNF-α -238, -308 and -857) and susceptibility to MS interferon regulatory factor 5 (iRF5) gene variants are associated and clinical course of the disease.Eighty six relapsing remitting MS with multiple sclerosis in three distinct populations patients and 150 sex, age and ethnic matched controls were enrolled C. Wang1, G. Kristjansdottir1, J. K. Sandling1, A. Bonetti2, I. M. Roos3, L. Milani1, in the study. Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP method. A. Syvänen1; We observed a statistically significant increase in TNF-α 857 CC gen- 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Helsinki University, Helsinki, Finland, otype in MS patients than controls (p<0.001) while TNF--α 857 CT 3Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. genotype showed a significant negative correlation with MS patients Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory disorder that mainly dam- (p=0.033). No differences in the distribution of the TNF-α 238 and 308 ages the central nervous system. Here we investigated whether this alleles were observed. None of the three polymorphisms (-238,-308,- disease would be associated with the variants of interferon regulatory 857) did not show relation with disease duration, EDSS or age of on- factor 5 (IRF5) gene, which encodes a transcription factor involving set. On the other hand significant difference of TNF-857 CC genotype both in the type I interferon and the toll-like receptor signaling path- was identified with the low disease index (p=0.025). ways. In total nine single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and one Although the study group is small, the results indicate that TNF-α 857 insertion-deletion polymorphism (indel) in the IRF5 gene were geno- CC genotype may cause susceptibility to MS in the Turkish popula- typed in a collection of 2337 patients with MS and 2813 controls from tion. three populations: two case-control cohorts from Spain and Sweden, and a set of MS trio families from Finland. Two SNPs (rs4728142, P09.083 rs3807306), as well as the 5 bp indel located in the promoter and musical aptitude and creativity in music are associated with first intron of the IRF5 gene, showed association signals with values AVPR1A-haplotypes of p<0.001 when the data from all cohorts were combined. The pre- I. E. Järvelä1, L. T. Ukkola1, P. Onkamo1, P. Raijas2, K. Karma2; disposing alleles were present on the same common haplotype in all 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Sibelius Academy, Helsinki, Finland. populations. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays we observed Artistic creativity forms the basis of music culture and music industry. allele specific differences in protein binding for the SNP rs4728142 Composing, improvising and arranging music are complex creative and the 5 bp indel, and by a proximity ligation assay we demonstrated functions of the human brain, which biological value remains unknown. increased binding of the transcription factor SP1 to the risk allele of the We hypothesized that practicing music is social communication that 5 bp indel. These findings add IRF5 to the list of genes shown to be needs musical aptitude and even creativity in music. We analyzed associated with MS. As IRF5 has already been revealed to be related polymorphisms of the arginine vasopressin receptor 1A (AVPR1A), to several diseases with features of autoimmunity, our study adds to serotonin transporter (SLC6A4), catecol-O-methyltranferase (COMT), the evidence the type I interferon system is likely to be involved in the dopamin receptor D2 (DRD2) and tyrosine hydroxylase 1 (TPH1), development of these diseases. genes associated with social bonding and cognitive functions in 19 Finnish families (n=343 members) with professional musicians and/or P09.081 active amateurs. All family members were tested for musical aptitude common single nucleotide polymorphisms in the interleukin- using the auditory structuring ability test (Karma Music test; KMT) and 7receptor α gene and their associations with variable expression Carl Seashores tests for pitch (SP) and for time (ST). Data on creativity of IL7R α in Iranian population of multiple sclerosis patients in music (composing, improvising and/or arranging music) was sur- M. Heidari1, M. Behmanesh1, M. Sahraiyan2; veyed using a web-based questionnaire. 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical School We show that creative functions in music have a strong genetic com- of Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ponent (h2 =.84; composing h2 =.40; arranging h2 =.46; improvising Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an enigmatic disease of the central nervous h2 = .46) and that high music test scores are associated with creative system resulting in sclerotic plaques with the pathological hallmarks functions in music (p<.0001). We discovered a significant haplotype of demyelination and axonal damage. Susceptibility to MS involves association with AVPR1A and KMT (p=0.0008), and combined music a genetically complex autoimmune component. However, except for scores (COMB) (p=0.0056), ST (p= 0.0038) and COMB (p=0.0083)Complex traits and polygenic disorders  using HBAT. AVPR1A alleles and haplotypes were also associated with P09.086 composing (p=0.0351), improvising (p=0.0364) and arranging music maternal mtHFR polymorphisms do not predispose to neural (p=0.0334). Serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4: promoter region 5- tube defects in india HTTLPR) was highly associated with COMB (p=0.0084). The results K. G. Godbole1, T. Gayathri2, P. Smitha2, S. Ghule1, N. Memane1, A. Kanitkar1, suggest that the neurobiology of music perception and production is G. R. Chandak2, N. Oza3, J. Sheth3, I. Amithkumar4, S. Suresh4, C. S. Yajnik1; related to the pathways affecting intrinsic attachment behavior impor- 1K.E.M. Hospital and Research Center, Pune, India, 2Center For Cellular and tant in evolution. Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India, 3Foundation for Research In Genetics and Endocrinology, Ahmedabad, India, 4Fetal Care Research Foundation, Chennai, P09.084 India. No association of oestrogen receptor gene polymorphisms with MTHFR polymorphisms C677T and A1298C are reported to predis- myasthenia gravis pose to neural tube defects (NTDs) in the western world. We studied Z. Pal1,2, A. Gál1, V. Reményi1, K. Pentelényi1, M. J. Molnár1; the association of these SNPs in 175 Indian women who carried fe- 1Clinical and Research Centre for Molecular Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, tuses affected with NTDs and 332 unaffected fetuses (control). We 2Department of Genetics Cell- and Immunobiology, Budapest, Hungary. also measured maternal plasma folate, vitamin B12 and homocysteine Objective: Myasthenia Gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disease that ef- concentrations. Folate deficiency was observed only in 6% of mothers fects women more often than men, implying that sex hormones may who carried NTD fetuses. There was no association of maternal MTH- play a role in its pathogenesis. Our aim was to investigate the possible FR SNPs with plasma folate, vitamin B12 or homocysteine concentra- role of oestrogene in the pathomechanism of MG by elavulating the tions in cases, while in controls; TT genotype at C677T was associated association of oestrogene receptor (OR) polymorphisms in MG. with significantly higher homocysteine concentrations. Methods: PvuII and XbaI restriction fragment polymorphisms of the Frequency of the risk allele T at the C677T polymorphism was 0.13 in OR gene were analyzed in 33 male and 130 female MG patients and mothers with NTD fetuses and 0.14 in controls, while that of the risk 40 male and 134 female healthy controls. The distribution of OR geno- allele C at the A1298C polymorphism was 0.36 in mothers with NTD types was compared between the MG patients and the healthy control fetuses and 0.47 in controls. group. MG patients were divided into groups according to their OR The 677T allele in mothers was not associated with NTDs in the off- genotypes, then their AchR antibody status and age of onset and were spring (p=0.68) while the 1298C allele was more frequent in mothers compared between the groups. who had unaffected offspring (p=0.002). 1298C allele was noted to be Results: The OR genotype frequency of distribution did not show any preferentially transmitted from mother to offspring in 75% of cases and significant differences either between male MG patients and male con- 80% of controls, while 677T allele was preferentially transmitted from trols or female patients and female controls. No association was found mother to offspring in 60% of cases and 56% of controls. There was between the OR status and the age of onset or AchR antibody positiv- no significant association between the above MTHFR polymorphisms ity in either of the genders. and NTDs in the offspring. Conclusion: Though a larger patient sample is needed, our results Our results suggest that the MTHFR polymorphisms which predispose suggest, that OR status does not influence MG age of onset or AchR to NTDs in the western populations have limited contribution to the antibody seropositivity. etiology of NTDs in India. P09.085 P09.087 Association of the sPiNK5 gene genotypes and haplotypes with the common MTHFR c677t and A1298c variants are not nasal polyposis associated with the risk of non-syndromic cleft lip/palate in F. Belpinati1, C. Bombieri1, G. Malerba1, S. Gambardella2, M. D’Apice2, C. Cor- northern Venezuela radini3, G. Novelli2, P. Pignatti1; M. A. Sözen1,2, M. M. Tolarova3, R. A. Spritz2; 1Section of Biology and Genetic, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Depart- 1Afyon Kocatepe University School of Medicine, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Uni- ment of Biopathology, and Diagnostic Imaging, Tor Vergata University, Rome, versity of Colorado Denver Human Medical Genetics Program, Aurora, CO, Italy, 3Department of Otolaryngology, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, United States, 3University of the Pacific Department of Orthodontics, San Fran- Rome, Italy. cisco, CA, United States. Nasal polyps (NP) are lesions that emanate from nasal mucosa or Non-syndromic cleft lip with/without palate (nsCL/P) is among the most paranasal sinuses, caused by inflammation, related to dysregulation common of major birth defects, with a frequency of 1/500-1/2000 in of epithelial cell proliferation. NP incidence is higher in cystic fibro- most populations and with complex inheritance probably involving mul- sis (CF) patients than in general population (35-45% vs 1-4%) and is tiple genes and environmental factors. Numerous studies of MTHFR, one of the major otolaryngological CF manifestations, but no particular encoding methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase, which catalyzes the CFTR gene mutation was found associated with NP in CF patients. rate-limiting step of folic acid biosynthesis, have yielded inconsistent In an our previous study the D386N-SNP in SPINK5 gene was found association of two common hypomorphic allelic variants, C677T and associated with NP in CF patients.The aim of this study was to de- A1298C. Some showed apparent allelic association between MTHFR termine if SPINK5 variants could modulate the development of NP in polymorphisms and nsCL/P in patients versus controls, and others CF patients. Five SNPs, representative of SPINK5 LD blocks, were finding no or variable association. Other studies have reported asso- selected and analysed in 4 groups of subjects: 79 nonCF subjects ciation in mothers of patients with nsCL/P. Also, contribution of moth- with NP and 39 CF patients with NP, 104 CF patients without NP and ers genotype to the risk of nsCL/P has been reported. We have studied 101 controls. All CF patients have two CFTR severe mutations. Allele the two common functionally significant MTHFR variants, C677T and and genotype frequency and HW equilibrium were calculated for each A1298C, in nsCL/P patients (n=179), their mothers (n=168), and popu- polymorphism. An association analysis between either single SNP or lation-matched controls (n=138) from northern Venezuela. We found 5 SNPs of the SPINK5 gene and the NP was carriedout. Haplotype no supporting evidence for contribution of both the MTHFR C677T and analyses were also computed. A1298C polymorphisms to the risk of non-syndromic cleft lip with/with- A significant association between rs6892205 and NP was found in al- out palate in the population studied. Altogether, our data do not support most all the analyses performed (p: 0.005-0.01) while association of a causal role of either the MTHFR C677T or A1298C polymorphisms D386N was limited to CF group only (p=0.001). A preferential associa- in the pathogenesis of non-syndromic cleft lip with/without palate risk tion with NP was also confirmed by the haplotype analysis (p: 0.0015- in northern Venezuela. 0.015). These data support the association of SPINK5 gene with NP. It is possible to suppose for SPINK5 gene a role in the inflammatory P09.088 process involved in the pathogenesis of NP. Influence of main, interaction and modified effects of NET, ADRA2A and cOmt gene polymorphisms on personality traits in healthy individuals A. Kazantseva1, G. Faskhutdinova1, D. Gaysina2, E. Khusnutdinova1; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Acad- emy of Sciencies, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2MRC Unit for Lifelong Health andComplex traits and polygenic disorders  Ageing, London, United Kingdom. P09.090 Since psychobiological model of personality was proposed by Clon- Genes and lifestyle factors in obesity: results from 14,000 inger, interest of scientific groups has been focused on neurotransmit- subjects from KORA ter system genes. We aimed to define a single genotype effect of NET C. Holzapfel1, H. Grallert2, C. Huth2, S. Wahl2, B. Fischer2, A. Döring2, I. M. 1287A/G, ADRA2A -1291C/G and COMT Val158Met polymorphisms Rückert2, A. Hinney3, J. Hebebrand3, H. Wichmann2, H. Hauner1, T. Illig2, I. M. and to check possible epistatic effect between them and personality Heid2; traits (assessed with the EPI and TCI questionnaires). 1Else Kröner-Fresenius-Center for Nutritional Medicine, Technical University We recruited 652 healthy individuals (men-222, women-430) of Cau- Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum casian origin (Russians-233, Tatars-419) from Russia (mean age: Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, 19.53±2.24 years). Genotyping of 3 polymorphisms was performed Germany, 3Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Rheinische Kliniken using PCR-RFLP. The main, interaction and modified effects of gene Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. polymorphisms, gender and ethnicity on personality traits were detect- Background: Data from meta-analyses of genome-wide association ed under multiple regression (MR) analyses (SPSS 13.0). studies provided evidence that genetic variants are associated with While conducting MR analyses, the main effect of ethnicity (P<0.0001) body mass index (BMI). For most of these genes, expression results on variations in Extraversion, ADRA2A -1291C/G (P=0.028) and eth- indicated a neural role. The aim of our study was to investigate these nicity (P<0.0001) on Neuroticism, gender (P<0.0001) and ethnicity loci in a homogenous population-based study not only for their associ- (P=0.002) on Novelty Seeking, NET 1287A/G (P=0.007) and gender ation with BMI and percentage body fat, but also with lifestyle factors. (P=0.037) on Harm Avoidance, gender (P<0.0001) on Reward Depen- Methods: 7,080 women and 6,977 men from the population-based dence, NET 1287A/G (P=0.047) on Persistence was observed. More- KORA study were genotyped for polymorphisms in or near the genes over, epistatic effect of gene-gene and gene-environment interaction being associated with BMI (e.g. FTO, MC4R, TMEM18, SH2B1). Nutri- was established: ADRA2A*NET*COMT*ethnicity*gender interaction tional parameters (carbohydrate and fat intake scores), physical activ- (P=0.026) and ADRA2A*gender*ethnicity modified effect (P<0.0001) ity scores, smoking behaviour, and alcohol consumption were derived explained 0.9% and 8% of variance in Neuroticism correspond- from detailed questionnaires. For statistical analysis, regression-based ingly; ADRA2A*COMT interaction (P=0.024) explained 1.3% of vari- models were used. ance in Novelty Seeking; ADRA2A*COMT interaction (P=0.005) and Results: The minor allele of polymorphism rs1558902 (T>A) in the FTO NET*gender*ethnicity modified effect (P=0.001) corresponded to 1.7% gene was associated with higher BMI (p=1.37x10-7) and percentage and 2.4% of variance in Harm Avoidance accordingly; COMT*ethnicity body fat (p=0.0002). Also polymorphism rs6548238 within TMEM18 interaction (P=0.004) explained 1.4% of variance in Reward Depen- gene was associated with BMI (T allele -0.42 kg/m², p=1.22x10-8) and dence. percentage body fat (T allele -0.41%, p=0.0002). For lifestyle factors, Our findings indicate that noradrenergic system genes have larger no significant association with any of the analysed DNA variants was impact on anxiety-related traits than on Reward Dependence.Study observed after adjustment for multiple testing. Accordingly, the asso- was supported by Russian foundation for humanities grant (08-06- ciation between genotypes and BMI was not influenced by taking life- 00579a). style factors as a covariate into the model. Similar results were found for other genes and polymorphisms. P09.089 Conclusion: In our homogenous large population-based study previ- Genotypes-by-nutrient associations of common polymorphisms ously detected obesity associated genes were significantly associated in obesity-related genes within the czech population with BMI and percentage body fat. There is no evidence for an asso- J. A. Bienertova Vasku1, P. Bienert1, M. Forejt2, J. Tomandl3, M. Vavrina1, J. ciation of any of these polymorphisms with lifestyle factors. Kudelkova1, M. Chmelikova1, K. Heczkova2, Z. Piskackova2, L. Kucerova2, Z. Brazdova2, A. Vasku1; P09.091 1Masaryk University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathological Physiol- the Gln241His polymorphism in the carbohydrate response ogy, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- element binding protein (mLXiPL) gene is associated with ment of Preventive Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk University, Fac- fasting triglyceride concentrations and Bmi in a mediterranean ulty of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Brno, Czech Republic. population INTRODUCTION: The personal food preferences can either enhance C. Ortega-Azorin1, P. Carrasco1, J. Sorli1, O. Coltell2, E. M. Asensio1, C. Luna1, or suppress the development of obesity and the selection and propor- J. I. Gonzalez1, D. Corella1; tion of macronutrients in the diet seems to have a heritable component. 1CIBER OBN-University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 2Jaume I University, Cas- In this study, we therefore focused on dietary composition as a specific tellon, Spain. trait related to obesity and we determined, whether genetic variations In a recent genome-wide association study, we participated in the in leptin (LEP), leptin receptor (LEPR), ghrelin (GHRL), adiponectin identification for the first time of a new locus associated with plasma (ADIPOQ), interleukin 6 (IL6), proopiomelanocortin (POMC) and mela- triglyceride concentrations. This loci was at 7q11 near TBL2 (trans- nocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) underlie specific native food preferences ducin (beta)-like 2) and MLXIPL (MLX interacting protein-like or car- and obesity-realated anthropometric parameters. bohydrate response element binding protein) genes. Further studies METHODS: The total of 409 individuals of Czech Caucasian origin identified a nonsynonymous SNP (rs3812316, G771C, Gln241His) were enrolled into this study and the 7-day food records and parallel in the MLXIPL gene as the SNP most significantly associated with 7-day records of physical activity were obtained from the study subject plasma triglycerides. Moreover, its has been suggested that MLXIPL as well as anthropometric measurements. In a subset of study sub- is a thrifty gene because the wild-type variant may permit more ef- jects, plasma levels of adiponectin, leptin and soluble leptin receptor ficient food utilization, fat deposition and rapid weight gain at times were measured. of food abundance. Therefore our aims were to study the association RESULTS: Independenty on the BMI of the individuals, common varia- between the Gln241His in the MLXIPL gene with fasting triglycerides tions in leptin and leptin receptor genes were associated with specific and obesity-related variables in a high cardiovascular risk Mediterra- eating patterns, mainly with respect to timing of eating. Diastolic blood nean population. pressure was significantly associated with the common variation in the We analyzed 1002 high cardiovascular risk individuals from the PRE- leptin receptor gene as well as with the ratio of soluble leptin receptor DIMED-Valencia Study. Participants (men and women aged 67y) were and leptin plasma levels. In multivariate analysis, common variations free of CVD and had type 2 diabetes (45%), or three or more CVD risk in LEP, LEPR, POMC and MC4R genes expressed an independent factors. Genetic, clinical, biochemical, anthropometric and life-style prediction role for percentage of body fat. data were determined. DISCUSSION: To conclude, we report common allelic variants asso- Prevalence of the MLXIPL genotypes were: 85.4% CC, 13.7% GC, ciated with specific feeding behaviour and obesity-related anthropo- 0.9% GG (allele frequencies, C=0.923 and G=0.077). Plasma triglyc- metric traits. Moreover, we identified allelic variants that significantly eride concentrations were significantly lower in carriers of the G al- influence time structure of food intake during the day. lele (P=0.012). Interestingly, we found a consistent association of the SNP with lower BMI. In terms of weight, we observed a gene-dosage decreasing effect of this polymorphism: 78+/-13 kg (CC), 75+/-12 kgComplex traits and polygenic disorders  (CG), 66+/-19 kg (GG); P=0.004. This decrease in body-weight in G- problems around the world, related to the general aging of societies, allele carriers was observed in both men and women. with improvement in preventive health and delay in mortality. Fracture, the clinical outcome of osteoporosis, is also dependent on genetic fac- P09.092 tors, with a heritability of about 25-35%. The objective of the pres- serotonergic polymorphisms in childhood onset Obsessive ent study was to describe genetic epidemiological aspects of osteo- compulsive Disorder porosis, as family history may predict the disease risk in otherwise Z. Nemoda1, E. Kenezloi2, Z. Tarnok2, J. Gadoros2, M. Sasvari-Szekely1; healthy women. 62 patients were studied, mean age of 51 years, just 1Institute of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry, Bu- before or soon after menopause. 2/3 of the women who had mothers dapest, Hungary, 2Vadaskert Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinic, Budapest, with osteoporosis developed this disease too, which proves that the Hungary. maternal parent with osteoporosis represents an important risk fac- Childhood onset Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) has substan- tor, unfortunately not possible to influence. About 1/3 of these women tial genetic background. The symptoms are likely to evolve as a result had vertebral osteoporosis, half of them having 1 or more vertebral of interactions of adverse environmental factors and predisposing ge- fractures. Osteoporosis was developed in more than 2/3 of the cases netic factors. Hitherto, only the long-allele of the serotonin transporter in which menopause was settled before the age of 45. Thus, settling of gene promoter polymorphism has been indicated as potential risk menopause before this age is a very important cause for the release factor for OCD. In the present study we aimed to investigate genetic of physiopathological mechanisms of osteoporosis. A parental history polymorphisms in the serotonin transporter, tryptophan hydroxylase 2 of fracture confers an increased risk of fracture that is independent of (TPH2), and serotonin 1A and 1B receptor genes. bone mineral density, suggesting that there is another shared compo- Clinical diagnosis of 115 OCD patients was obtained by the DSM-IV nent, which influences bone fragility. These results provide an initial criteria, for symptom assessment the Children’s Yale-Brown Obses- epidemiological profile for osteoporosis and fracture risk besides infor- sive Compulsive Scale was administered. Anxiety or mood disorder mation useful for genetic counseling. was present in 38%, and 48% of the children had comorbid tics. Vari- able number of tandem repeats in the serotonin transporter gene P09.095 (5HTTLPR in the promoter region, STin2 in the second intron) and Genetic associations of the antioxidative enzyme glutathione single nucleotide polymorphisms in the TPH2 and serotonin recep- peroxidase 1 with low bone mineral density in men tor genes were studied. Allele- and genotype-frequencies of the OCD S. Jurković Mlakar1, J. Osredkar1, J. Prezelj2, J. Marc3; clinical group as well as subgroups of OCD with/without tics or anxiety 1Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Biochemistry, University Medical disorder were compared to a sex matched (77.2% male and 22.8% Centre Ljubljana, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Endocrinology, female) control group. Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, 1000 The serotonin transporter polymorphisms were associated with OCD, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Department for Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, more specifically with the OCD + anxiety disorder subgroup. Geno- 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. type frequency of the STin2 was significantly different when the anxiety Glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPX1) is an important antioxidant enzyme present OCD group was compared to the anxiety absent OCD group in humans. It protects human body from negative effects of reactive or to the control group (p = 0.04, and p = 0.05, respectively). In addi- oxygen species. Recently, oxidative stress has been suggested to par- tion, increased SL genotype frequency of 5HTTLPR could be detected ticipate in the development of osteoporosis. Osteoblasts can produce in this subgroup. antioxidants such as GPX1 to protect against reactive oxygen spe- This work was supported by OTKA-F67784. cies. The aims of this study were to determine frequencies of genotypes of P09.093 GPX1 genetic polymorphisms and to associate with low bone mineral AXIN contributes to cleft lip and palate in multiple populations density (BMD) and concentration of plasma osteocalcin of 115 men, R. Menezes, M. L. Marazita, M. E. Cooper, T. G. McHenry, K. Bardi, C. Bran- aged 67,96 ± 6,01 years. Each patient was examined clinically with the don, A. Letra, R. A. Martin, A. R. Vieira; measurement of BMD and concentration of plasma osteocalcin. University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States. PCR was used to amplify two fragments in coding regions of the gene Cancer and congenital malformations occasionally may have a com- GPX1 to determine polyalanine regions of 5, 6 and 7 trinuclotide re- mon etiology. We have recently demonstrated that families segregat- peats using the DHPLC method and Pro198Leu polymorphism using ing oral clefts present a higher incidence of family history of cancer RFLP method. and that AXIN2, a gene that when mutated increases susceptibility The frequencies of genotypes of 115 men subjects were as follows: to colon cancer, was associated with cleft lip with or without cleft pal- 5/5 (27,8%), 5/6 (19,1%), 5/7 (22,6%), 6/6 (9,6%), 6/7 (13,9%), 7/7 ate (CL/P) in a US population. In this study, we genotyped 484 fami- (7,0%) for the polyalanine repeats and CC (54,8%), CT (35,7%), TT lies with more than two affected cleft individuals from North America (9,6%) for Pro198Leu polymorphism. The genotype 6/7 is significantly (USA), Europe (Spain, Hungary and Turkey), Asia (China and India) associated with a higher BMD value of femoral neck and total hip than and central America (Guatemala) to test for association with AXIN2. the 5/5, 5/6, 5/7 and 6/6 genotypes (p<0,04). The borderline significant TaqMan chemistry was used to generate genotype data in four SNP difference between CC and CT genotypes of Pro198Leu and BMD of markers and alleles at each AXIN2 SNP were tested for transmission total hip was detected (p=0,052). Moreover, no significant associations distortion with CL/P using the Family-Based Association Test (FBAT). with plasma osteocalcin concentrations were determined. We tested each population individually and pooled for all populations The results show for the first time the significant association of the anti- as well as for Caucasian, Asian, and Hispanic subsets. AXIN2 markers oxidative genetic polymorphisms of GPX1 with the osteoporosis. were associated with CL/P in the U.S. group (p=0.01), in the Spanish cohort (p=0.04), and in the pooled dataset (p=0.02). The association P09.096 was more significant in the U.S. group when only cleft lip and pal- Evidence of Epistasis Between the catechol-O- ate individuals were considered in the analysis (p=0.003). Our results methyltransferase and Aldehyde Dehydrogenase 3B1 Genes in suggest that AXIN2 represents a component in the etiology of human Paranoid schizophrenia clefting. Q. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, Y. Fan, Y. Shen; Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. P09.094 Background: Schizophrenia is a common yet severe psychiatric condi- Identification of genetic risk factors for preventing osteoporosis- tion characterized by complex genetic mechanism and diverse clinical related fractures presentations. Our previous study indicated that the combined effect D. Stoicanescu1, M. Cevei2, V. Belengeanu1, E. Sirbu3, B. Almajan-Guta4; of two intronic single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which are lo- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, cated in the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and aldehyde de- 2Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 3West University, Ti- hydrogenase 3B1 (ALDH3B1) genes, respectively, conferred genetic misoara, Romania, 4University “Politehnica”, Timisoara, Romania. risk to paranoid schizophrenia. Osteoporosis is a polygenic disorder dependent on multiple genes and Methods: To further explore the precise mechanism of the COMT and environmental factors. It is one of the major and growing health care ALDH3B1 interaction involved in the pathophysiology of schizophre-Complex traits and polygenic disorders  nia, we scanned all possible functional SNPs within these two genes melweis University. PCR-RFLP and real-time PCR were applied to by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based genotyping analysis in genotype the PAI-1 4G/5G and five other polymorphisms required to 540 identify the AH8.1. paranoid schizophrenic patients and 660 control subjects from a Han Our data showed that septic shock was less frequent (p=0.092) in car- Chinese population. We also determined the effects of schizophrenia riers of the 8.1 haplotype and significantly less frequent (p=0.032) in associated SNPs on the development of psychotic symptoms, P300 carriers of the PAI-1 5G allele than in non-carriers. After adjusting for event-related potential components induced by an auditory odd-ball the main clinical parameters a significant protective effect of the AH8.1 task, and gene expression examined by quantitative real-time PCR was revealed (p=0.010). Analysing the two genetic factors together an analysis. additive association was found. Results: The major findings of this study were that, among the individu- These results indicated that the AH8.1 and the PAI-1 5G allele may als carrying the rs3751082 A allele in the ALDH3B1 gene, the rs4633 T have protective role in the progression of pneumonia-related sepsis. allele in the COMT gene was associated with susceptibility to paranoid schizophrenia (p=0.004), development of hallucination (p=5.141 E-5), P09.099 delay of P300 latency in both patients (p.006) and control subjects the X-linked DiAPH2 gene is a risk factor for Premature Ovarian (p=0.02), and increased expression of the COMT gene in control sub- Failure (POF) involved in actin dynamics of ovarian granulosa jects (p=0.002). However, the rs4633 T allele did not show any asso- cells ciation in the rs3751082 G/G genotype carriers. S. Carrabino1,2, S. Bione2,1, T. Corre1, S. Sansanelli1, F. Rizzolio1, R. Ricotti2, A. Conclusions: These findings provided convincing evidence that epista- Marozzi3, L. Persani3, P. Vogt4, D. Toniolo1,2, NIDO (Italian Network for the study sis between the COMT and ALDH3B1 genes plays an important role in of Ovarian Dysfunctions); the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. 1DIBIT-San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 2IGM-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 3University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Ger- P09.097 many. N-acetylation factor in the pathogenesis of pelvic organ prolapse Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is a complex disorder, resulting in (POP) primary or secondary amenorrhea before the age of 40 and affecting Y. A. Degtyareva1, T. E. Ivashchenko1, V. F. Bezhenar1, Y. A. Nasihova2; 1% of women. A genetic component of the disorder is demonstrated 1Ott`s Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St.Petersburg, by the prevalence of familial cases. The X-linked DIAPH2 gene was Russian Federation, 2St.Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian identified as interrupted by the breakpoint of a POF associated translo- Federation. cation. An association study performed in a large cohort of Italian POF More than half of women having children experience different form of patients and controls revealed the presence of a risk-haplotype sig- prolapse in their late adulthood. A number of studies are focused on the nificantly associated to the disorder. Significant association was also POP pathogenesis. Metabolic enzymatic activities contribute greatly to demonstrated in a cohort of German POF thus confirming the role of the POP genesis. We have hypothesized that the activity of N-acet- the gene as risk factor for POF. yltransferase-2 (NAT-2), a previously known factor for some gyneco- The Diaph2 protein belongs to a large family involved in actin cytoskel- logical pathology, could influence POP pathogenesis. Polymorphism eton remodeling. We investigated the role of Diaph2 in actin dynamics of NAT-2 gene (NAT2*4 (N), NAT2*11A (S1), NAT2*6B (S2), NAT2*7A of human ovarian follicles by eliminating its function by RNAi. We used (S3)) was detected by PCR in 70 POP patients (age 51,7 ± 9,8) and granulosa cell line (COV434) and primary cells, able to respond to hor- in population sample from Northwest region of Russia (89 individuals). monal stimulation. In COV434 expressing Diaph2, actin cytoskeleton Patients demonstrated different stages of POP: 31,4%- stage I, 34,3% forms long filopodia distributed along the cell surface. Diaph2 knock- - stage II, 28,6% - stage III and 5,7%- stage IV. In the patient group down caused a strong reduction in the number and in the length of frequency of N/N genotype was significantly lower (p =0,0015) and filopodia. In granulosa primary cells, treatment with follicle stimulating frequency of homo- and heterozygous mutant alleles was significantly hormone (FSH) induced changes in cell morphology and cell-to-cell higher (p=0,0466), compared to the population data. Interestingly, the interactions. This process was abolished when RNAi depleted Diaph2. frequency of S2 allele was significantly higher (p<0,0001) in the patient These results suggest that Diaph2 is involved in actin-mediated cyto- group. Individuals from both patient and population group, having at skeleton reorganization occurring after hormonal stimulation. Further least one N allele, were considered “rapid” acetylators and the rest as studies are in progress to elucidate the molecular mechanisms acting “slow” acetylators. According to our results, the rate of “slow” acety- in follicle cells in response to FSH stimulation in which Diaph2 could lators was higher among patients when compared to the population exert its function. control. Thus, prevalence of mutated alleles among the POP patients supports our idea that the factor of “slow” N-acetylation may have an P09.100 important role in POP pathogenesis. Deletion of LcE3c and LcE3B Genes at PsORs4 Does Not contribute to susceptibility to Psoriatic Arthritis in German P09.098 Patients Analysis of the 8.1 ancestral haplotype and the PAi-1 4G/5G U. Hüffmeier1, X. Estivill2,3, E. Riveira-Munoz2, H. Traupe4, J. Wendler5, J. promoter polymorphism in pneumonia-related sepsis Lohmann6, B. Böhm7, H. Burkhardt7, A. Reis1; I. Aladzsity1, K. Madách2, Á. Szilágyi1, J. Laki1, Z. Prohászka1, G. Füst1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 2Cen- 13rd Department of Internal Medicine, Research Laboratory, Semmelweis Uni- tre for Genomic Regulation (CRG) and Public Health and Epidemiology Net- versity, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Therapy work Biomedical Research Center (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain, 3Pompeu Clinic, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. Fabra University (UPF), Barcelona, Spain, 4Department of Dermatology, Uni- Sepsis is the main cause of death in the intensive care units, that is versity of Münster, Münster, Germany, 5Rheumatologische Schwerpunktpraxis, initiated by infection and is characterized by a systemic inflammatory Erlangen, Germany, 6Psoriasis rehabilitation hospital, Bad Bentheim, Germany, response. Numerous family-based studies suggest the importance of 7Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine II, Johann Wolf- genetic factors in the pathophysiology of sepsis. gang Goethe University, Frankfurt/ M., Germany. The acute-phase protein, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is a PSORS4 is a susceptibility locus for psoriasis vulgaris (PsV), a com- key element in the inhibition of fibrinolysis and activated protein C. The mon inflammatory, hyperproliferative skin disorder. Recently, a deletion 4G/5G promoter polymorphism affecting the transcription of PAI-1 has of two late cornified envelope (LCE) genes within epidermal differen- been related to the outcome of sepsis in many studies. tiation complex on chromosome 1 was shown to be enriched in 1,426 The 8.1 ancestral haplotype (AH8.1) is the most frequent haplotype of PsV patients, suggesting compromised barrier function in deletion car- the major histocompatibility complex region in the Caucasian popula- riers. We subsequently confirmed this genetic association in a German tion. Our workgroup has recently reported that this haplotype is associ- cohort. In order to investigate whether this variant also predisposes to ated with delayed onset of bacterial colonization in cystic fibrosis. psoriatic arthritis (PsA), we genotyped this deletion in a case-control To evaluate the role of AH8.1 and PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism in pneu- cohort of 650 patients and 937 control individuals of German origin. monia-related sepsis, we investigated 207 patients who were treated LCE deletion frequency did not significantly differ between PsA patients in the Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Therapy Clinic, Sem- and controls (65.0 % vs. 65.5 %). Similarly, no evidence for associationComplex traits and polygenic disorders  to three SNPs in strong linkage disequilibrium with the deletion was when only B27 negative cases and controls were analyzed. observed. This is the first risk factor predisposing only to skin-type of Conclusion The present study shows no departure from HWE in PsA psoriasis supporting the concept of partially overlapping, but different patients in Romania, and no potential association of any investigated etiological factors underlying skin and joint manifestations. allele with the susceptibility to this disease, although a larger number of patients may be required to verify this conclusion. P09.101 References: High-resolution association mapping in the mHc region 1.Goupille P., Joint Bone Spine 2005;72:466-470 identifies multiple independent loci for psoriatic arthritis 2.Seitz M et al., Rheumatology 2007; 46:93-96 P. Rahman1, N. Roslin2, F. Pellett3, A. Paterson2, J. Beyene4, M. Lemire5, L. 3.Rahman P et al., Ann. Rheum. Dis. 2006; 65:919-923 Peddle1, A. Pope1, C. Greenwood3, D. Gladman3; 1Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NL, Canada, 2Program in P09.103 Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children Research Insti- Autoimmune-associated LYP-W620 variant reduces t cell tute, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Toronto Western Hospital, University of Toronto, activation by altering a recirpocal feedback mechanism Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Child Health and Evaluative Science, The Hospital for E. Fiorillo1,2, V. Orrù1,3, Y. Liu1, S. Stanford1, M. Salek4, N. Rapini5, L. Delogu1, Sick Children Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Informatics and Bio- P. Saccucci5, F. Angelini5, M. Manca Bitti5, M. C. Rosatelli6, O. Acuto7, N. Bot- computing, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada. tini1; Objectives: To identify SNPs in the MHC region which are associated 1Institute for Genetic Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2Dept. of Bio- with PsA using a high density map. medical Science and Biotechnology, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 3Dept. Methods: 909 individuals (422 cases and 487 controls) were genotyped of Biomedical Science, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 4Sir William Dunn for 2299 SNPs in a 5 Mb region on chromosome 6 encompassing the School of Pathology, Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Dept. of Bio- MHC region, using Illumina’s MHC Panel Set. The patients were from pathology, Division of Pediatrics, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, two well established centers with an expertise in PsA. A stratified case/ 6Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Università degli Studi control analysis was conducted on each SNP separately to test for al- di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 7Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, Università di lelic association with PsA. A Breslow-Day test was used to determine if Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. the odds ratio estimates differed between the two populations. A missense C1858T single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the Results: 17 SNPs from 13 regions were associated with PsA (p-values PTPN22 gene recently emerged as a major risk factor for human auto- < 10-5); we report the results for these SNPs, noting their location rela- immunity. PTPN22 encodes the lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase LYP, tive to genes, and their linkage disequilibrium (LD, based on r2) with which forms a complex with the kinase Csk and is a critical negative each other. SNPs rs2734922 (between HLA-H and HLA-A), rs1150735 regulator of signaling through the T cell receptor (TCR). The C1858T (between RNF39 and TRIM31), rs11965214 (KIAA1949), rs3130933 SNP results in the LYP-R620W variation within the LYP-Csk interaction (between TCF19 and POU5F1), rs879882 and rs887468 (both be- motif. LYP-W620 exhibits a greatly reduced interaction with Csk and tween POU5F1 and HGC27), rs2523619 and rs2442719 (both be- is a gain-of-function inhibitor of signaling. Here we show that LYP con- tween HLA-C and HLA-B; the latter tags HLA-C*0802), rs6936035 (be- stitutively interacts with its substrate Lck in a Csk-dependent manner. tween HLA-B and MICA) and rs2516470 (between MICA and HCP5) TCR-induced phosphorylation of LYP by Lck on an inhibitory tyrosine were associated with PsA, however, none were in strong pairwise LD. residue releases tonic inhibition of signaling by LYP. The R620W varia- In a subset of controls who have also been genotyped for HLA-Cw6, tion disrupts the interaction between Lck and LYP, leading to reduced we observed that rs12191877 and rs3906272 are in LD with this allele phosphorylation of LYP and ultimately to gain-of-function inhibition of (r2=0.69 and 0.60, respectively). T cell signaling. Conclusions: Multiple regions within the MHC are associated with PsA and pairwise LD information suggests that the majority of these signals P09.104 are independent. PTPN gene polymorphism in autoimmune endocrine diseases M. Fichna1, M. Żurawek1, J. Nowak1, P. Fichna2, D. Januszkiewicz1,2; P09.102 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, TNFα promoter polymorphisms in psoriatic arthritis patients in Poznan, Poland. Romania Autoimmune destruction of glandular cells is the main reason of type O. M. Popa1, C. Ciofu2, M. Dutescu3, M. Bojinca2, R. Sfrent-Cornateanu1, V. 1 diabetes (T1DM) and Addison’s disease (AAD). Both diseases pres- Bojinca4, M. Milicescu5, C. Bara1, L. Popa6; ent complex genetic background, with prominent role of predisposing 1Department of Immunology and Physiopathology, University of Medicine and polymorphisms in genes involved in immune reaction. Intriguing candi- Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania, 2Department of Rheumatology date is PTPN22 gene, which encodes lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase and Internal Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bu- LYP. Aim of study was to analyse associations of PTPN22 G(-1123)C charest, Romania, 3National Hematology Institute Prof. C.T. Nicolau, Bucharest, and C1858T polymorphisms with susceptibility to T1DM and AAD in Romania, 4Department of Rheumatology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Polish population. Study comprised 215 T1DM patients (120 females Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania, 5University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol and 95 males) and 87 with AAD (65 females and 22 males), compared Davila, Bucharest, Romania, 6Molecular Biology Department, Grigore Antipa to 236 control subjects (133 females and 103 males). Mean age of National Museum of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania. disease onset was 8.3 (±4.3) years for T1DM and 35.2 (±11.5) years Background Tumour necrosis factor α (TNFα) is a proinflammatory for AAD. No difference was found in distribution of G(-1123)C polymor- cytokine of critical importance in psoriatic arthritis (PsA) due to his phism between T1DM patients and controls, whereas the same anal- high levels in synovial membrane and fluid and by the efficiency of ysis in AAD subjects revealed slightly higher frequency of C(-1123) anti-TNFα treatments in PsA patients [1, 2]. Genetic studies of TNFα allele (p=0.052). C(-1123) allele was significantly more frequent only polymorphisms in PsA have produced different results that may reflect in affected AAD males, than in controls (OR 2.79; 95%CI 1.39-5.56; differences in the ethnic background [3]. p=0.003). C1858T polymorphism in PTPN22 gene presented signifi- Objectives The aim of this study was to investigate two TNFα most cant association with T1DM (OR 1.73; 95%CI 1.19-2.51; p=0.004) and studied polymorphisms in PsA patients from Romania. AAD (OR 1.84; 95%CI 1.15-2.94; p=0.010). Association of T1858 al- Methods 45 unrelated well diagnosed patients with PsA (25/20 F/M) lele with T1DM remained significant for both genders, while in AAD and 109 healthy unrelated organ donors (46/63 F/M) were typed for patients it seemed restricted to male population (OR 2.89; 95%CI TNFα -308G/A (rs 1800629) and -238G/A (rs 361525) polymorphisms 1.24-6.76; p=0.011). The haplotype consisting of both mutant alleles, by TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay C_7514879_10 and C_2215707_ C(-1123)-T1858, was significantly more frequent in T1DM (p=0.003) 10 respectively (Applied Biosystems, USA). and in AAD (p=0.008) than in healthy controls. Results The observed genotypes for the TNFα-308G/A polymorphism Supported in part by Grant N402162533. (1AA, 6GA, 38GG in cases, respectively 4AA, 24GA, 79GG in controls) and for the TNFα-238G/A polymorphism (0AA, 5GA, 40GG in cases, respectively 0AA, 5GA, 102GG in controls) showed no departure from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE). The same results were obtainedComplex traits and polygenic disorders  P09.105 stood pregnancy) (n=37), and women with normal physiological preg- the positive association of +1858c>t polymorphism in PtPN22 nancy (n=83). No differences in the frequency of specific gene muta- gene with type 1 diabetes is replicated in Russian population. tions were detected when women with RM were compared with control E. Grineva, Y. Kudryashova, A. Kostareva, A. Kozyreva, V. Gryzina, E. Sh- women (p>0.05). Only homozygous genotype DD of the gene ACE lyakhto; was associated with RM (OR=2.67, 95%CI 1.11-6.48, p<0.048). The Almazov Federal Centre of Heart, Blood and Endocrinology, St. Petersburg, analysis of intergenic interactions of the studied polymorphic loci re- Russian Federation. vealed 3 two-factorial models of interaction: 1 model consists of two The nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) +1858C>T loci MTHFR A1298C and ACE I/D (p=0.006) and leads to formation within the PTPN22 gene coding the lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase of predisposition to spontaneous abortions; 2 - MTHFR A1298C and has been associated with type 1 diabetes and other autoimmune dis- ACE I/D (p=0.021), also conducts to the stood pregnancy; 3 - ACE I/D eases such as autoimmune thyroiditis, rheumatoid arthritis and lupus and FGB -455G/A (p=0.021), and, probably, causes burden obstet- erythematosus. In spite of the low frequency of this polymorphism ric anamnesis. Thus, interaction of studied polymorphic loci MTHFR its association with T1D has been confirmed in several populations. A1298C, FGB -455G/A and ACE I/D can play the important role in The aim of this study was to replicate type 1 diabetes association with formation of hereditary predisposition to development of thrombophilic +1858C>T SNP within the PTPN22 gene in Russian population. MA- conditions at RM. TERIAL AND METHODS: the study population included 150 children and adolescents with T1D and 250 unrelated healthy controls. The P09.108 rs2476601 in PTPN22 (C1858T) was genotyped using restriction frag- Genetic variation modifies the effect of ACE-inhibitor treatment: ment length polymorphism. RESULTS: We replicated for the first time a step towards personalized medication in a Russian population the association of the 1858T allele with an A. Isaacs1, J. J. Brugts1, E. Boersma1, A. H. J. Danser1, M. P. M. de Maat1, A. increased risk for T1D [ allele T vs. CC: OR (95%) = 1.6 (1.0-2.4); p = G. Uitterlinden1, J. C. M. Witteman1, C. M. van Duijn1, R. Ferrari2, K. Fox3, M. L. 0.002]. CONCLUSION: Our results provide further evidence that the Simoons1; +1858C>T polymorphism is primarily associated with type 1 diabetes 1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2University and represents a susceptibility factor in Russian population. of Ferrara and Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, Ferrara, Italy, 3Royal Brompton and National Heart Institute, London, United Kingdom. P09.106 The EUROPA trial demonstrated the efficacy of the ACE-inhibitor perin- sequencing of candidate genes in Rapid Eye movement sleep dopril in reducing the incidence of cardiovascular morbidity and mortal- Behaviour Disorder ity. Despite this, wide variation in individual response exists; these dif- S. L. Girard1, P. Dion1, L. Xiong1, J. Montplaisir2, R. B. Postuma3, G. A. Rou- ferences cannot be accounted for by clinical characteristics. In the cur- leau1; rent study, interactions between perindopril and 52 SNPs in 12 genes 1Center of Excellence in Neuromics, Montréal, QC, Canada, 2Centre d’étude du from the renin-angiotensin and bradykinin pathways were analyzed sommeil, Hopital Sacré-Coeur, Montréal, QC, Canada, 3Department of Neurol- to determine if genetic factors might underlie the variability in treat- ogy, Mcgill University, Montréal, QC, Canada. ment response. 8,790 participants from the randomized, double-blind- Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) is a sleep ed EUROPA trial with complete phenotypic and follow-up data were disturbance that involves a loss of muscular atonia in the dream-asso- genotyped for SNPs selected to ensure coverage of common varia- ciated REM phase. RBD is known to produce a violent dream-acting- tion in twelve members of the renin-angiotensin/bradykinin system. out behaviour and, thus, represents a risk of injury for both RBD affect- Perindopril*genotype interactions were assessed using multiplicative ed individuals and their bed partner. The prevalence of RBD is 0.38% interaction terms in Cox proportional hazards models. P-values were in the general population and 0.5% in the elderly population. Several corrected for multiple tests using permutation. Three perindopril*SNP studies have shown that there is an up to 90% male predominance interactions, one in the bradykinin receptor B1 gene and two in the in this disease, which suggests a potential link to chromosome X. To angiotensin II type I receptor gene, were significant (H.R. [95% interaction date, no genetic studies have been reported for RBD. Strong evidenc- C.I.]=1.44[1.13,1.83], 1.42[1.09,1.85], 0.77[0.63,0.94]; P empiri- es lead us to think that there might be a strong relationship between =0.004,0.008,0.011 and P =0.012,0.049,0.054). Haplotype cal permutation RBD, Parkinson’s disease (PD) and Lewy Body Dementia (LBD). We analysis of these genes provided confirmatory evidence of associa- followed this hypothesis to build an interactome of the genes shared tion. These three SNPs were subsequently typed in a subset of the by PD and LBD, using experimentally demonstrated human protein- PROGRESS trial consisting of 1,051 Europeans receiving perindopril protein interactions available online. Using this interactome as a basis treatment. Meta-analysis of the interaction effects from the two popula- for the mechanism that may underlie RBD, we selected 25 candidate tions improved the initially observed P-values and resulted in similar genes, according to different criteria: 1) genes carrying known muta- effect estimates for these SNPs (H.R. [95% C.I.]=1.42[1.13,1.78 interaction tions in either PD or LBD; 2) genes that have strong interactions with ],1.41[1.12,1.78],0.78[0.65,0.94]; P =0.003,0.003,0.010). This study meta genes carrying known mutations in either PD or LBD; 3) genes impli- of gene*medication interaction provides strong evidence that variation cated in other neurodegenerative disorders; and 4) genes located on in the bradykinin receptor B1 and angiotensin II type I receptor genes chromosome X. These candidate genes are currently being screened modify the treatment benefits of the ACE-inhibitor perindopril and for mutations in a cohort of 100 RBD patients, which constitutes one opens new avenues for the successful treatment of hypertension. of the first attempts to elucidate the genetic mechanisms underlying RBD. P09.109 sNPs in CD gene associated with rheumatoid arthritis in a P09.107 Japanese population thrombophilic genes in women with recurrent miscarriage A. Suzuki1, R. Yamada2, Y. Kochi1, Y. Okada2, K. Yamamoto3; F. M. Kaneva1, V. L. Akhmetova1, A. Z. Gilmanov2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; 1RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan, 2Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Sci- 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir ence, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 3Graduate School of Medicine, State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Recurrent miscarriage (RM) is a significant actual problem of mod- Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disorder charac- ern obstetrics with many etiologies. Thrombophilias is one of the most terized by the destruction of multiple joints along with multiple organ common cause of RM (40-75%). The contribution of specific inher- involvement. One of the mechanisms of the inflammation in autoim- ited thrombophilic genes to this disorder has remained controversial. mune diseases associated with signal transduction via signaling lym- We carried out the study of polymorphic loci MTHFR A1298C, FGB phocytic activation molecule (SLAM). It was also reported that SLAM -455G/A, ACE I/D, TPA25 I/D in 4 groups of women with RM: the first family gene, e.g., Ly108 is also associated with systemic lupus erythe- group - women with threat of interruption of pregnancy without the matosus (SLE). We investigated whether variants of the SLAM family burden obstetric anamnesis (n=111), 2 - with spontaneous abortions gene in the chromosome 1q region are associated with susceptibility to (n=57), 3 - with the stood pregnancy (n=97), 4 - with the burden ob- RA. The association peak in the block was observed at two functional stetric anamnesis (syndrome of loss of a fetus, habitual miscarriage, SNPs (rs3766379 and rs6682654) in CD244 in two independent RAComplex traits and polygenic disorders  cohorts from Japan (P= 3.23 x 10-8 and P=7.45 x 10-8). We also found a Minor effects of polymorphisms in selected candidate genes should Japanese cohort of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) that had the be analysed in subsequent studies investigating a larger sample of similar genotype distribution with RA cohorts. These disease-associ- patients and controls. ated SNPs, rs3766379 and rs6682654 have been shown to increase their expression in luciferase and allele-specific transcript quantifica- P09.112 tion assays. Furthermore, we indicated that rs6682654 locates on the Recurrent rearrangements in synaptic and neurodevelopmental binding site of USF-1 in CD244 gene and affect on the regulation of genes support the existence of shared biological pathways CD244 expression via USF-1. CD244 is a novel genetic risk factor for between schizophrenia, autism and mental retardation RA and may have a role for autoimmunity in RA. A. Guilmatre1, C. Dubourg2, A. Mosca1,3, S. Legallic1, A. Goldenberg4, V. Drouin-Garraud4, V. Layet5, A. Rosier6, S. Briault7, F. Bonnet-Brilhault8, F. Lau- P09.110 monnier8, S. Odent9, G. Le Vacon1, G. Joly-Helas4, V. David2, C. Bendavid2, shared genetic susceptibility in primary and secondary restless C. Impallomeni10, E. Germano10, G. Di Rosa10, C. Barthelemy8, C. Andres11, L. legs syndrome: A case-control association study in end-stage Faivre3, T. Frébourg1, P. Saugier-Veber1, D. Campion1; renal disease patients 1Inserm U614 and Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 2UMR B. Schormair1,2, J. Plag1,2, D. Roeske3, N. Groß4, B. Müller-Myhsok3, W. Sam- 6061CNRS, University of Rennes I, Rennes, France, 3Department of Genetics, tleben5, U. Heemann6, T. Meitinger1,2, J. Winkelmann1,4,2; Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France, 4Department of Genetics, Rouen Uni- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, versity Hospital, Rouen, France, 5Department of Genetics, Le Havre Hospital, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Ger- Le Havre, France, 6Centre de Ressources Autisme de Haute Normandie, Saint many, 3Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 4Department of Etienne du Rouvray, France, 7Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Neurology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Angers, France, 8Inserm U930, Université François-Rabelais and University Germany, 5Department of Internal Medicine, Nephrology Division, University of Hospital, Tours, France, 9Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rennes, Munich - Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, 6Department of Nephrology, France, 10Department of Medical and Surgical Pediatrics, University Hospital, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. Messina, Italy, 11Inserm U 619, Tours, France. There are two forms of the restless legs syndrome (RLS), primary Comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) studies have sug- RLS (pRLS) and secondary RLS. The most common form of second- gested that rare copy number variations (CNVs) at numerous loci are ary RLS is uremic RLS (uRLS) in end-stage renal disease (ESRD). In involved in the aetiology of mental retardation (MR), autism (ASD) recent genome-wide association studies (GWAs) we have identified and schizophrenia. We have investigated, using QMPSF (Quantita- variants (MEIS1, BTBD9, PTPRD, and MAP2K5/LBXCOR1) as risk tive Multiplex PCR of Short fluorescent Fragments), 28 candidate loci factors for familial and sporadic pRLS. It is not known if the same ge- previously identified by array-CGH studies for gene dosage alteration netic variants are implicated in uRLS.. in 247 subjects with MR, 260 with ASD, 236 with schizophrenia or We therefore analysed the contribution of the pRLS risk factors to schizoaffective disorder and 236 healthy controls. We show that the uRLS in a case-control association study in ESRD patients. A total of collective frequency of CNVs at these loci is significantly increased in 642 ESRD patients were scrutinized for symptoms of RLS in face-to- autistic patients, patients with schizophrenia and patients with MR as face interviews. 199 were classified as RLS-positive cases (38 familial, compared with controls (p<0.001, p=0.01 and p=0.001 respectively, 161 sporadic), 443 as RLS-negative controls. Basic dialysis param- Fisher exact test). Individual significance (p=0.02) was reached for as- eters of both groups did not differ significantly (duration of dependence sociation between autism and a 350 kb deletion located in 22q11 and on dialysis, P>0.09; average time on dialysis per week, P>0.7). We spanning the PRODH gene. These results support the hypothesis that genotyped 10 pRLS-associated SNPs in these groups using the Se- weakly to moderately recurrent CNVs, either transmitted or occurring quenom iPLEX technology. Statistical analysis was performed using de novo, are causing or contributory factors for these diseases. Sec- logistic regression with age and sex as covariates. After correction ond, we show that most of these CNVs, which contain genes involved for multiple testing, MEIS1 (rs12469063, P = 0.006) and BTBD9 in neurotransmission or synapse formation and maintenance, are pres- corr (rs3923809, P = 0.002), were associated with uRLS. SNPs in PT- ent in the 3 pathological conditions, supporting the existence of shared corr PRD and MAP2K5/LBXCOR1 did not show any association (P>0.15) biological pathways between these neurodevelopmental disorders. with uRLS.. These results support the concept of a partially overlapping genetic P09.113 predisposition mechanism in pRLS and uRLS. Fine mapping of AHi1 on 6q23 as a susceptibility gene to schizophrenia P09.111 F. Torri1, A. Akelai2, S. Lupoli3, M. Sironi4, D. Amann-Zalcenstein5, M. Fuma- Polymorphisms in genes with emerging roles in regulation of galli4, R. Cagliani4, C. Dal Fiume1, E. Ben-Asher5, K. Kanyas2, D. Lancet5, P. immune response and their effect on sarcoidosis susceptibility Cozzi6, E. Salvi1, A. Orro6,7, J. Beckmann8, B. Lerer2,9, F. Macciardi1; in slovenian patients 1University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Hadassah–Hebrew University Medical Center, A. Maver1, I. Medica1, B. Salobir2, M. Tercelj2, B. Peterlin1; Jerusalem, Israel, 3INSPE, Scientific Institute San Raffaele, Milan, Italy, 4Scien- 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Pulmonary tific Institute IRCCS E. Medea, Bosisio Parini (LC), Italy, 5Weizmann Institute of Diseases and Allergy, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Science, Rehovot, Israel, 6ITB, CNR, Milan, Italy, 7CILEA Consortium, Segrate, Sarcoidosis is a chronic inflammatory disease characterised by ap- Milan, Italy, 8University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 9Miller School of pearance of granulomas in various organ systems. Among possible Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, United States. causes, genetic factors have been implicated in sarcoidosis aetiology. Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a multifactorial disorder where probably mul- We have performed the search for novel candidate genes utilising in- tiple genes of small to moderate effect act in combination also with tegrative genomics approach, which was based on data from reported environmental factors to increase the risk of illness. In previous stud- transcriptional, proteomic and linkage association studies in sarcoid- ies, using a set of Arab-Israeli families, we identified by linkage and osis. The search revealed several potential previously uncharacterised association mapping a susceptibility region to SCZ on the long arm candidate genes, among which genes that have recently been impli- of chromosome 6 (6q23.3); this association was also replicated in an cated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory lung diseases, were select- independent sample. The peak region includes the Abelson Helper In- ed. Here we present data on association of polymorphisms -1260/ C>A tegration Site 1 (AHI1) and a putative gene for a human-specific hypo- in the CYP27B1 gene, Lys198Asn in the EDN1 gene and Ile105Val in thalamic mRNA BC040979. the GSTP1 gene with sarcoidosis in a group of 178 Slovenian patients Here we densely map the most probable candidates in this area, per- in comparison with 272 healthy controls. Genotypes were obtained forming a finer mapping of the originally identified linkage peak. The by multiplex polymerase chain reaction using allele specific primers strongest single SNP and haplotype association lies within a 500 kb (ASO-PCR). Genotype and allelic frequencies in patients and controls genomic region (135.6-136.1 Mb) encompassing the AHI1 gene and were statistically analysed for association with the disease. the BC040979 locus, supporting the role of AHI1 as a susceptibility There was no significant association of genotypes or allelic variants gene to SCZ. Interestingly the second highest significant subregion is of polymorphisms in any of the three genes with susceptibility to sar- immediately downstream and includes PDE7B and MAP7 genes. coidosis. Resequencing of a 10kb region within AHI1 in ethnically defined popu-Complex traits and polygenic disorders  lations suggested that the gene has undergone a selective sweep in Neurology, Institut de Recerca, Vall d’Hebron Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 2Bio- Europeans, in agreement with previous studies. Network analysis in- chemistry Laboratory and Lipids Unit, Vall d’Hebron Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. dicated the presence of two haplotype clades, with SCZ-susceptibility Background: haplotypes clustering within the major clade. Environmental and genetic factors contribute to the development of complex diseases such as ischemic stroke (IS), the leading cause of P09.114 disability and third cause of death in developed countries. In order to serotonin transporter gene sLc6A4 is associated with negative identify stroke susceptibility variants, we aimed to study 250 single affect intensity nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which had been associated with F. Mathieu1, R. Raymond1, B. Etain1,2, S. Jamain1, C. Henry1,2,3, F. Bellivier1,2,3, several processes involved in IS such as inflammation, fibrinolysis, co- M. Leboyer1,2,3; agulation, hypertension, coronary heart disease, angiogenesis, lipid 1INSERMU955, Créteil, France, 2AP-HP, Groupe Henri Mondor-Albert Chene- metabolism or diabetes. vier, Créteil, France, 3Université Paris 12, Faculté de Médecine, Créteil, France. Methods: Genetic analyses of bipolar disorder (BD) may be facilitated by the A case-control design was used to analyze 250 SNPs in 183 genes use of intermediate phenotypes. We recently showed that euthymic in a Spanish population comprising 270 IS patients with an occlusion bipolar patients have higher affect intensity than controls (Henry et al. in the middle cerebral artery territory and 270 matched controls, free 2008). In the present study, we assessed the 40-items Affect Intensity of neurovascular and cardiovascular disorders and familiar history of Measure (AIM) scale (Larsen and Diener, 1986) to 245 bipolar patients stroke. The results obtained were replicated in a new similar popula- and 92 control subjects. As the uni-dimensional structure of the AIM tion of 270 IS patients and 270 healthy controls. scale has been often questionned, a factorial analysis was performed Results: in the two groups. A similar four factor structure was retained in both Analysis by additive model revealed 11 SNPs associated with IS. samples of bipolar patients and controls: positive affectivity, serenity, Three of those SNPs were also associated with IS in the replication negative intensity and negative reactivity. The four dimensions were population, although only two SNPs remained significant after logistic higher in bipolar patients than in controls (p<0.001 for positive affectiv- regression analysis adjusting for IS risk factors (age, gender, smok- ity, p=0.01 for serenity, p=0.01 for negative reactivity and p<0.001 for ing, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia): SNP1, p1= 0.009, negative intensity). Bipolar and controls were subsequently genotyped OR1= 2.629 (1.279-5.406) and p2<0.001, OR2=3.998 (2.022-7.906); for the SLC6A4 promoter region insertion/deletion variant (5HTTLPR). SNP2, p1=0.039, OR1= 1.367 (1.016-1.839) and p2=0.050, OR2= Genotypic frequencies were similar in bipolar and in controls (p=0.67). 1.360 (1.000-1.851), p1 and OR1 corresponding to the first study and The short allele of the serotonin transporter gene promoter polymor- p2 and OR2 to the replication study. phism was associated with higher negative intensity (p = 0.002). The Conclusion: short allele of the SLC6A4 promoter variant may influence the vulner- We observed an association between two SNPs and an increased risk ability to bipolar disorder through its implication in the affect intensity of IS in the Spanish population. The role of these polymorphisms in dimension. IS opens diagnostic and therapeutic expectations and merits further investigation. P09.115 Large scale association analysis of sNPs associated with lipid P09.117 concentrations in 21,010 Japanese individuals Genetic and epigenetic analysis of ssAt gene dysregulation in K. Nakayama, B. Tumenbayar, K. Yamanaka, M. Kumada, T. Gotoh, N. Utsu- suicidal behavior mi-Wada, Y. Yanagisawa, M. Okayama, E. Kajii, S. Ishibashi, S. Iwamoto, The M. Guipponi1, S. Deutsch2, K. Kohler1, N. Perroud1, F. Le Gal1, M. Vessaz1, Jichi Community Genetics Team (JCOG); T. Laforge1, B. Petit1, F. Jollant3, S. Guillaume3, P. Baud1, P. Courtet3, R. La Jichi Medical University, Simotsuke, Japan. Harpe1, A. Malafosse1; Recent genome wide association studies identified seven novel loci in- 1University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Geneva fluencing plasma concentrations of triglycerides, HDL cholesterol and Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 3University Hospital of Montpellier, Mont- LDL cholesterol in Europeans. For these newly identified loci, large pellier, France. scale replication analyses using other ethnic groups have been await- It has recently been proposed that the SSAT gene plays a role in the ed. To address this issue, we tested associations between single nu- predisposition to suicidal behavior. SSAT expression was found to be cleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the seven novel loci and plasma down-regulated in the brain of suicide completers. In addition, SNP lipid concentrations in 21,010 Japanese individuals. Genotyping of the rs6526342 was associated both with variation in SSAT expression and SNPs was performed by using the TaqMan assay system. Effects of with suicidal behavior. In this study, we aimed to characterize the rela- SNP genotypes on plasma lipid concentrations were assessed by us- tionship between SSAT dysregulation and suicide behavior. To this end, ing multiple linear regression models including sex, age, BMI, smok- we measured SSAT expression levels in the ventral prefrontal cortex ing, medication for diabetes as covariates. We observed evidence for (VPFC) of suicide completers (n=20) and controls (n=20) and found strong associations between rs3812316 in MLXIPL and triglyceride them to be significantly down-regulated in suicide victims (p=0.007). To concentrations (P ~ 3.0E-11, 7.1 mg/dl decrease per minor G allele) identify the basis of the regulation of SSAT expression, we performed and rs599839 in CELSR2/PSRC1/SORT1 and LDL cholesterol con- an association analysis of 309 SNPs with SSAT transcript levels in 53 centrations (P ~ 3.1E-11, 4.7 mg/dl decrease per minor G allele). SNPs lymphoblastoid cell lines from the CEPH collection. We then exam- near ANGPTL3, TRIB1 and GALNT2 showed evidence for associations ined the methylation status of the SSAT promoter region in suicide with triglyceride concentrations (3.6E-6 < P < 5.1E-5). The SNP near completers and control subjects whose SSAT brain expression had TRIB1 also showed association with LDL cholesterol concentrations been measured. We found no evidence to support a role for SNPs in (P ~ 1.2E-5). SNPs in NCAN/CILP2/PBX4 and MVK/MMAB were not controlling the level of SSAT expression. SSAT promoter methylation associated with any plasma lipid profiles in the Japanese population levels were not different between suicide completers and controls and (P>0.05, after Bonferroni correction). The successfully replicated loci did not correlate with SSAT expression levels. In addition, we found are considered to predispose to polygenic dyslipidemia in Japanese. no indication of a genetic association between suicidal behavior and In the case of NCAN/CILP2/PBX4 and MVK/MMAB, ethnic differences SNPs located within the SSAT gene. both in lifestyle and linkage disequilibrium pattern would contribute to Our study provides new results which show that dysregulation of SSAT the lack of association in the Japanese population. expression does play a role in suicide behavior. However, our data do not support any association between rs6526342 and variation in SSAT P09.116 expression or suicidal behavior. Predicting the genetic risk of ischemic stroke: study of 250 polymorphisms in 1.080 cases and controls. S. Domingues-Montanari1, I. Fernández-Cadenas1, A. del Rio-Espinola1, M. Mendioroz1, J. Fernández-Morales1, P. Delgado1, A. Penalba1, P. Chacón2, D. Salat1, M. Ribó1, A. Rosell1, J. Montaner1; 1Neurovascular Research Laboratory and Neurovascular Unit, Department ofComplex traits and polygenic disorders  P09.118 Helsinki, Finland, 4Helsinki Biomedical Graduate School LERU PhD Program in Role of interlukin-10, interferon gamma and tumor necrosis Biomedicine, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Dermatology, University of Tam- factor alpha genes polymorphisms in suicidal behaviour pere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 6Department of Rheu- M. Omrani, B. Bushehri, M. Bageri, A. Alipour, R. Massomi; matology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Peijas Hospital, Vantaa, Finland, Uromieh Medical Science University, Uromieh, Islamic Republic of Iran. 7Section of Dermatology, and Department of Clinical Science and Education, Background: Suicide is a major and growing public health concern Karolinska Institutet at Stockholm Söder Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. throughout the world and yield significant number of morbidity and Objective. Several candidate genes have been implicated in suscepti- mortality annually. Some researchers have shown that there is an im- bility for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), a complex autoimmune balance between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines in disease. The proposed genes include members of the type I interferon patient with suicidal behavior. But controversy still is high in this field (IFN) pathway and genes involved in immunological defense functions. and further experiments among different population need to be carried The aim of this study was to systematically replicate six such genes, out. TYK2, IRF5, CTLA4, PDCD1, FCGR2A and NOD2. Material and methods: To assess whether an association exists be- Methods. Single nucleotide polymorphisms in TYK2, IRF5, CTLA4, tween cytokine polymorphisms and suicide risk, 145 patients with PDCD1, FCGR2A and NOD2 were genotyped in 277 SLE patients suicide attempts, and 160 (150-167) healthy individual genotyped for and 356 healthy controls from Finland, giving a power of 42-70% for IL-10, IFN-γ, TNF-α polymorphisms using ASO-PCR method. different genes at published allele frequencies. Results: Our study showed the frequency of IL-10 A/A genotype Results. Significant association was seen for rs2304256 (p=0.0001) was significantly higher in the majority of the studied groups in com- and rs12720270 (p=0.0031) in TYK2 and rs10954213 (p=0.0043) in parison to normal individuals (exception died male vs. normal male IRF5 in our samples, but not for the other genes. We found evidence (OR,CI:1.2(0.81, 1.59, 0.61)). IFN-γ +874 A/A and A/T genotypes was for genetic interaction (p=0.014) between rs2304256 in TYK2 and significantly higher in male bedded vs. male control (OR, CI: 1.9(1.21, rs10954213 in IRF5, both members of the type I IFN pathway, further 2.59, 0.023)) and male died vs. male control (OR, CI: 1.63(1.22, 2.04, strengthening the role of the type I IFN pathway in SLE pathogenesis. 0.037)), respectively. TNF-α -308 G/G genotype was significantly Conclusion. We conclude that the interferon pathway genes IRF5 and higher in all studied patients groups vs. normal control, but TNF-α - TYK2 may act synergistically in increasing risk for SLE, but our lack of 308 A/A genotype was significantly higher in only Died groups vs. con- replication does not exclude effects of the other studied genes. trol groups (1.29(1.01, 1.57, 0.047)) and Female died vs. f. control (1.76(1.16, 2.36, 0.014)). P09.121 Conclusion: Based on the finding of this study, it is possible to say, Classification of low and high risk group of Type 2 Diabetes IL-10, IFN-γ and TNF-α polymorphisms may play a role in suicidal be- mellitus in maltese and Libyan patients by quantitative havior. expression profiling of SNPlotypes A. A. Al Ashtar1, J. Vassallo2,3, J. Azzopardi3, J. Borg1, M. Debono2,3, C. Scerri1, P09.119 G. Grech4, A. E. Felice1; Investigation of complement component C4 loci deficiencies in 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Msida, Malta, 2Diabetes and Endocrine Russian children with systemic Lupus Erythematosus (sLE) Centre, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, 3Department of Medicine, University I. Shagina1, N. Kuzmenko2, M. Kurnikova1, A. Shcherbina2, A. Prodeus2, D. of Malta, Medical School, Msida, Malta, 4Department of Pathology, Mater Dei Shagin1,3; Hospital, Malta. 1Evrogen Joint Stock Company, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research and T2DM is related to interplay between multiple genes with quantitative Clinical Center for Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, effect. Twenty SNPs were studied in the Diabetic patients of Malta and Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Libya, together with a random number of neonatal controls. Seven Bioorganic Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. SNPs (ADRABβ2 [nt46 A->G], FABP2 [codon 54 G->A], UCP1 [nt3826 Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multisystem, autoimmune A->G], LEPTIN [nt -2549 C->A], IPF1 [codon 18 T->C], IL-6 [-174 G- inflammatory disease, with both genetic and environmental causative >C], TCF7L2 [IVS3 T->G]) were found to be more frequent among factors. A number of studies have shown that complement component Diabetic patients over the reference pool of neonates, and were se- C4 loci (C4A and C4B) are among genes implicated in the pathogen- lected for SNPlotyping analysis, i.e accounting for the total mutant al- esis of SLE. Patients with C4A deficiency have been previously re- lele number per SNPlotype per person. The log of risk ratio increased ported as being susceptible to SLE in different ethnic groups. The aim with increasing SNP score from -0.7 to 1.08 in Maltese and in Libyan of our study was to examine the frequencies of homozygous C4A/B -1.23 to 0.85. The response to Insulin, Metformin and Glibenclamide deficiency, large deletion of C4A gene and CYP21A pseudogene and in T2DM patients representing the different SNPlotypes was mea- 2 bp insertion in exon 29 of C4A/B genes in Russian patients with sured as a function of differential allele expression on mRNA extracted SLE. The patient group was comprised of 36 unrelated children who from monocytes. Only β2 adrenergic receptor (ADRABβ2) transcripts fulfilled the American College of Rheumatology classification criteria were detected in the untreated and treated monocytes. The expres- for SLE. Control group consisted of randomly selected unrelated 76 sion of ADRABβ2 indicated a relation between the response to the healthy individuals (50 children and 26 adults). The homozygous defi- drug and the SNPlotype of the patient. The expression of ADRABβ2 ciency of C4A was in one control child. The homozygous deficiency of was downregulated in response to Insulin and Metformin in patients C4B was in one patient and in one control adult. The frequency of large with SNPlotypes lacking the ADRABβ2 mutation and upregulated in deletion of C4A gene and CYP21A pseudogene was 11.11% (4/36) in the other SNPlotypes. The outcome of ADRABβ2 mRNA was depen- patients compared to 18.00 % (9/50) in control children group, with no dent on patient SNPlotype, when ranked by wildtype and mutant UCP1 significant difference between SLE patients and controls (p=0.379). and ADRABβ2 polymorphisms. Quantitative mRNA data from selected One patient had the 2 bp insertion in exon 29 of C4A gene as well as genes that made up common and rare SNPlotypes, reflect a risk for one control adult. Thus, our results show lack of evidence of a specific T2DM due to SNPlotype scoring perhaps useful to classify patients role for C4A/B deficiency in determining disease susceptibility among into potentially therapeutic groups. children with SLE in Russian population. P09.122 P09.120 the tARGEt study: A randomised controllled trial of tPmt Evidence for genetic association and interaction between the testing TYK and IRF genes in systemic lupus erythematosus K. J. Tricker1, K. Payne2, S. A. Roberts2,3, E. A. Fargher4, S. Pushpakom5, A. Hellquist1, T. M. Järvinen2,3,4, S. Koskenmies3,2, C. Orsmark-Pietras1, M. J. Alder5, K. Poulton1, J. Andrews2, J. B. Houston6, R. A. Elliott7, R. Elles1, D. Zucchelli1, L. Berglind1, J. Panelius3, T. Hasan5, H. Julkunen6, M. D’Amato1, U. Ray1,2, J. Shaffer8, C. Griffiths2,8, I. Bruce1,2, F. Qasim1, W. E. R. Ollier2, W. G. Saarialho-Kere3,7, J. Kere1,2; Newman2,1; 1Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Swe- 1Central Manchester University Hospitals Foundation Trust, Manchester, United den, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, and Folkhälsan Kingdom, 2University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Central Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Dermatology, Helsinki Manchester University Hospitals Foundation Trust,, Manchester, United King- University Central Hospital and Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, dom, 4Bangor University, Bangor, United Kingdom, 5University of Liverpool,Complex traits and polygenic disorders 0 Liverpool, United Kingdom, 6University of Manchester, Manchester, United P09.124 Kingdom, 7University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 8Salford tNF-alpha Gene 308 G/A and 850 c/t Polymorphisms in turkish Royal Hospitals NHS Trust, Salford, United Kingdom. children with PANDAs Background: Deficiency of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) has U. Luleyap, D. Onatoglu; been associated with severe neutropenia in individuals treated with Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of thiopurines. Adoption of TPMT testing into clinical practice has been Cukurova, Adana, Turkey. limited by insufficient robust prospective evidence regarding the added Objectives: PANDAS (Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Dis- value of testing. orders Associated with Streptococcal Infections) is a newly defined Methods: A randomized controlled trial was undertaken. Individuals pediatric disorder in neuropsychiatry. This disorder occurs with an with inflammatory disease requiring azathioprine treatment were ran- autoimmune mechanism after Grup A Beta Haemolytic Streptococcus domized (50:50) to receive standard prescribing or TPMT genotyping infection. Streptococcus infection may causes OCD (Obsessive Com- to inform prescription. The primary endpoint was stopping azathioprine pulsive Disorder) or tic disorders and PANDAS. The aim of the current secondary to adverse drug reactions (ADRs). Secondary endpoints study was to investigate whether there is an association between TNF- included reduction in severe neutropenia, prediction of other ADRs, alpha gene 308 G/A and 850 C/T polymorphisms and PANDAS. quality of life and drug efficacy. An economic evaluation was also con- Methods: In this study, 92 cases of PANDAS and 58 control cases ducted, were genotyped for TNF-alpha-308 G/A and TNF-alpha-850 C/T poly- Results. Following ethical approval, 333 participants (167 interven- morphisms with PCR-RFLP method. tion: 166 standard) were recruited from 19 centres in England over 24 Results: All 92 PANDAS cases had mutant genotype for 308 G/A poly- months. Overall 111 (33%) patients stopped azathioprine by 4 months morphism. In control group, however, cases had 8,62% GA mutant due to any ADRs, with no difference in the likelihood of stopping by genotype and 91,38% GG genotype. treatment group (OR 0.91 p=0.71). The incidence of significant neu- As for 850 C/T polymorphism, we found 34,78% CC genotype, and tropenia was lower than anticipated (2.7%). Only one individual (stan- 65,22% mutant genotype in PANDAS cases. In control group, however, dard arm), was homozygous for the TMPT*3A allele and presented 46,55% mutant genotype and 53,45% CC genotype was observed. with severe neutropenia. Data on secondary clinical endpoints will be In our study, we observed remarkable effects of these two polymor- presented. phisms particularly on phenotype-genotype relations. In different parts Conclusion: Our findings support the assertion that TPMT testing is of the world, studies conducted for different OCD patients have vari- specific (individuals homozygous for null alleles are at high risk of able results. Moreover, there have not been any study revealing an neutropenia when treated with azathioprine), but has low sensitivity in association between PANDAS and TNF-alpha gene polymorphisms detecting individuals at risk of neutropenia. Therefore, TPMT testing is reported yet. valuable in identifying individuals at risk of neutropenia, but must be Conclusion: Here, we have demonstrated an association between performed in tandem with full blood count monitoring to detect individu- TNF-alpha 308 G/A and 850 C/T polymorphisms and PANDAS sus- als at risk of non-TPMT related neutropenia. ceptibility. In light of our findings, we propose that these two polymor- phisms can be used as a molecular indicators of PANDAS which needs P09.123 to be verified by further research on PANDAS. mutation detection of thyroid peroxidase gene in Persian patients with thyroid dyshormonogenesis P09.125 S. Karimizare1,2, F. Soheilipour3, H. Khanahmad1, M. Karimipour1, S. Aminza- Association of candidate genes for type 1 diabetes with deh1,2, M. Hashemipour*3; parameters of vasoactive and proteolytic systems 1Pasteur Institute of Iran, Molecular Medicine Department, Tehran, Islamic Re- N. V. Tarasenko1, E. I. Kondratieva2, L. V. Spirina2, G. A. Suchanova2, A. A. public of Iran, 2Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad university, Tehran, Rudko1, V. P. Puzyrev1; Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Endocrine & Metabolism Research Center, Isfahan 1State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, University of Medical Sciences & Health Services, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of 2Siberian Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Iran. Associations of polymorphisms in genes NOS1 (C3392T), NOS3 (C- Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is one of the most common endocrine 691T, VNTR, C774T, G894T), TNFA (G-308A), IL1A (+3953 A1/A2), disorders in childhood. According to morphological findings, CH can be IL1RN (VNTR), IL4 (G717C) and IL4RA (A148G) with parameters of subdivided into defects of thyroid development (dysgenesis), ranging vasoactive and proteolytic systems at children and the adolescents from hypoplasia to athyrosis, and defects of thyroid hormone biosyn- with type 1 diabetes (T1D) were studied. 119 children and the adoles- thesis (dyshormonogenesis) with normal thyroid gland size. The most cents with T1D have been surveyed. Biochemical research included prevalent cause of dyshormonogenesis is thyroid peroxidase (TPO) definition of: kallikrein (KK), kallikreinogen (KKG), angiotensin convert- gene deficiency. TPO encodes a membrane-bound glycoprotein. This ing enzyme (ACE), α1-proteinase inhibitor (α1-PI), α2-macroglobulin protein acts as an enzyme which plays a central role in iodide organi- (α2-MG). At T1D group, there was an increase in activity of KK, and fication and is important for thyroid function and pathogenesis. The development of diabetic neuropathy (DN) was accompanied by hy- prevalence of CH is occurring one in 3000-4000 live births in North peractivity of ACE and decrease in activity of α1-PI in blood. Children America and Europe. The recent study in Isfahan province of Iran and adolescents who were carriers of C allele of C774T (NOS3) had Demonstrated a high frequency of congenital hypothyroidism with lower values of KKG than TT homozygotes (p=0,043). Carriers of G al- 1:370ratio in newborns. In this study DNA was extracted from periph- lele of G894T (NOS3) had lower values ofα1-PI than TT homozygotes eral blood of 30 permanent congenital hypothyroidism Persian patients (p=0,008). For polymorphism A148G in IL4RA we found that activity of Isfahan province according to the salting out method. Diagnosis of of ACE was increased in carriers of A allele (p=0,008). The obtained CH was based on elevated TSH and decreased T4 levels in 3 years associations of investigated polymorphisms with parameters of vaso- old children, who had normal thyroid scan. The 17 exonic region of active and proteolytic systems confirm participation of these genes in the TPO gene were amplified and PCR products were analyzed by development of endothelial dysfunction at diabetes. single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and Sequencing. No exonic mutation in TPO was identified In all patients with dyshor- P09.126 monogenesis CH in this study. It remains possible that these patients’ “Genetic Load” of diabetes risk alleles affects beta-cell function disorder was caused by TPO gene defect in regulatory or intronic re- in patients with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes gion. In addition, other gene defects, such as in the pendrin, thyroid S. Bonetti1, G. Malerba2, E. Trabetti2, L. Xumerle2, M. Trombetta1, L. Boselli1, M. oxidase and thyroglobulin genes, need to be considered and pursued Muggeo1, E. Bonora1, R. C. Bonadonna1, P. F. Pignatti2; in further studies. 1Dept of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2DMIBG, Sect of Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. Genetic variation in a number of SNPs has been demonstrated to affect the risk of type 2 diabetes mostly by genome wide association studies. Some of these “diabetoSNPs” have been associated to prediabetic phenotypes in nondiabetic individuals. However, no studies have re-Complex traits and polygenic disorders  ported associations between “diabetoSNPs” and the patient metabolic 34.8% and 6.97% in schizophrenic patients and 69.86%, 19.17% and phenotype. We assessed beta-cell function and insulin sensitivity in 10.95% in BMD patients. The homozygote FF genotype was more 343 consecutive GADA-negative, drug treatment naive patients with common in BMD patients compare to healthy controls (p=0.04). The newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes by state-of-art methods. Both beta- odds ratio between frequency of FF genotype in BMD and healthy cell function and insulin sensitivity of these patients were severely re- control was 1.97 with 95% confidence interval was between 1.04 to duced (~60%, p<0.001) when compared to healthy controls. 3.73. There was no significant association between FF genotype and In all patients alleles of rs7903146 (TCF7L2), rs5219 (KCNJ11), schizophrenia (p=0.7). rs10946398 (CDKAL1), rs1111875 (HHEX2), rs679931 (CACNA1E), Conclusion: Previous studies indicated a possible biochemical mecha- rs1801282 (PPAR-gamma) and rs1044498 (ENPP1) were determined. nism occurring between vitamin D and mood disorders. Since VDR According to the number of the risk alleles, the patients were divided FOKI polymorphism has been found to correlate with serum vitamin D in 3 groups: “low” (<=6 alleles), “intermediate” (7-8 alleles), “high” (>8 concentrations, it was expected this gene variation associate with bi- alleles) genetic load. No differences in insulin sensitivity were detected polar mood disorder as we found. Also VDR as a nuclear receptor may among the 3 groups. However, the dose-response curve relating gly- contribute to psychiatric disorders via modifying of neurotransmitters cemia to insulin secretion rate was significantly lower in the “interme- transcriptions like dopamine and serotonin. diate” and “high” genetic load groups (Delta: ~-30% in both groups, p<0.02) than in the low genetic load group, to indicate a more severe P09.129 defect in beta-cell function in patients burdened with a higher genetic Association of gene polymorphisms with power performance in risk of the disease. In newly diagnosed type 2 diabetic patients a low wrestlers genetic load hallmarks patients with better beta-cell function. Our data G. Kobritsov1, I. I. Ahmetov2, A. G. Fedotova1, E. V. Linde1; imply that the ever expanding number of “diabetoSNPs” might be use- 1The Russian State University of Physical Culture, Sports and Tourism, Mos- ful to assess the metabolic phenotype of the patients. cow, Russian Federation, 2St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian Federation. P09.127 Analyses of the genetic determinants of strength and power provide the transcription factor 7-like 2 (tcF7L2) gene variants and risk information concerning the contribution of both genes and environ- of type 2 diabetes mental factors. We have recently shown that rare PPARG (peroxisome M. Mohaddes Ardebili1, R. Roudi1, J. Gharesouran1, A. Aliasgharzadeh2; proliferator-activated receptor gamma) 12Ala and PGC1B (PPARga- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Medical mma coactivator-1-beta) 203Pro alleles are overrepresented in elite Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Internal medicince, power-oriented athletes compared to controls. PPARgamma is in- University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. volved in regulation of insulin pathway; whilst PGC1b coactivates the Although type 2 diabetes mellitus has a strong genetic basis, until re- MEF2 family of transcription factors to stimulate the type IIX myosin cently, most candidate genes for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) have heavy chain promoter (IIX MHC determines fast glycolytic muscle fi- shown only modest effects and the associations have been inconsis- ber phenotype). Accordingly, the aim of the study was to investigate tent. Recent studies have implicated variants of the transcription fac- gene polymorphisms for association with power performance in Rus- tor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene in genetic susceptibility to T2D in several sian elite male sambo wrestlers. Determination of knee extensor peak different populations. The TCF7L2 gene is a member of the T-cell fac- power and peak movement velocity were performed using dynamom- tor (TCF)/lymphoidenhancing factor family of high mobility group box- eter Biodex. PPARG Pro12Ala and PGC1B Ala203Pro gene polymor- containing transcription factors involved in the Wnt signaling pathway. phisms were determined by PCR-RLFP. We found that PPARG 12Ala This pathway is a key component to the regulation of cell proliferation allele was significantly associated with increased relative knee exten- and differentiation. The aim of this study was to determine whether sor peak velocity of athletes (Ala/Ala - 694 deg/sec/kg (%), Pro/Ala variants of this gene are also risk factors for T2D developments in - 609 (66) deg/sec/kg (%), Pro/Pro - 495 (84) deg/sec/kg (%); P=0.03). northwest of Iran (Azerbaijan). We genotyped two of these polymor- Furthermore, carriers of PGC1B 203Pro allele exhibited the highest phisms (rs12255372 and rs7903146) in an admixed sample of 100 values of average knee extensor peak power (Ala/Ala - 250 (57) W, patients with T2D and 100 controls. Study were performed using poly- Ala/Pro - 393 (42) W; P=0.014). In conclusion, PPARG Pro12Ala and merase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism as- PGC1B Ala203Pro gene polymorphisms are associated with power say to investigate the association of rs12255372 (G/T) and rs7903146 performance in sambo wrestlers. (C/T) polymorphisms of the TCF7L2 gene with T2D. These variants in TCF7L2 seem to be associated with an increased risk of diabetes P09.130 among persons with impaired glucose tolerance. The risk-conferring Analysis of mtR A2756G and mtRR A66G polymorphisms genotypes in TCF7L2 are associated with impaired beta-cell function among mothers of cL/P children from West Ukraine but not with insulin resistance. These data suggest that inherited or ac- L. Chorna1, Y. Harbuz1,2, H. Akopyan1, H. Makukh1; quired changes in TCF7L2 expression or function are mechanistically 1State institution “Institute of Hereditary Pathology of Academy of Medical Sci- involved in causing type 2 diabetes mellitus. ence of Ukraine”, Lviv, Ukraine, 2Ternopyl regional MGK, Ternopyl, Ukraine. Craniofacial anomalies, particularly cleft lip/palate (CL/P), are among P09.128 the most common birth defects. Polymorphisms in genes encoding Association of Foki vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms enzymes involved in the metabolism of homocysteine, such as methy- with psychiatric disorders lenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), methionine synthase (MTR) A. Hossein-nezhad1, H. Saghafi1, S. M. Arzaghi2, A. Najm Afshar1, B. Larijani2; and methionine synthase reductase (MTRR) could play a role in the 1Bio & Nano Technology Unit of Endocrinology and Metabolism Research mechanisms predisposing for clefting. Center/Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Contradictory findings have been recently published on the evalua- 2Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center/Tehran University of Medical tion of the mutant allele: formerly called MTRR A66G, but now called Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. MTRR G66A, because the G allele was found to be more common Introduction: Low level of vitamin D is known to alter brain develop- than the A allele based on the new data. There are considerable dif- ment, and is a candidate risk factor for psychiatric disorders. This ferences in frequencies of genotypes between different population and study examines the association of FokI polymorphisms in the vitamin ethnic groups. D receptor (VDR) with schizophrenia, bipolar mood disorder (BMD). DNA of mothers of CL/P children’s were analyzed for chosen polymor- Methods: In a case-control study 43 Schizophrenic, 73 bipolar mood phism MTR 2756AG and MTRR 66AG by PCR-RFLP assay. disorder patients and 100 healthy controls were recruited. All psychi- The analysis of 2756AG of the MTR gene showed that the GG geno- atric disorders were diagnosed according to DSMIV criteria. Healthy type was more prevalent in the mother group (0.22) as compared to controls had no familial history of these disorders. DNA extraction was controls (0.12), G allele frequencies were - 0.36 and - 0.30 among performed from whole blood .Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism the cases and controls, respectively, and these differences were not (FOKI) was genotyped by PCR-RFLP method. statistically significant. Results: The frequency of FF, Ff, ff genotypes in healthy controls were The analysis of 66AG polymorphism of MTRR gene revealed high 54 %, 39% and 7% respectively. These frequencies were 58.13%, frequency of 66G allele: 0.61 and 0.78 in studied and in the controlEvolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  groups respectively. The heterozygous genotype 66AG of MTRR gene P10.03 was more prevalent among the mother of CL/P children’s (55%) as Genome-wide association study in late-onset Alzheimer‘s compared to controls (36%). Only this difference was statistically sig- disease nificant (p<0.05). L. Imaz1, N. Rodríguez-Ezpeleta1, M. Hackenberg1, J. Alvarez1, M. M. Reg- Supported by: West-Ukrainian BioMedical Research Centre (WUBM- ueiro1, E. Sarasola2, I. Medina3, D. Montaner3, J. Dopazo3, A. Antigüedad2, J. M. RC). Uterga2, A. M. Aransay1; 1CIC bioGUNE, Derio, Spain, 2Hospital de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain, 3CIPF, Valen- cia, Spain. P10. Evolutionary and population genetics, and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that affects Genetic epidemiology more than 5% of the individuals older than 65 years. Apolipoprotein E (APOE), the universally confirmed risk gene for late-onset Alzheimer’s P10.01 disease (LOAD), is neither necessary nor sufficient to cause AD, and Genetic risk factors for cardiovascular diseases in the Roma 50% of the genetic-risk effect of the disease still remains unexplained. minority population of croatia As an attempt to discover new markers associated to LOAD, we are T. Škarić-Jurić1, H. Zeljko2, Ž. Tomas1, M. Peričić Salihović1, N. Smolej carrying out a multi-stage case-control genome-wide association study, Narančić1, B. Janićijević1; an approach that has the potential to effectively identify genetic contri- 1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2General Hospital butions to complex diseases. About 400 individuals were sampled and «Sveti Duh», Zagreb, Croatia. genotyped for 312,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using The Roma, formed as a founder population that has undergone mul- the Infinium technology of Illumina Inc. Additionally, PCR-RFLP based tiple consecutive bottlenecks and consequently experienced genetic APOE genotyping was used to confirm significant association of this drift together with it’s persistent socially, politically and culturally deter- gene with LOAD in the studied cohort. Logistic regression with age, mined isolation, present almost ideal target population for investigation sex and APOE genotype as covariates was performed on the 375 in- of genetic factors influencing development of complex diseases. In this dividuals (191 cases and 185 controls) and 302324 SNPs that fulfilled investigation we assumed that Bayash Roma population living in Croa- established quality-control criteria. There are some interesting chro- tia could be exemplary for having population-specific allele frequen- mosomal regions in which there are several markers with low p-val- cies, including those for candidate genes for cardiovascular disease. ues, although in this first stage no SNP showed statistically significant To assess the genetic risk factors for development of cardiovascular association with the disease after applying the corrections for multiple disease in the population of Bayash Roma we investigated the allele testing. Potential association of copy-number variations with LOAD is frequencies of the following polymorphisms: ACE I/D, eNOS VNTR also being studied. These data, together with functional annotation of and LEP G-2548A. The allele frequencies in a sample of 230 Bayash the likely associated SNPs, will guide us in the selection of markers to Roma of Croatia are compared with the data reported for other Euro- be genotyped in a more statistically powerful second-stage that will be pean and world populations and the geographic distributions of minor performed in an independent sample set. allele frequencies are presented. Population analysis showed that the Bayash Roma population living in Croatia has typical European fre- P10.04 quency of the I allele of the ACE I/D polymorphism (45%), but the fre- Analysis of cFH, LOc387715, HtRA1 polymorphisms and ApoE quency of the allele 4 of the eNOS VNTR polymorphism (12%) as well alleles with susceptibility to age-related macular degeneration in as of allele G of the LEP G-2548A (34%) are lower than those found Hungary in surrounding European populations placing Croatian Roma popula- G. Losonczy, A. Fekete, Z. Voko, E. Dzsudzsak, L. Takacs, A. Berta, I. Balogh; tion further east, among Asian populations. Present analysis showed University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. that the Bayash Roma of Croatia in comparison with other European Introduction: Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading populations, do not carry increased genetic risk for cardiovascular dis- cause of irreversible central vision loss in the elderly worldwide and its eases related to the most common polymorphisms of the ACE, eNOS prevalence increases with age. AMD has a strong genetic component. and LEP genes. The goal of our study was to establish the frequency of Tyr402His poly- morphism of the CFH gene, rs10490924 polymorphism at LOC387715, P10.02 rs11200638 polymorphism of the HTRA1 gene and different ApoE al- Highest prevalence of Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency found in leles in Hungarian AMD patients and to determine disease risk con- madeira island ferred by these factors. C. Spínola, R. Gonçalves, A. Brehm, H. Spínola; Methods: 105 AMD patients and 95 unrelated healthy controls were Human Genetics Laboratory, Funchal, Portugal. analyzed in our case-control study. According to disease severity, 48 Alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency is a common genetic disease that patients were assigned to the early and 57 patients to the late AMD affects lung and liver. Early diagnosis in asymptomatic patients helps subgroup. The mutations were tested using PCR-RFLP. on modifying lifestyle choices and reduces the risk of Cronic Obstruc- Results: When hetero- and homozygous mutation carriers were com- tive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). The determination of the prevalence bined and tested against wild type individuals, CFH, LOC387715 and of this genetic deficiency on Madeira Island (Portugal) population is HTRA1 odds ratios were 1.8 (95%CI:1.0-3.3), 2.0 (95%CI:1.1-3.6) and important to clarify their susceptibility and define the importance on 2.2 (95%CI:1.2-4.0), respectively. In the early AMD subgroup, homo- a general aplication of genetic tests for AAT on populace at risk of zygous CFH, LOC387715 or HTRA1 polymorphisms conferred 4.9- COPD. fold (95%CI: 1.7-14.2), 7.4-fold (95%CI: 2.1-26.2) or 10.1-fold (95%CI: Two hundred unrelated samples from Madeira Island were genotyped 2.5-40.8) greater likelihood of disease, respectively. In the late AMD for the two most common AAT deficiency alleles, PI*S and PI*Z, using subgroup, homozygosity for CFH, LOC387715 or HTRA1 risk alleles Polymerase Chain Reaction - Mediated Site-Directed Mutagenesis. resulted in 10.7-fold (95%CI: 3.7-31.0), 11.3-fold (95%CI: 3.2-40.4) or Results show one of the highest frequencies found worldwide for both 13.5-fold (95%CI: 3.3-55.4) increased disease risk, respectively. No mutations. In fact, PI*S mutation in Madeira Island population (18%) association was found between ApoE alleles and AMD in our groups. have the highest prevalence comparing to any world population al- Conclusions: The analyzed CFH, LOC387715 and HTRA1 polymor- ready studied, and PI*Z mutation (2.5%) was the third higher found phisms strongly associate to the development of AMD in the Hungar- worldwide. The frequency of AAT deficiency genotypes in Madeira ian population. The association is particularly strong when homozy- (PI*ZZ, PI*SS and PI*SZ) was estimated to be the highest studied: gous risk alleles are present and in late stage of the disease. 41 per 1000. This high prevalence of AAT deficiency on Madeira Island reveals an P10.05 increased genetic susceptibility to COPD and recommends a routine capturing the genetic variation in the ATGL gene by Ecotilling: genetic testing for people at risk. the rare mutation approach S. Coassin1, A. Brandstätter1, B. Paulweber2, C. Lamina1, S. C. Hunt3, F. Kro- nenberg1; 1Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck,Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  Austria, 2First Department of Internal Medicine, Paracelsus Private Medical individuals from Madeira Island population. Five different polymor- University, Salzburg, Austria, 3Cardiovascular Genetics Division, University of phisms with proven association to the asthmatic disease develop- Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. ment were studied, namely IL4-590 C/T (rs2243250), ADAM33 S1 G/A Background: Several recent studies highlight that especially rare mu- (rs3918396), GSDML C/T (rs7216389), STAT-6 C/T (rs324011) and tations exhibit a strong influence on many atherosclerosis-related phe- IL13 +2044 G/A (rs20541). Genotyping was performed by Real Time notypes. Since the ATGL lipase catalyzes the rate-limiting step of the PCR. Allelic and genotypic frequencies were determined for each poly- lipolysis, it represents an important candidate gene for the investiga- morphism. We also determined the genetic profile of each individual by tion of the influence of rare mutations on the lipid metabolism. combining the five polymorphisms. Comparisons between both popu- Aim of the study: To capture the entire genetic variation of ATGL in a lations were done using χ2 test for each polymorphism and the Fisher’s large healthy working population with a special focus on potentially test to compare all genetic profiles. Significant differences have been regulatory non-coding regions. found amongst studied populations for IL4-590 (C/T) (p<0,05) oppo- Methods: The full ATGL gene region including the predicted promoter site to the remaining polymorphisms. The overall genotypic profile was screened for mutations in 1473 individuals of the SAPHIR study combination revealed the presence of specific profiles on the patients’ by using a pooled Ecotilling approach. All polymorphisms were con- sample which are absent on Madeira’s population. firmed by sequencing, bioinformatically characterized and four com- By increasing the number of studied polymorphisms new specific asth- mon SNPs (2 of them being previously unknown) were finally geno- ma predisposing profiles may be identified. The definition of asthma typed in SAPHIR and in the Utah obesity case-control study. risk-associated profiles will allow an early intervention in terms of pri- Results: We detected 58 new, previously unknown mutations: 33 pri- mary prevention directed towards children in these families. vate mutations, 20 SNPs with a frequency below 5% and 5 common polymorphisms. Eleven mutations affected the protein sequence and P10.08 ~30% of all detected variants were located in the 5’ upstream region. mutational spectrum of congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia in Greek Interestingly, only 16 of the 25 reported dbSNPs could be confirmed. cypriot Patients Association studies with phenotypes from lipoprotein metabolism are V. Neocleous1, C. Costi1, Y. S. Ioannou2, N. Skordis2, L. A. Phylactou1; currently ongoing. 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department Conclusion: Rare mutations are relatively common and may represent of Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. an important factor for the diversity of lipid-related phenotypes in a Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a common autosomal reces- population. We found several new mutations to be located in poten- sive disorder mainly caused by defects in the steroid 21-hydroxylase tially functional sites such as exons and promoters. This highlights the (CYP21) gene. 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21-OHD) leads to impaired current lack, respectively need, of comprehensive information about synthesis of cortisol from cholesterol by the adrenal cortex. In 21-OHD the distribution and impact of rare genetic variants. CAH, excessive adrenal androgen biosynthesis results in virilization in all individuals and salt wasting in some individuals. More than 90 % of P10.06 cases of CAH are caused by point mutations or deletions of the CYP21 APOA5 gene polymorphism and triglyceride levels in metabolic gene which they are attributable to conversion of DNA sequences from syndrome patients its neighbouring duplicated CYP21P gene. The aim of our study was P. Kisfali1, M. Mohas2, A. Maasz1, F. Hadarits3, T. Oroszlan4, Z. Bujtor4, Z. Ba- to determine the mutational spectrum of CYP21 and the genotype and gosi4, B. Gasztonyi4, I. Wittmann2, B. Melegh1; phenotype correlation in Greek Cypriot patients with CAH. Molecular 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, analysis was performed in 41 CAH patients and 99 family members. Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Medicine and Nephrological Center, Uni- The most frequent genetic defects were V281L (50.68 %) in the non- versity of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 3Central Laboratory, Markusovszky County classical form and 8bpdE3 (20.54 %) and I splice (12.32 %) in the 2 Hospital, Szombathely, Hungary, 42nd Department of Medicine, Zala County salt wasting form. Compared with other populations, Greek Cypriot pa- Hospital, Zalaegerszeg, Hungary. tients had a higher frequency of V304M missense mutation (4.10 %) in Metabolic syndrome (MS) is a clustering of abdominal obesity, in- the nonclassical form. The severity of the genetic defects and the clini- creased triglycerides, low levels of high density lipoprotein cholesterol, cal-laboratory features of our patients are well correlated. Thus, these high blood pressure, and elevated fasting glucose levels and consists results underline the importance of genetic evaluation and counselling of multiple risk factors that are increasing the cardiovascular mortality. in hyperandrogenic women who are predicted to carry CYP21 causing Naturally occurring variants of the apolipoprotein A5 gene have been mutations by biochemical tests. There is also evidence that the het- associated with increased triglyceride level and have been found to erozygous carrier state for CYP21 mutations can be associated with confer risk for cardiovascular diseases. In our study four haplotype-tag- symptoms of androgen excess in certain susceptible individuals. ging polymorphisms, the T-1131C, IVS3+G476A, T1259C, and C56G alleles were analyzed. A total of 325 metabolic syndrome patients were P10.09 genotyped by polymerase chain reaction - restriction fragment length Geographical endogamy in morocco polymorphism. MS patients were separated into four quartile (q) groups H. Hami, A. Soulaymani, A. Mokhtari; based on triglyceride levels (q1: TG<1.38 mmol/l; q2: 1.38-1.93 mmol/ Laboratory of Genetic and Biometry, Department of Biology, Faculty of Sci- l; q3:1.94-2.83 mmol/l; q4: TG>2.83 mmol/l). We observed significant ences, Ibn Tofail University, PO Box 133, Kenitra, Morocco. relationships between three APOA5 minor allele carrier frequencies This study aims to evaluate the geographical marital endogamy among and plasma triglyceride quartiles: -1131C (q1: 4.94%; q2: 8.64%; q3: the population of Rabat-Salé-Zemmour-Zaer region in Morocco in or- 11.6%; q4: 12.3%), IVS3+476A (q1: 4.32%; q2: 7.4%; q3: 10.36%; q4: der to estimate the reproductive isolation (or openness) of the popula- 11.1%), 1259C (q1: 4.94%; q2: 7.41%; q3: 10.4%; q4: 11.7%). The se- tion studied. rum total cholesterol levels did not show allele-dependent differences. The study was conducted within a randomly selected sample of moth- The findings presented here revealed unique arrangement of APOA5 ers postpartum in Souissi maternity in Rabat city, between November minor alleles in MS. 2004 and June 2005. Endogamy among 270 couples was compared to that seen among their parents. Various types of endogamy were P10.07 measured, based on the place of birth, place of residence and geo- Determination of genetic profiles associated with atopic asthma graphical origin of the spouses and their parents. The results show the in madeira population tendency of couples toward geographical endogamy. This tendency A. G. Berenguer1, R. Câmara2, A. T. Fernandes1, S. Oliveira2, A. Brehm1; is very strong among couples within parental generation. The results 1Human Genetics Laboratory, Funchal, Portugal, 2Imunoallergology Unit, Cen- of intergenerational comparisons can be concluded to a significant tral Hospital of Funchal, Funchal, Portugal. decrease of geographical endogamy from one generation to the next Atopic asthma arises from gene-environment interactions. There are (parents and children) (p<0.001). The method homogamy index con- many genes associated to asthma and their combination may enlight- firms this decrease. However, the values obtained do not exclude the en some results obtained in other studies regarding different popula- importance of this marital behavior among the younger generation. tions. A sample of 100 children with atopic asthma was compared with 105Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  P10.10 a spontaneous abortion. The consanguineous women of early preg- catechol-O-methyltransferase gene polymorphism study in nancy losses were compared with non-consanguineous women from uterine leiomyoma patients from Russia the same population and with the same obstetrical history, matched N. S. Osinovskaya1, I. Sultanov2, L. Dzhemlikhanova2; for maternal age. The investigation showed no difference in the rate of 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- maternal disorders. There was also no evidence of familial clustering tion, 2St.Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. of recurrent miscarriage in both groups. The absence of a relationship Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) is one of several enzymes between recurrent miscarriage and consanguinity in Tunisia could be participating in catecholamines metabolism. The gene COMT (22q11) due to the particular characteristics of the native Tunisian population, in contains a G-to-A transition polymorphism in codon 158, which results which rare recessive genes are uncommon, or overall to the absence in a valine-to-methionine substitution in its protein product. Several of an association between recurrent miscarriage and consanguinity. studies postulate association of this polymorphism with uterine leiomy- oma - a common, benign, smooth muscle tumor of great medical and P10.13 social significance. The aim of our study was to investigate possible Polymorphisms of Genes involved in oxidative stress response association of COMT G158A polymorphism with uterine leiomyoma PON1 (Q192R, L55m), mn-sOD (Ala16Val) and cAt (c-262t) and in women from North-West of Russia. DNA was extracted from blood the Development of coronary Artery Disease (cAD) in Patients samples of 33 uterine leiomyoma patients and from 68 control females of Different Age and sex in st. Petersburg, Russia. and subjected to PCR-RFLP analysis. The relative frequencies of AA, M. Bogdanova1, G. P. Pardo2, A. N. Voitovich3, O. S. Romashkina3, B. I. AG, GG genotypes were 0.429, 0.257 and 0.314 in the uterine leiomy- Smirnov4, A. J. Anisenkova1, V. A. Isakov5, O. N. Semenova5, N. V. Kirillova2, O. oma group, respectively, compared to control subjects - 0.426, 0.176 A. Berkovich6, E. V. Shlyahto3, V. I. Larionova3; and 0.398, respectively. No statistically significant differences with re- 1St.-Petesburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian spect to allele frequency and genotype distribution were ascertained Federation, 2St.-Petersburg State Chemical Pharmaceutical Academy, Saint- for COMT G158A polymorphism in the patients and compared to the Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint- control groups (P=0.6 and P=0.6, respectively). Thus far we could not Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4St.- Petersburg Electrotechnical University, confirm association of the COMT G158A polymorphism with risk of Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5Research Center for People, who lived uterine leiomyoma in women from North-West of Russia. in Blockaded Leningrad, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 6St.- Peters- burg State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. P10.11 The higher levels of lipid peroxidation products in CAD patients could Prevelance of consanguineous marriage in Afyonkarahisar and be related to a higher susceptibility of their plasma lipoproteins to oxi- its relation with the occurence of congenital anomalies dation and/or to a decrease of plasma antioxidant defenses. H. Samli1, D. Toprak2, M. Solak1; We have investigated the associations of the SNPs of PON1 (Q192R, 1Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Afyon- L55M), Mn-SOD (Ala16Val) and CAT (C-262T) genes involved in oxi- karahisar, Turkey, 2Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Family dative stress response with levels of total CH, LDL-CH and HDL-CH. Medicine, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey. Materials: 228 men, survived miocardial infarction (MI) under the 45 This study was performed to search the frequency and the causes of (group I), 95 men with MI after 60 years (group II) and 115 healthy men consanguineous marriages and their effects on spontaneous abortions (group III); 74 angiographicaly diagnosed CAD women (group IV) and and births with congenital abnormalities. In this study, only one person 85 women after 80 years without CAD (group V). was selected from each family by random sampling method and face Genotypes were determined by PCR-RFLP. to face survey method was performed. Consanguineous marriage was The QR genotype of PON1 192 was more frequent in group I com- detected in 381 (19,6%) of 1940 married people in the families studied. pared to group IV (p=0,001), the frequency of MM genotype of PON1 It is detected that fist cousin marriage was the most frequent one with 55 were significantly lower in group V compared to group I (p=0,019). 14,8% and the second was other cousin marriages with 4,8% frequen- Total cholesterol level was higher in QR patient, than in QQ and RR cy. When first marriage age was evaluated, especially the frequency carriers of group V (p=0,026). of consanguineous marriage was detected to be high at the ages of 17 There were no differences in genotype distribution of CAT C-262T and less, while it was rare at the ages of 31 and over. It was detected among our groups. But, T/T carriers of CAT had lower level of HDL-CH that consanguinity between parents and low education level increased in group IV (p=0,005). the frequency of spontaneous abortion and congenital abnormalities. The Val/Val genotype of Mn-SOD was more frequent in group III than The frequency of spontaneous abortion and congenital abnormalities in group I (p=0.013). Concentration of LDL-CH in Val/Val genotype car- in families with consanguineous marriage was found to be significantly riers was lower compared to Ala/Ala or Ala/Val carriers (p=0.004) in higher than the group made foreign marriage. group I. The genetic variants of PON1, Mn-SOD and CAT are associated with Consanguineous marriage and its degree in lipoprotein levels in CAD patients in view of their sex and age. Afyonkarahisar consanguinity / Degree n % P10.14 No 1559 80.4 Investigation of COX-2 -765G→C promoter variants among Yes (First cousin marriage) 287 14.8 iranian and iraqi populations Yes (second cousin marriage) 94 4.8 total consanguineous marriage 381 19.6 F. Biramijamal1, M. Soltani1, A. Hossein-Nezhad1, M. Sanati1, S. j. Al-Awadi2, total number of population 1940 19.6 A. Al-Zaag3; 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Baghdad University, Baghdad, Iraq, P10.12 3Baghdad University, Tehran, Iraq. Assessment of a relationship between consanguinity and early Cyclooxygenases-2 enzyme (COX-2) elevates in chronically inflamed pregnancy loss in tunisian population tissues. It converts arachidonic acid to prostaglandins. It has been I. El Kamel Lebbi1,2, R. Bhouri1, W. Ayed1, O. Kilani1, S. Abdelhak2, N. shown that the COX-2 -765G→C promoter polymorphism is associat- Bouayed-Abdelmoula3, A. Amouri1,2; ed with decreased promoter activity, which results in decreased COX-2 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Institute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Molecular expression and the response to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases Research Unit (MIGOD), UR26/04, (NSAIDs). In addition, it has been reported that this polymorphism is Pasteur Insitute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Laboratoire d’Histologie Embryologie, associated with increased risks of several types of cancers and inflam- Faculté de Médecine de Sax, Sfax, Tunisia. matory diseases. In this study, we’ve tried to establish the possible relationship between The aim of the study is to determine the prevalence of the COX2 gene recurrent miscarriage and consanguinity in the Tunisian population, polymorphism in different ethnic groups in Iran compared with those where the prevalence of first cousin marriage is about 50%. A clus- from Baghdad city in Iraq. The study population was selected from ter sample of 100 married couples, representative of all population eight cities. After obtaining signed informed consents, blood samples groups and all geographic locations of Tunisia were randomly selected were collected. Genotyping was performed with PCR-RFLP and con- whom were asked whether or not they had experienced a stillbirth or firmed with sequencing. Range of the C allele frequency was 11.4%Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  in Tehran to 27.1% in Shiraz. Overall, there were no significant differ- individual, optimized drug therapy. ences in allele frequencies across cities or ethnic groups. However, the allele frequency of the COX-2 genotype in the Tehran population P10.17 was significantly different from that of the Shiraz population (p value study of DFNB59 gene mutations in exon 2 and 4 in association = 0.048). The results indicated that the prevalence of this COX2 poly- with deafness using PcR-RFLP in a Province of iran morphism did not differ in healthy populations from Iran and Baghdad. M. Taherzadeh Ghahfarrokhi1, E. Farrokhi2, J. Saffari Chaleshtori2, S. kha- Thus, this polymorphism may be a suitable target for genetic research demi2, S. Asadi2, F. Shayesteh2, G. Mobini2, N. Parvin3, M. Banitalebi2, R. Hagi- in the field of inflammatory diseases among Iranian and Arab popula- hoseini Baghdadabadi4, H. Nazem4, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori2; tions. 1Tehran Payame Noor Univ and Cellular and Molecular Research Center Univ. of Med.Sci, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cellular and Molecular Re- P10.15 search Center Univ. of Med.Sci, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Plant study of association between polymorphism of 5 genes and Reaserch Center, Shahrekord Univ. of Med.Sci, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic crohn’s disease in Russian population of Iran, 4Biochemistry Dept., Payame noor Univ, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Y. A. Nasykhova1, N. V. Semenov2, T. E. Ivaschenko1, A. Y. Baranovskii2, V. S. Iran. Baranov1; Background and aim: Hearing loss is a heterogeneous disorder and 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, may be due to genetic or environmental cause. A novel gene, DFNB59 2Medical Academy of Postgraduate study, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. encods pejvakin has been very recently shown to cause neural deaf- Crohn’s disease (CD) is a chronic relapsing inflammatory bowel disor- ness. This study aims to determine the frequency of DFNB59 gene der which etiology remains unknown. At present the incidence of this mutations in exon 2 and 4 in 100 patients negative for GJB2 mutations disorder increases in the world. Therefore CD is thought to be one of in a province of Iran. the serious problems in the gastroenterology. Methods: In this descriptive-lab based study we investigated the fre- Allele and genotype frequencies of 8 polymorphic variants of 5 genes quency of DFNB59 gene mutations in exon 2 and 4 of the gene. such as NOD2/CARD15 (Arg702Trp, Gly908Arg, Leu3020InsC), TNFA DNA was extracted from all patients following the standard phenol (-238G/A, -308G/A), VDR (Taq-1), IL-4 (C-590T), IL-4R (Q576R) were chloroform procedure. The two mutations T54I and R183W was deter- studied in CD patients (102 individuals) and in controls (112 individu- mined using PCR-RFLP procedure. als). The patients and the control individuals were recruited in the North- Results: The AF1III restriction enzyme digested the related restriction West region of Russian Federation. The frequency of 3020InsC allele site in all of the 100 samples examined. Also, SsiI restriction site were of NOD2/CARD15 gene was 3-fold higher in CD patients compared digested in all of the 100 samples. These data indicate that no T54I to controls (18% against 6%, p=0.006). In patients with complicated and R183W mutations were not detected in deaf individuals tested. forms of CD the 3020InsC allele was significantly more frequent (27%) Conclusion: Based on data from the present study and previous study, compared to patients with inflammatory forms of CD (8,3%; p=0,02). we conclude that DFNB59 gene mutations have a very low contribu- 26,5% of CD patients were carriers of the rare allele -308*A for -308G/ tion to deafness in patients in a province of Iran. However, we exam- A polymorphism of TNFA gene and only 8% of controls (p=0.0004). ined only 2 DFNB59 mutations in 100 patients and to determine the The frequency of heterozygote genotype -308*GA was significantly role of this gene in developing deafness the entire coding region and higher in CD patients than in controls (24.5% against 8%, p=0.0004). promoter of the gene need to be investigated in more samples. Frequency of 576*RR genotype of IL-4R gene was significantly higher in CD patients (11,7%) in comparison with controls (1,4%; p=0,016, P10.18 OR=9; 95% CI:1.15-71.47). DNA repair gene polymorphisms in dialysis patients Thus, 3020InsC, -308*A alleles and 576RR genotype could be the risk M. Guven1, B. Batar1, G. S. Güven2, M. R. Altıparmak3, A. Tunçkale3, S. Trab- factors of CD in Russian population. We suggest that DNA-testing of lus4, M. Seven2, E. Yosunkaya2, A. Yüksel2; polymorphic variants of NOD2/CARD15, TNFA, IL-4R genes is impor- 1Department of Medical Biology, Cerrahpasa Medical School University of tant for the presymptomatic diagnostics of Crohn’s disease. Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medi- cal School University of Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Internal P10.16 Medicine, Cerrahpasa Medical School University of Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey, cYP2c19*2, cYP2c19*3 and cYP2c19*4 alleles frequencies in a 4Department of Nephrology, Istanbul Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Romanian population Turkey. A. P. Trifa, R. A. Popp, M. S. Militaru, T. O. Crisan, D. R. Arbore, I. V. Pop, A. Patients with end-stage renal failure, whether on conservative or hae- D. Buzoianu; modialysis therapy, have a high incidence of DNA damage, therefore University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. the potential involvement of DNA damage and its repair are of par- CYP2C19, a member of the cytochrome P450 superfamily, metabolizes ticular interest. Polymorphisms of DNA repair enzymes may affect around 15% of the clinical relevant drugs. Its coding gene, CYP2C19, repair efficiency and modulate cancer susceptibility. In this study, we has been shown to be polymorphic, two prominent alleles, CYP2C19*2 aimed to determine the frequency of four polymorphisms in two DNA and CYP2C19*3, well studied in many populations, being associated repair enzyme genes, xeroderma pigmentosum complementation with a poor metabolizer phenotype. The CYP2C19*4 allele, which is group D (XPD) and X-ray cross-complementing group 1 (XRCC1), in also associated with a poor metabolizer status is less characterized in 65 patients undergoing hemodialysis, and 61 subjected to peritoneal the Caucasian populations. Taking into consideration the lack of data dialysis, matched for gender and age with 60 controls. We used poly- regarding the frequencies of these three CYP2C19 alleles in Romania, merase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymor- the aim of this study was to provide a first evaluation of these alleles on phism (RFLP), to analyze XPD Asp312Asn, XPD Lys751Gln, XRCC1 a Romanian population group. The CYP2C19 alleles were studied in Arg194Trp, and XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphisms.The genotype dis- 200 healthy unrelated individuals. PCR-RFLP assays were employed tributions in the patients and controls were in Hardy-Weinberg equi- for the study of each CYP2C19 allele, plus an extra tetra-primer PCR librium for each polymorphism. For each polymorphism there was no assay used to randomly verify the results obtained with PCR-RFLP significant difference in the genotype distribution between the control for CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3 alleles. CYP2C19*2 was observed group and the dialysis patients, or between the HD and the PD pa- in heterozygous state in 49 individuals (24.5%) and in homozygous tients (p>0.05). Allele frequencies were also not statistically different state in 3 individuals (1.5%), while CYP2C19*3 allele was not dem- between the groups (p>0.05). We conclude that DNA repair gene poly- onstrated in any individuals. CYP2C19*4 was seen in heterozygous morphism is not associated with renal failure. state in one individual (0.5%), who was heterozygote for CYP2C19*2 as well. Thus, the allele frequencies for CYP2C19*2, CYP2C19*3 and P10.19 CYP2C19*4 were 13.75%, 0% and 0.25%, respectively. Overall, 4 in- Analysis of dopamine D2 receptor (DRD) gene polymorphisms dividuals (2%) included in this study are predicted to be CYP2C19 in cannabinoid users poor metabolizers. Genotyping for CYP2C19 variants before starting M. Nacak1, A. Baransel Isir2, S. Oguzkan-Balcı3, S. Pehlivan3, A. Aynacioglu1, the medication with drugs substrates for CYP2C19 could reduce the N. Benlier1; impact of adverse drug reactions and treatment failures, based on an 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology,Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department and haplotypes in Amerindians. Hence, we examined the distribution of Forensic Medicine, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3University of Gaziantep, Faculty of of three clinically relevant eNOS polymorphisms (T-786C in the promot- Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey. er, a variable number of tandem repeats-VNTR- in intron 4, and the Cannabis has been shown to increase the release of dopamine from Glu298Asp in exon 7) in 170 Amerindians from three tribes of Brazilian the nucleus accumbens. Dopamine receptor genes which are ex- Amazon, which are characterized by low admixture levels (2-3%) with pressed in this brain region can be candidates for cannabis addiction. nonindigenous people. We also estimated the haplotype frequency We therefore investigated whether polymorphisms in DRD2 gene are and evaluated associations between these alleles, and compared associated with cannabinoid users in Turkish population. these findings with previously reported results from black and white In this study total 80 cases with cannabinoid users and 100 age-and Brazilians. The Asp298, C-786 and 4a alleles were less common in Am- sex-matched healthy controls were tested for two SNPs which were erindians (5.0%, 3.2% and 4.1%, respectively) than in blacks (15.1%, Taq1-A and Taq1-B in DRD2 gene. SNPs were genotyped by PCR- 19.5% and 32.0%, respectively) and whites (32.8%, 41.9% and 17.9%, RFLP. respectively) (P<0.001). The most common predicted haplotype in the The distribution of A1/A1, A1/A2, and A2/A2 genotypes for Taq1-A three groups combined only the most common alleles, but exhibited polymorphism was 11%, 26% and 63% in cases compared with 4%, the highest estimated frequency in Amerindians (89%). Our findings 25% and 71% in controls (p=0.152). The allele frequency of A1 and are consistent with a lower genetic diversity in Amerindians compared A2 was 0.242, 0.758 in cases compared with 0.165, 0.835 in controls with blacks and whites. These striking interpopulation differences (p=0.09). Also, the distribution of B1/B1, B1/B2 and B2/B2 genotypes among Amerindian, black and white Brazilians may be of major rel- for Taq1-B polymorphism was 7%, 24% and 69% in cases compared evance for case-control association studies focusing on eNOS gene with 4%, 23% and 73% in controls (p=0.576). The allele frequency of polymorphisms in admixed populations, such as the American and the B1 and B2 was 0.194, 0.806 in cases compared with 0.155, 0.845 in Brazilian populations. controls (p=0.333). We conclude that distribution of the genotypes and the allele frequen- P10.22 cies were not significantly different between cannabinoid users and Presence of 4a allele of 4a/4b eNOS polymorphism may controls in DRD2 gene. However the observed genotype counts was contribute to the risk of complications in post-acute period of deviated significantly from those expected according to the Hardy- myocardial infarction (mi) Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE p=0.02 for Taq1-A, p=0.03 for Taq1-B). E. S. Kalaidina1, T. D. Glebovskaya2, M. A. Bogdanova3, A. N. Voitovich3, A. P. This is the study that we give the preliminary data is still going on. Khmyrova3, A. G. Obrezan1, O. A. Berkovich4, E. V. Shliakhto2, V. I. Larionova3; Further studies with larger samples are needed to address the exact 1St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Federal role of DRD2 gene in cannabinoid users. Heart, Blood and Endocrinology center after V.A. Almazov, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. P10.20 Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4St. Petersburg State Medical University, St. Polymorphisms of cytokine genes are associated with Petersburg, Russian Federation. endometriosis BACKGROUND: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) is consid- M. Kozlovskaya, G. Demin, N. Shved, M. Yarmolinskaya, S. Selkov, T. ered an important enzyme in regulation of vascular tone and therefore Ivashchenko, V. Baranov; may be involved in development of MI. A role of 4a/4b eNOS polymor- Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynaecology RAMS, St.-Petersburg, Russian phism in the risk of MI remains unclear. Federation. OBJECTIVE: To investigate genotype distribution and allele frequen- Endometriosis results from the outgrowth of endometruium tissue out- cies of 4a/4b eNOS polymorphism in male patients of different age side the uterine cavity with subsequent proliferation of the cell and with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and those who had survived MI growth in the pelvis. Typical endometrioid cells are characterized by in- being at the same age a few years ago. creased cytokine activity. Cytokine genes are polymorphic that results STUDY DESIGN: 13 male patients with AMI under the age of 45 (group in synthesis of proteins with various functional activities. Our study fo- I), 57 male patients with AMI older 60 (group II), 275 men who had sur- cuses on the role of allelic variants of IL4, IL4RA, TNFα and RANTES vived MI being under 45 (group III), and 100 men who had survived MI genes in pathogenesis of endometriosis. being older 60 (group IV) a few years ago. 4a/4b eNOS polymorphism DNA samples from the patients with endometriosis (n=120) and healthy was determined by PCR [Taniwaki et al., 2001]. women without gynecologic complications (n=91) were included in the RESULTS: Frequency of 4a allele was significantly higher in men from study. Polymorphisms of IL4 (-590T>C), IL4RA (1902A>G), TNFα (- the group I compared to the group III (p = 0.047, OR = 2.5). The num- 238G>A; -308G>A) and RANTES (-403G>A) were defined by PCR- ber of 4a allele carriers (men with 4a/4a and 4a/4b genotypes) was RFLP assay. Levels of TNFα and RANTES in peritoneal fluid were twofold in the group I compared to the group III (OR = 2.0 95 % CI measured by immunochemical analysis. 1.17-3.4). There was no difference in the allele frequencies and geno- The alleles and genotypes frequencies of IL4 gene did not differ be- type distribution in men from groups II and IV. tween the studied groups. The frequency of G/G genotype for IL4RA CONCLUSION: Our results allow suggesting that presence of 4a allele gene, -308 A/- and -238 A/- genotypes for TNFα gene and -403A/G of 4a/4b eNOS polymorphism may contribute to the risk of complica- genotype for RANTES gene were significantly higher in endometrio- tions in post-acute period of MI in young male patients. sis patients (18.8%, 42.2%, 44.9%, 48.3%) as compared to the con- trols ( 1.4%, 8.9%, 9.9%, 27.7%, p<0.01). Also the increased level of P10.23 TNFα and RANTES was found in peritoneal fluid in patients with en- the LiPOchip experience in spain dometriosis. The presence of rare alleles of IL4RA (1902A>G), TNFα M. Stef, A. Molano, L. Palacios, D. Tejedor, A. Martinez; (-308G>A) and RANTES (-403G>A) genes, associated with increased Progenika Biopharma SA, Derio, Spain. level of corresponding proteins could be treated as a risk factor in de- DNA-based mutation screening methods usually make the definitive velopment of endometriosis. diagnosis of Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) and the detection rates vary considerably from 25 to 80%, depending on the clinical crite- P10.21 ria used for the diagnosis, the genetic heterogeneity of the population Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOs) polymorphisms and studied and the different analytical methods performed. haplotypes in Amerindians from Brazilian Amazon To improve the FH genetic diagnosis, we have developed a new diag- M. Rizzatti Luizon, T. Izidoro-Toledo, A. L. Simões, J. Tanus-Santos; nostic tool based on a DNA-array system (LIPOchip) which has been Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. used since 2004 by the Spanish Health System. The LIPOchip plat- Disparities in the frequency of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) form comprises two steps: firstly the genetic analysis of FH patients is polymorphisms may explain differences in nitric oxide (NO)-mediated achieved by the use of a chip containing the 247 most frequent Span- effects and response to drugs among black and white subjects. While ish mutations (238 LDLR, 3 APOB and 6 PCSK9 mutations). Since these differences in the distribution of eNOS polymorphisms have around ten percent of LDLR mutations are deletions or duplications of clearly been shown in the American and in the Brazilian populations, part of the gene, the chip is also able to detect Copy Number Change there is no information regarding the distribution of eNOS gene alleles (CNC) in the LDLR gene. If no mutation is detected by the chip, se-Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  quencing of the entire LDLR gene is finally carried out. firmed. Karyotyping was performed in 9 cases and no chromosomal 2462 Spanish index cases were analyzed and mutations were found abnormality was found. No evidence of specific teratogenic exposure in 47% of the patients (94% of point mutations and 6% of CNCs). Se- was observed. quencing has been performed on negative samples and detected 66 new mutations leading to a final percentage of mutation detection of P10.26 49%. Molecular Identification of the most prevalent mutations of We here show that the chip is able to detect nearly 95% of Span- glucose-6-phosphat dehydrogenase(G6PD) gene isolated in two ish mutations and allows high throughput genetic diagnosis. We fi- provinces, Fars and Esfahan of iran nally show a poor relation between clinical diagnosis (based on Dutch F. Hashemi-gorji1, M. R. Noori-daloii2, M. R. Alivand1, P. Atef-vahid1, R. Salehi3; MedPed criteria) and genetic diagnosis, supporting that both diagnosis 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, should be employed. Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3De- P10.24 partment of Medical Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Esfahan University of Medi- the spectrum and frequency of mEFV mutations in newborns cal Sciences, Esfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. from tbilisi, Georgia Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most C. Oberkanins1, B. Rauscher1, I. Korinteli2, M. Korinteli2, G. Kriegshaeuser1, K. common human enzyme defect, being present in more than 400 mil- Pagava2; lion people worldwide. It catalyses the oxidation of glucose-6-phos- 1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics and phat to 6-phospho Gluconat in the first committed step of the pentose Adolescent Medicine, State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia. phosphate pathway, which provides cells with pentoses and reduc- Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is a hereditary inflammatory dis- ing power in the form of NADPH. fauvism disease causes hemolytic order caused by mutations in the MEFV gene. Carrier rates are known anemia impressible of fava bean and primaquine anti-malaria drug. to be particularly high among Sephardic Jews, Turks, Armenians and Genetic defect caused by mutations in the G6PD gene, resulting in Arab populations. The spectrum and frequency of MEFV mutations in variants with wide range of biochemical and clinical phenotypes. Re- Georgia has not at all been investigated so far. cently have been shown that prevalence of G6PD deficiency in regions Multiplex PCR and reverse-hybridization teststrips (FMF StripAssay) with malaria provides circumstantial evidence that G6PD deficiency were applied to simultaneously analyze twelve common MEFV mu- confers resistance against malaria. tations in DNA samples from dried blood on filter cards, which had The aim of this study was the molecular analysis of common G6PD been obtained from 202 unselected newborns at various hospitals in mutations (Mediterranean, Chatham, Cosenza and A-(G202A/A367G) Tbilisi, Georgia. We found 30 samples to be heterozygous and 1 to be in the patient with fauvism. compound heterozygous or complex (two mutations in cis). The carrier Studies on G6PD deficiency in Fars and Esfahan provinces were per- rate of MEFV mutations (15.3%) was remarkable, although lower than formed in 92 patients with a history of fauvism which collected 34 and data reported from neighbouring Turkey and Armenia (approx. 20%). 62 samples, respectively. genomic DNA with PCR-RFLP method ana- The most frequently observed variants were E148Q (15x), M680I G/C lyzed for known mutations such as; Mediterranean(C-T)nt, Chatham, (5x) and M694V (4x). Five other MEFV mutations were found at lower Cozensa and A202(G-A)/367(A-G) mutation ( PCR-RFLP). incidence (V726A, A744S, R761H: 2x each; P369S, F479L: 1x each). Our results indicated that, two different major polymorphic variants Our data indicate that MEFV mutations, including severe ones such were found: from the total 96 samples, 79 had G6PD Mediterranean as M680I and M694V, are not uncommon in the Georgian population. (82.3%) and 8 sample had G6PD Chatham (8.33%), and none of the Based on these new findings, the awareness for FMF and the avail- samples had Cozensa, A-(G202A/A367G) mutation AND remained ability of appropriate testing should be further promoted in Georgia. unknown. (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at) Conclusions: Result showed that G6PD Mediterranean was the most prevalent mutation in this two province which is similar to results of P10.25 other studied provinces in Iran. Fryns syndrome: epidemiological data from 33 European birth registries P10.27 I. Barisic1, L. Odak1, M. Loane2, F. Bianchi3, E. Calzolari4, E. Garne5, D. Welles- study of genes for glutathione s-transferases GSTT and ley6, H. Dolk2, EUROCAT Working Group; GSTM in patients with liver cirrhosis in siberian part of Russia 1Children’s University Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2University of Ulster, I. A. Goncharova1, M. Rachkovskyi2, E. V. Beloborodova2, E. U. Bragina1, V. P. Newtonabbey, Co Antrim, United Kingdom, 3CNR Institute of Clinical Physiol- Puzyrev1,2; ogy, Pisa, Italy, 4University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 5University of Southern 1Scientific Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 6Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess 2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Anne Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are phase II xenobiotic metabo- Fryns syndrome (OMIM 229850) is a rare autosomal recessive mal- lizing enzymes which intended for the detoxification of electrophilic formation syndrome. The main features include diaphragmatic hernia, compounds, including, therapeutic drugs, environmental carcinogens, characteristic dysmorphic features, and distal limb anomalies. Addi- acetaldehyde and products of oxidative stress. Oxidative stress is im- tional malformations of central nervous system, gastrointestinal and portant pathogenic factor in liver damage related to alcohol and hepa- genitourinary system can be present as well. Because of the rarity and titis B and C. observed phenotypic variability there is a need for better delineation of We investigated association for homozygous deletion (null genotype) epidemiological and clinical aspects of this condition. We present data of genes GSTT1 and GSTM1 with a cirrhosis of a liver and its etiol- on 22 cases of Fryns syndrome reported to a large European network ogy. The group of patients with a cirrhosis consisted of 189 inhabitants of congenital malformation registries (EUROCAT) in the 1980-2002 pe- of Tomsk area of Russia. Among them were patients with alcoholic riod. Prenatal ultrasound examination detected abnormalities in 13/22 cirrhosis (n=82), viral induced cirrhosis (n=34) and cirrhosis of mixed (59%) fetuses. Mean gestational age at discovery of an abnormality by etiology (n=73). The 135 inhabitants of Tomsk was population control prenatal ultrasound was 22±3.9 (18-33) gestational weeks. Congenital group. diaphragmatic hernia (20/22 or 91%), limb defects (16/22 or 72.7%), Comparison of null alleles in the group with liver cirrhosis with control genitourinary tract anomalies (16/22 or 72.7%) and cleft palate (10/22 group has shown decreased frequency of null genotype for GSTM1 or 45.5%) were the most frequently found malformations. There were (39.2% and 54.8% in cases and controls, respectively, p=0.007) and 4/24 (18.2%) fetal deaths, 12/22 (54.54%) pregnancy terminations and null genotypes for GSTT1 and GSTM1 (7.9% and 15.6%, p=0.048). only 6/22 (27.3%) live born. Male: female ratio was 2 (14/7). The mean There were no differences in frequency of null genotypes for genes gestational age at birth was 33 weeks. The mean live birth weight was GSTT1 and GSTM1 between subgroups of patients with a cirrhosis 1591±967g for males and 2075±125g for females. Only one newborn of various etiology. However, patients with alcoholic cirrhosis and cir- survived the first week of life. Parental consanguinity was present in rhosis of mixed etiology were characterized by lower frequency of null 11/22 (50%) instances. In 9/22 (41%) cases previous siblings with genotype for gene GSTM1 comparing to control group (39%, 34.2% anomalies were noted, but in only one case Fryns syndrome was con- and 54.8%, p=0.034; p=0.007). We suppose, that null genotype geneEvolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  GSTM1 could be protective concerning alcoholic cirrhosis and cirrho- rs731236, rs2228570, rs1544410, rs1801133, rs1805087) were typed sis of mixed etiology. in 100 unrelated individuals (sex ratio 60:40) from Bucharest region (Romania). Aim was to analyze the genetic variability and to establish P10.28 the relation between this region and other European populations. Distribution of polymorphisms in genes for interleukins and Allele frequencies were calculated by direct counting; Hardy-Wein- their receptors in different ethnic groups of siberia berg equilibrium was assessed by an exact test. Gene diversity for N. P. Babushkina, E. Y. Bragina, A. A. Rudko, A. N. Kucher; each population was calculated. Genetic distances matrices were rep- Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. resented using Nei’s method by PHYLIP 3.68 package. Tree topol- Distribution of polymorphisms in genes IL4 (rs2243291), IL4RA ogy was inferred using the Neighbor-Joining method and assessed (rs1801275 and rs2074570), IL12A (rs568408), IL12B (rs3212227 and through 1,000 bootstrap iterations. rs3212220) and IL12RB1 (rs3746190 and rs11575926) in four ethnic In our lot, the most common polymorphism was MTR-rs1805087 groups of Siberian region (the immigrant Caucasian population - Rus- (82.5%) and the least frequent was VDR- rs731236 (50%). The gene sians, and indigenous Mongoloid populations - Yakuts, Tuvinians, diversity compute was 0.545. Polymorphism’s frequencies were simi- Buryats; 96 individuals in each group) was studied. lar to the mean frequencies calculated for the whole set of populations Comparison of allelic frequencies with the data on other populations included in the study. The most affiliated population with our lot are worldwide [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov] has shown that for six out of Italy, Spain, Poland, Germany, Greece and Turkey the most distant eight investigated SNPs the frequencies were beyond the values known population are United Kingdom, Sweden, Croatia and Slovacia. for Caucasians and Mongoloids (except for IL4RA (rs1801275) and This study indicates that data on SNPs provide information about the IL12B (rs3212220)). Allelic frequencies for SNPs in IL4 (rs2243291), evolutionary history of human populations. In the future other genetic IL4RA (rs2074570), IL12RB1 (rs11575926), IL12B (rs3212220) are markers will be studied to be compared with the results obtained in significantly different between Russian and indigenous populations of neighboring populations to elucidate more precisely the genetic struc- Siberia. For two SNPs (rs3746190 in gene IL12RB1 and rs3212227 ture of this region of the Balcanic Peninsula. in gene IL12B) ethnic differences in distribution of allelic frequencies were shown. No ethnic specificity was shown for distribution of allelic P10.31 frequencies for rs568408 in IL12A and rs1801275 in IL4RA. Accord- Genetic differences between four European populations ing to pairwise F values calculated for studied SNPs in four ethnic V. Moskvina1, M. Smith1, D. Ivanov1, International Schizophrenia Consor- ST groups, the extent of genetic differentiation in Siberia makes up 3.71 tium, D. Blackwood2, C. Hultman3, M. Gill4, A. Corvin4, C. O’Dushlaine4, M. %. We observed that only Buryats and Yakuts do not show statistically O’Donovan1, M. Owen1, G. Kirov1; significant distinctions in their genetic structure. 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2University of Edinburgh, Edin- The results once again testify high genetic heterogeneity of ethnic burgh, United Kingdom, 3Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Trinity Col- groups in Siberian region which has to be considered while planning lege Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. genetic-epidemiological studies of common diseases. Population stratification can distort the results of genome-wide asso- ciation studies (GWAS). One approach to deal with this inflation of P10.29 the statistic is to estimate the inflation factor and adjust the detection X-chromosomal haplotypes in global human populations statistic accordingly. However, the evolutionally forces work with differ- V. A. Stepanov, I. Y. Khitrinskaya; ent strength in some regions of the human genome, e.g. around the Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. lactase gene (LCT) and the HLA region, making such an adjustment To reconstruct the origin and evolution of X-chromosomal lineages inappropriate. in global human populations we investigated the genetic diversity in We examined the population differences in four European populations 23 population samples (about 1500 individuals totally) using SNP (Scotland, Ireland, Sweden and Bulgaria) using data from GWAS per- markers in a single linkage disequilibrium region of ZFX gene. About formed with the Affymetrix 6.0 array at the Broad Institute. We show sixty haplotypes belonging to 3 phylogenetic branches (A, B, and F) that there are >20,000 SNPs which are highly (p<10-6) significantly originated from the single African root were found in the total sample. stratified between the four populations, after genome wide Bonferroni Branch A includes mostly African haplotypes, whereas four major hap- correction for multiple testing. We then examined the top 20 stratified lotypes belonging to different sub-branches of B (haplotype E8) and F regions to see what genes might have caused the top differences, us- (haplotypes H4, I3 and I11) were present in Eurasia. Major haplotype ing a highly conservative cut-off of p<10-40. Some of the loci span genes of the older branch B (E8) is almost evenly distributed among Eur- reported before: hair colour and pigmentation (HERC2, EXOC2), the asian populations. Haplotypes of the younger phylogenetic branches LCT gene, genes involved in NAD metabolism, and genes involved in demonstrates clinal distribution with the sharp frequency changes immunity (HLA and the Toll-like receptor genes TLR10, TLR 1, TLR from East to West. Haplotype H4 is presumably “Eastern-Eurasian”. It 6). Among the top hits were several genes which have not yet been reaches the highest frequency in Eastern and South-Eastern Asians. reported as stratified within European populations, indicating that they Haplotypes I3 and I11 in the contrary show the clear frequency gradi- might also provide a selective advantage. Some involve other immunity ent from West to East with the highest frequency in Europeans, moder- genes (CD99, ILT6), but others show no obvious effect on positive se- ate frequency in Central Asia, and the minimal frequency in North-East lection: several zinc fingers, and most intriguingly, FOXP2, implicated and South-East Asia. The total level of genetic differentiation of global in speech development. Future GWAS should take into consideration human populations estimated by the analysis of molecular variance of any positive associations with these genes. X-chromosomal haplotypes (Fst = 9.1%) is quite high and roughly cor- responds to those measured for most other types of genetic markers P10.32 except Y-chromosomal haplogroups which are characterized by the conditional linkage and genome-wide association studies much higher level of between-population differences. identify UGt1A1 as major gene for anti-atherogenic serum bilirubin levels - a Framingham Heart study P10.30 J. Lin1, J. P. Schwaiger2, L. Cupples3, C. J. O’Donnell4, G. Zheng5, V. Schoen- Genetic Position of Bucharest region (Romania) in the born2, S. C. Hunt6, J. Joo1, F. Kronenberg2; According to Eight DNA markers 1National Heart Lung and Blood Institute; National Institutes of Health, Bethes- M. L. Toma1, M. Stavarachi1, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, M. Cojocaru1, N. da, MD, United States, 2Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Innsbruck, Austria, Panduru2, I. Radu1, L. Gavrila1; 3Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States, 4Fram- 1Institute of genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Prof. N. C. Paulescu” Institute of ingham Heart Study, Framingham, MA, United States, 5National Heart Lung Diabetes, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, Bucharest, Romania. and Blood Institute; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MA, United States, Historically, the Bucharest city that was founded at the end of XIV cen- 6Cardiovascular Genetics Division, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt tury played a key role as a trade route for south-eastern civilization, Lake City, UT, United States. and it has been the setting for numerous conquests and demographic Objective and Methods: Low bilirubin levels are significantly associated expansions. with cardiovascular diseases (CVD). In previous genome-wide linkage In this work, eight DNA markers (rs4646994, rs61722009, rs7975232, studies we identified a major locus on chromosome 2q harboring theEvolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  candidate gene UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1). The activity Republic of Iran. of this enzyme is significantly influenced by a TA-repeat polymorphism Background and aim: Hearing loss is the most common sensorineural in the promoter of the gene. In a prospective study individuals with disorder in human. This disorder is heterogeneous and happens due genotype (TA)7/(TA)7 had significantly higher bilirubin levels and ap- to genetic or environmental causes or both. Mutations in the GJB2 proximately one third the risk of CVD as carriers of the wild type (TA)6 gene have been involved in deafness in many populations. This study allele. In the present study we performed a conditional linkage study to aims to investigate genetic epidemiology and frequency of GJB2 gene investigate whether this polymorphism explains the observed linkage mutations in 45 big deaf pedigrees. peak and extended our analysis by a genome-wide association study Methods: In this genetic epidemiology study we have investigated 45 on bilirubin levels in 1345 individuals. big deaf pedigrees concerning inheritance patterns consanguinity and Results: After adjustment for the bilirubin variance explained by this diversity of deafness severity among siblings using data collected by polymorphism, the LOD score on chromosome 2q dropped from 3.8 to questionnaires and audiograms. We examined also the frequency and 0.4, demonstrating that this polymorphism explains the previous link- profile of GJB2 gene mutations in 45 probands using direct sequenc- age result. For the genome-wide association study, the closest marker ing strategy. to UGT1A1 was in the top ranking SNPs. The association became Results: Our study revealed 73% of consanguinity in the deaf pedi- even stronger when we considered the TA-repeat polymorphism in the grees studied from which first cousins marriage was the more common analysis (p=2.68x10-53). Five other SNPs in other regions reached with the rate of 49%. The most common type of first cousins marriage genome-wide significance without obvious connection to bilirubin me- was found between first cousin who were the children of two brothers. tabolism. We found autosomal recessive and X-linked recessive pattern in 94- Conclusions: Our studies suggest that UGT1A1 may be the major 97% and 3-6% of the pedigrees studied respectively. gene with strong effects on bilirubin levels and the TA-repeat poly- We found also 57% of diversity (mild to profound) of deafness severity morphism might be the key polymorphism within the gene controlling among deaf siblings GJB2 mutations were found in 11% of population bilirubin levels. Since this polymorphism has a high frequency and a studied including 35delG, 167delT, 299-300delAT and 363delC. substantial impact on the development of CVD, the gene might be an Conclusion: A high rate of consanguineous marriage determined in this important drug target. study could rise the rate of autosomal recessive patterns up to 94-97% of the overall pedigree and would be the main cause of congenital P10.33 deafness. This study revealed a low contribution of GJB2 gene muta- Polymorphism of some cytokines genes in connection with age tions in Chaharmahal va Bakhtiari Province. gradation V. V. Pauk, I. A. Tuktarova, T. R. Nasibullin, O. E. Mustafina; P10.35 Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. GJB2 carrier screening with ultrasonographic measurement of Aim of study was to investigate IL6 (-572G/C), IL10 (-627C/A), IL12B epidermal thickness. (1159A/C) and TNFA (-308G/A) gene polymorphisms in connection V. I. Guerci1, P. Guastalla2, D. Stefanidou3, D. L. Grasso4, A. Fabretto1, F. Fal- with age gradation. etra1, A. P. D’Adamo5, L. Ronfani6, P. Gasparini1,5; Total group (1627 individuals, from 1 to 109 years old, ethnic Tatars, 1Dipartimento di Scienze della Riproduzione e Sviluppo, Trieste, Italy, 2Radiol- Russia) was divided into young (1-20), middle-age (21-55), aged (56- ogy Unit, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 3Sinfony, Bologna, Italy, 4ENT 74), senile (75-89) and long-living (90-109) persons. Gene polymor- Unit, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 5Genetics Unit, IRCCS Burlo Garo- phism was analyzed by PCR-RFLP. Fisher’s two-tailed exact test was folo, Trieste, Italy, 6Epidemiology Unit, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy. used for age groups comparison. Inherited hearing loss (IHL), affecting 1/1000 children, represents an Among aged persons IL6(-527)*G/*G genotype frequency was important public health issue and implies disability, expensive inter- higher than in middle-age group (80.0% vs. 69.28%, P=0.004). IL6(- ventions and rehabilitation. The most frequent cause of IHL, due to 527)*G/*C genotype frequency was lower in group of long-livers than mutations in GJB2 gene, presents a high carrier frequency worldwide. in middle-age group (15.79% vs. 27.9%, P=0.006). IL6(-527)*C/*C There are no means to identify them apart from expensive DNA- meth- genotype frequency was lower in aged (0%, P=0.005) and senile ods. Recently high epidermal thickening due to GJB2 carrier status groups (0.56%, P=0.03) than in middle-age group (2.82%). In middle- was suggested. We used skin ultrasonography measurement of epi- age group IL10(-627)*C/*C genotype frequency (56.09%) was higher dermal thickness in a series of controls and obligate carriers. 273 in- in comparison with aged (47.83%, P=0.034), senile (43.53%, P=0.005) dividuals were tested by ultrasonography using a linear band probe to and long-livers groups (43.28%, P=0.015). Accordantly, in this group determine their epidermal thickness. Variance and linear regression IL10(-627)*C/*A genotype frequency (34.56%) was lower than in aged analyses were carried out. Regression coefficients were used to obtain (42.61%, P=0.03), senile (45.54%, P=0.002) and long-livers groups scores of thickness corrected by age and sex. Carriers presented sig- (46.27%, P=0.021). IL12B(1159A/C)*C/*C genotype frequency is nificant increase in epidermal thickness as compared to controls, GJB2 higher in senile group than in middle-age group (6.78% vs. 3.21%, status explaining 50% of this variability. Results led to the development P=0.049). In aged and senile groups TNFA(-308)*G/*G genotype fre- of a screening protocol with 98% of sensitivity and 93% specificity, in quencies were 71.39% and 79.37%, TNFA(-308)*A/*G genotype fre- subjects aged 20-80, with a likelihood ratio of a positive test of 14 to 1. quencies - 26.08% and 18.53% accordantly (P=0.02). Better results were obtained studying people in reproductive age. The Thus, genotypes frequencies changes of studied genes in various age availability of a simple, non-invasive, rapid, sensitive, and cheap ultra- groups are traced. This data allow considering cytokines genes as as- sonographic protocol opens new perspectives for carrier screening in sociated with life span. the population. Present data further supports the role of skin thickness The research was particular supported by Grant RFH 08-06-00426a. as major selective advantage for GJB2 carriers. Bibliography P10.34 D’Adamo et al. Does epidermal thickening explain GJB2 high carrier Genetic study of 45 big hearing loss pedigree and GJB2 gene frequency and heterozygote advantage? Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Dec mutations frequency in a province of iran 3. E. Farrokhi1, S. Shirmardi2, A. Khoshdel1, S. Amani1, M. Soleimani2, M. Kasiri2, Guastalla et al. Epidermal sonography can detect epidermal thicken- J. Rahbarian2, N. Parvin3, N. Shahinfard3, Z. Noaparast4, A. Salehifard1, M. ing in GJB2 carriers. Radiology. Radiology; 2009.Feb3. Afzal1, M. Shirani5, M. Hashemzadeh1; 1Cellular and Molecular Research Center,Shahrekord University of Medical Sci- P10.36 ences, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Ministry of Welfare Chaharmahal Genome-wide interaction Analysis Guided by A Priori va Bakhtiari province, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medical Plants information Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, C. Herold, T. Becker; Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Ministry of Welfare, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, Bonn, Germany. 5School of Public Health, Zabol University of Medical Sciences, Zabol, Islamic Complex diseases are caused by interacting genetic and environmental factors. Due to computational burden, genome-wide association stud- ies (GWAS) are typically limited to single-marker analysis. We presentEvolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 0 an approach for genome-wide interaction analysis that overcomes the P10.39 computational issue by prioritizing SNPs for interaction analysis using Worldwide HLA class i and ii Diversity a priori information. Sources of information can be biological relevance N. M. Qutob, A. Manica, F. Balloux; (common pathway, gene location ...) or statistical evidence (single Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. marker association at a moderate level). We present a respective soft- The Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) is a key component of the im- ware product that implements different approaches to joint analysis of mune system of vertebrate as it is responsible for the recognition and multiple SNPs (full modelling of marginal and interaction effects as well presentation of antigens and comprises the most polymorphic genes as explicit testing for association with a log-linear model). Moreover, in vertebrates. Numerous hypotheses have been proposed to explain link to databases with the relevant biological information is provided. how this diversity could be maintained. One such hypothesis (called We also present the results from an application to a GWAS. Pathogen-Driven Balancing Selection) states that different alleles pro- vide protection against different pathogens. A prediction under this P10.37 hypothesis is that populations exposed to a wider variety of diseases Hereditary Nervous system Diseases in Rostov Region should be characterised by higher diversity at their HLA genes. This N. A. D. Z. Vetrova, N. Vetrova, S. Amelina; prediction has recently received some support in humans when it was Rostov Medical Institute, Rostov, Russian Federation. shown that once past demography was accounted for, there is a posi- Research of Hereditary Nervous System Diseases is important for the tive correlation between HLA class I within-population genetic diversity following reasons: their prevalence among neurological disorders is and the number of endemic diseases found in that area. high. Many patients develop mental and physical handicap leading to My work involves compiling a large database of HLA allele frequen- severe disability. The population of eight districts was examined to ac- cies from human populations worldwide, including class I and II genes. cess prevalence of hereditary nervous system disorders in Rostov Re- One limitation of previous work was that a very simple measure of gion. Data collection and processing were done according to the proto- genetic diversity was computed, and the different alleles were simply col of Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory of Medical Centre in Moscow. considered as identical or different. Thus, my work involves using more The neuromuscular disorders in Rostov Region’ population composes refined measures of genetic diversity and focuses on the residues 30.62% of all hereditary nervous system diseases. Their prevalence is forming the Peptide Binding Region (PBR), as these are the expected 19.94 per 100,000 population. Hereditary Sensory-Motor Neuropathy target of natural selection. was prevailing not only in the group of neuromuscular diseases, but The work indicates that the geographic apportionment of HLA diversity also in hereditary nervous system disorders group. Total of 28 cases is the product of both past demography and complex selective pres- were identified in 15 families. The prevalence was 8.72 per 100,000 sures. It also highlights the complexity of the selective process, with population. DNA testing was performed to identify dup mutation in the likely involvement of coevolution with KIR genes and marks differ- gene RMR22 in all patients. ences between different classes of genes. This study identified 13 cases of Duchene/Becker Muscular Dystro- phy in 10 families. Prevalence was 8,10 per 100,000 male population. P10.40 DNA testing was performed to identify mutations in gene DMD in 9 HLA polymorphisms in são tomé and Príncipe Archipelago families. (West-Africa) Other common disorders such as oligophrenia, microcephaly and N. Saldanha, A. Lemos, A. Brehm, C. Spínola, H. Spínola; congenital hydrocephalus comprise 47.6 % of all hereditary nervous Human Genetics Laboratory, Funchal, Portugal. system diseases in Rostov Region; prevalence was 30,85 per 100,000 HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-DRB1 loci polymorphisms were high-resolu- population. tion typed through sequence based typing in Forros and Angolares Hereditary Nervous System Diseases, Duchenne/Becker Muscular ethnic groups from São Tomé and Príncipe archipelago (West-Af- Dystrophy, Neurofibromatosis and Tuberous Sclerosis are prevaling rica). The most frequent HLA-A alleles found in Forros were A*0201, disorders among Rostov Region’s population. All this diseases are A*2301 and A*6802, with 13% each. With a similar frequency (14%), single gene disorders, which is also true for Russian Federation neu- HLA-A*6802 was also a very common allele in Angolares, followed by ropathology spectrum. A*2301 (9.2%). HLA-B*5301 was the most frequent HLA-B allele in both Forros (19%) and Angolares (24%). The most recurrent HLA-DRB1 P10.38 alleles in São Tomé and Príncipe population were HLA-DRB1*0301 confounding factors in testing parent-of-origin effects: (12% in Forros and 18% in Angolares) and HLA-DRB1*1503 (11% in illustration with Hirschsprung disease genetics. both Forros and Angolares). Haplotypes A*6802-B*0702-DRB1*1301 A. Jannot1,2, J. Amiel2,3, A. Pelet2,3, S. Lyonnet2,3, F. Clerget-Darpoux1,4; in Forros (3%) and A*6802-B*5301-DRB1*0804 in Angolares (4.7%) 1INSERM U535, Villejuif Cedex, France, 2INSERM U781, Paris, France, 3Uni- were the most common three loci found in each group. versité Paris Descartes, Faculté de médecine, Paris, France, 4Université Paris Phylogenetic analysis reveals the West Coast of Africa as being the -sud, Villejuif, France. place of origin of São Tomé and Príncipe main genetic pool, specifically Parent-of-origin effect may be tested on affected sib pairs or trio family the area comprised between Guinea-Bissau and the Gulf of Guinea. data by comparing paternal and maternal transmission to the affected Forros and Angolares systematically cluster together in phylogenetic cases. However, the conclusion of these tests is not robust to non ran- analysis and are not statistically different, making the hypothesis that dom parental mating. In particular, we demonstrate, through theoreti- Angolares are descendents of slaves who escaped from plantations cal modelling, that reduced fertility and spermatic fitness can mimic a and kept themselves resistant to miscegenation plausible. parent-of-origin effect both for sib pairs and case-parents trios. In order to distinguish between true parent-of-origin effect and bias resulting P10.41 from reduced fertility, we propose here a method which combines the Genomic runs of homozygosity: population history and disease information on trios and sib-pairs. R. McQuillan1, M. Kirin1, C. S. Franklin1, V. Vitart2, P. McKeigue1, A. F. Wright2, We illustrate our findings with the International Hirschsprung disease H. Campbell1, J. F. Wilson1; (HSCR) Consortium data. RET is the major HSCR locus and a par- 1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Medical Research ent-of-origin effect has been suspected. Both the strong sex-ratio in Council Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. favour of females combined with a poor prognosis and the involvement Runs of homozygosity (ROH), resulting from the inheritance from both of RET in spermatogenesis have led to challenge a parent-of-origin parents of identical haplotypes, are abundant in the human genome. effect. Indeed, by combining the results of affected sib-pairs and trios, ROH length is determined partly by the number of generations since we show that a reduced fertility is the most likely mechanism to explain the common ancestor: offspring of cousin matings have long ROH, the observed allele sharing distortion in HSCR. while the numerous shorter ROH reflect shared ancestry tens and hundreds of generations ago. In studies of European populations we show that F , a multipoint estimate of individual autozygosity derived roh from genomic ROH, distinguishes clearly between subpopulations classified in terms of demographic history and correlates strongly with pedigree-derived inbreeding coefficients. In a global population da-Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  taset, analysis of ROH allows categorisation of individuals into four tational processes, such as replication slippage and point mutations, major groups, inferred to have (a) parental relatedness in the last 150 and selection, such as purifying selection and selection on the read- years (many south and west Asians), (b) shared parental ancestry aris- ing frames in which tandemly repeated codons can accumulate. The ing hundreds to thousands of years ago through population isolation balance between these processes significantly differ in two regions: and restricted effective population size (Ne), but little recent inbreed- replication slippage and strong purifying selection probably were the ing (Oceanians, African hunter-gatherers, some European and south main force for the evolution of the repeated glutamine codons, while Asian isolates), (c) both ancient and recent parental relatedness (Na- synonymous and non-synonymous point mutation and weaker puri- tive Americans), and (d) only the background level of shared ancestry fying selection drove evolution of repeated proline codons. Analyzed relating to continental Ne (east Asians, urban Europeans; African ag- region of the HD gene is an example for rapid evolutionary change in riculturalists). Long runs of homozygosity are therefore a widespread an evolutionary ancient gene, leading to crating homopeptide regions, and underappreciated characteristic of our genomes which record past which could assign huntigtin protein with some new functions. consanguinity and population isolation and provide a unique record of individual demographic history. Individual ROH measures also allow P10.44 quantification of the disease risk arising from polygenic recessive ef- the estimation the age of the founder mutation causing fects. We present preliminary data from a survey of the effects of ROH autosomal recessive hypotrichosis in chuvash and mari on quantitative disease-related traits and disease risk. Republics of Russia E. A. Bliznetz1, N. N. Vasserman1, R. A. Zinchenko1, E. I. Rogaev2, A. V. P10.42 Polyakov1; Detection and quantitation of mu opioid receptor splice variants 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Brud- mRNA in peripheral blood lymphocytes of opioid addicts nick Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, Department of Psychiatry, University N. Vousooghi1, A. Goodarzi2, F. Roushanzamir1, T. Sedaghati2, M. Zarrindast3, of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States. M. Noori-Daloii4; Chuvash and Mari populations of Russia is of great interest, as three 1Shahid Beheshti Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Sina endemic autosomal recessive diseases has been recorded with high cellular and molecular research center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Insti- frequency in these regions: erythrocytosis (OMIM#263400), osteope- tute for Cognitive Sciences Studies, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Tehran trosis (OMIM#259700), and hypotrichosis (OMIM#604379). The pres- University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ence of such genetic differentiation in the populations presumably re- Aims: In the present study we have investigated the presence and sults from the long reproductive isolation of the populations and the changes of PBLs mRNA expression of four human mu opioid receptor genetic drift. It was established the founder mutations caused this con- splice variants (hMOR-1A, hMOR-1O, hMOR-1X, and hMOR-1Y) in ditions - Arg200Trp in VHL gene, c.807+5G>A in TCIRG1 gene and ex the opioid addiction process to see whether they can serve as periph- 4 del in LIPH gene correspondingly. Recently, the age of the mutation eral markers. for erythrocytosis and osteopetrosis in Chuvashians calculated and Design: Splice variants mRNA expression in PBLs was detected and was average 1,250 and 890 years. measured by real-time PCR using SYBR green dye. In this work to estimate the age of the founder mutation for hypotricho- Participants: Four groups, each comprising of 30 male individuals were sis in Chuvash and Mari populations we were analyze five microsatel- included: opioid addicts, methadone maintained patients, long-term lite markers (D3S3730, D3S3609, D3S3592, D3S1262 and D3S3600) abstinent former opioid addicts, and non-addicted control subjects. flanking the LIPH gene in 18 Chuvash and 20 Mari chromosomes Findings: hMOR-1A and hMOR-1O are expressed in PBLs. However, bearing the mutation and in populations chromosomes (74 and 86). we did not observe PBLs expression of hMOR-1X and hMOR-1Y. The The mutation was associated with D3S3609, D3S3592 and D3S1262 hMOR-1A expression was reduced in abstinents (reaching 0.33 the in Chuvasians and with D3S3609 and D3S3592 in Marians. The mean amount of control group), up-regulated by the factor 1.94 in methadone age was equal to 26.3 generations for Chuvashians and 35.67 genera- maintained patients and not statistically different in addicted group in tions for Marians, i.e. ~ 720 and 1070 years. These results assume comparison to controls. The hMOR-1O expression was significantly that bottle neck was 700 - 1000 years ago in these regions. reduced in abstinent and methadone maintained subjects reaching 0.39 and 0.53 the amount of control group, respectively. However, ad- P10.45 dicted group was not statistically different from controls. the Linkage Disequilibrium Pattern of IGF- Promoter Conclusions: Deficiency in expression of hMOR-1A and hMOR-1O Polymorphism splice variants measured by a suggested peripheral marker, may be a Y. Chen1, W. Huang1, H. K. V. Leung1, L. S. N. Tang1,2; risk factor making individuals susceptible for drug addiction. This de- 1Department of Chemical Pathology, Shatin, Hong Kong, 2Laboratory of Genet- ficiency reaches to nearly normal levels in opioid addicts. However, ics of Disease Susceptibility,Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, Shatin, from therapeutic point of view, we have no explanation for hMOR-1A Hong Kong. mRNA up-regulation and hMOR-1O mRNA down-regulation in metha- Introduction: Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) is a strong risk factor of done maintained subjects at the moment. various cancers including colon cancer, prostate cancer and premeno- keywords: human, lymphocytes, mRNA expression, mu opioid recep- pausal breast cancer. Some studies suggested that the length of a cy- tor splice variants, opioids tosine-adenine (CA)n repeat polymorphism located in the promoter 1 region 970bp upstream of transcription start site (TSS) of IGF-I gene is P10.43 proportional to the IGF-I expression, while some others failed to repro- coevolution of the repeated glutamine and proline codons in the duce this relationship. Therefore, we hypothesized that there may be mammalian Huntington disease gene some other genetic variations in the IGF-I promoter region contributing D. Savic-Pavicevic1, D. Krndija2, G. Brajuskovic1, S. Romac1; to the high activity of IGF-I other than the -970 CA microsatellite re- 1Faculty of Biology, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Department of Internal Medicine I, Ulm, peat. The objective of this study was to define the relevant haplotypes Germany. of IGF-I promoter in the Chinese population. The human Huntington disease (HD) gene contains a CAG microsatel- Methods and results: One hundred and sixty male Chinese subjects lite encoding a polyglutamine tract, followed by cryptically simple re- participated in this study. Three identified SNPs (-603 T/A, -705 T/C, gions encoding a proline reach region. The HD gene is evolutionary -1410 T/C) and the -970 CA microsatellite repeat in the IGF-I promoter conserved between Drosophila and humans, but repeated CAG co- 1 were selected and genotyped by restriction fragment length poly- dons are seen only in the vertebrates, while repeated CGG codons are morphism (RFLP). The results showed that three haplotypes, C-18-TT, present only in the mammals. To improve understanding of the evolu- C-19-TT, and T-21-CA, are prevalent, and they account for almost 80% tion of the HD gene repeated codons, we sequenced that part of the of genotypes in the Chinese population. gene in 17 mammalian species. The analysis of the obtained nucleo- Conclusion: The haplotype pattern, together with the CA microsatellite tide and supposed protein sequences, as well as database sequences repeat number, may be a biomarker for various cancers in the Chinese of non-mammalian species, led to a model that predicts the coevolu- population. Additional studies are needed to investigate the different tion of repeated glutamine and proline codons in the mammalian HD transactivation activity of the prevalent haplotypes in the Chinese gene. The coevolution probably resulted from interplay between mu- population.Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  Acknowledgement: The study was supported by Research Grant La Laguna, Spain, 4MODERN, Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrin, Council (RGC), Hong Kong SAR government. Spain. Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 3 gene (IRAK3) is a candidate P10.46 susceptibility gene for complex disease processes such as asthma interleukin-23 receptor gene polymorphisms in Hungarian and sepsis. Before validating these associations in the Spanish popu- patients with psoriasis lation, here we used re-sequencing data of the gene from this popula- E. Sáfrány1, M. Széll2, V. Csöngei1, L. Járomi1, A. Maász1, C. Sipeky1, B. Me- tion to select different sets of tagging SNPs (tagSNPs), one including legh1; potentially functional variants (set1) and a second set unselected for 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, their functionality (set2), and compared their accuracy in predicting un- Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Rheumatology and Allergology, University of typed variants. Additionally, we explored how well a set of tagSNPs Szeged, Szeged, Hungary. chosen from the European HapMap samples data (set3) performed in Background: Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory disease that affects the Spanish population. These three sets were used to estimate minor the skin and joints. Its prevalence rates vary from 0-5% to 4-6% be- allele frequencies (MAFs) of untyped variants using TUNA software. A tween countries and races, affecting 2-3% of whites of European high correlation between observed and estimated MAFs was found for descent. Recently, associations were found between several autoim- all three sets (R2>0.95). Differences between observed and estimated mune diseases including psoriasis and variants of interleukin-23 re- MAFs were similar for set1 and set2 (~7%) and were much higher for ceptor (IL23R) gene. In our current work we analysed the association set3 (34%), being reduced by two-fold (1.7%, 2.7% and 17%, respec- of nine polymorphisms of IL23R with psoriasis in Hungarian samples. tively) for common variants (MAF≥10%). On the basis of these results, Methods: Groups of patients with psoriasis (n=214) and unrelated, we propose that only common (MAF≥10%) untyped variants of this clinically healthy control subjects (n=192) were genotyped using PCR- gene should be considered for association studies, especially when RFLP methods. Results: We observed a significant increase in the tagSNPs are selected from a reference HapMap population. Although carriage of the minor allele of rs11805303 in the psoriasis group com- functionally-enriched tagSNPs sets might be a straightforward way of pared to controls conferring a 1.55-fold risk for the development of exploring the association of a candidate gene with disease, their use psoriasis (p=0.029; OR=1.55; 95% CI: 1.05-2.29). Similarly, in psoria- increase genotyping costs without improving the accuracy in predicting sis patients the homozygous carrying of the minor allele of rs2201841 untyped variants or the coverage of the gene. or rs10889677 conferred a more than 2-, and 3-fold increase for Supported by grants from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innova- the development of psoriasis, respectively (for rs2201841: p=0.024; tion SAF2004-06833, PI081383 and EMER07/001. OR=2.41; 95% CI: 1.12-5.15; for rs10889677: p=0.008; OR=3.04; 95% CI: 1.34-6.92). Conclusions: We confirmed the associations of IL23R P10.49 polymorphisms with psoriasis in a Hungarian population, and were first Association of iL-10 promoter genetic polymorphisms with to demonstrate the effect of the rs11805303 intronic SNP on the dis- the risk of Kawasaki Disease and outcome of coronary artery ease. lesions L. Ger1,2, T. Lai2, K. Hsieh3, Y. Hwang4, K. Weng3, S. Huang1, Y. Chiao2, M. Lin5; P10.47 1Department of Medical Education and Research, Kaohsiung Veterans Gen- the incidence of inborn Erros of metabolism (iEm) in Estern eral Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 2Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Province of saudi Arabia SunYat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 3Department of Paediatric Cardiol- H. Moammar1, G. Cheriyan2, N. Al-Sannaa2; ogy, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 4Department 1King Fahed University Hospital, Khobar, Saudi Arabia, 2Dhahran Health Cen- of Cardiology, Fon-Lin Veterans Hospital, Hua-Lan, Taiwan, 5Institute of Public ter, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. Health, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Objective: To determine the number of children born with Inborn Errors Kawasaki disease (KD) is the most common cause of paediatric ac- of Metabolism (IEM) from 1983-2008 within the Saudi Aramco Medical quired heart disease. Recent studies have indicated that the acute Services Organization (SAMSO) medical centers. This population is KD patients were with 3-33 fold higher levels of interleukin-10 (IL-10) a relatively stable well defined population of the Eastern province of in plasma. Therefore, a family-based association study of 101 case- Saudi Arabia where a thorough follow up system is provided to all the parents trios and a matched case-control study of 76 KD cases with patients. coronary artery lesions (CALs) and 76 KD controls without CALs were Methods: The records of all patients, born from January 1983-Decem- carried out to evaluate the association of SNPs in IL-10 promoter (- ber 2008 within SAMSO facility and diagnosed with IEM. 1082, -819, and -592) with the risk of KD and CALs. Based on the Results: Over the last 25 years, 165,530 infants were born and fol- TDT results, there were significant differences in the transmission of lowed up at SAMSO. Among these infants, 248 were diagnosed with IL-10-819 and -592 SNPs (p=0.005 and 0.012, respectively). In ad- different types of IEM. The over all estimated incidence was 150 cases dition, the TC and CC genotypes of IL-10-819T>C were associated per 100,000 live births. 54 % of these were labeled as small molecules with the increased risk of KD (AOR, 1.33; 95%CI, 0.71-2.50 and AOR, disorders such as aminoacidopathy, organic acidopathy, urea cycle 3.25; 95%CI, 1.15-9.22, respectively) but decreased risk of CALs disorders and fatty acids oxidation disorders. Organic acidopathy was (AOR, 0.93; 95%CI, 0.47-1.81 and AOR, 0.074; 95%CI, 0.01-0.62, the most commonly diagnosed small molecule disorder (29/100,000). respectively), as compared to TT genotype. The AC and CC geno- Lysosomal Storage Diseases (LSD) was diagnosed in 31.5 % of chil- types of IL-10-592A>C were with borderline significance of increased dren. 43 % of these were mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) and the most risk of KD but decreased risk of CALs (AOR, 0.90; 95%CI, 0.46-1.75 common type was MPS VI. The incidence per 100,000 live births for and AOR, 0.03; 95%CI, 0.03-0.87, respectively), as compared to AA each group was estimated. genotype. Furthermore, as compared with TA/TA diplotype (defined by Conclusion: Our data provides a good estimate of IEM incidence in -819T>C and -592A>C), CC/CC diplotype of IL10 was associated with the population studied. Consanguinity plays a major role in the high the increased risk of KD (AOR, 3.25; 95%CI, 1.15-9.22) but with the incidence of single gene autosomal recessive disorders among this decreased risk of CALs (AOR, 0.18; 95%CI, 0.04-0.72). In conclusion, population. However, we believe this data still underestimated the true IL10-819 and -592 SNPs played important but contrary roles in the incidence. Therefore, regional newborn screening program will help susceptibility of KD and CALs outcome. provide the best estimation of the incidence of IEM in this population. P10.50 P10.48 Kinship and fertility in a fast-growing population is there a need for functionally-enriched tagsNPs sets in M. Tremblay, M. Jomphe, B. Casgrain, È. Lavoie, M. Bouchard, H. Vézina; candidate gene case-control association studies? An IRAK Université du Québec à Chicoutimi, Chicoutimi, QC, Canada. gene re-sequencing data exploration The relation between kinship and fertility has been investigated in M. Pino-Yanes1,2, T. Klassert3, L. Perez-Mendez1,2, A. Corrales1,2, M. Hernan- many populations, with mixed results regarding the advantage or dez3, J. Villar1,4, C. Flores1,2; disadvantage of consanguineous unions on reproductive success. In 1CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Spain, 2Research Unit, Hospital Uni- most cases though, measures of kinship were limited to close links versitario NS de Candelaria, Spain, 3Department of Genetics, Universidad de due to lack of genealogical data. In this study we investigated a to-Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  tal of 24728 couples who married between 1840 and 1944 in the Sa- among the groups. guenay-Lac-St-Jean (SLSJ) region of Quebec (Canada). Genealogical Our findings failed to prove an association between G2677A/T poly- and fertility data were obtained from the BALSAC population register. morphism in ABCB1 gene and drug resistance In Iranian epileptic pa- Most genealogical branches go back to the early 17th century, with an tients average depth of nearly 10 generations. All genealogical links between spouses of each couple were measured. Kinship coefficients were P10.53 computed by cumulating kinship links at each generation level, up to Aetiology of mental retardation in malta using clinical, the tenth generation. Fertility measures include total number of chil- cytogenetic, array cGH and molecular diagnostic techniques dren, married children and grandchildren for each couple. For most of E. Said1,2, A. Cuschieri1, S. Suleiman1, G. Neri3; the period, fertility levels remained high in this population. On average, 1Department of Anatomy & Cell Biology, University of Malta, Msida, Malta, SLSJ couples had 7 children, 4 married children and 21 grandchildren. 2Mater Dei Hospital, Malta, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Universita Cattolica,, Due to high levels of genealogical depth and completeness, at least Rome, Italy. one kinship link was found for nearly all couples (94%). At the tenth Introduction: Genetic aetiology of mental retardation is complex and generation, the average kinship coefficient reaches a value of 0.0076 includes chromosomal abnormalities, monogenic or polygenic condi- which is almost 5 times higher than the average value for close kinship tions, microdeletion syndromes and epigenetic disorders. (< 5 generations). Couples who share at least one ancestor before the Methods: A total of 380 individuals were studied using a diagnostic seventh generation have on average 7.4 children, compared to 6.9 protocol based on dysmorphology and clinical assessment. Investiga- children for couples with no kinship link. tions included a routine karyotype, testing for cryptic chromosomal re- arrangements using FISH and array CGH and DNA testing for FMR1, P10.51 MECP2 and other genes as indicated. studying human genome variation in malaria-endemic Results: A specific cause for the mental handicap was identified in 243 populations individuals (64%). These included a chromosomal abnormality in 86 K. Kivinen, on behalf of The Malaria Genomic Epidemiology Network; (22%), fragile X syndrome in 7 (1.8%), Rett syndrome in 9 girls (2.4%), Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. microdeletion syndrome in 4 (1%), recognizable syndromes in 43 Malaria is an enormous burden to global health care and represents (11%), neurological disorders in 25 (6.6%), metabolic conditions in 3 the strongest known evolutionary pressure on human genome. The (0.8%), an environmental cause in 26 (6.8%) and autism spectrum dis- Malaria Genomic Epidemiology Network Consortial Project 3 (Malaria- order in 21 (5.5%). Subtelomeric screening in 73 families identified a GEN CP3) assesses genetic variability in malaria-associated genomic microdeletion of 1pter and a t(7p:9p). Array CGH in 15 individuals with regions within and across malaria-endemic populations by re-sequenc- normal subtelomeric screens identified a 2MB duplication of 11q25, ing. Regions are prioritised based on their significance in genome- and a 6MB deletion of 22q12. wide association (GWA) studies and by their perceived relevance to Conclusion: While clinical diagnosis and conventional techniques form the medical research community. Each participating study site aims the mainstay of investigation of individuals with mental retardation, to collect DNA from at least 90 individuals. Our repository currently molecular cytogenetics and array CGH proved important diagnostic stores DNA from ~2000 individuals from 12 African and South-East tools increasing the diagnostic yield by 2%. Asian countries. We have completed a pilot study spanning four genomic regions in 288 P10.54 individuals from six populations. The regions contain alpha-globins Frequency of conserved extended haplotypes of the mHc region (90kbp, chr16), beta-globin (110kbp, chr11), SLC4A1 (30kbp, chr17) in Hungarian families and G6PD (20kbp, chrX). Automated variation detection pipeline has A. Szilágyi1, Z. Bánlaki1, E. Pozsonyi2, A. Hossó2, K. Rajczy2, G. Füst1; identified 19,000 putative SNPs, of which ~2300 have been verified 13rd Department of Internal Medicine, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department of Im- manually. More than 50% of verified SNPs appear to be novel. Manual munogentics, National Blood Transfusion Service, Budapest, Hungary. verification of oppositely fixed positions and putative insertion-deletion Conserved extended haplotypes (CEH) or ancestral haplotypes (AH) polymorphisms is ongoing. are characteristic features of the major histocompatibility complex Current commercially available genotyping platforms are too sparse (MHC) region of the band 6p.21.3 on the short arm of chromosome 6. for powerful GWA studies in malaria-endemic populations. In addi- Although many studies performed on reference cell lines of homozy- tion, markers used to successfully fine-map one population may fail gous individuals were reported recently, family studies with the updat- to detect association in another population due to local variations in ed CEHs suitable to establish their population frequencies are scarce. haplotype structure and low level of linkage disequilibrium (LD). Our Therefore we performed such a study in 52 families in Hungary. Re- project will help to identify tagging markers for fine-mapping studies sults obtained in 49 Caucasian and 3 Gipsy families were separately and provide a rich source of information regarding genome structure in evaluated. Besides HLA-A, -B and -Cw as well as HLA-DR1/DQ1 African and South-East Asian countries. alleles, copy number polymorphism of the C4A and C4B genes and several SNPs encoded in the central (class III) MHC region (RAGE P10.52 -429T>C, Factor B S/F, HSP70-2 1267A>G, TNF -308G>A and LTA multidrug resistance in iranian epileptic patients is not 252A>G) were determined. associated with g2677t/a polymorphism in the abcb1(mdr1)gene By analyzing 188 Caucasian haplotypes in Hungary we found 12 pre- F. Kamgarpour1,2, A. Arab1, K. Gharagozlie3, M. Karimipour1, M. Sayyah1; viously reported haplotypes in 53 copies. As expected, the most thor- 1Institut Pasteur of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Khatam University, oughly studied haplotype AH8.1 or [B8, SC01, DR3] occurred most Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Sci- frequently (5.85%). In addition, 13 new, earlier not reported haplotypes ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. in 32 copies were found in a frequency of at least 1% among the Hun- Purposes: P-glycoprotein 170 encoded by the multidrug resistance garian chromosomes. Interestingly, a part of the DRB1-DQB1 blocks of 1 (MDR-1) gene, exports various antiepileptic drugs out of the CNS, these novel haplotypes were of Central-Asian type, in accordance with which leads to multidrug resistance. the origin of the Hungarians. These findings indicate that conserved The relationship between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) extended haplotypes are more frequent in the Caucasian population in the MDR1 gene and drug resistance in Iranians with epilepsy was than it is expected therefore their detailed analysis would be required evaluated in this study. for disease-association studies of this region. Methods: The SNP at nucleotide position G2677A/T in exon 21 of MDR1 gene was genotyped by PCR-RFLP and ARMS-PCR in 300 P10.55 Iranian Individuals. Subjects were classified according to whether they Involvement of the modifier gene of a human Mendelian disorder had drug-resistant (n=100) or drug-responsive epilepsy (n=100) or in a negative selection process healthy control (n=100). I. Jéru1, H. Hayrapetyan2, P. Duquesnoy1, E. Cochet3, J. Serre4, J. Feingold1, G. Results: The frequencies of genotype and phenotype were compared Grateau5, M. Jeanpierre6, T. Sarkisian2, S. Amselem1; between three groups. The results showed that the frequencies of 1INSERM U.933, Paris, France, 2National Academy of Sciences, Yerevan, genotype (G &A&T) and phenotype were not statistically significant Armenia, 3Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France, 4Université de Versailles-Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  Saint Quentin en Yvelines, Versailles, France, 5Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France, The genotype distribution were observed in healthy population: 4.6% 6Faculté de médecine Cochin, Paris, France. in AA, 28.6% in AG and 66.6 % in GG. The frequency of A allele is 19 Identification of modifier genes and understanding their mechanism of % whereas the frequency of G allele is 81 %. action represent two major challenges in human genetics. SAA1 is one The presence of the A and G allele frequencies in various populations of the few modifiers identified in humans. This gene is known to influ- such as China, USA, Australia, Brazil, Europe, France and Germany ence the risk of renal amyloidosis (RA) in patients with familial Medi- is similar to our results according to the published data. Nevertheless, terranean fever (FMF), an autoinflammatory disorder associated with it was understood that A allele frequency in the populations in Taiwan mutations in MEFV. Indeed, the SAA1 alpha homozygous genotype and Korea was lower than that of us while G allele frequency was and the p.Met694Val homozygous genotype at the MEFV locus are higher and that there was a deviation from Hardy-Weinberg Equilib- two main risk factors for RA. Here, we investigated Armenian FMF pa- rium (p<0.05) only in China and Germany populations. tients and controls living in two neighboring countries: Armenia, where RA is frequent (24%) and Karabakh, where RA is rare (2.5%). The fre- P10.58 quencies of p.Met694Val homozygotes were found to be similar in the Genetic portraits of populations of sakha (Yakutia): implications two groups of patients. However, a major deficit of SAA1 alpha homo- for the history of peopling of Northeast Eurasia zygotes was found in Karabakhian patients as compared to Armenian S. A. Fedorova1, M. Reidla2, I. A. Kutuev3, E. Metspalu2, J. Parik2, S. Rootsi2, E. patients (p=5.10-5), whereas, in the two control populations, genotype K. Khusnutdinova3, R. Villems2; distributions at this locus were similar and complied with Hardy-Wein- 1Yakut Research Center, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Rus- berg equilibrium (HWE). Most importantly, we observed deviations sian Federation, 2University of Tartu and Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, from HWE in the two groups of patients, and unexpectedly, in oppo- 3Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Center, Russian Acad- site directions. A population-based study revealed that the excess of emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. SAA1alpha homozygotes in Armenian patients is readily explained by Northeast Eurasia was colonized by modern humans at least 30 kya the recruitment of patients with severe phenotypes. In contrast, the [Pitulko et al., 2004]. The consecutive archaeological cultures chang- deficit of alpha/alpha among Karabakhian patients revealed a negative ing observed in the region is regarded as the effect of multiple waves selection against individuals carrying this genotype. This study, which of migrations from territories surrounding upper reaches of Enisei, provides new insights into the role of SAA1 in the pathophysiology of Lake Baikal and Amur River basin. To elucidate the human coloniza- FMF, represents the first example of deviations from HWE and selec- tion process in Northeast Eurasia mtDNA and Y chromosome lineages tion involving the modifier gene of a Mendelian disorder. variation was analyzed in populations of the Republic Sakha (Yakutia) in the northeastern part of Russian Federation. Haplotypes of mito- P10.56 chondrial DNA were determined by sequencing of HVSI and analysis Research of monogenic hereditary ophthalmopathology of the of 86 diagnostic sites of coding region in 694 individuals from 7 popula- Rostov region. tions of Yakutia - Central, Vilyuy and Northern Yakuts, Evenks, Evens, O. L. Kireeva, S. S. Amelina, O. V. Khlebnikova, R. A. Zinchenko; Yukaghirs, Dolgans. The diversity of Y-chromosome lineages was Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. studied in 318 men by typing 24 biallelic and 6 microsatellite loci of Y Hereditary pathology of the eye comes up to about 30% in the general non-recombining portion. On the basis of 33 novel and 250 published structure of eye disorders. Population of eight rural districts of the Ros- complete mtDNAs sequences of haplogroups (hgs) CZ, D and R1, the tov region was examined. Total size of investigated populations was topology of of hgs C, Z, D4j, D4m, D4e, D5 and R1 was refined. We 320925 persons (90% Russians).The research was conducted under typed informative coding region markers defining distal twigs of the the original examination protocol, providing for detection of more than obtained trees in populations of Yakutia to mark out differences be- 2500 various hereditary disorders (HD) and syndromes. The diagnos- tween them that could discriminate the different stages of colonization tics was performed by physicians of different specialties possessing and to found the traces of ancient Paleolithic migrations in this area. professional qualification of HD. To obtain a wider view of the entire region as a complete system, we Families with monogenic herediritary ophthalmopathology (MHO) analyzed our results in a broader context of the Eurasian mtDNA and which constituted 36,8% of the total number of patients identified in Y-chromosomal variability. this population. The prevalence of the whole MHO was 1:823 persons, including isolated forms 1:1408, and the prevalence of 1:1981 as a P10.59 part of hereditary syndromes. Nosological spectrum of MHO in the mitochondrial DNA sequence variability in Bulgarian population Rostov region is notable for a great variety. The most numerous MHO S. Dimitrova1, B. Zaharova1, A. Todorova2, A. Savov1, V. Georgieva1, I. Kre- groups were pathology of the retina, optic nerve and cataract. Virtually mensky1; all hereditary forms of retina degeneration known as of today were de- 1National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic scribed in the course of research, they make up 53% in the structure of Laboratory “Genica”, Sofia, Bulgaria. retina and optic nerve diseases. Another nosological form determining Population mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variability is of special interest a basic part of MHO burden in this population was autosomal dominant for forensic geneticists for correct statistical interpretation of probabili- and autosomal recessive cataracts with microcornea. MHO detected ties of match. To date there is no profound study of mtDNA sequence in total was lower than in other rural populations of Russia. variability among Bulgarian population. Our study is aiming at creating a referent mitochondrial Bulgarian database by direct sequencing of P10.57 mtDNA control region (CR) in more than 300 unrelated individuals. myeloperoxidase gene G-463A polymorphism in the Here we present our preliminary results. southeastern Anatolia MtDNAs of 94 unrelated Bulgarian individuals from different parts of S. Budeyri1, T. Sever1, S. Pehlivan2, V. N. Ulgezer1, S. Oguzkan-Balci1; Bulgaria were isolated with salt extraction technique. Two hypervari- 1University of Gaziantep, Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep Faculty of able segments (HVRI and HVRII) of approximately 870 nucleotides Medicine, Gaziantep, Turkey. within the CR of mitochondrial genome were examined by direct auto- Myeloperoxidase (MPO) has been involved in the pathogenesis of sev- mated sequencing on ABI3130xl. eral diseases through excessive production of reactive oxygen species Among 94 studied individuals were identified 89 different haplotypes. (ROS) as well as through its genetic polymorphism. Seventy-three haplotypes were defined by 81 variable sites in HVRI The aim of this study was to determine Myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene and 64 haplotypes were defined by 43 variable sites in HVRII. Two G-463A region polymorphism in healthy population of Southeastern novel, unreported so far, nucleotide changes were observed: 16233 Anatolian region in Turkey. Also we compared the results according A→T and 42 T→TG. Point mutation heteroplasmy was detected at to the literature data if there is any difference between the healthy five positions- 16093, 16287, 146, 185 and 298. Mitochondrial diver- population of Southeastern Anatolian with the populations of different sity (D) was estimated as 0.983 for HVRI, 0.980 for HVRII and 0.998 countries. for both regions. These values, compared with other European popu- The subjects of this study were 150 unrelated healthy individuals. The lations (0.93-0.98), revealed very high genetic diversity of Bulgarian genotyping was determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction population. Random match probability, estimated for HVRI (2.7%), fragment length polymorphism method. HVRII (3%) and both regions (1.2%), indicated that sequence analysisEvolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  of both HVRI and HVRII would be very informative for forensic practice P10.62 in Bulgaria. High-resolution melting analysis for the genotyping of an Alu This study was supported by the National Science Fund of Bulgarian insertion/deletion polymorphism at the myotonic dystrophy type Ministry of Education and Science, grant VU-L-204/06 1 locus J. Radvansky1, M. Surovy1, A. Ficek1,2, G. Minarik1, L. Kadasi1,2; P10.60 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2SAS, mitochondrial Genome Diversity in tungusic-speaking Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia. Populations (Even and Evenki) and Resettlement of Arctic Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is the most common autosomal dom- siberia After the Last Glacial maximum inant neuromuscular disorder of adults associated with unstable ex- I. O. Mazunin, R. I. Sukernik, E. B. Starikovskaya; pansions of a (CTG)n repeat tract in the 3´-untranslated region of the Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. DMPK (Dystrophia Myotonica Protein Kinase) gene, on chromosome The present study includes the Even/Evenki, hunters and reindeer- 19q13.3. Haplotype analyses demonstrated a complete allelic asso- breeders, sampled from a few localities scattered across their vast ciation of DM1 causing alleles with several intragenic and extragenic geographic range encompassing low Yana-Indigirka-Kolyma in the polymorphisms among which the Alu insertion/deletion polymorphism west and the Sea of Okhotsk coast in the east. The mtDNA data show located 5 kb telomeric to the (CTG)n repeat tract is one of the most a very close affinity of the Even/Evenki with the Yukaghir, typical rein- studied. In patients of European and Asian ancestry the larger allele deer hunters, dominating in extreme northeastern Siberia until the (Alu+) was found to be in complete linkage disequilibrium with DM1 middle of 18th century but now being on the brink of extinction. We causing alleles. The aims of our study were to design a simple, rapid found that the majority of mtDNA diversity in the Tungusic-speaking and reliable method for genotyping the Alu insertion/deletion polymor- populations was accounted for by Siberian-East Eurasian lineages C2, phism and to study the status of this polymorphism in conjunction with C3, D2, D3, D4-D9 and G1. The similarity in the haplogroup C and D the number of (CTG)n repeats on DM1 and healthy chromosomes in mtDNA intrinsic variation between the Even and Yukaghir populations Slovak population. For rapid genotyping of this locus we successfully is pronounced and indicates that the Even/Evenki harbor an essential combined the previously described three-primer PCR amplification portion of the ancestral Yukaghir pool. The phylogeography of the D4- protocol (with modified primers) and high-resolution melting (HRM) D9 point to an early Neolithic phase expansion initiated northward to analysis using a 96-well LightScanner and a fluorescent DNA bind- the northern and eastern perimeters of former Beringia. Concerning ing dye. In sample of Slovak DM1 patients all of the identified DM1 unique D2* lineage (Volodko et al. 2008), the network analysis encom- expanded alleles were found to be in association with the Alu(+) allele. passing four complete sequences, three of the Yukaghir from the low This fact together with the finding of all large-sized normal alleles being Indigirka-Kolyma region and one of the Evenk from the upper reaches also on the Alu(+) background is consistent with the hypothesis that of the Aldan River would suggest that the founding haplotype (1935- alleles with more than 18 CTG repeats may form a pool of unstable 8683-14905) for D2* originated within western part of former Beringia. alleles that may constitute a reservoir for recurrent DM1 mutations. In the meanwhile, the core of the Even/Evenki mtDNA pool residing in the midst of the Yukaghir ancient territory would represent a recent P10.63 amalgamation of the remnants of the Yukaghir and northern Tungusic- A retrospective study of neural tube defects speakers (Even/Evenki) originated in the mid-Amur region. V. Filip1, C. Skrypnyk2, E. Popescu3; 1Clinical Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Neonatology Unit, Oradea, P10.61 Romania, 2University of Oradea, Genetics Department, Oradea, Romania, the monitoring results of the newborn congenital development 3Clinical Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Anatomic Pathology Unit, defects (cDD) in Rostov region. Oradea, Romania. T. I. Valkova, S. S. Amelina; Neural tube defects (NTDs) are one of the most common birth Rostov regional clinical hospital, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. defects,occurring in approximately one in 1,000 live births, caused Children CDD monitoring in Rostov region has been taking since by a combination of multiple genes and multiple environmental fac- 01/01/2000. Taken research enabled made possible to identify com- tors. We present an overview of 315 NTDs cases registred in Clinical mon CDD rate and newborn strict account anomalies’ frequency, Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology from Oradea (2,54% of babies which were 15.32±0.37‰ and 8.66±0.28‰ respectively. Multiply born alive)with a relatively constant distribution along the studied in- congenital development defects (MCDD) frequency was 3.44±0.18‰ terval 1984-2008. The most frequent NTDs were represented by hy- (1:291). CDD structure analysis displayed that MCDD keep second drocephaly(37,46%), spina bifida (30,15%)and cephalocele (17,46%). place after heart anomalies and form 22.47% from general diseases Most cases come from mothers of 20-25 years of age and it was their quantity. Analysis which was taken according with the prevalence rate, first pregnancy in 52,06% cases. We notice a higher incidence of these displayed that isolated CDD form were 77.53%, MCDD - 12.99%, abnormalities in the female sex (55,23%). 55,87 % of cases were born chromosomal anomalies - 9.48%, according with etiology - multifacto- prematurely. Most of the NTDs babies born alive had a good clinical rial CDD - 82.50%, chromosomal anomalies - 9.48%, monogenic dis- condition at birth, with an Apgar score of 10-7. Hydrocephaly was the eases - 8.02%. The frequencies of CDD according with etiology were first cause of neonatal death in 54.92% of the cases. made up: multifactorial - 12.64±0.33‰, chromosomal - 1.45±0.11‰ The genetic evaluation NTDs cases concluded a possible multi-facto- and monogenic - 1.23±0.10‰. MCDD structure was presented by rial polygenic heredity in most of the cases, in absence of a suggestive unspecified complexes - 48.18%, chromosomal anomalies - 42.19%, family history the monogenic forms being only presupposed. In cases monogenic syndromes MCDD - 8.85%. They are including autosomal that associated NTDs with multiples annomalies we suspected a pos- dominant (6.77%), autosomal recessive (1.56%), X-linked (0.52%) sible chromosomal heredity. The maternal gestational diabetes was and unknown etiology syndromes (0.78%). Taken genetic consulta- incriminated in 1,6% cases. Maternal hyperthermia during the embryo- tion of families made possible to diagnose 22 monogenic syndromes. genesis was suspected in 1,2% cases. Aminopterion and the valproic Children overall chromosomal anomalies rate in Rostov region formed acid, teratogenic factors associated for certain with NTDs weren’t iden- 1.45±0.11‰ (1:689), among them which consisted of Down syndrome tified in the preconceptional history and in the first trimester of preg- , Patau syndrome, Turner syndrome, Edwards syndrome, structural nancy in none of the cases evaluated retrospectively or prospectively. chromosomal aberrations (18q-) and (5p-). Patau syndrome and Ed- wards syndrome were attended by heavy forms of congenital heart P10.64 anomalies, which lead to high infant mortality affected them in the first the prevalence of 657del5 mutation of the NBN gene in the Lviv day after born, and according to this, low detectabilities of this syn- Region of Ukraine dromes in Rostov region. The received results are conformed to the H. R. Akopyan; Russian Federal Register’s data and EUROCAT. Institute of Hereditary Pathology of Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine. Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a rare chromosomal instability disorder, characterised by microcephaly, facial dismorphism, growth retardation, immunodeficiency, hypersensitivity to radiation and a highEvolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  predisposition to lymphoid tumors. Most of the NBS patients are of - 30:100,000; Polydactyly, preaxial - 25:100,000; Syndactyly, type 1 Slavic origin and carried a major founder mutation 657del5 of the NBN - 25:100,000; Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, type 3 - 12.5:100,000; Os- gene. The prevalence of the 657del5 in the West Ukraine was previ- teogenesis imperfecta - 6.5:100,000; Achondroplasia - 4.5:100,000; ously studied by R. Varon et al. (2000) and frequency of heterozygotes Epiphyseal dysplasia multiple - 5:100,000; Acrocephalosyndactyly was estimated as 1:182, expected NBS cases - 1:133 000. Since 1999 - 4.6:100,000; Diastrophic dwarfism - 3.5:100,000 were the most and till 2009 the 30 NBS cases were diagnosed in Ukraine, half of frequent HSD (isolated and syndromic forms) in the world. 320925 them - in the Lviv region of the West Ukraine. The purpose of this study people of eight areas of Rostov region were examined. The research was to evaluate the prevalence of 657del5 mutation of the NBN gene was made taken under the RCMG RAMS protocol, which, accord- in Lviv population upon a base of verified NBS cases. The total number ing to OMIM, provides more than 2500 genetic diseases diagnosis. of 511598 children were born in Lviv region in 1989-2007 years and Then families with HSD were selected from the cite data. In the re- 11-years period was marked by NBS case appearance: 1989 (1), 1990 sults 336 patients from 226 families were detected with HSD. The total (1), 1992 (2), 1994 (1), 1998 (2), 2001 (1), 2002 (1), 2003 (2), 2004 prevalence rate of HSD in Rostov region was 1:950. The following ten (1), 2005 (1), 2007 (2). Thus, in the time span of 2 years, 1-2 new NBS syndromes: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, type 3 - 15.6:100,000; Marfan cases are expected to be born. The frequency of Nijmegen breakage syndrome - 5:100,000; scoliosis, idiopathic - 5:100,000; Polydactyly, syndrome in Lviv population is estimated as 1 per 13640-34106 neo- postaxial - 4.7:100,000; Noonan syndrome - 4:100,000; Syndactyly, nates, whereas the prevalence of 657del5 heterozygotes is approxi- type 1 - 3.7:100,000; Osteogenesis imperfecta - 3.1:100,000; Achon- mately 1 per 58-95 neonates. The high frequency of heterozygous droplasia - 2.8:100,000; Syndactyly, type 2 - 2.8:100,000; Polydactyly, carriers of NBN founder mutation in Lviv population may contribute to preaxial - 2.5:100,000 were the most frequent HSD in the Rostov re- cancer frequency in the West Ukraine. gion. Diversity and incidence of the most frequent HSD differs from the world data. The further research will enable to reveal the reasons of P10.65 this regional HDS spread peculiarities. the spectrum of GJB2 (connexin-26) mutations in patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss: high prevalence of the allelic P10.67 variant V37i (109G>A) in Asian populations of sakha (Yakutia) Epidemiological aspects of Osteogenesis imperfecta in N. A. Barashkov1, L. U. Dzhemileva2, S. A. Fedorova1, F. M. Terutin3, E. E. Bashkortostan Republic of Russia Fedotova3, E. K. Khusnutdinova2; D. Nadyrshina1, R. Khusainova1, A. Mardanova2, E. Khusnutdinova1; 1Yakut Scientific Centre of Complex medical problems, Siberian Branch of 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Repub- Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute lic Perinatal Centre, Ufa, Russian Federation. of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Centre, Russian Academy of Sci- Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a clinically and genetically heteroge- ences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Republican Hospital №1 – National Centre of neous disorder of connective tissue characterized by brittle bones, blue Medicine, Yakutsk, Russian Federation. sclerae, short stature, bone deformity, hearing loss and dentinogen- Congenital hearing loss is one of the frequent sensory defects affect- esis imperfecta. 95 patients with OI are identified from 90 families the ing 1-3 in 1000 newborns, and 50% of these cases are hereditary de- Republic of Bashkortostan (RB). The prevalence of OI is estimated at termined. Nonsyndromic hearing loss (NSHL) accounts approximately 1 per 45000, whereas in other countries of the world it is estimated to 80% of hereditary deafness cases. GJB2 mutations are implicated as a be 1:10000-1:30000. Our results show that OI is extended irregularly major cause for the development of NSHL in majority of populations. in the RB. The disease is detected in 29 from 54 administrative districts We studied GJB2 mutation spectrum in patients with NSHL in Sakha and in 12 from 21 cities. The incidence of OI varies from 0.42:100000 Republic (Yakutia) (East Siberia, Russia). A total of 66 patients with to 17.8:100000. The distribution of patients by the sex composition NSHL of different ethnic affiliation (Caucasians and Asians) were ana- is as follows 52males and 43 females. Epidemiological investigations lyzed by PCR-SSCP and further sequencing of GJB2 gene. The mo- based on the ethnic composition of 95 patients with OI scattered are lecular screening of V37I in 6 populations of Yakutia (Yakuts, Dolgans, as follows: Tatars -29.4%, Russians- 23.1%, Bashkirs - 18.9%, 6.2% Evenks, Evens, Yukaghirs and Russians) was performed using allele- from Armenians, Maris, Ukrainians, Chuvashes and 22.4% are me- specific amplification PCR method. tis. 70 from 95 cases have blue sclera (34males and 36females). 16 GJB2 mutations were found in 50.0% of Caucasian and 9.2% of Asian patients have autosomal dominant and 79 have autosomal recessive patients chromosomes. We identified 3 different deletions 35delG, inheritance pattern. More than 10 fractures during their lifetime had 39 312del14, 333-334delAA known as recessive and 5 different missense patients, multiple fractures - 33 patients and 23 patients didn`t have mutations V27I, M34T, V37I, R127H, E114G which pathogenic role is fractures. The distribution of patients with OI by the age composition is controversial. One of the common allelic variants in Asian patients is congenital 22 cases (26%), from 1 to 7 years old 35 patients (42.8%) V37I (45% of all mutant chromosomes). Molecular screening of V37I and from 8 and older 27 cases (32.3%). The irregular prevalence of OI in 6 populations of Yakutia showed that it was one of the common in RB, apparently, occurs randomly as absence of patterns associated allelic variant in studied populations. We found the V37I allele in Tur- with local concentration incidents with OI. kic-speaking populations of Yakuts, Tungusic-speaking populations of Evenks and Evens and Slavic-speaking ones of Russians. V37I was P10.68 not detected in populations of Dolgans and Yukaghirs. High preva- study of two common P53 gene mutations in gastric cancer lence of V37I in populations of Yakutia may be a result of common using (PcR-RFLP) in a Province of iran founder effect. J. Saffari Chaleshtori1, M. Moradi2, E. Farrokhi2, M. Tabatabaieefar2, M. Taher- This work was supported by RFBR (08-04-90730) and RHSF (08-06- zadeh Ghahfarrokhi1, G. Mobini2, S. Khademi2, F. Shayesteh2, M. Shahrani2, G. 84602a/U). Mardani2, M. Banitalebi2, N. Parvin2, N. Shahinfar2, G. Rahimian2, H. Nazem3, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori2; P10.66 1Payame Noor Univ. Tehran & Cellular and Molecular Research Center the comparative analysis of hereditary skeletal disorders’ Shahrekord Univ. of Med.Sci. Iran, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, spectrum in Rostov region 2Cellular and Molecular Research Center Shahrekord Univ. of Med.Sci. Iran, R. A. Valkov1, S. S. Amelina2, R. A. Zinchenko3; Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Payame Noor Univ. Tehran, Shahrekord, 1Railroad clinical hospital, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 2Rostov re- Islamic Republic of Iran. gional clinical hospital, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 3Research Centre Background and aim: Gastric cancer is the most common cause of for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences (RCMG RAMS), cancer death world wide after lung cancer. Genetic factors including Moscow, Russian Federation. oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are always involved in pro- Hereditary skeletal disorders (HSD) are a large heterogeneous group gression of this cancer. The P53 tumor suppressor gene is believed of genetic diseases with different prevalence rate in populations. A to have a broad role in the cell such as programmed cell death and cumulative international incidence of at least 1:5000 newborns has stop cell replicating damaged DNA which has been summarized on the been estimated (in most cases, it was estimated by cumulating infor- guardian of the genome. This study aims to determine the frequency of mation from the different publications). The following ten syndromes: two common P53 gene mutations using PCR-RFLP in gastric cancer Marfan syndrome - 30:100,000; Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita in a Province of IranEvolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  Methods: This descriptive - lad based study describes the mutation are genetically closer to each other than to north-western group. Our analysis of paraffin embedded gastric samples from 38 patients in a findings are consistent with evidences on Bashkir ethnogenesis and Province of Iran.We have investigated the frequency of P53 gene mu- historical facts. tation in exons 7 and 8 by PCR-RFLP to detected alteration in two common hot spots in codon 248 and 282. P10.71 Results: We determined no mutation in P53 gene hot spots in codon Analysis of three microsatellite markers (D5s818, D7s870 and 248 and 282. D13s317) in Romanian population and their genetic relationship Conclusion: We conclude that association of P53 gene mutations with with other European populations gastric cancer is very low in Chaharmahal Va Bakhtiari, a Province of A. Rodewald1, A. Kroll1, G. Cardos2, C. Tesio3, D. Banica4; Iran. However we have examined only 38 gastric samples and more 1Department of Human Biology of University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, samples need to be investigated to reveal the contribution of P53 gene 2”Victor Babes” National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 3Faculty of mutation in causing gastric cancer in this province. Also it is necessary Biology, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 4”Marius Nasta” Institute to study the entire coding region and promoter of the gene in patients of Pulmonary Diseases, Bucharest, Romania. from different population and ethnic groups. We report on analysis of 3 different DNA-polymorphisms (Microsatel- lites D5S818, D7S870 and D13S317) in a sample of 200 individuals P10.69 from Bucharest, Romania, as a part of a more complex study, in order the PPARGCA G1444A polymorphism in Lithuanian to elucidate the genetic structure of Romanian population and to show professional athletes and the general population their genetic relationship with other European human populations. V. Ginevičienė, J. Kasnauskienė, V. Kučinskas; Genomic DNA was isolated from whole blood samples and multiplex Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania. PCR amplified by AmpF/STR Profiler Kit (ABI). Allele assignment was The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1 performed by capillary electrophoresis by ABI 3100 Analyzer. Our re- (PGC1A) is involved in regulation of fatty acid oxidation, skeletal mus- sults were compared with similar data of a Romanian population sam- cle fiber type specificity, and gluconeogenesis. The prevalent G1444A ple from Prahova Valley and other European human populations. (rs8192678) variant in PGC1A was shown to be associated with traits The genetic relationship between populations was evaluated based on of the metabolic syndrome. Moreover, it is unclear whether it influenc- both Nei’s genetic distance and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) es human physical performance. The hypothesis of the present study by Phylip Package (version 3.6) and Statistical Package for the Social was that frequency of the minor [A] allele at the PGC1A locus is lower Sciences Software. in Lithuanian professional athletes than in the general population of Our results revealed no significant difference in allele frequencies of Lithuanian. We tested genotypes and allele frequencies of this SNP in the three microsatellite markers between the panmictic population of athletes (n = 551; mean age: 17.7±5.3 years) and the control group of Bucharest and the slight isolated population from Prahova Valley. general population of Lithuania (n = 97; mean age: 31.3±13.5 years). Genetic distance analysis and PCA showed closer genetic kinship to Genotyping was performed by PCR and restriction enzyme digestion. Greek population, as well as Slavic population from Poland. Genotypes of athletes were identified as [G/G] 52.1%, [G/A] 42.1%, Intercultural exchanges and intense trading activities between old [A/A] 5.8% (χ2=2.83, p=0.09) and the genotypes in the population human populations from Romania (Thracians) and Greek population samples were [G/G] 42.2%, [G/A] 37.8% and [A/A] 20.0% (χ2=3.79, groups, who established colonies on the west coast of the Black Sea p=0.055). The frequency of the minor [A] allele was significantly lower (nowadays East-Romania) during the 7th-8th centuries, may explain in athletes than in controls (26.9% vs. 38.9%; P = 0.01). PGC1A [A/ our findings. A] genotype is less frequent in Lithuanian athletes in comparison to The Slavic influence may be the result of migrations of Slavic groups the general population (5.8% vs. 20.0%; P=0.005). The results of the across the Carpathian-Danube regions during the 6th-9th centuries. present study imply that the PGC1A [G] allele of the [G/G] genotype These data can also be used for paternity and forensic analyses in is more common in the professional athlete group than in the general Romanian population. population of Lithuania. In conclusion, the present findings suggest that there is an association between PGC1A G1444A polymorphism P10.72 and physical performance in Lithuanian athletes. High sequence variability of exon 2 of runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) in four siberian populations P10.70 M. S. Nazarenko, M. V. Golubenko, L. P. Nazarenko; Analysis of 10 autosomal DNA markers in Bashkir population State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. E. R. Grinberg1, Y. I. Grinberg1, V. L. Akhmetova1, M. A. Bermisheva1, R. A. The runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) is the principal osteo- Zinchenko2, N. V. Petrova2, S. S. Murzabaeva3, E. E. Timkovskaya2, E. K. genic master switch, which acts as regulator of osteoblast differentiation Khusnutdinova1, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; and skeletal morphogenesis. Mutations of RUNX2 gene were shown 1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Research to cause cleidocranial dysplasia (OMIM 119600). It’s also believed that Center for Medical Genetics, Моscow, Russian Federation, 3Bashkirs state this gene is a candidate for osteoporosis. To date, a few reports about medical university, Ufa, Russian Federation. polymorphisms in the RUNX2 gene have been published describing The purpose of our work was investigation of genetic differentiation population prevalence of repeat length variants in glutamine and ala- between ethno-geographic bashkir groups. Genetic structure of Bash- nine stretches and nearby SNPs. We employed PCR-RFLP and DNA kir supopulations has been studied based on analysis of 10 autosomal sequencing to screen genetic variations within the exon 2 of RUNX2 DNA markers (diallelic and multiallelic): CCR5Δ32, ACE, D7S23(KM19) gene in DNA samples of Russians (n=96), Yakuts (n=96), Tuvinians STR/THOI, STR/FABP, STR/IVS6a, VNTR/PAH, VNTR/ApoB, VNTR/ (n=96) and Buryats (n=96). In total of 15 chromosomes with gluta- DAT1, VNTR/eNOS (53 alleles). The total number of samples, wich mine stretch variants (16Q, 30Q and 32Q) were detected in our study. was more than 800 individuals belonging to three ethno-geographic Two mutants (16Q) were found among Russians. One 32Q allele and bashkir groups: south-eastern (Burzyansky, Abzelilovsky, Baimaksky one 30Q allele were identified in Yakutia and Tuva, respectively. The and Kugarchinsky districts), north-eastern (Arkhangelsky and Sala- most abundant sequence variability was registered in Buryatia. From vatsky districts) and north-western (Askinsky district) (7 subpopula- the 96 individuals genotyped, there were a total of 11 glutamine tract tions), were analized. Analysis of allele’s frequency of autosomal variations, including ten 32Q alleles and one 30Q allele. All RUNX2 DNA markers in Bashkir subpopulations shows considerable genetic variants were heterozygous for a mutant allele and a wild type al- differentiation between Bashkir subpopulations. The highest level of lele. We revealed two Tuvinians with novel variant NM_001924630.2: genetic diversity in diallelic system was established on locus ACE, c.467C>T (NP_001019801.2: p.A156V). The frequencies of alleles H =0,5278, in multiallelic system - on locus STR/THOI, H =0,7520. and genotypes of common 18 base pair deletion of polyalanine tract obs obs The level of genetic differentiation between bashkir subpopulations and rs6921145:G>A were also established in our study. These results is higher than in Udmurt and Chuvash populations (F =0,008). The suggest that there is considerable sequence variability of exon 2 of ST analysis of dendrograms, based on correlations between the matrix of RUNX2 gene in ethnically diverse Siberian populations. genetic distances, and multidimentional scaling analysis showed that south-eastern and north-eastern ethno-geographic groups of BashkirEvolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  P10.73 habilitaion university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Genetic disorders in saudi Arabia- An update Short tandem repeats (2-6 bp) have become wide-spread in their A. S. Warsy1, M. A. F. El-Hazmi2; use by the forensic DNA typing, Paternity testing, gene mapping, 1Department of Biochemistry, College of Science, Center for Science and Medi- and diagnosis of hereditary disease. Allele frequencies for 8 STR loci cal Studies for Girls, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Department (D16S539, D8S1179, D5S818, D13S317, F13B, MTHO1, TPOX and of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi FES/FPS) were determined in the samples of 218 un-related volunteer Arabia. of East Azerbaijan province population using PCR and subsequent Saudi Arabia, is the largest Arab country and has an estimated popula- poly-acrylamid gel electrophoresis and silver staining. tion of around 27.6 million. The family and tribe are the basis of the so- Regarding to the results, Among 8 STR loci , heterozygosity of cial structure and Saudis are cognizant of their heritage, their tribe, and D16S539, D5S818,D8S1179, D13S317, F13B, FES/FPS,MTHO1, their extended and nuclear family. Consanguinity and other factors, TPOX respectively were 0.8213,0.8188, 0.7883, 0.8062, 0.7442, including environmental factors, have played a significant role in accu- 0.7397, 0.7834, 0.6769 . No devotion from Hardi-winberg equilibrium mulating genetic disorders, some very rare ones, at a higher frequency was observed. D16S539 with 0.8213 heterozygosity is the most infor- in the Saudis. We conducted three National studies over a period of mative marker and TPOX with 0.6769 heterozygosity was the least in- twenty years to screen the entire country for common single gene dis- formative marker on target group. Therefore except for TPOx all men- orders (including sickle cell gene, α- and β- thalassaemia, glucose- tioned markers could be used for forensic DNA typing and paternity 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency) and multifactorial disorders test of East Azerbaijan population. (including diabetes mellitus, obesity, and hypertension). Over 60,000 samples were screened and gene frequencies of these disorders were P10.76 obtained. In addition, studies conducted in other institutions reported Forensic value of 10 stR loci in the entire region of turkey several inborn errors of metabolism, chromosomal, mitochondrial and population and comparisons to other ethnics groups or areas somatic cell disorders (cancers). Several disorders, rare in other popu- M. Ozkorkmaz1, A. Baransel-Isir2, S. Pehlivan3, E. Gokalp-Ozkorkmaz4; lations, occur at a high frequency in the Saudi. The genetic basis of 1Ege University Faculty of Science, Izmir, Turkey, 22. Gaziantep University, Facul- several of these disorders has been unveiled and very interesting pic- ty of Medicine, Department of Forensic Medicine, Gaziantep, Turkey, 34. Gazian- ture has emerged for the common disorders, where mutations specific tep University, Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and Genetic, to Saudis and rare in other populations form the basis of several of Gaziantep, Turkey, 4Ahi Evran University, College of Healty, Kırsehir, Turkey. the common disorders. The natural history of several of the disorders Allele frequencies of the 10 STRs loci (D16S539, D2S1338, D3S1358, has been investigated and a wide range of clinical diversity has been vWA, D18S51, D21S11, D8S1179, D19S433, FGA, THO1) included identified. Steps have been adopted towards primary prevention. This in the AmpFlSTR SGM Plus kit were obtained from different biological paper will present a comprehensive coverage of the present status of materials of sample of 100 unrelated individuals in the entire region of genetic diseases in Saudi Arabia and steps adopted towards control Turkey. Chi-square test showed that all STR loci agreed with Hardy- and prevention. Weinberg equilibrium. The population genetic data were compared with the previously publishing population data of Turkish and other P10.74 ethnic groups or areas. The results of present study suggest that 10 Ancestral origin of pure repeat expansions and cAA interrupted STR loci with its high combined PD values (0.99999999999988) seem alleles in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (scA2) to be a useful system for the cases in forensic identifications. E. M. Ramos1, S. Martins1,2, I. Alonso1, V. E. Emmel3, M. L. Saraiva-Pereira3, L. B. Jardim3, P. Coutinho1,4, J. Sequeiros1,5, I. Silveira1; P10.77 1UnIGENe, IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal, Estimation of smN1 Deletion carrier Frequency in the iranian 2IPATIMUP- Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade Population based on Quantitative Analysis do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, M. Hasanzad1, M. Azad2, K. Kahrizi3, B. Shoja Saffar3, S. Nafisi4, Z. Keyhani- Brazil, 4Hospital São Sebastião, Feira, Portugal, 5ICBAS, Universidade do doust5, M. Azimian3, A. Aghajani Refah3, E. Also6, J. A. Urtizberea7, E. F. Tiz- Porto, Porto, Portugal. zano6, H. Najmabadi3,2; The spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is an autosomal dominant 1Islamic Azad University, Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of neurodegenerative disease characterized by gait and limb ataxia. Iran, 2Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic This disease is caused by the expansion of a (CAG)n located in the Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare ATXN2, that encodes a polyglutamine tract of more than 34 repeats. & Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Lately, alleles with 32-33 CAGs have been associated to late-onset Neurology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic disease cases. Repeat interruptions by CAA triplets are common in of Iran, 5Imam Khomeini Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, normal alleles, while expanded alleles usually contain a pure repeat Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Department of Genetics, Hospital de Sant tract. To investigate the mutational origin and the instability associated Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 7Assistance Publique Hopitaux de Paris, Hopital Marin, to the ATXN2 repeat, we performed an extensive haplotype study and Hendaye, France. sequencing of the CAG/CAA repeat, in a cohort of families of differ- Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common autosomal recessive neu- ent geographic origins and phenotypes. Our results showed (1) CAA romuscular disorder caused by mutations in the survival motor neuron interruptions in ATXN2 alleles, regardless of its pathogenic nature, 1 gene (SMN1). Carrier frequency studies of SMA have been reported and that (2) CAA interrupted alleles in the range 33-44 repeats shared for various populations. Although no large-scale population-based an ancestral haplotype with pure expanded alleles; (3) an intragenic studies of SMA have been performed in Iran, previous estimates have SNP-based haplotype, C-C, common to all SCA2 families regardless indicated that the incidence of autosomal recessive disorder partly be- of its interruption pattern, origin or phenotype; and (4) higher genetic cause of the high prevalence of consanguineous marriage is much diversity in European SCA2 families, suggesting an older European higher in the Iranian population than in other populations. ancestry of SCA2. In conclusion, we found a shared ancestral ATXN2 In this study, we used a reliable and highly sensitive quantitative real- haplotype for pure and interrupted expanded alleles, with strong impli- time PCR assay with SYBR green I dye to detect the copy number cations in mutation diagnosis and counseling. Our results indicate that of the SMN1 gene to determine the carrier frequency of SMA in 200 interrupted alleles, below the pathological threshold, may be a reser- healthy unrelated, non consanguineous couples from different part of voir of mutable alleles, prone to expansion in subsequent generations, Iran leading to full disease mutation To validate the method in our samples, we determined the ΔΔCt ratios of patients with homozygous deletion (0.00) and hemyzygous carriers P10.75 (0.29 to 0.55). The ΔΔCt ratios in 10 of 200 normal individuals were Allele frequencies of eight short tandem repeat loci in East within the carrier range of 0.31-0.57, estimating a carrier frequency of Azerbaijan province population 5% in the Iranian population. J. Mohseni1, S. Mohaddes Ardebili2, H. Najm-Aabadi3; Our data show that the SMA carrier frequency in Iran is higher than in 1East azerbaijan brach of ACECR, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tabriz the European population and that further programs of population car- medical sciences university, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Welfare and Re- rier detection and prenatal testing should be implemented.Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology  P10.78 P10.80 Retrospective epidemiological study of spinal muscular atrophy the index of endogamy in the Buryatia Republic in slovenia E. R. Eremina; N. Teran1, B. Gornjak-Pogorelc2, D. Neubauer3, J. Zidar4, B. Peterlin1; Buryat Branch State Institution, Ulan-Ude, Russian Federation. 1UMC Ljubljana, Dept. of Obst. and Gynecol., Institute of Medical Genetics, Lju- The analysis of marriages which have been made in 1961-1965, 1977- bljana, Slovenia, 2University of Ljubljana, Medical Faculty, Institute of Forensic 1981 and 1997-2001 (further - the first, second, third generations) in Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3UMC Ljubljana, University Childrens’ Hospital, city Ulan-Ude is lead. It is analysed more than 56 % from number of Dept. of Pediatric Neurology, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4UMC Ljubljana, Div. of Neu- the registered marriages in each of generations. rology, Institute of Clinical Neurophysiology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. For Russian population of Ulan-Ude on three generations of the index Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is one of the most com- of endogamy - 7,36, 15,71 and 25,75 % consistently in three genera- mon autosomal-recesive neuromuscular disorder. It has a prevalence tions is marked. The index of endogamy for Russian population of of between 1 in 6000 and 1 in 10,000 live births in Caucasian popula- Russia in 90th years are described at research of small cities of Kras- tions. The epidemiology of SMA in our country was not published yet. nodar region and the Kostroma region, and during later period - for In retrospecitve study we examined patients with clinical diagnosis of urban population of the Rostov and Tomsk regions. Alongside with the SMA in order to estimate the prevalence of SMA. data received for Russian population of the Ulan-Ude, dynamics of the Material and Methods: Molecular genetic analysis was performed index of endogamy for the Buryat also had a positive gain, however for patients with a clinical diagnosis of SMA, whose blood samples sizes of this parameter were lower and have made 0,18, 0,29 and 2,12 was sent to our laboratory during the 10 years period (from 1998 until % in three generations. The index of endogamy of the Buryat in the 2008). PCR/RFLP analysis was used to detect homozygous deletion third generation is lower in comparison with city indigenous population of the SMN1. MLPA analysis was found to be an efficient method for of Udmurts and Maris. Thus, for aboriginals Buryatiya (Buryat) and detecting copy numbers of SMN1 and SMN2. Russian population, living in the city of Ulan-Ude, the shown distinc- Results: After screening by PCR/RFLP analysis 75 out of 158 patients tions in the index of endogamy. had homozygous SMN1 deletion. Exons 7 and 8 were homozygously deleted in 58 patients (77%), while 17 (23%) showed deletion of only P10.81 exon 7. In one SMA patient, MLPA revealed 1 copy of SMN1. In one the prevalence of hereditary eye pathology in two regions of family, 2 sibilings with SMA and 1 non-affected showed only homozy- Kirov area of the Russian Federation gous deletion of SMN2. Additionaly, homozygous deletion of SMN2 V. V. Kadyshev, O. V. Hlebnikova, R. A. Zinchenko; was detected in the mother, whereas her daughter’s lack both copies Research Center for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. of SMN1. The prevalence of SMA was estimated at 3.94/105 on Sep- The role of hereditary pathology in etiology of eye disease in differ- tember 30st 2008 . ent populations and ethnic groups according to the literature makes Conclusions: The prevalence is comparable to previously reported from 20 to 45 %. To determine and study the prevalence of hereditary data in other Caucasian populations. Due to complexity of SMA ge- ophthalmic pathology (HOP) was organized the total inspection of the netics, testing of additional family members should be suggested and population of two regions of the Kirov area (Svechinsky and Shabalin- offered when appropriate. sky). The total number of population is consist 21858 persons (90 % of population are Russian). The examination of patients was conducted P10.79 by a group of doctors of different specializations, focused on a heredi- Age- and sex- related reduction of relative telomere length over tary pathology. Prevalence HOP (autosomal-dominant, autosomal-re- ten years in the population-based Bruneck study: Application of cessive and X-links) in Svechinsky area is account 1:228 the person; a high-throughput real-time PcR genotyping assay in Shabalinsky - 1:287. The spectrum of HOP detected in 2 regions A. Brandstätter1, S. Ehrlenbach1, P. Willeit2, S. Kiechl2, J. Willeit2, F. Kronen- was formed by 31 diseases. berg1; Among the isolated HOP following diseases (14 forms) were registered: 1Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Neurol- different forms of congenital cataracts, congenital glaucoma, hereditary ogy, Innsbruck, Austria. dystrophy of a cornea, iris coloboma, congenital nystagmus, bilateral Background: Telomeres play a key role in the maintenance of chromo- ptosis, Best macular dystrophy, Wagner syndrome, choroideremia, some integrity and stability. Telomere length is linked to age-related optic atrophy with congenital myopia. HOP as a part of hereditary syn- diseases, with shorter telomeres associated with an increased prob- dromes was found in 17 forms: Usher; Gronblad-Strandberg; Sturge- ability of mortality from infection or heart disease. Our aim was to de- Weber; Aarskog; Treacher-Collins-Franceschetti; Marfan; Holt-Oram; termine the decrease rate of telomere length over a time period of ten Noonan; Williams-Beuren; albinism oculocutaneous; microcephaly years and whether this decrease rate was influenced by age, sex and with telecanthus, hypertelorism; camptodactylia with blepharophimo- smoking behaviour. sis; oligodontia with congenital iris coloboma, microphthalmia; relative Research design and methods: We compared relative telomere lengths deafness with a congenital cataract; congenital ataxia with defects of (RTL) in 510 sample pairs from the longitudinal population based Bru- eyes; mental retardation with ptosis and a converting strabismus. neck study, which were collected in 1995 and ten years later in 2005. Congenital cataracts were detected as the most frequent form (41 %), RTL were determined by a high-throughput real-time genotyping assay presented by various clinical and genetic variants. The significant fa- and by applying various mathematical models. milial polymorphism was noted in many cases. The most frequent type Results: Rate of change in RTL was highly variable among individuals. of inheritance was autosomal-dominant. Mean telomere length decreased over ten years by 20.4% (95% CI: 16.8 - 24.1; p<0.001). The RTL attrition rate was highly correlated with P10.82 the starting RTL in 1995 (r=0.743, p<0.001) and showed differences tumor necrosis factor - alpha gene promoter polymorphisms in between males and females. By contrast, smoking behaviour seemed healthy population of southeastern Anatolian to have no influence on telomere lengths. T. Sever, S. Oguzkan-Balci, S. Pehlivan; Conclusions: Our findings underscore the complexity of telomere dy- University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology namics and highlight the importance of taking measurement errors into and Genetics, GAZIANTEP, Turkey. consideration when interpreting uncommon findings. Our methodology The production of cytokine varies among individuals and correlates proved to be a reliable and replicable tool for a rapid determination of with the polymorphism of cytokine genes. Tumor Necrosis Factor - al- relative telomere length with a low amount of input DNA. The most pha (TNF-α) is an important cytokine that has been implicated in the striking observation was that age-dependent RTL shortening was pro- pathogenesis of a number of diseases. portional to RTL at baseline examination. The aim of this study is to determine TNF-α promoter (-308,-238 and -857) polymorphisms in healthy population of Southeastern Anatolian region in Turkey. Also we compared the results according to the litera- ture data if there is any difference between the healthy population of Southeastern Anatolian with the populations of different countries. The subjects of this study were 150 unrelated healthy individuals. TheEvolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 0 genotyping was determined by PCR-RFLP methodology. subjected to directional selection. The genotype distribution for -308 region was observed: 1.3% in AA, Although the underlying selective pressure(s) remains to be identi- 35.3% in AG and 63.4% in GG. The genotype distribution for -238 re- fied, we consider this to be among the first documented examples of a gion was observed in our population: 0% in AA, 4.7% in AG and 95.3% gene involved in mood disorders and subjected to natural selection in in GG. Also the genotype distribution for -857 region were observed humans; this observation might add support to the long-debated idea in our population: 12.7% in TT, 30.7% in TC and 56.6% in CC. We that depression/low mood might have played an adaptive role during compared our results with the literature data of healthy populations human evolution. in 13 different countries. No deviation for -308 and -238 regions from Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) were observed in our population P10.85 (p> 0.05) whereas deviation for -857 region from HWE was observed Estimating the heritability of vitamin b12 levels: a study of adult (p< 0.05). These results show that these deviations occur due to the female twins fact that our region is the transition region of migrations. This is the first I. Cotlarciuc, T. Andrew, G. Surdulescu, T. Spector, K. Ahmadi; study in Turkish healthy population for the TNFα promoter (-308,-238 Dept of twin research and genetic epidemiology, King’s College London, United and -857) polymorphisms. Kingdom. Background: Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) is an essential cofactor involved P10.83 in one carbon metabolism (remethylation of homocysteine to methio- the USHA c.2299delG mutation: dating its common origin in nine) and in the metabolism of branched chain amino acids. Currently southern Europe population the extent of the genetic and environmental influences on vitamin B12 E. Aller1,2, L. Larrieu3, D. Baux3, T. Jaijo1,2, C. Espinos4,2, F. González5, M. levels has not yet been determined. Our aim was to determine the Claustres3,6, A. F. Roux3, J. M. Millan1,2; first heritability estimate for vitamin B12 levels in an adult female twin 1Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2CIBER de Enfermedades population. Raras (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain, 3Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) Methods: We estimated the heritability of vitamin B12 levels in 1063 Montpellier, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, France, 4Uni- female twin pairs (262 monozygotic twin pairs and 801 dizygotic twin dad de Genética y Medicina Molecular. Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, pairs), aged 18 to 80 years from the TwinsUK Adult Twin Registry. CSIC, Valencia, Spain, 5Institut Cavanilles de Biodiversitat i Biologia Evolutiva Structural genetic modeling was used to determine the influence of (ICBiBE), Valencia, Spain, 6Inserm, U827, Montpellier, France. genetic and environmental factors on vitamin B12 variation. Usher syndrome type II is the most common form of Usher syndrome. Results: Genetic factors showed to account for 52% (95%CI, 45-58%) Although 3 genes are known as disease causing, USH2A is the major of vitamin B12 variation. The variance in vitamin B12 levels was ex- involved gene. It encodes two isoforms of the protein usherin. This plained by additive genetic and non-shared environmental factors, with protein is part of an interactome that plays an essential role in the de- the additive genetic variance estimated to 52% (95%CI, 45-58%) and velopment and the function of the stereocilia of inner ear hair cells. In the non-shared environmental variance to 48% (95%CI, 41-54%). the photoreceptor, usherin is located at the periciliary region between Conclusions: Vitamin B12 levels were shown to be highly heritable and extern and inner segments. This gene contains 72 exons over a region here we report the first heritability estimation for vitamin B12 levels. of 800 kb. Although numerous mutations have been described, the The high heritability obtained for vitamin B12 levels is suggesting that c.2299delG mutation is the most prevalent in several populations. Its further genetic analysis have to be considered in order to identify ge- ancestral origin was previously suggested with the identification of a netic variants responsible for vitamin B12 variation. core haplotype restricted to 250 kb in the 5´ region of the gene. Be- cause we extended the haplotype analysis over the 800 kb region with P10.86 a total of 14 intragenic SNPs, we could define 10 different c.2299delG Comparison of VKORC1 haplotype profile and CYP2C9 haplotypes showing a high variability but with the conservation of the polymorphisms as determinants of coumarin dose in Hungarian previous described core haplotype. An exhaustive c.2299delG/control and Roma population samples. haplotypes study suggests that the major source of haplotype vari- C. Sipeky1, E. Safrany1, V. Csongei1, L. Jaromi1, P. Kisfali1, A. Maasz1, N. Pol- ability in USH2A gene is recombination. Furthermore, we have found gar1, J. Bene1, I. Takacs2, M. Szabo3, B. Melegh1; twice amount of recombination hotspots in the 500 kb 3´ region of the 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, gene, explaining the higher variability observed in this region compar- Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Institute of Internal Medicine and Haema- ing to the first 250 kb. Our data confirm the common ancestral origin of tology, Semmelweis Teaching Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary, 3Koch Robert Hospi- the c.2299delG mutation and suggest that it arose 5,500-6,000 years tal, Edelény, Hungary. ago. Anticoagulant action of coumarins is mainly moderated by the VKORC1 and CYP2C9 genes. By means of haplotype tagging SNPs (G-1639A, P10.84 G9041A, C6009T) we characterized Hungarian (n=510) and Roma A complex selection signature at the human AVPR1B gene (n=451) populations for the VKORC1*1, *2, *3, *4 haplotypes, and for R. Cagliani1, M. Fumagalli1,2, U. Pozzoli1, S. Riva1, M. Cereda1, L. Pattini2, G. P. the CYP2C9*2, CYP2C9*3 allelic variants. The samples were ana- Comi3, N. Bresolin1,3, M. Sironi1; lyzed by PCR-RFLP assay and direct sequencing. In Hungarians the 1Scientific Institute IRCCS E. Medea, Bosisio Parini, Italy, 2Bioengineering De- VKORC1*1, *2, *3, *4 haplotypes were 3, 39, 37, 21%, by contrast, partment, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy, 3Dino Ferrari Centre, Department in the Roma populations were 5, 30, 46,19%, respectively. Compar- of Neurological Sciences, University of Milan, IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Poli- ing the genotypes of Roma and Hungarian populations difference was clinico, Mangiagalli and Regina Elena Foundation, Milan, Italy. found in the *2*2 (6.87 vs. 13.5%), *2*4 (13.9 vs. 19.2%), 3*3 (21.9 The vasopressin receptor type 1b (AVPR1B) is mainly expressed by vs. 13.7%) VKORC1 genotypes. The frequencies of CYP2C9*1, *2, pituitary corticotropes and it mediates the stimulatory effects of AVP *3 alleles in the Hungarian population were 0.787, 0.125, 0.088 and in on ACTH release; common AVPR1B haplotypes have been involved Roma 0.727, 0.118, 0.155, respectively. The distribution of *1/*1, *1/*2, in mood and anxiety disorders in humans, while rodents lacking a *1/*3, *2/*2, *2/*3, *3/*3 genotypes in Hungarians were 0.620, 0.195, functional receptor gene display behavioral defects and altered stress 0.139, 0.021, 0.015, 0.011, while in Roma were 0.533, 0.168, 0.219, responses. 0.011, 0.047, 0.022, respectively. Significant difference was found be- Here we have analyzed the two exons of the gene and the data we tween Hungarian and Roma population considering the CYP2C9*3 present suggest that AVPR1B has been subjected to natural selection frequency and *1/*1, *1/*3, *2/*3 genotypes (p<0.005). The distribution in humans. In particular, analysis of exon 2 strongly suggests the ac- of low and high dose determining VKORC1 haplotypes and CYP2C9 tion of balancing selection in African populations and Europeans: the variant alleles in the Hungarian population is similar to that observed region displays high nucleotide diversity, an excess of intermediate- in other European populations. By contrast, the Roma population dif- frequency alleles, a higher level of within-species diversity compared fers from Hungarians, and from most of other Caucasian groups and to interspecific divergence and a genealogy with common haplotypes from population samples from reported from India in the incidence of separated by deep branches. This relatively unambiguous situation VKORC1 haplotypes and CYP2C9 common variants. coexists with unusual features across exon 1, raising the possibility that a nonsynonymous variant (Gly191Arg) in this region has beenGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  P10.87 Azores, Portugal, 4Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. Phylogeography of human Y chromosome haplogroup R1b1b2 Brittany, a large peninsula located at the western part of France, is of (R-m269) in Europe particular interest because of its historical settlement and its relative F. Cruciani1, C. Antonelli1, B. Trombetta1, D. Sellitto2, P. Moral3, R. Pascone1, geographic and cultural isolation. Brittany was invaded by waves of R. Scozzari1; migration from Britain and Ireland between the 4th and 7th centuries 1Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 2CNR, Rome, Italy, 3University of and, therefore, belongs to the Brythonic branch of the Insular Celtic Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. language. We have focused our study on the department of Finistère, The human Y chromosome haplogroup R1b1b2 (R-M269) displays an the most western territorial unit of Brittany, and its administrative and extremely wide geographic distribution within Europe, with a decreas- historical areas. To explore the diversity of the Y-chromosome, we ana- ing frequency cline from Iberia (frequencies up to 90%) towards the lyzed a total of 348 unrelated males using a combination of 23 biallelic Balkans (usually less than 10%). Previous studies have proposed that markers and 12 microsatellite loci. The molecular analysis revealed the observed R1b1b2 frequency cline is due to a population expansion that 82.2% of the Y chromosomes fell into haplogroup R1b, placing from an Iberian Ice-age refugium after the LGM (Malaspina et al. 1998; Finistère within the Western European landscape. Interestingly, at a Semino et al. 2000). microgeographical level, differences were detected by the haplogroup In this study, we explored the phylogeography of the human Y chro- R1a* being confined to the south of the department, while haplogroups mosome haplogroup R1b1b2 by analyzing more than 2,000 males E3b, F, G, J2, K and R1a1 were found in the north. Nevertheless, geo- from Europe. The haplogroup-defining marker M269 (Cruciani et al. graphical distribution of haplogroups and haplotypes suggested ter- 2002), and two additional internal markers (U106 and U152, Sims et al ritorial homogeneity inside Finistère. Most of the Y-chromosomal gene 2007) which identify internal branches (R1b1b2g and R1b1b2h) were pool in Finistère is shared with European, especially British, popula- analyzed. The paragroup R1b1b2*(xR1b1b2g, R1b1b2h) and the hap- tions, thus corroborating the historical reports of ancient migrations logroups R1b1b2g and R1b1b2h showed quite different frequency dis- to Brittany. Finally, the results are consistent with those obtained from tribution patterns within Europe, with frequency peaks in the Iberian classic genetic markers and support the Celtic paternal heritage of the Peninsula, northern Europe and northern Italy/France, respectively. Finistère population. The overall frequency pattern of R1b1b2 haplogroup is suggestive of multiple events of migration and expansion within Europe rather than P10.90 a single and uniform spread of people from an Iberian Ice-age refu- the N1b (N2) Y-chromosome haplogroup structure in Khanty gium. gene pool References: O. Medvedeva1, V. Kharkov2, V. Stepanov2; Malaspina et al. (1998) Am J Hum Genet 63:847-860 1Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute for Medical Semino et al. (2000) Science 290:1155-1159 Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Cruciani et al. (2002) Am J Hum Genet 70:1197-1214 Haplogroup N1b (N2) is one of the major Y-chromosome variant in Sims et al. (2007) Hum Mutat 28:97 South Siberia and North Asian Finno-Ugric population. In present study a total sample of 112 males from two villages of Khanty-Mansi P10.88 Autonomous Area (Kazym and Russkinskie) of Siberia was typed with Diversity of Y-stRs in the representative sample of the local 52 Y-chromosomal SNP markers. Five haplogroups (N1b (N2), N1c1 human population of canton sarajevo residents (N3à), Q*, R1a1 and R1b1b2 (R1b3)) were found in the Khanty gene M. Cenanovic1, L. Kovacevic1, N. Pojskic1, J. Avdic1, D. Marjanovic1,2; pool. The maximal frequency has N1b (N2) haplogroup: 67% in Kazym 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and population and 41% in Russkinskie population. Herzegovina, 2Genos d.o.o., Zagreb, Croatia. An analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) based on Y-chromosom- In one of our previous population studies of B&H human population, al haplogroups showed that the variation observed between the two we used twelve Y-chromosomal short tandem repeats loci incorpo- populations is 20.6%, indicated the high genetic subdivision of Khanty rated in the PowerPlex® Y System to generate Bosnian Y-STR ref- gene pool. The STR genetic diversity was H=0.49 in Kazym population erent database. Wishing to test these results in order to obtain spe- and H=0.68 in Russkinskie population. cific results in various DNA analyses for the local human population To reconstruct the structure of Y-chromosome haplogroup N1b (N2) in of Canton Sarajevo residents, we have decided to test DNA samples Khanty we have analyzed the diversity of seventeen Y-chromosomal collected from 100 unrelated healthy male individuals from Sarajevo at microsatellite (STR) loci. Median network analysis of STR data dem- twelve Y-linked short tandem repeats loci. Qiagen DnaeasyTM Tissue onstrates that haplogroup N1b (N2) is represented by two subclusters, Kit was used for DNA extraction from buccal swabs and PowerPlex® showing recent expansion times. It is also shown that haplogroup N1b Y System (Promega Corp., Madison, WI) has been used to simultane- (N2) is characterized by high frequency of founder haplotype, which ously amplify by PCR 12 Y-STR loci. The STR loci that were used are: includes 40% of all explored Y-chromosomes. The N1b founder hap- DYS19, DYS385a, DYS385b, DYS389I, DYS389II, DYS390, DYS391, lotype in Khanty is the same as the ancestral haplotype for the whole DYS392, DYS393, DYS437, DYS438 and DYS439. The total volume linage; and Khanty represents the maximum of the frequency suggest- of PCR reaction was 5μl. PCR amplifications were carried out in PE ing the North Siberian origin of N1b. GeneAmp PCR System Thermal Cycler. Electrophoresis of the amplifi- cation products was preformed on an ABI PRISM 310 genetic analyzer (ABI, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer’s recommenda- P11. Genomics, Genomic technology and tions. The raw data were compiled and analyzed using the accessory Epigenetics software: ABI PRISM®Data Collection Software and Genemapper® v3.2. In addition, we compared obtained Sarajevo data with the data P11.001 previously obtained from the entire Bosnian and Herzegovinian popu- simultaneous mutation and cNV detection by multiplex PcR lation, as well with geographically closer European populations. The based Gs FLX sequencing. results of this study will be used as guidelines in additional improving of D. Goossens1,2, L. Moens1,2, A. Lenaerts1,2, W. Glassee1,2, P. De Rijk1,2, J. Del- investigation of genetic relationship between recent local B&H popula- Favero1,2; tions, both isolated and opened, initiated in our previous researches. 1Applied Molecular Genomics Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, 2University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. P10.89 We evaluated multiplex PCR amplification as a front-end for high- the genetic position of Western Brittany (Finistère, France) in throughput sequencing to widen the applicability of massive parallel the celtic Y chromosome landscape sequencers for the detailed analysis of complex genomes. Using mul- K. Rouault1,2, C. Branco3,4, V. Scotet1, L. Mota-Vieira3,4, C. Ferec1,2; tiplex PCR reactions, we sequenced the complete coding regions of 1INSERM U 613, Brest, France, 2CHU Brest, Hop Morvan, Laboratoire de gé- 7 genes implicated in peripheral neuropathies in 40 individuals on a nétique moléculaire, Brest, France, 3Molecular Genetics and Pathology Unit, Genome Sequencer FLX. The resulting dataset showed highly specific Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo of Ponta Delgada, EPE, São Miguel Island, and uniform amplification. Comparison of the 454 data with the data- set generated by Sanger sequencing confirmed the detection of allGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  variants present and proved the sensitivity of the method for mutation P11.004 detection. In addition, we showed that we could exploit the multiplexed Rare Allele Enrichment by snapback Primer PCR amplicons to determine individual Copy Number Variation (CNV), L. Zhou1, D. Smith2, C. Wittwer1,3; increasing the spectrum of detected variations to both genetic and ge- 1Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt lake nomic variants. We conclude that our straightforward procedure sub- City, UT, United States, 2ARUP Laboratories, Salt lake City, UT, United States, stantially expands the applicability of the massive parallel sequenc- 3ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. ers for sequencing projects of a moderate number of amplicons (50 Allele specific PCR for selective amplification of minority alleles is - 500) with typical applications in resequencing exons in positional or widely employed in detecting cancer mutations. Allele specific PCR functional candidate regions and molecular genetic diagnostics. Com- using Snapback primers is a closed-tube intramolecular method that pletely in line with this conclusion, we are now developing assays for does not require fluorescently labeled probes. Only two PCR primers the CFTR and BRCA1/BRCA2 coding sequences. are required, with the addition of a short-tail of nucleotides on one primer that results in an intramolecular hybridization probe. Genotyp- P11.002 ing is performed by high resolution melting of the hairpin. Rapid cycle Promoter polymorphism -368 c/t of the acetyl-coA carboxylase PCR enables selective amplification of minority alleles by lowering the 2 gene ACACB influences activity and nuclear protein binding in extension time to 0 second. Using a carousel LightCycler® or LS-32 HepG2 cells (Idaho Technology), this requires less than 25 minutes. High-resolu- A. K. Lee, T. Kyriakou, S. D. O’Dell; tion melting is then performed on an HR-1 or LS-32. The detection Nutritional Science Division, London, United Kingdom. sensitivity of point variants is up to 1 in 1000. A single hotspot muta- Acetyl-CoA carboxylase 2 (ACC2) catalyses the formation of malonyl- tion of the BRAF gene (1799 T>A, V600E) was analyzed in thyroid CoA, a key regulator of fatty acid oxidation. Increased ACC2 activity tumor tissue and needle samples from 45 genotyped patients. It is would reduce fatty acid oxidation because malonyl-CoA inhibits entry the most common change in papillary thyroid carcinoma resulting into mitochondria via carnitine palmitoyltransferase I (CPTI). The tran- in more than 80% of thyroid cancers. The sensitivity and specificity scriptional regulation of the ACC2 gene (ACACB) is complex and in- were 100% compared to histology and other molecular methods. An volves many factors which may be tissue-specific. In liver, it has been EGFR exon19 in-frame deletion was used for small deletion detection; established that promoter P-II controls transcription of the ACACB a 1:10000 deletion mutations to wild type ratio could be analyzed. So- gene and sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1 (SREBP-1) matically acquired mutations in the EGFR gene in non-small cell lung regulates expression. We studied the functional impact of a single cancer are associated with a significant clinical response to tyrosine nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the promoter region -368 C/T kinase inhibitors. Enriching minority alleles with Snapback primers is (rs16939972) in HepG2 cells in the presence of SREBP-1a. The -368 attractive because only PCR reagents and dsDNA dye are needed. No C/T SNP was selected as the closest to known SRE sites, validated expensive modified oligonuleotides, separations, purification or addi- on dbSNP and occurring at a frequency of over 0.05 in the CEPH tion steps are necessary. population (MAF=0.25). The promoter construct carrying the -368 T allele showed 1.35 fold lower activity than the construct carrying the P11.005 -368 C allele. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) revealed impaired activity of serum alpha 1-antitrypsin in carriers of the -368 T allele has a higher affinity for nuclear proteins than the -368 p.G320R variant C allele, suggesting the -368 C/T SNP may bind to a repressor. EMSA M. Ljujic1, A. Topic2, A. Nikolic1, A. Divac1, M. Grujic3, M. Mitic-Milikic3, D. Ra- competition experiments using unlabelled oligonucleotides containing dojkovic1; transcription factor binding motifs, showed that the -368 C/T SNP may 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, bind to C-Myb, GATA and/or glucocorticoid receptor (GR) proteins. In 2Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Belgrade University, conclusion, the data suggest the ACACB -368 C/T polymorphism is Belgrade, 3Institute for Lung Disease and TB, University Clinical Center of Ser- a regulatory SNP that affects promoter activity in HepG2 cells in the bia, Belgrade, Serbia. presence of SREBP-1a and alters nuclear protein binding affinity. The alpha 1-antitrypsin (A1AT) gene is highly polymorphic, with more than 100 genetic variants identified so far. Some of these variants can P11.003 affect A1AT protein concentration and/or function and lead to pulmo- molecular and cytogenetic characterisation of human albumin nary and/or liver disease. This study reports on the characterization of transgenic goat fibroblasts as a source of nuclei in the somatic p.G320R variant found in two patients - one with emphysema and other cloning with lung cancer. This variant results from a single base-pair substitu- A. Wozniak1, D. Lipinski1,2, A. Nowak2, J. Zeyland2, K. Nuc2, B. Rynska3, R. tion in exon 4 of A1AT gene (Gly-320[GGG]→Arg-320[AGG]) and has Slomski1,2; been characterized as P by isoelectric focusing. Functional evaluation 1Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, of A1AT p.G320R variant was performed by determination of specific 2University of Life Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, trypsin inhibitory activity in two patients with pulmonary disorders, car- Poznan, Poland, 33National Research Institute of Animal Production, Depart- riers of p.G320R variant, and 19 healthy individuals, carriers of normal ment of Animal Reproduction Biotechnology, Balice, Poland. A1AT M variants (M1, M2, M3, M1M2 and M1M3). Results showed The production of pharmaceutically important human proteins in the that specific trypsin inhibitory activity was lower in both emphysema mammary gland of transgenic animals constitutes an important field and lung cancer patients (2.45 mU/g and 2.07 mU/g respectively) in of biotechnology. comparison with values obtained in carriers of normal A1AT M variants In this study goats’ fibroblasts were transfected by lipofection with (range 2.51 - 3.71 mU/g). This A1AT variant is associated with reduced transgene, which contained human gene encoding albumin under the functional activity of A1AT protein. Considering that it was found in control of the tissue specific WAP promoter. Transfected fibroblasts patients with severe pulmonary disorders, this variant might be of clini- were cultured with selective medium with blasticidine. cal significance. In order to completely characterize this variant and Transgene integration was examined by PCR method. Chromosomal estimate whether it is associated with pulmonary disorders, expression aberrations were examined using the GTG-binding pattern. Fluores- concentration, secretion rate and tendency to aggregate should also cence in situ hybridization (FISH) enabled the mapping of transgene be analyzed. specific DNA sequences. Transgenic cells are going to be used as a source of nuclei in the ex- P11.006 periments of obtaining transgenic goats by somatic cloning technique. the hunt for de novo chromosomal aberrations in patients with The application of tissue specific WAP promoter allows to reduce the mR/mcA expression of the transgene to mammary gland. Human albumin is K. Kok, G. van der Vries, Y. Swart, H. Alkema, H. Zorgdrager, T. Dijkhuizen, C. going to be found only in the milk of animals being accurately in the pe- van Ravenswaaij-Arts, B. Sikkema-Raddatz; riod of lactation. After the separation of albumin from milk components UMCG, Groningen, The Netherlands. it would be applied in medical treatment. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization has become an indis- pensable tool in the hunt for small de novo chromosomal aberrations that are presumed to be present in patients with multiple congenitalGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  abnormalities and/or idiopathic mental retardation. The discovery of aims to abstract the GUI development from individual GUI toolkits by neutral copy number variants has complicated these analyses. There using an XML-based GUI definition language. GUIs are generated in is thus a need for procedures that efficiently distinguish inherited from runtime from defined GUI tags that are embedded into the R script. de novo aberrations. We have implemented an oligo-based array plat- The RGG project further includes the development of a web-based form for the postnatal screening of patients with MR/MCA for cryptic repository for RGG-GUIs. RGG is an open source project and can be microdeletions and duplications in addition to karyotyping. One hun- downloaded freely at http://rgg.r-forge.r-project.org dred patients have been analysed simultaneously with their parents. On one array the patient is hybridized to a reference sample consti- P11.009 tuted of a pool of either 40 males or females. On a second array, the Neurominer: Web-based platform for integrated microarray parents are hybridized with opposite dyes. Separate 2logR files for analysis the parents are subsequently generated using home made software A. Kastrin, B. Peterlin; package that creates export files can be uploaded into several com- University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. mercial data analysis platforms. In this procedure ~89% of all aberra- Global gene expression studies have provided new insights into the tions detected by the patient could directly be traced back to either of pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. A hallmark of the scien- the parents. This approach constitutes a cost-efficient and fast way to tific process is the reproducibility of published outcomes, and yet com- determine the de novo nature of the aberrations that are seen in the paring the results of microarray studies has proven difficult. Although patient. Furthermore, we have used the data for 400 healthy parents to experimental results of global gene expression measuring may identify generate a database of local CNVs. This database has proven to be of common genes, each research group will typically produce different high value in the analysis of individual patients. Results on the analysis list of statistically significant differentially expressed genes, which calls of 100 trios and 600 additional patients will be presented. into question the reliability and validity of each gene list. There are two general approaches to integrating microarray studies: meta-analysis of P11.007 the primary data by merging data from multiple studies, and compara- Optimisation and standardisation of sample preparation with the tive analysis of the published results (i.e., gene lists). The application Bead-beating technology in genomics research of conventional meta-analysis to raw microarray data is complicated R. Verollet; by differences in the type of microarray used, gene nomenclatures, Bertin Technologies/CNIM Group, Biotech System Department, Parc d’Activités species, and analytical methods. An alternative approach to combin- du Pas du Lac, Montigny le Bretonneux, France. ing multiple microarray studies is to compare the published gene lists. In the context of sample preparation and cell lysis, Bertin Technologies However, manual combining data from published gene lists is often a (France) has developed a technology dedicated to the homogeniza- very tedious and time-consuming task. In order to address these is- tion and grinding of soft to hard materials. The goal is to improve the sues, we have developed a web-based platform, called NeuroMiner to first critical step in any molecular biology process and follow the latest house and integrate the results of published microarray experiments requirements of analysis equipments which have radically improved in from selected neurodegenerative diseases (Alzheimer’s disease, Hun- terms of throughput, reproducibility, detection limits and linearity. tington’s disease, Multiple sclerosis, and Down syndrom). NeuroMiner Following specific mechanical engineering studies of bead beating allows researchers to compare the results of similar studies in order technology, a high speed figure-8 multidirectional motion gives shak- to identify consistent expression patterns, as well as helping experi- ing energy to the beads that grind/homogenize samples in sealed menters to compare their own data to published microarray results. tubes. This patented solution Precellys24 plays a large part in the NeuroMiner is available free of charge for academic purposes at http:// analyse chain of rapid method to extract and detect or quantify DNA, www2.arnes.si/~akastr1/. RNA or proteins. Thanks to Cryolys option, temperature inside Precel- lys24 tubes is maintained at an optimal level during homogenization. P11.010 Cryolys technology permits temperature-sensitive molecules to keep taqman® Arrays for pathway based biomarker discovery their native state for any analysis. A. Ferlinz1, D. Keys1, K. Y. Lee1, J. Sherlock1, T. Langmann2; Bertin and its partners have been investigating mechanical lysis with 1Applied Biosystems (part of Life Technologies), Foster City, CA, United States, the Precellys bead beater vs. manual, chemical or sonicator methods. 2Institut of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. Several applications on protein and RNA extraction from human or Molecular biomarker discovery usually results in the identification of a animal tissues illustrate the contribution of this equipment to the im- single gene or small number of genes that can be used to diagnose provement of genomics research. a disease or predict a therapeutic outcome. Intensive genome-wide Bead beating technology was successfully evaluated in these applica- transcriptome studies are commonly used to generate the initial list tions and satisfied users in term of efficiency without degradation of the of genes which display differential expression across treated versus material, reproducibility, time and labour saving that are mains items untreated tissues, or diseased versus normal tissues. Recently, at- to consider. tention has been focused on identifying pathway based biomarkers which involves direct screening of genes from a specific pathway or P11.008 a set of biologically or functionally related genes (gene signatures). DAmE and RGG - two software tools from the Ait bioinformatics To this end we have developed >100 TaqMan® Gene Signature Ar- software lab rays for human, mouse and rat in 384-well micro-fluidic card and 96- C. Noehammer, I. Visne, E. Dilaveroglu, A. Yildiz, K. Vierlinger, A. Weinhaeu- well plate format. TaqMan Arrays allow reproducible and quantitative sel, A. Kriegner; real-time, high-through put screening across many samples and genes Austrian Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria. and provide higher sensitivity, specificity and dynamic range than DNA High throughput methods, such as microarrays or next generation se- microarrays. Genes for each signature panel were selected from the quencing, are widely used in molecular research. Target annotation, GeneAssist™ Pathway Atlas (http://www4.appliedbiosystems.com/ sequence analysis, signal analysis and further experimental planning tools/pathway/all_pathway_list.php), external collaborations, and/or increasingly require the combination of multiple bioinformatics re- literature curation. Here we present results from the development of sources. a Lipidomics Gene Signature Array for mouse. Data from the mouse DAME (Data Analysis Management and Exploration) is a user-friendly 96-well array format comparing expression of lipid genes in primary software for high throughput analysis of DNA, RNA and protein se- microglia and primary bone-derived macrophage after treatment with quences, feature selection and assay design. The entire analysis data bioactive compounds will be presented. flow is organized into a virtual table, thus batch processing of thou- sands of sequences can be performed very efficiently. Function usage P11.011 is unified by a standardized IPOP (input/parameter/output panel). the Folliculin (FLcN) mutation database: an online resource for RGG (R GUI Generator) is a general GUI framework for R scripts that FLcN sequence variants involved in Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome has the potential to introduce R statistics (R packages, built-in func- D. Lim1,2, P. K. Rehal2, F. Macdonald2, E. R. Maher1,2; tions and scripts) to users with limited programming skills and helps to 1Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, University of Birmingham bridge the gap between R developers and GUI-dependent users. RGG College of Medical and Dental Sciences, Institute of Biomedical Research,Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, standing the role epigenetics plays in the development of disease will Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. ultimately lead to the development of diagnostics and hopefully pre- Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome is an autosomal dominantly inher- ventative and therapeutic options. Roche NimbleGen’s highly flexible, ited familial cancer syndrome characterised most commonly by the high density HD2 microarray platform, with 2.1 million (2.1M) long-oli- development of facial fibrofolliculomas, pulmonary cysts (predisposing gonucleotides probes per array, affords researchers the opportunity to to spontaneous pneumothorax) and renal tumours. Germline muta- examine epigenetic events using ChIP-chip and MeDIP-chip assays tions in FLCN on 17p11.2 have been reported in patients with BHD at unprecedented scale and resolution. We will demonstrate (1) the and also in patients with isolated primary spontaneous pneumothorax. comprehensive, sensitive, reproducible DNA methylation analysis pos- The function of the FLCN gene product, folliculin, is not well charac- sible using MeDIP and the 2.1M DNA Methylation arrays, (2) the util- terised but recent studies have suggested that it may be implicated in ity of the positive, negative and non-CG controls regions present on the regulation of several key signalling pathways including the AMPK- these arrays in analyzing MeDIP experimental performance, and (3) mTOR route. the power of combining MeDIP, sequence capture, and bisulphite se- We describe the FLCN mutation database which is based on the quencing to analyze DNA methylation at single-base resolution across Leiden Open (source) Variant Database (LOVD) system. To date the the genome. variants described in the database were extracted from the published literature and from unpublished mutations detected in Birmingham, P11.014 UK. However the database will be expanded to include further mu- Amplification of intermethylated sites, Bioinformatics and tations from partners in the European BHD Consortium (http://www. capillary electrophoresis: the ABc of the cancer methylomes europeanbhdconsortium.eu/members.aspx). Researchers can also A. S. Tanas1, V. V. Shkarupo1,2, E. B. Kuznetsova1,2, D. V. Zaletaev1,2, V. V. directly submit new sequence variants (to Derek.Lim@bwhct.nhs.uk Strelnikov1,2; or E.R.Maher@bham.ac.uk). The FLCN mutation database offers a 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow valuable resource and tool for clinicians involved in the management Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. of BHD patients, clinical geneticists and researchers. Amplification of intermethylated sites (AIMS) is the method that best fits the requirements to make it a universal unbiased differential meth- P11.012 ylation screening approach. Still it is not frequently elaborated because Grid-enabling G2P association studies: a knowledge discovery it possesses drawbacks in fragments resolution and mapping of the scenario identified differentially methylated loci. AIMS generates significant G. Potamias1, L. Koumakis1, D. Kafetzopoulos2, P. Flicek3, H. Parkinson3; numbers of PCR products, thus the mode of DNA fragments detection 1Institute of Computer Science, Heraklion, Greece, 2Institute of Molecular Biol- has to be optimized to achieve appropriate resolution and easy map- ogy and Biotechnology, Heraklion, Greece, 3European Bioinformatics Institute, ping to the genome. We have achieved single-nucleotide resolution by Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. capillary electrophoresis (CE). At the same time CE does not generally The heterogeneity and scale of the data generated by high through- provide preparative option, thus sequencing the bands in order to iden- put (HTP) genetic association studies calls for the seamless access tify the genomic locations of the fragments has to be substituted by to respective distributed data sources. In this context, GEN2PHEN another approach. Knowledge of exact nucleotide length of a predicted devotes efforts on the utilisation and harmonisation of Semantic Grid or practically obtained AIMS product allows its in silico identification (SG), Web Services (WS), Scientific Workflows (SWf), and Knowledge in genomic context. In order to utilize this option we have designed Discovery (KD) technology. The task is realised in a Grid-enabled G2P specific software, AIMS in silico, which predicts all possible outcomes SWf (GG2P). of AIMS and labels the fragments of certain lengths with unique se- GG2P SWf unfolds into five steps: (i) using EBI’s and custom-made quence descriptors allowing their genomic positioning. Elaboration of WSs registered genotype experiments are accessed from public re- this AIMS-bioinformatics-CE approach allows rapid characterization of positories (e.g., ArrayExpress) - respective XML files are downloaded, normal and cancer methylomes, assessment of tissue-specific meth- (ii) custom-made WSs are called to parse the XML files and down- ylation, identification of novel genes prone to abnormal methylation load the respective raw data, (iii) with custom-made WSs the data are in cancer, and rough evaluation of the cancer methylome landscapes brought into formats suitable for data-analysis; (iv) data-mining algo- for different types of disease. We present the results obtained on rithms, wrapped as WSs, are called to discover indicative SNPs that paired (tumor/control) breast tissue samples, control peripheral blood discriminate between phenotypic classes, and (v) special WSs are samples and extraembryonic tissues in order to demonstrate the valid- called to map the discovered most-discriminant SNPs to correspond- ity and potentials of our approach, and describe novel cancer related ing genome regions, and visualise them within the Ensembl genome genes identified in breast cancer. browser. GG2P SWf was applied on a HTP SNP-genotyping experiment that P11.015 concerns 36 BRCA and 36 control/normal samples (E-GEOD-3743). Expression of centa2 and suz12 during mammalian heart We were able to identify a set of about 100 SNPs, the heterozygosity development profile of which exhibit a clear LOH in the BRCA cases. M. Venturin1, S. Brunelli2,3, G. Gaudenzi4, M. Stroppi1, F. Cotelli4, P. Riva1; GG2P utilises a BPEL-compliant Wf editing and enactment environ- 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, ment. We plan to devise an integrated Grid reference architecture for Milan, Italy, 2Stem Cell Research Institute, H. San Raffaele Scientific Institute, the GEN2PHEN environment able to support GG2P-like scenarios and Milan, Italy, 3Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Milano-Bicoc- SWs. ca, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Biology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. Acknowledgements: GEN2PHEN is funded by the European Commu- Cardiovascular malformations (CVMs) have a higher incidence in pa- nity’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant tients with NF1 microdeletion syndrome, compared to classical NF1 agreement 200754. patients, presumably owing to haploinsufficiency of the genes lying in the deletion interval. Searching for CMVs candidate genes inside the P11.013 deletion, we focused our attention on three genes, CENTA2, SUZ12 High-density, flexible arrays for genome-wide or targeted AND UTP6. Whole mount in situ hybridization (WISH) on mouse em- analysis of epigenetic mechanisms of disease bryos showed high expression of Centa2 in heart at 9-10 dpc, and T. Takova1, C. Kashuk1, H. Rosenbaum1, H. Holster1, A. Sharp2, J. Kitzman1, L. of Suz12 in the atrium around 10 dpc, suggesting their involvement Freeberg1, M. Rodesch1, B. Godwin3, H. Halvensleben1, T. Millard1, R. Selzer1, in heart development and CVMs onset. RT-PCR analysis on zebraf- T. Albert1, T. Richmond1, J. Greally4, J. A. Jeddeloh1, A. L. Iniguez1; ish embryos showed Centa2 and Suz12 expression in oocytes and 1Roche NimbleGen, Madison, WI, United States, 2University of Geneva, Gene- throughout all the analyzed stages (8 cells-120 hpf). Centa2, but not va, Switzerland, 3Roche 454 Life Sciences, Branford, CT, United States, 4Albert Suz12 was also present in adult heart. We thus carried out WISH ex- Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY, United States. periments on zebrafish embryos to characterize Canta2/Suz12 spatio- Epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation and histone modifi- temporal expression profiles. At 24 hpf we observed a diffuse Centa2 cation, play critical roles in the development of many human diseases specific hybridization signal in the cephalic and medial portion of the including cancer, pediatric syndromes and genetics disorders. Under- embryo, which becomes stronger starting from 48 hpf. At 48-72 hpfGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  Centa2 is also expressed in liver and pectoral fin bud. We observed a cytoplasm and the perinuclear region, and can translocate through mi- weak signal in the bulbus arteriosus at 48-72 hpf, but not in the remain- crotubules anchoring, according to its hypothesized role in vesicular ing heart portions. Suz12 shows an intense hybridization signal in the trafficking. medial and rostral region of the embryo at 30-72 hpf, but no expression in the heart. Considering that zebrafish heart has two chambers, we P11.018 speculate that Centa2 and Suz12 might be important for cardiac mor- Detection of cFtR copy-number variations in cystic Fibrosis phogenesis in the most evoluted organisms, such as mammals, which and congenital Bilateral Aplasia of the Vas Deferens patients by have a four-chambered heart. custom array cGH S. Quéméner1,2, C. Bénech1,3, C. Le Maréchal1,2, K. Giteau2, M. P. Audrézet1,2, P11.016 J. M. Chen1,3, C. Férec1,2; the regulation of cDK5R1 gene expression by miRNAs may 1INSERM U613, Brest, France, 2CHU, Lab. of molecular genetics, Brest, have a role in Alzheimer’s disease France, 3EFS Bretagne, Brest, France. S. Moncini1, M. Venturin1, A. Salvi2, P. Zuccotti1, V. Lanzi1, C. Sabelli2, G. De Introduction : Mutation in the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conduc- Petro2, S. Barlati2, P. Riva1; tance Regulator (CFTR) gene is responsible of a large spectrum of 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences - University of Milan, clinical phenotype from severe CF to male sterility due to Congenital Milan, Italy, 2Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Biomedical Sci- Bilateral Aplasia of the Vas Deferens (CBAVD). More than 1500 CFTR ences and Biotechnologies - University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. mutations have already been described and new semi quantitative ap- CDK5R1 encodes for p35, an activator of CDK5, which is involved in proaches have been developed to evidence gross rearrangements in neuronal migration and differentiation during CNS development and is the 27 exons of the gene. These deletions account for about 1-3 % of hyperactivated in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) leading to Tau hyperphos- the CF disease. We have described 8 new rearrangements and char- phorylation. We recently reported that the large 3’UTR of CDK5R1 acterized their breakpoint junctions. However this technique missed contains regulatory elements affecting transcript stability. Many mi- the intronic region as well as the 5’ and the 3’ UTR part of the gene. croRNAs (miRNAs) target sites have been predicted by PicTar soft- Methods : We designed a custom Agilent 15K array on the locus CFTR. ware. We evaluated the expression of nine pre-miRNAs, among the This oligonucleotide array enable us to cover 2 Mb encompassing the 20 miRNAs predicted to bind CDK5R1, in six cell lines. Among the ex- CFTR locus as well as the gene itself. We analysed positives and unaf- pressed miRNAs, we observed that five of them present a high number fected controls, 109 CF and 160 CBAVD patients with an incomplete of target sites with a free energy <-20 kcal/mol. A Real-Time PCR of genotype. the above miRNAs showed an inverse correlation between miR-107/ Results and conclusion: We evidenced the 11 deletions collected in miR-103 levels and p35 expression, suggesting a negative effect of our laboratory as controls. We also identified 5 duplications and 2 de- the two miRNAs on CDK5R1 expression. We overexpressed miR-107 letions in the CFTR gene. About the CBAVD patients, we observed 2 by transfecting the specific precursor in neuroblastoma SK-N-BE cells intronic deletions. This custom array allow a rapid design of primers to and observed a 75% reduction in p35 expression, while the transfec- amplify the 5’ and 3’ breakpoints junctions of the variation and to obtain tion of anti-miR-107 led to a 2.3 times increase of p35 in comparison the sequence permitting the characterization of the defect at the mo- to the control. The obtained findings indicate that miR-107 regulates lecular level. Our array is an excellent tool allowing a rapid detection CDK5R1/p35 expression. It’s worth to be noted that under-expression of the rearrangements located throughout the 200 kb genomic region of miR-107 has been implicated in the acceleration of AD. Experiments of the CFTR gene. on the other miRNAs of interest are in progress. Luciferase constructs will be used to validate the predicted miRNA target sites in CDK5R1 P11.019 3’UTR. Our findings on CDK5R1 regulation by miRNAs allow us to sNP-based system improves the applicability of qPcR for hypothesize that a new pathogenetic miRNA-mediated mechanism chimerism monitoring might influence the CDK5 phosphorylation activity on Tau, leading to E. Gineikienė, M. Stoškus, L. Griškevičius; AD progression. Vilnius university hospital Santariskiu clinics Hematology, oncology and transfu- sion medicine center, Vilnius, Lithuania. P11.017 Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is established medical procedure Searching for centaurin-α2 interacting proteins: evidence of used to treat various malignant and nonmalignant hematological dis- interaction with tubulin-β eases. The key test used to predict disease relapse and graft rejection M. Stroppi, M. Crippa, M. Venturin, E. Battaglioli, P. Riva; is monitoring of post-transplant chimerism. Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, The basic principle in the detection of chimerism is the utilization of Milan, Italy. differences between recipient and donor genomes. Single nucleotide Centaurin-α2 belongs to the centaurin family and is characterized by a polymorphism is the most abundant form of genetic variability in the zinc binding domain similar to Arf-GAP and by two PH domains. Its ex- human genome. SNPs have proved to be particularly useful as mark- pression pattern and function have not yet been extensively investigat- ers for monitoring chimerism after BMT, because they are stable and ed. Centaurin-α2 was shown to bind PIP2 and PIP3 and to localize at unique and can be analyzed by sensitive qPCR. However, before it plasma membrane, promoting the release of GTP and the consequent becomes established method for routine chimerism monitoring, qPCR inactivation of Arf-6, a protein involved in the regulation of intracellular marker set for every transplant pair should be available. vesicular trafficking and in cytoskeletal rearrangement. We recently The aim of our study was to design and validate a new SNP allele- studied the expression profile of CENTA2 mRNA by in situ hybridiza- specific system to supplement already existing InDel primer panel. We tion, during mouse embryo development and we found it is expressed present an approach for the economic in-house design of SNP allele- in early developmental stages of encephalon and heart. specific qPCR primers/probe sets with locus individualized reference With the final aim of elucidating the centaurin-α2 molecular pathways system that allows accurate quantification of respective informative and its biological role/s, we searched for interactors by means of the locus using simple ααCt method without standard curves. yeast two-hybrid assay. We designed ARMS-primers/probe sets specific for seven biallelic SNP An interaction with the C-terminal region of tubulin-β has been ob- loci and validated them in a population of 30 transplant pairs. Detec- served and confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. This portion of tu- tion limit of our system was 0.1%. Combination of our SNP-qPCR sys- bulin-β is involved in the binding of MAPs and motor proteins. Con- tem and InDel primers increased recipient genotype identification from sidering that tubulin-β was found to bind phospholipase Cγ1 through 86.6% (113/127) to 96.6% (123/127) when tested in a population of all its PH domains, we hypothesized an interaction between centaurin-α2 transplant pairs. The developed SNP marker panel may contribute to mediated by this domain. the successful screening for discriminative markers and further extend The yeast two-hybrid assay allowed us also to detect an interaction the overall number of SNPs available for chimerism evaluation. with nucleoporin NUP53, a component of the nuclear pore complex, that will be confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. According to our evidence, that will be further investigated, we pro- pose that centaurin-α2 can be localized at the plasma membrane, theGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  P11.020 P11.022 Long range expression effects of copy number variation: copy Number Variation Analysis Using Quantitative taqman® insights from smith-magenis and Potocki-Lupski syndrome copy Number Assays mouse models T. Hartshorne1, K. Li1, A. Broomer1, Y. Wang1, F. Wang1, I. Casuga1, E. Goley1, G. Ricard1, N. Gheldof1, J. Chrast1, J. Molina2, S. Pradervand1, J. Lupski3, K. W. Bi2, S. Cheung2, C. Chen1; Walz2, A. Reymond1; 1Applied Biosystems/Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Baylor 1center for integrative genomics, lausanne, Switzerland, 2Centro de Estudios College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. Cientificos, Valdivia, Chile, 3Baylor College of Medicine, houston, TX, United Recent whole-genome studies have identified 6225 Copy Number Vari- States. ant (CNV) loci, which are large-sized deletion or duplication events. To study the effect of structural changes we assessed gene expression CNV regions can influence gene activity and certain CNVs have been in genomic disorder mouse models. A microdeletion and its reciprocal associated with disease susceptibility. Copy number changes are also microduplication, which model the rearrangements present in Smith- detected in microdeletion/microduplication syndromes that are as- Magenis (SMS) and Potocki-Lupski (PTLS) syndromes, respectively, sociated with genomic disorders. Although array-based technologies have been engineered. They show phenotypic features similar to those are powerful for large-scale CNV and microdeletion/microduplication identified in human patients. We profiled the transcriptome of five dif- discoveries, more quantitative technologies with high accuracy, speci- ferent tissues affected in patients in mice with 1n (Deletion/+), 2n (+/+), ficity and sample throughput are necessary to both validate microar- 3n (Duplication/+) and uniallelic 2n (Deletion/Duplication) copies of the ray-identified copy number changes and to examine such changes same region in an identical genetic background. in large samples sets. To meet these needs, Applied Biosystems has The most differentially expressed transcripts were ranked. A highly sig- developed TaqMan® Copy Number Assays. Using a proprietary de- nificant propensity, are mapping to the engineered SMS/PTLS interval. sign pipeline, assays have been generated to high quality, genome- A statistically significant overrepresentation of the genes mapping to wide targets. TaqMan Copy Number Assays are run with a reference the flanks of the engineered interval was also found in the top-ranked assay, known to be present in two copies in a diploid genome, and differentially expressed genes. A phenomenon efficient across multiple gDNA in a duplex real-time PCR. Sample copy number is determined cell lineages and that extends along the entire chromosome, mega- by relative quantitation analysis using Applied Biosystem’s CopyCal- bases from the breakpoints. These long-range effects are unidirection- ler™ Software tool. Here we show data generated from assays target- al and uncoupled from the number of copies of the CNV genes. Our re- ing X chromosome, CNV-associated OMIM genes, and chromosomal sults suggest that the assortment of genes mapping to a chromosome regions associated with genomic disorders. The assays were tested is not random. They also indicate that a structural change at a given with different genomic DNAs including HapMap samples and samples position may cause the same perturbation in pathways regardless of with known deletions/duplications. These data sets demonstrate ex- gene dosage. An issue that should be considered in appreciating the cellent TaqMan Copy Number Assay performance with high accuracy contribution of this class of variation to phenotypic features. and specificity. We also applied TaqMan Copy Number Assays to array We will also discuss the molecular networks that are altered in the CGH validation and demonstrated concordance between platforms. different models. This network analysis enables the identification of metabolic pathways that potentially play a function in the SMS/PTLS P11.023 phenotypes. Deep surveying of whole transcriptome under cNV effect E. Ait Yahya Graison1, C. N. Henrichsen1, J. Thomas2, S. Pradervand2, G. P11.021 Lefebvre3, J. Rougemont3, K. Harshman2, A. Reymond1; Assessment of copy Number Variation on a Large Population- 1CIG, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2DAFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3EPFL, Laus- Based cohort, the Rotterdam study anne, Switzerland. K. Estrada, M. Peters, B. Eussen, A. de Klein, A. de Klein, H. A. Pols, T. A. Copy number variation (CNV) of DNA segments has recently been Knoch, J. M. van Meurs, A. G. Uitterlinden, F. Rivadeneira; identified as a major source of genetic diversity, but a comprehensive Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. understanding of the phenotypic effect of these structural variations is Background: Copy number variants (CNVs) are a form of genetic vari- only beginning to emerge. My host laboratory has generated an ex- ation where individuals have amplifications or deletions (> 1kb) in dif- tensive map of CNV in wild mice and inbred strains. These variable ferent regions of the genome. They occur commonly in the human ge- regions cover ~11% of their autosomal genome. Tissue transcriptome nome, often affecting genes and potentially influencing human traits. data show that expression levels of genes within CNVs tend to cor- Aim: Assess the prevalence of CNVs at the population level and their relate with copy number changes and that CNVs influence the expres- association with multiple traits and diseases. sion of flanking genes. Genes within CNVs show lower expression Methods: We obtained normalized intensity data of 5,824 individuals of levels and more specific spatial expression patterns than genes map- the Rotterdam Study (RS), a population-based cohort of elderly men ping elsewhere. These analyses reveal differential constraint on CNV and women of Dutch origin, genotyped on the Illumina 550K array and genes expressed in different tissues. Dosage alterations of brain-ex- applied two computational methods that use intensity signals (Quan- pressed genes are less frequent than those of other genes. This study tiSNP) and deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and informa- suggests that CNVs shape tissue transcriptomes on a global scale tion on LD patterns (Trityper) to detect both common and rare CNVs. and thus represent a substantial source for within-species phenotypic Results: After quality control, Trityper identified 775 sites with evidence variation. To unravel the effects of CNV on expression of both coding of a common deletion, 400 of which had a frequency > 0.05. Quan- and non-coding RNA at the nucleotide rather than locus level I propose tiSNP identified 49,229 events (mapping to 26,162 genomic locations) to use RNA-seq to monitor expression changes of transcripts that map with an estimated false positive rate of 1 / 100,000. We performed a to CNV regions and their flanks. Considering the multiple tissues we case-control association study in 5,287 participants of which 809 had plan to investigate and the sequencing coverage we plan to achieve clinical evidence of osteoporotic fractures. A 210 kb deletion located on this work should (i) give an unprecedent global and precise view of the the 6p25 chromosomal region was found present in seven individuals mouse transcriptome; (ii) produce the first transcriptome comparison of the population (0.1%). The CNV is in the vicinity of the CYDL gene of normal individuals of the population at the nucleotide level; and (iii) and was found significantly associated with the risk of osteoporotic help gauge the influence of CNVs on the transcriptome. fracture OR:32 ([95%CI 3.4-262]; p=3x10-7; p = 0.02 after correction for multiple testing). P11.024 Conclusions: CNV association analyses for multiple cardiovascular, indexed paired-end next-generation sequencing for medical neurological, locomotor and opthalmological disease traits and condi- resequencing demonstrated in patients with congenital tions is currently underway. hyperinsulinism (cHi) A. Benet-Pagès1, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, S. Eck1, K. Mohnike2, O. Blanken- stein3, T. Meitinger1,4, T. M. Strom1,4; 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Human Genetics, Neuherberg, Ger- many, 2Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Magdeburg, Germany, 3Charité Campus Virchow, Department ofGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  Pediatrics Endocrinology and Diabetes, Berlin, Germany, 4Technische Univer- DNAs from 109 children with MR and normal G-banded chromosomes sität München, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany. and 1 mentally retarded child with a de novo balanced reciprocal trans- Capillary sequencing of the coding region of the ABCC8 and KCNJ11 location were evaluated for rearrangements by Illumina Human610- genes in patients with diffuse Congenital Hyperinsulinism of Infancy Quadv1_B arrays. Data quality was assessed with standard deviation (CHI) results in a low mutation detection rate. In 23 out of 44 patients (mean SD: 0.19) and mean absolute deviation (mean MAD: 0.12) no mutations were found and 9 patients had a heterozygous muta- of the log2 intensity ratios. In male samples, a signal-to-noise ratio tion. (mean SNR: 3.82) was calculated. CNVs were called using circular In order to detect further rare variants, we resequenced the entire ge- binary segmentation (DNAcopy). Candidate CNVs were compared nomic region of the ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes (100 kb) on a GA II with known polymorphisms and relevant regions were confirmed by system in 24 samples and evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of qPCR. variant detection. The region was amplified with 19 long-range PCR A total of 3,087 CNVs (2,436 losses, 651 gains) ranging in length from reactions. For library construction, a beta-version of the Illumina multi- 118 to 13,386,172 base pairs (mean 85,224, median 24,331) were plexing oligonucleotide paired-end kit was used and up to 12 samples detected. 152 out of 3,087 candidate regions were investigated. Of were processed in a single lane. Data were analyzed using the MAQ these, 58 (38.2%) were confirmed, 94 (61.8%) were false-positive. 75 software. Coverage was between 300- and 5000-fold. Preliminary (79.8%) of the false positive were detected in regions defined by <10 analysis revealed several false positive variants that were only found SNPs, 16 (17%) were indicated by 10-20 SNPs and 3 (3.2%) by >20 on either the forward or reverse strand and showed preference for SNP. specific neighboring nucleotides. After filtering for this systematic error, This study led to the identification of 13 de novo CNVs and one mater- we detected 399 out of 402 previously sequenced coding SNPs/muta- nally inherited Xq13.1 deletion in a male patient. The inheritance of 5 tions. One of the three differing positions could be accounted for by low CNVs could not be established because of missing parental DNA. coverage in this region. The other two were unambiguous calls. Ad- ditionally to the known variants, we detected 88 new SNPs and 8 new Position Number Number Length Known ID Chromosome Gain/Loss indels in the intron- and intergenic regions. 59.1% SNPs and 62.5% UCSC hg18 of SNPs of Genes (Mb) Syndrome indels were confined to a single patient. The other variants are en- 28181 4q28.3-q31.1 Loss 136,619,480- 140,515,101 770 7 3.895 no countered in at least two individuals. Population frequencies of these 28181 6q16.2-q21 Loss 98,465,339- 111,851,511 2628 >50 13.386 no 28181 6q24.1 Loss 141,216,188- 142,860,121 212 3 1.643 no variants are being investigated. 35858 2p12-p13.3 Loss 72,397,638- 77,632,757 1074 >50 5.235 no 35929 13q32.3 Loss 98,706,939- 98,709,985 6 1 0.003 no P11.025 37497 14q11.2 Loss 20,388,473- 21,164,794 222 21 0.776 no 38749 16p11.2 Loss 28,363,967- 28,549,743 34 8 0.185 16p11.2-p12.2 deletion Finding copy Number Polymorphism in the swiss Population 38749 16p11.2 Loss 28,733,550- 29,283,628 89 9 0.550 16p11.2-p12.2 deletion A. Valsesia1,2, T. Johnson2,3, Z. Kutalik2,3, CoLaus Consortium, B. J. Steven- 39753 6p25.1 Loss 5,104,063- 5,406,969 92 2 0.302 no son1,2, C. V. Jongeneel1,2, J. S. Beckmann4,3, S. Bergmann2,3; 39753 23p21.3 Gain 29,043,064- 29,392,222 60 1 0.349 no 1Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute 40633 13q12.11 Gain 19,165,733- 19,942,459 200 7 0.776 no 43308 17q11.2 Loss 26,024,127- 27,392,540 211 14 1.368 NF1 type I of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Medical Genetics 44289 2q23.3-q24.2 Loss 153,522,479- 161,822,306 1617 25 8.229 no UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Service of Medical Genetics, CHUV, Lausanne, 44399 23q13.1 Loss 69,341,389- 69,381,997 6 2 0.040 no Switzerland. 33361 4p16.3 Loss* 7,764- 1,504,781 289 24 1.497 no Having technologies like microarrays and ultra-high throughput se- 33361 4p16.3-p15.33 Gain* 1,504,782- 13,259,183 2991 >50 13.251 no 32808 6q14.1 Loss* 79,576,561- 80,104,580 75 3 0.528 no quencing, facilitate the identification of genetic structural variations. 30921 2p25.3 Gain* 1,069,320- 1,752,354 195 3 0.683 no SNPs are used to investigate susceptibility to common diseases, yet 31166 23p22.2 Gain* 15,952,583- 16,694,026 90 4 0.741 no they explain but a small fraction of the phenotypic variance. Copy number variation (CNV) is the most frequent structural variation in the P11.027 human genome and encompasses more nucleotides than SNPs. It is A genome-wide cpG island methylation analysis microarray likely that CNVs explain at least some of phenotypic variance that can- A. Wong1, R. Straussman2, Z. Yakhini1, I. Steinfeld1, H. Cedar2, A. Ashutosh1, R. not be attributed to SNPs, but the extent of this contribution remains M. Saxena1, D. Roberts1; unknown. 1Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2Hebrew University, We present an approach to detect CNVs from Affymetrix arrays and to Jerusalem, Israel. combine these into Copy Number Polymorphic regions (CNPs). Using CpG islands are stretches of high GC content DNA containing mul- an HMM we attribute a copy number state to each SNP probed for a tiple CpG dinucleotides. When CpG dinucleotides within these islands collection of individuals. We then perform a principal component analy- are methylated, especially in promoter regions, expression of the cor- sis on a window of SNP data across individuals. Only components that responding downstream genes is often repressed. Aberrant CpG is- explain most of the variance are used to cluster SNPs into CNPs. land methylation is implicated in cancer. We have refined a protocol Based on this merging method, we report a comprehensive variation for methylated DNA immunoprecipitation (mDIP) and coupled it with map on the CoLaus dataset (Cohort Lausannoise - a 6000 individual microarray detection. DNA isolated by mDIP is fluorescently labeled population). This map describes 1853 common events (>=1% frequen- and hybridized to an oligonucleotide microarray that specifically repre- cy) and 5797 rare events (frequency between 0.1% and 1%) having sents the unique CpG islands in the human genome. This microarray respectively a median (mean) size of 140 (201) Kb and 81 (127) Kb. contains ~237,000 oligo probes tiling ~20,000 CpG islands, with an av- 17.1% of the rare CNVs and 17.97% of the common CNPs were al- erage spacing between probes of 95 base pairs. In addition, we have ready known. The remaining predicted variants are good candidates tiled CG rich promoter regions. As proof of concept we perform mDIP for being structural variations in European populations that should be and microarray analysis of human genomic DNA samples from normal replicated by independent studies. Our CNV map will facilitate asso- tissues. We compare our mDIP array data with bisulfite sequencing ciation studies of clinical phenotypes with these variants. data. We demonstrate the ability of our array based methylation assay to distinguish probes corresponding to methylated regions from probes P11.026 corresponding to unmethylated regions. We then apply the whole-ge- Detection of copy number variations (cNV) in patients with nome assay to tumor and normal DNA.and identify differential meth- mental retardation using high density sNP microarrays ylation patterns. N. Rivera Brugués1, M. Hempel2, S. Spranger3, B. Kazmierczak3, T. Meit- inger1,2, T. M. Strom1,2; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Univeristät München, Munich, Germany, 3Praxis für Humangenetik, Bremen, Germany. Chromosomal abnormalities are a major cause of mental retardation. Whole-genome array-based technologies have increased the detec- tion rate of cryptic aneusomies among these patients up to 10-20%.Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  P11.028 we developed a mouse model of CTHMs (81.3%), thymic abnormali- Linking macro ncRNAs to human imprinted gene clusters and ties (98.4%) and neural tube defects (NTD, 20.3%). A nutritive therapy cimP (cpG island methylator Phenotype) regions in normal and based on folic acid (FA) administered to mouse embryos previously cancer cells treated with BMS-189453, resulted in a reduction of CTHM (64.8%), I. M. Vlatkovic, R. Huang, F. M. Pauler, F. Santoro, D. P. Barlow; thymic abnormalities (27.8%) and NTD (3.7%) Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Science, Vienna, We performed a global transcription analysis by microarray to identify Austria. genes or molecular pathways affected in both the experimental mod- Genomic imprinting results in parental-specific gene expression els. and offers one of the best examples of an epigenetic gene silenc- A total of 447 genes were differentially expressed (FC= ± 1,5) in BMS- ing mechanism in mammals. The analysis of imprinted gene expres- treated mouse; while a total of 239 genes were differentially expressed sion in mouse models has identified two important but unexpected, in BMS+FA-treated embryos. A comparative analysis of these gene epigenetic mechanisms. First, that DNA methylation acts to silence expression patterns revealed 140 common genes; 70 of them includes macro non-protein-coding RNAs. Second, that macro ncRNAs act genes that were down or up regulated in BMS-treated embryos, but to silence flanking genes in cis. To date, two examples of imprinted returned to a “wild-type” level in BMS + FA-treated embryos. These macro ncRNAs with a silencing function are known (Air and Kcnq1ot1, genes were mainly involved in protein metabolism (14.8%), transport reviewed in Pauler & Barlow 2006). In order to identify and character- (10.2%), signal transduction (13%), cell cycle (7.4%) and transcription ize new macro ncRNAs we selected imprinted regions from the hu- (6.5%). man genome and CIMP (CpG Island Methylator Phenotype) regions QRT-PCR assay performed on a selected group of commonly regu- to generate HIRTA (Human Imprinted Region Tiling Array) Chips. RNA lated genes confirmed the microarray data. samples from different tissues, ES cells and from normal or tumor cell The discrete number of genes which resulted from our data might be lines are hybridized to these chips using the RETA (RNA Expression considered as candidate genes for conotruncal heart and thymic mal- Tiling Array) technique. In order to analyze the results from the Chips formations in humans. we have developed the NORBERT (NOn- coding RNA identification Based on Enrichment on RNA Tiling array) program. Our goals are to P11.031 test: (1) if macro ncRNAs are a common feature of imprinted regions the cYLD tumor suppressor sensitizes cells to microtubule in the human genome, (2) if imprinted macro ncRNAs are deregulated destabilization in cancer, and (3) if macro ncRNAs play a role in regulating non-im- S. Krauss1, J. So1, M. Huber2, A. Koehler3, R. Schneider3, S. Schweiger4; printed genes. We are particularly interested to test if macro ncRNAs 1Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of play a role in the gain DNA methylation of tumor suppressor genes Dermatology, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Biochemistry, Innsbruck, in tumors. Our preliminary data show that by this approach we can Austria, 4University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom. identify 5 well-known imprinted ncRNAs and that we are able to detect Mutations in the CYLD tumor suppressor have been identified in pa- novel macro ncRNA candidates. Our immediate goal is to characterize tients with familial cylindromatosis and familial trichoepithelioma, which the transcriptional features of novel candidate macro ncRNAs. are both autosomal dominant genetic predispositions to multiple tu- mors of the skin appendages. CYLD has been shown to deubiquitinate P11.029 TRAF proteins and Bcl-3, both leading to inhibition of NF-κB activation. Assessing the levels of cREB1 after siRNA mediated knockdown We have now found that CYLD is a microtubule-associated protein that in K562 cells accelerates microtubule destruction in cells treated with the microtu- Z. Deilami Khiabani1, M. Banan2, J. Gharesouran3, A. Asgharian2, M. Hoseini2, bule-depolymerizing agent nocodazole. CYLD protein carrying a point S. Farashi2, H. Najmabadi2; mutation that truncates the protein at a.a. 485 and thereby deletes 1Isalamic Azad University, Zanjan Branch, Zanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Ge- the C-terminus, including the majority of the third predicted CAP-GLY netics Research Center, University of Social Welfare &Rehabilitation Sciences, domain, still associates to microtubules, but has no influence on micro- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of tubule stability. Accordingly, specific knockdown of CYLD results in an Medicine, University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. increase of microtubule stability and faster recovery after nocodazole CREB1 is an important downstream protein for many signaling path- withdrawal. Our data strongly suggest that, in addition to upregulation ways. By designing efficient siRNAs against CREB1, it may be pos- of NF-κB signalling, microtubule dynamics plays an important role in sible to assess the role of molecules involved in signaling pathways the development of skin cancer induced by mutations in the tumor sup- in different cell types. In this research the efficiency of CREB1 knock- pressor CYLD. down by 2 different siRNAs in K562 cells have been studied. siRNAs have been designed according to the criteria suggested by Reynolds P11.032 et al. K562 cells were transfected by siRNA using Lipofectamine 2000. the integration of approaches for the study of biological The efficiency of CREB1 knockdown has been assessed by quantita- networks in the inner ear tive relative real time PCR. Our results have shown that only one of T. Elkan1, R. Hertzano1, I. Ulitsky2, R. Elkon1, M. Irmler3, R. Shamir2, J. Beck- the siRNAs has a high level of inhibitory effect on CREB1 gene ex- ers3, K. B. Avraham1; pression. The expression of CREB1 by this siRNA was knocked-down 1Dept. of Human Molecular Genetics & Biochemistry, Tel Aviv University, Sack- 79.5% in K562 cells. Reasons other than the aforementioned criteria ler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Blavatnik School of Computer Science, may be involved in effectiveness of siRNAs. Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Institute of Experimental Genetics, Neuher- berg, Germany. P11.030 Systems biology involves studying the interaction and interplay of Transcriptional profiling of mouse embryos with cardiac and many levels of biological regulation. We combined comparative tran- thymic defects induced by antagonist of retinoic acid and scriptomic and proteomic analyses of early post-natal cochlear and recovered by supplementation with folic acid vestibular sensory epithelia to identify networks of genes and proteins L. Diano1, D. Cipollone2, S. Bueno3, L. Vecchione1, G. Prosperini3, A. Desideri4, essential for the development and function of these inner ear organs. G. Chillemi3, B. Marino2, G. Novelli1, F. Amati1; Expression profiling of vestibular and cochlear sensory epithelia was 1Dept. of Biopathology and Diagnostic Imagining,Tor Vergata, University, Roma, performed using Affymetrix microarrays. Proteomics analysis was Italy, 2Dept. of Pediatrics, La Sapienza University, Roma, Italy, 3CASPUR, Con- performed using the Q-TOF mass spectrometer with ITRAQ labeling sortium for Supercomputing Applications, Roma, Italy, 4Dept. of Biology, Tor (Smoler Proteomics Center, Technion). Integration of the transcrip- Vergata University, Roma, Italy. tome and proteome data led to the identification of genes/proteins that Congenital heart diseases (CHDs) account for 25% of all human con- may play an important role in the inner ear. These genes/proteins are genital abnormalities and affect 1-2% of newborn children. Specific being examined in further detail. malformations of the outflow portions of the heart are termed conotrun- In addition, we identified microRNAs (miRNAs) that are expressed in cal malformations (CTHM; OMIM 217095) and account for a fourth to a these sensory epithelia using the miRCURY LNA array system. We third of all nonsyndromic congenital heart defects. integrated the transcriptome, proteome and miRNA levels to efficiently By induction of a retinoic acid competitive antagonist (BMS-189453) predict targets of miRNAs in the inner ear using newly developed algo-Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  rithms. Using this integration, the number of potential targets predicted P11.035 using bioinformatic tools was significantly reduced. These targets are sequence capture Approaches coupled to Next Generation now being validated to determine whether they are true biological tar- sequencing to identify candidate mutations causing inherited gets. Disorders Research supported by the European Commission FP6 Integrated L. Dannenberg1, T. Albert1, D. Burgess1, J. Jeddeloh1, M. Bainbridge2, M. Project EuroHear. D’Ascenzo1, D. Muzny2, L. Nazareth2, X. Zhang1, R. Gibbs2, V. Ott1; 1Roche NimbleGen, Inc., Madison, WI, United States, 2Human Genome Se- P11.033 quencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. Ribosomal protein S19 and S24 insufficiency in Diamond- We have developed an optimized oligonucleotide microarray for ge- Blackfan anemia cause prolonged cell cycles with distinct nomic selection and targeted sequencing of the entire human CCDS arrests in non-hematopoietic cells database. The NimbleGen Sequence Capture 2.1M Human Exome J. Badhai, A. Fröjmark, E. Davey, J. Schuster, N. Dahl; array contains 2.1 million capture oligonucleotides targeting ~180,000 Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala Univer- exons, totaling ~34 Mb of sequence. We have used this array, coupled sity, Uppsala, Sweden. to 454 Titanium sequencing technology on the Genome Sequencer Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a severe congenital anemia char- FLX instrument, to sequence the exons of patients with idiopathic atax- acterized by a specific decrease of erythroid precursor cells. Although ia to ~10X average coverage. Data analysis has revealed previously anemia is the most prominent feature, the disease is also associated uncharacterized mutations in genes known to cause neurological dis- with growth retardation and congenital malformations in 50% of pa- orders. This approach has the potential to replace time-consuming and tients. Heterozygous mutations in one of the seven ribosomal protein laborious classical genetic methods, and may lead directly to functional (RP) genes RPS7, RPS17, RPS19, RPS24, RPL5, RPL11 and RP- candidate mutations for highly penetrant inherited phenotypes. L35a have been identified in approximately 35% of patients. We es- tablished primary fibroblast cell lines from DBA patients with truncating P11.036 mutations in the RPS19 (c.72-2A>C) and RPS24 (c.1A>G) genes. A comparative analysis of expression levels of genes of the growth assay showed that fibroblasts from DBA patients with truncat- extracellular matrix proteins from human normal and scar skin ing mutations have a marked reduction in proliferative capacity. Mutant fibroblasts fibroblasts are associated with cell cycles extended by 50% and 33%, A. Solovyeva1, M. Khotin2, L. Turoverova2, N. Yudintseva2, M. Blinova2, G. respectively, when compared to w.t. cells. RPS19 mutant fibroblasts Pinaev2, D. Tentler2; accumulate in the G1 phase suggesting a G1/G0 arrest, whereas 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2In- RPS24 mutant cells are significantly reduced in the G2 phase. We also stitute of Cytology RAS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. observe a concomitant down regulation of the small subunit proteins A major reason for scar formation is an abnormality in the synthetic in mutant cells. The mutations result in impaired rRNA maturation and activity of fibroblasts, which are the major producers of the extra cel- ribosomal subunit assembly. The results show that the major cause lular matrix (ECM) in different types of tissues. Compositional ratios of of impaired growth in RPS19 and RPS24 insufficient fibroblasts is a structural ECM proteins are strongly tissue-specific and variations in delayed cell cycle with distinct profiles. We suggest that the reduced these protein compounds may contribute to architectural and function- proliferative capacity is an important contributing mechanism behind al heterogeneity. A particular kind of ECM organization is the epidermal extra-hematological features in DBA. basal membrane (BM). The main structural proteins of BM are lam- inin, collagen and fibronectin. In order to reveal the possible reasons P11.034 responsible for scar skin formation, we compared the expression of comparison of DNA methylation patterns in three mouse tissue genes encoding main proteins of the BM between normal, embryonic types. and scar skin human fibroblasts in culture. Using semi-quantitative RT- B. F. Johnson1, C. J. Davidson1, M. Kondo2, L. K. Joe1, S. R. Berosik1, A. PCR method, we have estimated the expression levels of the following Chhibber1, R. N. Fish1, S. C. Hung1, J. Lee1, R. A. Padilla1, D. Rodriguez1, A. A. genes: LAMA2, LAMB1, LAMB2, LAMY1 encoding subunits of laminin; Pradhan1, A. C. Felton1; COLIA1 and COLIA2 encoding subunits of collagen type 1; and COLI- 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems-Japan, VA1, COLIVA2, COLIVA4 and COLIVA5 encoding subunits of collagen Tokyo, Japan. type 4. The results showed that expression levels of genes LAMA2, Enzymatic methylation of the cytosine residues in genomic DNA LAMY1, COLIVA4 and COLIVA5 depended on type of skin fibroblasts (gDNA) has been shown to correlate with gene expression. Methyla- origin. The expression levels of COLIVA4, LAMA2 and LAMY1 genes tion of cytosines (C) at CpG motifs, usually in the promoter regions of were higher in normal skin fibroblasts and the expression levels of genes, will shut down expression of the gene in complex biological pro- COLIVA5 were lower in scar skin fibroblasts comparing to two other cesses. Technologies like microarray and next generation sequencing types of fibroblasts. No other correlations were revealed. We have also allow identification of methylation patterns on a genome-wide scale but developed a sparing method of ECM proteins isolation from cultured capillary electrophoresis analysis is ultimately used for detailed infor- fibroblasts. Our next goal is to estimate whether differences identified mation of each CpG in the amplicon and remains the gold standard in in genes expression on RNA levels also reflect different amounts of the validating DNA methylation results. In this study bisulfite treated gDNA corresponding protein products. of a specific gene region from three mouse tissues was cloned into Acknowledgements: This work was supported by program MCB of pGEM-T vector, amplified and sequenced with BigDye® Terminator Russian Academy of Sciences Cycle Sequencing v3.1 chemistry, and analyzed by capillary electro- phoresis. A number of factors affect the reliability of methylation pat- P11.037 terns revealed by sequencing including the purity of the gDNA, the A molecular combing approach for FsHD: direct visualization of efficiency of bisulfite conversion, and the interaction of modified DNA the FsHD locus in individual DNA molecules for straightforward with primers and DNA polymerase. The extent of cytosine conversion diagnosis and genetic and epigenetic explorations by bisulfite is affected by the presence of protein associated with gDNA P. Walrafen1, K. Nguyen2,3, A. Vannier1, E. Renard1, C. Vovan2, C. Chaix1, R. , the denaturation state of the target DNA and well as the quantity of Bernard2,3, A. Bensimon1, N. Lévy2,3; DNA in the conversion reaction. In this study a control using methyl- 1Genomic Vision, Paris, France, 2Département de Génétique Médicale - Hôpital ated and unmethylated reference DNA is described that validates the d’enfants La Timone, Marseille, France, 3INSERM UMR S910 «Génétique et bisulfite conversion conditions for improved reliability of the resultant génomique fonctionnelle», Université de la Méditérranée, Marseille, France. methylation profile. Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy (FSHD) is the third most common muscular dystrophy, with autosomal dominant transmission. FHSD is associated to the contraction of a repeat array at the subtelomere of chromosome 4q (4q35), which comprises 1-150 copies of a 3.3 kbp re- peat unit, D4Z4. A virtually identical array is present at the subtelomere of chromosome 10q. FSHD alleles carry 1-10 copies on a 4qA chromo- some, one of two equally frequent variants of the 4qter subtelomere.Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics 0 4qA arrays with more than 10 repeat units, as well as 4qB and 10q the inter group difference (p<0.05). We identified few differentially ex- arrays, are non-pathogenic. pressed miRNAs in the three groups and found that some correspond- The current genetic diagnostics relies on Southern blotting, which al- ing mRNA targets were accordingly modified, as shown by the mRNA lows sizing of D4Z4 repeat arrays and, to some extent, determination profiling experiments. Interestingly, 5 of the selected miRNAs also bind of their chromosomal origin and haplotype. However, it is cumbersome to the 3’ UTR of the FMR1 gene. and cannot reliably account for relatively frequent deviations from the These experiments may lead to the identification of FXS pathogenetic canonical description above, such as recombinations, translocations pathways, eventually allowing pharmacological therapy of FXS, in between 4q and 10q, deletions of sequences adjacent to the repeat spite of the absence of FMRP. arrays, somatic mosaicism etc. To bypass these heavy limitations, we have developed a test based on a novel approach, the direct visual- P11.040 ization of the D4Z4 loci at kilobase-resolution on individual DNA mol- MBD2 mediated γ-globin repression in K562 cells is not ecules stretched by Molecular Combing. dependent on its association with LARc Our results on reference cell lines and patient samples demonstrate M. Banan, J. Gharaseuran; the ability of Molecular Combing to precisely visualize the haplotype Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and provide the repeat unit counts of all four 4q- and 10q- D4Z4 arrays The methyl binding domain protein (MBD2) acts as a repressor on the in a single experiment. Furthermore, we identified unexpected rear- human γ-globin gene. In transgenic mice harboring a human β-locus, rangements at the D4Z4 loci. This approach should allow for routine knockout of MBD2 leads to a substantial induction of γ-globin mRNA genetic testing, as well as provide better understanding of the patho- (Rupon et al. PNAS, 2006). However MBD2 does not seem to act by physiology of FSHD. binding to CpG regions in the γ-globin promoter. Here we have sought to determine whether MBD2 is mediating its effect through associa- P11.038 tion with the LCR-associated remodeling complex (LARC)_a complex A unique tool to detect LDLR, APOB and PcsK9 point mutations that contains NURD (and MBD2) and binds to the LCR as well as the as well as copy Number variation of the LDLR gene γ-globin promoter (Mahajan et al. PNAS, 2005). Here we have first M. Stef1, L. Palacios1, M. Viegas1, D. Tejedor1, A. Martinez1, M. Pocovi2, J. determined that K562 cells are an appropriate model system to study Defesche3; MBD2-mediated γ-globin repression. In particular, we have shown 1Progenika Biopharma SA, Derio, Spain, 2Department of Biochemistry, Univer- that a validated siRNA targeting MBD2 leads to a 35% knockdown sity of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, 3Department of Vascular Medicine, Aca- of MBD2 and a corresponding 1.7-fold increase in γ-globin in K562 demic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. cells (using qPCR and GAPDH as the internal control). In contrast, a Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disor- validated siRNA targeting hnRNP C (C1/C2), the DNA binding protein der with a prevalence of heterozygous FH of one in 500 individuals. It of LARC, gave a 46% knockdown of hnRNP C but had no appreciable is mostly due to point mutations in the low-density lipoprotein (LDL)- effect on γ-globin RNA levels (1.07 relative to a scrambled siRNA). receptor gene (LDLR) and Copy Number Change (CNC) of part of this These results suggest that MBD2 mediated γ-globin repression is not gene account for 5-10%. Mutations are also seen in the APOB and mediated through LARC in K562 cells. We are in the process of us- PCSK9 genes. ing lentiviral vectors to deliver MBD2 and hnRNP C shRNAs. Delivery To improve FH genetic diagnosis, we have developed a new diagnostic via transduction followed by antibiotic selection should lead to better tool based on a DNA-array system: Lipochip which is able to detect at knockdown levels. This should help us more accurately determine the the same time point mutations in the LDLR, APOB and PCSK9 genes role of these proteins (if any) on γ-globin transcription. as well as CNC in the LDLR gene. To enable detection of CNCs, controls probes from the chromosomes P11.041 X and 21 were included on the chip. 247 mutations were included on Detecting known and novel splicing events in the human the LIPOchip (238 LDLR, 3 APOB and 6 PCSK9 mutations). A soft- transcriptome by high throughput sequencing ware was created for the automated analysis. A. Siddiqui1, B. Tuch1, C. Barbacioru1, J. Brockman2, J. Schageman2, J. Gu2, All point mutations and all types of CNC hybridized were identified. S. Heater2, K. Lea2, C. Bormann-Chung1, C. Monighetti1, L. He1, K. Bramlett2, D. Only one discrepancy was observed between MLPA and the LIPOchip, Ilsley2, S. Kuersten2, M. Barker1, B. Setterquist2, F. De La Vega1; due to a polymorphism in the sequence hybridizing the MLPA probe. 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems, Reviewing the prevalence of the different mutations in Europe, we es- Austin, TX, United States. timate that this tool is able to detect more than 80% of the mutations of Alternative splicing of exons is a major factor in promoting diversity of representative European populations (Spain, Norway, Netherlands). cell type and function from a limited set of genes. Recent studies have We here show that a unique tool is able to detect at the same time shown that alternative splicing is far more common than previously point mutations and CNCs allowing rapid and robust genetic diagnosis thought with almost all human genes transcribing multiple isoforms. of FH. Traditionally, Sanger sequencing of full cDNA clones as well as exon microarrays have been used to identify alternative splicing events. P11.039 More recently next-generation sequencing is emerging as a cost effec- Analysis of the expression profile of mRNAs and microRNAs in tive method to infer splicing by mapping tens of millions of sequencing fragile X syndrome. reads to the human genome. E. Tabolacci1, M. Accadia1, F. Pirozzi1, M. Moscarda1, U. Moscato2, C. Bernar- Current approaches to map sequencing reads are limited to finding dini3, P. Chiurazzi1, G. Neri1; known and novel alternative splicing events between annotated exons. 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Rome, Italy, 2Institute of Public Health, Rome, Here, we present a method capable of finding known and novel alter- Italy, 3Institute of Human Anatomy, Rome, Italy. native splicing events between known and novel exons. The method is Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by the absence of the FMRP capable of identifying inter-chromosomal fusion transcripts as well. protein. FMRP is involved in multiple pathways of mRNA metabolism We applied this method to transcriptome sequencing data generated and stability [Zalfa et al., 2007]. Indeed, FMRP has been shown to be on the Applied Biosystems SOLiDTM System from a library prepared associated to microRNAs (miRNAs) in mammals [Jin et al., 2004], pos- from poly-A purified MAQC Human brain reference (HBR) RNA and sibly regulating neuronal mRNA translation or stability. Human universal reference RNA. For HBR, of the 17,320 genes tran- We performed microarray experiments to characterize the transcrip- scribed, 67% are found to have alternative splicing events between tional profile of lymphoblastoid cell lines from 4 FXS, 3 controls and known exons. Only 39% of these transcripts are described in the 2 unmethylated full mutation (UFM) carriers. Bioinformatic analysis RefSeq database. Further, we found 93% of expressed genes par- yielded a list of genes either up− or down−regulated in FXS lympho- ticipating in alternative splicing when events between known exons blasts, compared to controls. We selected 8 genes for validation and and unannotated exons are included. A further 1,544 events between confirmed that 5 of these were actually differentially expressed. We unannotated exons are also found. We are conducting additional ex- also analyzed the miRNA expression profile in lymphoblasts from 6 periments to validate these findings. FXS, 6 controls and 3 UFM carriers. We observed internal homogene- ity in each of the three groups (FXS, controls and UFM) and confirmedGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  P11.042 lism: it catalyses the conversion of ceramide and phosphatidylcholine A digital anatomical atlas of the murine transcriptome at to sphingomyelin and diacylglycerol (DAG). Since SMS1 may have a embryonic stage E14.5 direct impact on cell proliferation and life span by regulating the cel- G. Diez Roux, EURExpress consortium; lular levels of pro-apoptic factor ceramide and mytogenic factor DAG Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy. it is of a great importance to investigate the function of SMS1 gene We have generated the first genome-wide digital transcriptome atlas in the cell. To date we have found 12 new alternative transcripts of by RNA in situ hybridization (ISH) of the developing mouse at embry- SMS1 gene using in silico and in vitro methods. Most of them differ onic stage E14.5. The expression patterns of approximately 18,000 from SMS1 mRNA in 5’-untranslated regions (5’-UTR). New-revealed genes were organized, curated manually and placed in a specifically 5’-UTRs are located in front of exon I and also between exons I and designed database freely available to the scientific community (www. II, II and III, VI and VII. These exons were identified in SMS1 gene eurexpress.org). This database allows browsing, downloading and earlier. We also found alternative transcripts of this gene that include searching the data by keyword, gene sequence and by anatomical site not-known before exons, situated between exons VII and VIII. Analy- of expression. To generate the digital atlas we produced 20,000 tem- sis with GENOMATIX software revealed several putative promoter plates and generated 360000 ISH images. The manual annotation of regions adjacent to four new exons. Variations in levels of different the data describes site, strength and pattern of expression using a spe- transcripts between tissues were obtained by semi-quantitative RT- cifically designed ontology that includes over 1400 anatomical struc- PCR. We presume that regulation of SMS1 gene functional activity is tures. The global analysis of gene expression annotation determined provided by using alternative promoters and synthesis of alternative that 39% of genes displayed a regional or restricted expression pattern mRNAs. It was shown that some of predicted open reading frames of at this stage. We found that about 950 genes, 16% of which are of new transcripts encode full-length SMS1 protein while others encode unknown function, display exclusive expression to particular anatomi- C- or N-terminal truncated forms of the protein. In particular circum- cal structures. We used the textual annotation to perform data cluster- stances the presence of different alternative transcripts of SMS1 gene ing analysis and we found several examples of synexpression gene may give rise to at least three different proteins. clusters. The quality and the resolution of the data allowed performing high-resolution molecular regionalization, uncovering a series of new P11.045 markers for several developing structures. In conclusion, EURExpress Establishing a genotyping platform for pharmacogenetic is the first genome-wide digital transcriptome atlas that gives a pan- investigations in anesthesia: Genechip resequencing array oramic view of gene expression in an entire mammalian organism and S. Levano, M. Singer, A. Urwyler, T. Girard; represents a unique resource to uncover many novel ontogenetic and University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland. functional associations relevant to development and disease. In anesthesia two inherited pharmacogenetic diseases are of primary interest: malignant hyperthermia (MH) due to the potentially fatal con- P11.043 sequences and butyrylcholinesterase (BCHE) deficiency due to its high Evaluation of common Gene Expression Patterns in colorectal incidence. MH is a dominantly inherited disorder of skeletal muscle cancer triggered by inhalative anesthetics in genetically predisposed individu- M. Ioana1, C. Soare1, F. Burada1, C. Gug2, E. Cioboată1, F. Mixich1, M. Cruce1; als. MH susceptible (MHS) patients are known to carry mutations in 1Univ Med Pharm Craiova, Craiova, Romania, 2Univ Med Pharm Victor Babes RYR1 and CACNA1S genes. Because of the large gene sizes, minor Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania. allele frequency of causative mutations of RYR1 gene as well as lack BACKGROUND: DNA damage checkpoint is one of the surveillance of predominantly hot spot regions in the CACNA1S gene, the acquisi- systems to maintain genomic integrity. The aim of our study was to tion of genetic information in a routine way is difficult. Mutations in the compare genes expression profiles in normal, premalignant and malig- BCHE gene can substantially prolong the duration of action of short nant specimens in order to distinguish differentially expressed genes acting neuromuscular blocking drugs. This prolongation prevents the by using quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain patient from spontaneous ventilation for hours. We aim to maximize reaction (qRT-PCR). the information of these anesthesia related genes in a practicable way PATIENTS AND METHODS: In order to detect the gene expression applying array technology. The development of the genechip included patterns we analyzed three sample types for each of our 25 patients: the selection of the gene sequences, selection of the positive SNP con- specimens from diverse sites of healthy gut, adenomatous polyps and trols, setup of the PCR parameters, verification of the PCR fragments, malignant tissue. In order to asses the RNA quality we analysed the labeling of purified PCR fragments and finally chip hybridization and 18S and 28S ribosomal RNA bands integrity by electrophoresis. The analysis. We will present the preliminary data obtained using this chip. reverse-transcription was performed using the High Capacity cDNA The resequencing based array technology enables sequencing a large Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). In order to evaluate number of bases on a single chip. This resequencing array promises gene expression, we used Applied Biosystems validated TaqMan Gene a reliable, efficient and high throughput method that would improve Expression Assays for 9 genes associated with the ATR/ATM signaling the analysis of these heterogeneous genes and therefore facilitate to network and transcriptional targets of DNA damage response. determinate the genetic basis of MH susceptibility and contributes to RESULTS: We successfully performed qRT-PCR analysis showing safer administration of drugs. that a dysfunction in DNA damage response contributes to genomic instability in colon samples. In 20 of our malignant samples we detect- P11.046 ed a significantly disregulation of gene expression in six DNA repair Genetic diversity of the Russian populations of genes of rare genes (ANKRD17, EXO1, MLH1, MLH3, MSH2, MSH3) comparing hereditary disorders with the normal specimens. R. A. Zinchenko, G. I. El’chinova, N. V. Petrova, L. A. Bessonova; CONCLUSION: Determination of gene expression profiles by us- Research Center for Medical Genetics, Моscow, Russian Federation. ing qRT-PCR is an ideal tool to improve knowledge of CRC molecu- The genetic diversity of genes of monogenic hereditary disorders lar pathways. However, defined gene signatures are highly variable (HDs) in 11 populations of Russia (6 ethnic groups: Russians 6 re- among studies, none of the identified expressional patterns or molecu- gions, Maris, Chuvashs, Udmurts, Adighes, Bashkirs) was analyzed. lar markers has been successfully validated as a diagnostic or prog- The size of the investigated population was 2.8 millions of persons. nostic tool applicable to routine clinical practice. All population was examined by standard protocol of medical genetic research elaborated in laboratory of genetic epidemiology, Research P11.044 Centre for Medical Genetics. About 2500 HDs of OMIM could be identi- the multiple alternative transcripts of human sphingomyelin fied by this research. Clinical investigations were performed by neurol- synthase 1 (SMS) gene ogists, ophthalmologists, orthopedic, otolaryngology’s, dermatologists, A. V. Rozhkova, V. G. Dmitrieva, A. S. Konkov, S. A. Limborska, L. V. Dergu- pediatricians and clinical geneticists, focused on diagnostic of HDs. Si- nova; multaneously with medical genetic study the population genetic study Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. was performed in the populations. By comparing both studies it was Recently sphingomyelin synthase 1 (SMS1) gene has been identified. suggested that the genetic drift is a most important factor which deter- The enzyme SMS1 occupies a central position in sphingolipid metabo- mines genetic differentiation of populations by the prevalence and ge-Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  netic diversity of autosomal disorders. Genetic diversity of HDs in the The first version of the website provides an introduction to the GEN- investigated populations was revealed 454 disorders (6800 affected): 2PHEN project, and this will evolve into the fully functional GEN- 215 AD, 183 AR and 56 X-linked recessive. It is established, that 57.39 2PHEN-KC during the first few months of 2009, with ongoing develop- % of patients for all types of inheritance concern to the common forms ment thereafter. of the HDs causing only 6 % of all revealed nozological forms. These Acknowledgements: GEN2PHEN is funded by the European Commu- 28 disorders meet with high frequencies in all investigated populations nity’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant (15 with AD, 8 with AR and 5 with X-linked inheritance). However, be- agreement 200754. sides these 28 diseases which frequencies also varied between re- gions, specific common diseases are revealed in each population. It P11.049 has been demonstrated that the genes of HDs are a promising tool for UGt1A1(tA)n promoter polymorphism in spanish patients with characteristic ethnogenetic processes in populations. a clinical diagnosis of Gilbert syndrome M. Pico1, L. Peña2, E. del Rio3, A. Lasa3, M. Cornet3, M. Baiget3; P11.047 1H. U. de Gran Canaria Dr. Negrín, Las Palmas de Gran canaria, Spain, 2Hos- HGVbaseG2P: an advanced database for the integration of pital Materno-Infantil, Las Palmas de Gran canaria, Spain, 3Hospital Sant Pau, genetic association datasets Barcelona, Spain. R. C. Free, R. K. Hastings, O. Lancaster, G. A. Thorisson, A. J. Brookes; Gilbert’s syndrome is a mild hereditary unconjugated hyperbilirubine- University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. mia caused by mutations in the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase gene The reporting of genetic association studies is far from optimal since in (UGT1A1). The causative mutation in Caucasians is almost exclusive- many cases (especially negative findings) results are not made publi- ly a TA dinucleotide insertion in the TATA box of the UGT1A1 promoter. cally available. Consequently, it is very difficult to determine what sig- The vast majority of affected individuals are homozygous for the vari- nals should be believed, or to integrate the results of different studies. ant promoter and have 7 instead of 6 TA repeats. To improve on this situation, the Human Genome Variation Genotype- The aim of the present study was to determine the genotypes of Phenotype database (HGVbaseG2P: www.hgvbaseg2p.org) has been UGT1A1(TA)n promoter in 686 cases referred to our laboratory with constructed to provide a new publication medium for association study clinical diagnosis of Gilbert Syndrome. results - including large-scale, small-scale, GWAS, candidate gene, To determine the number of TA repeats, we performed a fluorescence- positive, and negative findings. HGVbaseG2P focuses upon summa- labelled PCR. The PCR products were separated by an automated ry-level information, and work is underway to orchestrate the control of capillary electrophoresis and analyzed using the ABI GeneScan pro- access to such datasets globally, to overcome concerns about identify- gramme (Applied Biosystems). ing study participants from such information. We have identified the following genotypes: TA/TA (n:1); TA/TA 5 6 6 6 HGVbaseG2P aims to combine the best features of a database and a (n:58); TA/TA (n:147); TA/TA (n: 5); TA/TA (n: 472); TA/TA (n: 2) 6 7 6 8 7 7 7 8 scientific journal, and in that respect a partnership has been established and TA/TA (n:1) 8 8 with HUGO and Springer to explore awarding DOIs and PubMed IDs The TA allele was first described by Beutler in subjects with African 8 to studies submitted to HGVbaseG2P. Additionally, curators actively ancestry and is very rare in Caucasians. Four cases out of five with a gather and collate data from all relevant public data resources. TA/TA genotype were first degree relatives of the boy with a homozy- 6 8 The latest version of HGVbaseG2P provides a highly-innovative set of gous TA/TA genotype. This is, to our knowledge, the first homozygo- 8 8 new genome browser options for visually comparing and contrasting us case of this rare allele. genetic association datasets - both at genome wide and region specific levels. P11.050 To disseminate these technologies more widely, a blank ‘HGV- complete sequencing of the cFtR gene using next-generation baseG2P-in-a-box’ will shortly be made available so that others can Gs-FLX sequencing technology create compliant databases to report their own compilations of re- L. Vliegen, J. Cassiman, H. Cuppens; search findings. All such databases will automatically be interoperable, Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. enabling pan-database searches. Next generation sequencing technologies have been recently intro- Acknowledgements: GEN2PHEN is funded by the European Commu- duced. However, this technology was initially developed for whole ge- nity’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant nome sequencing purposes. agreement 200754. We have adopted this technology for complete sequence analysis of the CFTR coding region. P11.048 For a 50x coverage, only half a million nucleotides are needed for GEN2PHEN Knowledge centre: a virtual centre of excellence for CFTR sequence analysis of one patient. Therefore, 100-200 samples the genotype-to-phenotype community should be pooled in order to use the full capacity of the GS-FLX sys- A. J. Webb, A. J. Brookes; tem. We have developed an economically feasible universal sample University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. tagging approach allowing the pooling of 100 samples with one set of The GEN2PHEN project aims to help establish increasingly holistic 260 primers (60 amplicon-specific primers and 200 tagging primers). access to Genotype- Phenotype (G2P) information. This goal involves This compares to 6000 primers if amplicon-specific primers are tagged promoting a federated network of G2P resources, and enabling the bi- as such. directional flow of knowledge between public G2P databases to G2P Normally, each amplicon should be amplified individually and purified. researchers. To this end, we are constructing the ‘GEN2PHEN Knowl- Then, the concentration of each solution is accurately determined in edge Centre’ (GEN2PHEN-KC: www.gen2phen.org). order to pool all amplicons in equimolar concentrations. The universal The GEN2PHEN-KC will be much more than a simple informational tagging approach resulted in a less dynamic range of the yield of the website, as it will provide: i) increasingly comprehensive searches of different amplicons, so that the time-consuming preparation of equi- broad segments of the G2P domain, ii) systems by which researchers molar solutions could be simplified. can add comments onto records in public databases, allied to various We are even further simplifying the PCR steps through the develop- modes for the community to discuss small or large topics in the G2P ment of robust multiplex PCR reactions. Indeed, 30 amplicons should field, iii) access to software, tools and resources created by the GEN- be analyzed for the CFTR gene, and this can ultimately be only eco- 2PHEN Project, iv) latest news and updates on the G2P field, including nomically feasible if amplified in one, or a limited number, of multiplex an extensive diary of relevant events, v) training resources, such as PCR reaction(s). Specifically, we have developed a robust multiplex tutorials, screencasts and instructional videos. amplification assay in which biotinylated amplicon-specific primers are Such features will equip researchers with an easy-to-use and effective locally restricted through streptavidin/biotin crosslinking. central outlet to promote their research, to network and establish col- We thus developed an assay for routine sequencing of the CFTR gene laborations, and to assess the value of G2P datasets and resources. in a diagnostic setting using next generation sequencing. Researchers will also be able to rate and comment on articles, blog posts and resources, edit wiki-type pages, and engage in debates with peers.Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  P11.051 Pavia, Italy. Allelic spectra of large genomic regions identified by DNA Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) is a successful pathogen that establishes a pooling, array capture and high throughput sequencing persistent infection in more than 70% of those who contract it. Chro- L. H. Franke1, K. Hunt1, G. Heap1, J. Yang2, N. Bockett1, V. Mistry1, C. A. Mein3, nicity is often associated with liver cirrhosis and carcinoma. Current R. J. Dobson3, Z. Albertyn4,5, C. Chelala6, C. Hercus5, D. A. van Heel1; treatment is effective in approximately 50% of patients, likely due to 1Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and The London School of host genetic factors. Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom, 2Diabetes and Inflammation Human genetic variability ranges from point-form variations (SNPs) to Laboratory, Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medi- large genetic rearrangements, such as Copy Number Variants (CNVs). cal Research, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, Since CNVs represent the amount of copies of a particular DNA frag- United Kingdom, 3The Genome Centre, Barts and The London School of Medi- ment, they are currently emerging as a potential source of susceptibil- cine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom, 4Novocraft Technologies Sdn Bhd, ity to a significant panel of both multi-factorial and infectious disorders. Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 5Centre for Comparative Genomics, Murdoch Univer- We are focusing on the chromosomal determinants related with the sity, Murdoch, Australia, 6Centre for Molecular Oncology and Imaging, Institute pathogenetic consequences of chronic HCV infection, hunting for ge- of Cancer & CR-UK Clinical Centre, Barts & The London School of Medicine netic aberrations relevant for both the progression of hepatic damages (QMUL), London, United Kingdom. and the therapeutic outcome. The recruitment of blood and liver biop- Genome wide association studies (GWAS) typically report regions with sies from HCV-infected patients is performed according with the liver common tag variants, variably correlated with the actual biologically fibrosis level and the therapeutic response. Hundreds of genomic DNA causal genetic variants. Additional, independently associated, rare and samples have been already subjected to Whole Genome Association common variants may exist. To identify the spectrum of genetic vari- (WGA) studies employing the microarray technology developed by Il- ants at three celiac disease associated genomic regions (total 1.26Mb, lumina®. In order to assess SNPs and CNVs associated to the HCV of which 1.01Mb non-repeat sequence was tiled and analysed), we infection, microarray data are analyzed with informatics and statistical made 10 pools of 8 human DNA samples and enriched each pool us- devices, such as Nexus, QuantiSNP and R. Validation of any genetic ing Nimblegen sequence capture microarrays and high-throughput se- association disclosed by the WGA is being confirmed by an indepen- quenced captured fragment paired-ends. We developed variant calling dent sensitive analysis based on both High-Resolution Melt and Real- algorithms and identified 3457 SNPs (45.8% previously known), 517 Time PCR. Our study can help to improve the actual knowledge on the small (≤7bp) insertion-deletions variants (25% previously known) and host susceptibility to HCV, shedding a new prospective on the infection over 10 larger structural variants by read-pair insert analysis. A 4.98% outcome and therapeutic possibilities. per-SNP false negative rate was determined using sample Hap300 BeadChip genotypes. A 6.1% per-SNP false positive rate was de- P11.054 termined using deep dideoxy capillary resequencing of 52 randomly GLEAm: a possible solution to the problem of analysing selected SNPs. These methods will advance identification of causal heterogenous disorders variants from GWAS regions. V. Murday1, D. Ellis2, A. Ayesha1, J. Duncan1, S. Stenhouse1; 1West of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 2Qia- P11.052 gen Ltd, Crawley, United Kingdom. Influences of genetic variants on plasma factor VIII levels in Analysis of heterogeneous disorders is laborious and expensive. female carriers of hemophilia A GLEAM is a tool for researchers and diagnostic laboratories wishing to B. Horvath1, F. Abu-Hamdeh2, R. Freitag1, C. Male3, I. Pabinger2, K. Thom3, C. eliminate known causative genes. It can be used for autosomal domi- Mannhalter1; nant, recessive and X-linked conditions. The use of GLEAM enables 1Department of Medical and Chemical Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical Univer- researchers to identify those families in which unidentified genes are sity Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology likely to be causative, allowing further study of these cases. In a diag- and Haemostaseology, Medical University Vienna, Austria, 3University hospital nostic setting it will reduce the number of causative genes requiring for paediatrics, Medical University Vienna, Austria. sequencing in families in which mutations are sought and potentially Introduction: An inversion in intron 22 of the factor 8 gene causes se- identify large scale deletions. Mutation specific oligos can also be in- vere hemophilia A with FVIII activity (FVIII:C) <1%. In female carriers corporated within the analysis. FVIII:C is highly variable. Age, blood group and von Willebrand fac- The proof of principle used CHIP based technology and required DNA tor antigen (vWF:Ag) concentration could influence FVIII:C. Currently, from only two affected relatives from families in which the causative data on their effect on FVIII:C in female carriers are not available. Also, gene was known. It eliminates the need for samples from multiple fam- systematic analyses of the role of the inversion in intron 22 and X-chro- ily members and a good family structure which makes conventional mosome inactivation (XCI) on FVIII:C are lacking. linkage analysis difficult in most cases. Crucially there is no need to Patients and Methods: We measured FVIII:C by one stage assay in establish phase. 48 female carriers - 21 with inversion 22. Blood group and vWF:Ag The level of informativeness is determined by the degree of relation- were determined using standard methods. XCI was analyzed by PCR ship between the individuals used and was observed to be 60% in the amplification of the human androgen receptor (HUMARA). pairs chosen for the pilot study. This agreed with our predictions based Results: FVIII:C ranged from 14 to 192%, the vWF antigen varied from on the relationships. Where they were informative the correct gene 63 to 236%. We found no influence of age. Carriers with blood group 0 was eliminated in all cases. This demonstrates the potential for reduc- showed lower FVIII:C (mean 76%) than carriers with non 0, the differ- ing the need for sequencing and the laborious analysis of variants of ence was not significant. XCI could be evaluated in 36/48 individuals. unknown significance. Results from the use of GLEAM in breast can- Fourteen carriers had a balanced XCI pattern while 22 showed skew- cer and cardiomyopathy will be presented. ing. In 12 the ratios of X:X were 1 to 3 or higher. Skewing was equally 1 2 frequent in inversion carriers (n=7, 32%) and non-inversion carriers P11.055 (n=7, 27%). FVIII:C was not affected by skewing. The inversion in in- systematic comparison of High-Res melting® genotyping tron 22 did not influence FVIII:C (p=0.969). methods on the Lightscanner and Lightscanner 32: small Conclusion: Age and blood group had no significant effect on FVIII:C in Amplicons, Lunaprobes™, and snapback Primers female carriers. Even though skewed XCI is frequent, an association M. D. Poulson, C. Gundry, R. Lems, M. Wall, D. Teng, J. McKinney; of FVIII:C with skewing was not found. Idaho Technology, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States. Small Amplicon Genotyping (SAG) and LunaProbes are well estab- P11.053 lished High Resolution Melting genotyping methods. SAG requires two Detection of genetic determinants relevant for HcV primers whereas LunaProbes require an additional 3’ blocked oligo- pathogenesis nucleotide. A new method, Snapback primers, shows promise as a C. Cheroni1, F. Marabita1, R. Scavelli1, S. De Nicola2, A. Alghemo2, G. Prati2, M. genotyping technique. Snapback uses two primers, with one primer Comelli3, R. De Francesco1, M. Rumi2, S. Abrignani1, M. Crimi1; modified 5’ with a “probe” element complimentary to the SNP region. 1National Instiute of Molecular Genetics (INGM), Milan, Italy, 2Migliavacca Lunaprobes and Snapback produce a probe-melt (low Tm) and an am- Center for Liver Disease, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3University of Pavia, plicon melt (high Tm) region, while SAG produces a single ampliconGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  melt only. P11.058 Ten SNPs were interrogated using each method. Comparisons in- Genomic targets of human papillomavirus E2 protein cluded genotype accuracy, discrimination of unequal allele fractions, R. Kurg1, L. Võsa1, A. Sudakov2, M. Ustav1, M. Remm2; and simplicity of design. SAG assays used primers placed as close as 1Institute of Technology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biol- practical to each SNP, generating 50-70 bp amplicons. LunaProbes ogy, Tartu, Estonia. and Snapback utilized the same primers, generated 90-150 bp ampli- Papillomaviruses are DNA tumour viruses that infect epithelial cells cons, and were designed to work using asymmetric PCR. LunaProbes and induce the formation of benign hyperproliferative lesions. HPV E2 were designed 18-35 bp. Snapback used one primer that was modified protein regulates viral gene transcription and is required for viral DNA with a 5’ probe element. replication. E2 is a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that recog- Each method was 100% accurate in genotype calls across all targets, nizes a palindromic sequence 5’-ACCGNNNNCGGT-3’ (E2BS). Our with all genotypes represented. SAG assays were easiest to design aim was to study the involvement of papillomavirus E2 protein in regu- and optimize. LunaProbes and Snapback required the lowest software lation of cellular gene expression. We have identified the abundance sensitivity setting to call accurate genotypes, and displayed greater dis- and placement of E2BS in the human genome and studied the role of crimination of unequal alleles, down to 5% of the low-fraction allele. some of these sequences in E2-dependent cellular transcription regu- All three applications are accurate, cost-effective and offer different lation. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that human genome contains advantages. Together, these methods will offer increased flexibility and over three thousand copies of E2-specific DNA motifs, but only 753 of success rate of assay development. SAG is the simplest method, while them are locating in repeat free regions. E2BSs occur less frequently LunaProbes and Snapback offer greater ability to distinguish unequal than is expected from genome nucleotide content. Additionally, most allele fractions. sites are suboptimal for HPV E2 binding suggesting that the number and structure of these sites appears to be under negative selection P11.056 pressure. Our experiments show that some of the genomic sequences A PcR coupled high-resolution melting analysis for reliable gene containing at least two E2BS within 500 bp can act as E2-responsive scanning of the faciogenital dysplasia gene, FGD1 transcription regulatory elements in transient transcription assays. T. Kaname1,2, K. Yanagi1, Y. Chinen1, K. Naritomi1,2; E2 can also induce changes in expression levels of genes containing 1University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Japan, 2SORST, JST, Tokyo, Japan. those sites in the genomic context. These data suggest that HPV E2 It is important to establish an easy and reliable system to detect muta- proteins can alter cellular gene expression through binding to specific tions or variations for genetic testing. High-resolution melting analysis E2 recognition sites in the human genome. (HRM analysis) is a method, which allows simple and rapid detection of gene variations. We constructed a sensitive system for detecting P11.059 gene variations in FGD1. The FGD1 gene is a responsible gene for Primer optimization for detecting low levels of methylation using Aarskog-Scott syndrome (AAS), which is an X-linked disorder charac- High-Resolution melting analysis terized by short stature, dysmorphic facial appearance, brachydactyly, A. R. Tobler, N. Koch, G. Janaway, C. J. Davidson, M. J. O’Donoghue; shawl scrotum, and sometimes neurobehavioral impairment. Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. We set up a PCR coupled HRM system for all exons of FGD1 us- DNA methylation plays a critical role in the regulation of gene expres- ing LightCycler 480 Instrument (Roche). Then we evaluated the PCR/ sion in development, differentiation, and disease. Methylation of CpG HRM in the screening seven mutations of FGD1, which we found in Islands in promoter regions usually turns off gene transcription. Global AAS patients previously, plus variations of FGD1 in five sporadic pa- hypomethylation of genomic DNA has been observed in tumor cells tients, two families, and 48 controls. The PCR/HRM discriminated all and a correlation between hypomethylation and increased gene ex- the FGD1 mutations studied from wild-type DNA. In control individuals, pression has been reported for many oncogenes. four polymorphisms and three unknown variations were found in the Most of the techniques available to study DNA methylation do not offer FGD1 gene. Besides, the PCR/HRM discriminated not only four haplo- enough sensitivity to confidently detect methylated DNA levels less types in exon 14, but also between heterozygous and hemizygous or than 10%. HRM is a powerful method, able to achieve detection levels homozygous of those haplotypes. below 10%; however, knowledge of different parameters that influence The system is a valuable method for rapid and reliable scanning of detection sensitivity will improve the chance of a successful assay. FGD1 gene variations and is applicable to high-throughput genetic In this report, methylation of the promoter region of the MTA1 gene is testing. examined using HRM. Positive controls with 100% and 0% methylation are used to establish melt curves for complete hyper- and hypometh- P11.057 ylation, respectively. Unknown samples with as low as 0.1% methyla- Functional study of nuclear missense mutations causing tion are detected using the HRM method. This can be achieved by mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency including CpG dinucleotides in the PCR primer sequence and delib- M. Ramos, M. Arnedo, B. Puisac, M. C. Gil-Rodríguez, M. P. Ribate, J. C. de erately shifting the PCR bias to preferentially amplify the methylated Karam, A. L. Díaz, S. Menao, F. J. Ramos, J. Pié; sequence. The methylation status of each CpG is confirmed by di- Laboratory of Clinical Genetics and Functional Genomics. Medicine School., rectly sequencing the PCR product of the HRM reaction. These results Zaragoza, Spain. demonstrate the sensitivity of HRM analysis in detecting extremely low The HMGCS2 gene codifies the human mitochondrial HMG-CoA levels of methylation, and the general workflow of sequencing the PCR synthase (mHS). The mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency product following HRM methylation analysis. (OMIM 600234) is a rare autosomic recessive disorder of the ketone- bodies synthesis that sometimes cause sudden infant death. Up to P11.060 date, eight patients with this deficiency have been reported. Clinical Rapid high throughput screening and identification of unknown diagnosis must be confirmed by measuring the enzyme activity in liver DNA variation using High-Resolution melt and sequencing tissue. Recently, we have cloned the HMGCS2 gene into the pMAL- workflow. c2x expression vector, overexpressed the recombinant plasmid into N. Koch, N. Chen, A. Lam, G. Janaway, J. Wang; the E.coli BL21 and purified the mHS protein with amilose affinity chro- Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. matography. Here, we reported for the first time the obtention of the High Resolution Melt (HRM) is a recent enhancement to traditional mHS protein correctly folded and with a great level of purity which melting analyses that significantly increases the detail and informa- allowed us to carry out accurate enzyme activity measurements. We tion that can be captured. HRM requires the use of new DNA bind- have also studied the natural mutants of the enzyme and observed ing dyes that allow a sharp melting transition of double stranded to significant structural abnormalities in four of them. We identified two single stranded DNA. The HRM screening method is sensitive enough missense mutations that caused the complete loss of the enzyme ac- to detect single nucleotide differences in several hundred base pairs tivity and one missense mutation that caused the loss of 75% of en- of sequence. We have successfully used HRM to screen for unknown zyme activity. DNA variations in genomic DNA. Traditional methods of DNA vari- This work is supported by a grant of Diputación General de Aragón ant screening (dHPLC, SSCP) are more costly and time consuming (Ref. B20). than the HRM method. HRM screening identifies samples containingGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  sequence variation relative to a control sample; however, HRM does both mouse strains, high expression level being detected in bone mar- not impart the identity of the variation, and sequencing is required to row, spleen, liver and the lowest level in lung. Particular methylation exactly identify the nucleotide changes. Since HRM is an end-point pattern in a regulatory region (between -990 bp and -822 bp up-stream PCR analysis technique, we further developed a workflow enabling to the coding region) of the kit gene was identified in spleen, which the product of HRM PCR to be used directly in a Sanger sequencing may be correlated with high gene expression level. Our results sug- reaction after a simple 100 to 200 fold dilution. The direct sequencing gest that DNA methylation may play an important role in tissue and approach conserves sample by eliminating another round of PCR to organ-specific regulation of the kit gene, therefore our epigenetic study generate product for sequencing. And the high ratio dilution eliminates will be extended to other kit gene regulatory elements. the need for a purification step after PCR. The fluorescent dye used Financial support: PN 06.26-02.18/2008 National Research Program. for HRM does not interfere with the sequencing reaction. To further simplify the workflow, universal M13 tags were added to the 5’ end P11.063 of the gene-specific primers allowing the HRM amplicons to be easily colocalisation of predicted exonic splicing enhancers in LAMA sequenced using a universal protocol in any high throughput sequenc- gene with reported sequence variants ing setting. O. Siala, F. Fakhfakh; Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, SFAX, Tunisia. P11.061 Translationally silent mutations were classified as polymorphisms. intra-intronic human minisatellite UPs29 associated with This assumption is now being challenged through the analysis of the neurological diseases regulates reporter gene activity mRNAs produced from mutant alleles, leading to the realization that depending on its copy number in cell line F9 a higher proportion of polymorphisms affect splicing. In our study, we L. Sasina1, I. Suchkova1, K. Solovyev1, N. Slominska1, V. S. Baranov2, E. Pat- analysed the colocalisation of exonic SNPs in LAMA2 gene related to kin1; the MDC1A form of congenital muscular dystrophy with exonic splicing 1Institute of Experimental Medicine, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s enhancers (ESEs). Then, we searched the effect of allelic change on Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. ESEs efficacy. The LAMA2 sequence was searched for ESE motifs Earlier we found the association of increased rate of short alleles of using the web-based tool ESEfinder. Exons were screened for se- minisatellite UPS29 localized in intron of CENTB5 gene with some quence motifs likely to be recognised by the SR proteins SF2/ASF, forms of Parkinson disease and epilepsy. The molecular mechanism SC35, SRp40 and SRp55. Matching sequences are scored and only of such correlation remains mainly unclear. To elucidate this problem scores above thresholds are predicted to act as ESEs. Results showed we generated PCR product corresponding to “healthy” (900bp) and the presence of 2709 ESEs in the 65 coding exons of LAMA2 gene; to “disease” (400bp) UPS29 alleles. These PCR products were intro- this number was reduced to 480 significant ESEs after applying the duced into plasmid pEGFP with ROSA-betagco26 promoter and fused thresholds values filter. Secondly, the analysis of published sequence to reporter gene GFP. These plasmids were transfected into cells of variations in LAMA2 gene showed the presence of 41 exonic SNPs, 18 embryonal carcinoma line F9. Number of GFP-positive cells, their of them colocalize with the identified significant ESEs, representing a morphology and fluorescence intensity were analyzed with the help of fraction of about 44%. In addition, the allelic changes in 5 synonymous confocal microscopy after cultivation for 24 and 48h. Plasmids without or non synonymous SNPs can abolish or create an ESE suggesting UPS29 served as controls. There were no signal-positive cells in case their potentially functional role in LAMA2 gene expression. These re- of the same but minisatellite-free plasmids, though molecular analysis sults indicate the utility to consider the functional role of exonic SNPs shower the presence of plasmids in F9 cells. Thus an GFP expres- in splicing and can also answer to many questions about the disease sion lacked in control, but appeared due to presence of UPS29 in con- susceptibility and about the phenotypic variability observed in patients struct. The number of GFP expressing cells depended on repeated sharing with the same mutation in LAMA2 gene. units number in UPS29. The most high fluorescence was observed in neuron-like derivatives of F9 cells induced to differentiate. We sup- P11.064 pose that such regularity could be explained by minisatellite-specific the Utility of capillary Electrophoresis and Next Generation TF binding, and as a result UPS29 served as enhancer relatively to Sequencing platforms for scientific discovery ROSA26 promoter. Obtained results point to possible mechanism of B. Finkelnburg1, F. Raffaldi2, A. Ferlinz1, J. Walker3, P. Vatta3, C. Cummings3, A. regulatory function of intra-intronic and other non-protein coding re- Pradhan3, M. Bozzini3, A. Shah3, A. Tam3; peats as additional enhancers. The shortening of one of minisatellite 1Applied Biosystems Deutschland GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany, 2Applera Italia, allele will lead to gene expression decrease and further to pathology. Monza, Italy, 3Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. Acknowledgement. The work was supported by RFBR grant 08-04- With its long read lengths and high accuracy, capillary electrophoresis- 12167 based sequencing is the gold standard technology for de novo proj- ects. Typically in de novo projects for genetic analysis of any organism P11.062 CE is considered ideal for creating high quality scaffolds. Now with the Epigenetic study on regulation of normal and mutant kit gene in availability of sequencing by short-read next generation sequencing mice technologies system, this process is complemented through finishing G. Cardos1, A. Arghir1, S. M. Chirieac1, G. P. Savi1, M. E. Hinescu1,2; with high coverage. Alternatively, short-read sequencing technologies 1”Victor Babes” National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2„Carol offer the throughput requirement for assaying large numbers of candi- Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. date regions or when resequencing pooled or heterogeneous samples. The Kit protein is a tyrosine-kinase receptor with a key-role in normal Next-generation sequencing is suited for large-scale discovery experi- development of Interstitial Cajal Cells (ICC), the kit gene having differ- ments, while CE with its high accuracy and unmatched data quality ent expression levels in various tissues and developmental stages. can be used to validate structural genetic variations We report preliminary results of an epigenetic study on the kit gene We looked at de novo and targeted sequencing as two applications regulation in order to find correlation (if any) between gene expression where each technology could be applied. In our analysis we con- level and methylation status of its regulatory elements in mice, in differ- sider sample preparation, and reagents, as well as key criteria that ent tissues and organs in which ICCs were identified. researchers consistently demand including accuracy, coverage, read Different segments of gastrointestinal tract and extra-digestive organs length, quality values and ease of use. were sampled from mutant B6Cg-KitW-sh/HnihrJaeBsmJ and control B6129PF2/J mice. RNA and DNA were extracted by DNA/RNA Mini Kit P11.065 (Qiagen). Gene expression analysis was performed by Reverse Tran- the Gen2Phen project: collecting gene sequence variants scription-PCR methodology. The methylation status of the kit regula- and their phenotypic consequences in web-based LsDBs for tory elements was studied by both enzymatic restrictions with methyla- mendelian disorders tion-sensitive BstUI endonuclease followed by PCR and Methylation I. F. A. C. Fokkema, P. E. M. Taschner, G. B. van Ommen, J. T. den Dunnen; Specific-PCR after bisulfitic treatment of DNA by EpiTect® Bisulfit Kit Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands. (Qiagen). The EU-funded Gen2Phen project aims to provide a holistic view of Our study revealed comparable levels of the kit gene expression in genotype-phenotype information. Gen2Phen facilitates the collectionGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  of gene sequence variants and their phenotypic consequences by of- peroxisomal-proliferator-activated receptor α (PPARα) activates tran- fering free support to establish and host Locus-Specific DataBases scription of rat hepatic MCD via two of the three PPRE sites identified (LSDBs). To build, curate and share these gene variant databases, we (PPRE2 and PPRE3). We have identified the putative PPRE sites in have developed the Leiden Open-source Variation Database software human by alignment with the rat sequence. Promoter deletion analysis (LOVD, http://www.LOVD.nl). As demonstrated during this presenta- in HepG2 cells with overexpression of PPARα/RXRα (retinoid X recep- tion, after installation from CD, this free, open-source, platform-inde- tor α) showed that PPRE1 and PPRE3 were functional in human. We pendent tool builds a basic database following current recommenda- also studied the functional impact of the closest single nucleotide poly- tions of the Human Genome Variation Society. The database manager morphism (SNP) -379bp C/G (rs880088) to the putative PPRE sites can add any data field desired, e.g. to capture disease-specific pheno- in HepG2 hepatocytes and GT1-7 hypothalamic neurons in transient type information, deciding per field the input accepted and whether or transfection studies. No significant difference in promoter activity was not those data will be available for public display. LOVD supports sev- found between the alleles in HepG2 but the -379 G allele showed 2.1 eral levels of data access (website visitor, submitter, curator, database times greater activity than -379 C allele in GT1-7 cells. Electrophoretic manager), searching in and across data columns, custom design of mobility shift assays (EMSAs) revealed that the -379 G allele binds direct links (to internet, intranet or even local-PC files), data exchange to nuclear protein(s) only from GT1-7 cells. In conclusion, the data with central repositories (incl. NCBI, UCSC), automatic mutation no- suggest the MLYCD -379 C/G polymorphism is a regulatory SNP that menclature error checking using Mutalyzer and data storage on vari- affects promoter activity in GT1-7 cells. ants in different genes found in one patient. LOVD allows searching of data in non-public records, returning the number of hits and the option P11.068 to ask for more information. Currently, LOVD is used to curate >260 Loss of paternal methylation affecting the MEG locus located LSDBs world-wide, with the Leiden server hosting >120 and data col- on chromosome 14q32.2 imprinted region in a girl with maternal lected for ~60,000 variants from >30,000 patients, the largest series upd-like phenotype covering gene variants in relation to neuromuscular disorders. B. Demeer1, G. Morin1, R. Gouron2, L. Razafimanantsoa3, S. Kanafani4, J. Funded by the European Community’s Seventh Framework Pro- Andrieux5, H. Copin4, L. Cusisset6, M. Mathieu1; gramme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement nº 200754 - the 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Amiens, France, 2Depart- GEN2PHEN project. ment of Orthopaedics, University Hospital, Amiens, France, 3Pediatric Depart- ment, Beauvais, France, 4Department of Cytogenetics, University Hospital, P11.066 Amiens, France, 5Department of Molecular Genetics, University Hospital, Lille, investigation the methylation status of promoter in JmJD1A of France, 6Department of Molecular Genetics, Cochin-Saint Vincent de Paul oligoazoospermia patients Hospital, Paris, France. M. Javanmardi1,2, M. Noruzinia3, H. Abdul-Tehrani1, P. Fatehmanesh3; We report the case of a 8-year old girl seen in the orthopaedic depart- 1Department of medical biotechnology of Tarbiat modares University, tehran, ment for scoliosis. She is the third child of non consanguinous healthy Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Sarem women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of parents. She was born after an uneventful pregnancy (BW : 2.330kg, Iran, 3sarem women hospital, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. BH : 47.5cm, BHC : 32 cm, Apgar score 10,10). Neonatal feeding dif- Introduction: ficulties and moderate axial hypotonia were noted. Motor milestones CpG islands in or near promoter region of many genes are subject and speech were delayed. From the age of 2 years, she began to to methylation which can have impact on gene expression. Thus, hy- put on weight and developed obesity. At 8 years 2/12, parameters are permethylation of promoter regions are known to be a cause of gene 38.4kg (+4SD), 136.5cm (+2.2SD), BMI 20.6; Tanner stages : S1A1P2. expression silencing and pathogenic in many genetic disorders. JM- She presents a 40° dorsal scoliosis, rather short hands and feet, no JD1A is a crucial gene for the final step of spermatogenesis. There dysmorphic facial features and no mental retardation. Cerebral MRI are evidences that this gene directly controls expression of several was normal. Karyotype is 46, XX, ish15q11-13(SNRPNx2), and Array- genes required for DNA packaging in sperm cells and defects in this CGH did not detect any microdeletion or microduplication. gene could be the cause for some cases of male infertility. In this study As maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 14 (maternal UPD we investigated methylation pattern in JMJD1A promoter region in pa- 14) was suspected, microsatellite studies and methylation analysis of tients with unknown infertility. Maternally Expressed Gene 3 (MEG3) located in the 14q32.2 region Methods and materials: were performed. Maternal UPD 14 was excluded by showing bipa- In this study we prepared testicular biopsy from Iranian azoospermic rental inheritance of microsatellite markers. Methylation of the MEG3 infertile men for investigation of methylation status of 5´ region of JM- locus showed loss of paternal methylation with normal profil methyla- JD1A gene. Tissue sample of 5 obstructive azoospermic patients were tion of both parents. used as normal controls. MS- PCR (Methylation Specific PCR) was set Yet very few patients with exclusively maternal methylation profil of up to study methylation status in the promoter region. the MEG3 locus have been described, but notably clinical features Results and discussion: seemed to be grossly similar in epimutation patients and maternal Patients with non-obstructive azoospermia and infertility showed dif- UPD 14 patients. ferent pattern of methylation compared to normal controls. In brief, 100% of controls showed only unmethylated allele. In patient group, 3 P11.069 patients (10%) showed only methylated allele. 2 patients ( 7%) showed Both translation start sites in the human MCT gene are used to both methylated and unmethylated alleles. The rest showed only un- produce two mct8 protein isoforms in vitro methylated allele. This is the first evidence of involvement of epigen- E. C. H. Friesema1, S. Kersseboom1, T. Wood2, C. E. Schwartz2, T. J. Visser1; etic changes in JMJD1A promoter region in male infertility. 1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States. P11.067 Mutations in MCT8 (SLC16A2) are associated with severe X-linked Identification of functional SNP and putative PPRE sites in psychomotor retardation and elevated serum T3 levels, also known as promoter of human malonyl-coA carboxylase gene (mLYcD) Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome. MCT8 is an important thyroid hor- A. K. Lee, T. Kyriakou, S. D. O’Dell; mone transporter, especially in the brain. In contrast to the mouse, the Nutritional Science Division, London, United Kingdom. human MCT8 gene contains two possible translation start sites (TLSs), Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase (MCD) catalyses the degradation of malo- giving rise to proteins of 613 (MCT8L) or 539 (MCT8S) amino acids. nyl-CoA to acetyl-CoA. Malonyl-CoA is an intermediate in fatty acid Studies in human liver revealed the presence of mRNA species con- synthesis and a potent inhibitor of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 taining both TLSs. Also, we described last year a patient with an inser- (CPT1). CPT1 transfers long-chain fatty acyl-CoA (LCFA-CoA) to the tion of 2 amino acids (p.G41_S42 dup) located between the two TLSs mitochondria for β-oxidation. Reduced activity of MCD would lead to in MCT8. In addition to short MCT8 cDNA containing only the 2nd TLS, elevated LCFA-CoA in the hypothalamus, which signals energy surfeit we cloned long MCT8 cDNA with both TLSs, inserted the G41_S42 du- and leads to inhibition of feeding. We proposed that genetic variation plication or mutated the second TLS (M75A, M75L) to prevent the syn- influencing expression of the MCD gene (MLYCD) could influence body thesis of MCT8S. Western blotting showed that transfection with long weight through an effect on energy intake. It has been established that MCT8 cDNA results in bands of 61 and 69 kDa, representing MCT8SGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  and MCT8L. Transfection of long MCT8_M75L or MCT8_M75A cDNA P11.072 resulted only in the production of MCT8L. Transport studies showed Expression profiles of small RNAs from various tissues that uptake of thyroid hormone in cells expressing MCT8L was lower generated by sOLiD™ sequencing than in cells expressing MCT8S. However, the G41_S42 duplication R. Tanzi1, B. Nutter1, S. Kuersten2, J. Gu2, C. Barbacioru1, D. Wang1, B. Gar- in the MCT8 protein did not change thyroid hormone transport activity, diner3, K. Lea4, S. Heater2, M. Barker1, L. Chapman2, T. Gulham1, L. Wong1, S. surprisingly in contrast to the studied human MCT8 mutations so far. Grimmond3; We found that both TLSs in MCT8 are used to produce two isoforms 1Life Technologies, Foster city, CA, United States, 2Life Technologies, Austin, which are both capable of transporting thyroid hormones in vitro. It is TX, United States, 3The university of Queensland, St Lucia QLD, Australia, 4Life yet unknown whether these isoforms are differentially expressed in Technologies, austin, TX, United States. human tissues. The combination of the SOLiD™ Small RNA Expression Kit (SREK) with the SOLiD Sequencing System presents a unique opportunity to P11.070 study miRNA expression in a way not previously possible. We bar- Whole Genome Amplification of single cell: application in coded and sequenced small RNA libraries from ten different human tis- forensic SNP profiling. sues to saturating levels of detection; generating up to 200 million tags. E. Giardina1, I. Pietrangeli1, M. De Felici2, G. Arcudi3, A. Spinella4, G. Novelli1,5; Comparing both independent sequencing runs and libraries indicates 1Biopathology, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Public Health, University of Rome the system is highly reproducible and has up to 6 logs dynamic range. Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Public Health-Institute of Forensic To analyze the quantitative ability of this approach we compared tag Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, count data to real-time PCR assays generated using TaqMan miRNA 4Direzione Centrale Anticrimine, Servizio di Polizia Scientifica, Rome, Italy, low density arrays. Fold-change comparisons between platforms show 5Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Pearson correlation values of 0.95. Detailed analysis indicates a far Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States. greater repertoire of miRNA variants, or ‘isomirs’, than previously ob- The scarcity of genomic DNA can be limiting factor in several fields of served suggesting a much broader range of mRNA targets for miRNA- genetic research such as forensic, prenatal of preimplantation diagno- mediated regulation. Using this approach we have identified hundreds sis. Multiple displacement amplification (MDA) is a whole genome am- of potentially novel sequence tags. We chose a subset of these novel plification technique developed to amplify a limited DNA sample non- transcripts and designed custom TaqMan miRNA assays to validate specifically to generate a new sample that is indistinguishable from the them by real-time PCR analysis. We are able to demonstrate both the original but has a higher DNA concentration. presence and expression profile of >50% of the novel sequences, most In this work we evaluated the applicability of MDA for forensic pur- of which are present at relatively low levels in the ten tissues. Interest- poses. We amplified DNA, extracted from 30 single amniocyte cells ingly, we failed to detect nearly all of these novel targets using conven- and 10 single lymphocytes and typed a 36-SNP panel. Single cell tional northern blotting highlighting the need for qPCR sensitivity for MDA DNA was typed twice for the same set of SNPs to evaluate the validation purposes. This human miRNA expression atlas provides a reproducibility of results. We performed a total of 2160 typing reac- unique opportunity to understand the sequence complexity and iden- tions observing a positive typing rate in amplified DNA (99,65%) and tity of small noncoding RNAs present in a variety of human tissues. 97,87% of concordance rate between amplified vs control (genomic) DNA. The absence of perfect concordance rate revealed the failure P11.073 of amplification of alleles in heterozygous samples (ADO). We also microRNA target prediction by expression analysis of host performed traditional STR-based profiling on single cell amplified DNA genes obtaining a higher ADO rate. These results suggest that MDA should V. Gennarino, M. Sardiello, R. Avellino, N. Meola, V. Maselli, A. Ballabio, S. be considered as a suitable option for SNP typing in challenging fo- Banfi; rensic casework. TIGEM, Naples, Italy. Acknowledgements MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that control gene This work was supported by financing from EU FP6 projects NACBO: expression by inducing RNA cleavage or translational inhibition. Most Novel and Improved Nanomaterials, Chemistries and Apparatus for human miRNAs are intragenic and are transcribed as part of their host- Nano-Biotechnology (contract no. NMP4-CT-2004-500804). ing transcription units. We hypothesized that the expression profiles of miRNA host genes P11.071 and of their targets are inversely correlated and devised a novel proce- Multiplexed DNA methylation testing for efficient tumor marker dure, HOCTAR (host gene oppositely correlated targets), which ranks definition and microarray validation predicted miRNA target genes based on their anti-correlated expres- A. Weinhaeusel1, M. Hofner1, C. Fürhauser2, M. Wielscher1, S. Schönthaler1, sion behavior relative to their respective miRNA host genes. HOCTAR R. Pichler1, C. Singer2, D. Kandioler3, R. Panzer4, C. Noehammer1; is the first tool for systematic miRNA target prediction that utilizes the 1Austrian Research Centers GmbH – ARC, Health & Environment, Molecular same set of microarray experiments to monitor the expression of both Medicine, Seibersdorf, Austria, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, miRNAs (through their host genes) and candidate targets. We applied Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 3Department of Surgery, Medi- the procedure to 178 human intragenic miRNAs and found that it per- cal University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 4CCRI - Children’s Cancer Reseacrh forms better than currently available prediction softwares in pinpointing Institute, St Anna Children’s Hospital, Vienna, Austria. previously validated miRNA targets. The high-scoring HOCTAR pre- Here we present the design principle and performance of a combined dicted targets were enriched in gene ontology categories, which were multiplex-PCR and microarray hybridization technique for multiplexed consistent with previously published data, as in the case of miR-106b methylation testing. and miR-93. By means of overexpression and loss-of-function assays, Targeting 323 published DNA regions hypermethylated in several neo- we also demonstrated that HOCTAR is efficient in predicting novel plasias, methylation analysis is performed via methylation dependent miRNA targets and we identified, by microarray and qRT-PCR proce- restriction enzyme digestion of 500ng of starting DNA. DNA is ampli- dures, 34 and 28 novel targets for miR-26b and miR-98, respectively. fied within 16 multiplex PCRs covering 360 different amplicons and Overall, we believe that the use of HOCTAR significantly reduces the detected via microarray hybridization. After PCR amplicons are pooled number of candidate miRNA targets to be tested compared to the pro- and positives are detected using strepavidin-Cy3 via microarray hy- cedures based solely on target sequence recognition. Finally, our data bridization. Although the melting temperature of CpG rich DNA is very further confirm that miRNAs have a significant impact on the mRNA high, primer and probe-design as well hybridization conditions have levels of most of their targets. been optimized, thus this assay enables multiplexed methylation test- ing of human samples. The assay has been designed that 24 samples x 360 reactions can be run in parallel on a single 384 well PCR plate. Several tumor entities have been tested using the assay. Chip-data derived from the multiplexed assay enabled classification and class prediction and defined candidate-markers with potential diagnostic ap- plication.Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  P11.075 la neuve, Belgium, 3Institut Clinique de la Souris, IGBMC, Illkirch, France. Experimental and critical assessment of six methodological The generation of mouse mutants by conventional knock-out shows approaches to quantify heteroplasmy of mitochondrial two major limitations: (i) gene disruption often results in lethal pheno- mutations types (ii) it does not allow site specific and time controlled inactivation I. Kurelac, M. Lang, R. Zuntini, G. Gasparre, G. Romeo; of the gene of interest. Conditional knock-outs overcome these limita- Medical Genetics, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, tions. In the Cre-loxP system, the allele of interest is flanked by recog- Italy. nition sites for the Cre recombinase (loxP sites). When “floxed” mice Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations have an important effect on the are bred with transgenic mice expressing Cre in a tissue/cell-specific development of many genetic diseases, and are believed to play a role manner, the gene is knocked-out only in this tissue or cell. Temporal in aging and cancer. Most mammalian cells contain hundreds of mito- control is achieved using a ligand-activated recombinase, a fusion of chondria and each mitochondrion is endowed with several copies of the recombinase with a mutated ligand binding domain of the estro- mtDNA. However, an individual’s mitochondrial asset may not always gen receptor (ER), which can only be activated by the synthetic ligand be uniform. After an mtDNA variation arises, it may be maintained, lost tamoxifen (Cre ERT2). or amplified to different levels. As a result, cells and tissues, but also At ICS, we have generated about 50 Cre lines expected to express single mitochondria, may harbor both wild-type and mutant mtDNA, a CreERT2 recombinase in different target tissues or cells. These in- condition known as heteroplasmy. In order for an mtDNA mutation to clude different neuronal populations, adipose tissue, different cell show a phenotypic effect, a certain threshold of heteroplasmy must be populations in the digestive tract, pancreas, muscle, bone, immune reached. Therefore, it is extremely important not only to qualitatively system, reproductive tract, skin ... Characterization of the efficacy and detect a mutation but also to provide an adequate and efficient quan- specificity of such lines is demanding, and we have devised a stan- titative analysis of heteroplasmy. Here we compare six different meth- dardized flow-scheme (F. Gofflot et al.). Various lines are at different odologies for their capacity to evaluate, capture and quantify different stages of characterization. We will provide the list of promoters and heteroplasmy levels. We also considered the issue of the potential targeted tissues, and an update on their validation. These lines will bias introduced by preferential amplification during polymerase chain be available to the research community and will be a powerful tool for reaction (PCR). The mutation we chose to investigate is an insertion the study of disease genes function, creation of disease models and of a single base in ND1 gene described by Bonora et al (Cancer Res, to answer questions on the cell/organ autonomous or not character of 2007). Cloning and sequencing was set as the golden standard and pathological phenotypes. the comparison was made between the following methods: fluorescent PCR, denaturation high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC), P11.079 quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), high resolution melting analysis New method and new tool for human mtDNA phylogeny (HRM) and 454 pyrosequencing. The final results will be presented. reconstruction N. Eltsov, N. Volodko; P11.077 Institute of Cytology and Genetics, SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. in-lane Normalization improves the Analysis of mLPA Data Human mtDNA sequence variation is characterized by a high amount Obtained from capillary Electrophoresis systems of homoplasy which does not always allow unequivocal phylogeny re- E. Schreiber1, L. Pique2, C. Davidson1, E. Nordman1, B. Johnson1, R. Fish1, L. construction by conventional methods. We propose a novel maximum Joe1, A. Pradhan1, A. Felton1, I. Schrijver2; parsimony-based method for reconstruction of human mtDNA phylog- 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Stanford University Medi- eny. Briefly, the method consists of three successive stages: identi- cal Center, Stanford, CA, United States. fication of potential homoplastic mutations; analysis of potential ho- Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA®, MRC-Hol- moplastic mutations and identification of true homoplastic mutations; land) is an OLA-PCR- (oligonucleotide ligation assay PCR) based identification of back and parallel mutations. The method designed method used predominately for detecting copy number changes, such was implemented in mtPhyl. This software package allows rapid and as whole exon deletions and duplications, in gDNA. Typically, MLPA comprehensive analysis oh human complete mtDNA sequences. Apart reactions are analyzed on capillary electrophoresis (CE) instruments from maximum parsimony phylogenetic tree reconstruction it performs and specialized secondary analysis software is used to normalize different types of searches; analyzes mutation features; exports list of the data and to calculate probe ratios to determine the presence of particular mtDNAs mutations into Excel table; defines mitochondrial duplications or deletions. Here we describe the use of a new in-lane haplotype; calculates coalescence time of clusters; estimates the ef- normalization reagent that is added to MLPA sample reactions prior to fect of natural selection; makes reference list and downloads human CE analysis. The data collection software on a newly developed CE mtDNA complete sequences from GenBank. mtPhyl represents a instrument calculates a normalization factor that can then be applied timely advance, since the advent of cheaper sequencing methods has to the raw MLPA data by the GeneMapper® v4.1 secondary analysis generated an excess of sequence data, and there is an urgent need to software. To demonstrate the benefits of in-lane normalization to MLPA perform their automatic analysis. Demo version of mtPhyl is available data, gDNA samples for Pendred syndrome patients were analyzed from the authors upon request and at http://eltsov.org/mtphyl.aspxl. using an MLPA kit (P280 Pendred-SLC26A4, MRC-Holland) designed to interrogate the causative gene. Pendred syndrome, the most com- P11.080 mon syndromal form of deafness, is an autosomal recessive disorder Describing complex sequence variants by extending HGVs associated with developmental abnormalities of the cochlea, senso- sequence variation nomenclature rineural hearing loss, and diffuse thyroid enlargement. Pendred syn- P. E. M. Taschner, J. T. den Dunnen; drome results from mutations in the Solute Carrier Family 26, Mem- Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands. ber 4 (SLC26A4) gene. The MLPA multiplex kit consists of probes for New technologies allow rapid discovery of new sequence variants in- each of the 21 exons of SLC26A4 in addition to two mutation-spe- volving complex structural rearrangements. The description of these cific probes. We have found that in-lane normalization significantly im- variants challenges the existing sequence variation nomenclature proves the reproducibility and robustness of MLPA data analysis when guidelines of the Human Genome Variation Society (HGVS, http://www. using GeneMapper v4.1 software. hgvs.org/mutnomen), which are mainly focused on simple variants. Here, we suggest extending the HGVS nomenclature guidelines with P11.078 new description formats facilitating unambiguous and more detailed Generation of creER-t2 transgenic mouse lines for temporal descriptions of most complex sequence variants. These include: 1) and cell type specific conditional gene inactivation: a tool for nested changes supporting descriptions of changes within inversions analysis of pathomechanisms in mouse models of monogenic and duplications, 2) composite changes supporting concatenation of diseases inserted sequences, 3) new duplication types describing changes in L. Venteo1, N. Chartoire1, F. Augé1, J. Gallego-llamas1, M. Koch1, G. Neau1, N. orientation. One advantage of this extension is that the differences Ott1, F. Gofflot1,2, X. Warot1, J. Auwerx3, J. L. Mandel3, M. C. Birling1, G. Pav- and similarities between complex variants can be derived easily from lovic1; the new descriptions. In addition, this extension is expected to provide 1Institut Clinique de la Souris, Illkirch, France, 2univ catholique louvain, Louvain sufficient flexibility and consistency to limit the proliferation of alterna-Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics  tive interpretations giving rise to ambiguous descriptions of complex technology or combination of technologies followed by bioinformatic variants. The consistent specifications of the new description formats analysis using a pipeline consisting of state-of-the-art analysis tools. should allow easy implementation in sequence variant nomenclature checkers (e.g. Mutalyzer, http://www.LOVD.nl/mutalyzer). We are P11.083 planning to extend the functionality of Mutalyzer to incorporate the lat- Whole-genome human sNP detection using next-generation est version of the HGVS sequence variation nomenclature guidelines sequencing: accurate heterozygote detection at low coverage as part of the development of curational tools for Locus-Specific Data- with diBayes algorithm. Bases (LSDBs) within the EU-funded Gen2Phen project (http://www. F. Hyland1, S. Tang1, T. Wessel1, C. Scafe1, O. Sakarya1, C. Yang1, H. Peck- gen2phen.org). This project aims facilitate the collection of gene se- ham1, A. McBride2, S. McLaughlin1, C. Lee1, G. Costa1, K. McKernan1, M. Re- quence variants and their phenotypic consequences by offering free ese2, F. De La Vega1; support to establish and host LSDBs. 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Omicia, Emeryville, CA, Funded in part by the European Community’s Seventh Framework United States. Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement nº 200754 - the With the advent of next-generation sequencing, novel algorithms to GEN2PHEN project. detect SNPs using short-read data are needed. The dibase-coded oli- gonucleotides used by the Applied Biosystems SOLiDTM System allow P11.081 SNPs to be distinguished from sequencing errors, facilitating sensitive Validation of sensitivity and specificity of Tetraplet-Primed PCR and specific heterozygote detection at low coverage. We have devel- (tP-PcR) in the molecular diagnosis of myotonic Dystrophy type oped diBayes, a Bayesian algorithm to detect SNPs in SOLiD reads. 2 (Dm2) We apply diBayes to whole-genome sequencing of three HapMap hu- C. Catalli1,2, A. Morgante1, R. Iraci2, F. Rinaldi1, A. Botta1, G. Novelli1,2; mans. We identified over 6 million SNPs; ~80% in either African sample 1Genetica Medica - Dip. Biopatologia e diagnostica per immagini, Università di and 90% in the European are present in dbSNP, and the remainder are Roma Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy, 2U.O. Genetica medica, Policlinico Tor Vergata, novel. We evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of diBayes, compar- Roma, Italy. ing SOLiD to HapMap genotypes; with a moderately aggressive setting Myotonic Dystrophy type 2 (DM2, OMIM #602688) is a multisystemic of the algorithm, we call 85% of heterozygotes at 9x coverage, 95% of degenerative disease caused by a tetranucleotide (CCTG)n expan- heterozygotes at 17x coverage, and more than 99% of heterozygotes sion in the ZNF9 gene. Routine testing strategies require the use of at 23x coverage. The heterozygote false discovery rate for HapMap Southern Blot or Long Range PCR but technical difficulties, due to SNPs is 8.5*10-4. Homozygous concordance is 0.9995.We annotat- the presence of very large expansions and wide somatic mosaicism, ed the damaging potential of non-synonymous SNPs (nsSNPs) with greatly reduce the sensibility of present gold standard techniques. In PolyPhen, and predicted 20% of nsSNPs to be damaging. There are order to simplify the diagnostic procedure for DM2, we developed a significantly fewer damaging SNPs in homozygote than heterozygote Tetraplet-Primed PCR (TP-PCR) for a fast discrimination of positive state, consistent with the role of purifying selection. Using Pather on- and negative patients. We validated the sensitivity of this technique tology for annotation, we discovered that genes encoding transcription analyzing 87 MD2 positive and 76 MD2 negative individuals, previous- factors, ligases, growth factors, receptors, and are under-represented ly characterized by Long Range PCR. The specificity of the TP-PCR in in the genes with damaging mutations. Further, GPCR genes involved the identification of (CCTG)n expanded alleles was evaluated testing in olfaction, and genes involved in immunity and defense are highly 37 DM1 patients with different (CTG)n expansion. Our results show over-represented among genes with damaging mutations. Among that TP-PCR is a fast, reliable and flexible technique, with a specific- OMIM alleles previously associated with human disease, very few are ity and a sensitivity of almost 100%, with no positive or false negative homozygous; none at highly penetrant Mendelian-disease loci. results. We therefore consider that the use of this technique, in combi- nation with the Short Range PCR, is sufficient to correctly establish the P11.084 presence and the absence of ZNF9 exanded alleles in the molecular targeted enrichment of selected genomic regions in preparation diagnosis of DM2. for Next Generation sequencing A. Kellermann, J. Maurer, C. König; P11.082 imaGenes GmbH, Berlin, Berlin, Germany. comparision of Next Gen sequencing technologies and Next Generation Sequencing technologies have revolutionized the bioinformatic analysis tools - case studies on different projects search of genetic variants contributing to specific traits or disease. K. A. Stangier; One significant challenge in exploiting their power effectively, however, GATC Biotech AG, Konstanz, Germany. is to isolate candidate regions from complex genomes specifically. To Objectives offer custom tailored services for the full experimental pipeline, we Next Generation sequencers, e.g. Roche GS FLX and Illumina Ge- have established efficient protocols for oligo design and enrichment of nome Analyzer II, have been on the market for quite some time. A vari- such target regions on different array platforms, and for downstream ety of different projects now reveal the pros and cons of each technol- use predominatly with the illumina Genome Analyzer II. Protocols for ogy. The projects performed by GATC show that the use of one tech- Roche and SOLiD sequencing systems have also been developed nology alone does not deliver the best results for all projects. Rather or are currently being established. Our enrichment success is moni- a combination of two or three technologies provides a more complete, tored by quantitative RealTime PCR assays and classical sequencing cost-effective analysis. In addition to sequencing, bioinformatic analy- of library subclones before loading the samples onto the sequencing sis is critically important for gaining an in-depth understanding of the instrument. We present exemplary results from our methods, and dis- biological significance of the sequence data. The combination, analy- cuss the benefits of different strategies. sis and visualisation of these data are key challenges to the successful application of the Next Generation sequencing technologies. P11.085 Methods and results increased Read Length on the sOLiD™ sequencing Platform Having performed many projects, each with a different set of questions S. M. Guenther1, E. T. Dimalanta2, L. Zhang2, C. L. Hendrickson2, T. D. Sokol- and goals. GATC presents sequencing data using single and paired sky2, A. E. Sannicandro2, J. M. Manning2, S. F. McLaughlin2, H. Fu3, C. C. Lee2, end sequencing methods on different systems. Sequencing of mate C. C. Lee2, A. P. Blanchard2, G. L. Costa2, K. J. McKernan2; pairs, especially using libraries with large inserts, helps tremendously 1Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany, 2Applied Biosystems, Beverly, MA, to improve assemblies and alignments. United States, 3Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. GATC uses a wide range of bioinformatic solutions for genome assem- The SOLiD™ Platform is an ultra-high throughput DNA sequencing bly and alignment, transcriptome analysis and other studies. We will system that utilizes sequential ligation of fluorescently labeled oligo- present data comparing different bioinformatic tools which are avail- nucleotide probes. Improvements in the ligation biochemistry, sample able on the market. preparation, and incorporation of an imaging buffer providing a higher Conclusion: signal to noise ratio have made it possible to routinely sequence 50 To ensure a successful sequencing project and to maximise the infor- base reads from long fragment libraries, or 2x50 base reads from mate mation obtained, it is necessary to choose the best Next Generation pair libraries with over 99.9% accuracy, generating over 20 gigabasesGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics 00 of mappable sequence data per run. Currently, novel ligation protocols P11.088 have been developed to support increased read lengths of 75 bases to improving signal strength consistency in capillary 100 bases, as well as reverse ligations to facilitate paired end reads. electrophoresis for high resolution fragment sizing applications These longer read lengths increase throughput per run, facilitate re- R. N. Fish1, S. R. Berosik1, A. Chhibber1, C. J. Davidson1, S. Hung1, B. F. John- sequencing efforts of large genomes, and aid in the identification of son1, J. Lee1, R. A. Padilla1, D. Rodriguez1, E. S. Nordman1, J. D. Kyle1, A. Y. SNPs, indels, and other structural variations. Longer reads also lend Spoonde1, M. Yamazaki2, Y. Lou1, J. A. Benfield1, A. M. Wheaton1, A. A. Prad- themselves to novel applications of SOLiD™ such as RNA expression han1, A. C. Felton1, L. K. Joe1; analysis and de novo sequencing. 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Hitachi High Technologies, Naka, Japan. P11.086 Capillary electrophoresis (CE) is an important technology used for targeted sequence enrichment for the sOLiDtm system many DNA fragment sizing applications. Researchers have reported K. J. Li1, T. D. Sokolsky2, A. A. Antipova2, C. R. Clouser2, E. T. Dimalanta2, that when the same DNA fragment is analyzed by CE, a certain de- C. Kosnopo2, C. C. Lee2, S. S. Ranade2, L. Zhang2, C. L. Hendrickson2, A. P. gree of variation in signal strength may be observed across multiple Blanchard2, K. J. McKernan2; CE instruments; within a single instrument among different capillar- 1Applied Biosystems, part of LIFE Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, ies; or among different runs from the same capillary. For applications 2Applied Biosystems, part of LIFE Technologies, Beverly, MA, United States. that interrogate human polymorphisms associated with disease, such The SOLiDTM system can acquire several gigabases of sequence with- as short tandem repeats, loss of heterozygosity, or single nucleotide in a single run, allowing for accurate resequencing of large genomes. polymorphisms, minimal signal variation is desired. Quantitative analy- The ultra high throughput of the SOLiDTM system also facilitates deeper ses such as quantitative fluorescent PCR or gene expression stud- sequencing of targeted genomic regions of interest for specific applica- ies would also be improved by reducing signal variation. We describe tions. Methods to enrich DNA in targeted regions include hybridization the different sources of variation and elucidate two methods (one that with custom oligonucleotides in-solution or on microarrays. For small- adjusts hardware and one that uses chemistry) to obtain more con- scale studies, microarray enrichment is more cost-effective, while in- sistent signal across the three levels of variation on CE: from run to solution enrichment is preferred for larger studies due to its scalability run, capillary to capillary, and instrument to instrument. In combination, and potential for automation. Here, we report coupling of both enrich- these methods have been observed to provide a significant reduction ment techniques with SOLiDTM sequencing, using Agilent HD-CGH mi- in the range of peak heights obtained across several instruments. This croarrays and in-solution probes to extract target regions from Yoruba methodology would be useful to a single researcher or a consortium DNA. We present an optimized SOLiDTM workflow for both enrichment of investigators with multiple instruments who require the most consis- strategies and provide deep sequencing results from these methods. tent and comparable results possible from every instrument for high The workflow from enrichment to SOLiDTM sequencing is streamlined resolution fragment sizing applications. We describe a workflow from by library construction prior to probe hybridization. Post-enrichment sample preparation to software analysis to quickly and simply obtain material can be used directly for downstream steps including emulsion consistent results. PCR and sequencing on the SOLiDTM system. We demonstrate that combining these hybridization-based enrichment methods with the P11.089 SOLiDTM system platform provides useful solutions for targeted rese- A high resolution comparison of human and mouse alternative quencing applications. splicing patterns J. M. Mudge1, A. Frankish1, J. Fernandez-Banet1, T. Derrien2, R. Guigó2, J. P11.087 Harrow1; Whole Genome microarray and Real-time PcR to detect genes 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Centre for Ge- involved in non-syndromic ascending aortic aneurysms nomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain. A. Pasquali1, C. Patuzzo1, M. Iafrancesco2, A. Zamboni3, F. Santini2, G. Fag- The HAVANA group will manually annotate all protein-coding genes, gian2, A. Mazzucco2, P. F. Pignatti1, E. Trabetti1; transcripts and pseudogenes on the human reference genome assem- 1Section of Biology and Genetics, Verona, Italy, 2Section of Cardiovascular bly as part of the ENCODE project, providing a significant resource for Surgery, Verona, Italy, 3Dpt. Biotechnology, Verona, Italy. genome-science and medicine. Manual annotation is advantageous in The non-syndromic ascending aortic aneusysm is a complex disease the classification of alternative splicing, a process to which the major- that involves a lot of people. The media coat is principally involved in ity of human genes are subjected. Transcription and splicing are er- the disease. Aim of this study is to identify gene expression differences ror-prone processes, however, and GenBank contains immature ESTs between aneurysmal and normal ascending aortic media coats. A total and mRNAs; the proportion of the transcriptome which represents of 41 aneurysmal aortic samples (cases) and 22 aortic samples with- functional splice variation is therefore unclear. Here, we compare our out aneurysm (controls), had been harvested from patients undergoing annotation of the splicing patterns of 310 human coding genes within aneurysmectomy and heart transplantation, respectively. After separa- the ENCODE pilot regions against their mouse orthologs. We (1) in- tion of the three coats, RNA from the media coats has been extracted, vestigate the conservation of alternative splicing at the transcriptional amplified and labelled according to standard protocols. Competitive and splice site level, (2) classify conserved and non-conserved vari- hybridization of 3 single RNA cases vs a pool of 10 RNA controls has ants into 41 categories of alternative spliceform stucture, and (3) cat- been performed on microarray platforms, consisting of 21,329 70mer egorise each variant as potentially protein coding or nonsense-medi- oligonucleotides. Differentially expressed genes are validated by Taq- ated decay inducing. Conserved and nonconserved alternative splice man Real Time PCR. From the microarray analysis the following eight events are seen to display distinct - perhaps unexpected - enrichments differentially expressed genes have been selected: Decorin, Recep- for different structural categories as well as functional potential. In line tor-interacting serine-threonine kinase 3, Osteoblast specific factor 2, with previous reports, we observe that conserved alternative splice Period homolog 2, EPH receptor A8, Adaptor protein with pleckstrin junctions are frequently (not always) embedded within near identi- homology and src homology 2 domains, Resistin, CD2 antigen. Pres- cal blocks of genomic sequence; we can now compare the presence ently, semiquantitative analysis has confirmed up-regulation of Period of such elements with our inferred functionality of the corresponding homolog 2, and down-regulation of Decorin genes. Both these genes splicing events. Overall, manual annotation generates a significantly are involved in the integrity of the aortic wall, and in extracellular matrix higher resolution dataset than available to previous studies, affording remodelling. a deeper view into the function and evolution of the alternative splicing Further expression analyses will better indicate pathways involved in process. thoracic aortic aneurysms development. All HAVANA annotation is presented in the Vega genome browser: http://vega.sanger.ac.uk.Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics 0 P11.090 ing been identified. These genes have suggested that disruption of a methylation changes in p53 pathway in non-small cell lung myriad of molecular pathways (e.g. ubiquitin and proteasome, mito- cancer and their potential association with tP53 mutations chondrial function and protein misfolding) can lead to the degeneration K. Kirotar1, R. Kolde2, I. Bure3, M. Solovjova1, T. Vooder1,4, K. Välk1,5, A. Met- of the substantia nigra. However it remains unclear how mutation of spalu1,6, N. Tõnisson1,4; these genes and disruption of these pathways lead to PD. 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology / Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, To address these issues, we have developed a high throughput and 2Institute of Computer Sciences, Tartu, Estonia, 3Voronezh State University, Vo- high content screening facility using siRNA to modulate the expression ronezh, Russian Federation, 4Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Asper of every gene in the genome and determine their effect in a range of Biotech, Tartu, Estonia, 6Estonian Genome Project, Tartu, Estonia. cellular assays related to PD. Several assays have been established Methylation changes are common and relatively stable in various types to measure several processes which have been implicated in PD of cancer. Mutations in TP53 may be present in up to 50% of non-small pathogenesis such as α-synuclein aggregation and phosphorylation, cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cases. It is known, that virtually all naturally DJ-1 related functions (apoptosis, translocation and oxidation). The occurring mutations in TP53 gene reduce the transactivating ability of goal is to construct a detailed molecular pathway of the proteins that p53 protein. are involved in the function of genes mutated in PD. This will provide a We have studied methylation of transcriptional start sites of wild-type greater understanding of the molecular pathways involved in PD and p53 target genes in six NSCLC cell lines, two (A549, H292) with wild- if any of these can be modulated or exploited for their therapeutic po- type TP53 gene and four (H23, H520, H1703, H1299) with different tential. TP53 mutations using combined bisulfite-restriction analysis. Six normal lung control samples were analyzed. For finding associations P11.093 between methylation and expression repression, we carried out 5-aza- Putative interactors of Pax6 indicate novel molecular cascade of 2’-deoxycytidine treatment. The analysis revealed presence of meth- its function ylation in nine genes, but all the cell lines had a somewhat different set R. Mishra, R. Tripathi, K. Shubham; of methylated genes. Department of Zoology, Varanasi, India. The number of hypermethylated genes was higher in cell lines with Objective: The Pax6 (a transcriptional regulator) is critical for brain and TP53 mutations. Methylation patterns of p53 transcriptional target eyes development. The mutation in Pax6 leads to severe brain and genes were compared to the corresponding expression profiles. Hi- eyes anomalies. Phenotypes are of variable peneterance and expres- erarchical cluster analysis of the methylated genes showed their cor- sivity. It is presumed to be influenced by protein-protein interaction relation with TP53 mutation status. Normal lung tissue controls with (matricellular proteins/TGIF/TGF/Neurotrophins) no TP53 mutations found by sequencing, clustered together with the Methodology: Models of Pax6 interacting proteins were analysed wild-type TP53 gene cell lines. through on-line servers (STRING and PIP). The interacting proteins 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine treatment caused decrease in the methylation of Pax6 were also explored through co-immunoprecipitation and co- of several analyzed genes and also induced a mild degree of apopto- localzation sis in the NSCLC cell lines with TP53 mutations. Significant Results: Novel interaction of Pax6 with SPARC (secreted protein, acidic and rich in cysteine, a matricellular glycoprotein of P11.091 43kDa) was observed. The immunoreactive bands with Ras and p53 SERPINA1 identifies papillary thyroid carcinoma across four were also detected in the sample of brain immunoprecipitated with distinct microarray studies and in independent validation data anti-Pax6 K. Vierlinger1, M. Lauss1, C. Nöhammer1, F. Leisch2; Conclusions: The observations elucidate novel interactors in the cas- 1ARCS, Seibersdorf, Austria, 2University of Munich, Munich, Germany. cade or hierarchy of Pax6 or SPARC functions. The putative interac- Background: Several DNA microarray based expression classifiers tors also provide link to Akt and TGF-beta pathways through SPARC, for the different clinically relevant thyroid tumor entities have been Ras and p53. The preliminary observations are useful in exploring mo- described over the past few years. However, reproducibility of these lecular basis of nervous system function markers is generally low, mainly due to study biases, small sample sizes and the highly multivariate nature of microarrays. P11.094 Methods: Therefore we adopted a meta analysis approach for four Rapid single-molecule haplotyping in patients with sickle cell publicly available microarray datasets on thyroid carcinoma. Data inte- disease gration to remove study specific bias was done using Distance Weight- S. Menzel1, J. Qin2, N. Vasavda1, S. L. Thein1, R. Ramakrishnan2; ed Discrimination (DWD) and for feature selection and classification 1King’s College London School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom, 2Fluid- a nearest shrunken centroid algorithm (PAM - Prediction Analysis for igm Corporation, South San Francisco, CA, United States. Microarray) was used. Results were validated using independent Mi- Genome-wide association studies have provided many new genes croarray and RTPCR datasets. influencing disease risk and severity as well as biometric traits. Iden- Results: Meta-analysis identified a one-gene classifier (SERPINA1) for tifying causal variants at these new loci has become a bottleneck and papillary thyroid carcinoma. In Meta-analysis, identification of papillary poses a challenge for technology: how to extract useful information thyroid nodules versus benign thyroid was achieved with 99% accura- from a focused genomic region in large numbers of samples. High- cy (97.9% weighted average accuracy in study crossvalidation). In the density SNP genotyping provides a point-by-point survey of the region independent microarray validation data, which consisted of all major of association, but additional information could be gained from the thyroid tumor entities, SERPINA1 correctly classifies 100% of nodules sequence of SNP alleles on each parental chromosome (phase), i.e. into one of the two classes PTC and non-PTC. haplotypes present in each study subject. Conclusions: These results show that new insights can be gained us- We have used an integrated fluidic circuit (IFC) system from Fluidigm ing existing data and indicate a huge potential for future diagnostic Corporation (the digital array) to analyze multiple SNP loci from indi- applications. vidual molecules of sample DNA and to rapidly obtain haplotype infor- mation over several kb of target sequence. Using this approach, we P11.092 were able to phase double heterozygous SNP genotypes over distanc- High throughput phenotypic screens in Parkinson‘s Disease es of 0.7, 1.2, and 5.2 kb. We have studied three SNPs (rs9399137, S. Jain1, D. Sondervan1, P. Heutink1,2; rs9402685 and rs11759553) at a locus on chromosome 6q23 (HBS1L- 1CNCR, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2VUMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. MYB) that modifies clinical severity in sickle cell disease, a monogenic Parkinson (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease with a huge socio- blood disorder due to a mutation of the β hemoglobin chain. We de- economic burden. In PD years of slowly progressing neurodegenera- tected four common haplotypes (with 46%, 21%, 14% and 13% fre- tion set the stage for devastating clinical phases. Current treatments quency) and a single infrequent one (5.5%), which is associated with are only symptomatic which ultimately result in debilitating side ef- milder disease. We plan to extend phasing to a fragment of 24 kb to fects thus there is an urgent need to develop therapeutics which stop help identifying the causative DNA variants at this locus. and reverse disease progression. 13 loci have been implicated in the pathogenesis of PD, with only 7 of the genes underlying the loci hav-Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics 0 P11.095 studies generated large amount of genetic data which is important to New targets of semax (N-terminal ActH fragment analog) action study the occurrences of diseases that differ across ethnic groups. on gene expression: temporal and spatial dynamics There is therefore a need for a central repository of this data. The SL- P. Slominsky, T. Kolomin, T. Agapova, M. Shadrina, J. Agniullin, S. Shram, N. GVD was created to fulfill this void. This offers a web based access to Myasoedov; genetic variation information of Sri Lankan people. It would also be an Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. important informatics tool for both research and clinical purposes to re- Semax is a synthetic peptide which consists of the N-terminal adreno- trieve and deposit human variation data. The database was designed corticotropic hormone fragment (4-7) and C-terminal Pro-Gly-Pro pep- confirming to guidelines issued by the Human Genome Variation So- tide. Semax is used in the treatment of human neurological diseases. ciety (HGVS). The variation data cataloged in SLGVD were derived Our recent findings revealed that single intranasal Semax administra- from research performed by Sri Lankan Scientists. Addition to variation tion results in rapid and specific for different rat brain structures Bdnf data each variation links with the relevant entries of Online Mendelian and Ngf genes expression changes. So we investigate dynamics of Inheritance in Man (OMIM), SNP and Genbank databases at National expression of some genes of Wnt, NF-kB, Jak-Stat and retinoic acid Center of Biotechnology Institute (NCBI). For each variation, genotype signal transduction pathways (Pparg, Nos2, Mig, Rbp1). As we can and allele frequencies of different ethnic groups are represented in nu- see all genes under study significantly changed their expression levels merical and graphical format. SLGVD can be publicly accessed from 40’ after Semax administration and these effects were still observed 24 http://hgucolombo.org/default.aspx. hours after the peptide treatment. Both hippocampus and frontal cor- tex tissues demonstrated gene expression changes. Particularly in the P11.098 frontal cortex expression dynamics of Mig and Nos2 were analogous Protein thermal shift Assay Using Applied Biosystems Real most part of the experiment. In the hippocampus the expression simi- time PcR instruments larities were observed for Pparg and Rbp1 genes and for Nos2 and M. O’Donoghue1, N. Nhiri2, E. Jacquet2, P. Allard1, A. Ferlinz1, J. Verheyde1, K. Mig genes in pairs from 3 till 24 hours after Semax treatment. Compar- Warrington1; ing hippocampus and frontal cortex we can see that all gene expres- 1Applied Biosystems - part of Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, sion in the first structure deeply decreased 24 hours after the peptide 2IMAGIF, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. administration. We can see that gene expression reaction on Semax The Protein Thermal Shift Assay (TSA) is a rapid and sensitive tool for application in hippocampus is more continuous then investigated time monitoring protein thermostability, aiding in the identification of optimal period. Gene expression in the frontal cortex on the contrary mostly conditions or conformations/sequences that favour protein stability, in- returned to its basic level to the end time point of the experiment. It cluding the investigation of protein-ligand interactions. TSA is based could be evidence of the more distant changes in the hippocampus on temperature-induced protein denaturation, monitored using an en- compared with frontal cortex under Semax administration. vironmentally sensitive dye, such as SYPRO Orange, that is naturally quenched in a stable, aqueous solution. As the temperature increases, P11.096 exposed hydrophobic regions will bind the SYPRO Orange dye, lead- Preaxial Polydactyly: two novel mutations in sonic hedgehog ing to a proportional increase in fluorescence that is measured using a long-range regulator and one negative family real-time PCR instrument. The inflection points of the resulting fluores- J. M. Albuisson, T. Marsaud, M. Giraud, B. Isidor, A. David, S. Bezieau; cence/temperature plot are used to compare different test conditions, Medical Genetics Department, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France. and the extent of the observed temperature shift is considered to be The limb-specific long-range cis-regulator of Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), representative of the stability of the protein in certain solution condi- called ZRS (ZPA Regulating Sequence) is a highly conserved regula- tions. TSA data have been obtained from the whole range of Applied tory sequence 1Mb away from SHH. This regulator allows the pattern- Biosystems Real Time PCR Systems; including the 7900 HT, 7500 ing of SHH expression to the posterior limb bud. Fast and StepOnePlusTM Real Time PCR Instruments. TSA has wide- Point mutations or complete duplications of the ZRS have been shown ranging applications, including high-throughput screening for unknown to cause ectopic expression of SHH in the anterior limb bud, leading ligands and protein inhibitors, protein-substrate interactions, and con- to autosomic dominant preaxial polydactyly (PPD2, MIM #174500) in centration-dependent stabilisation conditions. In addition, TSA benefits humans, mice, cats and dogs. protein crystallography studies, for determining the concentration of a We present here our analysis of the SHH locus in three large French compound that will provide maximal stability in order for a protein to families with isolated PPD2. reach maximum occupancy. The benefits of performing a TSA with an Two families have full-penetrant point mutations in the ZRS, 297G>A, Applied Biosystems Real Time PCR System include the flexibility of 334T>G (according to the original numbering by Lettice). Bioinformatic run-method programs, catering for a range of data resolution require- analysis revealed that these point mutations are located in highly con- ments and in the use of small reaction volumes, providing fast and served predicted transcription factors (TFs) binding sites for SOX9 accurate results with only a few µg of protein. and PAX3. Those TFs are simultaneously expressed with SHH in the mouse developing limb bud at the time of digit patterning, and have P11.099 been respectively involved in polydactyly and limb development de- Whole-gene expression system by RmcE-mediated integration fects. of PAc clones Analysis of the third family revealed possible linkage with SHH locus, V. Orrù1,2, E. Fiorillo3,2, S. Stanford2, N. Bottini2; but no point mutation or copy-number variation of the ZRS could be 1Department of Biomedical Science, Sassari, Italy, 2Institute for Genetic Medi- detected by sequencing and QPCR. CGH-array revealed no anomaly cine, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los at SHH locus or in any other genomic region. We then sequenced five Angeles, CA, United States, 3Department of Biomedical Science and Biotech- other highly conserved candidate regions around SHH that contained nology, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. conserved TFs binding sites concerning TFs of interest: no mutation Systems to express whole-genes in cell lines would be highly desirable was detected. We hypothesize that another nearby regulatory se- in order to overcome the limitations of current reporter-based assays quence or an undetected position effect between ZRS and SHH could in the functional assessment of mutations within intronic or regulatory be responsible for this familial case. regions. Here we achieved whole-gene over-expression of the tyrosine phosphatase LYP, a critical regulator of signaling through the T cell P11.097 receptor, encoded by a major autoimmunity gene in Jurkat T cells by the sri Lankan Genome Variation Database single-copy RMCE-mediated genomic integration of a PAC clone. The P. S. Samarakoon, R. W. Jayasekara, V. Dissanayake; PAC clone was recombineered in order to tag exogenous PTPN22 Human Genetics Unit, Colombo, Sri Lanka. and to provide a sortable marker of PAC integration. Our system can Sri Lankan Genome Variation Database (SLGVD) is a database of be useful for the study of gene regulation and in functional genetics of genetic variations found in Sinhalese, Sri Lankan Tamils and Moors, polymorphisms and extended haplotypes of PTPN22 and other candi- the three major ethnic groups in the Sri Lankan population. Studies date autoimmunity genes. of variations in genes among different groups of individuals in the Sri Lankan population have grown rapidly during last few years. TheseGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics 0 P11.100 stable reference for inter-generational genetic diagnoses. Additionally, Expression Profiling of both miRNAs and mRNA targets using a there may be several alternatively-spliced transcripts. Furthermore, novel nanofluidic real-time qPCR technology legacy exon- and amino-acid-numbering systems may have arisen for A. Bond, E. Grigorenko, E. Ortenberg, J. Hurley, J. White, K. Munnelly; particular genes and be in common use, even though they do not com- BioTrove, Inc., Woburn, MA, United States. ply with current variant reporting standards. Previously, profiling both microRNAs and their mRNA targets was dif- To address these limitations, we have developed a new sequence for- ficult, time consuming, and involved extensive post-profiling validation. mat known as Locus Reference Genomic (LRG) that will have both Our system allows for easy, rapid and inexpensive quantitation of both locked and updatable sections. miRNA and mRNA targets with no need for validation. The reliability of The locked section will primarily comprise: real-time qPCR, the flexibility of an array format and novel nanofluid- • The DNA sequence ics provide the backbone of this elegant system. Using the OpenArray • Coordinates of all identified exons system, we profiled RNA from a panel of human adult tissue types for a • Details of coding transcripts and their conceptual translation set of well characterized miRNAs. In our second study, total RNA was The updatable section will primarily comprise: obtained from normal tissues and tumor tissues, reverse-transcribed • Coordinates and other information to map a LRG onto the current and loaded on plates preformatted with primer pairs against hundreds human genome build of genes that have been found to be differentially expressed in cancer. • The exon-numbering scheme This pre-validated qPCR panel covers disparate, but linked pathways • Details of legacy DNA reference sequences, RefSeq and RefSeq- such as DNA repair, angiogenesis, cell adhesion and cell cycle. Using Gene sequences this nanofluidic system we were able to identify genes that consistently • Details of legacy exon- & amino-acid-numbering systems changed expression across cancer types as well as genes differen- • Chromosome number tially expressed in specific cancers. The OpenArray system allowed us • Known sequence variants to concurrently chart both the modulator and the modulated. An analy- • Audit data for each feature sis of the data provides us with a rich view of the complexities of gene Details of LRGs, which are implemented in XML, accompanied by expression and further validated our technique. The simple power of sample sequences can be found at http://www.lrg-sequence.org this technique is that the researcher does not need to further validate Acknowledgements: GEN2PHEN is funded by the European Commu- their results with qPCR; they have simultaneously performed both the nity’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant discovery and validation phases. agreement 200754. P11.101 P11.103 Reference materials for genetic diagnostics and HLA-typing Dual luciferase reporter assay system: limitation of its J. Boyle, M. Hawkins, W. Pickering, E. Byrne, E. Gray, P. Metcalfe, R. Hawkins; interpretation National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, South Mimms, Hertford- L. Grodecka1, H. Grombirikova1, B. Ravcukova1, J. Litzman2, T. Freiberger1; shire, United Kingdom. 1Molecular Genetics Laboratory, CKTCH, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Institute of The National Institute for Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC) Clinical Immunology and Allergology, St. Anne’s University Hospital, Brno, in collaboration with diagnostic laboratories have developed a pro- Czech Republic. gramme to generate genetic reference materials (GRMs) as WHO Genetic reporter systems are popular tools for studying many process- International Standards and CE-marked In Vitro Diagnostic Controls. es that take place in eukaryotic cells, e.g. transciriptional regulation, The materials are used for genetic diagnostics, both for genetic dis- mRNA processing, etc. Usually, dual reporter enzymes, an experiman- ease and tissue typing (HLA-typing), and are typically positive control tal reporter and a normalizing standard, are used in one experiment to DNA samples of known genotype which serve to verify assay, operator minimize an interassay variation caused by differences in transfection and data tracking performance. The genetic material is sourced from efficiency and cell viability. Consequently, the results are expressed cell lines established from primary lymphocytes to produce quality-as- as the reporter enzyme activity normalized to the activity of internal sured cell banks. standard. Assuming that the same amount of reporter genes is always CE-marked HLA-typing panels are produced within the ISO13485 used in one experiment, the ratio of its expression (and thus ratio of quality system. The HLA-A genotyping panel comprises 24 genomic enzyme activities) should be a constant. No correlation is supposed DNA samples and provides single-use positive controls in DNA-based between the ratio of reporter activities and the number of transfected low resolution HLA-A typing for many common alleles in the UK Cau- cells or the activity of the reporters. However, in our experiment, there casian population. The panel has been awarded the CE-mark and is is a correlation between the ratio of reporter activities (luminescence expected to be available in 2009. A HLA-DRB1 panel of 40 genomic of different luciferases) and the experimental reporter activity. Using DNA samples is currently in production. one mixture of reporter and standard gene contructs for transfection of WHO International Standards of genomic DNAs have been produced different amounts of cells, we obtained ratios of luciferases activities for Factor V Leiden, Prothrombin G20210A, Haemophilia A intron 22 strongly correlated to the firefly luciferase activity (r = 0,84; p < 0,001). inversion and Fragile X syndrome. A genomic DNA GRM for Prader This effect was specific for the particular construct since neither the Willi and Angelman syndromes will be submitted to the WHO or an- construct with shorter insert of the same type nor the reporter gene- other international organisation in 2009. GRMs for other genetic disor- containing plasmid without any insert showed this effect. We speculate ders, including a panel for hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer that some specific expression activator could induce such non-stan- with genomic DNA deletion samples are planned. NIBSC aims to ad- dard outcomes. These results clearly indicate that the reporter gene dress the rapid increase in the numbers of tests performed and the assays data should always be evaluated with care. development of new technologies by the provision of GRMs as a key This study was supported by grant of IGA MZ CR No. NR 9192-3. tool in successful genetic diagnostics. P11.104 P11.102 identifying Users and contributors on the Biomedical internet the Locus Reference Genomic (LRG) DNA sequence format G. A. Thorisson, P. Burton, A. J. Brookes; R. Dalgleish, the GEN2PHEN Consortium, the European Bioinformatics Insti- University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. tute (EBI), the National Center for Biotechnology Information(NCBI); A number of ostensibly separate initiatives have begun considering University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. the risks, benefits, and practicalities of unambiguously identifying re- A crucial element of sequence variant nomenclature is the reference searchers as they use and contribute to biomedical data sources on DNA sequence used to describe the variant. NCBI has established the Internet. The GEN2PHEN project (http://www.gen2phen.org) is curated non-redundant reference sequences of genomes, transcripts, one such initiative, given its general aim of helping to unify human proteins and genes (RefSeq & RefSeqGene). However, these are not and model organism genetic variation databases towards increasingly ideal for reporting variants in Locus-Specific Databases (LSDBs). holistic views into Genotype-To-Phenotype (G2P) information. More The primary limitation is that the reference DNA sequence might be specifically, the GEN2PHEN project considers researcher identifica- revised over time, reflecting current knowledge, but failing to provide a tion to be an absolutely central part of how biomedical databasing, andGenomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics 0 scientific reporting in general, needs to be developed. classical forms (half of these mutations were revealed in 8 hot spots At the heart of this lies the concept of a user-centric system for re- of MeCP2 gene) of Rett syndrome compared to atypical patients with searcher identification - i.e., one or more ‘ID systems’ by which indi- mental retardation (28%). viduals can be unambiguously identified along with various types of Gross rearrangements of the MECP2 gene, which are not detectable information associated with them, and where the individual controls by sequencing or SSCP, have been identified using dosage assays his/her online identity and how/where it is used. At present, key Web including quantitative fluorescent PCR and real-time PCR. Large dele- 2.0 Internet technologies which can underpin such a system (e.g., tions were identified in 15% cases of our patients in whom no MECP2 OpenID - a decentralized, open authentication protocol), are being mutation had previously been detected by sequence analysis. widely adopted. Variability of Rett phenotype has been partly attributed to an effect of To advance this field, a community of key stakeholders (e.g., GEN- X-chromosome inactivation. In the same cohort of patients skewed X- 2PHEN, P3G, HUGO, HVP) has been assembled and is continually inactivation was detected in 10% RTT cases. Moreover, phenomenon growing. This group is exploring innovative ways to exploit this new of nonrandom X-inactivation (NXI) assessed by CAG polymorphism Internet ecosystem to support research-related activities and services. analysis of AR (HUMARA) gene was detected in mothers of RTT pa- A dedicated website is provided (via www.gen2phen.org) where issues tients (38%). In these cases NXI was found in the absence of mutation are being discussed, and a workshop on the subject has been planned and clinical features of diseases. for May 2009. Acknowledgements: GEN2PHEN is funded by the European Commu- P11.108 nity’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant some points for the optimization of the semiquantitative agreement 200754. multiplex PcR assay for detection of exon rearrangements in the Parkin gene P11.105 Z. Fazlali1,2, F. Ghazavi1, S. S. Banihosseini3, S. Shojaee4, E. Elahi1,5; Abundance and orientation bias of retroelements in mammalian 1School of Biology, College of Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Na- genes tional Elite Foundation, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran University of N. V. Tomilin, N. V. Tomilin; Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Biotechnol- Russian Academy of Sciences, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. ogy, College of Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Center of Excellence In different eukaryotic genomes some transposable elements (TEs) in Biomathematics, School of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science, located in introns of genes show significant bias with predominant College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. antisense orientation of TEs. It was suggested that this bias can re- Mutations in the parkin gene are responsible for a notable fraction of flect negative selection against TEs in the orientation of coding strand. autosomal recessive early onset Parkinson’s disease incidence world- In mammalian genomes retrolelements of L1 family are known to be wide. Exon rearrangements in the gene constitute an important class of strongly underrepresented in GC-rich gene rich regions but their abun- the mutations. In our study we performed a commonly used semiquan- dance and orientation in introns of genes is poorly studied. Here we titative multiplex PCR assay for detection of rearrangements of Parkin analyzed abundance and orientation of major families of retroelements exons. The assay essentially compares relative amounts of template in introns and promoters in eight large groups (>300 genes each) of DNA in a PCR reaction, thus allowing identification of templates that coexpressed human and mouse genes. We found that human Alu deviate from the expected number in a diploid genome. In order to and mouse B1 repeats are overrepresented in introns and upstream detect these rearrangements, several exons are PCR amplified simul- regions of all studied groups of genes with significant bias for their taneously, allowing comparison of relative amplification of exons in dif- inverse orientation in groups of the widely expressed (housekeeping) ferent samples. The co-amplified exons serve as internal standards genes. L1 elements are underrepresented in all studied groups of for quantification. The amount of PCR product is directly related to the genes especially in the upstream regions and only ~30% of L1 is found number of template molecules as long as PCR is terminated within the in direct orientation. LTRs are also underrepresented in all groups of exponential phase of amplification. Each PCR for a given combination human and mouse genes with only 15-30% of their copies present of exons results in a typical pattern of peak heights for normal control in direct orientation suggesting strong selection pressures operating DNA, thus producing reference ratios between the peaks. Because during evolution on retroelement content of promoters and introns of rations are compared, extraneous factors are expected not to interfere human genes. Purifying selection of LTRs, L1 elements and some Alu with detection of rearrangements. repeats in direct orientation is apparently a consequence of their nega- Our study resulted in identification of several exon deletions in the Par- tive effects on normal transcription and/or splicing. Accumulation of kin gene. We noted that for optimal detection of rearrangements, care- Alu and B1 in the housekeeping and some tissue-specific genes may ful attention must be made to several factors: -all the fluorescently-la- be caused by positive selection of complex genome rearrangements beled primers in a combination should be labeled with the same dye; facilitating transcription. -height of exon peaks reflecting extent of amplification should be very similar for the different exons (less than 10% difference); -quality of the P11.106 DNA samples should be high. MeCP gene point mutation analysis, gross deletions and X- chromosome inactivation in 200 girls with Rett syndrome and P11.109 with variants of the disease in Russia. High coverage, low bias libraries for the sOLiD™ 3 system to O. V. Babenko1,2, V. V. Strelnikov1,2, T. V. Kekeeva2, G. G. Guzeev3, V. G. support 2x50 mate pair libraries Solonichenko3, N. A. Demina1, V. A. Galkina1, G. E. Rudenskaya1, D. V. Zale- M. D. Rhodes1, K. Varma1, B. Li1, Z. Liu1, E. Gerdts1, D. Greiner1, J. Ziegle1, C. tayev1,2; Clouser2, G. C. Costa2, K. Mckernan2, T. Burcham1, A. Shah1; 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems, for Molecular Medicine, Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federa- Beverly, MA, United States. tion, 3Centre for Medical Genetics, N.F.Filatov Pediatric Hospital, Moscow, Rus- Paired end sequencing facilitates sequence assembly and broadens sian Federation. the application of next generation sequencing technologies. Library Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder inherited in an construction strategies that utilize type III restriction enzymes, such X-linked dominant manner affecting almost exclusively females. MeCP2 as EcoP15I and MmeI, generate mate-paired libraries with limited se- gene (Xq28) is responsible for both classic and atypical cases of Rett quence tag length. As the read length of the SOLiD system improves, syndrome. Mutation analysis of MeCP2 gene was performed in 200 fe- a library construction method that generates longer DNA mate pairs is male patients with classic and variant phenotypes of RTT and with non- necessary. We describe a paired end library construction method that specific mental retardation by using SSCP analysis and sequencing of uses nick translation activity of DNA polymerases and T7 exonuclease the coding region of the MeCP2 gene. Prior to mutations screening we to generate DNA mate pairs. The length of the DNA mate pairs can be have excluded Angelman syndrome (methylation in 15q11-q13 region), adjusted by controlling the temperature and time of the nick transla- Smith-Magenis syndrome (17p11.2 deletion) and CGG expansion of tion reaction. We have prepared multiple paired end libraries with tag FMR1 in patients with nonspecific mental retardation. lengths of 75-100bp using many complex genomes. These libraries More mutations in this study have been identified in 64% patients with have been extensively sequenced at 50 bp for each tag using SOLiD,Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics 0 AB’s next generation sequencing platform. We have determined sever- Barcodes are unique 5-7 base sequences that are added at the 3’ end al conditions that result in high coverage and low bias libraries. These of the template along with a barcode priming region. Sets of 10, 16, libraries enable the ability to read 50 bases on each tag, allowing rapid and 96 barcodes have been designed and can be assigned to up to and precise mapping of structural variations, including translocations, 96 individual samples. Data presented shows the sequencing results across the entire genome of complex organisms. of all three sets of barcodes, as well as the results of an alternative design of 20 barcodes. For all sets of barcode analysis, over 96% of P11.110 matching sequenced tags contain a barcode. The multiplexing system improving the quality of DNA libraries in the Next Generation coupled with SOLIDTM’s ability to process two slides, accommodating Sequencing workflow two to sixteen depositions, enables researchers to sequence over a R. Salowsky1, K. Gromadski1, S. Glueck1, N. Bontoux2; thousand patients or unique biological samples within a single run. 1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2Agilent Technologies, Massy, France. P11.113 Next-generation sequencing technologies play an important role in in- the Detectable Genome: How much of the human genome is vestigating complete cancer genomes and transcriptomes. To further accessible to variant discovery by next-generation sequencing? increase productivity of this compelling technique, the quality of DNA L. He1, S. Thoraval2, H. E. Peckham3, Y. Fu3, S. F. McLaughlin3, E. F. Tsung3, S. libraries plays an important role. One important step in the Illumina se- S. Ranade4, C. C. Lee3, C. R. Clouser3, J. M. Manning3, C. L. Hendrickson3, L. quencing workflow is the amplification of the generated libraries for de- Zhang3, E. T. Dimalanta3, T. D. Sokolsky3, J. K. Ichikawa3, J. B. Warner3, M. W. termining the exact sequencing cluster concentration. The drawback Laptewicz3, B. E. Coleman3, B. Li4, A. P. Blanchard3, J. A. Malek5, G. L. Costa3, of this step is that amplification artefacts and errors will be introduced K. J. McKernan3, J. Mangion6; into the target sequence. 1Applied Biosystems, Sweden, 2Applied Biosystems, France, 3Applied Biosys- An on-chip electrophoresis instrument has become a standard tool for tems, MA, United States, 4Applied Biosystems, CA, United States, 5Weill Cor- implementing DNA library quality control and quantification in the Illu- nell Medical College in Qatar, Qatar, 6Applied Biosystems, United Kingdom. mina workflow. The microfluidic device monitors the size and quantifi- The human genome is being vigorously sequenced in an effort to cation of the amplified libraries and also helps to detect contaminating understand the extent of normal human variation as well as disease artefacts. With an optimized protocol and newly developed electropho- causing variants. This initiative brings with it the challenge of assess- resis chemistry, the sensitivity could be increased by a factor of 20-30, ing the areas of the human genome that are accessible to variant de- down to the pg/µl concentration range. This improved detection sensi- tection. We illustrate the amount of the human genome that is covered tivity allows for the significant reduction of amplification cycles thereby with uniquely placed single tags and uniquely placed mate pairs and reducing the target sequence error rate. demonstrate how both larger insert sizes and read lengths increase the portion of the genome that is uniquely mappable by paired-end P11.111 tags. We use various human genomes (NA18507 - 10x Yoruban male, mapreads: a tool that rapidly maps short reads to a genome NA19240 - 26x Yoruban female) sequenced with SOLiDTM sequencing E. N. Spier1, S. Katzman2, N. Mullaken1, Y. Sun1, J. Ni1, Z. Zhang1; to illustrate the amount of SNPs and indels that are detected at vari- 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2University of California, ous levels of average sequence coverage. We also demonstrate the Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, United States. sequence and clone coverage needed to identify indels of any size Mapreads is a bioinformatics tool that is optimized to rapidly map short between paired-end reads. We use libraries with an assortment of SOLiD (color space) or sequence reads to the genome. Mapreads insert sizes to show that larger libraries increase the accessibility of indexes the genome for a specific word size (W=14/15 is default for the genome by spanning larger insertions. We show that the bisulfite mapreads), but unlike BLAST can use both continuous and discon- converted human genome is less uniquely mappable than the normal tinuous word patterns called “schemas”. An example of a discontinu- human genome but significantly less signature is lost in color space ous schema for a 25-mer will be 7 matches in the beginning of the than in base space. We also illustrate that a significant portion of large read followed by 11 charcters followed by 7 matches (effective W=14). segmental duplications are accessible to sequence and clone cover- Only seven W=14 schemas are required to map a 25-mer with up to age by paired-end reads. These principles are applicable to all next- two mismatches (25-2) enabling much quicker searchers than BLAST generation sequencing platforms and are essential to comprehend the W=7. A new feature of mapreads allows to specify the number of mis- amount and location of variability in the human genome. matches for each schema and report “k-best” hits in the genome. A single base difference between a read and the reference leads to two P11.114 color differences - so called valid-adjacent (VA) mismatches. Mapre- Tissue-specific forkhead protein FOXA2 regulates SOX gene ads can count these as a single (VA=1) or two (VA=2) mismatches. In expression addition mapreads supports IUB codes in the reference sequence en- J. Popovic, M. Stevanovic; abling to avoid “non-reference allele bias” when mapping short reads Institute of molecular genetics and genetic engeenering, Belgrade, Serbia. to known SNPs. We present results how mapping and false-positive / Sox14/SOX14 is a member of B2 sub-group of Sox/SOX gene su- false-negative SNP-calling rates for human paired 25-mers depend on per-family that functions as transcriptional repressor. Its expression is mapping parameters. We use both artificially generated color-reads restricted to a limited population of neurons in the developing brain and with “spiked errors” and SOLiD sequences from a HapMap individual spinal cord. In spinal cord explants, expression of Sox14 was found to with known genotypes. Performance for mapping to human genome be regulated by Sonic hedgehog (SHH). Foxa2 (previously named He- ispresented. The source code of mapreads is available under GPL patic nuclear factor-3-beta: HNF3β) displays a remarkable functional from http://solidsoftwaretools.com/gf/project/mapreads/ diversity and is involved in a wide variety of biological processes dur- ing development and adulthood. In the developing nervous system, P11.112 Foxa2 can be detected in the floor plate of the spinal cord and in peri- multiplex sequencing on the sOLiD™ Platform with 10, 16, or 96 ventricular areas of the midbrain and diencephalons. Barcodes We have proceeded with investigation of transcriptional regulation of hu- L. Zhang1, G. Silfwerbrand2, A. Rico2, J. Stuart1, J. Bodeau2, C. Hendrickson1, man SOX14 gene expression. Our gel-shift and super-shift experiments E. Dimalanta1, J. Manning1, H. Peckham1, A. Blanchard1, G. Costa1, T. Sokol- demonstrated that FOXA2 interacts directly with predicted binding site sky1, K. McKernan1; within the SOX14 enhancer region. Using mutated oligonucleotide probe 1Applied Biosystems, Beverly, MA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems, Foster we further confirmed specificity of the FOXA2 binding to the predicted City, CA, United States. site. Results obtained with Foxa2 over-expression in co-transfection ex- The SOLIDTM DNA sequencing system utilizes stepwise ligation of periments confirmed that SOX14 enhancer region possesses regulatory oligonucleotide probes and enables high fidelity, high throughput se- element activated by this protein in HepG2 and U87MG cells. quencing. In order to maximize sequencing capacity and reduce work- In conclusion, here we present the first evidence that transcription fac- flow of sample preparation, a single sequencing run containing multiple tor FOXA2 is involved in the up-regulation of human SOX14 expres- biological samples is sometimes preferred. To this end, a multiplexing sion in HepG2 and U87MG cells by direct interaction with the binding method with barcodes has been developed for the SOLIDTM platform. site within its enhancer region.Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics 0 P11.115 throughput sequencing technology with paired-end tags to sequence Expression of genes involved in self-renewal or lineage priming three HAPMAP genomes NA18507 (Yoruba male, 6x), NA19240 (Yo- in mouse embryonic stem cells ruba female, 14x), and NA12878 (CEPH female, 12x). J. Au-Young, S. Dadi, D. Keys, K. Y. Lee, J. Sherlock, C. Chen; We developed an analysis pipeline to detect the occurrence of struc- Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. tural variations in our samples compared to the reference genome. A Profiling gene expression in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) requires deletion, an inversion or a translocation is defined by its two break- technology that allows the use of very small samples, yet has the ca- points while an insertion by a sole breakpoint. The supporting evi- pability to analyze the expression of many mRNAs simultaneously. dence for occurrence of breakpoints is scored for each base pair in the A three step workflow including reverse transcription, multiplex pre- genome. The regions corresponding to local peaks of the scores are amplification, and singleplex PCR in TaqMan® Arrays was used. We called as candidate breakpoint ranges and bridged to form full struc- demonstrate that multiplex preamplification-based TaqMan® real-time tural variants. Each breakpoint range is then scanned for coverage PCR can be used to profile gene expression in limited starting ma- of normal mate pairs to identify a sub-range with the lowest normal terial or single cells. A total of 384 genes which are believed to be mate pair coverage as the most probable breakpoint locations, and to functionally associated with maintenance of the undifferentiated em- differentiate homozygous structural variants from heterozygous ones. bryonic stem cell state were studied in mouse embryonic stem cells The supporting evidence of all inversions can be visually inspected (mESCs), differentiated embryoid bodies (mEBs), and embryos. Three using SOLiDTM Alignment Browser (SAB). The output of this pipeline is endogenous control genes, Ctnnb1, Actb and Gapd were used to con- compared with other in-house and external tools, and the results from firm the uniformity of the PreAmp reaction and to normalize RNA in- PCR validation. For example, we tested 29 out of the 119 inversions put. Preamplification of starting cDNA molecules enables detection of found in NA19240, 21 of which were fully validated and 5 were partially low expressers from nanogram amounts of total RNA input and even validated. single embryonic stem cells. A novel subset of differentially expressed mRNAs was established, which can be used as biomarkers to distin- P11.118 guish the pluripotent state from cells that have undergone differentia- Differential expression profiles in human fetal hemoglobin- tion. Preamplification makes it possible to profile hundreds of genes expressing and non-expressing tissues from limited starting material, including single cells, reproducibly and M. Kleanthous1, M. Phylactides1, J. Hou2, S. Karkabouna2, C. Lappa- without amplification bias. Manakou2, F. G. Grosveld2, S. Philipsen2, M. Von Lindern2, G. P. Patrinos2; 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Erasmus P11.116 MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Exploiting the Full Potential Of sequence trace Files For The switch from embryonic γ-globin to adult β-globin production is a structural Variation complex process, involving many factors and regulatory elements, O. Lancaster, G. A. Thorisson, A. J. Brookes; which has not been fully elucidated yet.In an attempt to shed light on University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. the events and genes involved in this maturation process, we estab- Structural variation and copy number variation (CNV) are recently rec- lished conditions for the generation of primary erythroid precursor cul- ognized to be extensive in the human genome. Examples identified so tures from human fetal liver, umbilical cord blood, and adult peripheral far typically range in size from 5-200kb and encompass many genes blood. These are tissues and cells which express high (fetal liver, um- which play fundamental roles in both disease and evolution. The im- bilical cord blood) and low levels (adult peripheral blood) of γ-globin, pact of structural variation on genome function and disease is likely to respectively. The progress of the cultures was followed microscopically be substantial. and full growth curves were generated. After culture growth conditions Currently known structural variants have been identified by a range of were established, genome-wide patterns of gene expression were in- technologies - both experimentally and in silico. However, these ap- vestigated for 14 independently derived erythroid precursor cultures proaches are very inefficient at detecting rarer, shorter (<10kb) and using the Affymetrix U133 gene microarray. Differences were observed lower similarity variants. The reduced costs of sequencing and new for a set of approximately 300 genes. At the extreme opposite ends of high-throughput technologies mean there has been an exponential the γ-globin expression spectrum, four fetal liver and five adult periph- growth in the raw primary data used to assemble genomes. These eral blood-derived cultures have virtually mutually exclusive patterns publically available and extensive data will carry immensely detailed of expression for these genes. Five umbilical cord blood-derived cul- information about structural variation, but systems need to be provided tures lie in the middle of the two extreme expression patterns. Detailed to mine this knowledge. analysis of the genes that exhibit differential patterns of expression will We have therefore developed a dedicated computational tool that provide more clues as to the regulation of the human globin switching utilises raw sequence data from the world’s total public dataset of trace process. files to reveal and allow visual exploration of small (and large) struc- tural rearrangements. P11.119 Methods of analysis include; i) trace depth analysis, ii) discordant trace Whole transcriptome analysis of total human RNAs by massively end alignment, iii) trace file source filtering, iv) similarity of match con- parallel sequencing on the sOLiD™ system siderations - all linked to a powerful graphical browser with extensive R. C. Nutter1, D. Ilsely2, S. Kuersten2, J. Brockman2, J. Schageman2, C. Bar- tuning options and connections to many other forms of genome an- barciou1, B. Tuch1, K. Bramlett2, J. Gu2, H. Chen2, S. Heater2, T. Bittick2, B. notation. Setterquist2, A. Siddiqui1; This tool will benefit many research areas, such as primary genome 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems, polymorphism analysis, disease association studies, and investiga- Austin, TX, United States. tions into the genomic mechanisms of cancer development. Detailed analysis of the entire transcriptome of higher organisms is for the first time demonstrating the complexity of the structure of RNA and P11.117 providing a better understanding of the role different types of RNA play Detection of structural Variations Using sOLiDtm mate Pair in the control of gene expression. We report here the results obtained sequencing technology using a prototype version of a human whole transcriptome system be- A. Rico1, R. Tanzi2, Y. Fu3, H. Peckham3, D. Muzny4, A. Sabo4, S. Dugan-Ro- ing developed by our company. Using total RNA from Hela and Human cha4, Y. Ding4, K. McKernan3; Brain, we show the performance of this integrated system in terms of 1Applied Biosystems, Les Ulis, France, 2Applied Biosystems, Monza, Italy, maintaining sample representation, strandedness, and reproducibility. 3Applied Biosystems, Beverly, MA, United States, 4Baylor College of Medicine, A synthetic RNA spike-in mixture, containing six heterologous tran- Houston, TX, United States. scripts were added to total RNA at different concentrations. Sequenc- Structural variations in the human genome - insertions, deletions, in- ing shows the expected dose dependent response curve and uniform versions and translocations - are important aspects of genetic varia- coverage across each transcript. We highlight reproducibility of the tions that define individual genotypes and phenotypes. For example, system from data generated from six independent field confirmation chromosomal inversions are associated with Angelman Syndrome, sites. The results show the protocol is robust and easy to use. The se- Hemophilia A and other abnormalities. We used the SOLiDTM high- quencing data across all 6 sites shows similar detection of unique map-Genomics, Genomic technology and Epigenetics 0 pable sequences, presence of Ref Seq, and coverage across genes. We therefore propose that these elements may be interpreted as hall- Libraries representing the transcriptome were constructed from as little marks for dose-sensitive genes, particularly for those genes whose as 0.4 ug of rRNA-depleted RNA without appreciable loss of coverage. gain or loss may be directly implied in neurodevelopmental disorders. The correlation among the sites for Ref Seq was > 0.90. We cloned and sequenced rRNA depleted total RNA. Additionally, the same RNA P11.122 samples were cloned and sequenced using the same protocol by 6 Effect of semax and PGP treatment on expression of Vegf in independent field confirmation sites. In addition to technical reproduc- ischemic rat brain ibility, we will show the ability of the system to detect rare transcripts, V. V. Stavchansky1, L. V. Dergunova1,2, I. M. Maksimov1, A. B. Botsina2, T. V. alternative splicing events as well as putative fusion transcripts. Tvorogova2, V. I. Skvortsova2, S. A. Limborska1,2; 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of P11.120 Stroke RSMU, Moscow, Russian Federation. Expression analysis of immunorelevant genes in type 1 diabetes Vascular endothelial growth factor (Vegf) is a hypoxia-inducible angio- pathogenesis genic peptide with recently identified neurotrophic effects. On the other M. Hubackova1, Z. Halbhuber2, S. Kolouskova1, V. Stavikova1, T. Ulmannova1, hand early post-ischemic delivery of Vegf increased blood-brain bar- D. Chudoba1, M. Krivjanska2, K. Stechova1; rier leakage and tissue damage. We analyzed the effect of synthetic 12nd Faculty of Medicine of Charles University and University Hospital Motol, polypeptide Semax (Met-Glu-His-Phe-Pro-Gly-Pro) and its C-terminal Prague 5, Czech Republic, 2Central European Biosystems, Prague 4, Czech fragment Pro-Gly-Pro upon expression of Vegf in rat brain after global Republic. cerebral ischemia. The study was carried out on 2-3-month-old male We analysed expression of genes relevant to immunoregulation in Wistar rats (n=85). After 15 minutes of irreversible bilateral common peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). We compared basal ex- carotid artery occlusion the animals were exposed to intraperitoneal pression versus expression after stimulation with diabetes-associated injection of either Semax, PGP or saline 1, 4 and 8 hours after the oc- beta-cell autoantigens. For some parameters (some Th1, Th2, Th3 clusion. Ischemic rats injected with saline were used as control groups. and Th17 cytokines) we correlated gene data with protein microarray The mRNA expression of Vegf was assessed by relative quantification results. using real-time RT-PCR. Gapdh was used as the reference gene. The Gene expression of 58 genes of immune regulation was analysed level of Vegf mRNA was decreased compare with control animals: in using high density Phalanx gene microarray, containing total 30968 cortex of sham-operated and rats treated with Semax at 4h, 8h and genomic probes. Cytokines were detected by ELISA and quantitative 24h after occlusion; in hippocampus of rats treated with PGP - at 12h, protein microarray. PBMCs were stimulated by diabetogenic peptides 24h and treated with Semax - at 4h. The level of Vegf mRNA was (3 GAD65 derived peptides, IA2-peptide and proinsulin peptide). Study increased: in cerebellum of rats treated with PGP - at 12h, and in hip- cohort consisted of 6 patients with T1D, 14 of their first-degree rela- pocampus of rats treated with Semax - at 24h. tives (5/14 positive for at least one autoantibody - DRLpos group) and 4 healthy controls. P11.123 The highest gene expression after specific stimulation was observed GPGraphics: A Universal Graphical Backend for sNP microarray mainly within the DRLpos group. These persons are autoantibody Analysis positive but with normal intravenous glucose tolerance test. After spe- S. Uebe, F. Pasutto, M. Krumbiegel, D. Schanze, A. B. Ekici, A. Reis; cific stimulation in DRLpos group, significant gene expression was ob- Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany. served for: IFN-gamma, IL-1,-2,-6,-13,-22,-31, GATA-3, JUNB, IL-6R, Whole genome association (WGA) studies using microarray platforms STAT-6, TGF-beta. The most important difference was observed for are currently one of the most popular methods to search for disease- IL-23R which was downregulated in DRLpos group (12 fold) and also associated genes throughout the human genome. Several analysis in T1D patients (23 fold). In T1D patients we observed an important programs are available, most of them, however, lack both a graphi- activation of IL-2,- IL-33, JUNB genes after specific stimulation and cal user interface as well as graphical output. Most analysis software strong downregulation of IL-4 and slightly downregulation of STAT-6 packages are designed to run in high power computing (HPC) environ- and GATA-3. Protein array data are in agreement with gene expres- ments, where GNU/Linux and a variety of Unix flavors are the predomi- sion analysis results. nant operating systems. These systems are by their very nature rather Our results indicated that Th2/Th17 imbalance along with Th1 pre- text- than graphics-oriented, thus making it difficult for a researcher dominance may be important in human T1D pathogenesis but further to get an actual overview of the huge amount of data these programs study is necessary. produce. We now present GPGraphics, which can graphically evaluate Supported by projects No.00064203, NPVII 2B06019. data from pooling as well as single sample based WGA software, such as GenePool or PLINK. GPGraphics provides a series of mathematical P11.121 filters to visualize even faint signals in noisy data. Due to the modular Ultraconserved elements are enriched among pathogenic copy nature of the software, the more processing intensive analyses may number variants causing mental delay and congenital anomalies still be performed on a non-graphical HPC system, while the evalua- C. Orellana1, S. Monfort1, M. Roselló1, I. Ferrer-Bolufer1, D. Blesa2, S. Oltra1, F. tion of the data generated by those systems can be performed in the Martínez1; graphical environment of a Microsoft Windows computer. Since the 1Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Prín- software is written for the Microsoft .NET framework, it will even run on cipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain. non-Windows systems, provided they have a .NET runtime environ- The ultraconserved elements (UCEs) are defined as stretches of at ment fully compatible to the .NET 2.0 specification. The presented soft- least 200 base pairs of DNA that match identically with corresponding ware has been successfully used at our institute to analyze whole ge- regions in the mouse and rat genomes, albeit their real significance nome microarray data for both qualitative and quantitative traits, such remains an intriguing issue. These elements are most often located as pseudoexfoliation syndrome and cornea thickness, respectively. either overlapping exons in genes involved in RNA processing or in introns or nearby genes involved in the regulation of transcription and P11.124 development. Interestingly, human UCEs have been reported to be Transcriptome profiling of Williams-Beuren syndrome strongly depleted among segmental duplications and benign copy C. N. Henrichsen1, G. Csardi1, M. Zabot2, S. Bergmann1, G. Merla3, A. Rey- number variants. No comprehensive survey of a putative enrichment mond1; of these elements among pathogenic dose variants has yet been re- 1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Hospices civils de Lyon, ported. Hôpital Debrousse, Lyon, France, 3IRCCS “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza”, A survey for UCEs was performed among the cryptic genomic rear- San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. rangements detected in our series of patients with idiopathic neurode- Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS), a neurodevelopmental disorder velopmental disorders associated to congenital anomalies. A total of 25 characterized by mental retardation with unique cognitive and per- different elements, out the 481 described UCEs, were contained in 10 sonality profile, is caused by an interstitial deletion on chromosome of the 21 pathogenic gains or losses detected in our series, what repre- 7q11.23 encompassing 28 genes. Although the primary cause of WBS sents a highly significant enrichment of ultraconserved elements. is well-understood, the molecular basis of the phenotype is largely un-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 known. While hemizygosity of the elastin gene has been associated cation dependent on methylation and sequencing of bisulfite converted with supravalvular aortic stenosis, studies of patients with atypical de- DNA can yield detailed information about modified segments within a letions and mouse models have suggested that LIMK1, CYLN2 and genome. Here we present a novel bisulfite conversion technique that GTF2IRD1 might play a role in some aspects of the phenotype. requires only nanogram quantities of genomic DNA. The methodology To identify pathways and processes perturbed in WBS, we used was applied to two different genomes: Dh10b and Yoruba. Fragment microarrays to profile the transcriptomes of skin fibroblast cell lines libraries were constructed with methyl C protected adaptors and librar- from eight young WBS and nine age-matched control girls. Using an ies were sized on Polyacrylamide gel. The DNA was bisulfite convert- iterative signature algorithm on our dataset combined with other skin ed while still embedded in the gel piece and the library was amplified fibroblast transcriptomes publicly available, we identified modules of using an in-gel PCR method. These libraries were then sequenced on coherently regulated transcripts. Among our findings, two GABA-re- the SOLiDTM System, generating 50 bp reads. The high throughput of ceptor genes (GABBR1 and GABRE), one glutamate receptor subunit the SOLiDTM System and the unique advantages of two base encoding (GRIA3) as well as a few other genes possibly related to neurological allow the researcher to study the methylation of an entire complex ge- processes (SLIT3, GOLSYN and NAV1) were downregulated in WBS nome in unprecedented detail. The results from SOLiDTM sequencing patients. Other modules were significantly enriched in cell adhesion of the converted genomes and the analysis will also be discussed. and proliferation factors. These dysregulations, combined with that of at least 10 extracellular matrix proteins, constitute a potential cause for cognitive deficits and P12. molecular basis of mendelian disorders other neurological features, as they may influence CNS development by affecting cell and axonal migration. They could also modulate the P12.001 function of neuronal connections by accelerating or impairing neu- the novel iVsii-i (G>A) splice donor site mutation on the alpha 1 rotransmitter release and recycling at the synaptic level. globin gene M. Taghavi*, F. Bayat, A. Amirian, A. Valaei, N. Saeidi, Z. Kaini Moghaddam, A. P11.125 Kordafshari, S. Fathiazar, M. Mossayebzadeh, M. Karimipour, S. Zeinali**; A comprehensive characterisation of human cD46, cD55 and Pasteur Inistitute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. CD59 transgenic swine fibroblasts - a potential source of nuclei More than 30 different point mutations and small deletions and inser- for somatic cloning. tions have been reported in alpha globin gene. Point mutations are J. E. Zeyland1, R. Slomski1,2, A. Wozniak2, A. Nowak1, D. Lipinski1,2; less common, but they may occur at high frequencies in certain areas 1Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Life Sciences, under selective pressure by malaria. Here we report the combination Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, of IVSII-I (G>A) mutation at α1 -globin gene an β:HbD(CD121). Poznan, Poland. After obtaining informed consent, blood samples (10mL) were col- Transgenic swines, especially those expressing, not a single one, but lected in tubes containing EDTA and extracted by salting out method. a combination of the complement system regulators are essential to Multiplex Gap PCR and direct α-globin gene sequencing techniques help overcoming a hyperacute rejection (HAR) and necessary to esti- were used to analyze alpha globin gene mutations. Exon 3 of β-globin mate a potential ratio of a strategy collapse. gene was amplified for determination of HbD variant and digested by Single and triple transgenic swine foetal fibroblasts for human coding EcoRI. sequences of CD46, CD55 and CD59 using a promoter of a human Here we report a novel mutations causing α-thalassemia that has elongation factor 1 alpha gene were generated by lipofection method not been reported previously. The IVSII-I(G>A) mutation in α1-globin with 80% capacity. After blasticidine selection stable lines were mo- gene detected in the family with thalassemia phenotype.This muta- lecularly characterised and checked for transgene integration by PCR. tion disrupts donor splice site of second intron of α1-globin gene. Forward primers were located in the EF-1α promoter region and re- Direct sequencing revealed that the proband (7 years old child) was verse primers in the region coding CD46, CD55 or CD59 respectively. homozygous and the parents were heterozygous carrier. The other Lines with confirmed transgene integration were subjected for char- nucleotide change for this proband and her mother, was β:CD121 acterisation of expression by RT-PCR. The transgene expression and GAA>GCC (known as HbD Punjab). This mutation has not been re- its impact on human complement system was assessed by human ported in globin gene server. Because it disrupts the splice site of complement-mediated cytolysis assay. Human serum (HS) contains second exon, so it could be a pathologic mutation. It seems that the complement system components which are the main reason of HAR. homozygous form of this mutation does not make HbH disease (in our Each transgene expressed in single transgenic line had a protective case Heinz bodies were negative) and heterozygous from make a mild effect on the tested cells in HS cytotoxicity assay. Also in triple trans- α-thalassemia trait. genic lines the expression of the transgenes had a wide positive im- pact on the protection of cells from human complement-mediated lysis, P12.002 however it was not additive. Cytogenetic analysis was performed to Molecular analysis of γ-globin promoters, HS-111 and 3`HS1 in evaluate the chromosomal stability in the transgenic cells. Several cy- beta thalassemia intermedia patients associated with high levels togenetic staining procedures revealed, inter alia, anomalous number of HbF of the chromosomes, structural aberration and dicentromeric chromo- M. Hamid1,2, F. Mahjoubi3, A. Arab2, S. Zeinali2, M. Akbari4, M. Karimipoor2; somes. Only fully characterised cell lines can be used as nuclei donors 1Clinical Genetics Department, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and for a somatic cloning and producing healthy transgenic animals. Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2De- partment of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology Research Center,Pasteur In- P11.126 stitute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Clinical Genetics Department, sOLiDtm Sequencing of Whole Genome Bisulfite Converted National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Libraries Prepared from Nanogram Quantities Republic of Iran, 4Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medical Sciences, C. Lee1, T. Halama2, S. Ranade2, V. Boyd2, B. Coleman1, K. Pearlstein1, K. Tarbiat Modaras University,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Pearlstein1, Y. Sun2, Z. Zhang2, H. Peckham1, G. Costa1, M. Rhodes2, K. McK- We have studied the nucleotide variations in promoter region of ernan1, F. Raffaldi3; gamma globin genes, HS-111 and 3`HS1 regions in β-thalassaemia 1Applied Biosystems, Beverly, MA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems, Foster intermedia, thalassemia major patients and normal individuals from City, CA, United States, 3Applied Biosystems, Italy. Iranian origin. The five nucleotide variations in the 5’ sequences of the DNA methylation is the most characterized epigenetic mechanism, Aγ globin gene including -369 (C > G), -611 deletion T, -603 GA>AG playing an essential role in normal mammalian development and is in all samples, -588(A>G) in heterozygous and homozygous form and associated with gene expression and -AAGC at - 222 to -225 were found with different frequencies. In our carcinogenesis. In animals, DNA methylation normally involves the study the -369(C>G), -611(-T), modification of cytosine residues at the 5-carbon position. One popular -603/604(GA>AG) mutations might as common polymorphism in our method to study DNA methylation is to treat the sample with bisulfite. population, didn’t show any effect on expression of HbF and not corre- Bisulfite converts cytosine to uracil residues, but methylated cytosines lated with β-globin mutations, Whereas most of the -588 (A) variation is are not affected. Hence, the DNA is subjected to a very specific modifi- related to β-thalassemia intermedia pateints especially in IVSII-I/IVSII-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 I statues. We also show that the HS-111 (-21 A>G) variation correlates brothers and episodes of clinical cholestasis in the oldest. In family with increased fetal hemoglobin production in β-thalassemia interme- D, three siblings carried three missense mutations with double ma- dia and major patients. In contrast, the 3`HS-1 (+179 C>T)) mutation is ternal mutant allele; liver transplantation was required in the 17 year not statistically significant. We conclude that the -588 A>G and HS-111 old boy, compensated cirrhosis was documented in the 12 year old (-21 A>G) variations are useful genetic determinants for differentiation boy whereas any relevant clinical symptom was found in the young- of β-thalassemia major and intermedia patients. However this nucleo- est. ABCB4 deficiency associated with two mutated alleles and severe tide change alone may not be sufficient to raise the level of HbF, other liver failure in families with affected PFIC-3 children requires a careful unknown factors may play a role in HbF production. genetic counselling. P12.003 P12.005 Further analysis with multiplex Ligation dependent Probe Novel mutations in the ABcR gene associated with stargardt Amplification (MLPA) of the ABCA gene in spanish patients maculopathy in the italian patients with retinal dystrophies I. Passerini1, A. Sodi2, A. Mariottini1, S. Palchetti1, C. Giuliani1, U. Menchini2, F. J. Aguirre-Lamban1,2, R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, D. Cantalapiedra1,2, M. Garcia- Torricelli1; Hoyos1,2, A. Avila-Fernandez1,2, C. Villaverde-Montero1,2, M. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, C. 1AOU Careggi-SOD Diagnostica Genetica, Florence, Italy, 2AOU Careggi-II Ramos1,2, C. Ayuso1,2; Clinica Oculistica, Florence, Italy. 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigacion en Red de Stargardt disease (STGD) is a progressive juvenile-to-young adult- Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. onset macular degeneration inherited as an autosomal recessive trait Introduction: ABCA4 mutations have been associated with autosomal (arSTGD); mutations in the ABCR (photoreceptor-specific ATP-binding recessive Stargardt disease (arSTGD). A few cases with autosomal re- cassette (ABC) transporter) gene are responsible for arSTGD. In this cessive cone-rod dystrophy (arCRD) and autosomal recessive retinitis study we determined the mutation spectrum in the ABCR gene in a pigmentosa (arRP) have also been found to have ABCA4 mutations. group of Italian patients with arSTGD. Comparative genetic analyses of ABCA4 variation and diagnostics 93 families from central Italy, some members of which were affected by have been complicated by substantial allelic heterogeneity. The objec- autosomal recessive Stargardt disease, were examined. tive of this study was to determine whether deletions and duplications In all these patients we reported some mutations of ABCR gene. 99 in the ABCA4 gene are a frequent cause of retinal dystrophies among mutations were identified: 61 missense mutations (P68L, I73T, N96K, Spanish patients. I156V, G172S, H193P, R212C, N415K, L541P, E616K, R653C, G690V, Subjects And Methods: We analyzed a total of 55 unrelated families. V767D, W821R, M840R, G863A, T897I, V931M, N965S, T970P, Mutation analysis was performed in 40 arSTGD families, 6 arCRD T977P, G978D, F1015I, T1019M, A1038V, R1055W, G1078E, E1087K, families and 9 arRP families. DNA samples from patients were previ- T1089I, R1098C, R1108C, R1108H, L1201R, D1204N, P1380L, ously studied with the ABCR400 genotyping microarray. Patients with V1433I, L1473M, P1484S, T1526M, L1580S, A1598D, S1696M, either none or only one mutant allele were analysed with multiplex Y1754C, A1762D, A1794D, N1805D, S1806N, H1838D, H1838N, ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Sequencing was em- R1843W, G1961E, L1970F, G1977S, L2027F, V2050L, E2096K, ployed for the study of 50 control samples. L2140Q, K2172R, L2221P, R2269Q, Q2272K); 12 nonsense muta- Results: MLPA allowed us to find one novel mutation in heterozygosis tions (Q21X, R572X, W700X, E1087X, S1099X, C1177X, Q1332X, (p.Gln841Lys) in exon 16 of the ABCA4 gene. This variant was lo- W1408X, W1461X, W1479X, R2030X, Q2220X); 12 splicing mutation cated in the target site of the probe. Thus, a lower peak was shown in (V256splice, IVS6-1G>T, IVS9+1G>C, IVS13+15G>A, Q1376splice, the pattern of peaks of the MLPA. The p.Gln841Lys mutation was not IVS28+5G>A, IVS32+1G>A, IVS35+2T>C, IVS40+5G>A, IVS42- found in 100 control chromosomes. Neither deletions nor duplications 2delA, IVS42+4delG, IVS45+1G>C); 8 small deletions (811delGAGA- were found. TG, 4733delCGTTT, 5109delG, 5917delG, 5961delGGAC, 6535delT, Conclusions: MLPA was mainly designed to detect deletions and du- 6750delA, 6758delA); 5 small insertion (250insCAA, 324-327insT, plications of one or more exons of the ABCA4 gene. However, these 3584insGT, 6548insTGAA, 6464ins8bp); and one gross insertion types of mutations are not a frequent cause of these retinopathies. (4021ins24bp). G1961E was the most frequent in our series. 41 muta- Nevertheless, this technique enabled us to additionally detect point tions had not been previously described and were not detected in 150 mutations. unaffected control individuals.. These data confirm the extensive allelic heterogeneity of the ABCR P12.004 gene, in agreement with previous observations in patients with Star- Progressive Familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3: ABcB4 gardt disease from Italy. mutations in familial cases D. Degiorgio1, C. Colombo2,3, M. Castagni1, M. Seia1, L. Costantino1, L. Porca- P12.006 ro1, V. Paracchini1, D. A. Coviello1; identifying new AiRE interacting protein. 1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore A. Meloni1, D. Corda2, F. Incani2, E. Fiorillo2, D. Carta2, A. Cao1, M. C. Rosa- Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Centro Fibrosi Cistica, telli2; Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle Elena, Milan, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Ricerche, Cagliari, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Milan, Italy. Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. The ABCB4 protein translocates phosphatidylcholine from the inner to Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1), is a rare, mono- the outer leaflet of the canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte (“flop- genic autoimmune disease caused by mutations in the Autoimmune pase” activity). Severe ABCB4 deficiency causes Progressive Familial Regulator (AIRE) gene. The clinical phenotype of APECED patients Intrahepatic Cholestasis type 3 (PFIC-3) characterized by early onset reveals a triad of main manifestations: adrenocortical failure, hypo- of persistent cholestasis that progresses to cirrhosis and, frequently, parathyroidism and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. The AIRE to end-stage liver disease before adulthood. We enrolled 132 children protein contains several functional domains which are suggestive of with PFIC-3 phenotype and 100 healthy subjects and sequenced all a role as a transcriptional regulator: four LXXLL motifs, one SAND do- the 27 coding exons of ABCB4 gene. We observed 31 distinct disease main, one HSR domain and two PHD fingers. Herein we describe the associated-mutations in 27 patients from 22 families including 4 fami- functional studies performed to identify new AIRE interacting proteins. lies with more than 1 affected sibling. In family A, two brothers carried We screened a human thymus cDNA library through the yeast two two null alleles that caused death and liver transplantation at the age hybrid technique and we identified seven different clones encoding the of 5 and six years, respectively. In family B two siblings, aged 12 and same protein. The functional domains involved in the interaction with 2 respectively, carried two missense mutations (compound heterozy- AIRE protein have been mapped using deletion mutants. The physi- gous) associated to compensated cirrhosis on both, and with portal cal interaction was further confirmed with several in vivo and in vitro hypertension in the oldest. In family C two siblings, a 6-year-old girl approaches in fact we proved the interaction in mammalian cells by and a 4-year-old boy, carried three missense mutations with double co-IP and confocal analysis and then through GST-pull down assays. paternal mutant allele associated with compensated cirrhosis in both Chasing AIRE interacting proteins allowed us to discovery a new pro-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 tein partner which interestingly shows involvement into apoptosis phe- Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 32nd Department of Pe- nomena and transcriptional regulating properties as well. These data diatrics, Comenius University Medical School and Children’s Faculty Hospital, provided by our study will provide new and important insights into AIRE Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Faculté molecular action and regulation. de Médecine, Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille, France, 5Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatology, Gulhane Military School, Ankara, P12.007 Turkey. Review of molecular protocol of Alagille syndrome: what’s old, Alkaptonuria (AKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mu- what’s new, what’s overcome, what’s useful tations in the homogentisate 1,2 dioxygenase (HGO) gene leading to D. Marchetti, L. Pezzoli, A. R. Lincesso, D. Barachetti, M. Iascone; deficiency of HGO activity. AKU is characterized by homogentisic ac- Genetica Molecolare - USSD Lab. Genetica Medica, Ospedali Riuniti, Berga- iduria, ochronosis and ochronotic arthritis. In contrast to most of other mo, Italy. metabolic disorders, intellectual capacity and life expectancy are not Alagille syndrome (AGS) is an autosomal dominant multisystem di- reduced in AKU; however, ochronotic arthritis can be painful and dis- sorder involving primarily liver, heart, eyes, face and skeleton. Muta- abling. So far 74 different HGO mutations have been reported in about tions in JAG1 are associated with the majority of cases of AGS and 217 families. AKU shows a very low prevalence (1:100,000-250,000) haploinsufficiency is the pathogenic mechanism most involved. At the in most ethnic groups but there are countries, such as Slovakia or beginning, the genetic testing used in AGS was based on point muta- Dominican republic, in which the incidence of this disorder raises up tion scanning methods and on FISH to identify JAG1 deletion with a to 1:19000. In case of Slovak population this is difficult to explain by a detection rate of 70% and 5% respectively. Later, on 2006, mutations classical founder effect since in this relatively small country we earlier in NOTCH2 (<1%) were identified in AGS patients. In the last years, identified ten different HGO mutations, and now add two more. One the technological advances, associated to cost and time reduction, led of the new mutations is a novel missense change E178G (c.700A→ to an improvement of molecular analysis of this inherited syndrome. G), while the other found in two unrelated families is the most frequent From 2002 to now on, 38 patients with clinical diagnosis of AGS were European mutation M368V (c.1269A→G). HGO-haplotype analysis referred to our laboratory. We identified 31 mutations (82%) by JAG1 indicates that M368V mutation in one family represents recurrent mu- sequencing: 6 missense, 13 frameshift, 9 nonsense and 3 splice site tational event in Slovakia, while in the other family is associated with mutations. Subsequently we performed JAG1-MLPA on remaining ne- haplotype identical with that found in Spanish patient. Our results fur- gative cases. We found a partial deletion (from exon 22 to 26) and a ther underscore allele heterogeneity of AKU in Slovakia. complete deletion in another patient. The remaining five cases were We also report HGO mutations and haplotypes that we identified in analyzed by NOTCH2 sequencing and no pathogenic mutations were patients from Korea (Q33R (c.265A→G), G152A (c.622G→C)), Turkey found. The total detection rate for JAG1 analysis was 87%. So, the (N219S (c.823A→G)), France (IVS7+2T→C (c.636+2T→C), M368V “new” method of direct sequencing analysis has replaced the “old” mu- (c.1269A→G), G152fs (c.621insG), G217fs (c.819delG)) and Canada tation scanning protocol and MLPA, leading to detection also of par- (A122V (c.532C→T). Overview of all known AKU mutations will be pre- tial deletion of JAG1, had “overcome” FISH. This new comprehensive sented too. JAG1 molecular analysis is “useful” to reach a higher mutation detec- tion rate in AGS patients in short time, while NOTCH2 mutations seem P12.010 to be rarely associated to AGS. molecular analysis of alpha globin gene mutations among individuals with hypochromic microcytic anemia in kermanshah P12.008 M. Arash1, R. Alibakhshi1,2, R. Akramipour3, M. R. Farshchi4, S. Fathollahi4, H. the novel mutation in JAG gene leading to early liver failure in Nomani1; patient with Alagille syndrome 1Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine,Kermanshah University of K. Joost, K. Luts, R. Zordania; Medical Sciences, kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical genetics Tallinn` Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia. division, Reference laboratory, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Alagille syndrome (OMIM 118450) is an autosomal dominant disor- Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Pediatrics, School of der associated with abnormalities of the liver, heart, skeleton, eye and Medicine,Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, kermanshah, Islamic kidneys and a characteristic facial appearance. Clinical picture is vari- Republic of Iran, 4Medical genetics division, Reference laboratory,Kermanshah able, major contributors to morbidity arise from bile duct paucity or University of Medical Sciences, kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran. cholestatic liver disease and severe heart disease. The syndrome is Alpha thalassemia is one of the most common single gene disorders caused by dominant mutations in jagged1 gene (JAG 1), which en- in the world. Because both hemoglobin A and F have α chains, ge- codes a ligand in the Notch-signaling pathway. netic disorders of α chain synthesis result in defective fetal and adult We present clinical, histological and molecular data of the patient with hemoglobin production. The genetic incidence for this disease varies Alagille syndrome with early development of liver failure and previ- between 1% and 98% throughout the tropics and subtropics. Alpha- ously not described mutation in JAG1 gene. thalassemia is usually caused by one or more deletions of the alpha- The patient was born 3G/3P; his birth anthropometry was according globin chain loci. There are alpha globin gene cluster deletions that to gestational age. Due to congenital heart defect (coarctation of aorta underlie α0 and α+ thalassemia; we analyzed deletion types of alpha and peripherial stenosis of pulmonary arteries) and cholestatic liver thalassemia in kermanshah, a province located in the west of Iran. disease Alagille syndrome was diagnosed at the age of 3 months. One of this deletions that have high frequency in the Asia, is a 3.7kb Cholestasis was rapidly progressive and the liver failure developed at deletion (-α3.7).After iron deficiency was excluded, 93 individuals with the age of 5 months. Child died at the age of 7 months due to the liver low MCH, low or normal MCV and normal or slightly reduced HbA2 insufficiency. Histological findings from liver biopsy revealed infantile level, were analyzed with used GAP PCR technique. -α3.7 mutation giant cell hepatitis. Due to unusual clinical course of the disease mo- was identified in 29 patients (31.2%). Based on this study, we sug- lecular study of JAG1 gene was performed. The heterozygous inser- gested that the -a 3.7 deletion is a common cause of hypochromic tion c.2275dupT causing premature stop codon was indentified in exon microcytic anemia with low MCH, low or normal MCV and normal or 18 of the JAG1 gene. This mutation was not present in both parents. slightly reduced HbA2 level in Kurdish population in kermanshah. Conclusion: the previously not discribed mutation leading to the trun- , cated JAG1 protein was most likely the cause of early development of liver failure in the patient with Alagille syndrome. P12.011 comprehensive molecular testing forX-linked Alport syndrome P12.009 G. Pont-Kingdon1, F. Gedge1, K. Sumner1, C. Miller2, D. Crockett1, T. Lewis1, J. Alkaptonuria updated, twelve different HGO mutations identified Denison3, M. Gregory3, C. Tetaria4, E. Lyon2,5; in slovakia 1ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, A. Zatkova1,2, J. Radvansky2, H. Polakova1, A. Ficek1,2, M. Baldovic2,3, R. Aqua- United States, 2ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 3School ron4, I. Dursun5, F. Gok5, L. Kadasi1,2; of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 4Centre 1Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Hospitalier de Polynesie francaise, Papeete, French Polynesia, 5Department of Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of NaturalMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  Pathology, University of utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. is a multiorganic disorder characterized by cone-rod dystrophy, child- Alport syndrome (AS) is a progressive renal disease with cochlear and hood obesity, progressive bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, insulin ocular involvement that progresses to end stage renal disease (ESRD) resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Dilated cardiomyopathy oc- in young adults although milder cases have been described. The ma- curs in more than 62% of patients. Pulmonary involvement and he- jority of AS cases is X-linked (XLAS) and caused by mutations in the patic, renal and urological dysfunction are frequently observed. COL4A5 gene. The COL4A5 contains 51 exons with more than 400 ALMS1 gene consists of 23 exons and encodes a novel protein whose mutations reported throughout the gene. We present here a compre- function still remains unclear. However, the ALMS1 protein is widely hensive molecular testing for XLAS using several technologies and an expressed, and localises to basal bodies of ciliated cells and centro- algorithm that maintains good sensitivity while limiting cost. somes playing a possible role in intracellular trafficking. For adult onset XLAS, we developed an assay identifying the three We present the case of a girl from a Spanish family. She was referred most common adult type XLAS mutations in the US; C1564S, L1649R, with nystagmus, obesity, progressive sensorineural hearing loss and and R1677Q. short stature. The patient also presented benign acanthosis nigricans, For molecular diagnostic testing of individuals with unknown mutations endocrine hypothyroidism and several ophthalmologic findings. Fun- we developed a DNA sequencing assay to identify point mutations and dus examination showed numerous pigmentary spicules and a dimin- small deletions and insertions. ished caliber on the retinal vasculature. She also presented strabismus Additionally, a Multiplex-Ligation Probe dependant Amplification assay and poor visual acuity. Electroretinogram (ERG) and visual evoked po- (MLPA) and Nimblegen’s Chromosome X Tiling array were evaluated tencials (VEP) showed no response. to detect complete or partial (exonic level) deletions and duplications The identification of the mutation was performed amplifying the exons in COL4A5. 10 and 16 by PCR, which was followed by direct DNA sequencing. We developed a public online searchable data base that contains 446 The patient showed a homozygous deletion in exon 16, c.10790_ entries from the literature. In this repository, 88% of the mutations are 10791delTG that causes a premature termination codon at amino point mutations and small deletions or duplications and 12% are large acid 3600 (p.V3597fsX3600) of ALMS1 and truncation of the protein. rearrangements (deletions and duplications at the exonic level). In conclusion, one mutation in the ALMS1 gene causative for AS has Using different technologies to analyze different types of mutations, been reported, proving that mutational screening is a useful tool in the our laboratory has validated a comprehensive test for XLAS that in- molecular diagnostic of AS. cludes the development of a large mutation data base. P12.014 P12.012 Early-onset Alzheimer’s disease due to novel mutation in PSEN screening of COLA in Hellenic families from Greece and gene? - case report cyprus with X-linked Alport syndrome S. Walczysková1, V. Engelmannová2, E. Šilhánová1; P. Demosthenous1, K. Voskarides1, E. Dafnis2, K. Stylianou2, A. Pierides3, E. 1Faculty Hospital of Ostrava, Department of Medical Genetics, Ostrava, Czech Alexopoulos4, E. Liakou4, P. Giamalis4, I. Tzanakis5, E. Georgaki6, C. Stavrou7, Republic, 2University of Ostrava, Faculty of Health Studies, Ostrava, Czech C. Deltas1; Republic. 1University of Cyprus, Department of Biological Sciences, Nicosia, Cyprus, Patients with an inherited form of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) carry 2University of Crete, Department of Nephrology, Heraklion, Greece, 3Ippokra- mutations in the presenilin genes (PSEN1, PSEN2) or the amyloid teion Hospital, Department of Nephrology, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Aristotle University precursor protein gene (APP). These disease-linked mutations result of Thesalloniki, Faculty of Medicine, Nephrology Clinic, Thesalloniki, Greece, in increased production of the longer form of amyloid-beta, the main 5General Hospital of Chania, Department of Nephrology, Chania, Greece, component of amyloid deposits found in brains of AD patients. Prese- 6Agia Sophia Childrens Hospital, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Athens, nilins are postulated to regulate APP-processing through their effects Greece, 7Royal Artemis Medical Center, Pafos, Cyprus. on gamma-secretase, the APP-cleaving enzyme. Alport syndrome (AS) is a hereditary disease of basement membranes We present a 67-year-old woman with family history of dementia, who that manifests clinically as a progressive nephropathy variably associ- developed AD in her forties. ated with sensorineural deafness and ocular abnormalities. The most DNA was isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes. Intronic prim- frequent form of AS is the X-linked one (~85%) due to mutations in ers were used to amplify and to sequence exons 3-12 of the PSEN1, COL4A5 gene. To date, more than 400 different mutations have been PSEN2 genes and exons 16, 17 of the APP gene. APOE status was identified in the COL4A5 gene, with “private” point mutations being determined. Blood samples of family members were not available for the most. We detected and studied for the first time in Greece and testing, therefore co-segregation of the novel mutation and phenotype Cyprus - clinically and molecularly - 11 families with AS. Patients of in the affected family was not performed. 100 elderly healthy subjects these families showed some of the main characteristic features of Al- (aged>65) were tested for p.P69A substitution using PCR-ARMS. port syndrome, including hematuria, proteinuria, chronic renal failure Using sequencing analysis we found a novel mutation (p.P69A) in exon and hearing problems. In some of these families, characteristic AS bi- 5 of the PSEN2 gene. This mutation is not found in AD&FTDM Data- opsy was available. X-linked AS was inferred in 9 of these families and base, 2009. No p.P69A mutation was found in the healthy subjects. COL4A5 mutation screening was undertaken based on either linkage The absence of the p.P69A mutation in 100 healthy subjects suggests analysis results or clinical features only. Direct sequencing of the 51 that the mutation is not a ,,silent“ polymorphism. The pathologic conse- exons of COL4A5 gene was performed by the use of an ABI PRISM quences are uncertain and needs further investigation. 3130 Genetic Analyzer. We identified three novel mutations in three In conclusion, we present a 67-year-old woman, who developed AD in of the families, E228X, P628L, 3075delT and one known mutation in her forties. We found a novel mutation (p.P69A) in the PSEN2 gene, two of the families, G624D. Interestingly, the two Greek families carry- these was not found in the control group. The pathologic consequenc- ing G624D mutation have a common haplotype flanking the COL4A5 es needs further investigation. gene, suggesting a founder effect. In addition, male patients in these families have a later manifestation of the disease. Our results will P12.015 highly contribute in pre-symptomatic and prenatal diagnosis in these Molecular genetical findings of familial Alzheimer´s disease and families and will add to the international effort being made for genotype familial frontotemporal lobar degeneration in a patient cohort in - phenotype correlation in X-linked AS. Portugal - description of five novel mutations G. Miltenberger-Miltenyi1, S. I. Pereira2; P12.013 1Institute of Molecular Medicine, Lisbon, Portugal, 2GenoMed Diagnostics of Identification of a ALMS mutation in a spanish patient with Molecular Medicine, Lisbon, Portugal. Alström syndrome We studied 127 unrelated patients (aged 64±10 years) with Alzheim- T. Piñeiro-Gallego1, I. Pereiro1, E. Vallespín2, C. Ayuso2, D. Valverde1; er’s disease (AD) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) for 1Departamento de Bioquímica, Genética e Inmunología, Vigo, Spain, 2Servicio mutations in the amyloid precursor protein gene (APP), presenilin 1 de Genética. Fundación Jiménez-Díaz, Madrid, Spain. gene (PSEN1), presenilin 2 gene (PSEN2), microtubule associated Alström syndrome (AS, MIM #203800) is a rare autosomal recessive protein tau gene (MAPT) and progranulin (PGRN) genes. Until now disorder caused by mutations in ALMS1 gene (chromosome 2p13). It only 44 mutations in MAPT and 64 in PGRN have been described. ToMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  further clarify the proportion of FTLD and AD cases attributable to mu- E3 ubiquitin ligase which plays a key role in skin appendages forma- tations in these genes, the frequency of the mutations in a Portuguese tion. Indeed, TRAF6-deficient mice showed a similar phenotype to clinical series of familial FTLD and familial AD patients referred to our mouse homologous EDA. We have demonstrated that EDARADD in- laboratory for genetic testing between 2005 and 2009 was evaluated. teract with TRAF6 via the EDARADD death domain. In addition, we Fourteen patients were genetically tested only for AD, 60 only for FTLD have demonstrated that EDARADD is ubiquitinated and that this ubiq- and 53 for both diseases with PCR and direct sequence analysis. uitination is dependent on TRAF6 activity and involve probably lysine Eleven different mutations have been identified in 14 out of the 127 63 ubiquitin chains. We have identified a novel mutation in EDARADD patients: two known and one novel missense mutation in the MAPT (c.402-407del ; p.Thr135-Val136 del) responsible for a sever autoso- gene and four novel PGRN mutations. Three of these PGRN muta- mal recessive form of EDA which abolished NF-κB activity. Interestingly tions caused frameshift while one resulted in abnormal splicing as this mutation impaired EDARADD ubiquitination but not the interaction demonstrated with RT-PCR. Functional tests in cell lines are still run- with TRAF6. Together, our studies showed that EDARADD ubiquitina- ning. Two known mutations in PSEN1 gene and one known mutation tion is required for the ectodysplasin-induced NF-κB activation. in PSEN2 were also found. According to the initial clinical diagnosis mutation frequency in MAPT P12.018 and PGRN were in the lower range of those described in other stud- Combined indirect strategy for efficient genetic diagnosis of ies. The five novel mutations found in MAPT and PGRN suggest that autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa both genes should be tested routinely in patients presenting clinically D. Cantalapiedra1, A. Ávila-Fernández1, M. A. López-Martínez1, C. L. Aúz-Al- with FTLD. exandre1, E. Vallespin1, M. García-Hoyos1, R. Riveiro-Álvarez1, J. Aguirre-Lam- bán1, M. Cortón2, M. J. Brión2,3, Á. Carracedo2,3, C. Ayuso1; P12.016 1Genetics department, Fundación Jiménez Díáz - CIBERER, Madrid, molecular spectrum of androgen receptor gene alterations in Spain, 2Grupo de Medicina Xenómica, Universidad de Santiago de Belgian patients. Compostela, CIBERER, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Fundación Pública S. J. A. Van Dooren1, R. Vijzelaar2, S. Seneca1, M. De Rycke1, I. Liebaers1, W. Galega de Medicina Xenomica, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de San- Lissens1; tiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. 1Centre for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2MRC Holland, Autosomal Recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa (arRP) is a retinal dystro- Amsterdam, The Netherlands. phy characterised by its high degree of genetic and allelic heteroge- Alterations throughout the androgen receptor (AR) gene influence neity, which makes its molecular diagnosis difficult and tedious. In an male reproductive development and function and are associated with effort to significantly reduce the workload, sixteen arRP genes were androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS), a disease with a prominent ge- studied in 199 Spanish families (83 arRP and 116 sporadic cases or notypic-phenotypic heterogeneity. sRP) with STR and SNP genetic markers, and were also screened for We determined the AR gene sequence in 21 patients. Ten patients mutations with a genotyping microarray. Cosegregation and homozy- were suspicious of AIS. 4/6 with known 46,XY karyotype had com- gosity analysis were performed after the genotyping process. plete AIS (CAIS) and 1/6 had premature amenorrhea. The presence of The overall power to rule out genes of both the STR and SNP methods an Y-chromosome was confirmed in 2 patients by AR-MLPA, whereas is very similar, with an average of 11.17 genes (69.82%) and 11.54 karyotypes remained unknown for 2 AIS patients. genes (72.14%) respectively, taking only into account those families Three nonsense mutations were discovered at codons 353, 829 and with 2 or more affected genotyped individuals. Twice as many homo- 831 respectively, and a 4bp duplication c.2227_2230dupATGG were zygosity alerts were obtained with SNPs, but the ones in common with found to induce a premature stopcodon at codon 769. Two missense the STR analysis matched the mutated genes in all 4 fully-character- mutations at codon 700 and 860 were detected within the AR ligand ised control families. binding domain. Suspicion of AR-gene or -exon deletion in 2 patients, Our study allows discarding many genes and prioritising the mutational was corroborated by AR-MLPA, demonstrating the importance of con- screening of the remaining ones, based on homozygosity. Both indirect firmation methodology. For the remaining 6 patients (few clinical and/ approaches give similar results when discarding genes. A diagnostic or karyotype information was available and) no AR-alterations were method for arRP and sRP families is proposed, which maximises the found. Carrier status was confirmed in 5 investigated relatives of some probability of reaching a successful molecular diagnosis for each fam- of the index cases. ily, making a more rational and cost-effective use of resources by Our study has revealed a number of previously undescribed amino means of computer automation and the combined use of STRs and acid alterations presumingly causing impairment of the AR protein SNPs. function. Our findings demonstrate that AR sequencing and MLPA are important P12.019 tools to support the clinical diagnosis and counseling of AIS. Moreover, Genetic diagnosis of Ataxia telangectasia and role of the AIS genetic testing may be used for prenatal diagnosis and pre-im- mitochondria on it plantation genetic diagnosis, for which the CAG-repeat in exon 1 can M. Houshmand, M. Rouhi Moghadam; be used as marker. Genetic department, Special medical center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder..Al- P12.017 though the preferred method is the direct mutation analysis of the ATM tRAF6 dependent EDARADD ubiquitination is necessary for NF- gene,the large size of the ATM gene with 63 exons and the large num- KB activation and is impaired in Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia ber of possible mutations in patients considerably limit efficiency of E. Bal1, C. Cluzeau1, N. Chassaing2, G. Courtois1, A. Munnich1, P. Calvas2, A. mutation analysis as a diagnostic choice.Indirect molecular diagnosis Smahi1; using ATM-related molecular markers facilitates prenatal diagnosis of 1INSERM U781, hôpital Necker, Paris 15ème, France, 2Service de Génétique AT children. In ½Q1_ this study, four molecular markers: D11S2179, Médicale, Hopital Purpan, CHU Toulouse, France. D11S1787, D11S535, D11S1343 are genotyped in 19 unrelated fami- Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (EDA) is a disorder characterized by lies from different regions of Iran. . Amplified products by PCR method sparse hair, abnormal or missing teeth and inability to sweat. EDA has were separated using denaturing PAGE gels. In all families, segrega- been ascribed to at least three genes encoding ectodysplasin (EDA1), tion of alleles was according to Mendelian inheritance, and affected EDA-receptor (EDAR) and EDAR associated death domain (EDAR- chromosomes were distinguishable from unaffected ones. All carriers ADD). Ectodysplasin bind to its receptor, EDAR which in turn recruit and affected patients were diagnosed accurately. Thus, this method is EDARADD to activate NF-κB downstream signalling pathway. EDAR/ effectively useful in prenatal diagnosis of AT. NF-κB signalling is necessary to skin appendages develomentdevel- We also investigated mt-DNA deletions and haplogroups in AT patients. opment. In this study, 24 Iranian patients suffering from AT and 100 normal con- Through a yeast two-hybrid screening of keratinocytes cDNA library, trols were examined. mt-DNA examined by 6 primers for existence of using EDARADD as a bait, we have isolated TAB2 as a partner of mitochondrial deletions. We also amplified and sequenced the mtDNA EDARADD and demonstrated the involvement of TAB2/TRAF6/TAK1 HVS-I by standard sequencing techniques. mtDNA deletions were ob- complex in EDAR/NF-κB NF-KB signalling pathway. TRAF6 is as an served in 54.1% (13/24) of patients (8.9 kb deletion in all samples,Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  5.0 kb in one and 7.5 kb in two patients), representing mtDNA dam- P12.022 age which may be due to oxidative stress in mitochondria. Our results missense autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy (ARB) showed that there is no association between mtDNA haplogroups and mutations in bestrophin-1 cause defects in intracellular AT. This data may indicate involvement of mitochondrial damage in the trafficking and a decrease in chloride channel activity. pathogenesis of AT. A. E. Davidson1, I. D. Miller1, P. D. Brown1, A. R. Webster2,3, G. A. Wright4,3, G. C. M. Black1,5, F. D. C. Manson1,5; P12.020 1The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Oph- mutations of the EPHA receptor tyrosine kinase gene cause thalmology, London, United Kingdom, 3Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United autosomal dominant congenital cataract Kingdom, 4Institute of Ophthalmology,, London, United Kingdom, 5Manchester X. Zhang1,2, T. Zhang2, R. Hua1, W. Xiao2; Royal Eye Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. 1Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Bei- INTRODUCTION: The BEST1 gene encodes bestrophin-1, a baso- jing, China, 2China Medical University, Shenyang, China. lateral membrane protein primarily expressed in the retinal pigment Congenital cataracts (CCs) are clinically and genetically heteroge- epithelium where it may act as chloride channel. Mutations in BEST1 neous. Mutations in the same gene may lead to CCs differing in inheri- cause several retinal disorders including Best disease; autosomal tance, morphology and severity. Loci for autosomal dominant posterior dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy; and autosomal recessive be- polar CC and total CC have both been mapped to the chromosomal strophinopathy (ARB). ARB is consequent upon biallelic mutations in 1p36 region harboring the EPHA2 receptor tyrosine kinase gene. BEST-1 and thought to represent the null phenotype. Here, we report mutations of EPHA2 in three CC families from differ- OBJECTIVES: To investigate the trafficking and chloride electrophysi- ent ancestral groups. In a Chinese family with posterior polar CC, we ology of mutant ARB bestrophin-1 isoforms. identified a missense mutation, c.2819C>T (p.T940I), replacing a criti- METHODS: Chloride channel function was measured by whole-cell cal amino acid that functions at the receptor oligomerization interface. patch-clamping in transiently transfected HEK293 cells, the standard In a British family with posterior polar CC and an Australian family with system for this analysis. Cellular localisation was determined by im- total CC, we found a frameshift mutation (c.2915_2916delTG) and a munofluorescence in transiently transfected MDCKII cells which had splicing mutation (c.2826-9G>A), respectively. These two mutations been polarized on membrane supports to provide an epithelial model are predicted to produce novel C-terminal polypeptides with 39 identi- system. cal amino acids. Yeast two-hybrid analysis showed stronger interaction RESULTS: We have now identified 13 mutations in 10 families with between the total CC-associated mutant EPHA2 and low molecular ARB suggesting that this is an under recognised phenotype. ARB- weight protein-tyrosine phosphatase, a negative regulator of EPHA2 associated mutant bestrophin-1 isoforms had an altered intracellular signaling. Our results implicate the Eph-ephrin signaling system in localisation, showing a perinuclear reticular pattern typical of the endo- development of human cataract and provide a novel insight into the plasmic reticulum (ER). Whole-cell patch-clamping demonstrated that molecular mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of human CCs. all 9 ARB mutants investigated had a significantly reduced chloride conductance compared to wildtype channels. P12.021 CONCLUSIONS: Mutant ARB isoforms of bestrophin-1 are not cor- the method of high-resolution melting (HRm) in diagnostics of rectly trafficked to the cell surface and appear to be retained within autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) the ER, thus providing an explanation for the lack of chloride-specific V. Elisakova1, J. Stekrova1, S. Svobodova1, J. Reiterova1,2, M. Merta1,2, V. currents. We hypotheses that ER associated degradation (ERAD) of Tesar2, M. Kohoutova1; mutant bestrophin-1 isoforms is the disease mechanism underpinning 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine and ARB. General Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2De- partment of Nephrology of the First Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching P12.023 Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. ABO Genotyping by capillary Electrophoresis ADPKD is the most common hereditary renal disease. The disorder A. Chhibber1, S. Berosik1, C. J. Davidson1, R. N. Fish1, S. Hung1, B. F. John- is caused by mutations of PKD1 and PKD2 genes. PKD1 gene is the son1, M. Kondo2, J. Lee1, R. A. Padilla1, D. Rodriguez1, A. A. Pradhan1, A. C. main locus, which is responsible for 85% of ADPKD cases and severe Felton1, M. Yamazaki3, L. L. Joe1; disease course. Screening of PKD1 gene is complicated by its high 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Life Technologies, Tokyo, variability and presence of genomic duplications. Currently, 818 se- Japan, 3Hitachi High Technologies, Naka, Ibaraki, Japan. quential variants have been published in PKD database (http://pkdb. ABO blood-group identification by genotyping is often used in identi- mayo.edu), which includes polymorphisms as well as causal muta- fication of suspects, victims, or missing persons in criminal investiga- tions. Finding of the best method for PKD1 mutation analysis and iden- tions, and can also be a valuable tool in medical applications where tification of its new variants are the main aims of this work. routine serological typing is not feasible. Identification of specific com- 78 patients were screened in non-duplicated PKD1 region. Another binations of SNPs in the ABO locus on chromosome 9 can be used 12 patients were analysed within the whole gene. To find the most ef- to determine ABO blood type. However, most methods of ABO geno- fective screening method, several detection techniques were tested: typing are either too time consuming [eg., restriction fragment length direct sequencing, heteroduplex analysis, denaturing gradient gel polymorphism (RFLP) analysis] or too complex [e.g. single-stranded electrophoresis and high-resolution melting. conformational polymorphism (SSCP)] for routine laboratory use. Fur- From all techniques used, HRM is the fastest and most reliable method thermore, sensitivity is an important consideration, with ABO typing in for detection of PKD1 mutants. So far, 32 probably causal mutations forensic cases often relying on very small quantities of genomic DNA. have been revealed: 11 nonsense mutations, 14 missense mutations, A simple and rapid procedure for a multiplex single-base primer exten- 4 frameshift mutations, 2 deletions without frameshift and 1 intronic sion reaction for ABO typing using six SNP sites within the ABO gene mutation. 25 mutations have not been reported yet. has been described in the literature. In this study, we explore several Determination of localization and type of mutations in PKD1 gene and DNA extraction techniques to optimize upstream preparation of DNA their genotype-phenotype correlation will improve DNA diagnostics to- before amplification and electrophoresis. We also present a method gether with assessment of clinical prognosis. At the same time, the for capillary electrophoresis of such multiplex primer extension reac- results could help to reveal the mechanism of ADPKD pathogenesis. tions with sensitivity capable of accurate genotyping down to 0.1 ng of Within this study, HRM is the most suitable method for screening of genomic DNA and improved consistency across instruments and labo- PKD1 gene. ratories, along with a robust and rapid secondary analysis workflow. Supported by the grant projects IGA MZ CR NR/9427-3 and VZ MSMT 0021620806. P12.024 clinical and molecular study of 12 tunisian patients with Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome M. Chaabouni1, R. Mrad1, L. kraoua1, L. Euchi1, M. Kharret2, F. Maazoul1, n. ben abdallah3, H. Chaabouni1; 1Department of hereditary and congenital diseases, Charles Nicolle hospital, tu-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  nis, Tunisia, 2Department of human genetics, faculty of medicine Tunis Tunisia, Sang (EFS), Brest, France. tunis, Tunisia, 3Department of Endocrinology Charles Nicolle hospital - Tunis We have recently reported that the duplication or triplication of a Tunisia, tunis, Tunisia. ~605-kb segment containing the cationic trypsinogen gene (PRSS1) Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is an on chromosome 7 cause chronic pancreatitis, by means of quantita- autosomal tive fluorescent PCR (QFM-PCR) and FISH (1,2). We had failed to dominant disorder where eyelid malformation associated with (type I) clone the breakpoint junctions by a combination of QFM-PCR and or wi long-range PCR, an observation inconsistent with a simple recombi- thout (type II) premature ovarian failure (POF). It is ascribed to muta- nation mechanism. Here, we unraveled the complex structure of the tions in the forkhead transcriptional factor2 (FOXL2) gene. triplication by CGH: the triplicated ~605-kb segment is followed by an The purpose of this study is to identify mutations in FOXL2 in 2 spo- inverted segment of ~90-kb, the latter being normally located >100 kb radic BPES type I patients, 1 BPES type I family with 3 patients, and 3’ to the former. This greatly facilitated the task of characterizing the 3 families with a total of 7 patients were the type of BPES could not breakpoint junctions. Examination of the junction sequences enabled be determined. us to decipher how the triplication was generated. The duplication of Coding regions and nearby intron sequences of FOXL2 were ana- the ~605-kb segment plus the inverted ~90-kb segment was gener- lyzed by direct sequencing. A 30-bp in frame duplication 909 - 938 ated first, explicable by the model of microhomology-mediated, break- dup 30 was found in two families with undetermined BPES type , and induced serial replication slippage (3,4). The triplication was then a c.655C>T mutation in two sisters with BPES type I. 2 mutations in generated through non-allelic homologous recombination between the FOXL2 were identified in 3 families, including c.672_939 dup ( 2 fami- duplication-carrying chromosome 7 sister chromatids during meiosis. lies) and c.655C>T ( 1 family). No mutations were detected in one Our finding not only potentiated the increasingly recognized impor- family. 4 genomic variation were identified in 2 sporadic cases, includ- tance of break-induced replication in the generation of copy number ing c.655C>T (1case) and c.501C<T,c.536c>G, c.869C>A (1case). variations (4-6) but also provided a fascinating example showing how c.869C>A is a novel genomic variation that result in missense change a duplication-derived low copy repeats predisposed to the generation of the encoded protein, ie. p.Pro290His.This is the first reported mu- of a triplication. tations of FOXL2 in Tunisian BPES cases. One of the mutations, in- 1. Le Maréchal et al. Nat Genet 2006;38:1372. frame 30-bp duplication (909 - 938 dup 30), is one of the most common 2. Masson et al. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008;6:82 mutation hotspots in the coding region of FOXL2. In BPES family with- 3. Chen et al. Hum Mutat 2005;26:362 out FOXL2 mutation, it cannot be excluded that the disorder is caused 4. Sheen et al. Hum Mutat 2007;28:1198. by a position effect in the surrounding region of FOXL2 gene. 5. Bauters et al. Genome Res 2008;18:847. 6. Hastings et al. PLoS Genet 2009;5:e1000327. P12.025 TFAPA mutational hotspot in individuals with Branchio-Oculo- P12.027 Facial syndrome Lack of association of functional polymorphisms in the W. Just1, Y. Sznajer2, D. Müller3, S. Lyonnet4, C. Baumann5, N. Deconinck6, F. α-subunit of the human epithelial sodium channel and Roulez7, J. Reiber1; bronchiectasis 1Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2Pediatric Clinical Genetics, HUDERF, Brus- T. Bienvenu1, M. Viel2, J. Nectoux1, N. Guaich2, D. Hubert3, I. Fajac4; sels, Belgium, 3Medical Genetics, Klinikum Chemnitz, Chemnitz, Germany, 1Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin, CNRS (UMR8103), Paris, France, 4Dept of Genetics, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Dept of 2Laboratoire de Biochimie et Genetique Moleculaire, Hopital Cochin, Paris, Clinical Genetics, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 6Dept of Ped Neurol- France, 3Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 4Service d’ex- ogy, HUDERF, Brussels, Belgium, 7Dept of Ophthalmology, HUDERF, Brussels, plorations fonctionnelles, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France. Belgium. Bronchiectasis is defined as a permanent dilation of the airways aris- Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome (BOF) is an extremely rare autoso- ing from chronic bronchial inflammation/infection. In 50% of cases, no mal dominant disorder characterized by cervical skin lesions or bran- etiology can be identified. The role of the epithelial sodium channel chial sinus defects where skin can either be aplastic or overlaying. ENaC has been pointed out in the pathophysiology of cystic fibrosis. Craniofacial features include low-set ears with malformed pinnae and Recently, it has been shown that the common human ENaC alpha auricular pits, pseudocleft of the upper lip, or cleft lip/palate, and up- polymorphism hαA663T is a functional polymorphism that affects hu- per lip pits. Neurologic phenotype is characterized by developmen- man ENaC surface expression. We extensively analysed ENaCα in 55 tal delay or mental retardation in up to 40% of the patients. An array patients with idiopathic bronchiectasis and without two CFTR muta- analysis revealed a 3.2 Mbp deletion on 6p24.3 in a familial case of tions. Thirty-eight patients presented functional abnormalities suggest- BOF syndrome (Milunsky et al., 2008). In that publication, five sporadic ing impaired sodium transport (abnormal sweat chloride concentration cases of BOF syndrome have mutations in the transcription factor AP- or nasal difference measurement), and 17 had no such evidence. 2 alpha gene TFAP2A, a gene from this 3.2 Mbp interval. We have Sequencing of the exons and flanking introns of the ENaCα gene analyzed two familial cases of BOF and three sporadic cases. The identified three different intronic sequence variations (IVS7+54C>T; majority of them have postauricular cervical branchial sinus defects IVS11+32G>A, and IVS11-6C>T) and two different amino-acid chang- with hemangiomatous, scarred skin. Only two individuals showed pre- es ((3 p.W493R, and 1 p.V562I) in heterozygous state in four patients mature hair greying. We detected a recurring mutation in exon 4 and (3 with impaired sodium transport (7.8%), and 1 without evidence of new mutations only in exons 4, 5, and 6. The sequence of these exons sodium transport abnormality (5.9%)). Moreover, we studied the dis- is highly conserved in the animal kingdom from humans to the honey tribution of the hαA663T genotypes in each group. We observed no bee; explaining why these exons are almost free of SNP, whereas the significant association between the hαA663T genotypes and bronchi- other exons display a random arrangement of SNPs in their coding ectasis with impaired sodium transport. Moreover, the frequency of sequence. Our study represents the second mutation report to date on the A663 allele (associated with a less channel activity) is similar in patients with BOF syndrome. A larger cohort is now required in order patients with bronchiectasis with or without impaired sodium transport to delineate the genotype with its corresponding phenotype and may (66.25% vs 67.6%), and in patients with or without only one CFTR then improve our understanding on the variable phenotypes encoun- mutation (65.9% vs 68.18%). In conclusion, subtle genetic changes tered in BOF syndrome. in alpha-ENaC subunits might not be at the origin of bronchiectasis in our population. P12.026 Dissecting the origin of the trypsinogen triplication mutation P12.028 A. Chauvin1,2,3, C. Le Maréchal1,2,3, S. Quemener1,2,3, J. M. Chen1,2,3, C. Fé- Functional analysis of missense mutations identified in the rec1,2,3; Pmm2 gene causing congenital disorder of glycosylation type-ia 1Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U613, A. I. Vega, C. Pérez-Cerdá, L. R. Desviat, M. Ugarte, B. Pérez; BREST, France, 2Université de Bretagne Occidentale (UBO), Faculté de Méde- Centro de Biología Molecular. Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. cine et Des Sciences de la Santé, Brest, France, 3Etablissement Français du The congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) affect the synthesis or processing of N-glycans. CDG1a (MIM#212065) type is the mostMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  common form of the disease, and is caused by a deficiency in the ataxia, which included 14 patients in four generations. We examined cytosolic protein phosphomannomutase (EC 5.4.2.8, PMM 2). The aim seven patients who of this work has been the functional analysis of 12 missense changes had expanded CAG repeats in the CACNA1A gene with repeat insta- identified in a cohort of Spanish patients in order to provide clues to un- bility (24 and 25 derstand the phenotype-genotype correlation and to investigate new repeats). Although all patients showed cerebellar ataxia, each patient therapeutic approaches. First we have studied the PMM2 protein sta- exhibited peripheral bility and gene expression in the fibroblast cell lines. All fibroblasts cell neuropathy or spasticity indicating intrafamilial phenotypic variability. lines presented lower amount of PMM2 mutant protein while no effect This is the first on mRNA stability was detected. The prokaryotic in vitro studies have report of SCA6 in Iran, and suggests the worldwide distribution of demonstrated that all new changes are disease-causing mutations and SCA6.Key words: Spinocerebellar ataxia , SCA6 , Autosomal Domi- have revealed the presence of null mutations (R123Q, R141H, F157S, nant , Iran P184T, F207S and D209G), mutations with residual activity ranging between 44-54% (L32R, T118S, T237M and P113L) and mutations P12.031 with residual activity ranging between 16-21% (D65Y and V44A). Most somatic and germline mosaicism in a carrier of a large deletion of the patients are functional hemyzygous for a null mutation and a at Xp21 locus leading to chronic granulomatous disease and mc mutation with intermediate residual activity -usually associated with a leod syndrome moderate form of the disease- or with a mutation with higher residual C. Kannengiesser1,2, N. Mahlaoui3, D. Henry1, E. Al Ageeli1, S. Quentin4,5, D. activity usually associated with a milder clinical phenotype. The protein Moshous3, M. de Blois6, A. Auvrignon7, f. Monceaux8, S. Perdereaux8, S. Bri- stability assays identified at least six changes (V44A, D65Y, F157S, ault9, M. Gougerot-Pocidalo10,2, B. Grandchamp1,2; P184T, F207S and T237M) with decreased amount of immunorre- 1AP-HP, Bichat, génétique, Paris, France, 2Université Paris Diderot U773, active PMM2 protein and decreased half life compared to wild type, France, 3AP-HP, Necker, Immunologie, Paris, France, 4AP-HP, Plate forme opening up therapeutic possibilities by pharmacological chaperones in génomique IUH Saint Louis, Paris, France, 5Université Paris Diderot, Paris, several of our cohort of patients. France, 6AP-HP, Necker, Cytogénétique, Paris, France, 7AP-HP, Trousseau, hématologie oncologie pédiatrique, Paris, France, 8CHR Orléans, Pédiatrie, Or- P12.029 léans, France, 9CHR Orléans, cytogénétique, Orléans, France, 10AP-HP, Bichat, HLA polymorphism in celiac disease Romanian children immunologie hématologie, Paris, France. O. N. Belei1, I. Simedrea1, L. Tamas2, C. Daescu1, T. Marcovici1, F. Antonie3, G. The proband is a boy who presented when he was three months old Brad3, D. Mihailov4; with a granulomatous lymphadenitis. Nitroblue tetrazolium reduction 1First Pediatric Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, assay (NBT test) was consistent with the diagnosis of chronic granu- Timisoara, Romania, 2Biochemistry Departement, University of Medicine and lomatous disease (CGD), a immunodeficiency disease resulting from Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 3Emergency Children Hospital mutation in genes encoding the subunits of NADPH oxidase complex : Louis Turcanu, Timisoara, Romania, 4Third Pediatric Clinic, University of Medi- CYBA, CYBB, NCF1 and NCF2 (Online Mendelian Inheritance in man cine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. MIM#s 233690, 306400, 233700, 233710). Western blot analysis of Introduction: Celiac disease (CD) is an immune-mediated enteropathy the NADPH oxidase subunits revealed absence of expression of GP- caused by a permanent sensitivity to gluten in genetically susceptible 91phox encoded by CYBB (Xp21). The patient had also acanthocyto- individuals (DQ2 or DQ8 HLA haplotype). Objective: To correlate the sis suggesting a McLeod syndrome that is caused by a mutation in XK clinical forms of CD with villous injury severity, IgA anti-tissue trans- locus also at Xp21. We hypothesized a contiguous gene deletion for glutaminase (tTG) antibodies serum level and DQ2 / DQ8 haplotype. XK and CYBB. We confirmed the presence of a large deletion of 1.8Mb Material and Methods: We recruited 2 lots: lot 1 - 24 children diag- of CYBB by CGH array and characterized precisely the breakpoints by nosed with CD by mass screening in subjects associating risk factors sequencing a PCR fragment generated using primers from each side and lot 2 - 24 healthy controls matched with sex and age. HLA DQ2 of the deletion. Using quantitative PCR at the CYBB locus and the and DQ8 alleles were typed by PCR-SSP, IgA tTG assessment was specific PCR amplification of the deleted X chromosome, we showed made using ELISA and villous injury was classified using Marsh score. that the mother had a somatic mosaicism and that an half sister of the Results: From 24 CD patients, 15 associated atypical or silent form proband was a carrier of the deletion. Segregation analysis of micro- of disease and only 9 associated the typical form. Haplotype analysis satellite markers in this family (including 3 additional half brothers of showed that the main combination observed was DQ2 in cis confor- the proband) revealed that the deletion was either present or absent mation (DQA1*0501 and DQB1*0201 alleles) in 14 patients from lot on the same X-chromosomal region inherited from the mother, thus 1 and in one subject from lot 2. We found a strong correlation be- indicating a germline mosaicism. We provide here molecular evidence tween IgA tTG serum level and villous injury degree (p=0,03), but there for the occurrence of somatic and germline mosaicism in a carrier of was no statistically significant correlation between the clinical forms CGD and McLeod syndrome. of disease, Marsh score and the distribution of the different alleles (p = 0,07). Conclusion: We confirmed in this study the high frequency P12.032 of DQ2 haplotype in CD patients. Presence of HLA DQ2 or DQ8 is chiari malformation type i: Linkage to chromosome 16p13.3 in a mandatory but not sufficient for developing gluten enteropathy. HLA large spanish kindred polymorphism seems to have no impact on clinical forms of CD. E. Cuenca-Leon1, A. Urbizu1, S. Boronat1, E. Solana2, T. Vendrell3, E. 1 Vázquez4, M. Poca2, A. Macaya1; 1Grup de Recerca en Neurologia Infantil, Institut de Recerca Vall d’Hebron, P12.030 Barcelona, Spain, 2Servei de Neurocirurgia, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, A large family with spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 in iran: a Barcelona, Spain, 3Unitat de Genètica Clínica, Hospital Universitari Vall clinical and genetic study d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4Institut de Diagnòstic per la Imatge, Hospital R. Vazifehmand Roodposhtie1, H. Shimazaki2, V. Reza3, H. Hassan3, K. Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. Reza4, S. Sassan3, H. Shamsodin5, A. Fatemeh4, Y. Ouyang2, J. Honda6, I. Background: Chiari malformation type I (CMI) is a mesodermal anom- Nakano6, Y. Takiyama2; aly that may cause severe and progressive neurological deficits. The 1Shahid Beheshti Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Jichi main feature is the ectopia of the cerebellar tonsils which are down- Medical University, Neurology, Jichi, Japan, 3Shaheed Beheshti University of wardly displaced through the foramen magnum. Familial aggregation, Medical Sciences and Health Services, Department of Anatomical Sciences, twin studies and cosegregation with known genetic syndromes support Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- that at least in a subset of CMI patients there is a substantial genetic ences University, Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, contribution, but up to date no genetic loci or genes have been con- 5Qom University of Medical Sciences, Department of Neurological Sciences, vincingly linked to CMI. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Jichi Medical University, Department of Neu- Objective: To map the disease-causing gene in a large Spanish kin- rology, Jichi, Japan. dred with Chiari malformation type I (CMI) with a mendelian pattern The authors describe a large Iranian family with autosomal dominant of inheritance. cerebellar Methods: DNA samples from 31 family members were obtained.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  Twelve individuals were classified as affected after determine a down- ously described nonsense mutation Arg253Stop (c. 757C>T) in exon 6 ward herniation of cerebellar tonsils of ≥3mm through the foramen of CHM. Restriction analysis performed in a sister of the patient, who magnum and a volume reduction of the posterior fossa in a MRI sagit- has small clinical presentations of choroideremia, detected mutation tal view. After carrying out cytogenetic analysis to rule out major chro- Arg253Stop (c. 757C>T) in heterozygous state. Thus the given DNA- mosomal rearrangements, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)- analysis results revealed a disease-causing mutation Arg253Stop (c. based, 0.62cM density genomewide scan was performed in the 21 first 757C>T) and confirm the diagnosis “choroideremia” in the clinical recruited individuals. case. Results: Preliminary linkage analysis considering 21 individuals re- vealed a disease locus in a 4.3Mb region on 16q13.3 with a maximum P12.035 multipoint parametric LOD score of 3.109. Several candidate genes Functional analysis of chronic pancreatitis-associated 5‘ map to this region. Further analysis will include ten recently recruited regulatory variants in the pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor individuals and additional microsatellite markers. (sPiNK1) gene Conclusions: A genetic locus in CMI has been described, underscoring A. Boulling, J. M. Chen, C. Férec; the monogenic character of the disorder in some families. Elucidation INSERM U613, Brest, France. of the putative disease-causing gene in 16p13 awaits further investi- Introduction: The SPINK1 gene, which encodes the pancreatic secre- gation. tory trypsin inhibitor, is one of the major genes predisposing to chronic pancreatitis. To date, a dozen of variations have been described in the P12.033 5’ regulatory region (RR) of SPINK1 but their functional effects remain Genetic Heterogeneity of Geleophysic Dysplasia unknown. The aim of this study was to systematically characterize all C. Le Goff1, N. Dagoneau1, P. Stephan1, I. Diebold-Pressac1, V. Drouin-Gar- these currently known 5’ RR variants. raud2, R. Hennekam3, S. Mansour4, G. Mortier5, M. Splitt6, A. Superti-Furga7, S. Method: The wild-type 5’ RR of SPINK1 was firstly cloned into the Unger7, M. Le Merrer1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1,8; pGL3-Basic Luciferase Reporter Vector. All the 5’ RR variations in the 1INSERM, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France, 3Academic SPINK1 gene were then introduced into the pGL3-SPINK1 construct, Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4St George’s university of Lon- respectively, by means of site-directed mutagenesis. SPINK1 promoter don, London, United Kingdom, 5Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, activities were determined in human pancreatic Colo-357 cells. Func- 6Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 7Department of tional relevance of some variants was further evaluated by EMSA. Pediatrics, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 8Université Paris Des- Results: The 5’ RR variations can be divided into three categories in cartes, Paris, France. terms of luciferase expression, which correlated well with clinical find- Geleophysic dysplasia (OMIM 231050, GD) is an autosomal recessive ings. The variants that caused a decreased expression often show disorder characterized by short stature, small hands and feet, cone- consistent disease association among different studies whilst those shaped epiphyses, delayed bone age and shortened tubular bones. that had no effect on expression often show equal allele distribution Patients present with a progressive cardiac disease with dilation and between patients and controls. The variants that caused an increased thickening of the pulmonary, aortic or mitral valves often leading to expression are, in fact, in cis with a known disease-causing mutation. death before 5 years of age. Studying six GD families, we mapped the EMSA assay demonstrated that variations located in well defined regu- disease locus gene on chromosome 9q34.2 and identified four distinct latory motifs affected protein-DNA interactions. misense mutations and a nonsense mutation in the A Disintegrin And Conclusion: This work was the first to assess the functional impact Metalloproteinase with Thrombospondin repeats- like 2 gene (ADAMT- of the 5’-RR’s SPINK1 variations. Our finding clarified the role of the SL2). The ADAMTS-like subfamily comprises proteins homologous to diverse SPINK1 5’ RR variants in the etiology of chronic pancreatitis the ADAMTS ancillary domains but lacking the protease domain and and resulted in a better understanding of the genotype/phenotype re- hence lacking catalytic activity. Their functions are yet unknown. Using lationship. a yeast two hybrid screen, we identify Latent TGFβ Binding Protein 1 (LTBP1) as a partner of ADAMTSL2. We also found a higher level P12.036 of active TGFβ and an enhanced level of phoshorylated SMAD2 in Genetic background of primary ciliary dyskinesia in Polish GD fibroblasts allowing us to conclude at an enhanced TGFβ signal- patients - search for mutations in candidate genes ling. Following this initial study, we have collected the samples of 18 E. Zietkiewicz1,2, U. Skrzypczak1, K. Voelkel1, B. Nitka1, E. Rutkiewicz1, A. additional GD families and identified ADAMTSL2 mutations in 6/18 Pogorzelski3, M. Witt1,4; comprising 4 novel mutations. We do not find any distinctive clinical 1Department of Molecular and Clinical Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, feature between patients with or without ADAMTSL2 mutation. Finally, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Supported by, Kbn 3po5e 038- we also found an increase TGFβ level in non mutated ADAMTSL2 fi- 24; pbz kbn 122/p05-1; nn401-277534, Poland, 3Institute of Tuberculosis and broblasts. We conclude that GD is a clinically homogenous but geneti- Lung Diseases, Pediatric Section, Rabka, Poland, 4International Institute of cally heterogeneous condition. On going studies will hopefully lead to Molecular and Cell Biology, Warszawa, Poland. the identification of another disease gene presumably also involved in The study group comprises families with Kartagener syndrome (KS) the bioavailability of TFGβ. and CDO (ciliary dysfunction only). molecular analysis of the genes involved in PcD pathogenesis. DNAH. Sixty-eight families were P12.034 analyzed for the consistency in the inheritance of neutral intragenic DNA-diagnostics of choroideremia in Russian family SNPs and the disease phenotype. In total, 109 PCD families were O. V. Khlebnikova1, S. V. Gudzenko1, N. A. Beklemitcheva2, A. V. Polyakov1; screened for the presence of mutations in DNAH5 exons using SSCP/ 11- Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sci- heteroduplex method. In 77 (of 79) exons analyzed, we identified 13 ences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 22- Moscow Research Institute of Eye STOP mutations (including four already reported) and 11 missense not Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation. found in the control Polish population. Four mutations (3 STOPs, also Choroideremia - is a congenital X-linked ocular disease character- found in European patients, and one missense in exon 32 not reported ized by the degeneration of the choriocapillaris, the retinal pigment before) were found in more than one family; haplotype background epithelium and the photoreceptor of the eye. The disorder leads to the analysis indicated common origin for each of these repetitive muta- progressive loss of vision beginning at an early age resulting from the tions. DNAI. The search for mutations in DNAI1 was conducted in 113 complete atrophy of the choroid and retina. The CHM gene respon- families without DNAH5 mutations. Among 18 (of 20) exons examined, sible for choroideremia, is located on Xq21.2, contains 15 exons and four harbored mutations (three reported and two newly found). The encodes a protein, the Rab escort protein-1 (REP1), which is involved most frequent were: insertion in intron 1 and missense in exon 17, in membrane trafficking. Currently, there are about 110 mutations in previously reported among European patients. Mutations in DNAH5 CHM gene, and these are all nonsense, frameshift or splice site muta- and DNAI1 are responsible for PCD/KS in at least 20% and 8% Polish tions leading to choroideremia. families, respectively, all with ODA defects. Genetic background of The purpose of our study was elaboration of DNA-diagnostics of cho- atypically inherited PcD. Two families with overlapping X-linked RP roideremia in affected Russian patient. Sequencing analysis of all ex- and PCD symptoms were examined. In one, a mutation in exon 2 of ons and intron-exon junctions of CHM in affected man showed a previ- the XL-RPGR gene has been identified and shown to cause aberrantMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  RNA splicing. In the second family, a substitution in intron 2 (+5g>a) P12.039 has been found with unknown effect on splicing. Large deletion comprising COLA causes aortic dissection J. Meienberg1, S. Neuenschwander2, A. Patrignani2, S. Alonso1, E. Arnold1,3, P12.037 C. Henggeler1, R. Perez1, S. Azzarello-Burri4, B. Steiner4, K. Spanaus5, S. Re- Analysis of RUNX in a Danish cohort of cleidocranial dysplasia genass6, C. Giunta3, M. Rohrbach3, T. Carrel7, B. Steinmann3, W. Berger1, G. patients revealed two large chromosomal deletions and 14 Matyas1; pathogenic point mutations 1Division of Medical Molecular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Institute of L. Hansen1,2, A. K. Riis1, H. Hove1, E. Lauridsen1, H. Eiberg1, S. Kreiborg1; Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Functional Genom- 1Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2The Wilhelm Johannsen ics Center Zurich, ETH and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Division Centre for Functional Genome Research, Copenhagen, Denmark. of Metabolism and Molecular Pediatrics, University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is an autosomal dominant inherited dis- Switzerland, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzer- ease caused by mutations in the Runt gene RUNX2 (alias CBFA1; land, 5Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, OMIM 600211). No other candidate genes or loci are known from fam- 6Division of Clinical Immunology, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 7Clin- ily studies. In a cohort of 19 Danish CCD patients, pathogenic RUNX2 ic for Cardiovascular Surgery, University Hospital, Berne, Switzerland. mutations were found in 16 cases. This represents a higher mutation Aortic dissection (AD) is a life-threatening condition associated with detection rate than reported by similar studies (1). The mutations rep- high rates of morbidity and mortality. AD can occur non-syndromic, resent six missense mutations, two nonsense mutations and four shift e.g. in the case of familial thoracic aortic aneurysms leading to type mutations plus two large chromosomal deletions. Eight mutations were A dissections (TAAD), or in association with genetic syndromes, such novel and six were known mutations, and two mutations were found as Marfan syndrome (MFS) caused by FBN1 mutations, Loeys-Dietz in two families each. The large deletions at 6p12.3-21.1 represent 500 syndrome caused by TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 mutations, and vascular Kbp and 750 Kbp respectively and included exon 1 to 6 of RUNX2 and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS IV) caused by COL3A1 mutations. Al- the proximal located SUPT3H gene. The point mutations were mainly though mutations in FBN1, TGFBR1, and TGFBR2 account for the found in the Runt domain and the nuclear leading sequence of RUNX2. majority of AD cases referred to us for molecular genetic testing, we Two repeat variations were found in the poly alanine and glutamine have encountered negative genetic testing results in a large group of repeats in three cases. These were judged to be non-pathogenic that patients, suggesting the involvement of other genes, e.g. COL3A1, additional functional mutations were found in the coding regions. ACTA2 or MYH11, as the genetic cause of AD. In this study, we have In total 9 different cohorts of CCD patients including this work, repre- assessed the impact of COL3A1 mutations in patients with suspected sent 199 families and RUNX2 mutations were found in 124 of these, MFS in whom mutation screening in FBN1 and/or TGFBR1 and TGF- which represent 61% compared to the 84% in this study. Identification BR2 revealed no disease-causing sequence variation. MLPA analy- of the two large deletions by mutation screening of CCD patients has sis of 133 unrelated patients identified the heterozygous deletion of not been reported before and suggests that future mutation studies the entire COL3A1 gene in one patient with abdominal AD. Subse- must include analyses for large chromosomal deletions or duplica- quent microarray analyses and sequencing of breakpoints revealed tions. the deletion size of 3,408,306bp. Furthermore, DNA sequencing of 29 unrelated patients identified two novel exonic COL3A1 sequence vari- P12.038 ants (c.1105G>A and c.1854A>T). Our data not only emphasize the A novel VPs13B mutation in two brothers with cohen syndrome, importance of screening for COL3A1 mutations in comprehensive ge- cutis verticis gyrata and sensorineural deafness netic testing of AD patients with suspected MFS not fulfilling the Ghent A. Mégarbané1,2, R. Slim3, G. Nürnberg4, I. Ebermann5, P. Nürnberg4, H. J. criteria, but also extend the molecular etiology of EDS IV by providing Bolz5; hitherto unreported evidence for true haploinsufficiency of COL3A1. 1Unité de Génétique Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Université Saint-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 2Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France, 3Departments of Hu- P12.040 man Genetics and Obstetrics Gynecology, McGill University Health Centre, Variant phenotype in individuals with severe cYP 21 mutations Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Cologne Center for Genomics and Institute for Genet- M. Kocova, V. Anastasovska, E. Sukarova-Angelovska, E. Kochova; ics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia(CAH) is a common autosomal reces- We have previously described a syndrome characterized by micro- sive disease most frequently occurring due to mutations in the CYP cephaly, cutis verticis gyrata (CVG), retinitis pigmentosa, cataracts, 21 gene. Several “severe” mutations are reported to cause severe salt hearing loss and mental retardation (MIM #605685) in a non-consan- wasting(SW) form of the disease. However, homozygous carriers of guineous Lebanese family. In view of the rarity of the disorder and the mutations without clinical symptoms have been described. the high rate of inbreeding in Lebanese, we assumed an autosomal Aim. To analyze severe CYP 21 mutations in patients with CAH and recessive trait inherited from a common ancestor. Indeed, genome- their relatives and to analyze genotype/phenotype correlation. wide linkage analysis resulted in a single region on chromosome 8q22 Material and methods. Sixteen children (6 boys and 10 girls) with CAH with homozygosity by descent in the patients, comprising the Cohen from 12 families were diagnosed with salt wasting CAH. The diagnosis syndrome (CS) gene, VPS13B. We identified a novel homozygous was confirmed by high 17-OHProgesterone levels. splice site mutation that activates a cryptic acceptor site in exon 52. Molecular analysis was performed in all patients and 22 first degree CVG and deafness have never been reported in CS. This may reflect relatives with ACRS-PCR method detecting 11 frequent mutations. a variant of CS. Alternatively, there may be an overlap of genetic con- Total of 66 chromosomes were analyzed, 32 in patients, and 34 in ditions: Offspring from consanguineous parents may be homozygous relatives. for mutations in unlinked genes. Deafness and CVG could be caused Results. Intron 2 splicing mutation (nucleotide 656) was the most by mutations in different loci. However, our linkage data do not sug- common (33/66=50%), followed by codon 318(exon 8) mutation gest another causative locus. Another mutated gene or modifier locus (15/66=22.9%). Complex mutations were present in two children and may segregate in cis and be responsible for deafness and CVG, but two relatives. All 16 children with SW had severe mutations. However, no deafness locus maps to our 8q22 region. In contrast, the frequent 6 relatives were also homozygous for severe or had complex muta- association of CVG with mental retardation suggests that it may be a tions without symptoms. Prenatal diagnosis helped prompt treatment rare manifestation of CS. The mapping approach conducted here can of two newborn boys. Four of the relatives had I2 homozygous splicing serve as a paradigm in rare recessive phenotypes: The prevalence of mutation. “Leaky” mutation might be an explanation in these cases. homozygosity for the causative mutations can also be high in families However, the complex mutations are more difficult to explain. without documented consanguinity, due to a distant common ancestor, Conclusion. Although severe mutations were associated with the SW especially in small populations with a high rate of inbreeding. form, it is difficult to explain the homozygosity in healthy relatives. This complicates the prenatal diagnosis and counseling. Further analysis in individuals with no genotype/phenotype correlation is warranted.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  P12.041 3Instituto Pediatrico del Corazon Hospital “12 de Octubre”, Madrid, Spain. the study of the CYPA gene mutations in children with Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) consists of a heterogeneous congenital adrenal hyperplasia from Republic Bashkortostan group of cardiac malformations with various degrees of underdevelop- (Russia) ment of the left heart-aorta complex. It is one of the most severe con- V. L. Akhmetova1, Z. F. Ramova2, O. A. Malievsky2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; genital heart diseases and it’s usually lethal during early infancy. Most 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir hypotheses formulated to explain the pathogenesis of HLHS assume State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. that there is a primary anatomic/genetic abnormality which results in Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a group of autosomal reces- low flow through the left heart and it is the diminished flow that ulti- sive disorders of adrenal steroidgenesis in which 21-hydroxylase defi- mately leads to growth failure of the left sided structures. The molecu- ciency accounts for over 95% of cases. lar causes of HLHS are unclear. A recent report of mutations in basic We studied 68 patients with CAH from 68 families. The patients were helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor HAND1 found in hearts divided into 2 groups according to clinical findings: salt wasting (SW) with HLHS has suggested that in hypoplastic human hearts HAND1 (N=41) and simple virilizing (SV) (N=27). We screened CAH-patients function is impaired. Because of the profound implication of this find- for 11 the most common mutations in the CYP21A2 gene: large gene ing, we attempted to replicate it using peripheral blood samples from deletion or large gene conversion (delA2/LGC), G110del8nt, P30L, 46 patients and 8 different cardiac samples obtained from 5 patients I2splice, I172N, V281L, Q318X, R356W, E6cluster, F306+1nt . with HLHS who underwent cardiac surgery. Mutations of the CYP21A2 gene were revealed in 84.51% of the studied Newborns and children (25% female) with HLHS undergo a complete CAH-chromosomes. The mutations were distributed as follows: delA2/ evaluation to determine the type of defect and the potential presence LGC (33.1%), R356W (19.72%), I2splice (13.38%), I172N (8.45%), of extracardiac defect. The mean age at surgical intervention was 8 Q318X (7.04%), P30L (1.41%) and V281L (1.41%). In 15.49% CAH- days old. We sequenced the entire HAND1 gene starting from genom- chromosomes mutations were not identified. We found 8 patients who ic DNA extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes and from cardiac carried 3 mutations, two from which formed a cluster: Q318X+R356W samples. No evidence of germline or somatic mutations was found in (N=5), I172N+Q318X (N=2), I172N+R356W (N=1). This complex of this study. alleles probably resulted from large conversions or multiple mutations Germline and somatic mutations in HAND1 do not seem to be a fre- events. quent cause of abnormal cardiac development at basis of HLHS. In patients with SW form the most frequent mutation was delA2/LGC This work is supported by Telethon grant GGP07235 (39.08%), while R356W, I2splice and Q318X were found with lower frequencies (25.29%, 16.09% and 10.35%, respectively). In patients P12.044 with SV form the most common mutations were delA2/LGC (25%) A chinese patient with congenital nephrotic syndrome of the identified only in compound heterozygous state and I172N (17.86%), Finnish type caused by compound heterozygous mutations in followed by R356W (10.71%) and I2splice (8.93%). Thus, we have NPHS been able to detect the spectrum of diagnostic significant CYP21A2 Y. P. Yuen1, W. K. Siu2, S. C. Lau3, A. Y. Chan4, C. W. Lam5; gene mutations typical for SW and for SV forms of CAH patients. 1Department of Pathology, Hong Kong, China, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Princess Margaret Hospital, Hong Kong, China, 3Department of P12.042 Paediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, Princess Margaret Hospital, Hong Kong, mutation screening of cYP1B1 Gene in North indian congenital China, 4Department of Pathology, Princess Margaret Hospital, Hong Kong, Glaucoma Patients China, 5Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, M. Tanwar1, T. Dada2, R. Sihota2, V. Gupta2, R. Dada1; China. 1Deptt. of Anatomy, AllMS, New Delhi, India, 2Dr. R.P.Centre for Ophthalmic Sci- Mutations in NPHS1 (OMIM no.256300), NPHS2 (OMIM no.600995), ences, AllMS, New Delhi, India. WT1 (OMIM no.194080 and 136680) and LAMB2 (OMIM no.609049) Primary congenital glaucoma is an inherited ocular congenital disorder are known to account for the majority of early-onset hereditary ne- that can result in permanent blindness. Its prevalence varies across phrotic syndromes. Our patient was the first child of non-consanguin- ethnic communities, ranging from 1 in 10,000-20,000 in the western eous Chinese parents. She was born prematurely at 34 weeks with populations to 1 in 3300 in Southern India. Aim of this study was to a birth weight of 1.98 kg. The placenta weighed more than 53% of investigate the predominant mutations in CYP1B1 gene in north-In- the birth weight. She was noted to have facial puffiness, abdominal dian PCG patients. Fifty PCG patients and 50 ethically matched con- distension and pitting edema in her extremities on Day 13 after birth. trols without any ocular disease were enrolled in the study. CYP1B1 Nephrotic syndrome was confirmed by laboratory investigations. The gene was screened for six most prevalent mutations (Termination at karyotype was 46,XX and no ocular abnormalities were noted. Left 223, Gly61Glu, Pro193Leu, Glu229Lys, Arg368His and Arg390Cys) by nephrectomy was performed when the patient was 4 months old for PCR-RFLP method. On PCR-RFLP analysis total 20/50(40%) showed deteriorating symptoms in spite of daily albumin infusion and the use either of these mutation. Ter@223 was found in 18%, R390C in 16% of indomethacin and ACEI. Ultrastructural examination of the removed and R368H in 8% patients. On DNA sequencing R390C mutation was kidney showed narrow slits and absence of slit diaphragm. The en- found to be R390H and three novel (L24R, F190L and G329D) muta- tire coding sequences and flanking introns in NPHS1, NPHS2 and tions were identified. Because of Ter@223 mutation a functional null WT1 were analyzed by direct sequencing. No pathologic mutations protein is produced. Arginine residues at 368 and 390 are highly con- were identified in NPHS2 and WT1. However, two mutations, c.2172_ served in cytochrome 450 proteins. These map to helix K, which is 2173delTG and c.2783C>A, were detected in the NPHS1 gene. The 2- involved in proper protein folding and heme binding. E229 amino acid nucleotide deletion is predicted to create premature stop codon result- (aa) residue are also conserved in different cytochrome P450 proteins. ing in a truncated protein of 737 amino acids (E725GfsX13). The latter E229K mutation can cause conformational changes in the protein. The mutation changes codon 928 from serine (TCG) to a stop codon (TAG) most prevalent CYP1B1 mutation in our population is Ter@223 (18%) (p.S928X). Both were novel mutations not described before. This is followed by R390H (16%) while from other studies from south India the first case of genetically-confirmed congenital nephrotic syndrome R368H was the most prevalent CYP1B1 mutation. Our data is different of the Finnish type in Hong Kong Chinese. from southern population it may be because of genetic heterogeneity of the disease and different evolutionary history of both populations. P12.045 A novel mutation of the ELA2 gene in a patient with severe P12.043 congenital neutropenia Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: is it all in HAND? M. Maschan1, M. Kurnikova2, A. Maschan1, I. Shagina2, D. Shagin2,3; D. Barachetti1, D. Marchetti1, F. Seddio2, L. Boni3, A. R. Lincesso1, S. Villagra3, 1Federal Research Clinical Center for pediatric hematology, oncology and im- A. Mendoza3, L. Pezzoli1, L. Galletti2, P. Ferrazzi2, M. Iascone1; munology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Evrogen Joint Stock Company, Mos- 1Genetica Molecolare - USSD Lab. Genetica Medica, Ospedali Riuniti, Ber- cow, Russian Federation, 3Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic gamo, Italy, 2Dipartimento Cardiovascolare, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy, Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is an inborn disorder of granu- lopoiesis. Mutations of the ELA2 gene encoding neutrophil elastaseMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  are responsible for most cases of SCN and cyclic neutropenia (CN), a the obvious reduced penetrance of MHS make the determination of related but milder disorder of granulopoiesis. We found a novel muta- the pathogenicity of missense mutations and the subsequent counsel- tion in ELA2 in Russian patient with severe congenital neutropenia. ing of patients challenging. The proband was a 2 year old boy, the manifestation of disease oc- curred at the age of one month with the first of multiple recurrent epi- P12.048 sodes of tonsillitis, bacterial infections of skin and stomatitis. Absolute A novel smc1A gene mutation in a male with mild cornelia de neutrophil count below 0,5*109/l was recorded on multiple occasions. Lange syndrome Serum immunoglobuline level, hemoglobin and platelet levels were F. J. Ramos1,2, M. C. Gil-Rodríguez1, M. P. Ribate1, V. Rebage3, J. C. de normal. Bone marrow aspiration showed early arrest of granulocyte Karam1, M. Arnedo1, A. L. Díaz1, A. Pié1, B. Puisac1, J. Pié1; maturation. Family history was unremarkable. The clinical diagnosis of 1Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Hospital sporadic case of severe congenital neutropenia was thus established. Clínico Universitario “Lozano Blesa”, Zaragoza, Spain, 3Hospital Infantil “Miguel Genomic DNA amplification of the coding exons of the ELA2 gene Servet”, Zaragoza, Spain. and their flanking regions were amplified from genomic DNA by PCR Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) (OMIM 122470 and 300590) is and sequenced. The mutation in heterozygous state was revealed in an inherited multisystem developmental disorder characterized by dis- exon 4, and PCR fragment of exon 4 was additionally cloned and se- tinctive dysmorphic craniofacial features, growth and cognitive impair- quenced. The novel mutation is a 1-bp deletion in exon 4 (c.545delG) ment and limb malformations. Since 2004, mutations in three genes causing frame shift and introduction of a premature stop codon (8 co- (NIPBL, SMC1A and SMC3) of the cohesin complex and its regulators dons downstream of the mutation). This frame shift mutation remove have been found in affected patients. To date, 11 different mutations in the C-terminal portion of the molecule probably resulting in destabiliza- 14 unrelated patients have been reported in the X-linked SMC1A gene. tion of the protein structure near the active site. Here, we identified a novel sporadic SMC1A mutation (p.R711Q) in a 14-month-old male who had characteristic but mild facial CdLS ap- P12.046 pearance, microcephaly, postnatal growth retardation, mild to moder- connexin 26 gene in mutations autosomal recessive non- ate psychomotor delay, mild congenital heart defect (ASD and PDA) syndromic hearing losses and 2-3 syndactyly in the feet. The mutation altered a highly conserved Z. Ocak, A. Tatar, A. Yesilyurt, S. Öztas; residue and was not detected in his parents or in 50 control individu- Medical Genetics,Medical Faculty, Ataturk University, Erzurum, Turkey. als. It was located at the SMC coiled-coil domain and we hypothesize Up to day, about 34 genes and more than 100 loci have been detected that it may affect its angulation within the protein. This case supports in the etiology of non-syndromic hearing loss. In the result of mutation previously published work reporting that patients with mutations in the scannings carried out in various communities, it has been indicated SMC1A gene show a milder physical phenotype, generally without se- that GJB2 (gap junction B2) gene mutations are responsible for nearly vere limb malformations, than patients with mutations in the autosomal 50% of the cases with autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing NIPBL gene. loss. Fifty patients with hearing loss and 50 healthy volunteers were This work was supported by a grant from the Ministerio de Sanidad y included in this study. Additionally, The parents having doubtful band Consumo of Spain (Ref. PI061343) and from the Diputación General pattern in the analysis of Single Strand Conformational Polymorphism de Aragón (Ref. B20). (SSCP) were also included in this study. The ages of the subjects were between 15 and 35 years, and the study protocol was explained to P12.049 all participants, and their approvals were taken. In 13 individuals with mutation spectrum of cYBB gene in Russian families with X- autosomal reccessive non-syndromic hearing loss and with different linked chronic granulomatous disease. band patterns by SSCP and PCR-RLFP techniques, the existence of V. V. Zabnenkova1, I. G. Sermyagina1, A. V. Polyakov1, I. V. Kondratenko2; W77X, V95M, 176-19del16, 167delT, 235delC and 35delG mutations 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian has been also investigated. The purpose of this study is to scan GJB2 Children’s Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation. mutations, having an influence on non-syndromic autosomal recessive Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is genetically heterogeneous hearing loss, in our region. immunodeficiency disorder characterized by a defect of intracellular bacterial killing in phagocytes due to reducing of activity of NADPH P12.047 oxidase complex. CGD is characterized by recurrent life-threatening Ryanodine receptor type  mutation analysis in malignant bacterial and fungial infections, granuloma formation. The most com- hyperthermia susceptibility type 1, central core disease, and mon form of chronic granulomatous disease is caused by mutations in multiminicore disease. the CYBB gene accounting for about 70% of all CGD cases. Located E. Kamsteeg, T. Hofste, H. Scheffer; on chromosome Xp21.1 CYBB gene encodes the β-subunit of cyto- Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. chrome b558(gp91-phox), spans 30 kb, contains 13 exons. The ryanodine receptor type 1 (RYR1) gene encodes the skeletal- We have investigated 12 unrelated families with Chronic granuloma- muscle ryanodine receptor that is fundamental in excitation-contrac- tous disease. The search for CYBB gene mutations was performed by tion coupling and calcium homeostasis. RYR1 comprises 106 exons direct DNA sequencing analysis. and encodes a protein of 5,038 amino acids. Mutations in RYR1 are The analysis of CYBB gene showed 7 new and 3 reported mutations associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 1 (MHS1) on 12 chromosomes. The CYBB gene total deletion was registered on and with core myopathies, including central core disease (CCD) and 2 chromosomes, novel c.27delG - on 1 chromosome, novel c.226delC multiminicore disease (MmD). The inheritance of these disorders is - on 2 chromosomes, novel c.177C>A (p.Cys59Stop) - on 1 chro- complex: MHS1 shows a dominant inheritance pattern, MmD a reces- mosome, novel c.565_568delATTA - on 1 chromosome, c.676C>T sive inheritance pattern, while CCD can be inherited both in a reces- (p.Arg226Stop) - on 1 chromosome, c.935T>G (p.Met312Arg) - on 1 sive and in a dominant fashion. Additionally, maternal allele-silencing chromosome, novel c.1167delG - on 1 chromosome, novel c.1524_ of RYR1 may complicate this picture. MHS1 and CCD, though allelic 1527delGACT - on 1 chromosome, novel c.898-1ntG>A (IVS8as- disorders, do also share some specific mutations. To date, over 250 1ntG>A) - on 1 chromosome. The deletion c.27delG was de novo mu- different pathogenic mutations are known, of which less than 8% clear- tation: the patient’s mother was not heterozygous for it. ly is an inactivating (nonsense/splice/frame-shift) mutation. 10 CYBB mutations have been registered in this investigation. Most Recently, we have implemented sequence analysis of all 106 exons mutations were distributed throughout the 13 exons or at exon-intron of RYR1 and its splice sites in MHS, CCD and MmD. We have identi- boundaries, 6 of these mutations were unique. According to obtained fied 16 likely-pathogenic alleles, of which two clearly are inactivating. data we concluded that the direct DNA sequencing analysis is the best Of these 16 alleles, 11 are novel mutations, and 1 allele harboring method for diagnostics for Chronic granulomatous desease. three missense mutations has been found in four families not known to be related. In one CCD patient, a mutation well known in MHS1 (p.Arg614Cys) and a splice-site mutation (c.14364+1G>T) were ob- served in trans orientation. These data indicate that mutations specific to the Dutch population exist. The complexity of the inheritance andMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 P12.050 seau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Centre de référence des surdités génétiques, CYPA gene mutations in Portuguese cAH patients AP-HP, CHU Trousseau, Paris, France. B. Carvalho1, C. J. Marques1, J. Barceló1, A. C. Almeida1, S. Fernandes1, S. F. Auditory Neuropathy/ Auditory Dyssynchrony (AN/AD) is an hearing Witchel2, M. Sousa3, M. Fontoura4, D. Carvalho5, D. Pignatelli5, A. Barros1, F. impairment characterized by severely distorted or absent brainstem Carvalho1; evoked potential caused by an abnormal transmission of the auditory 1Dept Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Divi- signal to the brainstem and preserved otoacoustic emissions due to sion of Pediatric Endocrinology, Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, University normal function of the outer hair cells. Various genetic and non ge- of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 3Lab of Cell Biology, Institute of netic aetiologies of AN have been identified but the vast majority of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4Dept the cases are still unexplained. A worsening of the hearing defect con- Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital S. João, Porto, Portugal, 5Dept Endocrinol- comitant with fever has been reported in few cases. The causes of this ogy, Hospital S. João, Porto, Portugal. temperature dependent auditory neuropathy are unknown. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a common inherited autoso- We report a consanguineous family with three siblings affected by a mal recessive disorder of adrenal hormone biosynthesis due to muta- temperature dependent auditory neuropathy. The patients (10, 9 and 7 tions in the CYP21A2 gene, which encodes the enzyme 21-hydroxy- years old) had normal hearing to mild hearing impairment with normal lase. CAH is responsible for different degree of virilisation of external otoacoustic emissions and impaired auditory brainstem responses. genitalia in newborn girls and, in its most severe form, can be fatal if The family history describes transient hearing loss associated with not treated adequately. Patients with the mild, nonclassic form of the fever episodes. Imaging did not found any cochlear nerves or brain disease have less severe symptoms, associated with signs of postna- abnormalities. The family genotype was consistent with linkage to tal androgen excess. Genotyping for ten of the most frequent muta- the DFNB9/OTOF region. Molecular analysis of the 48 exons and tions was performed in 84 Portuguese CAH patients; 10 salt-wasters, intron-exon boundaries of OTOF reveals a novel mutation. The mu- 5 simple-virilizers and 69 non-classical patients. The patients were tation p.Glu1803del, in exon 44 of OTOF was found homozygous in diagnosed by a dosage of 17-hydroxyprogesterone above 10 ng/ml the patients and segregates with the hearing impairment in the family. either in basal conditions or after an ACTH 0,25mg IV Test. A variety Otoferlin is a protein expressed in the inner hair cells and is essential of genotyping techniques were utilized to detect these ten mutations. for the synaptic vesicle fusion. The new mutation described here, is CYP21 mutations were detected in 91.7% (77/84) of the patients. located in the C2F otoferlin domain and is associated with an unusual Among CAH patients, 9.5% presented two or more CYP21 mutations. phenotype compared to previous reported cases of patient affected by The most frequent mutations identified in our population were V281L OTOF mutations. (41.7%) and deletions/conversions involving the promoter region of the CYP21 gene (28.3%). A decreased frequency of IVS2-12C/A>G P12.053 mutation (5.6%) was the most characteristic feature of this population, DFNB1 locus mutation analysis in Latvian patients with suggesting some particularities of the Portuguese population regard- nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss ing the mutations frequency. O. Sterna1,2, I. Grinfelde1, N. Pronina1, D. Bauze1, Z. Krumina1, L. Kornejeva1, B. Lace1, S. Kuske3, R. Lugovska1; P12.051 1Medical Genetics clinic, University Children’s Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Rigas investigation of genetic aspects of congenital and early Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 3Latvian Childrens` Hearing centre, Riga, childhood deafness in special school for children with impaired Latvia. hearing of Kirov region, Russia. Background: Hearing loss is the most common birth defect and the A. A. Osetrova1, Y. I. Sharonova2, T. G. Rossinskaya1, R. A. Zinchenko2; most prevalent sensorineural disorder in developed countries. More 1Kirov Regional Teaching Children’s Hospital, Kirov, Russian Federation, 2Re- than half of prelingual deafness cases are due to genetic factors. search Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, About 70% of all hereditary deafness cases are classified as nonsyn- Moscow, Russian Federation. dromic and recessive. Two special schools for children with deafness of Kirov region were Approximately 50% of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing studied. 94 children with severe hearing loss from Kirov school and loss can be attributed to the disorder DFNB1, caused by mutations in 57 children with mild and moderate hearing loss from Sovietsk school the genes GJB2 and GJB6 (which encode proteins connexin 26 and were examined. The examination included ENT physician examination, connexin 30). DFNB1 has digenic pattern of inheritance. The 35delG genetic consultations, and determination of 35delG mutation in GJB2 mutation in GJB2 gene is the most common mutation in DNFB1 in gene and two big deletions in GJB6-gene, 342-kb (GJB6-D13S1854) many populations. and 309-kb (GJB6-D13S1830). Non-syndromic deafness was diag- Materials: We obtained 151 DNA samples from patients with prelingual nosed in 140 cases; hereditary syndromal pathology was detected in hearing loss in whom syndromic forms and environmental causes of 11 children. 35delG mutation in GJB2 gene was discovered in 45 chil- deafness had been excluded, their relatives and individuals with hear- dren (32.14%) with non-syndromic deafness (30 in homozygous state ing loss positive family history. and 15 in heterozygous state). 342-kb and 309-kb deletions in GJB6 Methods: DNA was extracted from whole blood. The GJB2 exon 2 gene were not detected. All the above patients with non-syndromic analysis was performed using PCR, enzymatic restriction and auto- deafness were divided into 2 groups. Group 1 with a family history of mated sequencing. Analysis of del(GJB6-D13S1830) and del(GJB6- deafness (28 children), and group 2 (112 children) without a family his- D13S1854) in GJB6 was performed by multiplex-PCR. tory of deafness. In group 1, 11 children (39.29%) had 35delG muta- Results: 65 unrelated patients were screened for the GJB2 mutations. tion in homozygous state, 3 had heterozygous state. Thus, the rate of Four different mutations in the GJB2 gene have been identified in Lat- 35delG mutation was 50%, severity of hearing impairment was severe vian DFNB1 patients: 35delG, 311-324del14, 235delC and M34T. One and profound. In group 2, 35delG mutation was revealed in 25.0% of heterozygous 51del12insA mutation was detected in unaffected indi- cases (18 in homozygous and 10 in heterozygous state). Of the above vidual with positive family history. 18 homozygous patients, 6 patients had an additional combination Two causative GJB2 mutations were found in 37 patients (56%), 25 of non-hereditary factors. Of the above 10 heterozygous patients, 6 patients had no GJB2 mutations, three patients are heterozygous for patients had an additional combination of non-hereditary factors. The one GJB2 mutation and the cause of impairment remains unclear. findings of the study show the necessity of DNA-diagnosis not only in We have started testing for two GJB6 deletions and the results are in case of a family history of deafness but also in non-hereditary factors. process. P12.052 P12.054 Deaf by fever! Identification of a novel mutation in RPS19 in a patient with Y. Nguyen1, D. Feldmann2, L. Jonard2, N. Loundon1, I. Rouillon1, E. Garabe- Diamond-Blackfan anemia dian1, F. Denoyelle1, S. Marlin3,4; M. Kurnikova1, M. Maschan2, I. Kalinina2, D. Shagin1,3; 1Service d’ORL pédiatrique et de Chirurgie Cervico-faciale, AP-HP, CHU Trous- 1Evrogen Joint Stock Company, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal Re- seau, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Biologie Moléculaire, CHU search Clinical Center for pediatric hematology, oncology and immunology, Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU Trous- Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Shemyakin and OvchinnikovMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. EVER2 gene localized on chromosome 17q25 in EV1 locus have been Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a rare, pure red blood cell aplasia identified to underline EV among 75% of patients with different ethnic of childhood caused by an intrinsic defect in erythropoietic progeni- origins. tors. Malformations occur in about 40% of patients. Mutations in the In the present study, we report clinical, histological and molecular in- gene encoding ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19) are found in 25% of vestigations of 4 EV Tunisian patients. patients. We found a novel nonsense mutation in RPS19 in a patient Clinical examination revealed three types of lesions among examined with DBA. The proband was a 1 year old girl presented with severe patients: flat warty, pityriasis versicolor-like macules and seborrheic anemia at birth. Transfusion dependence persisted into infancy. Ane- like changes. Histological observations of EV lesions showed hyper- mia was hyporegenerative with absent reticulocytes and slight mac- keratosis, hypergranulosis, acanthosis and papillomatosis. The kera- rocytosis. Peripheral blood platelet and granulocyte count was within tinocytes are vacuolated and show a clear blue-grey pale cytoplasm normal limits. Bone marrow aspiration showed absent erythroid series and a central pyknotic nucleus. The clinical and histological findings with normal granulocytic and megacaryocyte compartment. Bone mar- showed no squamous cell carcinoma. row PCR analysis for parvovirus B19 was negative. The patient had no As for several genodermatosis, similar mutational spectrum has been skeletal abnormalities. Her family history was unremarkable. The clini- identified among Algerian and Tunisian patients, EV Tunisian patients cal diagnosis of congenital pure red cell aplasia was established. Ge- were screened for the “Algerian mutations” (280 C→T and 754 or 755 nomic DNA amplification and sequencing of the coding exons and their del T) within EVER1 and EVER2, respectively. flanking regions of the RPS19 gene revealed a nonsense mutation None of the two Algerian explored mutations was found, suggesting in exon 3 in heterozygous state: c.156 G>A (Trp52Stop). Two other that Tunisian patients do not share the same mutations as those de- mutations in the same codon have been previously described: c.154 scribed among Algerians. Genotyping of HPV associated to EV in Tu- T>C (Trp52Arg) and c.155 G>A (Trp52Stop) (Willig, Draptchinskaia, nisian patients will be identified in order to determine the etiology of the 1999), and our data are consistent with identified “a hot spot” for mis- virus involving in the disease and to establish a possible phenotype- sense/nonsense mutations between codons 52-62, a highly conserved genotype correlation. region likely to have a critical role in RPS19 function. P12.057 P12.055 Tyrosinemia type 1: identification of a novel mutation in two Histological and molecular investigation of a dystrophic unrelated individuals epidermolysis bullosa tunisian family with phenotypic variability Z. Bahmani1, S. Zare Karizi1, G. R. Babamohamadi1, M. Karimipoor2, M. T. H. Ouragini1, F. Cherif1,2, S. Kassar3,4, G. Floriddia5, M. Pascucci5, W. Daoud2, Akbari1,3; A. Ben Osman-Dhahri2, S. Boubaker3, D. Castiglia5, S. Abdelhak1; 1Tehran Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Bio- 1« Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases » Research Unit, Institut technology Research Center , Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Re- Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Service de Dermatologie, Hôpital La Rabta public of Iran, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Tarbiat Modares University, de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Service d’Anatomo-Pathologie, Institut Pasteur de Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 4”Study of Hereditary Keratinization Disorders” Research Tyrosinemia type I results from deficiency of the enzyme fumarylace- Unit, Hôpital La Rabta de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 5Laboratorio di Biologia Moleco- toacetate hydrolase (FAH), encoded by the FAH gene. This gene is lo- lare e Cellulare, Istituto Dermopatico dell’Immacolata-IRCCS, Roma, Italy. cated at 15q23-25 and contains 14 exons. Untreated tyrosinemia type Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa (DEB) is inherited in both autoso- I usually presents either in young infants with severe liver involvement mal dominant DDEB and autosomal recessive manner RDEB, both of or later in the first year with liver dysfunction and renal tubular dysfunc- which result from mutations in the type VII collagen gene (COL7A1), tion associated with growth failure and rickets. Tyrosinemia type I is in- leading to the dermal-epidermal junction fragility. DEB is characterized herited in an autosomal recessive manner. The four common FAH mu- by inter and intrafamilial phenotypic variability. We investigated, here, tations (IVS12+5G>A, IVS6-1G>T, IVS7-6T>G, p.Pro261Leu) account a large multiplex Tunisian family with five affected members: four af- for approximately 60% of mutations in the general US population. fected by the pretibial DEB form and one by the generalized RDEB. Here we report two unrelated Iranian patients with a novel mutation in Indirect immunofluorescence (IF) with the antibody LH7:2 against col- the FAH mutation. The whole FAH gene of the patients were screened lagen VII and electron microscopy (EM) analyses were performed. by direct sequencing and it was established that mutation is: c.709 C The members of the family were genotyped with five markers flanking to T (R237X) at exon 9 of the gene in homozygous form. This muta- COL7A1, and screening for the deleterious mutation by DHPLC and tion leads to a premature stop codon (R237X), and can be considered direct sequencing. disease causing. Molecular investigation showed that all family members, unaffected and So far limited number of mutations in the FAH gene have been report- affected by the pretibial form, were heterozygous for the c.7178delT ed in type I tyrosinemia patients. Most of them are single-nucleotide mutation, except for the generalized RDEB member who was homo- substitutions occurring in the splice sites. Most of the mutations in FAH zygous. Moreover, IF showed no correlation with the affected and gene occur in a particular region between residues 230 and 250. This the healthy status of the heterozygous individuals. These results are area seems to be a hotspot region within the gene. The mutation iden- suggestive for an autosomal semidominant model of inheritance with tified in this study also resides within this hotspot. This novel mutation incomplete penetrance and variable expression for the identified muta- was shared by two unrelated individuals inhabiting different locations tion. No genotype phenotype correlation was observed suggesting the in Iran. As a result, we assume it might be a common mutation in our existence of other genetic determinants influencing dermo-epidermal population. junction cohesion. P12.058 P12.056 spectrum of LDLR mutations and role of PCSK as a modifier Genetic investigation of Epidermodysplasia verruciformis in four gene in familiar hypercholesterolemia in Lebanon tunisian patients M. AbiFadel1,2, J. Rabès1,3, M. Varret1, C. Junien1, A. Munnich1, C. Boileau1,4; O. Messaoud Ezzeddine1, S. Kassar2, C. Charfeddine1, M. Mokni3, A. Ben Os- 1INSERM U781, Paris cedex 15, France, 2Université Saint-Joseph, Lebanon, man Dhahri3, S. Boubaker2, S. Abdelhak1; 3Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Génétique Moléculaire; hôpital Ambroise Paré, 1Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases Research Unit (MIGOD), France, 4Laboratoire de Biochimie et de génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Am- Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Anatomo-Pathology Department, broise Paré, France. Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 3La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia. Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH), a major risk for Epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EV; MIM 226400) is a rare genoder- coronary heart disease, is associated with mutations in the genes en- matosis that is clinically characterized by flat, wart-like and pityriasis coding the low-density lipoproteins receptor (LDLR), its ligand apolipo- versicolor-like lesions. The disease is associated with high risk of skin protein B, and PCSK9 (Proprotein Convertase Subtilisin kexin 9), the cancer. EV results of a genetically determined abnormal susceptibility 3rd gene that we identified in the disease in 2003. Familial hypercho- to a specific oncogenic group of related human papillomavirus (HPV), lesterolemia (FH) caused by mutation in the LDLR gene is the most usually HPV type 5. frequent form of ADH. The identification of genes that modify the phe- Recently, homozygous mutations in either of two adjacent EVER1 or notype of FH is very difficult because more than 1000 LDLR mutationsMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  have been reported worldwide with different impact on the severity of a p.Glu281X truncation in the active site of FBP1 was discovered in the disease. patients from two families. The newly identified mutations in the FBP1 In this study, we characterize the spectrum of the mutations causing gene are predicted to produce FBP1 deficiency. These mutations are FH in Lebanon, where the incidence of FH is particularly high, presum- the only known genetic causes of FBP deficiency in Arab patients. The ably as a result of a founder effect. We confirm the very high frequency p.Cys39_Thr40dup is the first reported amino acid duplication in FBP of the LDLR p.Cys681X mutation that accounts for 81.5 % of the FH deficiency patients. We conclude that this study provides a strong ra- Lebanese probands recruited and identify other less frequent muta- tionale for genetic testing of FBP deficient patients of Arab ethnicity for tions in the LDLR. Finally, we show that the p.Leu21dup, an in frame recurrent or novel mutations in the FBP1 gene. insertion of one leucine to the stretch of 9 leucines in exon 1 of PCSK9, known to be associated with lower LDL-cholesterol levels in general P12.061 populations, is also associated with a reduction of LDL-cholesterol lev- Association of the neonatal Fc receptor gene VNtR els in FH patients sharing the p.C681X mutation in the LDLR. Thus, polymorphism with primary defects of antibody production by studying for the first time the impact of PCSK9 polymorphism on B. Ravcukova1, L. Grodecka1, J. Nejedlik1, M. Plotena1, J. Litzmann2, T. Frei- LDL-cholesterol levels of FH patients carrying a same LDLR muta- berger3; tion, we show that PCSK9 might constitute a modifier gene in familial 1Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic, hypercholesterolemia. 2Institute of Clinical Immunology and Allergology, St. Anne’s University Hospital and Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Centre for Cardiovascular P12.059 Surgery and Transplantation,Institute of Clinical Immunology and Allergology, Heterozygous mutation in mEFV have a potential triallelic effect St. Anne’s University Hospital and Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. on patients with two mutations in mVK gene? Introduction: The neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) for IgG has been char- M. Amorini, R. Gallizzi, D. Comito, C. Di Bella, V. Procopio, L. Grasso, F. Pu- acterized in the transfer of passive humoral imunity from mother to fe- gliatti, P. Romeo, C. Salpietro, L. Rigoli; tus. It transports IgG from maternal circulation to the fetal capillaries of Department of Pediatrics-Policlinico Universitario, Messina, Italy. the placenta villi. Moreover, FcRn protects IgG from degradation and Background: Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an autosomal thus prolongs a half-life of IgG antibodies in the serum. A variable num- recessive disorder characterized by fever and synovial inflammation. ber of tandem repeats (VNTR) polymorphism in the promoter region FMF is caused by mutations affecting both alleles of MEFV gene. Hy- of the FcRn gene has recently been described. Allele *2 showed de- per-IgD (HIDS) syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder char- creased promoter activity resulting in lower expression and decreased acterized by recurrent episodes of fever associated with lymphade- monocyte binding capacity for IgG compared to wild type allele *3. nopathy, arthralgia, gastrointestinal disturbance, and skin rash. HIDS Material and methods: We analysed a distribution of the FcRn gene is caused by mutations of MVK gene. VNTR polymorphism in 202 samples of general Czech population, Patients and Methods: In our study, we describe a Sicilian (ITALY) pa- 61 common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) patients, 21 X-linked tient with typical symptoms of the FMF. Moreover, he was affected by agammaglobulinemia (XLA) patients, and 5 individuals with low IgG an unusual type of HIDS (IgD no detectable). Interesting, the proband but normal IgA levels, using PCR. Fisher exact test was used for sta- was heterozygote for a mutation of MEFV gene (V726A) and he was tistical analysis. also compound heterozygote for two mutations of MVK gene (V377I, Results and discussion: The allele *2 was significantly more frequent P228L). The P228L, here described for the first time, is a novel mis- in patients with primary hypogammaglobulinemia compared to general sense mutation involving the exchange of a proline (CCA), highly con- population (11.5% v.s. 6.2%, p=0.02). While its frequency in CVID pa- served in mammals and birds, with a Leucine (CTA). tients did not differ from controls (8.2%, p=0.28), significantly more car- Conclusions: The findings of this study encourage our assumptions riers of this allele were detected among XLA patients and patients with about the triallelic transmission of the syndromes associated with pe- low IgG and normal IgA levels (16.7%, p=0.02, and 30.0%, p=0.02, riodic fevers, on the basis of the identification of 3 mutated alleles in respectively). More data are needed to better characterize a potential 2 different genes. The third mutation in the gene MEFV could play an role of the FcRn gene VNTR polymorphism in disease manifestation epistatic role, modifying the spectrum symptoms of HIDS. Our data in particular subgroups of patients with primary defects of antibody suggest that the study of a HIDS and FMF wider population would be production. important not only to clarify the genetic heterogeneity of this group of Supported by grant IGA-MZ-CR NR9192-3. syndromes, but mainly to establish a new diagnostic and therapeutic approach to these patients. P12.062 Congenital factor XIII deficiency caused by the same mutation in P12.060 five Tunisian families Novel FBP1 gene mutations in Arab patients with fructose-1,6- N. Louhichi1, F. Yaïch1, M. Medhaffar2, M. Elloumi2, F. Fakhfakh1; bisphosphatase deficiency. 1(1) Human Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Sfax, Tunisia, 2(2) Service of hema- H. Abalkhail1, M. Ul-Haque1, M. Al-Owain1, F. Al-Dayel1, Z. Al- Hassnan1, H. tology, Sfax, Tunisia. Al-Zaidan1, Z. Rahbeeni1, M. Al-Sayed1, A. Balobaid1, A. Cluntun1, M. Toulimat1, Inherited factor XIII (FXIII) deficiency is a rare bleeding disorder that I. Peltekova2, S. Zaidi3; can present with umbilical bleeding during the neonatal period, de- 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, layed soft tissue bruising, mucosal bleeding spontaneous intracranial 2Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada, 3University Health Network, To- hemorrhage and soft tissue hemorrhages. Congenital FXIII deficiency ronto, ON, Canada. is an autosomal recessive disorder, usually attributed to a defect in the Deficiency of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBP) results in impaired FXIII A and B subunits coding by F13A and F13B genes respectively. gluconeogenesis, which is characterized by episodes of hyperventi- The aim of this study was to determine the molecular defects respon- lation, apnea, hypoglycemia, and metabolic and lactic acidosis. This sible of congenital deficiency of factor XIII in five Tunisian families. autosomal recessive disorder is caused by mutations in the FBP1 Our diagnoses included antigen determination of FXIII A and B sub- gene, which encodes for fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase 1 (FBP1). Al- units in both plasma and platelets. Molecular analysis was performed though FBP1 gene mutations have been described in FBP deficient by direct DNA sequencing of polymerase chain reaction amplified frag- individuals of various ethnicities, there has been limited investigation ments spanning the coding regions and splice junctions of the FXIII A into the genetics of this disorder in Arab patients. This study employed subunit gene (F13A) in probands and in families’ members and com- five consanguineous Arab families, in which seventeen patients were pared with the reported sequence of this gene. clinically diagnosed with FBP deficiency. Seven patients and six carrier The measurement of the A and the B antigen levels showed that, in parents were analyzed for mutations in the FBP1 gene. DNA sequenc- all cases, FXIII A was undetectable and FXIII B was within the normal ing of the FBP1 gene identified two novel mutations in these families. range. Direct sequencing of the F13A gene for all probands showed A novel six nucleotide repetitive insertion, c114_119dupCTGCAC, was the same “c.869 insC” mutation. This is a frame shift mutation leading identified in patients from three families. This mutation encodes for a to a null allele. In addition to this mutation three new polymorphisms duplication of two amino acids (p.Cys39_Thr40dup) in the N-terminal had been identified. domain of FBP1. A novel nonsense c.841G>T mutation encoding for We describe here the molecular abnormality found in five Tunisian pro-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  bands diagnosed with FXIII deficiency. The identification of this founder P12.065 mutation and polymorphisms allowed a genetic counselling in relatives Friedreich Ataxia and mitochondria of these families and the antenatal diagnosis is now available. E. Vafaei1, M. Houshmand2; 1Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of P12.063 Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. A survey of PORcN mutations in focal dermal hypoplasia - Friedreich’s Ataxia (FA) is the commonest genetic cause of ataxia and strategies to survive lethal mutations is associated with the expansion of a GAA repeat in intron 1 of the F. Oeffner1, D. Bornholdt1, R. Happle2, A. König2, K. Grzeschik1; frataxin gene. Frataxin deficiency leads to excessive free radical pro- 1Centre of Human Genetics, Marburg, Germany, 2Department of Dermatology, duction, dysfunction of respiratory chain complexes and progressive Marburg, Germany. iron accumulation in mitochondria.Common deletion were identified Focal dermal hypoplasia (FDH, Goltz syndrome, MIM #305600) is a and confirmed by southern blotting in FA patients.Homozygous GAA pleiotropic birth defect characterized by widespread lesions of dermal expansion was found in 21 (84%) of all cases. In four cases (16%), hypoplasia or even aplasia. The resulting skin changes follow the lines no expansion was observed, ruling out the diagnosis of Friedreich’s of Blaschko, indicating mosaicism. Another major diagnostic sign is ataxia. In cases with GAA expansions, ataxia, scoliosis and pes ca- longitudinal striation of the long bones, likewise hinting to functional vus, cardiac abnormalities and some neurological findings occurred mosaicism. Associated variable features include areas of hairless- more frequently than in our patients without GAA expansion. Molecular ness, hypoplasia or aplasia of bones, malformations of the autopod, analysis was imperative for diagnosis of Friedreich’s ataxia, not only and microphthalmia or unilateral anophthalmia. In addition, hypodon- for typical cases, but also for atypical ones. mtDNA deletions were tia, hearing loss, horseshoe kidney, and papillomatosis of the larynx present in 76% of our patients representing mtDNA damage, which may be found. may be due to iron accumulation in mitochondria. Our findings showed Recently, we had shown that the disease is caused by mutations of that complex I activities and intracellular ATP were significantly re- PORCN in Xp11.23 (Nature Genetics 2007, 39: 833-835). The attach- duced (P=0.001) in patients compared with control. 8.6 kb deletion in ment of palmitoleic acid by the O-acyltransferase PORCN prepares mtDNA was detected in all of patients by multiplex PCR but Southern Wnt signaling molecules for the transport through the Golgi apparatus blot analysis confirmed the presence of deletion in 9 of 12 patients. for secretion, signal gradient formation, and receptor binding. Decreased Frataxin expression in FA cells result in accumulation of We have replenished the scope of known mutations considerably by mitochondrial iron and increased free iron levels leads to free radical analyzing PORCN in 24 novel patients: generation, increasing mtDNA mutation and decreasing complex I ac- i) In sporadic cases PORCN is affected primarily by nonsense mu- tivity and intracellular ATP content. tations whereas large deletions encompassing various neighboring genes are mostly familial. P12.066 ii) The missense mutations known so far almost exclusively exchange Identification of novel mutations of the mitochondrial DNA highly conserved amino acids in transmembrane domains or in the associated with iranian Friedreich’s ataxia lumenal loops. M. M. Heidari1, M. Houshmand2, M. Khatami1, S. Nafissi3, B. Scheiber-Mojde- iii) To override the consequences of lethal PORCN mutations, male hkar4; patients are somatic mosaics or show more than one X-chromosome. 1Department of Biology, Science School, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran, Yazd, Females, survive either due to extreme skewing of X-chromosome Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetic, National Institute for inactivation, which is particularly evident in familial deletions, or they Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic appear to be likewise somatic mosaics. Republic of Iran, 3Department of Neurology, Medical Science, Tehran Univer- sity, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Medical P12.064 Chemistry, Medical University of Vienna, Austria, Vienna, Austria. Evaluation of the Qiaxcel system for the analysis of products Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenera- generated with the Abbott Fragile-X PcR kit tive disorder caused by decreased expression of the protein Frataxin. D. Heine-Suñer, J. Martínez-Falcó, M. Rosado, B. Sierra, C. Vidal, J. Rosell; Frataxin deficiency leads to excessive free radical production. Mito- Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. chondrial DNA (mtDNA) could be considered a candidate modifier fac- Fragile X syndrome is the single most common inherited cause of tor for FRDA disease. It prompted us to focus on the mtDNA and moni- mental impairment and shows an approximate prevalence 1/4000. The tor the nucleotide changes of genome which are probably the cause of gene responsible for fragile X syndrome, FMR1, contains an unsta- respiratory chain defects and reduced ATP generation. We searched ble repeat sequence of (CGG) that when expanded causes the syn- about 46% of the entire mitochondrial genome by Temporal Tempera- n drome. PCR is a fast and effective method for the diagnosis of (CGG) ture Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (TTGE) and DNA fragments show- n repeat number. However, PCR methods traditionally were only useful ing abnormal banding patterns were sequenced for identification of the for repeat sizes in the lower premutation ranges (up to 70-100 repeats) exact mutations. because amplification becomes increasingly difficult as repeat number In 20 patients, for the first time we detected 26 Mitochondrial DNA increases. Recently, a commercial kit by Abbott has become available mutations which 11 (42.5%) was novel and 15 (57%) have been re- that has overcome such problem, as it amplifies products in all the pre- ported in other diseases. Our results showed that NADH dehydroge- mutation ranges (up to 200 repeats) and full mutation ranges (over 250 nase (ND) genes mutations in FRDA samples was higher than normal repeats). The analysis and sizing of the fluorescence labelled prod- controls (P<0.001) and we found statistically significant inverse corre- ucts generated using the Abbott fragile-X kit require a genetic analy- lation (r = -0.77) between number of mutation in DN genes and age of ser (sequencer). This equipment is expensive and not all laboratories onset in FRDA patients. It is possible that mutations in ND genes could have access to one. As an alternative, we have successfully tested the constitute a predisposing factor that in combination with environmental Qiaxcel system of Qiagen. We have found such a system adequate for risk factors affect on age of onset and disease progression. routine screening purposes with the Abbott Fragile-X PCR kit. How- ever, samples that are in the higher resolution limit (full mutations) or P12.067 lower resolution limit (females with 1 repeat differences), need to be chaperone effect of several iminosugars and aminocyclitols on analysed under special conditions. The removal of the gender primers mutated glucocerebrosidases: a possible therapeutic approach increases the PCR efficiency for large repeat sizes and may be more for Gaucher disease adequate for the detection of full mutations. G. Sanchez-Olles1, J. Duque2, M. Egido-Gabas3, J. Casas3, M. Lluch2, A. Cha- bas2, D. Grinberg4, L. Vilageliu4; 1Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERER, IBUB, BARCELONA, Spain, 2Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Clínic, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 3Research Unit on BioActive Molecules (RUBAM), Departamento de Química BioMédica, Instituto de Química Avanza- da de Catalunya, CSIC, Barcelona, Spain, 4Departament de Genètica, FacultatMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERER, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain. Macedonian patients with non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL). We Gaucher disease is an autosomal recessive disorder. It is character- have analyzed 33 patients with prelingual NSHL. ized by the accumulation of glucosylceramide in lysosomes of the SSCP analysis following by direct sequencing in fragments where al- mononuclear phagocyte system, attributable to glucocerebrosidase tered electrophoretic mobility was assigned was used for detection of (GBA; EC3.2.1.45) deficiency. The main consequences of this disease mutations in GJB2 gene, while specific PCR using two sets of primers are hepatosplenomegaly, skeletal lesions and, sometimes, neurologi- were used for (GJB6-D13S1830)del screening. cal manifestations. It has been shown that at sub-inhibitory concentra- In 12 out of 33 patients (36.4%) mutations in GJB2 gene were found. tions, several competitive inhibitors act as chemical chaperones by Among 22 mutated chromosomes, 15 (68.2%) carried 35delG mutation. inducing protein stabilization and increasing enzymatic activity. We Other common mutations Trp24Stop, Val37Ile and Arg127His, with a have tested the chaperone effect of two iminosugars, N-(n-nonyl)-de- frequency of 6.06%, 3.0% and 1.5%, respectively, were found. (GJB6- oxynojirimycin (NN-DNJ) and N-(n-butyl)-deoxynojirimycin (NB-DNJ), D13S1830)del mutation was not found in our group of patients. and four aminocyclitols with distinct degrees of lipophilicity on mutated Since high mutation rate was observed in GJB2 gene in NSHL pa- GBAs. The analyses were performed on COS-7 cells transfected with tients, testing should be performed as a routine screening in cases ten different mutant GBA cDNAs and on patient fibroblasts with diverse with prelingual deafness. genotypes. We have shown an increase in the activity of GBA with NN- DNJ, NB-DNJ and aminocyclitol 1 in stably transfected cell lines for P12.070 some of the mutations and with NN-DNJ and aminocyclitol 4 in some of screening of mutations in mYOc, cYP1B1 and OPtN in spanish the patients’ fibroblasts. These promising results on specific mutations families with glaucoma and ocular hypertension validate the use of chemical chaperones as a therapeutic approach E. Borràs1, I. Hernan1, E. Millá2,3, S. Duch3, M. Carballo1, M. Gamundi1; for Gaucher disease. However, the development and analysis of new 1Hospital de Terrassa, Terrassa, Spain, 2Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barce- compounds is required. As a next step, we are currently analysing the lona, Spain, 3Institut Comtal d’Oftalmologia, Barcelona, Spain. abnormal intracellular trafficking of mutant glucocerebrosidases by im- Glaucoma is a heterogeneous group of optic neuropathies and repre- munohistochemical techniques and confocal microscopy. The cells are sents the second most prevalent cause of blindness worldwide, pro- being treated with the compounds that showed to have a chaperone jected to affect more than 60 million people by 2010. The purpose of effect (NN-DNJ, NB-DNJ, aminocyclitol 1 and aminocyclitol 4), in order this study was the identification of MYOC, CYP1B1 and OPTN muta- to analyse if the enzymes from treated cells can reach the lysosomes. tions in a Spanish population affected by different clinical forms of fa- milial glaucoma or ocular hypertension, in order to determine the best P12.068 therapeutic approach. Generalized Atrophic Benign Epidermolysis Bullosa (GABEB), Clinical studies were performed with ophthalmologic examination that caused by a new COLA truncatious mutation in a tunisian included pachymetry-corrected intraocular pressure applanation to- patient nometry and optical coherence tomography or Heidelberg retinal to- L. Adala1, M. Gribaa1, I. Ben Charfeddine1, O. Mamai1, A. Mili1, T. Ben Lazreg1, mography. Mutation detection was performed in 202 individuals from M. Denguezli2, J. Lacour3, A. Saad1; 84 families with a positive family history of glaucoma. Screening of mu- 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, de Génétique Moléculaire et de Biologie de la tations in the MYOC gene in index patients revealed three previously Reproduction Humaines.CHU Farhat HACHED, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service de reported mutations (Gln368Stop, Val426Phe and Ala427Thr) and one Dermatologie et de Vénérologie.CHU Farhat HACHED, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Ser- novel mutation (Glu218Lys). We performed CYP1B1 mutation analy- vice de Dermatologie. Hôpital Archet 2, Nice, France. sis in index patients affected by primary congenital glaucoma, and six Generalized Atrophic Benign Epidermolysis Bullosa, GABEB (OMIM# previously reported mutations were detected, namely Gly61Glu, His- 226650), is a nonlethal variant of junctional epidermolysis bullosa with 354fs, Arg368His, Thr403fs, Asp449fs and Arg469Trp. OPTN mutation autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. Clinically, it is characterized screening is currently being performed and up to now we have not by blistering of the skin since birth, atrophy of the affected skin, dys- found any mutation associated to glaucoma. trophic nails, dental anomalies and alopecia. The pathogenesis of this We also present phenotype-genotype correlation in relatives of pa- disorder is generally caused by mutations affecting the BPAG2/CO- tients with mutation in any of the analyzed genes. The genetic analysis L17A1 gene encoding hemidesmosomal transmembrane protein; the helps us to provide a more accurate visual prognosis as well as ap- 180 KDa bullous pemphigoid antigen (BP180), also known as type propriate genetic counselling. XVII collagen.In this study we describe a Tunisian GABEB patient clinically EB affected who showed an absence of expression of BP180 P12.071 at the dermal-epidermal junction revealed by immunohistochemical molecular, hematological aspects in HbH disease staining analyses using antibodies against the type XVII collagen. The H. Bagherian, S. Abdi, P. Fouladi, F. Rahiminezhad, M. Feizpour, R. Vahidi, S. COL17A1 gene sequencing has revealed a homozygous C458X muta- Forughi, M. Heidari, S. Zenali; tion in exon 17 of this gene responsible of the disease. The parents’ Dr Zenali Lab, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. sequencing shows a heterozygous state of this mutation. Background: H disease is caused by deletion or inactivation of three alpha-globin genes, People with H disease usually have moderate P12.069 anaemia, but are generally thought to be asymptomatic. Some H dis- GJB2 mutations in macedonian patients with non-syndromic ease patients require transfusions, and there are non deletional forms hearing loss of Hb H.Here we describe hematologic feature of cases with Hb H E. Sukarova Stefanovska1, M. Davceva-Cakar2, A. Momirovska3,4, G. D. Efre- disease. mov1; Material and Methods: In this study we have defined the molecular 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Macedonian basis and the clinical phenotype with the alpha-globin genotype in 18 Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Iranian patients with HbH disease. HbH disease was diagnosed ac- Republic of, 2Audiology Center, Clinic for Otorhinolaryngology, Medical fac- cording to abnormal red cell morphology including hypochromia, HbH ulty, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 3Adrialab-Synlab, inclusion and persistence of HbH in Hb electrophoresis. Polyclinic for laboratory medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Result: The most molecular defect was the deletional most commonly Republic of, 4Association of deaf and hard of hearing, Skopje, Macedonia, The the (--/-alpha 3.7) genotype. In this study, 15 were deletional forms of Former Yugoslav Republic of. Hb H (--/-alpha) who had not received any blood transfusion and three Hearing impairment is one of the most common sensory-neural disor- patients had the nondeletional type of hemoglobin H disease (--/alpha ders with the incidence of profound deafness in one per 1,000 births. alphaT) with transfusion-dependent Hb H disease. Mean MCV and Mutations in the GJB2 and GJB6 genes for DFNB1 locus (13q12) are MCH for deletional were 58.04 ± 4.31fl and 17.5 ± 1.2 pg respectively responsible for about half of all cases of autosomal recessive prelin- (range from 46.6 to 64.9 for MCV and 14.3to 19.6 for MCH). HbH was gual hearing loss. Among them 35delG mutation accounts for approxi- elevated significantly in all cases (mean value 9.3±5% ranging from mately 70% of all GJB2 mutant alleles in most European populations. 1.2-19.6%). HbH levels are usually higher in non deletional than in de- The aim of the study was to evaluate the frequency and type of muta- letional, (P value<0.0001). A significant correlation was found between tions in GJB2 gene, as well as the frequency of GJB6 deletion among MCV values and genotype, (P < 0∙0001).Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  Conclusion: The (--/alpha alphaT) genotype has more severe disease P12.074 than those with the(--/-alpha) and the most molecular defect was (--/- Identification of a new β-globin variant (β133 GtG>AtG) in a alpha 3.7) . family from messina (sicily-italy) Key words: H disease, Hb H, genotype G. Lo Giudice, M. Amorini, M. A. La Rosa, C. Di Bella, V. Procopio, G. E. Cala- brò, P. Romeo, L. Grasso, F. Pugliatti, C. Salpietro, L. Rigoli; P12.072 Unità Operativa di Genetica ed Immunologia Pediatrica, Messina, Italy. Deletion of the HFE gene is present at the population level in The hemoglobinopathies, or structural Hb variants, are attributable to sardinia aminoacid substitution in either the α or non-α chain. We studied five G. Le Gac1, A. Cao2, R. Congiu3, I. Gourlaouen1, C. Férec1, M. A. Melis4; members of a family from Messina (Sicily-Italy). The proband, a 39 1Inserm, U613; Etablissement Français du Sang; Centre Hospitalier Univer- years old male, was investigated because he showed a little decrease sitaire, Brest, France, 2Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia CNR, in MCV values (79 fl) and a slightly increased HbA levels (3,5 %). Mo- 2 Cagliari, Italy, 3Ospedale microcitemico ASL8, Cagliari, Italy, 4Dipartimento lecular analysis by directly sequencing of the amplified β globin gene Scienze biomediche e biotecnologia, Università di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. revealed the presence of two single point mutations, a C>G transition Introduction: Very recently, we reported the case of a woman of Sar- at codon 70 (Gcc>GGc) and a G>A base substitution at codon 133 dinian descent who had a major structural alteration in the HFE gene. (GtG>AtG). Therefore, we examined 5 members belonging to three Molecular characterization revealed an Alu-mediated recombination generations of the family. The new variant, called Hb Messina, (β133 causing the loss of the complete HFE gene sequence. Although homo- Val>Met GtG>AtG) was identified in heterozygosis in four subjects. zygous for the HFE deleted allele, the woman had a phenotype similar Moreover, Hb Hershey was identified in heterozygosis in one subject to that seen in most women homozygous for the common p.C282Y (III.2). Familiar analysis showed that G>A base substitution at codon mutation. The deletion was not detected in a cohort of iron overload 133 was inherited from the father (I.1). Hb Messina shows asymp- patients of Northern European descent. Here, we focused on DNA tomatic clinical phenotype in heterozygotes subjects (I.1, II.3, II.4 and from Sardinia patients. III.1); however, two family members had slightly increased HbA levels 2 Methods: We looked for the HFE deletion by using a rearrangement (3,5-3,6 %) and showed a little decrease in MCV values (78-79 fl). specific PCR. Positive results were confirmed by QFM-PCR and se- The molecular analysis of the globin genes is important to perform quencing. an accurate diagnosis in the subjects with slightly alterations of the Results: The HFE deleted allele was detected in two of 24 unrelated hematogical parameters. patients. Both patients were previously viewed as homozygous for the common p.H63D variation. At diagnosis, they presented with moderate P12.075 iron overloads. Genetic analysis of 31 iranian families segregating autosomal Conclusion/Discussion: Deletion of the complete HFE gene sequence recessive hearing impairment is not private, but present at the population level in Sardinia. Additional M. A. Tabatabaiefar1,2,3, F. Alasti3,4, E. Farrokhi2, N. Peeters5, W. Wuyts5, M. R. studies have been started to ascertain the assumption of a founder Nooridaloii1, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori2, G. Van Camp3; effect and precisely investigate frequency of the HFE deleted allele. 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University/Medi- In future, the recognition of several individuals with the HFE deletion cal Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cellular and Molecular Re- will provides another opportunity to better understand penetrance of search Center, School of Medicine, Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences, the common p.C282Y/p.C282Y genotype, which remains a matter of Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Univer- debates. sity of Antwerp, 2610, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Natinal Institute for Genetic Engineer- ing and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Department P12.073 of Medical Genetics, University hospital of Antwerp, 2610, Antwerp, Belgium. The IVSI-5 (G◊C) β-thalassemia mutation in trans with the (delta ) Autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing impairment (ARNSHI) is cD12 (AAt>AAA) Hb A NYU in an iranian family the most common form of monogenic hearing impairment. It is a high- 2 A. Amirian, M. Karimipour, A. r. Kordafshari, M. Taghavi, M. Jafarinejad, M. ly genetic heterogeneous disorder, as up to now 60 loci have been Mossayebzadeh, S. Fathiazar, F. Bayat, N. Saeidi, S. Zeinali; mapped for ARNSHI. Iran, with a high rate of consanguineous marriage Pasteur Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. is a good genetic resource for studying ARNSHI. The aim of our project Beta-thalassemia is the most common hereditary disorder in Iran. The is to identify novel genes or mutations for ARNSHI. A set of Iranian abillity to premarital screening for thalassemia is in effect in Iran since families suffering from ARNSHI were studied. DNA sequencing of the 1997.Typical heterozygous carriers of β-thalassemia have Hb A >3.5, coding exon of GJB2, as well as linkage analysis of the DFNB1 locus 2 however, in some carriers of it is in normal range. Here we report the was performed and linked families were excluded from further analysis. co-inheritance of β- and δ-globin gene mutations in an individual with Seventeen out of 31 remaining families had S-link LOD scores higher microcytosis, hypochromia and normal Hb A .Among couples refered than the threshold value for genome-wide significance of 3.3. Linkage 2 to our lab from Primary Health Care centers (PHC) for molecular test- analysis of the 14 most common ARNSHI loci was performed for all ing and prenatal diagnosis of β-thalassemia in Tehran, one individual the families. To confirm linkage, further markers were genotyped in was found to be atypical to be investigated for β-thalassemia. After ob- the linked families. Eight families showed linkage to 4 different loci: 4 taining informed consent,CBC and Hb electrophoresis was performed families to DFNB4 (SLC26A4), 1 to DFNB7/11 (TMC1), 1 to DFNB9 and genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood Leukocytes (OTOF), 1 to DFNB2 (MYO7A) and 1 to DFNB21 (TECTA). Mutation by salting out method. Amplification refractory mutation system PCR screening of these 4 known genes is being performed in the linked fam- (ARMS-PCR) and direct DNA sequencing of δ-globin gene was ex- ilies. Four SLC26A4 mutations have already been found in the DFNB4 ploited for detection of beta and delta globin gene mutations. The CBC families. The results of this study support the notion that DFNB4 ranks and Hb electrophoresis pattern showed low indices and normal Hb A second after GJB2 as a cause for ARNSHI. Twelve families with S-link 2 . ARMS-PCR technique for β-globin gene mutation revealed the beta0 LOD scores higher than 3.3 not linked to any of the 14 known loci will IVS-I-5 (G to C) mutation. Direct DNA sequencing of δ-globin gene and be included into genome-wide linkage analysis studies. hematological studies of the family members confirmed the presence of mutation in delta codon 12 (AAT > AAA) . We suggested this indi- P12.076 vidual carries a delta globin gene mutation which is unable to increase Phenotype and genotype in females with pouf mutations the delta-globin chain output in response to beta-thalassemia. Direct S. Marlin1, M. Moizard2, A. David3, N. Chassaing4, M. Raynaud2, L. Jonard1, D. DNA sequencing confirmed the co-inheritance of mutation in δ-globin Feldmann1, N. Loundon1, F. Denoyelle1, A. Toutain2; gene as being codon 12 . 1Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France, 3CHU, Nantes, France, 4Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France. X-linked deafness is a rare cause of hereditary isolated hearing im- pairment estimated as at least 1 or 2% of the non-syndromic hearing loss. To date 4 loci for DFN have been identified and only one gene, POU3F4 responsible for DFN3, has been cloned. In males, DFN3 is characterized by either a progressive deafness associated with peri-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  lymphatic gusher at stapes surgery and with a characteristic inner ear to detect exon deletions and duplications. Different deletions were de- malformation. We have defined the phenotype of 8 independent fe- tected using MLPA assay on 25 patients affected by severe haemophil- males carrying POU3F4 anomalies. A late-onset hearing loss is found ia A, resulted mutation negative by sequencing analysis. Traditional in 3 patients. Only one has an inner ear malformation. No genotype/ PCR failed to amplify one or more exons in some of these patients and phenotype correlation is identified. we decided to use the MLPA test in order to confirm the conjectured deletions: 7 deletions were revealed in haemophiliacs patients and we P12.077 identified the carrier status in 2 female. An autosomal recessive nonsyndromic deafness locus is F8 mutational screening could be improved by adding MLPA to se- assigned to chromosome 18q12.3-21.1 quence analysis and MLPA is a helpful tool in order to define the status E. Pras1, H. Masri1, H. Reznik Wolf1, A. Abu1, Z. Brownstein2, K. B. Avraham2, of carriers in female relatives of haemophiliacs with deletions of one or M. Frydman1; more exons of F8 gene. It is to underline the importance of performing 1Danek Gartner Institute of Human Genetics, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 2Dept. of a molecular analysis in females suspected haemophiliacs carriers: the Human Molecular Genetics & Biochemistry, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel main obstacle to their counselling is the impossibility to demonstrate Aviv, Israel. a heterozygous status because of the amplification of the exon/s that We studied a large non-consanguineous Ashkenazi family in which 5 is/are present on the normal X chromosome. So, the only way to make of 10 children suffer from profound, prelingual hearing loss. A genome a definitive diagnosis is to detect the mutation in F8 gene and MLPA wide search mapped the disease gene to a n 8 Mb interval on chromo- provides an important tool for the detection of its complete mutational some 18q12.3-21.1, and a maximum lod score of 3.03 was obtained spectrum. with the marker AC021763 at θ =0.00. Saturation of the region with additional polymorphic markers and SNP’s revealed a 3.5 Mb homozy- P12.080 gous interval in the affected sibs. The region contains 12 known genes, Genotyping of coagulation Factor iX gene in Hemophilia B none of which have been previously associated with hearing loss. Se- Patients of Esfahan Province quencing of one gene from the interval, SLC14A1 did not reveal any L. Kokabee1,2, N. karimi1, S. Zeinali1, M. Karimipoor1; pathogenic variants in the exons or in the flanking intronic sequences. 1Molecular Medicine dept., Biotechnology Center, Pasteur Inistitute of Iran, Currently additional genes are being sequenced. These results define Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic a novel locus for autosomal recessive hearing loss on chromosome of Iran. 18q12.3-21.1. Hemophilia B, Christmas disease, is an X-linked bleeding disorder caused by the functional deficiency of blood coagulation factor IX. The P12.078 disease is due to heterogeneous mutations in the factor IX gene (F9), High-resolution breakpoint mapping of novel rearrangements located at Xq27.1. It spans about 34 kilobases (kb) of genomic DNA. involved in alpha- and beta-thalassemia using array- The aim of this study was molecular analysis and genotype- pheno- comparative Genomic Hybridization (acGH) type correlation of hemophilia B patients in Isfahan province, Iran. After M. Phylipsen, I. P. Vogelaar, Y. Ariyurek, J. T. den Dunnen, P. C. Giordano, C. obtaining informed consent, genomic DNA was extracted from the pe- L. Harteveld; ripheral blood of 37 patients referred from Isfahan hemophilia center, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. by standard methods. PCR amplification, SSCP and CSGE techniques Thalassemias are hereditary microcytic hypochromic anemias charac- were performed for scanning of the all functional-important regions of terized by abnormalities in hemoglobin production due to reduced ex- the F9 gene. DNA sequencing were performed for those with different pression of either the beta-globin gene, leading to beta-thalassemia, or migration patterns in SSCP or CSGE by chain termination method. In the alpha-globin genes, giving rise to alpha-thalassemia. About 10% of addition, haplotype were constructed using four the DdeI, TaqI, HhaI the beta-thalassemias and 90% of the alpha-thalassemias are caused and MnlI restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) markers. by deletions in either globin gene cluster. In a previous study, we ap- The sequencing results showed 70.3% missense mutation, 18.9% plied Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) to nonsense mutation, 8.1% deletion, 2.7% insertion. In this study, of the characterize large rearrangements in the alpha- and beta-globin gene 19 hemophilia B patients of the Kashan, all of them were represented cluster. Several new deletions and duplications were found, however, substitution (G6472A) that could represent a founder effect. Five novel the exact breakpoint sequences are still unknown. To facilitate confir- mutations which have not been reported in hemophilia B mutation mation by breakpoint PCR and to gain more insight in the mechanisms database, were also found. The information obtained from this study causing these rearrangements we decided to determine the precise could be used to diagnose potential female carriers in families with location of breakpoints. hemophilia B patients and prenatal diagnosis. Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) measures DNA copy number differences between a reference and a patient’s genome P12.082 sample thereby detecting and mapping deletions and duplications. molecular screening of 980 cases of suspected hereditary optic We used high resolution tiling arrays with 135,000 probes spaced at neuropathy with a report on 77 novel OPA1 mutations a density of ~15 bp to map the breakpoints to an interval that can be M. Ferré1,2,3, D. Milea4,5, A. Chevrollier1,3, H. Dollfus6,7,8, C. Ayuso9, S. De- validated by PCR and sequencing. The array was hybridized to a set foort10,11,12, C. Vignal13, X. Zanlonghi13,14, J. Charlin15,16, J. Kaplan17,18,19, S. of 55 thalassemia patients who were found to carry a deletion in the Odent15,20, C. P. Hamel21,22, V. Procaccio2,3,23, P. Reynier1,2,3, P. Amati-Bonneau1,3, alpha- or beta-globin gene cluster. The fine mapping results were used D. Bonneau1,2,3; to design breakpoint PCRs and resulting fragments were sequenced 1INSERM, U694, Angers, France, 2Université d’Angers, Faculté de Médecine, to determine the precise breakpoint. Angers, France, 3CHU d’Angers, Département de Biochimie et Génétique, Angers, France, 4Glostrup Hospital, Department of Ophthalmology, Glostrup, P12.079 Denmark, 5University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6INSERM, Multiplex ligation-probe dependent amplification (MLPA) and Equipe Avenir 3439, Strasbourg, France, 7Université Louis Pasteur-Strasbourg, Hemophilia A: detection of deletions in patients and tool for Faculté de Médecine, Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Strasbourg, France, carrier status in female relatives. 8CHRU de Strasbourg, Service de Génétique Médicale, Strasbourg, France, R. Santacroce1, V. Longo1, V. Bafunno1, F. Sessa1, M. Chetta1, M. Sarno1, N. 9Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Servicio de Genética, CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, Bukvic1, G. D’Andrea1, M. Margaglione1,2; 10CNRS, UMR 8160, Lille, France, 11Université de Lille 2, Lille, France, 12CHRU 1Genetica Medica, Foggia, Italy, 2Unita’ di Emostasi e Trombosi I.R.C.C.S. de Lille, Hôpital Roger Salengro, Service d’Explorations Fonctionnelles de la “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza”,, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. Vision, Lille, France, 13Fondation Rothschild, Département d’Ophtalmologie, Haemophilia A is an X-linked bleeding disorder caused by mutations Paris, France, 14Clinique Sourdille, Laboratoire d’Explorations Fonctionnelles widespread in the human coagulation F8 gene. Most of the mutations de la Vision, Nantes, France, 15Université de Rennes 1, Faculté de Médecine, in the F8 gene are detectable using genomic sequencing analysis. Rennes, France, 16CHU de Rennes, Service d’Ophtalmologie, Rennes, France, However, deletions of one or more exons or encompassing the entire 17INSERM, U781, Unité de Recherches Génétique et Epigénétique des Ma- gene can go undetected, especially in heterozygous females. ladies Métaboliques, Neurosensorielles et du Développement, Paris, France, Recently, MLPA has been broadly applied to gene mutation screening 18Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France, 19AP-HP,Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  Groupe Hospitalier Necker, Service de Génétique Médicale, Paris, France, Paris, France, 8Department of Neurology, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, 20CHU de Rennes, Département de Médecine de l’Enfant et de l’Adolescent, Germany, 9Department of Neurology, University of Schleswig Holstein, Kiel, Rennes, France, 21CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 22Uni- Germany, 10Department of Neurology, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, versité Montpellier1 et Montpellier2, Institut des Neurosciences, Montpellier, 11Research Division for Clinical Neurogenetics, Department of Neurodegenera- France, 23CNRS, UMR6214, INSERM, U771, Angers, France. tive Disease, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tübingen, Germany. We report the results of molecular screening in 980 patients carried out Background: Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) represents a neu- as part of their work-up for suspected hereditary optic neuropathies. rodegenerative disorder resulting in progressive spasticity of the Among these patients, 588 (60%) had a family history of hereditary lower limbs. The most frequent causes of autosomal dominant HSP optic atrophy whereas the remaining 392 (40%) patients had no obvi- (AD-HSP) are mutations in the SPAST-gene (SPG4 locus). However, ous family history of the disease. All the patients were investigated for roughly 60% of the patients remain SPG4 mutation-negative despite a Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) and autosomal dominant family history compatible with autosomal dominant inheritance. Muta- optic atrophy (ADOA), by searching for the ten primary LHON-causing tions in the gene for acetyl-CoA transporter (SLC33A1) have recently mtDNA mutations and examining the entire coding sequences of the been reported to cause autosomal dominant hereditary spastic para- OPA1 and OPA3 genes, the two genes currently identified in ADOA. plegia (HSP) type SPG42. Molecular defects were identified in 440 patients (45% of screened Objective: We wanted to determine the relative frequency of SPG42/ patients). Among these, 295 patients (67%) had an OPA1 mutation, SLC33A1 mutations in index patients of AD-HSP families for whom 131 patients (30%) had an mtDNA mutation, and 14 patients (3%), SPG4 mutations had been excluded. belonging to three unrelated families, had an OPA3 mutation. Interest- Methods: We screened a large cohort of 263 SPG4 mutation-negative ingly, OPA1 mutations were found in 157 (40%) of the 392 apparently patients for variations in SPG42/SLC33A1 by high resolution melting sporadic cases of optic atrophy. The eOPA1 locus-specific database (HRM) combined with direct sequencing. now contains a total of 204 OPA1 mutations, including 77 novel OPA1 Results: Currently, aberrant melting curves were identified in 32 cases mutations reported here. The statistical analysis of this large set of (12%). Subject to future investigation will be, for each resulting aber- mutations has led us to propose a diagnostic strategy that should help rant HRM curve the direct sequencing of the corresponding sample with the molecular work-up of optic neuropathies. Our results highlight due to assess a variation. Further a multiplex ligation dependent probe the importance of investigating LHON-causing mtDNA mutations as amplification assay (MLPA) targeting SPG42 will investigate copy well as OPA1 and OPA3 mutations in cases of suspected hereditary number variations. optic neuropathy, even in absence of a family history of the disease. P12.085 P12.083 Only rarely is thin corpus callosum (tcc) present in sPG11 synergistic effect of spastin gene mutations in a Hungarian - clinical heterogeneity and genetic data in a large international patient with hereditary spastic paraplegia (HsP) cohort A. Gal1, K. Mede2, V. Remenyi1, S. Wiess3, U. Goelnitz3, M. J. Molnar1; A. Rolfs1, U. Goelnitz2, S. Weiss2, D. Friday2, P. Bauer3, K. Boycott4, J. Gir- 1Clinical and Research Centre for Molecular Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, ouard5, P. Huan-Kee6, B. Lindvall7, I. Navarro Vera8, A. Summers9, L. Velsher9, 2Vasary Kolos Hospital, Esztergom, Hungary, 3Centogene GmbH, Institute of M. Wittstock10; Molecular Diagnostics, Rostock, Germany. 1Albrecht-Kossel Institute for Neuroregeneration, Rostock, Germany, 2Cento- Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a group of genetically hetero- gene GmbH, Rostock, Germany, 3Department of Human Genetics, University geneous disorders characterized by progressive spasticity of the lower of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 4Children´s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Dept limbs. Mutations in the SPG4 gene, which encodes spastin protein, are of Genetics, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 5CHA, Hopital Enfant-Jesus, Quebec, QC, responsible for up to 45% of autosomal dominant cases. Canada, 6Singapore Baby & Child Clinic, Mount Elizabeth Medical Centre, Here we present a Hungarian family, in which the 31 year old proband Singapore, Singapore, 7Muscle centre, Dept of Neurology, Örebro, Sweden, has pronounced progressive spastic paraparesis, increased deep ten- 8Centro de Analisis Geneticos, c/Santa Teresa 45, Zaragoza, Spain, 9North don reflexes and pyramidal sings in the lower limbs. She suffers from York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 10Dept of Neurology, University of urinary incontinence. The proband was born with club feet. Her 58 year Rostock, Rostock, Germany. old mother’s symptoms started at age 48 with mild walking problems. Spatacsin mutations cause an autosomal - recessive (AR) form of She has mild spastic paraparesis, increased deep tendon reflexes and spastic paraplegia, SPG type 11 (SPG11). Typically SPG11 is been pyramidal signs in the lower limbs. DNA analysis by direct sequencing diagnosed in cases with slight ataxia, thin corpus callosum (TCC), of all exons in SPG1, SPA2, SPG3a and SPG4 genes revealed the mental impairment, pyramidal signs, increased deep tendon reflexes following: the proband is compound heterozygous for the sequence and only rarely neuropathy. In a cohort of 251 patients with AR-HSP we variants C131T (S44L) and C1684T (R562Term) in the spastin (SPG4) analysed SPG11 gene by sequencing the gene including the exon-in- gene. In her mother only the C1684T (R562Term) mutation was de- tron boundaries and deletion screening by MLPA. We have been able tected. The C1684T substitution has been previously described as a to detect 88 mutated alleles in 44 patients from 37 non-related families. pathogenic mutation. Although the S44L amino acid change has been Patients are from Canada (N=11), Arabian countries (N=4), Scandina- described in the literature as a pathogenic mutation more current data via (N=3), East-Europe (N=9), Latin-America (N=2), 8 from Singapore, suggest this change is a harmless polymorphism (rs28939368) if it oc- UK, Denmark, Spain, Germany, Austria and Croatia, resp. We found curs alone. In the presence of a disease causing mutation it may act as 64 different mutations (37 are not described): splice mutations 22/88 a modifier, leading to an earlier age of onset. (25%), small deletions/insertions 38/88 (43%), large deletions (exon We can conclude that in the proband the coexistence of S44L and 11, 24, 27, 29, 31, 32, 34) 10/88 (11%), missense/nonsense muta- R562Term resulted in the severity clinical symptoms and early age of tions18/88 (20%). For 38 patients we got clinical data including MRI onset. results (35 cases). Age at onset ranged from 8 to 38 years with a mean of 22.0+/-9.6. Onset was characterized by gait disorders (21/38, 55%), P12.084 polyneuropathy (7/38, 18%), dementia, dystonia, tremor and dysarthria Frequency of sPG42 in Autosomal-Dominant spastic Paraplegia (each in three patients). Interestingly only in 15/35 (42%) a TCC has (AD-HsP) been demonstrable. This low frequency of TCC is in contrast to other N. Schlipf1, R. Schüle2,3, C. Beetz4, A. K. Erichsen5, S. Forlani6,7, S. Otto8, S. reports and raises the question of the specificity of TCC for SPG11. Klebe9, S. Klimpe10, K. Karle11, C. Tallaksen5, G. Stevanin6,7, A. Brice6,7, O. Mutations within the exons 24 - 34 are correlated with a more severe Rieß1, L. Schöls2,11, P. Bauer1; phenotype. Our data demonstrate a great phenotypic variability and a 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, Tübingen, Ger- high percentage of large deletions within the SPG11 gene many, 2Department of Neurology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 3Research Division for Clinical Neurogenetics, Department of Neurodegenera- tive Disease, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tübingen, Germany, 4Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany, 5Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 6INSERM, U679, Paris, France, 7Université Pierre et Marie Curie - Paris 6, URM S679,Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  P12.086 the expansion of CAG repeats in the first exon of the gene encoding Genetic heterogeneity of hereditary neuropathy with liability to huntingtin (Htt). Normal people have a polymorphic repeat, up to 36 pressure palsies at the Russian patients CAG, encoding for glutamine (Gln). The mutant protein, with a lon- O. A. Schagina, T. B. Tiburkova, E. L. Dadali, G. E. Rudenskaya, A. V. ger poly-Q tract, becomes harmful to cells, particularly to cortical and Polyakov; striatal neurons. Mutant Htt affects many cellular processes, calcium Research centre for medical genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. homeostasis and mitochondrial dysfunction between others, still inves- Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) is an tigated to unveil their cause and effect relationship. An important tool autosomal dominant painless peripheral neuropathy characterized for HD management could be the identification of molecular markers by episodes of repeated focal pressure neuropathies at sites of en- related to disease progression, in syntomatic and pre-symptomatic trapment/compression, with a considerable variability in the clinical people, useful to draw early therapeutic treatments. By using quantita- course. tive RT-PCR we investigate the expression level of genes involved in Forty patients and twenty one healthy members from 26 unrelated calcium homeostasis in the peripheral blood of HD subjects and age- families with a clinical history and examination suggestive of HNPP and gender- matched healthy controls. The genes selected for this were observed. In 9 families HNPP were due to the common 1.5 Mb study were: a purinergic receptor, P2RY5, and three calcium pumps, deletion. This mutation was detected on the basis of a PCR result that SERCA2, SERCA3 and PMCA1. The results we obtained demonstrate demonstrated loss of heterozygosity for each of four polymorphic mark- that, with respect to the controls HD patients display: 1) similar levels ers in 17p11.2-12 region. Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Analysis of SERCA3 and PMCA1 mRNAs. 2) a significant reduction of P2RY5 (MLPA) was carried out for all patients and family members using a mRNA level, in an age-related progression. 3) a significant reduction of probes were designed to evaluate all PMP22 coding exons and five SERCA2 mRNA level at all ages. Furthermore, we propose SERCA2 control genes: TBP, SIRT3, USP3, B2M and EEF. Disease-cause dele- reduction as an early event in HD pathogenesis, since this pump is tion was found at the three more unrelated families. At the three cases down-regulated at the protein level in clonally striata-derived rat cells deletion de novo was the reason of disease and in the others families expressing a doxycycline-inducible mutant Htt. mutation persistence at several generations. At one patient the dis- ease-cause duplication of 17p11.2-12 region were detect. P12.089 In the absence of the deletion/duplication direct sequence analysis of Exclusion of trinucleotide repeat expansions in JPH3 gene the all PMP22 coding exons 2-5, including their intron/exon boundar- causing disease in italian patients with Huntington-like ies was undertaken. One c.353C>T (Thr118Met) the previously de- phenotype scribed mutation in a heterozygotic condition and one new mutation A. Patitucci, A. Magariello, T. Sprovieri, L. Citrigno, C. Ungaro, A. L. Gabriele, c.75_78+2delCAGCgt were detected in two families. F. L. Conforti, R. Mazzei, M. Muglia; Thereby exciting cause was found in total at 15 from 26 unrelated fami- Institute of Neurological Sciences, CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy. lies. In summary, we were able to detect genetic lesions in over 60% of Huntington disease-like 2 (HDL2) is a rare autosomal dominant dis- HNPP patients from Russia. order of the nervous system, apparently indistinguishable from Hun- tington disease (HD). HDL2 belongs to a group of HDL disorders, also P12.087 including Huntington disease-like 1 (HDL1), an autosomal dominant Huntington disease pathogenesis: molecular biomarker/s in disease caused by an extra octapeptide repeat in the prion protein human peripheral blood and clonally striata-derived rat cells gene (PRNP), on chromosome 20p12; and Huntington disease-like R. I. Lonigro1, E. Bregant1, L. Temil1, F. Marcuzzi1, N. Passon1, G. Siciliano2, E. 3 (HDL3), an autosomal recessive disease, mapped to 4p15.3. Fur- Unti2, G. Damante1; thermore, dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) and spinocer- 1Department of Science and Biomedical Technologies, University of Udine, ebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17), may also have overlapping symptoms Udine, Italy, 2Neuroscience Department, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. with HD. Huntington disease (HD) is an inherited neurodegenerative disease HDL2 is caused by the expansion above 40 CAG repeats, in a vari- characterized by chorea and psychiatric disturbance. It is caused by ably spliced exon of the junctophilin-3 gene (JPH3), on chromosome the expansion of CAG repeats in the first exon of the gene encoding 16q24.3. The pathogenic mechanism underlying HDL2 remains un- huntingtin (Htt). Normal people have a polymorphic repeat, up to 36 known. Different JPH3 transcripts caused by alternative splicing and CAG, encoding for glutamine (Gln). The mutant protein, with a lon- different polyadenylation sites have been described. ger poly-Q tract, becomes harmful to cells, particularly to cortical and To date, the expansion in JPH3 gene has been found only in patients striatal neurons. Mutant Htt affects many cellular processes, calcium with African ancestry. A very recent paper reports the first HDL2 case homeostasis and mitochondrial dysfunction between others, still inves- with an apparent European ancestry. In order to find a new founder tigated to unveil their cause and effect relationship. An important tool effect on Caucasian population, we performed a mutational analysis in for HD management could be the identification of molecular markers JPH3 gene in 132 Italian patients negative for HD disease. All patients related to disease progression, in syntomatic and pre-symptomatic tested were negative for the expansion on JPH3 according to the avail- people, useful to draw early therapeutic treatments. By using quantita- able data on Polish, Yugoslavian and Portuguese populations. tive RT-PCR we investigate the expression level of genes involved in Further investigations for HDL1 and HDL3 forms, as well as DRPLA calcium homeostasis in the peripheral blood of HD subjects and age- and SCA17, will be performed on our patients. However, the diagnosis and gender- matched healthy controls. The genes selected for this of HDL2 should always be considered, regardless of the apparent ori- study were: a purinergic receptor, P2RY5, and three calcium pumps, gin of the family, particularly in populations of mixed ancestry. SERCA2, SERCA3 and PMCA1. The results we obtained demonstrate that, with respect to the controls HD patients display: 1) similar levels P12.090 of SERCA3 and PMCA1 mRNAs. 2) a significant reduction of P2RY5 PcR of (cAG)n repeats in Bulgarian Huntington Horea patients mRNA level, in an age-related progression. 3) a significant reduction of A. Todorova1, T. Todorov1, B. Georgieva1, A. Kirov1, L. Angelova2, S. Kalen- SERCA2 mRNA level at all ages. Furthermore, we propose SERCA2 derova1, V. Mitev1; reduction as an early event in HD pathogenesis, since this pump is 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, down-regulated at the protein level in clonally striata-derived rat cells Bulgaria, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Varna, Bulgaria. expressing a doxycycline-inducible mutant Htt. Huntington disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenera- tive disorder that gives rise to progressive, selective (localized) neural P12.088 cell death associated with choreic movements, rigidity and dementia Huntington disease pathogenesis: molecular biomarker/s in frequently associated with seizures. The disease is associated with human peripheral blood and clonally striata-derived rat cells increases in the length of a CAG triplet repeat in IT15 gene called R. I. Lonigro1, E. Bregant1, L. Temil1, F. Marcuzzi1, N. Passon1, G. Siciliano2, E. ‘huntingtin’ located on chromosome 4p16.3. Unti2, G. Damante1; The normal size of the CAG triplet of the HD is ≤35 repeats, the patho- 1University, Udine, Italy, 2University, Neuroscience Department, Pisa, Italy. logical number of the CAG triplet is larger than 36 repeats with different Huntington disease (HD) is an inherited neurodegenerative disease penetrance (36-39 repeats - <90% penetrance; 40-41 repeats - 90- characterized by chorea and psychiatric disturbance. It is caused by 99% penetrance; 42 repeats or more - 100% penetrance).Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  We developed a new PCR protocol for precise calculation of (CAG)n of POLβ and FEN1 resulting in poor coordination of polymerase strand repeats using high betaine concentration. The amplification products displacement and flappy endonuclease activities. were separated by capillary electrophoresis on ABI 310 genetic ana- lyzer (Applied Biosystems). Using this protocol the CAG triple repeats P12.093 could be precisely measured by size. We analyzed 12 individuals from sporadic in Utero Generalized Edema caused by mutations in 5 unrelated Huntington families. Seven individuals were found to be the Lymphangiogenic Genes VEGFR3 and FOXc2 affected. The expanded fragments were measured to have 39, 41, 42, A. Mendola1, A. Ghalamkarpour1, C. Debauche2, E. Haan3, N. Van Regemort- 43, 46 and 49 CAG repeats respectively. In all families the CAG trip- er4, Y. Sznajer5, D. Thomas6, N. Revencu1, Y. Gillerot7, L. Boon8, M. Vikkula1; let expands further in the next generation. The proposed diagnostic 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, UCL, Brussels, method is very fast, cheap and easy to perform, which makes it very Belgium, 2Department of Neonatalogy, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Brus- useful in routine laboratory work. It can totally substitute the utilized so sels, Belgium, 3Women’s and Children’s Hospital and Department of Paediat- far Southern blot analysis rics, University of Adelaide, North Adelaide, Australia, 4Centre de Génétique ULB, Hôpital Erasme, Brussels, Belgium, 5Centre de Génétique ULB, Hôpital P12.091 Erasme and Unité de Génétique Clinique Pédiatrique, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, structural analysis of the huntingtin protein 6Unité de diagnostic anténatal, Hôpitaux Iris Sud, Brussels, Belgium, 7Center N. Ersoy, N. H. Aydogan Catik; for Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, Halic University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Tur- 8Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, UCL and Centre key. for Vascular Anomalies, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium. Huntington’s Disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegen- Hydrops fetalis is a serious fetal condition with high mortality rate. It is erative disorder. The mutation underlying HD is the expansion of the mostly sporadic; the etiology is unknown in about 25% of cases. In this polymorphic CAG tract in the first exon. Despite intensive research, study, we investigated the genetic causes of idiopathic sporadic prena- molecular pathology of HD has not been fully understood. In this study, tal generalized edema. In a series of 12 patients, in whom in utero gen- threading method is used is to model the huntingtin protein. By us- eralized skin edema or hydrops fetalis had been diagnosed, three lym- ing the VMD programme, various glutamine expansion mutations phangiogenic genes, VEGFR3, FOXC2 and SOX18, were screened. are created and changes in the protein structures are analyzed. The In three of the patients, we identified a mutation: two in VEGFR3 and most convenient five models of huntingtin indicated the dominance one in FOXC2. Two of the mutations were de novo and one was either of α-helices. Where α-helices are less common, long turns, coils and de novo or non-penetrant inherited. In these patients, the generalized β-sheets are recognized. In addition to that, mutant proteins with ex- edema resorbed spontaneously, either in utero or after birth. In the panded glutamines are created in silico and their structures are com- two individuals with a VEGFR3 mutation, edema remained limited to pared to the most probable huntingtin structure, 1WA5_B. According lower limbs. Therefore, mutations in the VEGFR3 and FOXC2 genes to the results, mutant proteins with 33-38Q did not show any signifi- account for a subset of patients with unexplained in utero general- cant change, however 39 or more glutamines caused conformational ized subcutaneous edema and hydrops fetalis without family history changes like lengthened and increased turns and coils and shortened of lymphedema. These data expand our understanding of the etiology α-helices. In this situation, protein may gain non-covalent interactions of these phenotypes and suggest that lymphangiogenic genes should within itself or with other proteins and aggregate in the form of twisted be screened for mutations in sporadic patients diagnosed with fetal β-sheets. These changes may render the protein more prone to prote- edema. olysis. In this way, toxic protein fragments carrying the glutamine tract are favored. On the other hand, usual proteolysis may not take place, P12.094 which may cause toxicity by increasing the half life of the protein. Also, Hyperferritinémia and mutations in the promoter of HAmP conformational change may lead to misfolding and aggregation of the S. Pissard1,2, V. Koubi1, F. Houriez1, G. Legac3,4; proteolysis-resistant protein in the cell. Thus, conformational changes 1aphp, Hop H. mondor, Creteil, France, 2University Paris 12, Creteil, France, in the mutant huntingtin give some clues about the neurodegenerative 3Inserm U613, Brest, France, 4EFS, chu de Brest, Brest, France. pathways in HD. Hepcidin (gene HAMP , 19q13) is a protein which is supposed to regu- late iron uptake or recycling through binding to the iron export protein P12.092 : the ferroportin (gene SLC 40 A1, 2q32).It is secreted by the liver and somatic instability of cAG repeats in Huntington‘s Disease: role considered as a key iron-regulatory hormone linking the liver’s “iron of oxidative DNA damage and Base Excision Repair sensor” to bowel absorption. High iron storage induce the expression A. Goula1, D. Wilson2, Y. Trottier1, K. Merienne1; of hepcidin and thus the decrease of absorption. The Molecular de- 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2NIA/NIH, Baltimore, MD, United States. fects of its gene are associated with a class of hyperferritinemia called Huntington’s disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disorder, caused by hemochromatosis type 2b (OMIM : 606464). We have screened the CAG repeats extension encoding a toxic polyglutamine expansion in HAMP gene in patients displaying abnormal iron parameters not linked the huntingtin protein. Instability of the HD mutation leads to age-de- to a mutation in HFE or SCL40 A1 genes. We found two new mutations pendent and tissue-specific somatic expansion. Interestingly, the brain in the promoter : c. -153 C>G and c. -188 C>T. The first variant affects region preferentially degenerating, the striatum, is highly unstable, a binding site for BMP which was described to control hepcidin promot- while the disease-spared cerebellum is rather stable. Recently, the er activation. Functional studies of other mutations located in this bind- glycosylase Ogg1, which initiates Base Excision Repair (BER), was ing site confirmed its’ functional importance (G. Legac and J. Rochette, shown to promote somatic instability, suggesting that oxidative DNA personal communication).The second one was found several time in damage and BER drive this process. patients originated from Africa and screened for iron metabolism dis- We show that oxidative DNA damage is specifically increased at the orders. As it was recently published [J. Mol Med, (2008) 86:531-540], CAG-expanded locus in R6/1 HD mice. Surprisingly, levels of oxidative the proximal part of the promoter plays a crucial role in the regulation lesions are similar in striatum and cerebellum, and in young and aged of hepcidin expression. These observations could represent natural tissues. Thus, accumulation of oxidative lesions at the CAG repeats variants of hepcidin expression allowing to understand the regulation is neither tissue- nor age-dependent, indicating that oxidative DNA pathway of this gene and consequences of its perturbation. Functional damage at the CAG-expanded locus is necessary but not sufficient study of the second mutation is ongoing to trigger somatic instability. Protein levels and activities of major BER players were analyzed in the striatum and in the cerebellum of R6/1 P12.095 mice. We show in particular that FEN1, the flappy endonuclease in- Probing the oligogenic nature of idiopathic chronic pancreatitis: volved in Long-Patch BER (LP-BER) subpathway, is much less active first analysis of five susceptibility genes in a large cohort of in the striatum than in the cerebellum of R6/1 mice. Using chromatin young patients immunoprecipitation, we finally show that POLβ is specifically enriched E. Masson1,2, J. M. Chen1,3,4, M. P. Audrézet1,2, A. Dabricot2, V. Scotet1,4, C. Le at the CAG-expanded locus in the striatum of aged R6/1 mice, but Maréchal1,2,4, C. Férec1,2,4; not in their cerebellum. This supports that LP-BER triggers somatic 1Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U613, CAG expansion in the aging striatum, the inappropriate stoichiometry Brest, France, 2Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) Brest, Hôpital Morvan,Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et d’Histocompatibilité, Brest, France, started at age 15 with unsteady gait. Presently she has moderate gait 3Etablissement Français du Sang (EFS) – Bretagne, Brest, France, 4Université ataxia which worsens episodically and in association with vertigo. Ex- de Bretagne Occidentale (UBO), Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la amination revealed moderate truncal and limb ataxia. The 23 year old Santé, Brest, France. male’s (P2) symptoms started at age 12 with imbalance, 2 years later Introduction: Chronic pancreatitis (CP) is an inflammatory disease of dysarthria and episodic diplopia occurred. Examination revealed ocu- the pancreas. In developed countries, alcohol explains the majority lomotor apraxia, nystagmus, dysarthria, distal atrophy and spasticity of of the CP cases, followed by “idiopathic” causes which account for the legs, increased reflexes, pyramidal signs, truncal and limb ataxia. about 20% of the cases. Mutations in five genes, the cationic tryp- The 54 year old male (P3) has a progressive imbalance since the age sinogen (PRSS1) gene, the pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor of 40. Now he has oculomotor apraxia, truncal and limb ataxia, and (SPINK1) gene, the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regu- parkinsonian symptoms. All patients had increased AFP and cerebellar lator (CFTR) gene, the calcium sensing receptor (CASR) gene and the atrophy. Sequence analysis of the SETX gene in all patients revealed chymotrypsinogen C (CTRC) gene, have been found to be associated novel mutations: P1 had homozygous R1606X mutation resulting in with CP. In order to determine the relative contribution of these genes premature termination of gene translation before the helicase domain. in idiopathic CP (ICP), we recruited 239 patients who have developed P2 was compound heterozygous for the L2155W and R2444C muta- the disease before 20 years. tions in the helicase domain. P3 had homozygous T1854A mutation Methods: Coding regions of each gene were analyzed by either dena- localized close to the helicase domain. In conclusion: patients with mu- turing high-performance liquid chromatography, high-resolution melt- tations resulting in dysfunction of helicase domain have earlier age of ing or direct sequencing. Quantitative fluorescent multiplex PCR was onset and more severe clinical symptoms. This could be explained by performed to screen genomic rearrangements. the role of this domain in DNA repair, replication and RNA splicing. Results: Some 50% of the ICP patients carried at least one mutation in one of these genes. First, about 30% of the patients carried at least P12.098 one mutation in the CFTR gene including the IVS8-T5 variant, and Allelic heterogeneity of TMPRSS mutations 10% of the patients were compound heterozygotes (mild/mild or se- F. Guillem1, C. Kannengiesser2,1, C. Oudin2, A. Marfaing-Koka3, L. Chaiba-Ber- vere/mild). Moreover, the p.N34S polymorphism of SPINK1 was found roukeche3, J. Donadieu4, F. Toutain5, M. Da Silva5, B. Isidor6, G. Margueritte7, P. in about 15% of patients and 14 patients carried one mutation in the Aguilar-Martinez8, C. Beaumont1, B. Grandchamp2,1; CTRC gene. “Gain of function” mutations in the PRSS1 gene (11/239) 1Université Paris Diderot U773, Paris, France, 2AP-HP, Bichat, génétique, Paris, and CASR mutations (4/239) were rarely found. Finally, 27 patients France, 3AP-HP, Beclere, Hématologie, Paris, France, 4AP-HP, Trousseau, were trans-heterozygotes. hématologie oncologie pédiatrique, Paris, France, 5GH Havre hématologie Conclusion: These results demonstrated that about 50% of the pa- pédiatrique, Havre, France, 6CHU Nantes Génétique médicale, Nantes, France, tients labeled as ICP had, in fact, a genetic defect, and revealed the 7CHR montpellier, A de Villeneuve, pédiatrie, Montpellier, France, 8CHR mont- complex nature of ICP. pellier, Saint Eloi, pédiatrie, Montpellier, France. Matriptase-2 is a transmembrane serine protease encoded by the TM- P12.096 PRSS6 gene that negatively regulates hepcidin expression. TMPRSS6 mutation scanning in the IKBKG gene in incontinentia Pigmenti, mutations have been reported in several patients with iron deficiency methods and results anemia refractory to oral iron therapy (IRIDA), an autosomal recessive A. H. van der Hout, P. Grootscholten, R. Sinke; disease characterised by low serum iron, low transferrin saturation and Department of Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands. inappropriate high level of plasma hepcidin. Here we report 8 novel Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a rare neurocutaneous X-dominantly cases from 6 families with TMPRSS6 mutations. Four patients were inherited disorder, prevalence approximately 1/50,000. Besides skin compound heterozygotes for 2 missense mutations targeting different and neurological abnormalities, there is ophthalmologic and dental subdomains (families I,II,III). Two brothers (family IV) were homozy- involvement. The skin abnormalities appear in three stages, starting gous for a frameshift deletion. Finally, in two patients (cases 7,8) the in the neonatal period. After childhood hypopigmented lines are left. mutation was found in only one allele. A large range of serum hepcidin Skin abnormalities follow the lines of Blaschko. IP is observed almost concentration was found in different patients. All patients but two broth- exclusively in girls, affected boys die in utero. Female patients show ers (family II) were not sensitive to oral iron supplementation and had extremely skewed X-inactivation in DNA isolated from blood. Rare sur- received IV iron which resulted in an increase in the serum ferritin and viving male patients are mostly mosaics or have an XXY karyotype. IP almost complete correction of the anemia. After a course of IV iron, is caused by mutations in the IKBKG gene (kinase of inhibitor of kappa the response was usually sustained, with hemoglobin levels reaching light polypeptide gene enhancer in B cells gamma, also called NEMO), near normal values for several months. This observation supports the on Xq28. Mutation scanning of IKBKG is complicated by the presence idea that in the presence of abnormally elevated hepcidin levels, a part of a flanking pseudogene, identical to the functional IKBKG gene only of infused iron is sequestered in macrophages then is subsequently lacking exons 1 and 2. In most IP patients the causative mutation in slowly released and utilized by the erythropoietic cells. Our results IKBKG is a deletion of exons 4-10. This mutation can be identified by suggest that IRIDA is a relatively benign genetic disease provided ap- a specific PCR reaction. If no deletion is detected all exons are se- propriate therapy is given to the patients. quenced following specific amplification of the functional IKBKG gene by long-range PCR. We screened 79 index cases, 9 were males. We Hb ferri- Matriptase-2 protein domain age serum Hb identified the classical deletion in 37 female patients. In addition, we Family TMPRSS6 genotype in at Current tin modified/ at hepcidin (g/ identified 11 different mutations in 11 female patients. In only 9 patients Case affected subjects$ diagnosis age (µg/ aa change diagnosis (ng/ml)*§ dl)§ with extremely skewed X-inactivation no mutation was identified. In (g/dl) l)§ none of the male cases a mutation was found. In 30% of cases the I LDLRA2/ LDLRA2 [c.1561 G>A]+[c.1564 G>A] 1y 10 11y 443 347 11.9 deletion appeared de novo. All mutations other than the classical dele- 1 [p.D521N]+[p.E522K] tion introduce premature stopcodons. II [c.1253A>G]+[c.704 T>C] CUB1/CUB2 6y 7.7 11y 62 90 12 2, 3 [p.L235P]+[p.Y418C]¤ 7m 9 8y 81 115 12 III [c.2293 C>G(+) SEA/ SP P12.097 4y 10.2 7y ND 20 10.8 4 c.340 G>A] [p.E114K (+)p.P765A] Novel point mutations in the senataxin gene of three patient with IV 15y 7.6 28 4288 230 12 ataxia and oculomotor apraxia type 2 (AOA2) 5, 6 [c.1813 delG]+[c.1813 delG] [p.A605PfsX8]+[p.A605PfX8]¤ 11y 7.4 17 ND 66 12 K. Pentelenyi1, G. Aniko1, W. Stefan2, D. Friday2, M. Molnar1; V [c.1369+4 A>T]+[?] [splicing mutation£]+[?] 52y 10.6 61y 87# 28# 9.2# 1Clinical and Research Centre for Molecular Neurology Semmelweis University, 7 Budapest, Hungary, 2Centogene GmbH, Rostock, Germany. VI SEA/ ? [c.335 G>T]+[?] 13y ? 40y ND 40 12 AOA2 characterized by progressive cerebellar atrophy, axonal neu- 8 [p.R112L]+[?] ropathy and increased AFP. It is caused by mutations in the SETX gene. To date more than 35 mutations in 65 patients have been de- scribed in the literature. Here we describe 3 AOA2 patients harboring new senataxin mutations. The 22 year old woman’s (P1) symptomsMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  $ cDNA sequence reference AY055384 P12.101 * normal range : 28-244 ng/ml (unpublished data, Ganz et al) Karak syndrome in two saudi Arabian families with linkage to § current values for patients under iron therapy (oral or IV) excepted for patient 7, indicated by #. Hb of patient 7 reached 11.5 in 2001 PLA2G6 locus after IV iron therapy. H. Azzedine1, M. A. M. Salih2, E. Mundwiller1, A. Khan3, A. Aldriss4, E. A. Elma- ¤ patient also heterozygote for the p.R446W lik5, M. M. Kabiraj6, G. Stevanin1; £ donor splice site of intron 11 is predicted to be suppressed 1INSERM/UPMC UMRS 975 (exU679), Paris, France, 2Division of Pediatric abreviations : IRIDA : iron-refractory iron deficiency anemia, LDLRA :low density lipoprotein receptor class A domain, CUB : complement Neurology, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, factor C1r/C1s, urchin embryonic growth factor and bone morphogenetic protein, SEA : sea urchin sperm protein, enteropeptidase,agrin, 3King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4Division of Pediat- SP: serine protease, y year, m month ric Neurology, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 5Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, P12.099 Saudi Arabia, 6Division of Clinical Neurophysiology, Department of Neurosci- The first report of IVSI-II(T>C) from Iran in three β-Thalassemia ence, Armed Forces Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. carrier A hetererogeneous group of severe neurological disorders like Aceru- Z. Kaini Moghaddam, M. Karimipour, M. Taghavi, E. Shafieyeh, M. Moham- loplasminaemia, Neuroferritinopathy, Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome, madi, M. Jafarinejad, S. Fathiazar, S. Zeinali; HARP syndrome, and Fridreich ataxia involve excess brain iron ac- Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cumulation. The “eye of the tiger” sign is a common neuroradiologi- β-Thalassemia is the most frequent single gene disorder in Iran.The cal finding in neurodegeneration with iron brain accumulation type 1 cause of the disease is defect in the synthesis of β- globin chain and and 2 (NBIA1, 2), infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) and Karak has been reported from different parts of the world . Ordinairly, in any syndrome (KS). Mutations in PANK2 and PLA2G6 genes were impli- population there are specific mutations. The type of β-thalassemia mu- cated in NBIA, INAD and KS disorders. We describe 2 consanguine- tation has influence on the β- globin chain synthesis represented by β0 ous Saudi families with Karak syndrome. These consisted of 4 affected , β+ and β++ thalassemia. β -Thalassemia is very prevalent in northen individuals (1 male and 3 females, aged 5 - 24 years). Onset ranged proviences of Iran and the most regional a common mutation is IV- between 1 and 7 years with progressive cerebellar ataxia and spastic- SII-I(G>A). Some of the β-Thalassemia carriers reffered to our clinic ity associated, later, with extrapyramidal signs, intellectual decline and for mutation detection remained uncharacterized after ARMS analysis axonal form of Charcot-Marie- Tooth disease (CMT2). Ambulation was for known mutations. Among These individuals, three carriers were lost between 4 1/2 and15 years. One male patient died at 24 years. identified by direct sequencing of the PCR-amplified product, which Ophthalmic evaluations revealed abnormal vertical saccades and pur- had T>C substituation HBB.C.92+2 T>C (IVSI-II). Here we report a suit. Brain MRI showed iron deposition in the putamen in all patients. mutation in β-globin gene found in three individual carriers of β-Thal- These 2 families were genotyped for PANK2 and PLA2G6 loci using assemia referred to our lab.After obtaining written informed consent, 10 microsatellite markers. PANK2 locus was excluded while assign- genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral leukocytes by salting out ment of the families to the PLA2G6 locus was established by homozy- method. ARMS-PCR was exploited for detecting common mutations gocity mapping. Direct sequencing of the PLA2G6 gene is in progress and DNA sequencing was performed for finding unknown mutations in as well as the genotyping of 3 other consanguineous families with the β-globin gene.Among carreiers of β -Thalassemia referred to us three same phenotype and belonging to same country. The results of these had the above mutation.To our best knowledge this is the first report of investigations will be shown during the meeting. this mutation from Iran.The indices (MCV and MCH) and HbA of these 2 carriers were like reports in globin gene server. P12.102 molecular genetic analysis of families with Keratosis Follicularis P12.100 Spinularis Decalvans in a refined KFSD locus mutations spectrum of juvenile polyposis syndrome in Poland E. Aten1, R. H. A. M. Vossen1, I. B. Hooijkaas1, M. J. R. van der Wielen1, E. M. Podralska1, W. Cichy2, M. Teisseyre3, J. Steffen4, D. Nowakowska5, E. Czk- Bakker1, J. C. Oosterwijk2, M. H. Breuning1, J. T. Den Dunnen1; wanianc6, M. Skrzypczak1, R. Slomski1, A. Plawski7; 1Center of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Poznan, Poland, 3Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warszawa, Poland, Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. 4Institute of Oncology, Warszawa, Poland, 5Institute of Oncology, Poznan, Po- KFSD (Keratosis Follicularis Spinularis Decalvans, OMIM 308800) is land, 6Institute of Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital, Lodz, Poland, 7Instytitute a rare genetic disorder affecting both skin and eyes. It is characterized of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland. by follicular hyperkeratosis of the skin developing into patchy scarring Juvenile polyposis (JP) is a genetically determined predisposition to alopecia and loss of the follicles of the hair, eyelashes, and eyebrows. occurrence of multiple juvenile polyps in gastrointestinal tract and as- Associated eye symptoms include photophobia in childhood and/or sociated malformations such as: porphyria, psoriasis, mental retarda- blepharitis and corneal dystrophy. Due to the clinical heterogeneity tion, congenital heart disease, cleft lip and palate, epilepsy, hereditary of KFSD the definitive diagnosis is often challenging. KFSD closely haemorrhagic telangiectasia, digital clubbing in children. Hypertrophic resembles other disorders where abnormal keratinization is involved pulmonary osteoarthropathy and malrotation of the gut also could be such as keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei (KPAF), atrophoderma ver- observed. Prevalence of JP syndrome is 1 per 100000. The JP syn- miculatum (AV) and ichtyosis follicularis with atrichia and photophobia drome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and the risk of (IFAP). The question remains whether these syndromes are simply malignancy in JPS patient is increased and could be ranged more then variations of the same entity or truly independent. 60% in alimentary tract. We performed mutation analysis in DNA iso- Although an X-linked pattern of inheritance has been confirmed in two lated from 17 Polish patients with JPS. The entire coding sequence different families, the existence of a rare autosomal dominant variant of the BMPR1A and SMAD4 genes were studied. We used methods has been postulated. Linkage and recombination analysis in a large SSCP and HA analysis for mutation screening. The DNA fragment Dutch family identified two key recombinants mapping the KFSD locus presenting different migration patterns on the polyacrylamide gels to Xp22.11-p22.13. Towards identification of the causative gene, we were sequenced by direct PCR product sequencing using automated studied the large Dutch family and together with some other families DNA sequencer according to manufacturer’s instruction. In result of with a clinical diagnosis of KFSD using new molecular tools. 1M SNP molecular investigations we observed five mutations and ten exonic arrays were used to refine the locus to a 2.9 Mb region and to ex- polymorphism and intronic variations. Moreover, using the Multiplex clude the involvement of large deletions and duplications. At present, Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) - method with kit the 14 genes in the candidate gene interval are screened for possible P158-A1 (MCR Holland) we were able to detected five additional large pathogenic variants. Finally, whole genome gene expression profiling mutations. Detected the genomic deletions have size ranging from one is currently used to study differences between patient and control fi- exon to two whole genes. In our study in one case we observed dele- broblasts. tion both PTEN and BMPR1A genes. The study was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education projects no. 2PO5E02630 and N401 014435Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  P12.103 P12.105 Novel RDH12 and RPE65 gene variants associated congenital c-terminal deletions of y+LAt-1 do not affect the dimerization of Amaurosis with Leber y+LAt-1/4F2hc transporter but can cause a targeting defect. F. Torricelli1, S. Palchetti1, I. Passerini1, A. Sodi2, C. De Sanzo1, F. Girolami1, M. Toivonen1,2, K. Huoponen1, O. Simell3, J. Mykkänen3; U. Menchini2; 1Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Institute of Biomedicine, 1AOU Careggi-SOD Diagnostica Genetica, Florence, Italy, 2AOU Careggi-II University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Turku Graduate School for Biomedical Sci- Clinica Oculistica, Florence, Italy. ences (TuBS), Turku, Finland, 3Department of Paediatrics, University of Turku, Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is a severe retinal dystrophy in- Turku, Finland. volving both cone and rod systems and causing severe visual impair- Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI) is an autosomal recessive disorder ment. of cationic amino acid transport at the basolateral plasma membrane LCA is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Actually 11 genes caused by mutations in the SLC7A7 gene encoding y+LAT-1 protein. has been identified to be involved in the pathogenesis of the dis- The active amino acid transporter consists of the light subunit y+LAT-1, ease: AIPL1, CRB1, CRX, LRAT, GUCY2D, IMPDH1, TULP1,RDH12, which determines the substrate specificity as the heavy subunit 4F2hc RPE65, RPGRIP1, CEP290. guides the complex to the membrane. 4F2hc also regulates other cel- Even if these genes code for proteins playing different biological rate, lular functions including cell activation, proliferation, survival and apop- there is not a wide-range of phenotypes related to different mutations, tosis. and the clinical features related to different mutations in different genes We reported previously that y+LAT-1 protein with LPI missense muta- seems to be similar. tion is carried to the plasma membrane, while frameshift mutants are In this study 3 patients of 3 different families were examined for RDH12, cytoplasmic. Also, truncated y+LAT-1s lacking part of C-terminal tail are RPE65 e GUCY2D genes, by direct sequencing. correctly localized while larger deletions remain subcellular. However, The first patient showed one novel RDH12 missense variant the y+LAT-1-4F2hc interaction occurs regardless of the targeting muta- (p.Val233Glu) in homozygous state, and one previously described tions. In the current study, we use C-terminal deletions of y+LAT-1 to missense mutation(p.Pro701Ser) in GUCY2D gene, in heterozygous study their dimerization using flow cytometry FRET and the effects of state. their expression on the cells. The second patient showed one novel RDH12 stop variant Our results indicate that the interaction of y+LAT-1 and 4F2hc within (p.Trp304Stop), in homozygous state. The same mutation was identi- the cell is not disrupted by any of the deleted y+LAT-1 proteins. The fied in both clinically healthy heterozygote parents of this patient. localization of the small deletions is similar to the wild type, whereas The third patient showed two RPE65 mutations in heterozyuos state: proteins lacking more than 60 amino acids remain cytoplasmic. Trans- the novel variant c.440_441delCA, and the described mutation fection of C-terminally deleted y+LAT-1s results in reduction of y+LAT- p.Arg91Trp. 1-CFP expressing cells compared to transfection of wild-type y+LAT-1. Large-scale molecular screening of LCA-associated genes will prob- In addition, expression of truncated y+LAT-1 affects cellular viability, ably permit a better understanding of the physiopathological conse- which may be due to scavenging of 4F2hc by the mistargeted cyto- quences of the different gene mutations with more reliable prognostic plasmic y+LAT-1, leading to shortage of 4F2hc in the plasma mem- evaluations in clinical practice. brane and reduced cell proliferation compared to the cells expressing normally targeted 4F2hc. P12.104 A new splicing mutation in HPRt1 gene in a Romany boy - a P12.106 genotype-phenotype reference Gene expression profiling of haematological and immunological J. Behunova1, J. Ferenczova1, L. Stolnaja2, H. Vlaskova2, L. Dvorakova2, L. deficiencies in lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI) patients Podracka1; J. Salmi1, M. Tringham1, L. Tanner2, K. Huoponen1, K. Näntö-Salonen2, H. Ni- 1Safarik University Children Hospital, I. Department of Pediatrics, Kosice, Slo- inikoski2, O. Simell2, J. Mykkänen2; vakia, 2Charles University in Prague, 1st Medical Faculty, Institute of Inherited 1Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Metabolic Disorders of 1st Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Finland, 2Department of Paediatrics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. Prague, Czech Republic. Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI; MIM222700) is a rare autosomal re- Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is an X-linked disorder of purine methabolism cessive disorder caused by a defect of cationic amino acid transport caused by Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) in the small intestine and kidney tubules. All Finnish patients share deficiency. Mild forms are termed X-linked hyperuricaemia or Kelly- the same homozygous mutation c.1181-2A>T (c.859-2A>T) in the Segmiller syndrome, clinically presenting with gout, eventually also SLC7A7 gene. Altogether 51 mutations have been found worldwide mild neurological symptoms. Severe HPRT deficiency additionally but the Finnish founder mutation has not been detected in any other leads to nephrolithiasis with chronic renal failure and serious neurolog- population. The main symptoms of LPI comprise protein aversion after ic impairment - psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, automutilations. weaning, failure to thrive, muscle hypothonia, osteoporosis and hepa- The Romany patient described here clinically presented with acute re- tosplenomegaly. However, some findings vary markedly even in the nal failure already in newborn age. His present status (age 3 years) same family, and may include severe renal and pulmonary complica- represents severe delay - no sitting, no speach, hypotonia, dyskinesis. tions, such as end-stage renal disease and alveolar proteinosis. Some Self-biting started in his 2nd year of life. Renal functions are reduced, patients suffer from normochromic anaemia with poikilocytosis and an- ultrasound shows kidney calcifications. isocytosis and immunological problems with leukopenia and deficien- Analyzing a HPRT1 gene of the patient, we have identified a novel cies in T- and B-cell functions. splicing mutation c.27+2T>C in intron 1 (IVS 1+2T>C). The influence We have used microarray technology and quantitative real-time PCR of mutation´ impact to mRNA splicing was evaluated by cDNA analy- to find out which other genes than SLC7A7 may affect the phenotype sis. Sequencing of cDNA containing exons 1,2 and a part of 3, prooved of the patients. The gene expression profiles were obtained from the defective splicing of mRNA. Mutation c.27+2T>C abolishes the natural peripheral whole-blood cells. We found systematic up-regulation of donor splice site and an alternative splice site within intron 1 is used genes encoding proteins participating in erythropoiesis, heme synthe- (r.27_28ins49). The protein translated from the mutated RNA is pre- sis, erythrocyte membrane structure, transport, enzymatic functions dicted to contain only 26 amino acid residues. However, according to and blood group antigens. Down-regulated genes encoded e.g. inter- our results, the majority of mutated mRNA undergoes nonsense-medi- leukins, interleukin receptors, chemokines, regulators of complement ated mRNA decay and the defective protein is not synthesized. activity and histocompatibility complex proteins. These differentially The severe mutation described here occured de novo in the patient expressed genes may, indeed, light the background of haematological and led to full-blown Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Our results in accor- and immunological problems observed in LPI patients. dance with published data point to a good genotype-phenotype cor- relation in patients with HPRT deficiency. Grants´ support: VZ MSM CR 0021620806, VZ MZ CR 64165Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  P12.107 P12.109 clinical and genetic heterogeneity of mal de meleda: exclusion mutation analyses of MYH, ACTA, TAGLN, and TGFBR in of genetic linkage to the ARS gene in a tunisian family patients with suspected marfan syndrome M. Bchetnia1,2, R. Chakroun3, A. Ben Brick1, C. Charfeddine1, S. Boubaker4, A. H. Burri1, E. Arnold1,2, C. Henggeler1, R. Perez1, S. Alonso1, S. Fokstuen3, A. Dhahri Ben Osman3, S. Abdelhak1, M. Mokni2,3; Croquelois4, M. Rohrbach2, T. Carrel5, B. Steinmann2, W. Berger1, G. Matyas1; 1Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases Research Unit (MIGOD) 1Division of Medical Molecular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Institute of UR 26/04, Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Study of Hereditary Kera- Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Division of Me- tinization Disorders Research Unit (THK) UR 24/04, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, tabolism and Molecular Pediatrics, University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Swit- Tunis, Tunisia, 3Dermatology Department, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunis, Tuni- zerland, 3Geneva University Hospitals, Division of Medical Genetics, Geneva, sia, 4Anatomo-Pathology Department, Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia. Switzerland, 4Neuropsychology and Neurorehabilitation Department, Centre Background. Mal de Meleda (MdM) is a rare form of palmoplantar Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Clinic for Cardiovas- keratoderma (PPK) with autosomal recessive transmission. It is char- cular Surgery, University Hospital, Berne, Switzerland. acterized by diffuse erythema and hyperkeratosis of the palms and Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant disorder of connec- soles. Recently, mutations in the ARS (component B) gene (ARS, tive tissue, which displays variable manifestations in the skeletal, ocu- MIM: 606119) on chromosome 8q24.3 have been identified in families lar, and cardiovascular systems. Patients with suspected MFS referred with this disorder. to us for molecular genetic testing carry the disease-causing mutation Objective. Clinical and genetic investigation of a consanguineous fam- in FBN1, TGFBR1, and TGFBR2 in the majority of cases. Negative ily from Northern Tunisia with transgressive palmoplantar keratoderma genetic testing results can be due to assay limitations or because the closely resembling the Mal de Meleda phenotype. disease-causing mutation is located in another gene. Indeed, muta- Methods. A family with six members, among them two were affected tions in MYH11 and ACTA2 have recently been associated with famil- individuals, was recruited for this study. Mutation screening of the ARS ial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections (TAAD), which overlap gene was performed by direct sequencing and haplotype analysis with cardiovascular features of MFS, and TAGLN has been predicted using 2 microsatellite markers (D8S1836 and D8S1751) flanking the in silico as a candidate gene for TAAD. Furthermore, considering the ARS gene. TGF-beta pathway, one could also expect mutations in the TGFBR3 Results. No mutation was found in the coding region and exon-intron gene. Here, we analysed MYH11, ACTA2, TAGLN, and TGFBR3 in junctions of the ARS gene within the explored family. This genetic ex- patients with suspected MFS in whom previous mutation analyses clusion of the ARS gene was confirmed by haplotype analysis and Lod of FBN1 and/or TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 detected no mutation. Exon- score calcul. by-exon gDNA sequencing of 24 (MYH11), 89 (ACTA2), 46 (TAGLN), Conclusion. This is the second Tunisian Family with “MdM like” pheno- and 12 (TGFBR3) unrelated patients revealed two putative pathogenic type. Our findings give further evidence for the molecular heterogene- mutations in MYH11 (p.Leu1752_Glu1755dup and p.R1794Q) as well ity of the MdM phenotype in North African population. as one missense mutation in ACTA2 (p.I371T). Screening of TAGLN and TGFBR3 revealed no putative pathogenic sequence changes. P12.108 Although the number of patients analysed in this study is still small, Quantitative sequence analysis of FBN premature termination our results indicate that screening for MYH11 and ACTA2 mutations codons provides evidence for incomplete NmD in leukocytes should be considered in patients with suspected MFS in whom muta- I. Magyar1, D. Colman1, E. Arnold1,2, D. Baumgartner3, A. Bottani4, S. Fokstu- tion analyses of FBN1, TGFBR1, and TGFBR2 revealed no disease- en4, M. C. Addor5, W. Berger1, T. Carrel6, B. Steinmann2, G. Mátyás1; causing mutation, in particular in patients with cardiovascular compli- 1University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Genetics, Division of Medical Molecu- cations lacking skeletal features of MFS. lar Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 2University Children’s Hospital, Division of Metabolism and Molecular Pediatrics, Zurich, P12.110 Switzerland, 3Innsbruck Medical University, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Identification of genome wide targets of the UPF3B dependent Innsbruck, Austria, 4Geneva University Hospitals, Division of Medical Genet- nonsense-mediated mRNA surveillance pathway in patients with ics, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Service of mutations in UPF3B using exon array Medical Genetics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6University Hospital, Clinic for Car- L. Nguyen, C. Shoubridge, A. Gardner, L. Vandeleur, M. Corbett, J. Gecz; diovascular Surgery, Berne, Switzerland. SA Pathology, North Adelaide, Australia. In order to assess the pathogenic effects of mutations, we improved, Non-sense mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a universal RNA surveil- evaluated, and used Sanger sequencing for quantification of SNP vari- lance pathway that among other functions degrades mRNAs bearing ants in transcripts and gDNA samples. This improved assay resulted premature termination codons (PTC). We recently showed mutations in highly reproducible relative allele frequencies (e.g. for a heterozy- in UPF3B, an important member of this pathway, caused syndromic gous gDNA 50.0±1.4%, P=0.05, and for a missense mutation-bearing and nonsyndromic mental retardation (MR). To assess the impact of transcript 46.9±3.7%, P=0.05) with a lower detection limit of 3-9%. It UPF3B null mutations and identify relevant genes regulated by NMD, provided excellent accuracy (e.g. for a duplicated gDNA 66.6±2.2%, we performed expression profiling using RNA isolated from control and P=0.05) and linear correlation between expected and observed relative patient lymphoblastoid cells using Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST ar- allele frequencies. This sequencing assay, which can also be used for rays. Compared to controls, 633 genes were significantly de-regulated the quantification of CNVs, methylations, mosaicisms, and DNA pools, in patients (30% up, 70% down, false discovery rate = 10%), including enabled us to analyze transcripts of the FBN1 gene in fibroblasts and down-regulation of UPF3B. Hence, NMD is only partially compromised blood samples of patients with suspected Marfan syndrome not only in the absence of UPF3B as its own PTC containing mRNA is degrad- qualitatively but also quantitatively. We present a total of 19 novel and ed. Comparison with previous microarray studies from UPF1, UPF2 18 known FBN1 sequence variants leading to a premature termina- or UPF3B knock down cell lines in human, fly and yeast generated tion codon (PTC), 26 of which we analyzed by quantitative sequencing minimal overlap. Such low correspondence indicates these studies do both at gDNA and cDNA levels. The relative amounts of PTC-contain- reflect the situation of a real knock out or reflects differences in the ing FBN1 transcripts in fresh and PAXgene-stabilized blood samples tissue types and platforms used. Among the significantly de-regulated were significantly higher (33.0±3.9% to 80.0±7.2%, P=0.05) than those genes identified in patients with mutations in UPF3B, ARHGAP24 was detected in affected fibroblasts with inhibition of nonsense-mediated highly up-regulated. ARHGAP24 is a negative regulator of Rho-GT- mRNA decay (NMD) (11.0±2.1% to 25.0±1.8%, P=0.05), while in fi- Pase and has role in regulating cell polarity. We show that PC12 cells broblasts without NMD inhibition no mutant alleles could be detected. over expressing ARHGAP24 failed to differentiate into neuronal-like These results provide evidence for incomplete NMD in leukocytes and cells upon treatment with nerve growth factor. We have identified the have particular importance for RNA-based analyses not only in FBN1 bona-fide targets of the UPF3B dependent NMD pathway and suggest but also in other genes. up-regulation of ARHGAP24 contributes to the phenotypes seen in pa- tients with MR due to mutations in UPF3B.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  P12.111 range of clinical features in various combinations. In the present Recessive congenital methaemoglobinaemia type ii: a novel study, we described a patient with a form of leukodystrophy showing mutation in the NADH-cytochrome b5reductase gene in a psychomotor and neurodevelopmental delay, mild hyperintensity of Russian patient posterior periventicular white matter, spastic paraplegia, generalized N. Galeeva, A. Polyakov; clonic seizures and congenital deafness. He also suffered from a se- Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. vere tetraplegia, with central blindness and swallowing difficulty. Brain Hereditary methemoglobinemia is an autosomal recessive disorder is MRI showed involvement of the interpeduncular nucleus and central caused by NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase (cytb5r) deficiency. Two tegmental tract, white matter abnormalities and cerebellar atrophy. A forms of cytb5r are known, a soluble form and a membrane-bound whole mitochondrial genome screening in this patient revealed the form, and are localized in different cellular compartments. Hereditary presence of 19 reported polymorphisms and an undescribed A to G methemoglobinemia has been classified into two types, an erythro- heteroplasmic mutation at nucleotide 8411 (M16V) affecting a highly cyte type (type I) and a generalized type (type II). Type 1 is character- conserved region of the mitochondrial ATPase 8 protein. This mutation ized clinically by a single symptom, cyanosis, and biochemically by a could be associated to the disease in the tested patient who belongs deficiency of the red cell-soluble form of the enzyme. In type II, the to haplogroup U. cyanosis is accompanied by neurological impairment, mental retarda- tion and reduced life expectancy. Type II is characterized by deficiency P12.114 the soluble and the membrane-bound forms of the enzyme in various molecular genetic exploration-diagnostic tool for chronic tissues of patients. The cytb5r gene (DIA1) is 31-kb long, contains 9 granulomatous disease. case report exons, and has been localized to chromosome 22q 13-qter. M. Serban1, M. Bataneant1, C. Jinca1, D. Mihailov1, M. Puiu1, L. Dehelean1, L. We have investigated family with methemoglobulinemia type II from the Morodi2; Chechen Republic of the Russian Federation. There were 5 children 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes” Timisoara, Romania, Ti- in this family. First, second and fourth child was not affected. Third and misoara, Romania, 2Department of Infections and Pediatric Immunology, Medi- fifth child suffered from cyanosis and neurological impairment. Third cal and Health Science Center, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. child dead at the age of four years. We have investigated fifth child at Introduction: Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a heteroge- the age of 6 month and found a novel mutation (c.339insC) in exon 5 neous congenital immunodeficiency characterized by a profound of the gene DIA1 in homozygote. This insertion leads to appearance defect in the burst of oxygen consumption. Beside the genuine CGD premature stop codon. there are a lot of CGD-like syndromes, therefore a molecular genetic investigation is mandatory for a definite diagnosis, decisive for an ap- P12.112 propriate therapeutical decision. improved molecular diagnostics for patients with respiratory Case presentation: We present the case of a 8 years old boy with a chain complex deficiency history of recurrent episodes of fever, adenophlegmones and pulmo- M. Biste1, F. Madignier1, P. Freisinger2, B. Rolinski3, J. Mayr4, M. Tesarova5, R. nary infections since the age of 3 weeks. Hepatosplenomegaly as well Horvath3, W. Sper4, T. Meitinger1, H. Prokisch1; as pulmonary and vertebral aspergillosis with destruction of thoracic 1Technical University of Munich, Institute of Human Genetics, München, vertebrae D5-D7 characterized the clinical picture at admittance in Germany, 2Technical University of Munich, Stoffwechselzentrum Kinderklinik, our hospital. The suspicion of X-linked CGD was confirmed by absent München, Germany, 3Klinikum München GmbH, Medizet-Stoffwechselzentrum, respiratory burst and the presence of the genetic mutation (4. exon, München, Germany, 4Universität Salzburg, Kinderklinik, Salzburg, Austria, 5Uni- c.271C>T, p.R91X). Despite prolonged therapy, the patient continued versität Prag, Department of Pediatrics, Prag, Czech Republic. to present pulmonary and vertebral aspergillosis. Due to the presence Aim: Isolated respiratory chain complex I (RCCI)-deficiencies are the of an HLA-compatible brother, matched related PBSCT was performed most common form of mitochondrial diseases (round 25%). Clinically, under continuous antifungal treatment. Chimerism analysis showed the patients present a heterogeneous spectrum which can be multi- complete donor chimerism of granulocytes, monocytes, NK cells and systemic (e.g. neonatal lactic acidosis, Leigh syndrome) or with distinct CD19 lymphocytes and 85% and 96% donor chimerism of CD4 and symptoms (e.g. ataxia, myopathy). RCC I is composed of 45 different CD8 lymphocytes respectively. Respiratory burst performed showed subunits. The high number of genes involved is making the search for significant improvement. At 7 months after the HSCT, under antifungal the molecular basis of RCCI deficiency difficult. In routine diagnostics maintenance therapy, the patient is in good clinical condition with full the causal mutations can be identified in less than 10% of the pediatric donor chimerism and significantly improved radiologic findings on the patients with RCCI-deficiency. chest x-ray. Methods: A high-throughput molecular genetic screen for the RCCI Conclusion: Molecular genetic exploration proved the diagnosis of encoding genes was established. 92 families with isolated RCCI-de- CGD in our case. Its genetic marker 4 exon, c.271C>T, p.R91X was ficiency and previous exclusion of common mtDNA mutations were clinically expressed in a life-threatening infection, justifying a success- investigated by DNA melting profile analysis using an Idaho LightScan- fully undertaken hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. ner. To analyze genotype-phenotype correlations a clinical question- naire was developed based on the guidelines issued by the working P12.115 group on pediatric metabolic disorders. molecular mechanism underlining genetic defects in Results: We have screened 59 genes coding for the subunits and as- incontinentia Pigmenti sembly factors of RCCI. Causative mutations have been identified in M. Paciolla1, A. Pescatore1, F. Fusco1, J. Gauteron2, M. G. Miano2, G. Cour- 16% of patients which were inconspicuous in routine diagnostics. A tois2, M. V. Ursini1; single variant was identified in 30% of additional samples and in 54% 1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics “Adriano Buzzati Traverso” CNR, Naples, of samples no mutations have been found yet. The analysis shows Italy, 2INSERM U781 Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. typical clinical patterns correlated with mutations in specific genes. Incontinentia Pigmenti (IP) is an X-linked dominant genodermatosis, Conclusion: Molecular genetic diagnostics of RCCI-deficiency was im- lethal in male, caused by mutations in the Xq28 NEMO gene. NEMO is proved and prenatal diagnostics can be offered. Genotype-phenotype the essential subunit of the kinase complex IKK, required for the activa- correlations will enable more efficient diagnosis and allow predictions tion of NF-κB canonical pathway. The most frequent IP mutation (80%) on disease course. is a recurrent genomic exons 4-10 NEMO deletion. In addition, about 39 small mutations scattered along NEMO, have been reported. P12.113 In order to unravel molecular mechanism that underlines the altera- A novel mutation in the mitochondrial AtPase 8 gene in a patient tion of NF-κB activation in the pathology, we performed an analysis of with leukodystrophy the NEMO mutations associated to severe forms of IP. In particular, E. Mkaouar1, F. Kammoun2, I. Chamkha1, I. Hsairi2, C. Triki2, F. Fakhfakh1; we demonstrated that the A323P presents an impairment of (K63-) 1Laboratoire de genetique moleculaire humaine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service de polyubiquitination, which resulted from a detective interaction with Neurologie Infantile, C.H.U. Hédi Chaker de Sfax,, Sfax, Tunisia. TRAF6. This analysis allowed us to define the critical lysines residues Mitochondrial DNA defects were known to be associated with a wide of NEMO, target of TRAF6, that are required for proper response to spectrum of human diseases and patients might present with a wide multiple NF-κB activation signals, such as IL-1 and LPS. Starting fromMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  those evidences, we established hat other IP-associated NEMO muta- are indeed allelic. Interestingly, all mutations in the NHS gene causing tions, such as E57K and DeltaK90 showed a defective interaction with Nance-Horan Syndrome are protein truncating mutations. In contrast, TRAF6. The sum of this observation supports the view that multiple two X-linked cataract families have different copy number variations signal modifications, mainly polyubiquitination, that converge at NEMO of the NHS gene; an intragenic deletion and a complex duplication- are necessary events in IKK activation whose perturbation may cause triplication rearrangement. We suggest that both of these mutational human pathophysiology. events lead to altered transcriptional regulation of the NHS gene lead- ing to a milder phenotype than Nance-Horan syndrome. Analysis of P12.116 the position and sequences of the breakpoints pinpoints regulatory conventional mutations are associated with a different sequences for NHS gene expression, and also potential molecular phenotype than polyglutamine expansions in spinocerebellar mechanisms for non-recurrent non-homologous recombination. Our ataxias data show the importance of different mutational mechanisms leading A. Durr1,2, G. stevanin1,2, S. Forlani1, C. Cazeneuve2, C. Cagnoli3, K. P. to different severities of disease. Figueroa4, D. Lorenzo5, J. Johnson6, J. van de Leemput6, M. Viemont2, A. Camuzat1, A. Singleton6, L. Ranum5, S. Pulst4, A. Brusco3, E. Le Guern2, A. P12.118 Brice1,2; Possible involvement of N-acetyltransferase 2 in development of 1CRicm UMRS975/NEB, Paris, France, 2Département de Génétique et Cyto- endometriosis génétique, Paris, France, 3Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, E. Kamenec1, L. F. Kurilo1, A. V. Polyakov1, L. M. Michaleva2, A. A. Soloma- Torino, Italy, 4Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, tina3, N. V. Sikorskaya4; 5University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 6National Institute on 1Reseach Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute Aging, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States. of Human Morphology RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Russian State Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias comprise a wide spectrum of Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Municipal Clinical Hospital # diseases with different clinical/neuropathological profiles. At least 30 31, Moscow, Russian Federation. responsible loci (SCA) have been mapped. Nucleotide repeat expan- Endometriosis is a common disease defined as a growth of endometri- sions have been identified as responsible for the disease in 9 genes al tissue outside the uterine cavity that often results a vast array of gyn- including those caused by polyglutamine-coding (CAG)n repeat ex- aecological problems including dysmenorrhoea, pelvic pain, infertility. pansions in the SCA1-3,6,7 and 17 genes and rare forms caused by Basic aetiology and pathogenesis of this condition isn’t clearly enough. non-coding repeats in the SCA8,10 and 12 genes. More recently, con- Endometriosis is regarded as one of the multifactorial diseases caused ventional mutations were reported in SPTBN2/SCA5, TTBK2/SCA11, by an interaction between the environment and multiple genes. KCNC3/SCA13, PRKCG/SCA14, ITPR1/SCA15/16, FGF14/SCA27, N-acetyltransferase 2 is the enzyme realized N-acetylation and bio- AFG3L2/SCA28 as well as in the puratrophin gene. transformation of xenobiotics. NAT2 slow genotypes affect detoxifica- The relative prevalence of the SCA genes and their associated pheno- tion function and might increase the risk of the disorder. The present type was investigated in 826 index patients from families with a domi- study was carried out to investigate if polymorphisms of NAT2 are use- nant transmission of the disease collected from 1990 to 2008 in the ful markers for predicting endometriosis susceptibility. Pitié-Salpêtrière university-hospital in Paris or through clinical national DNA was extracted from blood of 86 patients with reliable diagnosis networks using standardized clinical charts. of endometriosis and 53 healthy women (control group). NAT2 gene The most frequently mutated genes were SCA3 (20.4%), SCA2 (9.7%), polymorphism was detected in five polymorphic sites: c.341T>C, SCA1 (7.7%), SCA7 (5.7%) and SCA6 (1.8%). Missense mutations in c.481C>T, c.590G>A, c.803A>G, c.857G>A. PCR-PFLP analysis SCA14 (1.8%), SCA28 (1.6%), SCA13 (1.2%) and SCA5 (0.8%) were was applied to detect the missense substitution in nt position 590 and less frequent. We found SCA17 (0.2%) and SCA12 (0.2%) to be very MLPA for others. The relative frequencies of the polymorphisms be- rare, while no cases of SCA10, 27 or puratrophin were identified. In tween both groups were compared. subclinical selections, heterozygous deletions in SCA15/16 (4/76) and The proportions of individuals homozygous for c.341C, c.590A, and a non-sense mutation in SCA11 (1/77) were also detected. c.803G were 18.6 and 11.3%, 7.0 and 5.6%, 19.8 and 9.4% in the Genotype-phenotype correlations showed that CAG repeat expansion endometriosis and control groups accordingly (P > 0.05). There were diseases shared a rapidly progressive and severe disease course with no individuals homozygous for c.857A in both groups. The proportion onset in the thirties. On the contrary, the clinical picture associated of c.481T homozygous individuals was 30.2% in patients and 7.5% with conventional mutations in the recently identified genes was milder in controls that corresponded to significantly difference between two despite the frequent presence of marked cerebellar atrophy on MRI. groups (P = 0.001). These results show the significant impact of NAT2 gene polymorphism in position 481 in development of endometriosis. P12.117 Nance-Horan syndrome and X-linked cataract are allelic P12.119 disorders NPHS and WT gene mutations in Greek children with steroid M. Coccia1, S. P. Brooks1, T. R. Webb1, K. Christodoulou1, V. Murday2, M. resistant nephrotic syndrome (sRNs) Balicki3, T. Wangensteen4, S. Park5, E. R. Maher6, A. A. Moore7, I. M. Russell- E. Fylaktou1, S. Megremis1, A. G. Mitsioni1, A. Mitsioni2, C. J. Stefanidis2, S. Eggitt8; Kitsiou-Tzeli1, E. Georgaki3, E. Kanavakis1, J. Traeger-Synodinos1; 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 2Yorkhill Hospital, 1Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Dept Pediatric Nephrol- Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3The hospital for sick children, Toronto, ON, Cana- ogy, “P. A. Kyriakou” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Dept Pediatric Ne- da, 4Ulleval University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cam- phrology, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece. bridge, United Kingdom, 6Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Several genes are implicated in the pathogenesis of autosomal reces- Kingdom, 7Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 8Great Ormond sive SRNS, including NPHS2 (encoding podocin) and WT1(transcription Street Hospital for Children, London, United Kingdom. factor Wilm´s tumor-1). The presence of mutations in the 8 exons of Nance-Horan syndrome (NHS) is an X-linked developmental disorder the NPHS2 gene, along with “hot-spot” exons 8 and 9 of the WT1 characterised by congenital cataract, dental anomalies, facial dys- gene, were investigated (direct sequencing) in 27 SRNS patients (2-18 morphism, and in some cases, mental retardation. Protein truncation years), including 8 familial (3 families) and 19 sporadic cases. mutations in a novel gene (NHS) have been identified in patients with NPHS2 analysis revealed pathogenic genotypes in 3/19 sporadic pa- this syndrome. Isolated X-linked congenital cataract (CXN) has been tients: homozygosity for R138Q (c.413G>A), homozygosity for R168H mapped to chromosome Xp22.13, which encompasses the NHS locus, (c.503G>A) and compound heterozygosity for R229Q (c.686G>A) in however, no mutations were identified in the NHS gene. In this study trans to A295T (c.883G>A). The novel A295T (exon 8) is predicted we describe a clinical and molecular analysis of 7 NHS and 2 CXN to be pathogenic by in silico assessment. Amongst familial cases, 3 families. We have identified five new protein truncation mutations and patients were heterozygous for R229Q without a second NPHS2 mu- a large deletion encompassing the majority of the NHS gene in NHS tation. Additionally, several known polymorphisms (IVS3-46C>T, IVS3- families. Two CXN families, who were negative for mutations in the 21C>T, IVS7+7A>G, S96S, A318A, and L346L) were found in both NHS gene, were further analysed using array comparative genomic patients and 100 unaffected controls with equal allele frequencies. A hybridisation (CGH). We show, for the first time, that these diseases novel intronic NPHS2 variant (IVS3-17C>T), was found in 2 relatedMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  patients, but no controls, and is under further investigation. matic activities. All mutant alleles were confirmed to be disease-caus- Four patients carried de-novo WT1 mutations, 3 had previously char- ing due to their low enzyme activity, although western blot analyses acterized mutations (1 with IVS9+5G>A, and 2 with R394W,) and the showed that a normal amount of protein was synthesized. The muta- fourth had a novel mutation R366H, predicted to be pathogenic in tion c.1257+4_1257+7delAGGG, which affects a non-canonical donor silico. Karyotype analysis showed XX in 3 patients, consistent with the splice site, was analysed at the RNA level. Only aberrant mRNAs, cor- female phenotype, but one (with R394W), was XY and had complete responding to previously reported minor SMPD1 transcripts, which do gonadal dysgenesis. not code for functional enzymes, were produced by this allele. This Thus 7/19 sporadic SRNS patients, (but no familial cases) had NPHS2 study is the first exhaustive mutational analysis of Spanish Niemann- or WT1 mutations, indicating that molecular investigation of these Pick A/B disease patients. genes is useful to support definitive diagnosis and management of pediatric SRNS.. P12.122 the Evaluation of clinical selection criteria in NsHL molecular P12.120 Results Genotype-phenotype correlations in patients with hereditary C. Radaelli1, P. Castorina2,3, F. Lalatta2, U. Ambrosetti3, A. Cesarani3, A. Murri4, neurodegenerative diseases D. Cuda4, F. Sironi1, L. Trotta1, D. A. Coviello1, P. Primignani1; N. V. Hryshchenko1, E. I. Patscun2, L. A. Livshits1; 1Medical Genetics Laboratory - Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Po- 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine, 2Regional Clinical liclinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Medical Genetic Service Hospital, Uzhgorod, Ukraine. - Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Neurodegenerative diseases (ND) are characterized by progressive Elena, Milan, Italy, 3ENT Audiology Department - Fondazione IRCCS Ospedale nervous system (NS) dysfunction, associated with mutation in genes Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena., Milan, Italy, 4ENT Audiology leads to atrophy of the affected central or peripheral NS structures. Department - Ospedale “Guglielmo da Saliceto”, Piacenza, Italy. To summarize our experience in the field of neurogenetics we provide Since January 2001 we have studied more than 1000 subjects among the investigation of mutations associated with various NS dysfunction deaf patients, family members and deaf/carrier partners. in patients with Huntington’s disease (HD) and Charcot-Marie-Tooth The majority of our patient’s population has been recruited through (CMT) disease. the Genetic Service of the O.R.L. Department of our Hospital in Milan HD is a common disorder of central NS caused by expansion of CAG- since 2001 and through the O.R.L. Service in Piacenza starting from repeats in the IT15. CMT is a heterogeneous group of peripheral NS 2004. The 658 subjects afferent to our Hospital were affected by neu- diseases with more than 20 involved loci. The most common types of rosensorial deafness with various degrees (from mild to profound) of CMT are due to mutations in PMP22 and Cx32. hearing loss (HL), while the 131 patients from Piacenza Hospital had a Analysis of CAG-, CCG- and del2642 of IT15 gene polymorphisms HL degree ranging from severe to profound. has been performed in patients with HD. We have provided the All patients were analysed for mutations of the entire Cx26 gene screening of PMP22 duplications/deletion and Cx32 point mutations (GJB2), and for the Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) deletion. The analysis of the in CMT patients. 35 HD-probands had expanded allele of IT15 (39- deafness-causing A1555G substitution in mitochondrial (mt)DNA was 52 CAG-repeats). The significant differences in sex-determined insta- carried out in our cohort of patients while, usually, in the second group bility of CAG-repeats inheritance have been revealed. The associa- this analysis is not requested. In order to compare the two different tion between del2642 and the age of HD onset has been analyzed. criteria of clinical selection and the concerning molecular results, we PMP22-duplications were found in 21 CMT-families. We also detected performed the mtDNA analysis in all the subjects with only one or with- the heterozygote PMP22 gene deletion in two patients with specific out Cx26 mutations. In the first group we found a lower percentage of HNPP-phenotype. Mutation screening of Cx32 revealed 2 brothers positive Cx26/Cx30 cases in comparison to the second group (25.8% with Arg22Gln mutation.Our data showed the association between dif- vs. 53.4%), but a higher percentage of dominant mutations (4.7% vs. ferent types of IT15, PMP22 and Cx32 genes mutations and specific 1.5%); the mtA1555G was found only in the first group of the affected abnormalities of the NS. Obtained data would be useful for better un- patients (3%). We conclude that clinical selection based on the sever- derstanding of ND pathogenesis and for providing new individualized ity of HL is quite relevant to obtain high percentage of Cx26 positive, therapy for curing of neurological disorders. but may allow the missing of uncommon GJB2 genotypes and mt mu- tations. P12.121 Identification and characterization of mutations causing P12.123 Niemann-Pick disease types A/B in spanish patients Frequency of 35delG mutations in cochlear implant recipients . L. Rodríguez-Pascau1, L. Gort2, E. H. Schuchman3, A. Chabás2, L. Vilageliu1, M. Falah1, M. Houshmand2, S. Akbaroghli3, S. Seyedhassani2, M. Farhadi1; D. Grinberg1; 1Department and research center of ENT and Head & neck surgery Iran Univer- 1Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, sity of Medical Sciences., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute CIBERER, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Clínic, Corporació Sanitària Clínic, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department 3Deputy for cultural affairs and prevention of Iran Welfare Organization, Tehran, of Genetics & Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, Islamic Republic of Iran. NY, United States. Objective: Hearing impairment is the most common sensory disorder, Niemann-Pick disease type A/B (NPD A/B) is an autosomal recessive present in 1 of every 500 newborns. Nonsyndromic sensorineural hear- lysosomal storage disorder caused by acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) ing loss(NSHL) is inherited in a predominantly autosomal recessive deficiency due to mutations in the SMPD1 gene. Type A NPD is the manner in up to 70% of cases. It is also an extremely heterogeneous severe neurological form whereas type B NPD patients have no neuro- trait. The gene more often involved is GJB2, encoding the protein Con- logical manifestations. In this work, we present a molecular analysis of nexin 26. In most populations a single mutation, 35delG, accounts for 19 Spanish patients and 2 from Maghreb, 8 with type A and 13 with type most cases of NSHI . B NPD. All mutant SMPD1 alleles were identified, including 17 different Methods: 90 patients receiving cochlear implants were ascertained mutations, 10 of which were novel: c.503G>A (p.W168X), c.939C>A through research centre of ENT & head and neck surgery .After ge- (p.Y313X), c. 1100A>G (p.Y367C), c.1400A>C (p.Y467S), c.1445C>A netic counseling for them DNA isolated from the peripheral blood, all (p.A482E), c.1456A>G (p.T486A), c.1159delC (p.R387VfsX7), patients were molecularly evaluated for the presence of the 35delG c.1169_1171delTCT (p.F390del), c.1257+4_1257+7delAGGG, and mutation by ARMS /PCR. c.1774_1776delACT (p.T592del). The only frequent mutations in the Result: We investigated 90 patients , 44.9% male and 55.1% female , 21 NPD patients were c.1823_1825delGCC (p.R608del) (38%) and that 90% of them were < 10 years old that receiving cochlear implant c.1445C>A (p.A482E) (9%). For most of the mutations a good cor- . relation between genotype and phenotype could be established and, 70.8% of these patients were born on consanguine family and 12.4% in particular, the p.R608del-type B association was confirmed. Six of of them were syndromic hearing loss. the mutations found in Spanish patients, and two other mutations for Among these patients 86.5% were normal, 10.1 % homozygote and comparison, were expressed in vitro to establish their residual enzy- 3.4% heterozygote for 35delG mutation.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  Conclusion: The most frequent genes implicated in autosomal reces- and up to seven clinical types have been described. OI is predomi- sive nonsyndromic hearing loss are GJB2, which is responsible for nantly inherited in an autosomal dominant manner although recessive more than half of cases.In our study, there was a significant relation- forms have been described. Dominant forms are caused by mutations ship between consanguineous marriage in our evaluated group and in either COL1A1 or COL1A2 genes, located on 17q21-22 and 7q22 express of NSHl (PV#0/00 and O.R= 3.43). but there was not any sig- chromosomal regions respectively. In this work we report our results nificant relationship between inheritance pattern and consanguineous and experience in the genetic diagnosis of Osteogenesis Imperfecta marriage with 35delG mutation. These data can help genetic coun- in a wide cohort of patients coming from several Spanish hospitals. selor and otolaryngologist for setting priority in evaluation, prevention Mutational analysis of both COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes has been and even treatment in these patients. performed by double-strand sequencing. Results are discussed on the basis of inter and intragenic mutational distribution, type of mutation, P12.124 aminoacid residues, familial implications and genotype-phenotype De novo mutations in stXBP1 cause early infantile epileptic correlations. We highlight the elevated percentage of mutations not encephalopathy previously reported (more than 50%) identified in our population. A N. Matsumoto, H. Saitsu; high expertise and experience must be required for the interpretation Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan. of nucleotide changes identified in genes with a high rate of de novo Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy with suppression-burst (EIEE), and novel (not yet reported) mutations, especially, in paediatric pa- also known as Ohtahara syndrome, is one of the most severe and tients because potential social and legal implications and patients with earliest forms of epilepsy. Using array-based comparative genomic a reproductive interest. Mutational spectrum of COL1A1 and COL1A2 hybridization (aCGH), we found a de novo 2.0-Mb microdeletion at genes depicted in our population provides an interesting epidemiologic 9q33.3-q34.11 in a female EIEE patient. Mutation analysis of candi- and pathogenic information about Osteogenesis Imperfecta. date genes mapped to the deletion revealed that four unrelated EIEE patients had heterozygous missense mutations in syntaxin binding P12.127 protein 1 (STXBP1). STXBP1 (also known as MUNC18-1) is an evolu- Distinct Oi Phenotype caused by cOL1 c-proteinase site tionally conserved neuronal Sec1/Munc-18 (SM) protein, which plays mutations an essential role for synaptic vesicle release in multiple species. Circu- A. M. Barnes1, K. Lindahl2, T. Hefferan3, C. Rubin2, A. Kindmark2, M. Whyte4, W. lar dichroism (CD) melting experiments revealed that a mutant protein McAlister4, S. Mumm4, A. Boskey5, O. Ljunggren2, J. C. Marini1; was significantly thermolabile compared to the wild type. Furthermore, 1BEMB, NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Uppsala University, Up- binding of the mutant protein to syntaxin was impaired. These find- psala, Sweden, 3Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 4Shriner’s Hospital ings suggest that haploinsufficiency of STXBP1 causes EIEE. Fol- for Children, St. Louis, MO, United States, 5Weill Medical College, New York, lowing doctors are highly appreciated: Drs. Mitsuhiro Kato (Yamagata NY, United States. University School of Medicine), Hitoshi Osaka (Kanagawa Children’s Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is often caused by mutations in the type Medical Center), Jun Tohyama (Nishi-Niigata Chuo National Hospital), I collagen genes. Mutations in the type I procollagen C-propeptide Katsuhisa Uruno (NHO Yamagata National Hospital), Satoko Kumada cleavage site are of interest because they disrupt a processing step. (Tokyo Metropolitan Neurological Hospital). We identified two children with mild OI who had cleavage site muta- tions in COL1A1 (P1: α1(I)D1041N) or COL1A2 (P2: α2(I)A1029T). P1 P12.125 DEXA z-score and pQCT vBMD were +3, contrasting with radiographs New mutations in the CXORF5 (OFD1) gene and the influence demonstrating osteopenia and os-in-os vertebrae, and histomorphom- of X-inactivation on the phenotype in patients with type i etry revealing increased bone remodeling, without a mineralization Orofaciodigital syndrome defect or signs of osteosclerosis. P2 had a DEXA z-score of 0, gracile I. J. Bisschoff, C. Zeschnigk, G. Wolff, D. J. Morris-Rosendahl; long bones with radiographic osteopenia, and decreased BV/TV and Institute for Human Genetics, University Clinic Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. increased BFR without a mineralization defect on histomorphometry. Thirteen forms of Orofaciodigital Syndrome (OFDS) have been de- FTIR imaging analysis in both cortical and trabecular bone confirms scribed, however CXORF5 (Xp22.3-p22.2) is currently the only known that P1 and P2 have elevated mineral/matrix and collagen maturity causative gene, in which mutations cause OFD type I (OFD1). OFD1 is compared to age-matched controls or a proband with classical OI. characterized by malformations of the face, oral cavity, and digits and Steady-state collagen electrophoresis showed slight overmodification is transmitted as an X-linked dominant condition with lethality in males. of α1(I) and α2(I) in cell layers of both probands, with a slight base- There may be central nervous system involvement in as many as 40% line delay in P1. Chain incorporation was normal in P1 and slightly of cases, and polycystic kidney disease seems to be specific to OFD1. delayed in P2. Pericellular processing of P1 was delayed, with in- We have performed mutation analysis via DNA sequencing in 27 spo- creases in both pCα1 and proα2, while P2 had increased pCα2 and radic and two familial cases of suspected OFD1. Fourteen mutations, proα2 and normal processing kinetics. Together with an adult with an nine of which have not previously been described, were found in the in- α1(I)A1040T substitution (Int Conn Tis 82S1: CC01), our cases sug- dex patients. Five of the mutations (36%) are predicted to affect splic- gest that defects in proα1(I) processing lead to high childhood BMD ing. Mental retardation has previously been associated with mutations possibly due to increased bone mineral content, with signs of osteope- in CXORF5 exons 3, 8, 9, 13 and 16. We have found a new splice trosis occurring subsequently. Proα1(I) cleavage appears crucial to C- mutation in intron 1, c.13-10T>A, in a mother and her two daughters, propeptide processing, while defective proα2(I) cleavage occurs after with greatly diverging phenotypes, especially with regard to cognitive α1(I) processing. ability. X-inactivation studies in lymphocytes showed preferential in- activation of the mutation allele in the mildly affected mother (normal P12.128 intelligence) and relatively mildly affected daughter, whereas both al- Pelizaeus-merzbacher Disease - different molecular defects leles appeared to be equally active in the severely retarded daughter. result in various clinical picture? Reverse transcription PCR and sequencing in lymphocytes revealed D. Hoffman-Zacharska1, M. Nawara1, K. Poirier2, H. Mierzewska1, T. Mazurc- the markedly increased presence of an extra, larger transcript which zak1, J. Poznanski3, A. Kierdaszuk4, J. Madry5, J. Chelly6, J. Bal1; includes intron 1, in the most severely affected daughter. Our results 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Universite Paris Desceartes; suggest that the pattern of X inactivation has a greater effect on the Institut Cochin: INSERM Unite, Paris, France, 3Institute of Biochemistry and brain phenotype than the type of mutation. Biophysics, Warsaw, Poland, 4Provincial Hospital, Biala Podlaska, Poland, 5Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, 6Universite Paris Desceartes; Institut P12.126 Cochin: INSERM Unite, Warsaw, Poland. mutational spectrum of the cOL1A1 and cOL1A2 genes in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD; OMIM 312080) is a rare, severe spanish patients with Osteogenesis imperfecta dysmyelination brain disorder caused by mutation in the X-linked gene J. Garcia-Planells, M. Molero, M. Lazaro, M. Torres-Puente, M. Perez-Alonso; PLP1. PMD typically manifests in infancy or early childhood with nys- Medical Genetics Unit. Sistemas Genomicos, Valencia, Spain. tagmus, hypotonia, and cognitive impairment; the findings progress Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a group of disorders characterized to severe spasticity and ataxia; life span is shortened. PLP1 protein by bones that break easily. Clinical features are very heterogeneous is exceptionally well-conserved in mammals showing nearly no poly-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  morphism and all types mutation have a discernible impact in human. ing PKU have been characterized in the PAH gene. The classes of mutations causing PMD are mainly duplications of the The aim of this study is to assess the prevalence of PKU mutations in whole gene and point mutations. Iranian population. For this purpose, 150 unrelated patients with clas- The purpose of this study is to analyse types of the PLP1 gene muta- sic PKU (300 alleles) were screened for 10 mutations (IVS10-11g>a, tions among Polish PMD patients and compare the clinical picture in R252W, R261X, R261Q, IVS11nt1, R408W, R408Q, L333F, 364delG the context of the causative mutation. and S67P) using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length The molecular analysis of the PLP1 gene was performed according to polymorphism. The predominant mutations in this population sample general guidelines starting with gene dosage screening (MLPA meth- are IVS10-11g>a, R261Q, IVS11nt1 and R252W with the frequency od) followed by direct sequencing for patients withought rearrange- 21.7%, 9%, 6.7% and 4.7% respectively. In addition, 6 other muta- ments. Any type of PLP1 changes were described in 37% of probands. tions have been identified at relatively low frequencies (R261X (4%), The duplication of all PLP1 exons was confirmed for four patients pre- 364delG (3.7%), L333F (2%), R408W, R408Q and S67P (0.33%)). senting different clinical picture (except brothers). We expected that These informations provide a good basis for direct DNA diagnosis of the gene dosage might be modified by different size of duplication. To PKU in this population. define more precisely the duplicated region aCGH was performed. The impact of discovered missense mutations on PLP1 protein struc- P12.131 ture and functional changes were analysed by in silico modelling. case report: 6-year old girl with porencephaly, cataract and Analyses comprise the group of PMD male patients; four (2 unrelated microhematuria caused by a de novo missense mutation in ,2 brothers) with duplication of the whole PLP1 gene, two patients COLA gene (brothers) with nonsense mutation in Ex3 and two unrelated patients K. Õunap1,2, R. Teek1,3, P. Rizzu4, R. Rein5, E. Sistermans4, M. S. van der with missense mutations in different exons Knaap6; 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories,Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, P12.129 Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Depart- mutations spectrum in the stK11 gene in Polish Peutz- Jeghers ment of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Section syndrome patients Medical Genomics, Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical W. Cichy1, M. Podralska2, M. Skrzypczak2, D. Nowakowska3, T. Banasiewicz1, Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 5Children’s Clinic, Tartu University Hos- P. Krokowicz1, M. Teisseyre4, E. Czkwanianc5, R. Slomski6, B. Niedoszztko7, A. pital, Tartu, Estonia, 6Department of Child Neurology, VU University Medical Plawski2; Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 1University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Porencephaly is heterogeneous anomaly and usually caused by an Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Oncology, Warszawa, Poland, 4Children’s Memo- ante- or perinatal parenchymal insult in the brain. More recently, the rial Health Institute, Warszawa, Poland, 5Institute of Polish Mother’s Memorial role of mutations in the COL4A1 gene has been shown as a one cause Hospital, Poznan, Poland, 6Instytitute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, of familial porencephaly. More than 20, mostly familial cases have 7University of Medical Sciences, Gdansk, Poland. been previously published. Here we describe an additional case. Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is rare, genetically conditioned dis- This patient was repeatedly investigated due to porencephaly and ease. PJS is heredited in autosomal dominant manner and is charac- cataract since birth. Symptomatic focal epilepsy, microcephaly (-3SD) terized by occurrence of hamartomatous polys. The hamartomatous and unspecified microhematuria were additionally noticed. Congenital polyps are manifested during second or third decade of life. Occur- cytomegalovirus infection was firstly diagnosed, but could not be con- rence hamartomatous polys in PJS may cause of many gastroin- firmed by DNA analysis on the newborn screening card. Brain MRI in- testinal discomforts. Although in PJS patients the risk of malignant vestigation showed bilateral porencephaly with a dark rim in the border transformation is lower then others hereditary neoplastic disease, an of these areas indicating preceding hemorrhage; in other brain areas increased risk to development malignancies such as the pancreas, the dark spots were seen, suggestive of hemosiderin deposition and dam- breast, female and male reproductive organs is observed. The second aged basal ganglia. Second MRI investigation showed additionally a characteristic manifestations of JPS are brown, dark or blue spots. signal abnormality in the hilus of the dentate nucleus. All those findings PJS is caused by mutations in the STK11 on chromosome 19. STK11 were suggestive to a mutation in COL4A1 gene. gene encodes a serine/threonine protein kinase participating in very The COL4A1 gene was analyzed by sequencing analysis and a de important cell signaling pathways. We present study considering 20 novo missense mutation was found: c.3707G>A (p.Gly1236Glu). This patients diagnosed with PJS. PJS diagnosis was based on presence mutation is likely pathogenic as it is a mutation that changes a highly of two or more polyps, or one polyp and typical pigmented lesions, or conserved Gly residue within Gly-Xaa-Yaa repeats in the triple helix one polyp and a family history of PJS. Mutations screening analysis domain. Changes in this conserved element are likely to impair the tri- encompassing SSCP, HA and direct sequencing of the LKB1gene are ple helix formation during collagen assembly. It is shown that COL4A1 reveled five mutations and one polymorphism. These mutations are mutation carriers have great diversity in the clinical expression within located in different position in gene (1, 2, 7 exons). With the Multiplex the same family. Our described case is showing that the diagnosis Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) - assay we detected should also be considered in sporadic cases of porencephaly. additional genomic mutations. For our screening we used the SALSA P101 STK11 kit which contains MLPA probes for most STK11 exons. In P12.132 four patients we identified exonic deletions or duplications range from Recessive primary congenital lymphoedema caused by a one to five exons VEGFR3 mutation The study was financed by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher M. Vikkula1, A. Ghalamkarpour1, W. Holnthoner2, P. Saharinen2, L. Boon3, J. B. Education project no. N401014435 Mulliken4, K. Alitalo2; 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, UCL, Brussels, P12.130 Belgium, 2Molecular/Cancer Biology Laboratory and Ludwig Institute for Cancer molecular analysis of most common mutations in Phenylalanine Research, Biomedicum Helsinki, Haartman Institute and Helsinki University hydroxylase gene in iranian population Central Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Laboratory of Human S. Zare Karizi1,2, G. R. Javadi1, S. Zeinali3, M. Mazinani2; Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, UCL and Centre for Vascular Anomalies, 1Islamic Azad University Science and Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic Re- Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 4Vascular Anomalies public of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Center, Department of Plastic Surgery, Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biotechnology Research Center , Pasteur School, Boston, MA, United States. Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. The aetiology for primary congenital lymphoedema is not well known. Phenylketonuria (PKU) is the most prevalent disorder of amino acid Heterozygous mutations in VEGFR3 have been identified in some fa- metabolism. It is one of the most important preventable causes of milial cases with dominant inheritance, known as Nonne-Milroy dis- mental retardation. Incidence of PKU in Iran has been estimated at 1 ease. Recessive cases of primary lymphoedema with a genetic cause in 3600-4000 births. The same is true of turkey. PKU is an autosomal are not known, except for two families with syndromic hypotrichosis- recessive disorder and it is caused by a deficiency of hepatic phenyl- lymphoedema-telangiectasia, with a SOX18 mutation. In this study, we alanine hydroxylase enzyme. To date several hundred mutations caus- present the first case of isolated primary congenital lymphoedema withMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  recessive inheritance, caused by a homozygous mutation in VEGFR3. interaction between the subunits is a primary phenomenon, which oc- The novel mutation is a transition from alanine-to-threonine in amino curs irrespective of the LPI-causing mutations in the light subunit. acid 855, located in the ATP binding domain of the VEGFR3 recep- tor. Assessment of receptor function showed impaired ligand-induced P12.135 internalization and ERK1/2 activity. Moreover, receptor phosphoryla- A Proteus syndrome case with PtEN gene mutation tion was reduced, although, less so than for a kinase-dead VEGFR3 B. Imko-Walczuk1, M. Podralska2, W. Cichy3, A. Plawski2; mutation, which causes Nonne-Milroy disease. In conclusion, a hypo- 1University of Medical Sciences, Bydgoszcz, Poland, 2Institute of Human Ge- morphic VEGFR3 mutation, with moderate effect on the receptor, in netics, Poznan, Poland, 3University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. a homozygous state can result in insufficient lymphatic functioning. Proteus syndrome is severe disorder of symmetric and disproportion- Thus, in addition to Nonne-Milroy disease with dominant inheritance, ate overgrowth of body parts. The first manifestations of disease are VEGFR3 alterations can cause isolated recessive primary congenital observed at birth and progress significantly with age. Proteus disease lymphoedema. These data expand our understanding of the aetiology belongs to hamartomatous syndromes and is characterized by mul- of congenital lymphoedema and suggest that large sale screening of tifocal overgrowth of tissue, especially ectodermal and mesodermal VEGFR3 in all primary lymphoedema patients is necessary. tissue. We present a case of 12-year-old boy treats in A. Jurasz Uni- versity Hospital in Bydgoszcz, Poland. Patient was born by natural P12.133 childbirth at 33 week of gestation. Birth weight was 3200 g. The Apgar Novel PccA gene rearrangements causing propionic acidemia scale was scored on 9 points. The family history was negative. Since represent 21% of the total mutant alleles births time it has been observed overgrowth and deformation of lower L. R. Desviat1, R. Sánchez-Alcudia1, B. Pérez1, C. Pérez-Cerdá1, R. Navarre- right limb and left foot. Follow-up examination showed extensive dor- te1, R. Vijzelaar2, M. Ugarte1; sal angioma. Based on these findings at 36 months of age the Klip- 1Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain, pel-Trenaunay syndrome was diagnosed. Because of progression of 2MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. skin, vascular and soft tissular changes the diagnosis was changed Propionic acidemia is caused by mutations in the PCCA or PCCB for Proteus syndrome. At the moment patient fulfills diagnostic crite- genes coding for the two subunits of the propionylCoA carboxylase ria of Proteus syndrome. Our patient presents main sings of Proteus enzyme. Most of the mutations detected to date in both genes are mis- syndrome like asymmetric overgrowth lower limbs, macrodactyly, pro- sense. In the case of PCCA deficient patients, a high number of alleles tuberant foots, scoliosis, seen skin lesions and vascular malformation. were uncharacterised, some of them suspected to carry an exonic de- Progression of soft tissue hyperplasia in right limb and foot deformity letion. We have now employed multiplex ligation probe amplification is watched (MLPA) to screen for genomic rearrangements in the PCCA gene in The entire coding sequence of PTEN gene was sequenced by direct 20 patients with incomplete genotype. Eight different deletions were PCR product sequencing. The deletion of one nucleotide was identi- found, corresponding to a frequency of 21,3% of the overall PCCA al- fied at the end of intron 7. The mutation was IVS7-3delT. The deletion leles. Two of the exonic deletions were frequent, one involving exons occurred at splice junction. 3-4 and another exon 23. Long-range PCR and chromosomal walking The study was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher were performed to identify the deletion breakpoints. This revealed two Education projects no. 2PO5E02630 and N401014435 different genomic deletions, both including exons 3 and 4, present in our sample. In all the cases studied, repetitive elements, Alu sequenc- P12.136 es or simple repeats were found at both sides of the deletion suggest- Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification refines ing that these repeats are involved in its generation. The pathogenicity molecular diagnosis in pseudoxanthoma elasticum of all the deletions is established based on their predicted effects or on L. M. Costrop1, O. M. Vanakker1, P. Coucke1, L. Martin2, N. Chassaing2, I. expression analysis of the deletion alleles. This work describes for the Pasquali- Ronchetti3, A. De Paepe1; first time the high frequency of large genomic deletions in the PCCA 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Dermatology, gene, which could be due to the characteristics of the PCCA gene Angers, France, 3Department of Biomedical Sciences, Modena, Italy. structure and its abundance in intronic repetitive elements. Our data Background: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a recessive disor- underscore the need of using gene dosage analysis to complement der characterized by oculocutaneous and cardiovascular manifesta- routine genetic analysis in PCCA patients. tions, due to mineralization of elastic fibres. The disorder is caused by mutations in the ABCC6 gene, encoding an ATP-dependent trans- P12.134 membrane transporter. By conventional methods, more than 200 mis- the effect of lysinuric protein intolerance (LPi) -causing sense and nonsense mutations have been described, and the current mutations on y+LAt-1 / 4F2hc dimerization analyzed with ABCC6 mutation detection rate accounts for 94% of disease alleles acceptor photobleaching FREt microscopy in our cohort. Remaining disease alleles can be partly explained by M. Tringham1, M. Toivonen1, J. Salmi1, P. Terho2, K. Huoponen1, O. Simell3, J. middle-sized deletions, which can be missed by direct sequencing. We Mykkänen3; aimed to optimize ABCC6 analysis by screening for such deletions us- 1Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, ing multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Finland, 2Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, Methods: We performed MLPA in a cohort of 35 out of 331 biopsy 3Department of Paediatrics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. proven PXE patients, in whom only one or no mutations were detected y+LAT-1 and 4F2hc form a transporter complex for cationic amino ac- after screening for the frequent multi-exon 23-29 deletion and direct ids in the basolateral membrane of epithelial cells, mainly in the small sequencing of the ABCC6 coding region and exon/intron boundaries. intestine and proximal kidney tubules. Mutations of y+LAT-1, 51 of Results: Ten deletions were observed comprising five different multi- which are currently known, cause lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI, exon deletions and five novel single-exon deletions. OMIM #222700), characterized by diminished intestinal absorption of Conclusion: For this cohort, we demonstrated that approximately 25% the cationic amino acids lysine, arginine and ornithine and severe loss (10/41) of currently undetected ABCC6 disease alleles can be identi- of these amino acids into the urine. We previously established fluo- fied using MLPA, yielding mutation detection rates of over 95 % in our rescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) microscopy as a tool in PXE population. Our results demonstrate that the majority of PXE mu- studying the interactions of y+LAT-1 and 4F2hc. We now have expand- tations are situated in the ABCC6 gene and indicate that the involve- ed the field into exploring the effects of three different LPI-causing mu- ment of another gene locus in classic PXE is unlikely. These results tations (Finnish founder mutation 1181-2 A->T, G54V and 1548delC) improve the efficacy of familial screening and genetic counseling in on the dimerization of the transporter complex. Based on the results PXE. Therefore, we propose MLPA as a valuable additional screening of this study, the mutations studied do not alter the dimer formation method in the molecular analysis of the ABCC6 gene. but mutated y+LAT-1 interacts with 4F2hc in a manner similar to that of the wild type. This can be observed by means of fluorescence reso- nance energy transfer confocal microscopy. The unquenching of the donor fluorescence reports of the occurrence of FRET and thus of the interaction of y+LAT-1 and 4F2hc. Consequently, we conclude that theMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders 00 P12.137 P12.139 Detection of large rearrangements by mLPA in severe Identification of allelic expression differences (eQTLs) in retinal hemophilia patients expressed (disease) genes N. Lannoy1, I. Abinet1, C. Vermylen2, K. Dahan1, C. Hermans3; S. Schimpf-Linzenbold, S. Balendran, B. Wissinger; 1Center of Human Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 2Departement of Pediatric, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Tuebingen, Germany. Brussels, Belgium, 3Departement of haematology, Brussels, Belgium. Reduced penetrance and variability in disease expression with respect Determination of genomic rearrangement responsible of disease was to onset, course and severity is common in retinal dystrophies and can a challenge in the past requiring time and critical standardization tech- be observed even between and within families with the same primary niques. The recent arrival of MLPA gene dosage kit made it possible to gene defect. It has been suggested that modifications in gene regula- detect these rearrangements quickly and easily in a single reaction. tion are responsible for much of the observed phenotypic variations. Large deletions encompassing from one exon to the complete Factor Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) studies have become a widely 8 (F8) gene account for about 5% of the causal mutations of severe X- used tool for identifying genetic variants that affect gene regulation. For linked hemophilia A leading to an absence of factor VIII. MLPA analy- identifying such eQTLs we crossed five inbred mice (C57Bl/6, Balb/c, sis was performed in 38 DNA unrelated Belgium patients with severe CAST, CBA and LP) to form a heterozygous but identical F1 generation hemophilia A after a negative genetic testing for intron 22 and 1 inver- and isolated DNA and RNA from ear and retina, respectively. Then, we sions. DNA of 3 unrelated symptomatic female carriers presenting with screened 20 different retinal disease genes for heterozygous cSNPs factor VIII deficiency in the absence of a family history or in absence of applying PCR and sequencing. To determine allelic expression differ- paternal investigation were also included. ences based on the identified cSNPs, we applied Pyrosequencing as- MLPA assay identified 3 large deletions (exon 5, exon 15 and exons 23 says on RT-PCR amplified retinal cDNAs. The results were calibrated to 26) and 2 large duplications (exon 1 and exons 1 to 22). For carriers for equimolar ratios by used genomic DNA as a control. without familial contribution, a decreased copy number compared to Using the Pyrosequencing technology, a highly accurate method to control DNAs of exon 1 to 12 in patient 1, of exon2 in patient 2 and of detect allele-specific expression differences, we have seen in 4 dif- exon 26 extending to the 3’UTR region in the third patient was identi- ferent genes an allelic imbalance. In one of those genes we can see fied. the allelic imbalance already on the genomic level suggesting a copy In conclusion, MLPA technology provides an efficient test to search number variation. In another gene, we were able to detect a mutation large genomic rearrangement in patients with severe hemophilia A. If within this gene that leads to a premature termination codon leading to deletions are common, a very few cases with duplication was reported. downregulation of the mutant transcript due to the nonsense mediated This technique is also warranted in female patients presenting with “de decay. For the other two genes we will determine the promoter se- novo” factor VIII deficiency or without familial investigation predicting quences and identify variants functionally assessed applying reporter the severity of the disease. gene assays. P12.138 P12.140 Renal hereditary tubulopathies: twelve years experience of screening of the CERKL c.238+1G>A mutation in 124 spanish genetic analysis families affected by Autosomal Recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa N. Borsa1, M. L. Syrèn1,2, A. Bettinelli3, C. Calderone1, S. Salardi1, D. A. Coviel- A. Avila-Fernandez1,2, E. Vallespin1,2, D. Cantalapiedra1,2, M. García-Hoyos1,2, lo1, S. Tedeschi1; R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, J. Aguirre-Lamban1,2, A. Gimenez1,2, M. J. Trujillo-Tie- 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore bas1,2, C. Ayuso1,2; Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. Materno-Infantili, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Pediatria, Purpose: Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a genetically heterogeneous Ospedale San Leopoldo Mandic, Merate, Lecco, Italy. group of inherited retinopathies. Up to now, mutations in 21 genes Bartter (BS) and Gitelman (GS) syndromes are rare autosomal reces- have been reported to cause the autosomal recessive retinitis pigmen- sive tubular disorders characterised by hypokalemic metabolic alkalo- tosa (arRP). Three mutations in the CERKL gene have been found to sis. So far five genes responsible for the disorders have been identi- cause arRP in different populations. The purpose of the present study fied. was to determine the prevalence of the c.238+1G>A CERKL mutation The aim of the study was to characterise and make observation about in Spanish patients affected by arRP. the molecular defects and the phenotype of the patients clinically di- Patients and Methods: To test 124 families affected by arRP for the agnosed as BS/GS. CERKL c.238+1G>A mutation, exon 1 was studied by automated DNA Genotyping was performed on 237 patients by sequence analysis of 4 sequencing. out of 5 genes: the sodium-chloride cotransporter (SLC12A3), the so- Results: No mutated allele was found in our affected population, in dium-potassium-chloride cotransporter (SLC12A1), the inwardly-recti- contrast to what has been described in the Yemenite Jewish popula- fying potassium channel (KCNJI) and the chloride channel (CLCNKB) tion. genes. For each patient the most probable candidate gene was se- Conclusions: The CERKL c.238+1G>A mutation seems to be an lected on the basis of laboratory findings and clinical features. unique mutation to the Yemenite Jewish population, being the CERKL One hundred forty-four patients (61%) showed two mutations: 19 pa- p.Arg257ter mutation an exclusive cause of arRP in the Spanish tients resulted as BS type I, 13 as BS type II, 23 as BS type III and 89 population and the second most frequent mutation in Spanish cases. as GS. Thirty patients (13%) were simple heterozygotes. Therefore, the Spanish population affected by arRP presents different A recurrent mutation was observed on GS patients coming from north- frequencies for different mutations in the CERKL gene, when it is com- ern Italy. The evidence of peculiar mutations may facilitate the mo- pared with other populations. lecular diagnosis. Among the tubulopathies, GS is confirmed to be the predominant genetic form and the syndrome with the more frequent P12.141 unknown alleles (20%). A single-base substitution within an intronic repetitive element All antenatal BS type II patients had a complete molecular characteri- causes dominant retinitis pigmentosa with reduced penetrance sation, with all the mutations clustered in exon 5. T. Rio Frio1, T. L. McGee2, N. M. Wade1, C. Iseli3, J. S. Beckmann1,4, E. L. Ber- BS type III patients revealed more peculiarities: the entire gene de- son2, C. Rivolta1; letion was more frequent among Sardinian probands whereas a chi- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Harvard Medical maeric gene (CLCNKA-CLCNKB fusion gene) was mainly detected School, Boston, MA, United States, 3Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and in Puglia. Moreover, BSIII presented a phenotypic overlapping more Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Centre Hospitalier frequent with GS then with antenatal BS. Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland. We report the study of a previously described family with an auto- somal dominant form of retinitis pigmentosa previously linked to the PRPF31 gene, causing hereditary blindness with reduced penetrance. Sequencing of all exons and introns of PRPF31 by both the classical Sanger and ultra-high throughput (UHT) techniques, resulted in theMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  identification of the c.1374+654C>G variant, which was located deep P12.144 within intron 13. In silico analyses suggested that this mutation leads Identification of mutations in the intracellular Ca2+ release to the creation of a strong donor splice site. Analyses of mRNA derived channels caused cardiac and skeletal muscle disorders from patient cell lines indicated that 2 mutant isoforms, both containing I. Valášková1,2, E. Flodrová1,2, E. Švandová2, Š. Prášilová1,2, R. Gaillyová1,2, P. parts of intron 13, are synthesized from the PRPF31 allele carrying Kuglík1,2, T. Novotný1; this mutation. These mRNAs harbour premature termination codons, 1University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University, Brno, Czech and were shown to be present in reduced levels in patient cell lines Republic. due to their degradation by the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Pro- Rapid mobilization of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) tein analysis revealed a decrease in the amount of full length PRPF31 into cytosol triggers activation of contractile elements, and it is there- protein and the lack of mutant proteins in patient cell lines. Our results fore a fundamental process in the physiology of heart and muscles. indicate that this mutation is pathogenic and, as with the vast majority The channels that regulate the duration and amplitude of calcium ef- of PRPF31 mutations described so far, leads to the reduction of func- flux from the SR are the ryanodine receptors (RyRs).Three subtypes tional PRPF31 protein and, consequently, that haploinsufficiency is the of these proteins exist: RyR1 is mainly expressed in skeletal muscle, cause of retinitis pigmentosa in the studied family. RyR2 is highly represented in cardiac tissue, and RyR3 is preferentially expressed in the brain. Mutations of RyR1 muscle isoform have been P12.142 associated with predisposition to 2 diseases, malignant hyperthermia Novel mutation in RP2 gene in Russian family with X-linked and central core disease. Mutations in the RyR2 gene have been iden- retinitis pigmentosa type 2 tified in families and in sporadic patients affected by catecholaminergic A. V. Polyakov1, O. V. Khlebnikova1,2, S. V. Gudzenko1, N. A. Beklemitcheva1; polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) and arrhythmogenic right 11- Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sci- ventricular dysplasia type 2 (ARVD2). The distribution of mutations ences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 22- Moscow Research Institute of Eye is identical for RyR1 and RyR2. Most RyRs mutations are clustered Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation. in the amino terminus, in the FKBP12.6-binding domains, and in the X-linked retinitis pigmentosa type 2 (RP2) - is a severe form of con- transmembrane domains of the proteins. We performed RYRs muta- genital X-linked retinal degeneration, characterized by constriction of tion screening based on clustering of known mutations along the RyR1 the visual fields, night blindness and fundus changes, including ‘bone and RyR2 genes. A multi-step approach is proposed: melting curve corpuscle’ lumps of pigment with a severely reduced visual acuity out- and HRM analysis of critical exons, DNA and cDNA sequencing of MH come. critical regions. We are able to identify pathogenic mutations in the RP2 gene, responsible for X-linked retinitis pigmentosa type 2, is lo- clinically affected proband. DNA analysis can be extended to all family cated on Xp11.3, consist of five exons and encodes a protein of the members to identify those are asymptomatic but genetically affected. same name RP2 which links the cell membrane with the cytoskeleton Detection of RyRs mutations is important because a preventing of fatal in photoreceptors of the eye. cardiac and skeletal muscle disorders in genetically affected patients The purpose of our study was searching for a disease-causing muta- has been shown to be effective. tion in Russian family with RP2. The penetrance among female carri- ers is incomplete in the family. Among 28 persons of a four-generation P12.145 family, in which 6 individuals were affected (5 males and a female), two heterozygous itPR1 deletions in German families with 26 individuals, including 6 affected were involved in DNA-study. Ge- dominant ataxia notyping analysis with polymorphic microsatellite markers NDPCA, P. Bauer1, C. Bauer1, M. Synofzik2, T. Schmitz-Hübsch3, U. Wüllner3, M. Bonin1, DXS1055 and DXS1003 from Xp11.3 showed the evidence of linkage O. Riess1, L. Schöls2; the disease with RP2 locus on chromosome X. Sequencing analysis 1Department of Medical Genetics, Tübingen, Germany, 2Hertie-Insitute for Clini- of all exons and intron-exon junctions of RP2 in affected man revealed cal Brain Research, Neurodegeneration, Tübingen, Germany, 3Department of a novel mutation- small deletion c.10-12delTTC in exon 1 of RP2. The Neurology, Bonn, Germany. mutation c.10-12delTTC was identified in all affected men in hemizy- At least 28 loci have been linked to autosomal dominant spinocerebel- gous and in all women-carriers in heterozygous state in the family. lar ataxia (ADCA). Causative genes have been cloned for nine nucleo- The results of the DNA-study revealed a novel disease-causing muta- tide repeat expansions (SCA1,2,3,6,7,8,10,12&17) and eight genes tion c.10-12delTTC in RP2 gene, leading to X-linked retinitis pigmen- with missense mutations (SCA4,5,11,13,14,15(16),27&28). Recently, tosa type 2. heterozygous genomic deletion comprising the ITPR1 gene on human chromosome 3p24 have been identified as the molecular defect under- P12.143 lying SCA15 in Australian and Japanese ataxia families. In order to as- Expression and siRNA interference of Rhodopsin cis-acting sess the prevalence and clinical phenotypes of SCA15, we screened splicing mutants associated with autosomal dominant Retinitis 69 patients with autosomal-dominant ataxias for genomic deletions in Pigmentosa exons 1 and 4 of the ITPR1-gene. I. Hernan, M. Gamundi, E. Borràs, M. Carballo; Two index patients showed relative gene dosage reduction for both Hospital de Terrassa, Terrassa, Spain. exons after qPCR indicating a heterozygous genomic deletion for at Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP), a clinically and genetically heterogeneous least exon 1 and exon 4 of the ITPR1-gene. To validate these findings group of retinal degeneration disorders affecting the photoreceptor we performed a high density SNP genotyping array (Affymetrix 6.0). cells, is one of the leading causes of genetic blindness. Mutation in the Copy number analysis validated both heterozygous genomic deletions rhodopsin gene (RHO) is the most prevalent cause of adRP (autoso- deleting approximativly 200kb and 500kb, respectively. Both patients mal dominant RP). had phenotypes compatible with rather pure cerebellar ataxia. Two cis-acting mutations (c.531-2A>G and c.937-1G>T), that lead to In our entire ADCA cohort (n=274), SCA15 is a rare cause of spino- a deficient pre-mRNA splicing, affect the splice sites of RHO and are cerebellar ataxia in Caucasians accounting for approximatively 1% of linked to adRP while a similar cis-acting mutation (c.936+1G>T) has dominant ataxias. Noteworthy this prevalence is comparable to SCA14 been linked to autosomal recessive RP (arRP). Transcriptional expres- and higher than SCA11 and SCA27. sion analysis shows that cis-acting splicing mutations causing adRP use intronic and/or exonic alternative splice sites while arRP mutation P12.146 results in a total exclusion of exon 4. Although protein expression anal- scA15/16: Phenotype in 4 families with deletions of the itPR-1 ysis confirms the translation of three RHO mutants, if some of these gene mutants (carrying a premature termination codon) are targeted by a A. Durr1,2, C. Marelli1,2, J. Johnson3, J. van de Leemput4, E. Ollagnon-Roman5, NMD mechanism is being studied. F. Tison6, F. Picard7, S. Sangla8, C. Thauvin-Robinet9, H. Dollfus10, J. Hardy11, Since most mutations causing adRP have a dominant-negative effect, G. Stevanin1,2, A. Brice1,2, A. Singleton4; three siRNA molecules have been designed to interfere the mutant 1CRicm UMRS975/NEB, Paris, France, 2APHP, Département de Génétique et transcripts detected in adRP families. Two of them specifically elimi- Cytogénétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Neuroge- nate the desired product. netics, Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 4Molecular Genetics Unit, National Institute in Aging, NIH,Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de la Croix Rous- P12.148 se, Lyon, France, 6Department of Neurology, Hôpital du Haut Lévêque, Univer- the involvement of Pi3K signalling pathway in spinal muscular sity Bordeaux 2, Pessac, France, 7Department of Neurology, UHMS, Geneva, atrophy risk disease: preliminary molecular data Switzerland, 8Department of Neurology, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, M. Stavarachi1, M. Toma1, P. Apostol1, D. Cimponeriu1, N. Butoianu2, N. Pan- 9Service de génétique, CHU, Dijon, France, 10Laboratoire Physiopathologie duru3, L. Gavrila1; des Syndromes Rares Héréditaires, AVENIR-Inserm, EA3949, Université Louis 1University of Bucharest, Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Al.Obre- Pasteur, Strasbourg, France, 11Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Institute gia” Clinical Psychiatry Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3”N. Paulescu” Institute, of Neurology, UCL, London, United Kingdom. Bucharest, Romania. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 15 (SCA15/16) is a recently identified Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a genetic condition characterized dominant ataxia caused by mutations in type 1 inositol 1,4,5-triphos- by motor neuron apoptosis, followed by progressive muscle weakness phate receptor (ITPR1). Molecular analysis used micro array to detect and in many cases by death. It is well known that the disease deter- rearrangements as described before (van de Leemput, PLoS Genet mining gene is SMN, but the molecular mechanism is still unclear. The 2007) in 76 index cases with autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia PI3K signalling pathway has been often reported as being responsible excluded from polyglutamine expansions. Four index cases (5%) car- for the motoneuronal death and can be involved in SMA onset or evo- ried a heterozygous ITPR1 deletion; exact size of the deletions has not lution. been yet determined. We proposed to evaluate the involvement of PI3KR1 and IGF1R genes There were 12 patients in 4 families with a mean age at onset of 35± polymorphisms (rs3730089 and rs2229765) in SMA risk disease. 15.8 years (n=11; range 18-66); mean disease duration of 15.8± 13 In the study were included 38 SMA patients clinically and molecular years (n =11; range 1-43). The first symptom was cerebellar gait ataxia diagnosed, after the informed consent was obtained. The PI3KR1 and in 10/11; one patient presented with writing difficulties and hand tremor. IGF1R genes polymorphisms genotyping was also assessed for 31 All patients developed progressive gait and limb ataxia, with dysarthria control subjects, without neuromuscular problems. Statistical analyses in 9 cases. Disease progression was slow in most, none was wheel- were therefore performed. chair bound. Ocular abnormalities included the presence of nystagmus The Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium law was respected for the both poly- (n=9), saccadic pursuit (n=5) and intermittent diplopia (n=4). Only one morphisms. The odd ratios with 95% confidence intervals estimated patient had pyramidal signs. Extrapyramidal signs, cognitive decline or for the risk genotypes, do not revealed statistically significant results. sensory abnormalities were absent. Cerebral MRI revealed vermian In the case of PI3KR1 gene, the OR = 0.81, 95% CI:0.0487<O. AA atrophy in six patients and global cerebellar atrophy in three. R.<13.513, Yate’s correction = 0.56, meanwhile for the IGF1R poly- In conclusion SCA 15/16 is rare among French patients with dominant morphism OR =0.94, 95% CI:0.3495<O.R.<2.5578, p=0.91. Regard- GG cerebellar ataxia. The overall phenotype is pure cerebellar ataxia with ing the risk conferred by polymorphisms alleles, we could observed an slow disease progression. OR = 1.22, p=0.6 in case of PI3KR1 gene and OR =1.14, p=0.6 for G A G allele for the other polymorphism. P12.147 Our preliminary molecular data do not sustain the hypothesis of the SHH mutations are an uncommon cause of developmental eye involvement of PI3K signaling pathway in SMA risk disease. A future anomalies study with an increased statistical power may clarify this relationship. S. A. Ugur Iseri1, P. Bakrania1, A. Wyatt1, D. J. Bunyan2, W. W. K. Lam3, D. R. This research was funded by CNCSIS grant TD 223/2008. Fitzpatrick4, D. Robinson2,5, N. K. Ragge1,6,7; 1Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Ox- P12.149 ford, United Kingdom, 2Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District two unaffected subjects with homozygous deletion of smN1 Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire, United Kingdom, 3Department of Clinical Genet- gene. ics, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4Medical Genetics N. Passon, G. Dubsky de Wittenau, E. Bregant, G. Damante, R. I. Lonigro; Section, MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, Department of Science and Biomedical Technologies, University of Udine, United Kingdom, 5National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Wessex), Salisbury Udine, Italy. District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire, United Kingdom, 6Moorfields Eye Hospital Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), an autosomal recessive neuromuscu- NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 7Department of Ophthalmol- lar disease, is caused by homozygous deletion of the SMN1 gene in ogy, Birmingham Children’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. about 96% of the 5q13-linked SMA patients. SMN1 gene, that mainly Sonic hedgehog (SHH) gene encodes a key morphogen implicated in produces full-length transcripts, has a highly homologous centromeric patterning of the ventral neural tube, the anterior-posterior limb axis copy (SMN2) that produces predominantly exon 7-skipped transcripts. and the ventral somites. Mutations in SHH are a cause of holopros- However, there is an inverse correlation between the SMN2 copy num- encephaly (HPE), a disorder in which the developing forebrain fails ber and clinical severity of SMA phenotype. In rare cases, homozygous to separate correctly into right and left hemispheres. HPE presents a deletion of SMN1 gene in unaffected siblings of patients with SMA can wide spectrum of clinical severity, ranging from cyclopia, proboscis-like be observed. Recently, Oprea et al., indicated that very high level of nasal structure and midfacial clefting in most severe cases to micro- Plastin 3 (PLS3) mRNA, observed in the peripheral blood of unaffected cephaly, mild hypotelorism, and eye and tooth anomalies in the milder females, could act as a protective gender-specific SMA modifier. In ones. Familial cases of HPE are typically inherited in an autosomal this report, we present two asymptomatic female carriers of biallelic dominant fashion with reduced penetrance and variable expressivity. absence of the SMN1 gene. We determined genes organization at the In this study, we screened the gene SHH in a cohort of 250 cases with SMA locus by MLPA/Q-PCR approaches that allows the contemporary anophthalmia-microphthalmia and coloboma via chromosome analy- evaluation of SMN1/SMN2 copy number. In both families we investi- sis, dosage analysis with by multiplex ligation-dependent probe am- gated: 1) the copy number of SMN2 gene; 2) the amount of the full- plification (MLPA), high resolution melting curve analysis and bidirec- length SMN mRNA; 3) the amount of PLS3 mRNA. The SMN2 copy tional DNA sequencing. These efforts collectively led to identification number resulted the same (4 copies) in the unaffected sister and her of an interstitial deletion on chromosome 7q36.1-q36.3 including the affected brother, while 5 copies were detected in the other unaffected SHH gene in a girl with microphthalmia in the right eye and coloboma female. The amount of full-length SMN mRNA is quite low and com- of the iris and retina in the left eye, a novel 24bp SHH intragenic dele- parable between asymptomatic and symptomatic subjects. Finally, the tion in a girl with unilateral microphthalmia, and a missense mutation in amount of PLS3 mRNA is comparable between all the subjects stud- a boy with unilateral microcornea, microphthalmia and iris coloboma. ied. Altogether these results suggest that other factors then full-length Our results suggest that the SHH mutations are an uncommon cause SMN and PLS3 could be important SMA phenotype modifiers. of AM. P12.150 molecular Analysis of Exon 7 and 8 of smN Gene in turkish spinal muscular Atrophy Patients S. Kocaturk Sel1, H. Kasap2, F. Koc3, A. Guzel1; 1Cukurova University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Adana, Turkey, 2Cukurova University School of Medicine, DepartmentMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  of Medical Biology and Genetics, Adana, Turkey, 3Cukurova University School clinical data do not in most cases suggest a particular defective gene. of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Adana, Turkey. Consanguinity is frequent in such families. Genome wide SNP array Scientific background: The spinal muscular atrophies (SMAs) causing analysis allows, by searching for homozygous regions in such patients, degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord characterized the selection of one or few candidate genes in which to search for mu- by progressive weakness of the lower motor neurons. Several types of tations. We report 8 such cases including 6 sporadic ones, where the SMA have been described depend on age when accompanying clini- disease causing gene and mutation were found using this approach cal features appear. The most common types are acute infantile (SMA (see table). type I, or Werdnig-Hoffman disease), chronic infantile (SMA type II), chronic juvenile (SMA type III or Kugelberg-Welander disease), and Number of candidateho- case Form Disease mutated gene adult onset (SMA type IV) forms. SMA is diagnosed with detection of mozygous segments homozygous deletions of SMN1 (exon 7 - 8 or exon 7) gene in mo- 1 Sporadic Myopathy 1 TRIM32 lecular level. 2 Familial Spastic paraplegia 1 SPG11 3 Familial Ataxia 1 AOA1 Objectives: It is aimed to conduct molecular analysis of exon 7 and 8 4 Sporadic Achromatopsia 2 CNGB3 of SMN gene in sixty five subjects of SMA (66 patients). 5 Sporadic Bardet Biedl 1 BBS1 Materials and methods: PCR-RFLP method is used for detection of 6 Sporadic Ataxia 6 FXN homozygous exon 7 - 8 deletions. PCR-SSCP method was used ei- 7 Sporadic Bardet Biedl 2 BBS6 8 Sporadic Bardet Biedl 2 BBS5 ther to identify for intragenic mutations and especially compound het- erozygotes or to confirm some SMA patients homozygous deletions detected by RFLP. Homozygosity mapping using 50K micro-arrays (Affymetrix) was performed only on Conclusion: In this study, 94 % (62/66) of SMA patients including all the patients and allowed us to identify causative mutation in a significant proportion of types were found homozygous for exon 7 and 8 deletions with RFLP sporadic cases affected with different neuromuscular or neurosensory diseases (see method. The rate of homozygous deletions determined was 94.7% table.). This rapid and not too expensive approach is particularly useful for diseases (18/19) in type I patients, 96% (22/23) in type II and 90% (18/20) in with extensive genetic heterogeneity like Bardet Biedl syndrome (14 genes published type III. SSCP method was used only for 4 subjects who are clinically to date) , limb girdle muscular dystrophy or sporadic ataxias, by selecting only one or diagnosed as SMA patients but not confirmed with RFLP analysis. The two genes for sequencing and identify the private mutation. In some cases, SNP array results of SSCP analyses led to decision that patients may be of com- analysis can reveal consanguinity that was unknown to or denied by the family pound heterozygous or intragenic mutations. P12.153 P12.151 Twenty novel mutations in SPG11/spatacsin identified using New DNA microvariations described by smRt arrays. both direct sequencing and mLPA P. Armero1, B. Hernández-Charro1, A. Hernández1, R. Agudiez1, J. Fdez-Toral2, G. Stevanin1,2, C. Depienne1,2, E. Denis2, E. Fedirko2, E. Mundwiller1, S. For- P. Madero1; lani1, C. Cazeneuve2, E. Le Guern2, A. Durr1,2, A. Brice1,2; 1Centro de Análisis Genéticos, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Genetics Department. Hospi- 1CRicm UMRS975/NEB, Paris, France, 2Département de Génétique et Cytogé- tal Universitario Central de Asturias, Spain. nétique, Paris, France. Introduction: Genome screening using array CGH has great potential Objective: To extend the SPG11 mutation spectrum and establish the in the characterization of unexplained chromosomal aberrations. The frequency of genomic rearrangements in this gene. whole genome Sub-Megabase Resolution Tiling Array (SMRT array) is Background: Truncating point mutations in SPG11/spatacsin are the capable of identifying microamplifications and microdeletions at a res- major cause of autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia with thin cor- olution of 100 Kb. Other different techniques, such as MLPA or FISH, pus callosum. Recently genomic rearrangements were also involved. are traditionally employed to detect these chromosomal alterations. In Methods: 45 unrelated patients with spastic paraplegia with thin cor- this study we show the utility of the SMRT arrays to provide precise pus callosum +/- mental retardation or cognitive delay were screened information about the size and breakpoints of DNA copy number gains using direct sequencing and MLPA. and losses. Results: 25 different SPG11 point mutations, 18 of which were novel, Methods: We present a patient with unexplained mental retardation were identified in 16 patients (36%). All mutations but one introduced and a male normal karyotipe 46, XY. MLPA kit (from MRC-Holland) premature termination codon in the protein sequence and were com- technique was carried out. A SMRT array, (from Wan Lam Laboratory patible with a degradation of the corresponding mRNA by the non- at the BC Cancer Research Centre) analysis was performed to confirm sense-mediated mRNA decay. The remaining mutation was a mis- and describe the alteration. sense variant which alters a highly conserved amino-acid of the pro- Results: MLPA study showed a 14q deletion of about 1.5 Mb. The 14q tein and was found associated with a truncating mutation. In addition, specific probe of MLPA kit was deleted. The SMRT array analysis of MLPA analysis detected heterozygous SPG11 micro-rearrangements the specific 14q32.33 region confirmed this microdeletion and allowed in two patients who already had a single heterozygous point mutation. us to exactly describe its size into 2.20 Mb. Analysis of the affected relatives and parents when possible showed Conclusions: The SMRT array study confirms a small deletion of 2.20 that the mutations segregated with the disease and that heterozygous Mb unless than 1.5 Mb previously detected by MLPA. SMRT array compound mutations were inherited each from a healthy parent. Only arises as an effective technique to detect DNA microvariations and two patients out of 16 had homozygous mutations; the remaining 14 provides more information about their size and precise breakpoints. patients had heterozygous compound mutations. Finally, we identified new missense polymorphisms that did not segregated with the dis- P12.152 ease. sNP array analyses can orient molecular diagnosis of autosomal Conclusions: These findings expand the SPG11 mutation spectrum recessive heterogenous diseases in sporadic cases from and highlight the importance of screening the whole coding region with consanguinous families both direct sequencing and a quantitative method. M. C. Vincent1,2, E. Schaefer3, M. Cossée1,2, C. Lagier-Tourenne1,4, N. Don- Rare missense polymorphisms are frequent in SPG11, complicating daine1, H. Dollfus3,2, C. Tranchant5, P. Charles6, J. Amiel7, C. Antignac7, I. interpretation of diagnosis. Vuillaume8, M. Koenig1,4, J. L. Mandel1,4; 1Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, CHRU, Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire P12.154 de Génétique Médicale, EA3949, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France, sPG4 mutations can mimic primary progressive multiple 3Service de Génétique Médicale, CHRU, Strasbourg, France, 4IGBMC (CNRS/ sclerosis on clinical, biological and mRi aspects INSERM/ULP), Illkirch, France, 5Service de Neurologie, CHRU, Strasbourg, P. Charles1, C. Depienne1, B. Fontaine2, C. Lubetzki2, O. Lyon-Caen2, A. Durr1, France, 6Consultation de Génétique, Pitié Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France, A. Brice1; 7Département de Génétique, Necker Enfants Malades,AP-HP, Paris, France, 1Département de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Paris, France, 2Fédération des 8Centre de Biologie-Pathologie, CHRU, Lille, France. Maladies du Système Nerveux, Paris, France. Molecular diagnosis of rare autosomal recessive diseases with ex- The most common form of autosomal dominant hereditary spastic tensive genetic heterogeneity represents a real challenge because paraplegia (AD-HSP) is caused by mutations in the SPG4/SPASTMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  gene, encoding spastin. SPG4-HSP and generally described as a (126/150, 84%), whereas 91% (114/125) of type III patients have 3 pure form of the disease_that is, as spastic paraparesis often associ- (67%) or 4 (24%) SMN2 copies. These results confirm that SMN2 cop- ated with a decreased sense of vibration in the lower limbs and urinary ies are strongly related to disease severity. However, the correlation is problems. However, it is characterized by a large variability in the age not absolute (i.e. 36 type I patients showed three SMN2 copies and 9 at onset (ranging from early infancy up to the eighth decade). Patients type III patients had two copies). This study performed in a large cohort usually have a family history of the disease but some may also present of subjects, allowed us to improve the genetic characterisation of the as sporadic cases due to incomplete penetrance or censor effects. In SMA locus. Moreover, it will be useful to define a subtype of patients the latter, non-genetic causes of spastic paraparesis, such as primary (i.e. those with three SMN2 copies and different SMA type) to further progressive multiple sclerosis, (PPMS) are usually searched for.. We investigate the functional copies of SMN2 and possible modifiers of report 3 patients with a primary diagnosis of PPMS, based on MRI the phenotype. Supported by GENAME Project, CIBERER and FIS findings, who carried a SPG4 mutation. Interestingly, 2 out of the 3 05-2416. patients had a family history of gait disorder or clinical diagnosis of MS and in one, the father died at age 60 (censor effect). The remain- P12.157 ing patient fulfilled Mc Donald’s criteria (MRI and CSF) for MS. Those High throughput, complete genotyping of the tNFRsF1A gene. findings must lead to important caution with PPMS diagnosis not to this project is supported through coordination theme 1 (Health) understimate genetic spastic paraplegia because of consequences for of the European community‘s FP7 appropriate genetic counselling. Those results could also modify our S. Lezer, A. Yakir, N. Navot; understanding of the mechanisms of demyelinating diseases and of Pronto Diagnostics Ltd, Rehovot, Israel. the interactions between axonal degeneration and inflammation. The TNF Receptor Associated Periodic Syndrome (TRAPS) is a rare autosomal dominant multisystematic autoinflammatory disorder, P12.155 caused by sporadic mutations in the TNF super family Receptor 1A molecular analysis of spinal muscular atrophy in iranian gene (TNFRSF1A). Genetic diagnosis of TRAPS consists usually of population sequencing of exons 2-4 of TNFRSF1A gene. However, mutations S. Vallian, N. Noori; which cause TRAPS have been also found outside these exons; there- The University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. fore, a system that would offer complete genotyping of the TNFRSF1A Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive genetic gene would be highly advantageous. We are currently developing an disorder of motor neurons. Defects in genes for survival motor neu- answer to this need using a new, high throughput technique, for simul- ron (SMN) and neural apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP) have been taneous detection of both known and novel point mutations (SNPs and shown to be associated with the disease. Among the genetic de- pathogenic mutations) and of large-scale genetic rearrangements in fects, deletions in exon 7 and 8 of SMN as well as exons 4 and 5 the TNFRSF1A gene. This system, called EMMA (enhanced mismatch of NAIP gene were found to be most significant. In this study, dele- mutation analysis) is based on electrophoretic heteroduplex analysis tions in SMN and NAIP genes were examined in 35 unrelated SMA (HDA) and semiquantitative multiplexed PCR by multi-capillary elec- patients (14 type I, 5 type II, 16 type III) patients. Deletion frequency trophoresis. The EMMA (Fluigent, France) mutation detection method in SMN (E7 and 8) and NAIP (E4 and 5) in patients with SMA type I is an alternative to dHPLC and sequencing. It combines all the ad- was 92.8%,42.8%,64.3%,78.6%; in type II, 60%,20%,80%,80%; and vantages of the screening before sequencing strategy: high through- in type III, 16.6%,6.25%,43.7%,43.7%, respectively. About 7.1% of pa- put, major reduction in sequencing costs and high productivity. The tients with SMA type I; 20% with type II and 56.2% with type III showed presence of both point mutations and long-range rearrangements has no deletions for the exons examined. Moreover, homozygous deletion a “signature” that can be associated with quantitative and objective in E7 and/or 8 of the SMN gene was found in 62.5% of the patients, numerical criteria. The analysis of electrophoregrams can be fully au- with high frequency in both type I (78.5%) and type II (80%), and less tomated; a feature that for the rare TRAPS case is less imperative, but frequency (48.5%) in type III. Similarly, homozygous deletions of E4 will be very useful for high-throughput screening of clinically important and/or E5 of NAIP gene was highest in type I (92.9%) compare to genes with more prevalent SNPs and pathogenic allele variants. type II (60%) and type III (6%). Our data suggest a strong association of deletions in E4 and E5 of NAIP together with deletions in SMN (E7 P12.158 and 8) with more severe form of SMA (SMA type I and II) in Iranian New trinucleotide diseases analysis based on HPLc and QF PcR population. M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska1,2, A. Sulek-Piatkowska3, A. Plawski2, R. Slomski2, U. G. Froster1; P12.156 1Institute of Human Genetics, Leipzig, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Estimation of smN2 copy number in 536 unrelated spanish smA Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Genetics, Insti- patients by Multiplex-Ligation dependent Probe Amplification tute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warszawa, Poland. (mLPA) Trinucleotide expansions are an important mutational form specifically S. Bernal1,2, L. Alías1,2, M. J. Barceló1,2, E. Also-Rallo1,2, R. Martínez-Hernán- in neurogenerative disorders such as HD (Huntington disease), differ- dez1,2, F. J. Rodríguez-Alvarez3,4, E. Aller5,6, E. Grau5,6, A. Peciña7,8, L. Ortiz7,8, ent types of SCA (Spinocerebellar ataxia), SBMA (Spinal and bulbar M. J. Rodríguez1,2, P. Gallano1,2, S. Borrego7,8, J. M. Millán5,6, C. Hernández- muscular atrophy) and DM1 (Myotonic dystrophy type 1). Trinucleo- Chico3,4, E. F. Tizzano1,2; tide disorders are characterized by an increasing of severity of dis- 1Servicio de genética. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, ease course in the next generation of mutation curriers. The number 2CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 3Unidad de genética. Hospital Ramón y Cajal, of repeats may reach over 2000 in severe affected individuals. These Madrid, Spain, 4CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 5Unidad de genética. Hospital La larger expansions require specific and time consuming methods for Fe, Valencia, Spain, 6CIBERER, Valencia, Spain, 7Unidad de gestión clínica identification, such as fragments lengths analysis by polyacrylamide de genética, reproducción y medicina fetal. Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, gel electrophoresis (PAGE) or Southern blotting. Identification and ex- Spain, 8CIBERER, Sevilla, Spain. act determination of alleles on the molecular level is very important for Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neuromuscular disorder caused by diseases diagnosis and prognosis. The aim of our study was to de- absence or mutations in the SMN1 gene. SMA patients are classified velop a highly sensitive, automated and economical molecular method into 3 groups, type I (the most severe), type II (the intermediate form) for determination and characterization of trinucleotide repeat regions. and type III (the less affected) according to age of onset, achieved mo- Here we present the molecular test based on high performance liq- tor abilities, and life span. SMN2 is the SMN1 highly homologous copy uid chromatography (HPLC) and quantitative fluorescent (QF) PCR that is considered as a modifier of the disease. for characterization of trinucleotide repeats. We analyzed 403 sam- We estimated the SMN2 copy number in 536 unrelated SMA patients ples - clinically diagnosed with different trinucleotide disorders. Our from different Spanish centres. We employed the Multiplex-Ligation results indicated high accuracy and consistency of the data obtained dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) technique, which includes a with HPLC (± 3 CAG) compared to classical methods based on PAGE mixture of specific probes for the SMA locus. and sequencing. The results obtained using combined QF and Long The majority of the type I patients showed two copies of the SMN2 PCR showed higher precision in comparison to the results obtained gene (209/261,80%), type II patients presented mainly 3 SMN2 copies by traditional techniques. We conclude that HPLC, QF and Long PCRMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders  can be used as a sensitive and efficient alternative diagnostic method P12.161 compared to conventional techniques for measuring fragment lengths Functional analysis of splicing mutations in Usher syndrome in trinucleotide diseases. genes T. Jaijo1,2, E. Aller1,2, I. Hernán3, M. J. Gamundi3, M. Carballo3, J. M. Millán1,2; P12.159 1Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2CIBER de Enfermedades Raras characterization of two novel mutations in tricho-rhino- CIBERER, Valencia, Spain, 3Servicio de Laboratorio. Departamento de Gené- phalangeal syndrome tica y Biología Molecular. Hospital de Terrassa, Terrassa, Spain. S. Cuevas1, A. Flores2, R. Ortiz de Luna3, M. Rivera-Vega4, J. Morales5, O. Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive disorder character- Mutchinick5, L. Gonzalez4; ized by sensorineural hearing loss, Retinitis Pigmentosa and variable 1Hospital General de Mexico, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, vestibular areflexia. Clinically three subtypes are distinguished (USH1- Mexico d.f., Mexico, 2Hospital Infantil de Mexico, Mexico d.f., Mexico, 3Hospital USH3) and to date, nine genes have been associated to the disease. Infantil de Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 4Hospital General de Mexico, Universi- The most prevalent USH genes are MYO7A for USH1 and USH2A for dad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 5Instituto Nacional de USH2, with prevalences that range 29-55% and 75% respectively. Ciencias Medicas Salvador Zubiran, Mexico D.F., Mexico. Five sequence variants, suspected to affect the splicing process, Mutations of the TRPS1 gene lead to the tricho-rhinophalangeal syn- had been identified in our cohort of USH patients: c.2283-1G>T and dromes (TRPS) types I or III. They are characterized by craniofacial c.5856G>A in the MYO7A gene, and c.1841-2A>G, c.2167+5G>A and and skeletal abnormalities. Cone-shape epiphyses are the charac- c.5298+1G>C in the USH2A gene. teristic radiographic findings. The patients have sparse scalp hair, a In the present study, minigenes based on pCI-Neo Mammalian Expres- bulbous tip of the nose, a long flat philtrum, and a thin upper vermillion sion vector were used to investigate the implication of these variants in border. TRPS III is similar to TRPS I except by the presence of se- the mRNA processing. Exons and flanquing intronic sequences, both vere brachydactyly due to short metacarpals and severe short stature. wild type as mutated, were cloned. After transfection of COS-7 cells, TRPS II or Langer-Giedion syndrome is a microdeletion syndrome RNA was extracted, retrotranscripted to cDNA and analyzed. affecting both the TRPS1 and EXT1 genes and differs from TRPS I All changes were observed to affect the splicing process, being re- and TRPS III by the presence of mental retardation and multiple car- sponsible for the skipping of implicated exons. Furthermore, the mu- tilaginous exostoses. TRPS I is inherited as an autosomal dominant tation c.2167+5G>A generated too an alternative splicing, where the trait and is due to molecular defects in the TRPS1 gene. In the pres- final of the affected exon is lost. ent study we describe two novel mutations in 2 families affected with It is important to analyze the role of putative splicing variants in USH TRPS I. We screened all exons of the TRPS1 from the patients. The genes in order to determine their pathologic effect. Most USH genes mutation analysis showed missense mutation in exon 3 and nonsense show an expression profile restricted to hardly accessible tissues so, mutation in exon 4 of the TRPS1 gene. The TRPS I phenotypes of strategies as minigenes are needed to determine the implication of most patients with a nonsense mutation and with a TRPS1 deletion or identified variants in the mRNA processing. disruption are very similar. All nonsense mutations in a heterozygous state, reduce the doses of TRPS1 protein, supporting that haploinsuf- P12.162 ficiency is the cause of TRPS. Our data show a higher genotypic spec- Unclassified variants in Usher syndrome and related disorders trum in the TRPS I and demonstrate that mutations within the initial D. Baux1, M. Claustres1,2, A. F. Roux1,2; region of the enzyme and in the GATA region of the TRPS1 gene result 1CHU Montpellier, Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, Montpellier, France, in TRPS I syndrome. 2Inserm, U827, Montpellier, France. Genes involved in Usher syndrome, the major cause of hereditary P12.160 deaf-blindness, are particularly prone to alterations of unknown clinical Large genomic rearrangements in the Usher genes significance (Unclassified Variants, UVs). In the MYO7A and USH2A L. Larrieu1, V. Faugère1, S. Le Guédard-Méreuze2, C. Abadie1, B. Gilbert-Dus- genes, such alterations can account for up to 50% of the newly identi- sardier3, C. Blanchet4, C. Hamel4, P. Castorina5, G. Lina6, M. Claustres1,2, A. F. fied variants in molecular diagnosis. The most encountered type of Roux1,2; UV is missense variants, which can affect the protein structure and 1CHU de Montpellier, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, Fran- therefore its function. In vitro assessment is there difficult and expen- ce, 2Inserm, U827, Montpellier, France, 3CHU de Poitiers, Service de génétique sive, and in silico studies represent an attractive way to classify these médicale, Poitiers, France, 4CHU de Montpellier, Centre National de Référence variants. We present here a multiple step analysis which combines des Affections Sensorielles Génétiques, Montpellier, France, 5Ospedale Mag- biological observations and in silico studies. Six items are taken into giore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 6CHU de Lyon, account (4 of which are discussed in Greenblatt et al., 2008), and are service ORL, Lyon, France. presented below: Usher syndrome is an autosomal recessive hearing loss which com- bines sensorineural deafness and retinitis pigmentosa. It is both clini- Biological observations In silico studies cally and genetically heterogeneous. Three clinical subtypes are de- fined in respect to the vestibular dysfunction and the degree of hear- Review of Position in cis or Presence or ab- Ortholog Conservation in 3D ana- ing loss. Type I (USH1) patients have profound hearing loss (HL) and published trans of a sec- sence in relevant conser- similar protein lysis vestibular dysfunction. Type II (USH2) is the most frequent form and literature ond alteration control DNAs vation domains patients have moderate to severe HL and normal vestibular function. Type III (USH3) is characterized by progressive HL. So far, 9 genes Each item is then rated following precise rules, and the sum allows the classification are known to be responsible for Usher syndrome (5 for USH1, 3 for of missense variants on a four-grade scale, UV1-4, as recommended in the guidelines USH2 and 1 for USH3). We have developed an exhaustive molecular published by the Clinical Molecular Genetics Society, UV1 corresponding to certainly analysis based on sequencing of the 9 genes (exons + flanking intronic non-pathogenic variants and UV4, considered as certainly pathogenic variants. This regions). More than 180 USH families have been analysed so far. We empirical method has already been applied to 115 missense variants identified in 6 identified the pathogenic mutations in most cases; however, 15% of genes responsible for Usher syndrome or related non-syndromic affections, and will our cohort carries either one or no mutation in any of the genes. The be extended to all identified missense variants in these genes. Moreover, this method absence of mutation can sign the presence of large rearrangements could be applied to variants identified in genes involved in any recessively transmitted that remain undetected by sequencing. Therefore we have developed Mendelian disease. a semi-quantitative non-fluorescent multiplex assay to identify large deletions or duplications. In addition, a MLPA kit has been recently P12.163 designed for PCDH15. Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in Italy: identification of 15 We have detected so far 12 large genomic rearrangements in 11 novel and 2 known COLA mutations families. The breakpoints could be identified for 6 families. This study B. Drera1, N. Zoppi1, M. Ritelli1, G. Tadini2, M. Venturini3, A. Wischmeijer4, M. shows that large genomic rearrangements are implicated in at least 6 Nicolazzi5, A. Musumeci6, M. Clementi7, P. Calzavara Pinton3, M. Valli8, S. Bar- % of the Usher cases and their screening should be included for ef- lati1, M. Colombi1; ficient molecular diagnosis. 1University of Brescia, Dept. Biomedical Sciences and Biotechnology, Brescia,Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  Italy, 2Institute of Dermatological Sciences, Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore P12.165 Policlinico, Mangiagalli, Regina Elena, IRCCS, Milano, Italy, 3Institute of Der- Williams-Beuren syndrome in a Bulgarian patient diagnosed by matological Sciences, University of Brescia, and Azienda Ospedaliera Spedali mLPA kit for microdeletion syndromes. Civili, Brescia, Italy, 4U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico Sant’Orsola Malpighi, A. V. Kirov, T. Todorov, A. Todorova, S. Kalenderova, V. Mitev; University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5UOC Malattie del Ricambio, Dipartimen- Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, to di Medicina Interna e Dermatologia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Bulgaria. Roma, Italy, 6Emergency Medicine Department, S. Maria degli Angeli General William-Beuren syndrome (WBS) syndrome is an autosomal domi- Hospital, Pordenone, Italy, 7Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università di Padova, nant disorder clinically characterized by supravalvular aortic stenosis Padova, Italy, 8Dipartimento di Biochimica A. Castellani, Università di Pavia, (SVAS), multiple peripheral pulmonary arterial stenoses, elfin face, Pavia, Italy. mental and statural deficiency, specific dental malformation, and in- Vascular EDS (vEDS) (MIM #130050) is a dominantly inherited dis- fantile hypercalcemia. order, whose clinical diagnosis is made by major and minor criteria The genetic cause of WBS is a contiguous gene deletion of several (e.g., easy bruising, thin skin, typical facies, and fragility of arteries, or genes on chromosome 7q11.23. The severity of clinical symptoms and internal organs). The first major complication occurs in 25% of vEDS particularly mental retardation may be related to the size of the dele- patients by the age of 20, and in 80% by the age of 40; the median tion (the number of genes involved). Recently developed for research survival is 48 years. vEDS is due to mutations in COL3A1 gene. About purposes Multiplex Ligation-dependant Probe Amplification (MLPA) 200 COL3A1 mutations have been reported. Mutations in TGFBR1 method provides a possibility to detect copy number changes (dele- and TGFBR2 cause the Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) type II (MIM tions and duplications) along a single or a number of genes. We suc- #610380), presenting with vEDS major signs and without cardinal fea- cessfully applied MLPA probe mix P245-A1 Microdeletion syndromes tures of originally described LDS. to genetically diagnose a patient with clinically suspected WBS. The In this work we report the characterization of Italian vEDS patients. In obtained results showed undoubted a reduction of gene dosage for 17 out of 32 probands, with presumed vEDS, we disclosed 15 novel the 3 specific WBS probes: two within Elastin(ELN) gene and one in and 2 known COL3A1 mutations: 13 (76,5%) missense, and 4 (23.5%) (LIMK1) gene, both localized in 7q11.23. The detected deletion in our splicing mutations. All the missense mutations affected a glycine in patient was associated with multiple peripheral pulmonary stenoses, the collagenous domain of the protein, and all the splicing mutations supravalvular aortic stenosis, moderate mental retardation, cognitive the donor splice site, leading to exon in frame skipping. No TGFBR1 problems associated with attention deficiency and hyperactivity. Facial and TGFBR2 mutations were detected in COL3A1 negative patients. dismorphology was also present: thick lips, machroorchidism, micro- The median age of the first complication in 15 out 17 probands was gnathia. 28.5 years. Two probands (at 35 and 12 years) and 3 relatives died for The MLPA analysis proved to be useful in routine genetic diagnosis of abdominal aorta rupture. The most involved vessels were the medium- microdeletion syndromes and particularly William-Beuren syndrome. sizes arteries, mostly the splenic and hepatic ones. The majority of the patients were diagnosed after a major event. These data add insights P12.166 to the knowledge of vEDS genotype-phenotype correlation. is tRim50, a Williams Beuren syndrome gene, at the intersection of autophagy and proteasome pathways? P12.164 C. Fusco1, M. Egorov2, L. Micale1, M. Monti3, M. G. Turturo1, B. Augello1, R. The influence of VEGF polymorphism on the progression of Polishchuk2, P. Pucci4, F. Cozzolino3, G. Merla1; chronic glomerulonephritis 1Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo Della Sofferenza Hospital, San H. Šafránková1, J. Reiterová1,2, M. Merta2,1, J. Štekrová2, V. Tesař1; Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Unit of Membrane Sort- 1Dept. of Nephrology, 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles University and General ing and Biogenesis Department of Cell Biology and Oncology, “Mario Negri Sud Faculty Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Human Consortium”, Santa Maria Imbaro, Italy, 3CEINGE Advanced Biotechnology Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles University and General Faculty and Department of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Federico II University, Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. Napoli, Italy, 43 CEINGE Advanced Biotechnology and Department of Organic The role of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a potent an- Chemistry and Biochemistry, Federico II University, Napoli, Italy. giogenic agent, in the pathogenesis of different glomerulonephritides Proteasome and Autophagy catabolic pathways have been implicated (GN) has been studied intensively. We investigated the influence of in many human disorders. Recently, we showed that TRIM50 acts as VEGF polymorphism at position -2578 (A/C) of the VEGF promoter on an E3-ubiqutin ligase. TRIM50 is hemizygous in the Williams Beuren the progression of two common GN - focal segmental glomeruloscle- syndrome (WBS), a contiguous genetic disorder, caused by a 1.5 Mb rosis (FSGS) and IgA nephropathy (IGAN). deletion at 7q11.23 that include about 25 genes. Although some of 247 Czech patients with FSGS and IGAN entered into study. Patients the WBS phenotypes have been associated to some of the deleted were divided into rapid progressors (RP) - 99 pts (64 males, 35 fe- genes, the contributions of the remaining genes, including TRIM50, to males, mean age 45.4 ± 10.7 years) with renal failure during 5 years the multiple defects are still undetermined. To get insight on its role and since renal biopsy and slow progressors (SP) - 148 pts (91 males, 57 to identify putative TRIM50-interacting peptides we performed fluores- females, mean age 46.5±12.1 years) with stable renal function. 100 cence and electronic microscopy and mass spectrometry. genetically unrelated healthy subjects were control group (CG). Ge- We founded that TRIM50 protein localizes in highly mobile, labile and nomic DNA was amplified by PCR with published primers. A χ2-test dynamic cytoplasmic bodies. CLEM-microscopy showed that it local- was used to compare the distribution of genotypes according to reces- izes in the multi-vesicular structures similar to the autophagosome and sive and dominant genetic model between RP and SP. notably it colocalizes with LC3, a specific marker of autophagosomes. The distribution of the -2578 VEGF polymorphism: Consistently, nano LC-MS/MS identified a number of putative TRIM50- interacting proteins known being implicated in the proteasome and autophagy. Among them we showed that TRIM50 interacts with P62/ AA (%) AC (%) CC (%) SQSTM1, an essential protein involved in the autophagic flux. p62 is FSGS RP 27.3 49.1 23.6 able to transfer misfolded and ubiquitinated proteins to the autopha- SP 23.1 50 26.9 gosomes for degradation and as TRIM50 is an E3-ubiquitin ligase, we RP 22.7 40.9 36.4 IGAN SP 22.1 52.5 25.4 can speculate that TRIM50 ubiquitinates its substrates that are, then, CG 21 54 25 shuttled to the autophagosome for degradation via TRIM50-p62 com- plex. There was a tendency to negative prognostic value of the C allele on IGAN, however These results show an unexpected role for TRIM50 on protein degra- a significant influence of VEGF-2578 polymorphism on the progression of FSGS and dation pathways. We anticipated that the haploinsufficiency of TRIM50 IGAN was excluded. could account for a consistent part of WBS phenotype through the ac- Supported by IGA projects NR/9523-3, NS 9779-4 cumulation and/or abnormal degradation of TRIM50 substrates.Metabolic disorders  P12.167 in SH2D1A are the most frequent cause of XLP. This gene encodes a Pattern of direct molecular diagnosis of Wilson disease in small intracytoplasmic protein, defects of which cause selective altera- moldavian patients tion of NK and T cell functions, resulting in an inability to control EBV- N. Mocanu, V. Sacara; infected B cells. Another XLP gene is XIAP (or BIRC4) encoding the National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Mol- X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein. dova, Republic of. We have investigated the group of 26 unrelated male patients: 22 Wilson’s disease (WD) is a rare inborn error of metabolism caused by with initial clinical XLP diagnosis; 4 with initial clinical FHL (Familial a defect in ATP7B, a protein necessary for proper copper excretion into hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis) diagnosis without mutations in bile. We investigated Moldavian families with WD for identification of FHL genes (PRF1, UNC13D, STX11). DNA samples have been in- mutations of the ATP7B gene in 14 and 15 exons using single strand vestigated for mutation in SH2D1A and XIAP genes coding areas by conformation polymorphism method (SSCP) of DNA molecule. direct sequencing. We analyzed 34 Moldavian patients with WD. The diagnosis was es- The analysis of SH2D1A coding region revealed 4 different mutations tablished in any patients with unexplained liver disease along with neu- on 7 chromosomes - hole gene deletion on 1 chromosome, c.164G>T rological or neuropsychiatric disorder, presenting of Kayser-Fleischer (p.55Arg>Leu) CD014961 on 2 chromosomes, c.53insA on 1 chromo- rings, low serum ceruloplasmin level, the amount of copper excreted some and c.163C>T (p.55Arg>Stop) CD981809 on 3 chromosomes. in the urine in a 24-hour period. Our patients had presented with pre- The c.53insA mutation was new, and others were previously reported. dominantly hepatic, neurological or psychiatric manifestations. In exon The investigation of XIAP coding region showed 3 previously re- 14 ATP7B gene have been determined missens-mutation His1069Glu ported polymorphisms (c.1268A>C (p.423Gln>Pro) rs5956583 on in 8 (25, 5%) causes. In 2 (25%) patients the mutation was detected 7 chromosomes, c.*+80G>C rs12838858 on 1 chromosomes and in homozygote form, but in 6 (75%) patients in heterozygote form. In c.*+12A>G rs28382740 on 4 chromosomes). New nucleotide substitu- the 15 exon of the ATP7B gene we don’t detected the fragments with tion (c.1056+19A>T) detected on 1 chromosomes wasn’t found among abnormal electroforetic activity. The search of deletion in the 15 exon previously reported SNP. (C3400delCgene) in studied patients hadn’t any results. According to our data SH2D1A gene mutations are the cause of XLP The detected of missens-mutations in 23,5 % of causes has a ma- for 27% of the examined cases. No mutations were found in coding jor importance for diagnosis in Moldavian patients. Frequency of His- region of XIAP gene. 1069Glu mutation in Moldavian’s patients is lower than in European’s patients. The presences in patients with certain clinical manifestation the heterozygous occurrence of missense-mutation can take part a P13. metabolic disorders compound phenomenon. P13.01 P12.168 Adiponectin gene polymorphism (G276t) in patients with Wolfram syndrome. clinical and genetic study in an italian abdominal obesity family. V. B. Timoshin1, O. D. Belyaeva2, E. A. Bagenova2, A. V. Berezina2, O. O. Bol- L. Rigoli, G. Salzano, C. Di Bella, M. Amorini, V. Procopio, G. Lo Giudice, P. shakova2, E. A. Chubenko2, A. E. Garanina2, E. I. Baranova2, O. A. Bercovitch3, Romeo, F. Pugliatti, L. Grasso, C. Salpietro, F. Lombardo; V. I. Larionova1; Department of Pediatrics-Policlinico Universitario, Messina, Italy. 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian Background: Wolfram syndrome (WS) is a recessively inherited men- Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Medical University after Pavlov IP, St. Pe- delian form of diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and tersburg, Russian Federation, 3St. Petersburg State Medical University after deafness. Affected individuals may also show renal tract abnormalities Pavlov PI, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. as well as multiple neurological and psychiatric symptoms. The caus- The adiponectin gene is a candidate gene responsible for insulin re- ative gene for WS (WFS1) encoding wolframin maps to chromosome sistance and type 2 diabetes. OBJECTIVE: (1) to determine the fre- 4p.16.1 and consists of eight exons, spanning 33.44 Kb of genomic quency of single nucleotide polymorphism 276 G>T of the adiponectin DNA. The current study aimed to contribute to our understanding of gene in patients with abdominal obesity, and (2) to study an effect of the molecular basis of WS in an affected Italian family. particular genotypes on serum adiponectin level and on insulin sensi- Methods: The proband was a 15-year-old girl who exhibited diabetes tivity. STUDY POPULATION: 78 males and 287 females with abdomi- mellitus at the age of 8 years, diabetes insipidus and optic atrophy nal obesity aged of 30-55 years. Control group included 119 children at the age of 14 years. No other clinical and instrumental signs were and adolescent from St. Petersburg. METHODS: Serum adiponectin, found at the time of our study. Her sister, a 6-year-old girl, was affected indicators of lipid and carbohydrate metabolism, blood glucose level, by diabetes mellitus ( age of onset at 5 years). No other clinical and waist circle, and body mass index (BMI) were evaluated according to instrumental signs were detected. The parents were not consanguine- standard protocols. Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP. RE- ous. Blood samples were obtained from the patients and their parents. SULTS: In patients with abdominal obesity, frequency of G-allele of WFS1 analysis included exons 1-8 of the coding regions. Results were T-allele was 0.68 and 0.32, respectively. There was no difference in compared with the WFS1 genomic sequence (NT-006051.17). GT, GG, and TT genotype distribution and in rates of G- and T-alleles Results: The two sisters exhibited a deletion c.1362-1377del16 located of adiponectin gene between the studied groups. No difference was at the exon 8 in homozygosity. The same deletion was found in their detected in adiponectin, glucose level, lipid spectrum of the serum, parents in heterozigosity. waist circle, and BMI between patients carrying different adiponectin Conclusions: Our data underline that the identification of WFS1 mu- gene genotypes. G-allele carriers (GG 4.65±0.54 and GT 5.68±0.77, tations in families with Wolfram syndrome enables specific carrier p<0.05) had higher HOMA-IR index compared to carriers of homo- detection, prenatal diagnosis and delineation of genotype/phenotype zygous T-allele (2.7±0.4, p<0.05). Insulin level was higher in patients correlation. carrying G-allele (22.46±1.46 vs 19.41±1.11, p<0.05) compared to pa- tients carrying TT-genotype (17.11±2.3, p<0.05). CONCLUSION: We P12.169 did not reveal any differences in adiponectin level in patients carrying Four sH2D1A mutations on 7 chromosomes detected in Russian various adiponectin gene genotypes. HOMA-IR index and insulin level patients with X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLP) were higher in patients carrying adiponectin gene G-allele. N. Poltavets1, M. Maschan2, I. Sermyagina1, A. Polyakov1, I. Kondratenko2, A. Maschan2, G. Novichkova2; P13.02 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal Variety of POLG phenotypes and molecular findings in a series Research Clinical Center for pediatric hematology, oncology and immunology, of 9 Russian patients Moscow, Russian Federation. P. Tsygankova1, S. Mikhaylova2, E. Zakharova1, L. M. Kolpakchi2; XLP is a congenital immunodeficiency disease characterized by de- 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian fective immune response against Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). The most Federation, 2Russian Clinical Child Hospital, Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Rus- frequent XLP phenotype is fulminant infectious mononucleosis which is clinically identical to hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. MutationsMetabolic disorders  sian Federation. cysteine and the isomerization of L-methylmalonyl-CoA, respectively. We describe clinical data of 9 patients with mutations in the gene, cod- To date defects in ten different genes coding for proteins involved in ing the mitochondrial polymerase gamma (POLG). Mutations in the B transport, synthesis of active cofactors-MetCbl and AdoCbl- and 12 POLG gene are one of the most common causes of mitochondrial dis- for the two apoenzymes MCM and MTR have been described. We ease in children and adults. report the molecular analysis of 65 cases with isolated methylmalo- We investigate 3 adult patients with clinical picture of mitochondrial nic acidemia (MMA) and 32 with methylmalonic acidemia combined disease. One patient, a 62-old woman with severe ataxia, external with homocystinuria (MMACH) mainly from Mediterranean and Latin- ophtalmoplegia, paresthesia in legs, autoimmune thyroiditis and my- American origin referred to our laboratory. Using cellular, enzymatic opathy. She has W748S mutation in POLG gene. Two patients had and genetic approaches the MMA patients were classified belonging A467T and P587L mutations consequently and showed typical symp- to the cblA (n=13), cblB (n=6), cblD-variant2 (n=3) and mut (n=43) toms of CPEO. complementation groups, and the MMACH patients belonging to the We investigate six children with hepatopathy and myopathy. cblC group (n=32). The mutational spectrum in the mut affected pa- Four patients from this group had Alpers syndrome: intractable sei- tients includes a high frequency of missense changes (56%). Two zures with a focal component, severe neurological deterioration, he- deep intronic changes causing intronic sequence exonization were patic failure. Additional symptoms were vomiting, ataxia, hypotonia, found and in vitro antisense therapy was investigated. In cblB affected high levels of lactate, liver transaminase and high concentration of patients intronic and exonic nucleotide changes affecting splicing were tyrosine in urine. Mutant POLG alleles were detected in all Alpers syn- frequent, and two misfolding missense mutations have been function- drome cases (G268A/A467T; W748S/G848S; W748S/L311P; W748S/ ally analyzed. Finally, in cblA, cblC and cblD-variant2 complementa- T855S). Symptoms of the rest two patients weren’t suitable for clas- tion groups a high proportion of premature stop codon changes (PTC), sical Alpers syndrome. They both didn’t have epilepsy, but have very including nonsense and frame-shift mutations, has been identified. In severe hypoglycemia with severe hepatic failure and muscle hypotony. cblC type patients the highest frequency described to date of the com- We revealed only one mutant POLG allele in each case, A467T and mon change R91fs (89%) has been found. The present work has a di- W748S consequently. mRNA analysis didn’t detect exon deletions in agnostic and therapeutic value in this complex metabolism addressing POLG gene. The presence of the second mutant allele in the promotor our investigation towards genetic specific therapies. region or locus heterogeneity involving mutations in other “mitochon- drial” genes can not be excluded. P13.05 Clinical phenotypes of POLG-related disorders are characterized by study of apoptosis in genetic B metabolism disorders (cblB 12 extremely variability of symptoms and this group may be more com- and cblc types) mon than previously thought. A. Jorge-Finnigan1,2, B. Pérez1,2, A. Gámez2, M. Ugarte1,2, E. Richard1,2; 1Centro de Biología Molecular “Severo Ochoa” CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain, P13.03 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBER- Evaluation of disease relevant mutations in Anderson Fabry ER), Madrid, Spain. Disease - how to proof the medical consequences? B metabolism disorders are a heterogeneous group of rare genetic 12 J. Lukas1, J. Frahm1, S. Weiss1,2, A. Wree3, R. Köhling4, A. Rolfs2; metabolic diseases caused by defects on cobalamin adsorption, trans- 1Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, University of Rostock, port or function. The aim of this study was to analyze apoptosis in Rostock, Germany, 2Centogene GmbH, Rostock, Germany, 3Department of several patients´ fibroblasts with defects on two of the genes involved Anatomy, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 4Department of Physiology, (MMAB and MMACHC) by flow cytometry, as well as to investigate University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany. the differential gene expression in pathways that regulate this process Anderson Fabry Disease (AFD) is an X-linked hereditary disorder of by PCR array. Patients´ cell lines showed a higher rate of apoptosis sphingolipid metabolism caused by a genetic defect of the lysosomal compared to controls. Using the human apoptosis pathway array, hydrolase α-galactosidase A (AGLA). So far, more than 300 AGLA we examined the gene expression profiles exhibited by six cblC and missense mutations have been described. However, numerous amino two cblB patients´ fibroblasts relative to four control individuals. Of acid exchanges appear to have only mild effects on enzyme activity the 84 apoptosis pathway-focused genes in the array, a total of 31 reduction. genes were differentially expressed. Up-regulation was observed in Bioinformatic tools cannot reliably predict the effects of these changes 23 genes, while 8 genes appeared to be down-regulated in patients´ and inevitably need to be supported by enzymatic measurements. fibroblasts. The most highly up-regulated genes belong to BCL2 and Therefore, a rapid screening procedure for all AGLA mutations will be TNF receptor and ligand functional gene families. Multiple anti-apop- invaluable for this purpose. To solve the limitations of all routine meth- totic genes, including BAG1, BCL2, BCL2A1, BCL2L1, NAIP, BRAF, ods we developed an in vitro model based on the overexpression of MCL1, TNF, CD27 and IGF1R were up-regulated; meanwhile BFAR AGLA mutants using a HEK293 cell system. Using fluorescence en- was down-regulated. PCR array results are currently being confirmed zyme activity assays we are able to determine the activity of mutant by Western Blot. In addition, we have detected the up-regulation of the enzymes compared to the wildtype. This procedure has shown that intracellular modulators of apoptosis, JNK and p38 MAP kinases, in the following mutations, which are described in the literature or have patients´ cells by immunoblotting. In conclusion, the increased rate of been found in our screening programs for Fabry have to be interpreted apoptosis in cblB and cblC patients´ fibroblasts might up-regulate the as SNPs and not clinically relevant AGLA mutations: D83N, S102L, anti-apoptotic molecules representing a compensatory response to a S126G, R220Q, R252T. potential disease pathogenic mechanism. Tools for the systematic in-vitro evaluation of newly detected mutations are also of high value for the evaluation of the consequences of new P13.06 therapeutic strategies, e.g. using pharmacological chaperones (PCs) Novel mutation in the GCH gene causing GtP-6 cyclohydrolase such as 1-Deoxygalactonojirimycin (DGJ). One of the challenges is deficiency in two saudi sibs and early detection by serum to find the right PC for any particular mutation because a substance neopterin might perform well on one mutation while failing on another. The pres- N. M. AL-HASHMI1, M. Al-Owain2; ent study includes a solution for screening newly synthesized drugs to 1king fasial special hospital and research center, riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King discover substances capable of acting like PCs. fasial special hospital and research center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. GTP-6 cyclohydrolase (GTPC) deficiency is a rare autosomal reces- P13.04 sive disorder of the terahydrobiopterin (BH4) pathway. Only 5 patients the molecular landscape of genetic B12 metabolism disorders reported in the literature. GTPC deficiency characteristic by hyper- in patients from mediterranean and Latin- American origin phenylalaninemia and low concentration of neopterins in urine and B. Pérez, B. Merinero, A. Rincón, A. Jorge-Finnigan, S. Brasil, F. Leal, L. R. blood and neurotransmitter defect. We report tow sibling diagnosed Desviat, M. Ugarte; with GTPC deficiency, one late and other early diagnosis. Patient 1 Centro de Biología Molecular. Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. presented at the age of nine years with severe global development Vitamin B is the cofactor of Methionine synthase (MTR) and Methyl- delay and frequent twitching of body. The plasma amino acid showed 12 malonyl-CoA Mutase (MCM) that catalyze the remethylation of homo- a phenylalanine of 357 umol/l.Which was not consistent with classicalMetabolic disorders  PKU. BH4 challenge test showed normalization of phenylalanine indi- which facilitates lysosomal export of cobalamin. cating BH4 dependent PKU. Serum neopterin level was extremely low Our patient is the second child of consanguineous Turkish parents. He at < 2.0 (2.0-10 nmol/L) suggesting that the cause is most likely GTPC presented on the second day of life with cerebral seizures and intraven- deficiency. Patient was started on BH4, l-dopa/carbidopa, 5-hydroxy- tricular hemorrhage. Plasma homocysteine and urinary methylmalonic typtophan, and folic acid without appreciable improvement.. Patient 2 acid levels were elevated, serum cobalamin levels were decreased. is the brother who at age of 3 months and in view of positive family his- Cultured skin fibroblasts showed deficient synthesis of both cobalamin tory of GTPC deficiency, serum neopterin level was found to be low at coenzymes. The cblF defect was confirmed by somatic complemen- <2 (2.0-10 nmol/L) confirming the suspicion about the disease.He im- tation analysis. Sequencing of LMBRD1 revealed the novel deletion mediately initiated on therapy Further confirmation was accomplished c.delG1405(p.D469fsX38) in exon 14 on both alleles. Real-time PCR by full sequencing of the GCH1 gene, and a novel homozygous D237V revealed mRNA levels comparable to those in controls, which is in mutation in exon 6 of the gene was found. . Now 5 years old, he has contrast to the reduced levels found in the patients with the common normal gross and fine motor skills with borderline cognitive delay. To deletion. Transfection of patient fibroblasts with the LMBRD1 wild type our knowledge, D237V is a novel mutation that has not been previ- cDNA rescued coenzyme synthesis confirming this new deletion as an ously reported in the literature, and the two sibs are the first confirmed additional cause of the cblF-defect. patients with GTPC deficiency in Saudi Arabia. This case adds to our knowledge of the spectrum of clinical presenta- tion and mutations of this rare disorder of lysosomal transport. P13.07 the frequency of 21 hydroxylase gene defects, phenotypic P13.09 effects and other molecular mechanisms in congenital adrenal Detection of new mutations in thyrotropin receptor receptor hyperplasia patients in turkish population. gene in children with congenital hypothyroidism D. Kıraç1,2, K. Ulucan3, D. Ergeç4, T. Güran5, T. Akçay5, F. Eren6, G. Koç1, D. E. Parshkova1,2, M. Bermisheva1, E. Khusnutdinova1, O. Malievskiy2; Javadova1, E. Ç. Kaspar7, I. Özden2, A. Bereket5, A. I. Güney1; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, 1Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federa- Istanbul, Turkey, 2Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Bio- tion. chemistry, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Marmara University, Faculty of Dentistry, Depart- The TSH receptor gene (TSHR) encodes a transmembrane receptor ment of Medical Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Maltepe University, present on the surface of follicular cells which mediates the effects of Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, TSH secreted by the anterior pituitary and is critical for the develop- Turkey, 5Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric ment and function of the thyroid gland. It belongs to a subfamily of hep- Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, tahelical G protein coupled receptors that have a common structure Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Yeditepe University, Faculty consisting of seven transmembrane segments, three extracellular and of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Istanbul, Turkey. three intracellular loops, an extracellular amino terminal domain, and Introduction: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a genetic, en- an intracytoplasmic carboxyl terminal tail. We examined the frequency docrine and metabolic disorder, caused by mainly 21-hydroxylase en- of TSHR mutations among patients with permanent primary congenital zyme deficiency. hypothyroidism and in the general population of Republic Bashkorto- CAH, due to 21 hydroxylase deficiency can be divided into two groups stan (Russia). as classic and non-classic type. In classic type most patients can not We enrolled 63 patients with primary congenital hypothyroidism who synthesize sufficient aldosterone to maintain sodium balance and may identified through newborn screening. develop potentially fatal “salt wasting” crises if not treated. We investigated all 10 exons of TSHR gene and detected 3 mutations Methods: To determine the frequency of 21 hydroxylase gene mu- including one well characterized substitution R450H and two new het- tations in Turkish population, CYP21A2 gene regions starting from erozygous mutations. promoter to the end of exon 4 were analyzed in 90 patients and 80 Those 3 patients had markedly elevated TSH levels concomitant with controls. DNA isolation from peripheric blood was performed and CY- low peripheral thyroid hormone levels and a reduced thyroid volume as P21A2 gene was amplified with specific primers for the functional gene determined by ultrasonography. This constellation of clinical findings by PCR. Mutations were detected by using direct sequencing after the warranted the diagnosis of congenital hypothyroidism. purification of amplified DNA. Results were evaluated statistically. In one case was detected a heterozygous mutation R450H in the Results: We found one, one and three novel mutations in promoter TSHR gene. Nagashima et all. are reported that the R450H mutants region, exon 1 and intron 2; also three and one novel polymorphysims demonstrates a slightly impaired receptor function. in exon 1 and intron 2 respectively. Additionaly we found 17 base Also was found heterozygous mutation C1318A which resulted in a substitutions. In patients, 2 mutations found in intron 2 are significant L440I substitution of the TSHR protein. compared to controls. There are 26 significant correlations between A novel heterozygous cytosine to thymine transition at nucleotide posi- base substitutions. We found 5 significant base substitutions between tion 1591 in 10 exon (R531W) was found in the third case. clinical phenotypes. When patients are compared with controls for the So, additional investigations are needed for conformation of patho- regions, intron 2 is significant for base substitutions, intron 2 and intron genecy for this novel sequence variations. 3 are significant for phenotypes. Conclusion: In our study, 26 base substitutions were found including P13.10 novel ones. To our knowledge, this is the first data obtained from direct The first founder DGUOK mutation associated with sequencing of Turkish CAH patients. hepatocerebral mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome N. Brahimi1, M. Jambou1, E. Sarzi2, V. Serre2, N. Boddaert1,3, S. Romano1, P. De P13.08 Lonlay1,2, A. Slama4, A. Munnich1,2, A. Rötig2, J. Bonnefont1,2, A. S. Lebre1; A novel mutation in LMBRD causes the cblF defect of vitamin 1APHP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Inserm, U781, Paris, B metabolism in a turkish patient France, 3Inserm, U797, Orsay, France, 4APHP, Hôpital Bicêtre, Kremlin Bicêtre, 12 S. Gailus1, T. Suormala2, M. R. Toliat3, T. Wittkampf1, G. Nürnberg3, P. Nürn- France. berg3, B. Fowler2, J. B. Hennermann4, F. Rutsch1; Deoxyguanosine kinase (dGK) deficiency is a frequent cause of mito- 1University Children’s Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 2Universitäts-Kinderspital chondrial DNA depletion associated with a hepatocerebral phenotype. beider Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 3Cologne Center for Genomics, Köln, Ger- In this study, we describe a new splice site mutation in the DGUOK many, 4Charité University Children’s Hospital, Berlin, Germany. gene and the clinical, radiologic, and genetic features of these DGUOK In the cblF defect of vitamin B (cobalamin) metabolism, cobalamin is patients. This new DGUOK homozygous mutation (c.444-62C>A) was 12 trapped in lysosomes. Consequently, cobalamin coenzyme synthesis identified in three patients from two North-African consanguineous is blocked and cofactors for methionine synthase and methylmalonyl- families with combined respiratory chain deficiencies and mitochon- CoA mutase are deficient. We recently identified LMBRD1 as the cblF drial DNA depletion in the liver. Brain MRIs are normal in DGUOK pa- associated gene located on chromosome 6q13 and showed that 18 tients in the literature. Interestingly, we found subtentorial abnormal out of 24 alleles in unrelated patients carried the deletion c.delG1056 myelination and moderate hyperintensity in the bilateral pallidi in our (p.L352fsX18). LMBRD1 encodes a lysosomal membrane protein, patients. This new mutation creates a cryptic splice site in intron 3 (inMetabolic disorders 0 position -62) and is predicted to result in a larger protein with an in- wall). A probably FD with the classical form of the disease was sus- frame insertion of twenty amino acids. In silico analysis of the putative pected in both, due to a low plasma alfa-galactosidase enzymatic ac- impact of the insertion shows serious clashes in protein conformation: tivity. Moreover, her aunt and her cousin, diagnosed of a mild FD form, this insertion disrupts the α5 helix of the dGK kinase domain, rendering presented the A143T mutation in alpha-galactosidase A gen (GLA). the protein unable to bind purine deoxyribonucleosides. In addition, a We suspected that the mutation A143T in the GLA was responsible for common haplotype that segregated with the disease in both families the disease in the new cases. However, the genetic analysis showed was detected by haplotype reconstruction with ten markers (microsat- that they were not carriers of the A143T mutation but they presented ellites and SNPs), which span 4.6 kb of DNA covering the DGUOK the mutation IVS5+2T>C previously associated with the classic form locus. In conclusion, we report a new DGUOK splice site mutation that of FD. This intronic mutation was no present in the patient with the provide insight into a critical protein domain (dGK kinase domain) and A143T mutation. the first founder mutation in a North-African population Conclusion. In this family we described two mutations previously asso- ciated with FD, but with available data we think that the pathogenicity P13.11 of the A143T mutation must be revaluated. High incidence of Fabry Disease - causing mutations in Galicia, North-west spain P13.13 P. Rana-Diez1, C. Colon2, J. Alonso-Fernandez2, J. Fraga2, R. Gonzalez-Bou- Five novel mutation in Fabry disease in a series of Russian zon1, A. Carracedo1, F. Barros1; patients. 1Fundacion Publica Galega de Medicina Xenomica, Santiago de Compostela, L. Golivets, E. Zakharova, T. Boukina, P. Tsygankova; Spain, 2Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de Compos- Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian tela, Spain. Federation. Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder that re- Fabry disease is an X-linked recessive abnormality related to lyso- sults from mutations in the α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A) gene which somal storage disorders. It is caused by deficiency of α-D-Galactosi- lead to a deficient activity of the enzyme and a progressive lysosomal dase A (α-GAL). Main symptoms include renal failure , cardiovascular deposition of globotriaosylceramide and other glycosphingolipids in disease, angiokeratoma, acroparaesthesia. In this issue we include 10 different cells of the body. male patients with classical clinical picture of Fabry disease. α-GAL In its classic form, with a typical onset in childhood or adolescence, the activity in leukocyte ranges from 0,01-7 nmol/mg/h. Using the adopted major disease manifestations include angiokeratoma, acroparesthe- method we measured the α-GAL activity in dried blood spots (DBS) in sias and vascular disease of the heart, kidneys and brain. 5 patients. Enzyme activity in DBS range from 0-0,04 nmol/spot*45h. The bibliography shows an estimated incidence of 1/117000 new- The enzyme deficiency was detected in all samples. We made se- borns, representing the second most prevalent lysosomal lipid storage quences of GLA gene; mutations were revealed in all cases and were disease. However, recent studies suggest that FD is underdiagnosed privet for each family. Five mutations have been already described demonstrating that neonatal incidence may fluctuate between 1/3100 (R112C, Cys142R,R227X, Thr282P, c.238delAA). And the rest five are and 1/4600. novel (R301L, c.782delG,Cys63R, R220X, c.541del18). Biochemical Material and methods. assay combined with DNA-testing gives the most effective diagnostic We designed primers for the direct bidirectional sequencing of the cod- approach. DNA analysis is preferable in Fabry carries as the α-GAL ing region of the α-Gal A gene and carried out an study of the muta- activity could be at the cut-off range in this group. tions of the gene in 112 newborns with low α-galactosidase A activity (less than 2 µmol/L/h) measured by fluorimetry. P13.14 Results. Acute Abdomen Reasoned surgery Frequency and mEFV In the sample of 112 newborns, we found 10 unrelated cases with mutations in the Patients with FmF pathological missense mutations (R118C: 5 hemizigous males; A143T: H. Samli1, F. Mutlu Icduygu2, A. Ozgoz2, G. Akbulut3, K. Hekimler2, N. Imirza- 4 hemizigous male and 1 heterozigous female). In adittion, 4 previ- lioglu2; ously undescribed intronic variants surrounding intron-exon boundar- 1Uludag University, Department of Moleculer Biology, Bursa, Turkey, 2Afyon ies were identified in six cases. Kocatepe University, Department of Medical Genetics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, Since the disease follow an X-linked dominat mode of inheritance (het- 3Afyon Kocatepe University, Department of General Surgery, Afyonkarahisar, erozygous females typically have milder symptoms at a later age of Turkey. onset than males) these results demonstrate an inusual neonatal inci- Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF), is an autosomal recessive dis- dence of 1/1400 in the North-West Spanish population of Galicia, the ease characterized by recurrent fever, peritonitis, arthritis, pleuritis and highest Fabry disease rate known to us in the literature. neuropathic amyloidosis. The disease is common in North African and Iraqi Jews, Turks, Armenians, Middle East Arabs and in ethnic groups P13.12 living in this region. More than 95% of FMF patients have peritoneal two different related Fabry mutations in the same family: “Who involvement mimicking acute abdomen, and sometimes this involve- isn´t saying the truth?” ment causes unnecessary surgical intervention. In the current study L. Monserrat1, M. I. Rodríguez-García2, L. Núñez1, M. Ortiz1, R. Barriales-Villa1, we objected to determine the frequency of acute surgical abdomen E. Maneiro1, L. Cazón1, X. Fernández1, E. Veira1, A. Castro-Beiras1, M. Her- intervention and MEFV gene mutations in FMF patients mida-Prieto1; In the interview of 159 patients referred to our department by predi- 1Instituto Universitario de Ciencias de la Salud- CHUAC, A Coruña, Spain, agnosis of FMF, totally 26 (16.4%) were detected to be operated. Of 2Complejo Hospitalario Universitario A Coruña- SERGAS. Instituto de Ciencias these 17 (10,7%) were operated by the reason of appendicitis and 9 de la Salud, A Coruña, Spain. (5,7%) were operated by other acute abdomen reasons. When the Introduction Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked lysosomal α-galactosi- mutations of these patients evaluated, M694V(40.5%) and E148Q dase A deficiency that causes multisystemic problems, including renal, (21.4%) mutations were the most frequent ones. neurological, ocular, skin, and cardiac manifestations. The mutation frequency in FMF patients with acute surgical abdo- Methods. A 43 year old female, with arterial hypertension, was remitted men intervention (80.8%) was significantlty high than the ones with- to our clinic because of a suspected diagnosis of hypertrophic cardio- out (56.4%). The increase of mutation scanning in FMF patients will myopathy. Clinical, electrocardiographic, echocardiographic, plasma significantly decrease unnecessary surgical intervention in this patient alfa-galactosidase A activity and genetic study was made of all avail- group. able relatives. Results. The index case echocardiogram shown left ventricular hyper- P13.15 trophy mainly of posterior-lateral wall (16mm). Her adolescent son had the bone mineral density in patients with Familial mediterranean been diagnosed of erythromelalgia, with cutaneous lesions consistent Fever with angiokeratomas and suffering for intense pains in his feet and S. Yuksel1, H. Samli2, M. Colbay3, U. Dundar4, G. Acarturk5, S. Demir5, T. Ko- hands (the mother had suffered the same pains in her youth). The son ken6, O. Aktepe7, V. Kavuncu8, M. Solak9; also presented mild left ventricular hypertrophy (13mm, postero-basal 1Suleyman Demirel University, Department of Internal Medicine, Turkey, 2Ko-Metabolic disorders  catepe University, Department of Medical Genetics, Turkey, 3Department of ase (GALT) gene. The incidence of the disease varies from 1:40000- Internal Medicine, Turkey, 4Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 1:60000 among Caucasian population. To date, over 170 different mu- Turkey, 5Department of Internal Medicine, Turkey, 6Department of Biochemistry, tations have been reported including point mutations, microdeletions Turkey, 7Department of Microbiology, Turkey, 8Department of Physical Medicine, and insertions. The most frequent reported mutation is Q188R which Turkey, 9Department of Medical Genetics, Turkey. accounts for approximately 60% of mutant alleles in Caucasian popu- FMF is hereditary illness. Although it was reported in one study that lation. bone mineral density was decreased in child patients with FMF, but the In the present investigation, results of a 5-year study on galactose- effect of FMF on BMD is not known in adult patients. The aim of this mia in Iran including biochemical diagnosis and molecular analysis of study is evaluation of the effect of FMF on BMD in adult patients. GALT gene are presented. Based on the Livneh criteria 23 FMF patients and control group with Methods: Twenty five galactosemia patients were subjected to diag- 15 people admitted to the study. Exclusion criteria were taking steroid nosis for a long time, chronic renal failure, woman in post menopause. The of galactosemia by the determination of GALT activity in RBCs using body mass index, BMD (between L1-L4), and Z scores were measured Beutler test. DNA samples were investigated for the 5 most reported in both groups. In addition to this taking drug period and illness dura- mutations including Q188R, K285N, X380R, L195P and Q169K using tion were taken into consideration in FMF patients. BMD and the other PCR-RFLP method. PCR-SSCP parameters were compared between groups. After that BMD related method was used for the whole GALT gene including 11 exons and parameters were evaluated. flanking intronic sequences to investigate the mutations which were The mean age of FMF patients (10-female, 13-male) and control group not detected by PCR-RFLP method. In a retrospective study, galactos- (10-female, 5-male) was 30.5±8.2(18-48) years and 35.0±10.2(22-54) emic patients were traced and years respectively. All of the women in both groups were premeno- their long term outcomes were evaluated. pausal. There was no difference between two groups for the mean Results: Q188R mutation was the most observed mutation with the age, gender and BMI. But FMF patients have had statistically signifi- allelic frequency of 57.1%. The allelic frequencies for S135L, Y209S, cant reduction in BMD (between L1-L4) and Z-scores (p=0.015 and A320T, and K285N were found to be 7.1%, 7.1%,7.1%, and 3.57%, p=0.010 respectively). No statistically significant correlation was found respectively. between BMY and age, BMI, illness duration in the FMF population. Conclusion: Our results show that galactosemia is a heterogeneous FMF that have episodic inflammation bring about to decrease in BMD. disorder at the molecular level in Iranian population. Study on long In our study we didn’t find any factor effective on BMD. Factors that term outcome of the disease emphasizes the need for a new look and could be affecting the BMD should be research in the big population. new challenges for galactosemia in Iran. P13.16 P13.18 Variants in the FtO gene associate to hyperandrogenemia and Gamma-Hydroxybutyric aciduria - identification of first Bulgarian metabolic parameters in polycystic ovary syndrome case by a metabolomic approach E. Wehr1, N. Schweighofer1, M. Graupp1, A. Giuliani2, D. Kopera3, T. R. Pieber1, M. B. Ivanova, I. M. Bradinova, R. Vazharova, I. Kremensky; B. Obermayer-Pietsch1; National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 1Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Nuclear Medi- Sofia, Bulgaria. cine, Medical University Graz, Austria, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecol- Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency (MIM ogy, Medical University Graz, Austria, 3Department of Dermatology, Medical 271980) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder due to defect in gam- University Graz, Austria. ma-aminobutyric acid catabolism, resulting in the accumulation of Background: Variants in the fat-mass and obesity associated gene gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) and causing neurological disorders (FTO) are associated with obesity and type 2 diabetes. Women with of varying severity. SSADH is characterized by psychomotor retarda- polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) frequently present with obesity and tion, childhood-onset hypotonia, and ataxia. Seizures occur in more impaired glucose tolerance. The aim of this study was to investigate than 50% of affected individuals. The diagnosis of SSADH deficiency the impact of FTO variants on metabolic and endocrine parameters in is suspected in individuals with gamma-hydroxybutyric aciduria pres- PCOS women. ent on urine organic acid analysis and can be confirmed by assay of Methods: We genotyped single nucleotide polymorphism rs9939609 SSADH enzyme activity in leukocytes. ALDH5A1 is the only gene cur- (T/A) in 179 PCOS women and 126 female controls. We performed rently known to be associated with SSADH deficiency. metabolic and hormonal measurements, oral glucose tolerance test, We report an 11 years old boy, fifth child of a consanguineous roma hirsutism score, and lipometry. family. The patient presented with severe psychomotor retardation af- Results: The A allele was associated with significantly increased ter birth. Later on he developed seizures. His older sister, the fourth free testosterone (p=0,026), FAI (p=0,042), weight (p=0,006), BMI child of the family has similar clinical signs of profound mental retarda- (p=0,008), waist (p=0,035) and hip circumference (p=0,041), and tri- tion and seizures. The boy died with severe dehydratation and epilep- glycerides (p=0,032). In logistic regression, the A allele was associated tic status during an ongoing infection. with free testosterone (p=0,032; OR 1,7; 95% CI 1,05-2,9; B=0,76). Preinvestigation findings were abnormal urine ketones; metabolic pro- Total fat mass (p=0,007), visceral adipose tissue mass (p=0,013), sub- file by GC/MS organic acid analyses in urine showed marked excre- cutaneous fat mass (p=0,007), and lean body mass (p=0,007) were tion of GHB and 3,4-dihydroxybutiric acid. Ketonuria and dicarboxiclic significantly increased in PCOS women carrying the A allele. The A/ aciduria were detected. SSADH enzyme activity have not been inves- T+A/A genotype showed increased prevalence in overweight/obese tigated because leukocytes are not available. PCOS patients (OR=2,5; p=0,006) and in PCOS women with impaired Substantial excretion of GHB against the background of the family his- glucose tolerance (OR=3,6; p=0,017). No significant association was tory and the clinical phenotype suggest succinic semialdehyde dehy- seen between FTO variants and the PCOS per se. drogenase deficiency. The significant amounts of dicarboxylic acids Conclusion: In summary, we demonstrated that FTO variants influence in the urine may indicate a secondary inhibition of mitochondrial fatty hyperandrogenemia and anthropometric parameters in women with acid beta-oxidation or propionyl-coenzyme A metabolism by succinic PCOS, indicating an important role of FTO variants not only in obesity semialdehyde or its metabolites. and diabetes but also in hyperandrogenism in women with PCOS. P13.19 P13.17 Gaucher‘s disease type I - cytokines profile Biochemical and molecular diagnosis of Galactosemia in iranian M. D. Grigorescu, P. Grigorescu-Sido, A. Cristea, V. I. Pop; patients UMF Iuliu Hatieganu Cluj-Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. M. Bahar1, M. Houshmand2, H. Aryan1; Aim: The paper proposed to investigate the dynamics of the serum 1Iranian Burn Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2special medical center, levels of cytokines in a group of patients with Gaucher disease in cor- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. relation with the severity score index and skeletal involvement. Pa- Classical galactosemia is an inborn metabolic disorder caused by au- tients and methods: The group included 15 patients with Gaucher tosomal recessive mutations in galactose 1 phosphate uridyl transfer- disease aged between 10-53 years; the diagnosis was based on clini-Metabolic disorders  cal, enzimatic and molecular tests and 15 controls.The severity score P13.21 index of the disease, the clinically and radiologically documented bone A novel SLCA mutation causing paroxysmal exercise-induced involvementand, the degree of the osteopenia (DEXA method) were dyskinesia in twin spanish patients determined in all patients. The cytokine profile (IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8, A. Urbizu1, M. Raspall1, D. Carranza1, J. Conill2, E. Cuenca-Leon1, A. Macaya1; IL-10, TGF-beta) was determined using ELISA (Quantikine Human RD 1Grup de Recerca en Neurologia Infantil, Institut de Recerca Vall d’Hebron, System). The assesments were made at baseline and one year later. Barcelona, Spain, 2Servei de Neurofisiologia Clínica, Hospital Universitari Vall Results: Baseline levels were different only for IL-6 (10,5 +/- 3.11 ng/ml d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. vs 1.48 +/- 1.13 ng/ml in controls) and IL-10 (15.6 +/- 5.59 ng/ml vs Introduction: Paroxysmal exercise-induced dyskinesia (PED) is a rare 5.07 +/- 1.08 ng/ml in controls). The analysis of the data in dynamics disorder featuring brief, dystonic or choreoathetotic attacks, triggered did not evidence changes in the cytokines profile, with the exception of by prolonged exercise, often occurring in association with different TGF-beta (18.97 +/- 7.03 ng/ml vs 10.97 +/- 2.35 ng/ml). A significant types of epilepsy. Familial cases suggest autosomal dominant inheri- correlation was found between the IL-6 serum level and the bone score tance. Two recent studies have identified mutations in the SLC2A1 (r = 0.823, p = 0.007), but no correlation between the cytokines level gene, encoding the GLUT1 glucose transporter, in patients with PED. and the spinal bone mineral density. Conclusions: The serum profile of Objective: To study a family with monozygotic twins presenting with cytokines might be useful to investigate the pathological mechanisms PED, learning disability and childhood absence epilepsy (CAE) at age of bone changes in Gaucher disease. 5 years. Patients and Methods: In both patients, aged 9, PED episodes oc- P13.20 curred daily and improved rapidly upon intake of isotonic beverages. Dyslipoproteinaemia in Gaucher disease: new study over 44 The EEG showed generalized paroxysmal 3 Hz spike-wave discharg- Romanian patients es; seizures improved with ethosuximide. The CSF/serum glucose ra- C. Coldea1, A. Zimmermann2, C. Al-Khzouz1, R. Popp3, A. Craciun4, P. Grigore- tio was low at 0.4 in both children. The 10 exons of the SLC2A1 gene scu-Sido1; and their corresponding exon/intron junctions including splice sites 1First Pediatric Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, and branch points were PCR amplified and sequenced. Romania, 21st Medical Clinic, Dept of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Results: The new mutation c.G493A was identified in exon 4 of SL- Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany, 3Department of Genetics, C2A1, leading to a p.Val165Ile substitution in GLUT1 protein, in the University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 4Department of two siblings but not in their parents. The replaced valine residue is Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. highly conserved in evolution. The mutation was not present in one Gaucher disease has, among metabolic complications, a specific dys- hundred unrelated healthy Spanish individuals. An identical mutation lipoproteinaemia. This study evaluates the lipid profile and the impact described by others in the paralogous GLUT2 is known to markedly of apolipoprotein E gene polymorphism on this metabolic status. Four- reduce glucose uptake. ty-three type I and one type III Gaucher patients, 33 receiving ERT and Conclusion: We report a novel mutation in the SLC2A1 gene in twin 11 nontreated, were analized during a period of 3.6+1.21 years and patients with PED and CAE. This finding confirms and extends previ- respectively 3.8+2.2 years. Total cholesterol, fractions HDL and LDL- ous observations indicating that GLUT1 deficiency must be considered cholesterol, tryglicerides, apolipoproteins A, B and E were assessed in the diagnostic work-up of paroxysmal movement disorder-epilepsy every 6 months, using standard methods. syndromes. Results are summarized in table I. P13.22 treated patients (n=33) Untreated patients (n=11) Glycerol kinase deficiency No Parameter Reference value Point of significance Point of significance E. Jamroz1, J. Paprocka1, E. Popowska2; Initially Finally Initially Finally (p<0.05) (p<0.05) 1Silesian Medical University, Child Neurology Department, Katowice, Poland, percentile 5, related to 1 Total cholesterol -4% +30% at 1,5 years of ERt -9% +3% none 2Memorial Children’s Health Institute, Department of Clinical Genetics, Warsaw, age and sex Poland. percentile 5, related to 2 HDL-cholesterol -16% +52% at 1 year of ERt -5% -7% none Glycerol kinase deficiency (GKD) is an inborn error of metabolism that age and sex was initially described in 1977. Glycerol kinase (GK) catalyzes the percentile 5, related to 3 LDL-cholesterol -5% +37% at 1.5 years of ERt -7 +17% none phosphorylation of glycerol to glycerol-3-phosphate in ATP-dependent age and sex percentile 95, related reaction. Affected individuals present with hyperglycerolemia and glyc- 4 Tryglicerides +4% -23% at 1 year of ERt -18% -14% none to age and sex eroluria. GKD presents with diverse phenotypes and is categorized 5 Apolipoprotein A minimum : 106 mg/dl -74% +36% at 1.5 years of ERt -13% +24% none into three different clinical presentations: - Infantile or complex glyc- minimum : 6 Apolipoprotein B +6% +89% at 1 year of ERt +76% +62% none erol kinase deficiency (cGKD)- the most common form, a contiguous 56 mg/dl gene deletion syndrome caused by a loss of glycerol kinase (MIM# maximum : 7 Apolipoprotein E 5.43 x 1 5.17x 2 none 10.04x 3 6.14x 4 none 300474), along with its neighboring genes, Duchenne muscular dys- 5 mg/dl trophy (DMD; MIM# 300377) and/or Nuclear Receptor Subfamily 0, Group B, Member 1 (NR0B1; MIM# 300473) - Juvenile or symptomatic Table I. Evolution of lipid profile in Gaucher patients (at: 13+1.1, 23.5+1.2 years of ERT results in point mutation in GK that causes episodic metabolic and ; 31.7+2.3, 43.8+2.2 years of monitoring) central nervous system decompensation - Adult form resulting from The apo E polymorphism analysis, performed by PCR-RFLP, in 39 patients, revealed point mutation detected incidentally with pseudohypertriglyceridemia the following genotypes: ε3/ε3 (77%), ε3/ε4 (12.8%) and ε2/ε3 (10.2%). The presence The authors present 4-month-old boy with cGKD coupled with liver of ε2 allele significantly changed the lipid profile into a type III hyperlipoproteinemic dysfunction. Measured activity of glycerol kinase in peripheral blood pattern (after receiving ERT). Presence of ε4 allele did not impact on total cholesterol leucocytes (by incorporation of 14C glycerol carbon into trichloroacetic and LDL-colesterol level. Apo E levels in ε2/ε3 carriers were twice higher than those in acid method) was residual - 1,3% of control value (0,84 pmol/min/mg ε3/ε4 carriers, significantly correlated with tryglicerides’ level. of protein, reference: 60-178 pmol/min/mg of protein). Mutation study Conclusion: Gaucher disease patients presented a potentially pro-atherogenic dys- revealed deletion involving the whole GK loci as well as loci for DMD lipoproteinaemia (hypocholesterolemia, hypo-HDL, hypo-LDL-cholesterolemia and which confirmed the diagnosis of GKD. hypertrygliceridemia), significantly improved by enzyme replacement therapy with Imiglucerase. Plasma levels of apolipoprotein E still remained elevated after receiving P13.23 3.5 years of ERT. Genotype ε2/ε3 validates into phenotype rather than ε3/ε4 genotype, mouse models for glycogen storage disease type iii and iV in treated Gaucher patients. Y. Lee1, C. Chang1, K. Liu1, J. Wu1, Y. Chen1,2; 1Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Depart- ment of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States. Glycogen storage disease type III (GSD-III) and IV (GSD-IV) are auto- somal recessive diseases resulting from deficient glycogen debranch- ing enzyme (AGL) and glycogen-branching enzyme (GBE) activityMetabolic disorders  respectively. GSD-III is characterized by excessive accumulation of suspicion of iron overload and liver disease, were assayed for C282Y, abnormal glycogen with short outer chains, in the liver and/or skeletal H63D and S65C mutations, serum ferritin, transaminases, and viral and cardiac muscles. GSD-IV is characterized by the accumulation hepatitis markers. Overall, 9 out of the 21 patients (42.86%) were of amylopectin-like polysaccharides. The typical presentation is liver found harbouring mutations in the HFE gene: four C282Y homozy- disease of childhood and progressing to lethal cirrhosis. GSD-III and gotes (19.0%), one compound heterozygote C282Y/H63D (4.8%), one GSD-IV are clinically heterogeneous disorders. single heterozygote C282Y (4.8%), two single heterozygotes H63D Using a gene-driven ENU-mutagenesis approach, the mice carrying (9.5%), one single heterozygote S65C (4.8%), and 12 wild-type cases the missense mutation T531M in AGL gene, or the stop coden mu- (57.1%). Among the subgroup of 10 patients with the most prominent tation E609X in GBE1 gene have been generated respectively. The signs of iron overload (hyperferritinemia and/or hepatocyte iron score ≥ homozygous GSD-III T531M mice appeared normal at birth. Glyco- 1), without hepatocellular carcinoma, the HFE genotypes were conclu- gen highly accumulated in the liver of the 20-week-old homozygous sive in 5 cases (50%). They had significantly increased ferritin levels GSD-III T531M mice was observed. The mice carrying the homozy- compared to wild-type cases (P = 0.029). The inclusion of iron studies gous E609X stop codon mutation in the GBE1 gene showed perinatal during routine clinical visits coupled with the availability of HFE geno- death. The heartbeats in some homozygous GSD-IV E609X mutation typing for family and population studies will facilitate the early detection fetus stopped at around 10.5 days of gestation, and the histopathology of HH in Romania. studies from the fetus revealed no glycogen accumulated in the wall of heart chamber and liver primodium, however glycogen is significant P13.26 accumulated in these regions at the same stage of wild type fetus. In molecular genetic analysis of multiple osteochondromas in the new born GSD-IV E609X mice the diastase-resistant PAS positive Bulgarian patients material was observed in the liver and cardiomyocytes. W. Wuyts1, M. Stancheva2, T. Sokolov3, I. Kremenski4, E. Van Hul1; These mice represent important animal models for the study of ab- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium, 2University Children`s normal glycogen metabolism and its related toxicity and to investigate Hospital “Alexandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3University Hospital of Orthopedics pathophysiology and treatment strategies for human GSD-III and and Traumatology “Prof.Boicho Boichev”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4National Genetic GSD-IV. Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria. The authors present two clinical cases with Multiple osteochondro- P13.24 mas /MO;exostoses/-a metabolic disease with autosomal dominant Hereditary folate malabsorption: case report and response to inheritence caused by an O-xylosylglycan defect of protein O-glyco- treatment with folinic acid sylation and characterized by bony outgrowths mainly located in the L. Russell, A. Karalis, S. ABISH; juxta-epiphyseal region of the long bones . The DNA analysis was McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada. performed by PCR amplification and direct sequencing of all coding Draft #6 exons /exon 1-11/ of the EXT1 gene and / exon 2-14/ of the EXT2 Hereditary folate malabsorption (HFM) is a rare autosomal recessive gene and MPLA analysis.The first child harbours a c.1468del C(p. disorder in which folic acid cannot be absorbed from the gastrointes- Leu490TrpfsX9)in exon 6 of the EXT1 gene which causes a frameshift tinal tract or transported from the blood stream into the brain. As a re- and premature stop codon , resulting in the formation of an unstable sult, patients present with failure to thrive, megaloblastic anemia, and, mRNA or a truncated non functional protein.The second child harbours without treatment, progressive neurologic deterioration. A defective a c.1079+1G>T mutation in intron 6 of the EXT2 gene which affects folate transport protein (Proton-coupled folate transporter, PCFT) was most likely proper splicing of exon 6 , resulting in the formation of an recently identified as the cause of the disorder. Less than 20 cases of unstable mRNA or a truncated non-functional EXT1 protein.The DNA HFM have been reported in the literature, most of them female. We analysis was performed for a first time in Bulgarian patients and con- report another case in whom treatment with folinic acid resulted in im- firmed the clinical diagnosis. Genetic consultation and prenatal diag- proved growth and stabilization of neurologic status. nosis were offered to both families. A 12 month old girl, product of consanguineous parents, was referred for evaluation of seizures and occipital calcifications. Despite these P13.27 findings, her development was normal. The past medical history Expression profiling of androgen and insulin pathway regulating was significant for failure to thrive and for megaloblastic anemia at 3 genes unveils sOs 1 as candidate gene for idiopathic hirsutism months of age that responded only partially to treatment with folic acid. D. Minella1, F. D’amico1, M. Biancolella1, F. Amati1, B. Testa1, I. M. Pedrazzi1, S. CSF 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, a folate metabolite, determination was Bueno2, F. Raducci1, F. Gullotta1, D. Lauro3, G. Novelli1,4, C. Moretti3; <2 nmol/L (normal 40 - 187 nmol/L), consistent with the diagnosis of 1Medical Genetic Dept. of Biopathology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, HFM. 2Caspur, Rome, Italy, 3Dept. of Internal Medicine, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Initiation of treatment with IM folinic acid resulted in dramatic improve- Italy, 4Fatebenefratelli Hospital “S. Pietro”, Rome, Italy. ment in her growth parameters and stabilization of her neurologic sta- Hirsutism (IH) is defined as the presence of terminal hairs in females tus, despite the fact that CSF levels never reached the reference range in a male-like pattern affecting about 5% -15% of women. Hirsutism of the testing laboratory. To date, she has had no further seizures and, results from the interaction between the androgen level and the sensi- aside from mild language delays, has exhibited normal growth and tivity of the hair follicle to the androgen. The pathophysiology of IH is development. These results emphasize the importance of accurate di- presumed to be associated to SRD5A activity and generally related to agnosis and early treatment in patients with this disorder. an alteration of androgen receptor function. IH can lead to the meta- bolic syndrome, visceral obesity, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance, and P13.25 hypertension. Mutant HFE genotype leads to significant iron overload in With the aim to identify genes involved in the pathogenesis of this dis- patients with liver diseases from western Romania order, we investigated the expression profile of 190 genes involved A. M. Neghina1, A. Anghel1, L. Tamas1, I. Marincu1, R. Neghina1, K. Thor- both in the androgen biosynthesis and metabolism, and other genes stensen2; coding for products active in the insulin pathway. The analysis was 1Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2St. done in skin genital fibroblasts of 5 idiopathic hirsute women and 2 Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway. related controls. The array gene signature in the hirsute patients iden- Hereditary haemochromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive disor- tified 4 differentially expressed genes, 2 up-regulated and 2 down- der of iron metabolism affecting 0.4% - 0.7% of European populations. regulated (FC≥± 1.5). Differentially expressed genes included prod- Approximately 80% of affected individuals are homozygous for the ucts involved in the insulin signalling while no alteration of expression C282Y mutation, but the H63D and S65C mutations are also of inter- level was found altered for androgens related genes. Specifically one est. The clinical penetrance and frequency of complications of HH is a of the over expressed transcript, coding for the SOS1 gene product, subject of controversy. The present study aimed at assessing the HFE was overproducted in patients compared to controls. After sequencing mutations (C282Y, H63D and S65C) in western Romanian patients the complete SOS1 gene, its promoter region and the 3’UTR region, with liver disease of diverse aetiologies suspected of iron overload. A we identified 18 SNPs potentially affecting the binding of transcription total of 21 patients, all Romanian residents hospitalized with clinical factors and the correct splicing of the gene. These findings proposeMetabolic disorders  a role for SOS1, in the pathogenesis of IH, in cooperation with other Funded by MEC (BFU2006-14600-C02-02). insulin pathway genes. P13.30 P13.28 Progressive myoclonic epilepsy as an adult-onset manifestation Bulgarian metabolomic aproach for diagnosis of inherited of Leigh syndrome due to the m.14487t>c mutation in ND6 Organic Acidurias S. Seneca1, B. Dermaut2, P. Santens3, L. Dom4, K. Smets5, L. Ceulemans6, J. M. B. Ivanova, I. Sinigerska, R. Vazharova, I. Bradinova, I. Kremensky; Smet3, B. De Paepe3, S. Tousseyn7, S. Weckhuysen8, M. Gewillig8, P. Pals9, National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria. P. Parizel10, J. De Bleecker3, P. Boon3, L. De Meirleir1, P. De Jonghe11, R. Van Organic acidurias are clinically important heterogeneous group of rare Coster3, W. Van Paesschen12, W. Lissens1, I. Liebaers1; inherited disorders with total frequency about 1:5-6 000 newborns. Be- 1UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2University of Leuven, VIB, Leuven, Belgium, cause of the unspecific clinic the diagnosis requires the application 3University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 4Koningin Paola Kinderziekenhuis, of many highly specialized methods and comprehensive approach. Antwerp, Belgium, 5University of Antwerp, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, 6Sint-Joze- Metabolomic approach (extensive quality investigation of the metabo- fkliniek, Bornem, Belgium, 7University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 8University lome) is the most widely used approach for this purpose. Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 9University Hospital Antwerp, Brus- In the National Genetic Laboratory a metabolomic approach for diag- sels, Belgium, 10University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 11University of nosis of inherited organic acidurias was developed and introduced. Antwerp, VIB, Brussels, Belgium, 12University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Ghent, The approach includes the next stages: urine qualitative target urine Belgium. analysis of some metabolites, GC/MS urine organic acid profile, plas- Mitochondrial disorders of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) ma amino acids and DNA analysis. system affect ~1/5000 individuals in the general population and pres- The main analytical techniques are High-effective liquid chromatog- ent with a surprisingly wide range of multisystemic and neuromuscular raphy (HPLC) and Gas chromatography - mass spectrometry (GC / phenotypes. The m.14487T>C mutation is a known pathogenic mtDNA MS). mutation resulting in an amino acid substitution (p.M63V) in NADH More than 1500 high risk patients were investigated by metabolomic dehydrogenase 6 (MT ND6), a complex I subunit of the mitochondrial approach. A total of 126 patients (8.8%) were diagnosed and classified respiratory chain. Thus far it has been found in isolated cases with in- into eleven basic organic acid disorder groups: defects of the aromatic fantile Leigh syndrome and progressive dystonia. We report here adult aminoacid metabolism -13; propionate and methylmalonate metabolism and late-onset phenotypes as it was seen in a 5-generation Belgian - 8; branched chain aminoacid metabolism - 13; mitochondrial fatty acid family with 12 affected family members. Clinical and mutation load data oxidation - 14; pyrimidine metabolism -1; γ- glutamyl cycle - 2; dibasic were available for 9 family members, while biochemical analysis of the aminoacid metabolism - 2; lactic aciduria -38; glycolysis and Krebs cy- respiratory chain was performed in 3 muscle biopsies. Heteroplasmic cle - 8; urea cycle - 21; miscellaneous disorders - 5;. The diagnostically m.14487T>C levels (36-52 % in leukocytes, 97-99 % in muscle) were informative metabolite profiles are detected for each disease. found in patients with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (PME) and dys- Our results can be assessed as a reasonably good and completely tonia or progressive hypokinetic-rigid syndrome. Patients with infantile comparable to the data of the leading European genetic centers. LS were homoplasmic (99-100 % in leukocytes, 100 % in muscle). Results indicate that the application of a metabolomic approach is a We found lower mutation loads (8-35 % in blood) in adult patients with useful and reliable algorithm for diagnosis of inherited metabolic dis- clinical features including migraine with aura, Leber Hereditary Op- eases. tic Neuropathy (LHON), sensorineural hearing loss and Diabetes mellitus type 2. Despite homoplasmic mutation loads, complex i P13.29 catalytic activity was only moderately decreased in muscle tissue Phenotype of LAt2 knockout mice of these patients. M. Espino Guarch1, S. Bodoy Salvans2, R. Sillué Bayarri1,3, G. Colell Dinares1, conclusions: the m.14487T>C mutation resulted in a broad spec- M. Font Llitjós1,3, M. Palacín Prieto4,5, V. Nunes Martínez1,3,6; trum of phenotypes in our family. This is the first report of PME as 1Centro de Genética Médica y Molecular IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, an important neurological manifestation of an isolated mitochondrial Spain, 2Institute for research in biomedicine, Barcelona, Spain, 3CIBERER complex I defect. U730, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 4Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Barcelona, Spain, 5CIBERER U730, Barcelona, Spain, 6UNIVERSIDAD DE P13.31 BARCELONA - IDIBELL. Ciencias Fisiológicas II, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Laboratory approach for biochemical diagnosis of Lysosomal Spain. storage Diseases LAT2 (SLC7A8) is a polytopic membrane protein that after covalent I. Sinigerska, I. Hassanova, M. B. Ivanova, R. Vazharova, I. Bradinova, I. Kre- association with 4F2hc (or CD98, SLC3A2) forms an heterodimeric mensky; amino acid transporter. LAT2-4F2hc induces system L transport activ- National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria. ity in the plasma membrane of most of the epithelial tissues (kidney, Lysosomal storage diseases (LSD) comprise a group of more than intestine, brain...). LAT2-4F2hc plays a role in the vectorial trans-epi- 40 rare diseases, most of them resulting from a specific enzyme de- thelial flux of neutral amino acid (re)absoption, particularly important ficiency.The diagnosis is complicated due to their clinical, biochemi- for cystine. cal and genetic heterogeinity. Definitive diagnosis, as well as prenatal To further study the physiological relevance of LAT2 in vivo, we gener- diagnosis of LSD are based on a specific enzyme or DNA analysis. ated a knockout mice model from ES cells. Mice model deficient in Quantitative and qualitative analysis of urinary metabolites facilitates LAT2 presents around 85% of lethality (n=200) despite there are no differential diagnosis, pointed to the probable enzyme deficiency. differences in weight and basic behavior compared to the wild type Appropriate scheme of assays depending on observed clinical features animals (studied up to 8 months of age). has been developed in our laboratory, in order to detect rapidly and re- We also generated an antibody that allows us to check the absence liably 27 of known LSD and to offer a prenatal diagnosis for them . of LAT2 in the majority of the tissues where it is expressed. We also In 30 years period more than 3000 patients , suspected of having LSD confirmed the basolateral location of LAT2 in the epithelial cells by im- have been tested according to a flowchart for biochemical diagnosis of munohistochemistry with the same antibody. LSD. In 112 patients a pathologycal excretion of glycosaminoglycans In addition to these preliminary results, we are analyzing amino acid have been found using quantitative dimethylmethyleneblue test and content in urine and plasma, examining the histopathology of all tis- qualitative thin layer chromatography or electrophoresis . Enzyme as- sues and evaluating different behavior parameters in the knockout says according to abnormal GAG patterns have been performed and mice. All these studies aim to increase our understanding about the 58 different mucoplosaccharidoses have been diagnosed. physiological role of LAT2 and its functional cooperation with TAT1 and Thin layer chromatofraphy of oligocassharides has been applied to LAT1-4F2hc, both transporters implicated in the (re)absorption in the the patients with clinical features similar to MPS but with normal GAG kidney and intestine. excretion. Abnormal bands has been found in 33 cases and relevant The LAT2 knockout mice model is viable so we have generated a po- enyme deficiency has been demonstrated. tential tool to improve our knowledge of LAT2 function in vivo and its The definitive diagnosis on enzyme level has been set in 213 cases. role in trans-epithelial flux of amino acids. Prenatal diagnosis has been undertaken ih 53 cases in families withMetabolic disorders  enzymaticaly confirmed diagnosis in the proband. Neurologie, Charité Virchow Klinikum, Berlin, Germany, 5Technical University The diagnostic rate obtained 6.8% shows unabiguosly the efficiency of of Munich, Stoffwechselzentrum Kinderklinik, München, Germany, 6University the used diagnostic algorithm. Bonn, Department of Epileptology and University Jena,, Bonn, Germany, 7Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Dept. of Neurology Ludwig-Maximilians-University of P13.32 Munich, München, Germany, 8Klinikum der Stadt Ludwigshafen gGmbH, Insti- mutation analysis of AtP7A, AtP7B and AtOX1 genes in patients tute for Clinical Chemistry and Molecular Diagnostics, Ludwigshafen, Germany. with menkes and Wilson diseases in czech Republic Aims: The principal goal of mitoNET is to establish a network of clinical L. Pospisilova1, L. Kralik2, R. Bruha3, Z. Marecek4, E. Flachsova1, P. Fruhauf5, and basic scientists in order to improve health care for patients with A. Puchmajerova1, J. Zeman1, P. Martasek1; mitochondrial diseases. 1Department of Pediatrics, 1st School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Work plan Steps to achieve this are: Czech Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics, 1st School of Medicine, Charles i) Buildup of a nationwide network of neurological and paediatric de- University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Internal Medicine 4, 1st partments for recruitment and phenotyping of patients, setup of a web- School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department based register, and conduction of longitudinal studies; of Internal Medicine 4,1st School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, ii) Comprehensive collection and storage of biological materials includ- Czech Republic, 5Faculty General Hospital Prague, Department of Pediatrics, ing DNA, RNA and myoblasts, providing aliquots to researchers within Czech Republic. and outside the net; Copper plays an essential role as a cofactor for many enzymes. There iii) Enhancing the range of diagnostic tools, including new assays to are two intracellular copper transferring P-ATPases in human: ATP7A quantify mitochondrial proteins and dynamics, high-throughput geno- and ATP7B, and a chaperone ATOX1 which delivers copper to them. typing, and a systems approach; Deficiency of ATP7A causes X-linked Menkes disease (MD). A defect in iv) in vitro investigations of novel treatments including an approach ATP7B causes autosomally recessive inherited Wilson disease (WD). to improve respiratory chain deficiency by fibrate-induction of peroxi- Here we report the mutational analysis of the ATP7A and ATP7B genes some proliferator-activated receptor pathways and an approach to of 4 patients with MD and 125 patients with WD from the Czech Re- identify mechanisms behind and strategies against propagation of public. mtDNA mutations; Genomic DNA was used to amplify 23 exons of the ATP7A gene and v) Increased collaboration of basic and clinical researchers to boost 21 exons of the ATP7B gene. PCR products were examined by RFLP synergy effects, interdisciplinary cooperation and training initiatives; and sequenced. We introduced fast mutation screening based on and differences in melting temperature of DNA fragments with sequence vi) Increased public and professional awareness. variations. We performed mutation analysis of the ATOX1 gene in pa- Expected results: Progress in the projects of the consortium and the tients whose clinical and biochemical phenotypes suggest impaired additional boost for collaboration, synergy and communication will lead copper transport, but no mutations were found within the ATP7A and to an improvement in diagnostics, therapy and medical care for pa- ATP7B genes. tients with mitochondrial diseases. Molecular analysis revealed 4 mutations in the ATP7A gene, two of which have not been previously published (Q724X and E1249X). 13 P13.35 mutations were found in the ATP7B gene (including prevalent H1069Q Respiratory pathology in monozygotic sisters with mPs1 mutation), and no mutations in ATOX1 gene. M. O. Mkheidze1, D. S. Poliakov2; Molecular analysis of the ATP7A gene allows for genetic counselling in 1Medical academy for postgraduate studies, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- families affected by MD. Screening for the prevalent H1069Q mutation tion, 2Medical university named after I.P.Pavlov, St.Petersburg, Russian Fed- in the ATP7B gene shows that the frequency- 44% of analysed alleles- eration. is in accordance with its occurrence in Central Europe. Mucopolysaccharidosis 1 (MPS1, Hurler syndrome, MIM252800) is an Supported by Grants IGA MZ NR9406, NR9215, MSMT 1M0520 autosomal recessive disease characterized by variable systemic mani- festations, increased urinary mucopolysaccharide excretion and the P13.33 defective α-L-iduronidase (IDUA, EC 3.2.1.76). The MPS1 gene has the clinical spectrum of methylmalonic Aciduria secondary to been mapped to chromosome band 4p16.3. Two common nonsense Cobalamin B Deficiency in Three Saudi Families mutations W402X and Q70X are responsible for between 15 and 65% N. A. Al-Sanna’a1, R. Mathew2; of mutant alleles depending on the population. We report on 8-year-old 1Dhahran Health Center, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, 2Vanderbilt University, Vander- monozygotic sisters with MPS1 caused by IDUA deficiency (genotype bilt, TN, United States. Q70X/Q70X). The probands have severe variant of MPS1, including We report eight patients with Methylmalinic aciduria secondary to Co- coarse facial features, corneal opacity, skeletal dysplasia, dysosto- balamin B deficiency from three Saudi families. Their age ranged be- sis multiplex, mental deficiency and hepatosplenomegaly. They suf- tween four to nineteen years. The diagnosis was confirmed by vitamin fer from frequent attacks of respiratory lung disorders. Both sisters B12 complementation study done on cultured skin fibroblasts. Only four get rhinitis, acute bronchitis three or four times each year. One of the of them had their first symptoms within the first few days of their life. monozygotic sisters got bronchopneumonia last year. Both girls had However, all had become symptomatic by the end of their first year. All the sings of emphysema and fibrosis of lung tissue revealed with X-ray the affected children were subjected to a restricted protein diet, special observation. We suppose that pulmonary disorders in our children are formula and L-Carnitine supplement. Multiple hospital admissions per caused by inborn error of mucopolysaccharide degradation because year were required for acute metabolic decompensation by the major- a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme IDUA results in accumulation ity. Three patients died at six months, four and fourteen years of age of the mucopolysaccharides dermatan sulfate and heparin sulfate as a result of their underlying disease. Three had developed a renal throughout tissues and organs of our patients. Pessimistic prognosis, insufficiency, and one had required hemodialysis. Five children were death from MPS1, is usually caused by upper airway obstruction and able to attend regular schools with variable performances. One of the pulmonary complications. We use enzyme replacement therapy with surviving children had sustained a severe psychomotor retardation. A laronidase. Although the phenotypes were slightly modified there was detail clinical course and outcome for seven of the affected children still physical handicap and developmental delay. and review of the literature is provided. P13.36 P13.34 Age-dependent changes of the mitochondrial DNA content in mitoNEt - German Network for mitochondrial disorders muscle, liver and fibroblasts H. Prokisch1, I. Witt2, L. Schöls3, M. Schülke-Gerstenfeld4, P. Freisinger5, W. K. Vinsova, M. Pejznochova, E. Trefilova, M. Tesarova, J. Zeman; Kunz6, A. Abicht7, B. Obermaier-Kusser8, T. Meitinger1, T. Klopstock7; Charles University, First Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics and 1Technical University of Munich, Institute of Human Genetics, München, Ger- Center of Applied Genomics, Prague, Czech Republic. many, 2Molecular Bioenergetics, University Clinics Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Ger- Tissue-specific depletion of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), caused by many, 3University of Tübingen, Department of Neurology and Hertie-Institute mutations in increasing number of genes, often gives rise to serious for Clinical Brain Research, Tübingen, Germany, 4Klinik für Pädiatrie m. S. mitochondrial disorders. Recently, a real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) hasMetabolic disorders  been widely used to determine mtDNA content. Nevertheless, this to be mild adverse effects and were completely eliminated with acet- high sensitive method requires a large number of tissue-specific and aminophen. age-matched controls. To bypass the lack of controls, we analyzed the Conclusions: Though the decline in GAGe was close to that for ALID- mtDNA amount in available samples from patients referred to our labo- 014-02 trial and the duration of treatment was even longer, the efficacy ratory to exclude mitochondrial disease. Specimens with decreased was evident, but not so prominent. Measurements of Health Related relative amount of mtDNA compare to other age-matched samples Quality of Life will help to evaluate the evidence-based efficacy of ERT were selected for mutation screening of candidate genes. in MPS I children. We quantified mtDNA amount by the qRT-PCR as described previ- ously (Pejznochova, 2008) in almost 200 muscles, 50 liver and 80 cul- P13.39 tured-skin fibroblasts specimens. MtDNA content was expressed as a incidence of the mucopolysaccharidoses in taiwan, 1984-2004 copy-number ratio of mtDNA to nuclear DNA. Samples with confirmed S. P. Lin1, H. Y. Lin1, C. K. Chuang1, F. J. Tsai2, M. C. Chao3, P. C. Chiu4, W. L. deletion or point mutation in mtDNA were excluded from the analysis. Hwu5, D. M. Niu6, L. P. Tsai7, J. L. Lin8, S. J. Lin9; The relative amount of mtDNA was found to gradually increase during 1Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 2China Medical University Hospital, the first 20 years in both muscle (n=98, r=0.7, p<0.01) and liver (r=0.5, Taichung, Taiwan, 3Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, p<0.01) while in fibroblasts it appears to remain largely unchanged. 4Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 5National Taiwan Besides, four samples with decreased mtDNA content were selected University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 6Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, for consecutive mutation analysis of POLG or TK2 genes. Taiwan, 7Buddhist Tzu-Chi Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 8Chang-Gung Memorial Our results are in accordance with previously published data in dis- Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 9National Cheng-Kung Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan. ease-free samples and accentuate the age dependence of mtDNA Previous studies on the incidence of MPS diseases in different popula- amount evaluation. Moreover, our data can be temporary utilized in tions have shown considerable variation. However, information regard- a candidate searching for a sequencing of mtDNA depletion-related ing the incidence of MPS in Asian population is lacking. An epidemio- genes. logical study of MPS in Taiwan using multiple ascertainment sources Supported by research project MSM0021620806 and grant IGA MZ was undertaken, and incidences of different types of MPS during the NR/9410-3 period of 1984 to 2004 were estimated. We compared our data with previous reports in different populations. The combined birth incidence P13.37 for all MPS cases was 2.04 per 100,000 live births. MPS II had the mucolipidosis type ii highest calculated birth incidence of 1.07 per 100,000 live births (2.05 J. Paprocka1, E. Jamroz1, A. Pyrkosz2; per 100,000 male live births), comprising 52% of all MPS cases diag- 1Silesian Medical University, Child Neurology Department, Katowice, Poland, nosed. The birth incidences of MPS I, III, IV, and VI were 0.11, 0.39, 2Silesian Medical University, Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, 0.33, and 0.14 per 100,000 live births, respectively, which accounted Katowice, Poland. for 6%, 19%, 16%, and 7% of all MPS, respectively. No cases of MPS Mucolipidosis II (or I-cell disease) (ML II) is a rare autosomal reces- IIID, IVB, VII or IX were ascertained during the study period. Overall sive lysosomal storage disease due to N-acetylglucosaminyl 1-phos- incidence of MPS diseases in Taiwan was consistent with that reported photransferase deficiency (EC 2.7.8.15). This phosphotransferase in Western populations. In contrast to the higher incidence of MPS I catalyzes the initial step in the synthesis of the mannose 6-phosphate in most Western populations, this study showed a higher incidence of determinant required for efficient intracellular targeting of newly syn- MPS II in Taiwan. It remains to be investigated whether this discrep- thesized lysosomal hydrolases to the lysosome. This enzyme is en- ancy is attributed to the underdiagnosis of MPS I in Taiwan or to ethnic coded by 2 different genes. The altered gene coding for the a/b sub- differences. units is localized on chromosome 12p. Clinical and radiological signs are similar to those in Hürler’s disease, P13.40 although onset is during the first months of life. It is characterized by Mucopolysaccharidosis in IRAN (A fifteen years survey) hypertrophic gingivae, enlarged tongue, coarse facies, hirsutism, her- Y. Shafeghati1, Z. Hadipour2, F. Hadipour2, M. Kariminejad3; nias, cutaneous infiltration, limited joint mobility, dysostosis multiplex, 1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Sarem Women hepatosplenomegaly, corneal opacities, deafness, mental and motor Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Kariminejad/Najmabadi Genetics retardation, and dwarfism. The authors present a boy diagnosed with Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. mucolipidosis type II at the age of four years.. More than 500 different phenotypes of metabolic disorders identified and categorized in the medical literature during 20th century after Gar- P13.38 rod. Now for the most of them biochemical and molecular background Mucopolysaccharidosis I: One More Attempt to Evaluate Efficacy has been identified. Individually they are rare disorders but as a whole of Enzyme Replacement therapy. 1 of every 1000 live-borne babies may suffer from one of these dis- N. V. Buchinskaya, O. V. Kalashnikova, M. F. Dubko, V. G. Chasnyk; eases. Consanguinity is a predisposing factor, because in the most State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. of them inheritance pattern is autosomal recessive. Between them Background: Mucopolysaccharidosis I (MPS I) is a progressive dis- mucopolysaccharidoses are common rare disorders with characteris- ease caused by the deficiency of alpha-L-iduronidase due to mutations tic phenotypes. Clinically they are chronic, progressive, and disabling in 4p16.3. Clinical trials (ALID-014-02, BIO7500-001, ALID-003-99, disorders. ALID-006-01, ALID-017-03) showed the recombinant human enzyme Because the rate of consanguineuous marriages are very high in our (Aldurazyme®, Genzyme) replacement therapy (ERT) to be enough population, these diseases are prevalent and now they constitute a safe and effective. very important health problem in our community. Objectives: Evaluation of the safety and efficacy of ERT with Aldura- We have studied 134 families with 278 cases in the past 15 years zyme® in Russian children with MPS I. diagnosed as MPS. The diagnosis in the index cases (after a detailed Methods: Non-randomized, open label, uncontrolled, single group as- clinical, biochemical, radiological, imaging, and……) confirmed by en- signment study with eligibility criteria similar to protocol ALID-014-02 zyme assay in the genetic and metabolic department of the Erasmus but without limitations on age. Two girls (7 years) and a boy (7 years) university and the Centogene laboratory in the Rostock. Prevalence with Hurler syndrome were enrolled. Patients received intravenously of different types have been shown in the table. The most common Aldurazyme® at a weekly dose of 100 U/kg for 84 (boy) and 56 weeks type was MPSIII, followed by MPSII and MPSI respectively. Prenatal (girls). Criteria of evaluation: urinary glycosaminoglycan excretion diagnostic tests carried out in 89 pregnancies and 27(33%) affected (GAGe), vital signs, the investigator’s global assessment. fetuses detected. Results: The GAGe decreased 56%, 33% in the girls, 71% in the boy, the reduction being associated with clinical benefit in the girls. In the girls a decrease in liver and spleen size was evident. All children had mild heart left ventricular hypertrophy, and hydrocephaly which didn’t progress. Improvement in psychomotor, emotional status was notice- able. Anxiety, fever, urticaria after several infusions were consideredMetabolic disorders  Normal Affected PND No of cases No of families Diagnosis tients and 252 age-matched controls. 87 40 msP iii Results : 45 16 MSP III A Mean age at examination was 57.7±11.5 years (33-85) for PD and 25 14 MSP IIIB 57.8±11.9 (31-85) for controls. Mean age at onset and mean disease 2 3 MSP III C duration were 47.5±10.0 years (30-70) and 10.3±6.6 (1-30). GBA vari- 14 6 MSP IIID ants were more frequent in PD compared to controls (11% versus 0.4%, 70 29 MPS II p<0.0001). We detected the following variants which are considered of 52 28 MPS I severe (S), intermediate (I) or unknown (U) severity: N370S (I, n=7), 33 17 MPS VI L444P (S, n=2), D409H (S, n=1), R131C (S, n=1), E10V (U, n=2), 33 17 MPS IV Y212N (U, n=2), D282N (U, n=1), A292P (U, n=1), the combination 62 27 (33%) 89 278 134 total of E326K (homozygous) + D410H (S, n=1), the combination of L444P + A456P + V460V (S, n=1) and the following SNP: E326K (modifier, Relative incidence of MPS cases & n=11), T369M (neutral, n=3). Four variants (U) were newly described. Prenatal Diagnosis in affected Iranian families GBA-PD had significantly delayed onset of treatment-induced fluctua- tions (186±229 versus 52±42 months, p=0.013) and more often in- P13.41 creased lower limbs reflexes (25% versus 10%, p=0.026). Functional analysis of the gene deficient in MPS IIIC patients Conclusion : A. O. Fedele1,2, M. Filocamo3, M. Di Rocco4, G. Sersale5, T. Lübke6, P. Di Na- GBA heterozygous variants are significantly associated with PD in the tale7, M. P. Cosma2, A. Ballabio2, J. J. Hopwood1; French population and influence the phenotype. 1Lysosomal Disease Research Unit (LDRU), SA Pathology, North Adelaide, Australia, 2Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy, P13.43 3Laboratorio Diagnosi Pre-Postnatale Malattie Metaboliche, Istituto G. Gaslini, the role of methionine metabolism in the clinical manifestations Genoa, Italy, 4U.O. Pediatria II, Istituto G. Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 5Clinica Pe- of Phenylketonuria diatria, Università Milano Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 6Institut für Biochemie 2, Göt- N. Usurelu1, V. Tsourea2, S. Garaeva3, V. Sacara1; tingen, Germany, 7Department of Biochemistry and Medical Biotechnologies, 1The National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Federico II University, Naples, Italy. Republic of Moldova, 22The State University of Medicine and Pharmacy “N. Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) IIIC is an autosomal recessive lyso- Testemitsanu”, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova, 3The Institut of Physiology and somal storage disorder caused by a deficiency in heparan acetyl CoA: Sanocreatology of Academy of Science, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. alpha-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase (HGSNAT). This is localised Phenylketonuria(PKU) is an inborn poly-enzymatic multi-system pathol- to the lysosomal membrane and catalyses a transmembrane acetyla- ogy of the metabolism, its primary block being the Phenylalanine(Phe) tion in which the terminal glucosamine residue of heparan sulphate ac- hydroxylation that leads to severe mental retardation with clinical and quires an acetyl group, thus forming N-acetylglucosamine. The char- biochemical polymorphism. acteristic feature is the deterioration of the central nervous system, Methods: 30 PKU children were investigated for the level of free amino but other symptoms may include coarse facies, developmental delay, acids in blood and urine determined through liquid chromatography on macrocrania and motor retardation. Only recently has the gene for amino acid analyzer Kovo AAA339, Czech. They presented the follow- MPS IIIC been identified. HGSNAT is localised to chromosome 8p11.1 ing troubles: excitability (97%), capricious mood (93%), mental retar- and contains 18 exons. The cDNA codes for a product of 635 amino dation (47%), hyperactivity (53%), tics, convulsions(13%), deficiency acids which is predicted to contain a cleavable signal peptide at its of attention and memory (80%), sleep disturbance (83%). N-terminus, 11 transmembrane domains, and up to 5 N-linked glyco- Results: In addition to the Phenylalanine transformations troubles, sylation sites. We and other groups have since sequenced 45 different we appreciated the increased levels in blood of: Cystheine (by 2.5 disease-causing HGSNAT alleles in MPS IIIC patients. 19 of these are times,p<0.001), cystheinic acid (by 4 times,p<0.05), cystathionine (by missense mutations, although these are yet to be functionally anal- 1.3 times), Homocystheine and low levels of: Methionine (by 1.8 times, ysed. Furthermore, certain biochemical properties of HGSNAT, such p<0.05) and Taurine (by 1.2 times). The urine amino acids spectrum as its active site, remain uncharacterised. In this study, a number of was following: the high level of cystheinic acid (by 1.4 times), cysta- mutations known to occur in MPS IIIC patients have been introduced thionine (by 3.8 times,p<0.05), Homocystheine, Taurine (by 1.6 times) into the cDNA of HGSNAT. The expression of these HGSNAT deriva- and low level of Cystheine (by 1.6 times,p<0.001). tives in cell culture and the analysis of their protein levels and activity We added to the traditional PKU diet the drug metabolical correction have been performed to examine the effect of the tested mutations on containing the vitamins of group B (50-150 mg/day) and Taurine (250- HGSNAT function. This research will aid in detailing the biochemical 500 mg/day). As the result, the children showed calmer and equili- characteristics of HGSNAT activity, and thus the molecular basis of brater, the hyperactivity and seizures decreased, sleep disturbance MPS IIIC. disappeared, the attention and memory increased, the cognitive ca- pacity improved. P13.42 Conclusion: The effectiveness of the PKU treatment increases if com- GBA gene variants are associated with PD in France bining the low Phe diet with drug metabolical correction, considering M. Anheim1, C. Condroyer2, S. Lesage2, A. Troiano3, A. Durr4, A. Brice5; all metabolical components. We consider, that will be better if the |PKU 1Genetics Department, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 2INSERM, formula be enriched with high doses of vitamins B and Taurine. UMRS975, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CRicm, Paris, France, 3Genetics Department, INSERM, UMRS975, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 4Genetics De- P13.44 partment, INSERM, UMRS975, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CRicm, Pitié Salpêtrière Genetic and biochemical characterisation of a novel splice-site Hospital, Paris, France, 5Genetics Department, INSERM, UMRS975, UPMC mutation in mitochondrial polymerase gamma (POLG1) Univ Paris 06, CRicm, Federation of the Nervous System Diseases, Pitié A. Schaller1, D. Hahn2, I. Kern3, C. Chardot4, D. C. Belli3, J. M. Nuoffer2, S. Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France. Gallati1; Objective : 1Division of Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland, 2Institute of Clinical Chemistry, To compare the frequency of variants in the GBA gene which encodes Bern, Switzerland, 3Department of Pediatrics, Genf, Switzerland, 4Department β-glucocerebrosidase, in Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients and in of Pediatric Surgery, Genf, Switzerland. controls. To compare the clinical features of GBA-PD patients with PD Aim: Genetic and biochemical investigations in a 3y old boy suspected patients without any mutations. for POLG1 defect due to valproate induced fatal cholestatic hepatopa- Background : thy. Homozygous mutations of GBA are responsible for Gaucher disease. Methods: Patient’s DNA was analysed for POLG1 mutations and con- It has been reported that heterozygous mutations of GBA was a risk sequences of the splice site mutation was analysed by reverse tran- factor for PD, especially in Ashkenazi Jews. scription. The content of mtDNA of patients liver, fibroblast and muscle Methods : biopsies was quantified by qRT-PCR. The activities of respiratory chain GBA sequencing was performed in 293 mostly (87%) French PD pa- complexes (RCC) were measured spectrophotometrically in variousMetabolic disorders  tissues. BN-PAGE from liver and muscle biopsies was performed, fol- rs8050136 (FTO), rs7754840 (CDKAL1), rs5215 (KCNJ11), lowed by in gel activity assays. rs1801282 (PPARG), rs1111875 (HHEX-IDE), rs13266634 (SLC30A8), Results: Sequence analysis of POLG1 gene revealed compound het- rs10811661 (CDKN2A-CDKN2B), rs4402960 (IGF2BP2), rs757210 erozygosity for the most commonly found mutation p.A467T in exon 7 (HNF1B), rs10010131 (WFS1). NODAT was defined by fasting plasma and a novel splice-site mutation c.1251-2A>T in intron 6 resulting in an glucose 126 mg/dL on at least two occasions or de novo hypoglycae- in frame skipping of Exon 7. The liver biopsy showed marked deficien- mic therapy. cy of Complex I, III and IV. In muscle we found an isolated Complex Results: Patients who developed NODAT (N=145, incidence=11.8%) IV deficiency, whereas in fibroblasts all activities were normal. There within the first 6-months post-transplantation were compared to pa- was a 90% mtDNA depletion in liver, no depletion in muscle and a 30 tients free of NODAT (N=1084) for clinical and genetic factors. NO- % depletion in fibroblasts. In liver there was a reduced in gel activity DAT was significantly associated with the following characteristics by for complex I, no activity for complex IV, the activities of complex II multivariate analysis: TCF7L2 polymorphism (P=0.014), older age were equal to the control. In muscle we found decreased activity of (P<0.0001), black African or north-African ethnicities (P=0.003), high- complexes I and II and no activity for complex IV. er body mass index at transplantation (P=0.016), tacrolimus (P=0.01) Conclusion: This new splice site mutation affects a highly conserved and mTOR inhibitors (P=0.003). The risk to develop NODAT was region of the protein and leads in combination with p.A467T to different 1.55 (OR; 95%CI: 1.06-2.25; P=0.02) for CT genotype and 1.79 (OR; depletion levels in different tissues. It extends the number of POLG1 95%CI: 1.02-3.14; P=0.04) for TT genotype, in comparison with the mutations associated with fatal childhood hepatoencephalopathy. CC genotype of rs7903146. No other polymorphism was significantly associated with NODAT. P13.45 Conclusions: Our results show the independent contribution of the Novel SUCLG mutations in a patient with encephalomyopathic TCF7L2 polymorphism in NODAT, and suggest a common insulin se- phenotype associated with mild methylmalonic aciduria and cretion defect pathway with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Our results may mtDNA depletion help to tailor immunosuppression in order to prevent NODAT. C. Rouzier1, K. Fragaki1, C. Caruba2, S. Desmet3, S. Tuffery-Giraud4, S. Le- Guédard-Méreuze4, V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,5; P13.47 1Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre de référence des pathologies mito- Identification of the tMTHFR mutation in a case with portal chondriales, CHU, Nice, France, 2Service de Biochimie, CHU, Nice, France, cavernoma 3Service de Réanimation Pédiatrique, CHU, Nice, France, 4Laboratoire de gé- M. T. Bataneant, B. Zoica, C. Petrescu, P. Urtila, C. M. Jinca, L. Pop, E. Ursu, nétique moléculaire, Inserm U827, Institut Universitaire de Recherche Clinique, M. Serban; Montpellier, France, 5FRE CNRS 3086, Faculté de Médecine, Nice, France. University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. The mitochondrial DNA depletion syndromes (MDS) are a heteroge- Introduction. Homocysteine is an amino acid important in metabolism. neous group of severe mitochondrial disorders inherited as autoso- Most folate-responsive mild homocysteinemia is due to homozygos- mal recessive traits. Three main clinical forms have been described: ity for a common C677T polymorphism in methylene tetrahydrofolate myopathic, encephalomyopathic and hepatocerebral. Recently, the reductase that produces a thermolabile enzyme (tMTHFR). Approxi- SUCLA2 and SUCLG1 genes, which code for different subunits of mately 10% of whites are homozygous for tMTHFR. As compared to succinate-CoA ligase, have been involved in patients with severe en- the general population, persons with hyperhomocysteinemia have a cephalomyopathy and mild methylmalonic aciduria. However to date, 6.8 time greater risk of peripheral arterial disease, 2.5 time greater risk only one family with SUCLG1 mutation has been reported. of stroke, and 2 time greater risk of heart disease. Herein, we report the clinical and molecular findings in a child with en- Case presentation. A 5 year old female was admitted for asymptom- cephalomyopathic MDS secondary to novel SUCLG1 mutations. atic thrombocytopenia and leucopenia discovered to an occasionally At birth, this child presented with a severe hypotonia, respiratory failure laboratory exploration. Her grandfather died due to mesenteric throm- and hypoglycemia. Metabolic investigations revealed lactic acidosis bosis and the patient presented in the neonatal period septicemia with and mild methylmalonic aciduria. Histologic, biochemical and molecu- left temporo-mandibular arthritis that recovered with ankylosis and left lar analyses of the muscle showed respectively cox-negative fibers, mandibular hypoplasia. Clinical exam revealed splenomegaly without combined respiratory-chain enzyme deficiency and mtDNA depletion. hepatomegaly. Laboratory tests confirmed thrombocytopenia (41.000/ We identified two novel mutations in SUCLG1. One allele, inherited mmc) with leucopenia (2300/mmc) and bone marrow aspirate analysis from the mother, carried a missense mutation that changes a highly excluded a hematological disease. Abdominal Eco Doppler revealed conserved C to G (c.509C>G, p.Pro170Arg). Amino acid conserva- the absence of flux in portal vein and portal cavernoma was confirmed tion, in silico predictions and absence of this variant in 160 controls by angio-MRI. AT III, C protein, S protein were in normal range but are strong arguments for its pathogenicity. The second allele, inherited homocysteine level was increased. Genetic analysis detected homo- from the father, carried a G to C substitution (c.97+3G>C) in intron 1. In zygous C677T mutation in tMTHFR. We consider that the genetic con- silico studies predicted this variant to affect splicing. Functional analy- firmation is crucial for the therapeutical measures, not only in folic acid ses using reporter minigenes are in progress to ascertain the splicing supplementation but mainly in thrombosis prophylaxis that is obliga- outcome of this intronic variation. tory in all surgery interventions as in all known situations that increase We described the clinical evolution of a child with MDS due to SU- the thromboembolic risk. CLG1 mutations confirming its role in encephalomyopathic MDS with mild methylmalonic aciduria. P13.48 Familial investigation of a rare mitochondrial myopathy P13.46 F. Guerry1, S. Jacquemont1, P. Jeannet2, D. Ballhausen3; TCFL polymorphism is an independent risk factor for New 1Service de Génétique médicale, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Service de Onset Diabetes mellitus After transplantation: a cohort study on pédiatrie, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Service de pédiatrie moléculaire, 1229 renal transplant patients. CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland. M. J. Abramowicz1, L. Ghisdal1, C. Baron2, Y. Lebranchu2, Y. Le Meur3, J. Re- The vast majority of mitochondrial mutations affect tRNA genes. Muta- rolle3, A. Lionet4, F. Glowacki4, K. M. Wissing1, D. Abramowicz1; tions in different tRNA genes and different mutations within a same 1ULB-Erasme Hospital, Brussels, Belgium, 2CHU Tours, Tours, France, 3CHU tRNA can cause distinct clinical and biochemical phenotypes with vari- Limoges, Limoges, France, 4CHRU Lille, Lille, France. able expression and age of onset. This renders genetic counseling Objective: Whether New Onset Diabetes Mellitus After Transplantation very difficult. (NODAT) shares the same susceptibility genes with type 2 diabetes We report on a rare A3302G tRNALeu(UUR) mutation in 5 family members. mellitus has not been adequately assessed to date. The aim of our The proband developed at 2 years of age progressive axial and limb study was to investigate the association between 11 type 2 diabetes girdle myopathy. She subsequently lost head control due to severe ax- mellitus-associated polymorphisms and the risk of NODAT within the ial hypotonia. At present,she is wheel-chair bound and suffers from fre- first 6 months after-renal transplantation. quent bronchitis with respiratory decompensation. Biochemical analy- Methods: A total of 1229 patients free of diabetes at transplanta- ses demonstrated a deficit in the complex I of the respiratory chain tion were genotyped for 11 polymorphisms: rs7903146 (TCF7L2), in the muscle biopsy. Genetic analyses showed a 95% mutant loadTherapy for genetic disorders  in the muscle,91% in epithelial cells and 97% in lymphocytes. Family mRNA increase obtained after exposure of K562 cells to 5-Azacyta- investigation revealed that the grandmother,mother,aunt and uncle of dine was 7.36 fold--seen after a 3 day exposure to 15 μM of 5-Aza. the proband were all carriers with a mean mutant load of 10%,40%,5% These results suggest that MBD2 siRNAs can indeed induce γ-globin and 20% respectively. The heteroplasmy was constant across tissues. at significant levels. The DNA binding site of MBD2 is not clear. We These four relatives are asymptomatic and despite relatively high mu- sought to determine whether MBD2 was mediating its repressive activ- tant load (i.e.:40% in the mother),biochemical analysis revealed nor- ity via LARC. To this end siRNAs against C1C2 shRNP, the DNA bind- mal complex I activity in the muscle biopsy performed in the mother ing protein of LARC, were transfected into K562 cells and C1C2 and and her two siblings. γ-globin levels measured as discussed above. C1C2 levels were de- These results provide important insight on genotype-phenotype cor- creased to 0.54±0.16, whereas levels of γ-globin remained unchanged relation. Positive mutant load observed in an older(70y.) asymptomatic (1.07±0.25). These results suggest that the repressive effect of MBD2 individual as well as normal OXPHOS assays in the other unaffected is not mediated through its binding to LARC. adults demonstrate that high mutant loads are probably necessary for symptoms to develop. These findings as well as heteroplasmy consis- tency through tissue type could represent valuable information for fam- P14. therapy for genetic disorders ily members seeking accurate genetic counseling or prenatal testing. P14.02 P13.49 Breast cancer prevention by letrozole in post menopausal spectrum of Wilson Disease Gene (AtP7B) and AtOX1 BRcA1/2 mutations carriers : the onco-03/LiBER trial mutations in an isolated Romanian Population P. Pujol1, S. Mijonnet2, K. Samb3, A. Martin2; F. Raicu1,2, A. Şendroiu2, C. Glavce2, R. Cocoş1, L. Bohîlţea1, I. Şendroiu2; 1oncogenetique CHU, INSERM-CRCM Val d’Aurelle, Montpellier, France, 1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2FNCLCC, paris, France, 3oncogenetique CHU, INSERM- CRCM Val d’Aurelle, 2Francisc I Rainer Institute of Anthropology Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Montpellier, France. Romania. Women carrying germline BRCA1/2 deleterious mutations represent Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by an extreme risk population for developing breast cancer, with a cu- dramatic build-up of intracellular hepatic and brain copper. WD is mulative life-time risk of 56-80%. Although it greatly affects the quality caused by mutations in the gene ATP7B. We report the further results of life, breast prophylactic surgery in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers have of an ongoing project concerning the spectrum of mutations on the increased in Europe and in US over the last decade. Medical preven- ATP7B gene patients from an isolated Romanian population with high tion of breast cancer could thus provide a precious alternative to pro- prevalence of WD. Direct sequencing of all 21 exons within ATP7B phylactic mastectomy. gene revealed that four WD patients are heterozygotes or compound The major breast cancer prevention trials using tamoxifen and raloxi- heterozygotes bearing three previously reported mutations: P767P- fen showed an approximately 50% risk reduction in high risk women. fs, H1069G and K832R (considered by some researches a polymor- The contralateral risk reduction in current adjuvant trials comparing phism). We found that one WD patient has only K832R polymorphism aromatase inhibitors (AI) to tamoxifen reveals a higher preventive ef- in homozygosis. His parents are homozygote for K832R and heterozy- ficacy of AI after menopause. Two ongoing randomized studies using gote for P767P-fs. The boy has all WD manifestation associated with exemestane (MAP3) or anastrozole (IBIS2) are assessing the risk re- a mild disruption of copper metabolism based only on the presence of duction of breast cancer but none are designed for BRCA1/2 carriers. hepatic disturbance and we supposed the presence of two disease- The French federation of cancer centres, “FNCLCC” and the French causing mutations in his DNA. Proteins interacting with the ATP7B national cancer institute (INCa) have developed a randomized phase copper transporter such as ATOX1 are important in explaining this III study to determine the efficacy of an aromatase inhibitor (letrozole) phenomenon. Human ATOX1 protein regulate the catalytic activity of to reduce the incidence of invasive breast cancer in post menopausal ATP7B protein by binding and transporting cytosolic copper to ATPase BRCA1/2 carriers. The ONCO-03 (LIBER) study is a double-blind, le- proteins in the trans-Golgi network for later incorporation to the ceru- trozole versus placebo, controlled study involving 30 centres in France. loplasmin. Mutation analysis of the four exons of the ATOX1 gene was The study opened for recruitment in february 2008. The study design, performed in all five WD patients diagnosed by DNA analysis.Direct procedures and first analysis of patients enrolment are presented. sequencing of the ATOX1 gene within the 5’-UTR region revealed one For women bearing a BRCA1/2 genetic predisposition, evaluation of known heterozygous polymorphism (T/C at 5’UTR -99) in one Wilson medical prevention of breast cancer risk is needed to offer an addi- patients. The genetic base of Wilson Disease in our K832R WD patient tional option to surveillance or bilateral mastectomy. remains undentified. P14.03 P14.01 Endothelial function and plasma thiols in patient with cADAsiL Induction of γ-globin by knockdown of MBD and CC in K562 (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical cells by siRNA infarct and leukoencephalopathy) J. Gharesouran1,2, Z. Deilami3, A. Asgharian4, M. Banan2; S. Romano1, J. Campolo2, E. Puca1, M. Frontali1, F. Pescini3, L. Pantoni3, C. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Medical Tomasello4, M. Stromillo5, M. Dotti5, C. Mariotti4, C. Pelucchi6, R. De Maria2, D. Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Research Center, Univer- Inzitari3, F. Taroni4, A. Federico5, O. Parodi2; sity of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 1Istituto di Neurobiologia e Medicina Molecolare CNR, Roma, Italy, 2Istituto Iran, 3Department of Microbiology, Islamic Azad University, Science and Re- Fisiologia Clinica CNR, Milano, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche e search Unit, Zanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of cell and molecular Psichiatriche Univ. di Firenze, Firenze, Italy, 4Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neu- biology, Islamic Azad University, Science and Research Unit, Tehran, Islamic rologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche e Republic of Iran. del Comportamento Univ. di Siena, Siena, Italy, 6Laboratorio di Epidemiologia At present a number of chemicals that induce expression of the fetal Malattie Croniche Dipartmento di Epidemiologia Istituto di Ricerche Farmacolo- γ-globin gene are used as treatment for β-thalassemia. One of these giche “Mario Negri”, Milano, Italy. chemicals is a DNA methyl transferase inhibitor called 5-Azacytadine CADASIL, a rare disorder due to point mutations of Notch3 gene, is (5-Aza). A potential downstream effector (γ-globin repressor) of 5- characterized by recurrent strokes, serious motor disability, pseudo- Aza is a protein called Methyl Binding Domain protein 2 (MBD2). We bulbar paralysis and subcortical dementia. The mutation modifies a sought to determine whether knockdown of MBD2 by siRNAs in hu- transmembrane receptor involved in the arterial maturation inducing man erythroid cells would result in induction of γ-globin mRNA. This structural anomalies of endothelial cells and smooth muscle of small information could used to develop more targeted β-thalassemia drugs. vessels. Endothelial dysfunction (ED), an important prognostic marker To this end, an MBD2-specific validated siRNA was transfected into in cardiovascular disorders, is associated to defective endothelial pro- K562 erythroleukemia cells and the levels of MBD2 and γ-globin com- duction of nitric oxide (NO); the essential cofactor of NO-synthase, pared to cells transfected with a scrambled siRNA control by using BH4, increases NO bioavailability. We designed a study to assess qRT- PCR. MBD2 levels were knocked down to 0.65±0.23 and γ-globin whether endothelial function may be improved by BH4 administration levels were increased to 1.70±0.46. In contrast, the largest γ-globin in 60 CADASIL patients enrolled at 5 Italian centres. We report onTherapy for genetic disorders 0 baseline data of endothelial function, assessed by measurement of step construct can be isolated from cells. Our procedure is faster than changes induced by reactive hyperemia in pulsatile volume at finger- the existing cloning strategies and also is highly efficient, directional tips, through a non invasive pletismographic method (EndoPAT Itamar and reliable. Besides that since two different cohesive ends are used, Israel) and redox state as determined by blood thiol concentrations. the orientation of the insert in relation to the vector can be controlled. Preliminary results show that CADASIL patients have a lower endo- Flexibility in choice of vector and insert makes this method exception- thelium-dependent vasodilatation (PAT index) than healthy controls ally suitable for high-throughput cloning. This characterization is par- with/without conventional cardiovascular risk factors (RF). Patient ticularly useful for ensuring that a DNA fragment is directionally cloned categorization according to their RF profile shows an interaction be- into the correct reading frame for protein expression or for the creation tween CADASIL and the coexisting RFs: PAT index is lower in patients of fusion proteins. with ≥1 RF [n=19, 1.68 (1.44-1.92)] vs those with no RF [n=28, 2.01 (1.77-2.60)] (P≤0.03). Thiol profile showed significantly increased cys- P14.06 teinylglycine (37±7 vs 32±9 μmol/l, P=0.02) and decreased glutathione Improvement of life quality in patients with cystic fibrosis (5.5±2 vs 7.7±3 μmol/l, P=0.02) concentrations in CADASIL patients through kinetotherapy and physical exercises vs healthy controls. B. Almajan Guta1,2, V. Almajan-Guta3, E. Sirbu4,5; These findings underscore the importance of specific assessment of 1University “Politehnica” Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2National Cystic Fibro- ED and redox state and accurate management of RF in CADASIL pa- sis Centre, Timisoara, Romania, 3“Speranta” Special Care Centre, Timisoara, tients. Romania, 4West University of Timisoara, Physical Education and Sport Faculty, Timisoara, Romania, 5Clinic Municipal Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. P14.04 Background: The physical treatment is one of the most important as- The benefit of an intensive rehabilitation program in patients pects of the management of Cystic Fibrosis. The problems of the lungs with cerebral palsy remain the major difficulty which has to be dealt with on a day-to-day E. Sirbu1, D. Stoicanescu2, R. Mihaescu2, V. Belengeanu2; basis. 1West University of Timişoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine & The aim of study was to prove the efficiency of several physiotherapy Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. techniques and to adapt them according to the age and adherence of Background: Cerebral palsy is defined as a group of permanent dis- patients. orders of the development of movement and posture, causing activity Methods: 71 patients aged between 2 month and 18 years were fol- limitation, attributed to non-progressive disturbances that occurred in lowed up over the last 4 years, 2004-2008 in the National Cystic Fibro- the developing brain. Cerebral palsy may be due to many causal fac- sis Centre and divided in 3 groups according to age and compliance: tors that act during prenatal, perinatal or postnatal life, most cases group I: 15 infants age between 2 months-3 years old, group II: 14 seeming to be of early prenatal origin. children between 3-6 years old, group III: 42 children between 6-18 Objective: The aim of the present study was to demonstrate that ap- years old. We have assessed: clinical status, nutritional condition, X- plication of an intensive program of physical therapy considerably im- ray, bacteriological exam, MEF , FEV PEF. 25-75% 1, proves the global motor function. Results: The result at the first group has indicated an improvement in Material and methods: We studied a lot of 20 children with cerebral all parameters. At the second group the maximum compliance was in palsy (12 with pyramidal tetraparesis and 8 with pyramidal hemipare- physical exercises 86%, and the maximum efficiency 72% was in the sis), mean of age 4.4 years, beneficiaries of a physical kinetic program, combined techniques. The statistical briefing of data in the third group specific for each type. The lot was divided in two groups: control group shows the fact that there are significant statistical difference (p< 0,05), (10 subjects) and experiment group (10 subjects). Subjects included in before and after treatment in all ventilator index. control group followed a rehabilitation program for 6 months, 3 times Conclusions: The chosen technique proved to be very efficient, in im- a week, whereas subjects included in experiment group followed an proving of respiratory symptoms and ventilator parameters. It is ex- intensive rehabilitation program - 2 times a day, for 6 months. The tremely important to make sure that the treatment advised for each global gross motor function was evaluated for each child before and individual patient is that which is most suitable to them for their age, after therapeutic intervention (GMFM 88). cultural background and disease severity. Results: The gross motor function of children from both groups im- proved significantly after this intervention. Children from the experi- P14.07 ment group performed better and showed significantly greater im- Effects of early rehabilitation in a plurimalformative syndrome provement than those from the control group. due to deletions of chromosomes 13 and 18-case report Conclusions: Application of an intensive rehabilitation program de- C. Avram1, D. Stoicanescu2, M. Cevei1; termines increasing of motor independence in children with infantile 1Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 2University of Medicine & cerebral palsy and allows creating of a favorable climate for their inte- Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. gration in society. Deletion of the long arm of chromosome 18 is a chromosomal disor- der with a phenotype that may vary considerably in range and sever- P14.05 ity, depending on the type of deletion and location of the breakpoints. Enzyme-Free and High-throughput cloning means for production Children have characteristic features including short stature; mental of recombinant protein and gene therapy retardation; hypotonia, malformations of the hands and feet; cranio- H. Sadeghi1; facial abnormalities and numerous neurologic deficiencies with a high 1jacobs-university, Bremen, Germany, 2*, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. incidence of dysmyelination. Deletion of long arm of chromosome 13 DNA cloning is one of the most utilized techniques in molecular biology is characterized by malformations of the craniofacial region, skeletal research. Using the traditional DNA cloning methods, which include abnormalities, other physical abnormalities and intellectual disability. usage of restriction endonucleases and DNA ligase, have many limita- In this paper we report the case of a female infant with multiple con- tions including unavailability of unique restriction sites in both insert genital abnormalities, craniofacial dysmorphism, heteroataxia, severe and vector. LIC (Ligase-Independent Cloning) methods have been mental retardation and severe hypotonia, who was found to have dele- developed to overcome such problems, they use different enzymes tions of the long arm of chromosomes 13 and 18. We included her in to generate long enough “sticky ends” that can hold insert and vec- a rehabilitation program from the age of eleven months. Rehabilitation tor together. Reparative mechanism of cell can join the nicks in both programs aimed improving hypotonia as well as stimulating the de- strands and final construct can be formed. velopment of motor skills. We observed the child for a period of one Here we describe a simple method for the cloning of PCR products year, periodic monitoring of muscle tone and performance along with without the need for restriction enzyme and any post enzymatic treat- the neurological status showing significant motor and mental improve- ment. PCR products containing phosphorothiate bonds are used to ment. Conclusions: Rehabilitation treatment is effective and must be create complementary single stranded overhangs on both insert and an early intervention. vector by a post-PCR iodine treatment. These single stranded over- hangs are designed to allow directional cloning without using any en- zyme (Enzyme-Free cloning). After hybridization and transformationTherapy for genetic disorders  P14.08 P14.10 musculoskeletal and central nervous system (cNs) response to the Rat Aldolase B intronic Enhancer augments the Production early administration of enzyme replacement therapy (ERt) for of Human coagulation Factor iX minigenes in cultured infantile Pompe disease Hepatocyte cell Line M. Rohrbach1, A. Klein2, C. Balmer3, M. Baumgartner1; M. Sam1, A. Hadad Mashadrizeh2, M. Shokrgozar3, F. Ataei1, A. Amanzadeh3, A. 1Department of Metabolics, University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, Zomorodipour1; 2Department of Neurology, University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 1National Institue of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 3Department of Cardiology, University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. Republic of Iran, 2Institute of Biotechnology, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Pompe disease is a rare lysosomal glycogen storage disorder, charac- Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of National Cell Bank of Iran, terized by deficiency of acid α-glucosidase enzyme (GAA) caused by Pasture Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. mutations in the GAA gene, leading to accumulation of glycogen filled Hepatocyte is main source for production of functional hFIX and suit- lysosomes and autophagic vesicles mainly in the musculoskeletal sys- able host for gene or cell-therapy of hemophilias. For a hepatocyte tem. Infantile type Pompe disease is a multiorgan disorder presenting mediated gene expression, hepatocyte-specific elements such as al- with cardiomyopathy, hypotonia, respiratory insufficiency, and early pha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) promoter and aldolase B enhancer sequence death by 1 year of age. (ABE) are attractive candidates. To achieve an efficient hepatocyte We report a 2 8/12 year old girl with infantile Pompe’s disease, on ERT expression system for production of hFIX, a set of plasmids with vari- started at age of 8 weeks. She presented with severe hypertrophic car- ous combinations of AAT promoter and ABE enhancer and human diomyopathy (left ventricular cardiac mass 132g/m2), facial, axial and beta globin (hBG) introns were used to study the expression of hFIX in proximal weakness; Pompe disease was confirmed by undetectable HepG2 cells systematically. Comparative analysis of the permanently serum GAA activity and a homocygous mutation (c.1157insA) in the transfected cells of different minigenes indicates the potentials of the GAA gene. Brain MRI was normal as was lung function testing. ERT examined elements for specific expression of biologically active hFIX with 20mg/kg Myozyme® biweekly resulted in significant reduction of by all the recombinant cells. However various expression levels were LVM of 50% within 12 months of treatment, and reduction of LVM on obtained, according to the particular constructs used. In the examined MRI to 54 g/m2 at 30 months of age. Brain MRI at 18 and 30 months conditions the CMV promoter was found stronger than a minimal AAT of age, respectively, revealed symmetrical signal alteration of the deep promoter for the expression of hFIX. Moreover, application of the ABE white matter upstream to both the AAT and CMV promoters augmented the hFIX and no delay in myelination milestones. Motor development and mus- expression. The enhancer-like effects of the hBG introns on the rhFIX cle power was almost normal at 30 months, however cognitive de- expression level in the cultured media of the transfected cells was also velopment was markedly delayed especially the speech development, demonstrated. This is a first report that both introns 1 and 2 of hBG in unexplained by mild sensoneuronal hearing impairment. hFIX-cDNA in combination with ABE synergistically contributed to hFIX While musculoskeletal and cardiac tissue responded well to ERT, CNS over-expression by HepG2 cells manifestations are persisting. More data is needed to evaluate wheth- The recombinant plasmids and their corresponding cell-lines gener- er longer survival by ERT unmasks the CNS phenotype and to better ated in this work will facilitate studies, dealing with the expression of understand the limitations of ERT itself. hFIX in hepatocytes and provided means to investigate the expression of proteins in hepatocytes in vitro and in vivo. P14.09 cell survival suppression and apoptosis induction by Dendrosome-encapsulated curcumin on the Human Gastric Adenocarcinoma AGs cell line P14.11 A. Padeganeh1, M. Sadeghizadeh1, M. N. Sarbolouki2, S. J. Mowla1; A new approach for screening of homologous recombination hot 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Tarbiat Modares Univer- spots into human genome with aim of safe gene therapy sity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics G. Kardar1,2, A. Zomorodipour1, M. Moin2, Z. Pourpak2; (IBB),University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Gastric Cancer, is a major cause of mortalities with a large number of Republic of Iran, 2Immunology, Asthma & Allergy Research Institute, Tehran newly diagnosed cases per annum worldwide. Current modalities for University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. gastric cancer include surgery and chemotherapy, but local recurrence Gene targeting as a main approach for the treatment of genetic dis- and sever side effects are still unresolved issues in this regard, indicat- eases is performed by means of viral and non-viral delivery systems. ing the necessity of development of safer and more effective therapeu- Both of these systems may lead to complexities, such as oncogen- tics. Curcumin, is a well known chemopreventive herbal compound. esis, toxicity and possibility of triggering immune responses as well Inhibition of cell proliferation and Apoptosis induction, are proposed as various genomic rearrangements in the host. Therefore, in order mechanisms of action for curcumin. to guarantee the result of a gene targeting experiment with high prob- In the present study, effects of curcumin treatment, along with Den- ability, it is important to identify those potential sites within the human drosome-encapsulated drug were assessed on the survival and prolif- genome, where the integration of a transgene is not harmful to host eration of the human Adenocarcinoma AGS cells. FACS analysis was and the transgene can be expressed efficiently. This approach is done performed to elucidate the effect of drug treatment on cell cycle and by means of a human genomic library, in which the plasmids carry vari- apoptosis status of cells followed by RT-PCR measurement of Oct4 ous overlapping segments of human genomic DNA (3-5 Kb) next to the expression profile, as a Cancer Stem Cell marker, assumed to pro- previously cloned transgene (reporter gene). In order to target various mote cell survival. locations of the genome, the linear forms of total recombinant plasmids Curcumin treatment resulted in a decrease in the G1 population and a derived from the amplified genomic library (at least 4 x 105 recombinant significant increase in the number of the apoptotic cells compared to clones) will be used to transfect a human cell line, where a homolo- untreated cells. gous recombination mediated integration of the plasmids into the ge- Further, encapsulation of curcumin into dendrosomes, a novel family nomic DNA is expected. Subsequently, the transfected cells, isolated of vehicles previously used by our group for transfection and therapy, in selective media, will be screened for the expression of the trans- significantly enhanced the number of apoptotic cells and the G1-popu- gene. Any of cells with successful transgene expression and normal lation decrease, and resulted in a marked reduction of Oct4 expres- growth will be candidate and subject for mapping of the corresponding sion. integration sites of the transgene. By this new method, we will perform Our results indicate that Dendrosome-encapsulated curcumin, might a genome-wide screening and detect several suitable integration sites be a promising chemotherapeutic for inhibition of tumor growth and simultaneously. This may lead to new horizons for safe gene therapy. cell proliferation and that Dendrosome encapsulation might enhance the efficacy of treatment while administrating lower amounts of drug.Therapy for genetic disorders  P14.12 P14.14 systemic gene therapy for cardiomyopathy and muscular Phage lambda-derived nanobioparticles; a new generation of dystrophy of the BiO14.6 hamster eukaryotic gene delivery vehicles I. Rotundo1, S. Faraso1, C. Vitiello1, E. De Leonibus1, G. Nigro2, G. Di Salvo2, M. Khalaj-Kondori1, M. Sadeghizadeh1, M. Behmanesh1, P. Gill2; D. Di Napoli3, S. Castaldo3, S. Aurino1, A. Auricchio1,4, V. Nigro1,5; 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Tarbiat Modares Universi- 1Telethon Istitute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2A.O. Monaldi, Se- ty, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Nanobiotechnology, Faculty conda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy, 3Centro di Biofarmacologia, of Basic Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Ospedale A. Cardarelli, Naples, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università degli Attempts to treatment of diseases caused by genetic deficiencies - Studi di Napoli “Federico II”, Naples, Italy, 55Dipartimento di Patologia Genera- gene therapy- have ever faced with various challenges. One of the le, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy. major challenges in this regard, is selection of a safe and proper car- The delta-sarcoglycan deficient Syrian hamster strain BIO14.6 is one rier. Viral vectors are efficient gene carriers to eukaryotic cells, but, in of the most studied models for inherited dilated cardiomyopathy and spite of their high gene delivery efficiency, suffer from frailties such as muscular dystrophy. This carries a spontaneous deletion of the delta- stimulation of the immune system, likelihood of transformation of the sarcoglycan gene promoter and first exon. Its lifespan is shortened to host cells. Bacteriophages have developed significant adaptation to 10-15 months because heart slowly dilates towards heart failure. We the immune system as they reside every where including the human injected the human delta-sarcoglycan cDNA by AAV2/8 by single intra- body. Moreover, it was reported that bacteriophages are safe to eu- peritoneal injection at two weeks of age. We obtained the body-wide karyotic cells and possess various capabilities e.g. potential of genetic restoration of delta-sarcoglycan expression associated with functional manipulation and targeting which are the most important features of a reconstitution of the sarcoglycan complex and with significant lower- potential proper delivery vehicle. In the present study, to evaluate the ing of centralized nuclei and fibrosis in skeletal muscle. Motor ability potency of phages as eukaryotic gene delivery vehicles, the sequence and cardiac functions were rescued. Using serotype 2/8 in combina- encoding the GFP was inserted into the Lambda ZAP-CMV vector, tion with serotype 2/1, lifespan was extended up to 22 months with under the CMV promoter followed by in vitro packaging. The resultant sustained heart function improvement. phage particles were further manipulated with rat apo-transferrin as It is know that corticosteroids have beneficial therapeutic roles in the a targeting moiety to formulate directed phage lambda derived nano- treatment of Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies and sarco- bioparticles. Further, the transfection efficacy of directed and non-di- glycanopathies. These drugs allow the maintenance of walking, slow- rected phage nanobioparticles into the rat intestinal epithelial cell line ing down the progression of the disease. IEC-18, was compared using fluorescent microscopy followed by flow- At present, all patients with a defined diagnosis of muscular dystrophy cytometery. Our results highlight the potency of the phage lambda de- are corticosteroid-treated. Our aim is to evaluate the combined effects rived nanobioparticles as a new gene delivery route into eukaryotic of gene and glucocorticoid treatments using BIO14.6 hamsters. We cells in gene therapy trails. treated at the age of 45 days BIO14.6 hamsters using cycles of 0.3 mg/kg deflazacort for 3 weeks followed by 3 weeks of interval without P14.15 drug. The effects of the interaction were evaluated by serial echocar- Generating genetically engineered bone marrow stromal stem diography, behavioral tests and histology. cells with reduced rate of cell death after induction of neural differentiation P14.13 S. J. Mowla1, Z. Hajebrahimi1, M. Tavallaei2, M. Movahedin1, M. R. Soroush3; the experience of enzyme replacement therapy for 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Biolo- mucopolysaccharidosis Vi in Belarus gy Research Center, Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic A. Gusina, A. Kulpanovich, V. Kuryshka, N. Gusina, E. Budzeiko, I. Naumchik; Republic of Iran, 3Janbazan Medical and Engineering Research Center, Tehran, National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Islamic Republic of Iran. Belarus. Bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) are adult stem cells that have the Introduction: Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (MPS VI) is a lysosomal stor- potential for transdifferentiation into cell types including neuronal cells. age disease caused by the deficiency of the arylsulfatase B (ASB). The Neural-like cells derived from BMSCs carry the potential for repair- disease is heterogeneous in clinical presentation and progression. Re- ing degenerative or traumatic CNS injuries. The functional recovery of cently, galsulfase (Naglazyme® [BioMarin]), recombinant human ASB the CNS promoted by these cells, however, depends on their survival became available as long-term enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). for prolonged periods following grafting into the lesion site. We have Goal of this study: to present and compare the safety and efficacy investigated the expression profile of the main regulators of neuronal of galsulfase in 2 patients presenting mild and severe phenotypes of survival /death during neural differentiation of BMSCs. Interestingly, MPS VI. the expression of p75NTR, common receptor of Neurotrophins, is ab- Methods: two female MPS VI patients 29 and 32 years old were treat- sent in un-differentiated cells but is initiated by 6 hours after induction ed with 1.0 mg/kg galsulfase for 12 weeks. Urinary excretion of glycos- of differentiation and remained at this level by 12 hours. The expres- aminoglycans (GAG), endurance, liver and spleen volumes, cardiac sion is completely shot downed thereafter. During this period of time and pulmonary function were investigated. (6-12 hrs after differentiation) a substantial proportion of cells undergo Results: Improved endurance mentioned in 4 weeks of ERT. After 12 cell death via apoptosis. Inhibition of p75NTR receptor using a small weeks patients showed 91 and 18 m gain in 12-minute walk and 55 interfering RNA revealed a 3.5-fold reduction of apoptosis in neural and 18 stair profit in 3-minute stair climb. Best results were achieved by like cells derived from rat BMSCs. The finding provides a method to mildly affected patient. Urinary GAG level decreased by 60% and 90% increase the survival of the stem cells upon the induction of neural dif- in patient with mild and severe phenotype respectively in 4 weeks and ferentiation based on the inhibition of p75NTR receptor and provides was sustained thereafter in both. Liver and spleen volumes reduced the applicable manipulation methods in order to increase the efficiency by 20% in both patients. We found slight improvement in pulmonary of cell-based transplantation to cure neurodegenerative disorders. and cardiac function in patient with mild disease, but not in severely affected patient. There were no adverse events or allergic reactions P14.16 within the period of ERT. surgical aspects in Prader-Willi patients Conclusions: ERT was well tolerated in patient with mild and severe C. M. Popoiu1, V. L. David2, M. Puiu1, D. Dan3, M. Lesovici2, E. Ursu2, A. clinical presentation of MPS VI. Biochemical response was similar in Popoiu1, E. S. Boia1; both patients, while patient with mild disease showed more rapid and 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, significant clinical response. 2Children’s Hospital “Louis Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania, 3Prader Willi Asso- ciation Romania, Zalau, Romania. Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is the most common genetic cause of life-threatening obesity caused by the lack of a functional paternal copy of 15q11-q13 chromosome. Main clinical features are: hypotonia and feeding difficulties in the neonatal period, hyperphagia and se- vere childhood obesity at an early age, short stature, varying degreesTherapy for genetic disorders  of mental deficiency, hypogonadism, scoliosis, osteoporosis and fre- revealed a novel mutation, P492R (1475 C>G), which confirmed the quent pathological fractures. diagnosis of Segawa syndrome. After the onset of L-Dopa/Carbidoba The aim of this study is to provide recommendation and clinical path- (2 mg/kg/day), no response with regard to relieve of symptoms ap- ways for the diagnostic and management of surgical problems of PWS peared after one month of therapy. Selegiline, an agent selectively in- patient. hibits MAO-B, added to the therapy regimen, which in turn, markedly We encountered a case of a 20 year’s old PWS female with typical improved the clinical picture. Here, we report the follow-up period of obesity, short stature and mental retardation. She had a history of con- three siblings with Segawa syndrome resulting from a novel mutation genital hip dislocation, severe muscular hypotonia in infancy and a left in TH gene. femur fracture and delayed healing in childhood. The patient had an in- active lifestyle with low level of physical activity. Clinical exam showed P14.19 unbalanced thoraco-lumbar scoliosis, lower limb length discrepancy, Deferasirox reduced iron-load in patient with Ferroportin disease severe walking and equilibrium maintenance difficulties. Polysomno- refractory to phlebotomy: a case report. gram revealed sleep disordered breathing, nocturne sinusal tachycar- T. Sura, S. Pingsuthiwong, J. Eu-ahsunthornwattana, A. Tunteeratum, K. dia of 88/ min, apnea-hypopnea index 54.8/ h, mean nocturnal arterial Srichan; saturation was 96% and total reduction of sleep efficiency to 28%. Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. Surgical issues are a major concern for PWS patients and regular We report a patient with a mutation in the SLC40A1 gene, which en- systematic examination is mandatory. In respect for the good clinical codes the protein Ferroportin 1 (FPN1) resulting in hemochromatosis practice procedures we propose an orthopedic treatment, dietary in- type 4 (HFE4), who has been treated with Deferasirox. He was 32 tervention, psychological and educational counseling. We opened a year-old when first seen, asymptomatic but with dusky complexion, regional data base for patients with PWS for better medical assistance and has strong family history suggestive of autosomal dominant he- efficient cost management. mochromatosis. DNA sequencing from the proband had shown a Cy- s326Tyr (TGC>TAC) mutation in exon 7 of the SLC40A1 gene, which P14.17 is also found in the other affected family members. Although a few fam- the prevalence of protrombin G20210A mutation by PcR-RFLP ily members including himself had previously been treated with regular in iranian patients with thromboembolic evidence phlebotomy, his serum ferritin remained unsatisfactorily high (3,624 L. Mohammadi Ziazi, Z. Mohammadtaheri, A. Rakhshan, M. Poorabdola, F. ng/mL), along with high transferrin saturation (137%; serum iron = 171 Mohammadi; μg/dL; TIBC = 125 μg/dL). He was commenced on a therapeutic trial National Research Institute of Tuberculosis, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of the oral chelating agent Deferasirox (ICL670). After a period of dos- Deep vein thrombosis is one of the leading causes of mortality with age titration, his serum ferritin declined steadily, as did his transferrin an annual incidence of 1 per 1000 .Interaction between multiple ge- saturation. At the most recent visit, one year after treatment initiation, netic and environmental risk factor is responsible for thromboembolic his serum ferritin decreased to 619 ng/mL, the transferrin saturation tendency. A single nucleotide exchange at position 20210 in the 3’ un- to 75% (serum iron = 218 μg/dL; TIBC = 292 μg/dL), and no adversed translated region of prothrombin gene which results in guanine to ad- reaction was noticed. Among the four defined types of primary hemo- enine transition. This mutation was found as the second most common chromatosis, HFE4 is the only type with autosomal dominant inheri- genetic risk factor for venous thrombosis. tance. It also differs from the other HFE’s in that most of the iron is The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of this muta- deposited in the tissue making phlebotomy ineffective and potentially tion in Iranian patients with a history of thromboembolism in national complicated by anemia. Iron chelating agents therefore seems to be a research institute of tuberculosis and lung disease (NRITLD) by PCR better option, particularly the orally administered agents as was dem- RFLP. All thromboemboli patients were from the Iranian population onstrated in this patient. (n=43). The result was compared with matched control group (n=50) that were kidney donor without any known thromebophilic defects . P14.20 Genomic DNA was used as a template for PCR amplification of exon Pharmacogenetic approach to the treatment of smA patients 14 and PCR product was digested by HindIII enzyme. with valproic acid and carnithin preparations The mean age of patient was 52.7±16.1 (range 19-84). They consist V. Vakharlovsky1, G. Zheleznyakova2, A. Kiselev1, M. Danilova2, A. Glotov1, V. of 25 (55.6%) male and 20 (44.4%) female. The mean age of control Komantsev3, A. Baranov1, V. Baranov1; group was 42 (range 29-60). They consist of 34 male and 16 female. 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian All the patients and controls had homozygote G/G genotype. We had Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Fed- no heterozygous G/A or homozygous mutation (A/A). eration, 3Institute of Human Brain RAS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. In our study none of control subjects and none of patients were carrier Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neuro- for prothrombin A gene mutation which is correlate to finding of two muscular disorder, with an incidence in European populations of 1 in studies in China and Thailand and support the previous report that this 10000 newborns. The telomeric survival motor neuron gene (SMN1) mutation is rare in Asia country. is the SMA disease gene, and the centromeric gene (SMN2) is the main modifier of the disease severity. Recent research suggests that P14.18 valproic acid (VPA), a commonly used epilepsy drug, may be able combined L-Dopa and selegiline therapy greatly improves to upregulate expression of SMN2 gene and to slow progression of the clinical picture in segawa syndrome: A follow-up study the disease. Since 2003 we were involved in combined clinical trial on three siblings with a novel c1475G mutation on thyrosine of VPA + carnithine treatment in SMA patients. Over 60 SMA patients Hydroxylase (tH) gene were collected and studied so far with at least half of them being en- E. Yosunkaya, E. Karaca, B. Okcesiz, S. Basaran Yilmaz, G. S. Guven, M. rolled in the trial. Liver functional activity is monitored and SMN2 gene Seven, A. Yuksel; copy number is determined by means of real-time PCR. Nerve activ- Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Department of Medical Genet- ity testing was performed by means of electroneuromyography. Also ics, Istanbul, Turkey. the patients were tested on presence of (c.681 G>A) polymorphism in Three siblings, of whom the elder are monozygotic twins, born to first CYP2C19 gene contributing to VPA metabolism and thus to efficacy cousin parents were referred for neurodevelopmental delay and dif- of treatment. Highly positive curative effects including general health fuse dystonia. Initial physical examination of the sibs, twins at age 4 6/12 improvements and progress in motion abilities were registered in SMA and the youngest boy 1 9/12 years, revealed body measurements below patients especially of the II type. The results of the study are relevant third centile. They had minor dysmorphic features, such as bifrontal to elaboration of efficient strategy in SMA patients’ treatment. narrowing, downslanting palpebral fissures, low-set ears, up-turned nostrils and retrognathia. Cognitive functions were severely retarded. Increased deep tendon reflexes, diffuse muscle atrophy and spasticity were evident. Absent of eye contact and head control, diffuse dysto- nia, hypokinesia, choreatetosis and tremor also noted in neurologi- cal examination. Molecular testing of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) geneLaboratory and quality management  P14.21 P14.23 Higher efficiency of TA-clamp modified single stranded Particularity of the therapy in a case with turner syndrome oligonucleotides in targeted nucleotide exchange is not associated with juvenile rheumatoid polyarthritis correlated to a lower intracellular degradation M. Cevei1, D. Stoicanescu2, D. Farcas1; M. Wuepping, D. Kaufmann; 1Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 2University of Medicine Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany. and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. Specific single stranded oligonucleotides can induce targeted nucleo- Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis is the most common type of childhood tide sequence correction in an eukaryotic genes in vitro and in vivo. arthritis. It is an autoimmune, chronic disease that most commonly Our model for investigating the reasons for the low correction rates causes inflammation and tissue damage in joints and tendons. The achieved with this method is the correction of a point mutation in the most common features are: joint inflammation, joint contracture, joint hypoxanthine-guanine-phosphoribosyl-transferase (hprt) gene in the damage and/or alteration or change in growth. Other symptoms in- cell line V79-151. Using single stranded phosphorothioate modified clude joint stiffness following rest or decreased activity level and oligonucleotides the correction rates of this hprt mutation were low but weakness in muscles and other soft tissues around involved joints. always reproducible. One reason for low exchange rates may be a Turner syndrome is a chromosomal disorder with characteristic physi- very fast intracellular degradation of the oligonucleotides. Therefore cal abnormalities, such as short stature, signs of ovarian failure and we compared the exchange rates of different 3´- and 5´-end modi- also skeletal dysplasia. We present the case of an 18 years old girl fied oligonucleotides with their degradation rates. TA-repeat (clamp) diagnosed with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis at the age of 3 years. Dur- modified oligonucleotides showed higher correction rates than those ing childhood she was also diagnosed with Turner syndrome. Besides with a GC-clamp and 5´-clamps induced higher correction rates than replacement therapy, she was initially treated with nonsteroidal anti- clamps at the 3´-end. Experiments on the stability of the most effective inflammatory drugs and prednisone and then with methotrexate and 5´-TA and 3´-TA-clamp modified oligonucleotide indicated a very rap- Enbrel. Treatment focused on preserving physical activity to maintain id cleavage and the occurrence of shortened oligonucleotides in the full joint movement and strength, preventing damage and controlling presence of cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts. The phosphorothioate pain. Medical rehabilitation treatment was associated to the biological modified oligonucleotides were more stable, but their correction rates therapy, the main objective being maintaining mobility and functional were lower. We suggest that there is no direct correlation between the parameters for an active life. As there is an association of these two biological stability of the full length oligonucleotides and the exchange conditions, the standard therapy could not be applied, she could not rates achieved. receive the efficient doses of drugs, and the rehabilitation program has been modulated according to the existing statural deficit and coexis- P14.22 tence of modified joints with limited range of motion. Rapamycin treatment of a girl with double phakomatosis: tuberous sclerosis and neurofibromatosis type 1 K. Mayer1, H. Seidel2,3, A. Wiemer-Kruel4, I. Rost1, M. Staehler5, M. Fisch- P15. Laboratory and quality management ereder6; 1Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany, P15.01 2Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University, Munich, Germany, 3Institute the POcEmON (Point-Of-care mONitoring and Diagnostics for of Human Genetics, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, 4Epi- Autoimmune Diseases) project: building a Lab-On-chip centered lepsy Centre Kork, Clinic for Children and Adolescents, Kehl-Kork, Germany, on Rheumatoid Arthritis and multiple sclerosis. 5Department of Urology, Ludwig Maximilians University, University Hospital S. Lupoli1,2, C. Cosentino2, V. Tieran2, F. Taddeo2, S. Atkinson3, A. Barton4, Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, 6Department of Nephrology, Medical Policlinic, A. Wilson3, D. Plant4, J. Maxwell3, I. Chumakov5, F. Kalatzis6, K. Schicho7,8, H. Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany. Gruessinger8, F. Macciardi2; Tuberous sclerosis (TSC) and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) repre- 1INSPE, HsR Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 2University of Milan, Milan, Italy, sent the two most common neurocutaneous disorders. Both are au- 3University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 4arc Epidemiology Unit, tosomal dominantly inherited with well-delineated genetic and clinical University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Pharnext S.A., Paris, findings. However, the simultaneous presentation in one patient is quite France, 6Unit of Medical Technology and Intelligent Information Systems, rare. We report a 13 year old girl with the clinical diagnosis of TSC in- University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 7Medical University of Vienna, Cra- cluding skin, brain and kidney lesions and additionally an increasing nio-Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery, Vienna, Austria, 8PCS Professional Clinical number of cafe-au-lait spots. Molecular analysis revealed a de novo Software GmbH, Klagenfurt, Austria. TSC2 mutation and a NF1 mutation inherited from the mother. POCEMON is a large-scale integrated project founded from the Eu- The gene products of TSC1 and TSC2, hamartin and tuberin, respec- ropean Commission (FP7-ICT-2007-216088). The aims of the project tively, form a complex and inhibit the mammalian target of rapamycin are to develop an integrated diagnostic platform mainly dedicated to (mTOR) in the correspondent signalling pathway. The drug rapamycin Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) and Multiple Sclerosis (MS) in a first stage has been shown to suppress mTOR signalling which is activated in by combining Lab-On-Chip technology, DNA microarray genotyping, renal angiomyolipoma due to TSC mutations. The patient has been microelectronics, mobile devices, intelligent algorithms and wireless treated with rapamycin for six months in order to reduce angiomyolipo- communications. ma volume prior to organ preserving renal surgery. The achieved sig- MS and RA are two progressive autoimmune diseases and are causes nificant reduction of tumour volume allowed partial nephrectomy and of disability in young adults. Considering the social relevance of MS complete AML resection. As an additional benefit, cognitive functions and RA, it is extremely important to improve the timing and confidence improved as a consequence of decreased epileptic activity. of the diagnosis. According to this vision the POCEMON project can be NF1 is caused by loss-of-function mutations of the NF1 gene encod- a real milestone for the improvement of life style of many patients. ing neurofibromin, a RasGAP. In NF1 deficient human tumours, Ras In a first (discovery) phase, we are performing a case/control whole and mTOR are activated through cross-talk of Ras/MAPK and PI3K/ genome association study, mostly centered to identify HLA (Human Akt/mTOR signalling pathways. To our knowledge this is the first pa- Leukocyte Antigens) and other potentially relevant susceptibility genes tient with TSC and NF1 treated with rapamycin. Although she currently for the two diseases. For the discovery phase of RA, we are using a presents only cafe-au-lait spots potential future rapamycin treatment homogeneous North-European population (with 800 cases and 800 focussing on NF1 lesions will show if the drug also exhibits a viable controls). The discovery is then followed by a confirmatory phase, therapy for NF1. where the “best” SNPs are evaluated in a second independent sample (2000 cases affected by RA or MS respectively and relative controls), from three separate cohorts. The genotyping phase for RA, using Illumina HumanCNV-370, is con- cluded. Plink 1.05 is used for QC of genotyping data, single marker association analysis and permutations. The analysis is ongoing. Initial findings pointed to several susceptibility genes across the genome in- volved in the disorder other than confirming a role of HLA.Laboratory and quality management  P15.02 Dossier(1) was developed to provide a formal process for the evaluation Whole genome and transcriptome amplification in large of new genetic tests and was first piloted in 2003. The Gene Dossier biobanks Working Group was set up in 2004 to provide a dedicated forum for the N. Klopp1, T. Illig1, C. Korfharge2, H. Wichmann1; evaluation of dossiers and is comprised of clinicians, patient represen- 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich-Neuherberg, Germany, 2QIAGEN tatives, scientists and members of the UKGTN Project Team. GmbH, Hilden, Germany. The gene dossier incorporates the key concept that ‘a genetic test’ is Biobanks are a key resource in unravelling the molecular basis of dis- a test that detects eases, identification of new targets for therapy and improvement of • A particular genetic variant (or set of variants) attribution in drug discovery and development. The scientific trend in • For a particular disease biobanking shows the need for stable techniques for amplification of • In a particular population biomaterials, which can be used for samples stored under very dif- • For a particular purpose ferent conditions. The focus of the project is the standardisation and From these principles it follows that the test is evaluated as a compo- validation of the innovative techniques of whole genome amplification nent of a patient care pathway rather than in isolation. (WGA) and whole transcriptome amplification (WTA) in the context of Genetics is a rapidly advancing field and the gene dossier process biobanks. A general standardized protocol for WGA and WTA proce- needs to be adaptable to the changing needs of patients and the net- dures that use Phi29-DNA-polymerase in biobanking will be devel- work laboratories. This has led to an evolution of both the dossier and oped.The major aims of our project are: the evaluation process which will be described. 1. To establish standardized WGA protocols for large biobanks (1) Kroese, M, et al. (2007) EJHG, 15, 917-921 2. To develop standardized WGA tools to recover genomic DNA, which is in plasma or P15.05 serum samples and from FFPE- tissue or blood spots Hardware and consumable innovations for a New Genetic 3. To optimize the WGA procedure by extensive quality control mea- Analysis system sures of WGA S. R. Berosik1, A. Chhibber1, C. J. Davidson1, R. N. Fish1, J. R. Goudberg1, S. products C. Hung1, B. F. Johnson1, E. S. Nordman1, R. A. Padilla1, A. A. Pradhan1, A. C. 4. To develop and establish WTA of large biobank samples Felton1, R. R. Santhanam1, L. K. Joe1, M. Yamazaki2; 5. To optimize WTA procedures by extensive quality control of WTA 1Life Technologies Corporation, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Hitiachi High products Technologies, Naka, Ibaraki, Japan. Furthermore, the concept of the project is to transfer the results of The genetic analysis platform by which all sequencing technology is WGA and WTA solution to national and international organisations in compared for accuracy and quality of data generation continues to be the field of biobanking. The development of the proposed, innovative the capillary electrophoresis (CE) platform. A genetic analysis system and specialized tools and customized solutions will help to expand and that builds upon the industry standard of CE has been developed that secure biobanks. incorporates hardware and ease-of-use improvements. This newly de- signed system will supports DNA sequencing and fragment sizing ap- P15.03 plications, and provides scientists with medium-throughput technology Finding the right song : - introducing clinical test criteria for for use in research validated environments. cystic Fibrosis (cFtR) and Fragile X (FmR1) molecular testing. The steps from system set-up to base-called or size-called data results P. W. Lunt1, &. Project Team2; have been facilitated with hardware functionality and ease-of-use en- 1(Bristol) Clinical adviser to UK Genetic Testing Network (UKGTN), Bexley hancements designed into this new CE system. We will discuss a host (ukgtn@bexley.nhs.uk), United Kingdom, 2UKGTN, Bexley (ukgtn@bexley.nhs. of advancements on this new CE system including: an improved poly- uk), United Kingdom. mer delivery pump design, ready-to-use consumables and containers, Due to the volume of requests, despite low individual cost, tests for 6-dye detection functionality, radio frequency identification- (RFID) Cystic Fibrosis (CFTR gene) and Fragile X (FMR1 gene) make up 2 consumable tracking integration, plate base flexibility, increased of the leading 5 conditions contributing to total UK cost of DNA testing throughput, improved power efficiency, peak height normalization, in- in clinical service. The UKGTN promotes the development and use tuitive user software, and integrated primary analysis software. Run of clinical testing criteria for single gene disorders to ensure clinical modules have been developed for analysis of small amplicon rese- appropriateness of newly available DNA tests offered to the National quencing to long-read sequencing, as well as fragment sizing modules Health Service. Following a strategic decision to develop testing criteria for numerous applications. for the commoner high volume conditions, two workshops of experts were organized in 2008 to formulate clinical testing criteria for CF (or P15.06 CFTR-related disorders) and FraX (and related disorders). For CF, 7 Performance of the KB™ Basecaller for a New sequencing different clinical scenarios (fetal echogenic bowel; symptomatic child; system adult with bronchiectasis; pancreatitis; absent vas; carrier testing; re- S. R. Berosik, A. Chhibber, C. J. Davidson, R. N. Fish, G. A. Fry, C. S. Gehm- productive donor) and for FraX, 5 scenarios (learning-disabled male an, S. C. Hung, B. F. Johnson, D. Rodriguez, S. J. Schneider, A. Y. Spoonde, A. child; female; adult; FXTAS; POF) were separately considered, and A. Pradhan, A. C. Felton, L. K. Joe; criteria developed. Most dovetail to relatively tight clinical definitions Life Technologies Corporation, Foster City, CA, United States. of the target population (eg. bronchiectasis must be CT scan proven A sequencing system that builds upon the industry standard of capil- with a not-normal sweat test and/or appropriate bacterial flora; fetal lary electrophoresis has been developed to help streamline the gen- echogenic bowel must be ‘as bright as bone’ as an isolated anomaly eration of high quality pure- and mixed-base sequencing content, while and with obvious other causes excluded; ovarian failure must be at also providing scientists with long-, medium-, or short-read sequencing <40yrs). However, it is clear that whereas the role of CF testing is to options. The thrust of this newly designed system provides scientists make a diagnosis, and criteria could rationalise requests, FraX testing with low-to-medium throughput DNA analysis requirements with a cap- is largely used as a first line exclusion test where rationalisation is illary electrophoresis platform generating high-quality data for use in less applicable. Implementation of the criteria will, however, present a both research and regulated laboratory environments. separate challenge. Development of a new capillary electrophoresis DNA analysis platform includes the development and validation of the basecalling capability P15.04 for these systems. Dye-labeled DNA fragment mobility correction as UK genetic testing network and the evolution of the gene well as the capability of generating high-quality, highly-accurate se- dossier process quencing content is essential for successful sequencing projects. S. A. Stenhouse, on behalf of the UKGTN gene dossier working group; Below we highlight a process used to evaluate the performance of this West of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Glasgow, United Kingdom. new system, including validation of the KB™ Basecaller basecalling The UK Genetic Testing Network was established in 2002 to ensure algorithm. The process starts with the creation of the mobility correc- reliable, high quality, equitable services for patients and their families tion file content and includes the data generation and validation of the who require genetic advice, diagnosis and management. The Gene pure- and mixed-basecalling abilities of the KB™ Basecaller for theLaboratory and quality management  system using more than 7,800,000* independently called bases with Seven large deletions were first detected by P081/082/P122C1 MLPA quality value (QV) 20 or better data (*data estimate excludes the calls (6 total and 1 partial). < QV20 which are also used). Mutations were identified in 136 among the 143 remaining patients with a global mutation detection rate of 96% [CI95%: 91-98]. P15.07 Our results confirm that the association of the MLPA and dHPLC tech- system Validation of a New Real time PcR and High Resolution niques provides an accurate and fast method for the identification of melting instrument: the Lightscanner32 (Ls32) NF1 mutations. C. Gundry, D. David, R. Weigel, R. Lems, M. Poulson, R. Lundstrom, B. Wade, D. Hawks, L. Caldwell, S. Moore, M. Ferguson, B. Dorcheus, D. Kane, R. Ab- P15.09 bott, D. Nielsen, J. T. McKinney; information on quality assurance in genetic testing in Europe: Idaho Technology, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States. Orphanet/ EuroGentest Rapid air-thermocycling was introduced by Idaho Technology in 1991, L. Desmet1, N. Nagels1, M. A. Morris2, M. Jovanovic3, I. Caron3, M. Hanauer3, resulting in the development of the LightCycler in 1996. Licensed to S. Aymé3, E. Dequeker1; Roche (1998), the LightCycler is now commonplace throughout the 1Centre for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium, 2Laboratoire de world with an install base >7000. High-resolution melting was intro- Diagnostic moléculaire, Service de Médecine Génétique, University Hospital, duced by Idaho Technology in 2003 with the HR-1 instrument and is Geneva, Switzerland, 3INSERM, SC11 / Orphanet, Paris, France. now a validated technology for mutation scanning and genotyping. Given that the outcome of genetic testing has a great impact on the The LightScanner32 (LS32), capable of both rapid real-time PCR and life of patients and their entourage, the quality of genetic testing is high-resolution melting, has been developed by Idaho Technology and of utmost importance. Since December 2008, the EuroGentest portal launched in February 2009. LS32 combines features of the LightCycler of the Quality Assurance database moved to the Orphanet website. and HR-1 instruments (see Table 1). System validation tested instru- Data about the quality management of laboratories offering medical ment and software functionality independently and as integrated com- genetic testing are now linked to their tests and contact details. To ponents. Instrument control and analysis modules were tested with ensure the highest possible reliability of the quality assurance data, independent 16-rotor experiments as part of the formal system vali- replies of laboratories are validated by comparison with EQA providers dation plan. Integrated system testing included: multiplex qPCR with and accreditation bodies by EuroGentest, prior to dissemination via color-compensation; qPCR dynamic range, precision, and accuracy; Orphanet database. Currently, the database includes data from 1,308 high-resolution melting; multi-users and database’s; customizable data laboratories. Quality data comprise laboratory accreditation status with reports. Over 100 experiments representing specific test cases were a link to the accreditation scope, participation in genetic external qual- performed for each design input and product specification. All design ity assessment and the presence of a quality manager. inputs and product specifications related to system performance and With the developing awareness of the central role of QAu, we believe experimental applications were successfully verified with the planned that the uptake of quality data in Orphanet will benefit laboratories by test cases. System validation resulted in final modifications to software encouraging and providing recognition of their investment in QAu and and the operator manual, with any potential software modifications by the possibility of a better informed choice for referral of tests, con- validated by re-running the appropriate test cases. LS32 system per- sumers (patients, doctors, laboratories, etc.) by a greater transparency formance was documented via Idaho Technology’s quality system and and a possibility of a better-informed choice, and quality organizations approved for launch in February 2009. (EQA providers, accreditation bodies etc.) by greater visibility and rec- ognition of their roles. Instrument Comparison Orphanet is continuously updated and participation in the database is HR- freely open to all European laboratories offering human medical genet- LightCycler(Roche) LS32(IdahoTech) 1(IdahoTech) ic testing (www.orpha.net). If you have any further questions concern- Amplification Yes No Yes ing quality data, please contact the EuroGentest team at QAuSurvey@ Analysis Mode qPCR, Melting Curves Hi-Res qPCR, Melting eurogentest.org. Melting Curves,Hi-Res Melting Acquisition Single/Step/ Single/Step/ Continuous P15.10 Mode Continuous Continuous Data Resolution 4.1 pts/Co 400 pts/Co 400 pts/Co the role of EuroGentest and cF Network in measuring the Sample improvement of quality assurance in genetic testing laboratories 32 1 32 Capacity S. Berwouts1, M. A. Morris2, E. Dequeker1; 1Centre of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Labo- P15.08 ratoire de Diagnostic Moléculaire, Service de Médecine Génétique, Hôpitaux the mLPA-dHPLc procedure to analyse the NF1 gene Universitaires de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland. S. Pinson; Laboratories across Europe are increasingly evolving towards imple- Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. mentation of quality assurance (QAu) and ISO 15189:2007 is being The identification of mutations in the NF1 gene causing type 1 neuro- widely implemented by genetic testing services. The EuroGentest fibromatosis (OMIM-162200) is still presenting a considerable amount workshops on QAu and the CF Network cystic fibrosis (CF) external of work mainly because of the large size of the gene and the restricted quality assessment (EQA) scheme provide useful instruments to ex- number of recurent mutations. The high frequency of NF1 which affect amine the evolution of quality in laboratories. 1 in 3500 individuals lead us to choose two complementary methods 35 institutions that participated in the workshops were surveyed about for NF1 gene analysis: their accreditation status and implementation of different “quality pa- - the multiplex ligation-dependant probe amplification (MLPA) for the rameters”. Accreditation changed from 37% of the laboratories in 2005 large deletion and duplication detection (P081 and P082 - P122C1) to 49% in 2007. The majority of the non-accredited laboratories initially - and the automated denaturing high performance liquid (dHPLC) participated in EQA schemes (72% in 2005, 83% in 2007), whereas screening method. technical aspects such as validation of methods (0% in 2005, 22% in The MLPA method was validated by the detection of 19 known large 2007) tend to be addressed later in the move towards accreditation. NF1 gene deletions. We also tested 39 different mutations that would Overall, implementation of all the parameters surveyed increased with interfere with the MLPA results. time. A follow-up survey will be performed in 2009. The dHPLC was optimised for a rapid screening of the 60 exons and 152 laboratories participated in the CF EQA scheme in each of 2005, the splice junctions of the NF1 gene. The dHPLC conditions were vali- 2006 and 2007. Improved error rates in genotyping (4% in 2005, 2% in dated by the detection of 260 known variants located in two thirds of 2007) and interpretation errors (14% in 2005, 7% in 2007) are encour- the NF1 exons. We also evaluated the sensitivity of dHPLC for somatic aging. Similar improvements are apparent for the inclusion in reports mosaicism mutation. of elements required by ISO 15189:2007, such as patient name (98% The sensitivity was evaluated in a MLPA/dHPLC analysis of a panel of in 2005 and 2007), sample number (86% in 2005, 89% in 2007) and 150 unrelated french NF1 patients with at least two consensus diag- gender (53% in 2005, 63% in 2007). 2008 scheme data will be anal- nostic criterias. ysed.Laboratory and quality management  These results reveal a tendency for quality improvement in laborato- X RMs by WHO. ries participating in continuous education and EQA, which should lead EuroGentest’s efforts have led to an increased awareness of the im- to improved services and patient care. portance of quality assurance in GT, and the projects are helping to improve the quality of GT across Europe. P15.11 Quality assurance and management in clinical cytogenetics P15.13 laboratories: the role of a technical assessor Genetic testing in Europe: major differences from one country B. B. Ganguly; to another MGM Centre for Genetic Research & Diagnosis, Navi Mumbai, India. M. Jovanovic1, I. Caron1, E. Dequeker2, L. Desmet2, M. Morris2, J. Cassiman2, Obtaining accreditation from reputed organization has become a con- S. Aymé1; cern of many clinical cytogenetics laboratories across the world for 1ORPHANET, PARIS, France, 2EuroGentest, LEUVEN, Belgium. assuring a standard operating system. For clinical laboratories ISO Genetic tests are now offered internationally, through both public and 15189 standard is generally followed for accreditation. The technical private sector genetic testing services. Physicians prescribing these assessors in the field recruited by the accreditation organization as- tests and biologists receiving the samples need to know which tests sess the quality system and documents of laboratory-operation with are available, where they are performed and whether the identified the help of the check-list which is specifically designed by the accredi- laboratories meet quality standards. To fulfil this need, www.orpha.net tation organization for the purpose. It has been experienced that the was launched ten years ago to set up a database of clinical laborato- experts engaged in routine or molecular diagnostic service with some ries in the field of rare diseases. The data collection covered 1 coun- exposure in the field of clinical cytogenetics are employed for assess- try in 1997, 15 in 2003, 26 in 2006 and 38 in 2009. This major effort ment. However, such assessors fail to detect the diagnostic errors and was enabled thanks to resources from the EC DG for public health. make specific comments on the inaccurate ongoing system and its In collaboration with the EuroGentest NoE, information on quality further improvement. It is true that conventional cytogenetics depends management has been added over the past three years. To obtain on skilled expertise and dedicated involvement for extraction of correct information on genetic testing in Orphanet, it is possible to search by information on the constitutional or acquired anomalies and making disease name or by gene (symbol or name in English) in addition to the diagnostic interpretation on the present status and its future implica- traditional search by name of laboratory or professional. The informa- tion. Involvement of inexperienced persons at technical and/or super- tion provided on laboratories includes data on quality management. visory level in lab operation and assessment as well will misinterpret Currently, 1308 laboratories offering tests for 2991 diseases are reg- the standard of service and accreditation. The technical assessor shall istered on the Orphanet database. The test offer differs greatly from be a qualified expert with enough experience in clinical cytogenetics. one large country to another: Germany (1940 diseases), France (1630 Failing which the accreditation might help the audited laboratory to diseases), Italy (1110 diseases), UK (845 diseases) and Spain (740 increase the work-load/business; however, the quality of diagnosis will diseases). Medium and small-sized countries have a test offer ranging be compromised in such accredited laboratories. It is true that the con- from 3 to 956 diseases. This situation explains the large cross-border stitutive errors cannot be corrected, but accurate result can prevent the flow of specimens and underlines the need to organise services at the recurrence of anomalies, while acquired anomalies can be treated in European level. many cases of hematological malignancies. P15.14 P15.12 Evaluation of four automated mutation detection programs for EuroGentest: A collaborative network aimed at improving the clinical re-sequencing. quality of genetic testing S. L. Bleoo, R. Tomaszewski, M. Hicks, K. Baptista Wyatt, S. Ordorica, C. L. R. J. Hastings1, D. E. Barton2, S. Berwouts3, C. Brady2, J. Camajova4, P. Cor- Walker, B. Elyas, M. J. Somerville; bisier5, A. Corveleyn6, L. Desmet3, R. Elles7, B. Fowler8, D. Gancberg5, R. T. University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. Howell1, T. Janssens3, O. Kamarainen7, M. J. Macek4, G. Matthijs3, M. A. Mor- Clinical re-sequencing of large genes by capillary electrophoresis re- ris9, C. R. Müller10, N. Nagels3, G. Peirelinck8, B. Quellhorst-Pawley1, A. Stam- quires software capable of accurate and rapid variant detection. We bergova4, E. Swinnen3, E. Dequeker3; identified four commercially available programs, Variant Reporter 1.0 1John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Our Lady’s Children’s and Seqcape 2.6 (Applied Biosystems), Mutation Surveyor 3.24 (Soft- Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 3University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Charles genetics) and SeqPilot 3.2.1.2 (JSI Medical Systems) and evaluated University, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Institute for Reference Materials and Mea- their ability to: detect and flag various variants, process large datas- surements, Geel, Belgium, 6University of Leuven,, Leuven, Belgium, 7St Mary’s ets, utilize HGVS nomenclature, identify regions of interest (ROI) and Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 8University Children’s Hospital, Basel, de-convolve two alleles. Parameters such as software ease of use, Switzerland, 9University Hospital Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 10University of network performance, audit trail capability and operational costs were Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. also considered. After preliminary testing, two programs (Seqscape EuroGentest, a European Commission funded Network of Excellence, and Seqpilot) met our minimum diagnostic requirements and were aims to improve and harmonize the quality of genetic testing (GT) subjected to a variant analysis of over 2,000,000 bp of bi-directional across Europe. EuroGentest includes a Quality Management (QM) sequence (ie. over 4,000,000 bp in total). Both programs had a bi-di- Unit whose main objective is to ensure that all genetic testing services rectional false-negative rate of 0%, but also have the potential to fail to are offered within a structure that will assist Governments, regulators alert the user to variants located in a single direction (ie. variants un- and professional bodies to fulfil their responsibility to the public. der primer sequences or miscalls due to incorrect assignment of base The Quality Management Unit has:- (1) organized 13 quality work- spacing). Additional features important to a diagnostic laboratory such shops for genetic laboratories, covering 5 topics, where participants as electropherogram peak statistics, a mutation database, audit trail learn about the requirements of a QM system and share experience capacity, a client-server application, and the ability to de-convolve het- of problem-solving; (2) set up a database listing tests, accreditation erozygous indel mutations into two alleles are provided by the SeqPi- status and EQA participation of laboratories, enabling users to find lot software. Therefore, we have concluded that of the four programs accredited laboratories and specific genetic tests (www.orpha.net); evaluated, the SeqPilot software provides the greatest overall utility for (3) increased the range of EQA schemes available for CEQA, EMQN clinical re-sequencing of large genes. & ERNDIM, organized meetings of EQA scheme organizers - con- sequently some harmonisation and merging of EQA schemes has occurred; (4) through workshops developed and produced disease- specific best practice guidelines; (5) produced draft guidelines for the validation of assays for clinical use and DNA extraction and MLPA pro- tocols have been validated and (6) provided guidance on the proper use of reference materials (RMs) with a priority list drawn up and RM producers have been assisted with sourcing patient materials, design of RM panels, validation of materials and the adoption of the FragileMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  P16. molecular and biochemical basis of disease France. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an autosomal recessive ciliopathy P16.01 defined by progressive retinal degeneration, obesity, cognitive impair- molecular diagnosis for Alström syndrome ment, polydactyly and kidney anomalies. BBS is genetically hetero- A. Palmeiro, R. Cerqueira, L. Lameiras, H. Gabriel, P. Rendeiro, M. Tavares; geneous with 14 genes identified to date, which account for ~75% of CGC Genetics (www.cgcgenetics.com), Porto, Portugal. affected families. BBS1 and BBS10 each account for ~20% of the mu- Introduction: Alström Syndrome (AS) is a monogenic recessive disor- tational load, BBS12 for about 8% whereas each of the other genes der featuring an array of clinical manifestations: systemic fibrosis and accounts for ≤5% of the cases (or even for BBS11, 13 and 14 each in multiple organ involvement, retinal degeneration, hearing loss, child- a single family). hood obesity, diabetes mellitus, dilated cardiomyopathy, and pulmo- The genetic heterogeneity is a burden for identifying mutations as the nary, hepatic, and renal failure. Currently, 300 individuals with AS have full sequencing of the BBS coding sequences implies >150 amplicons been identified in 44 different countries. AS is caused by mutations and is time-consuming with routine techniques of diagnostic labora- in the ALMS1 gene, which comprises >224 kb of genomic DNA, 23 tories. exons and encoding a predicted 461.2 kDa protein with unknown func- We analyzed a cohort of 174 families, using various strategies, includ- tion. CGC Genetics is the reference laboratory for Alström Syndrome ing SNP array for initial homozygosity mapping of candidate loci. The International. Here we report our experience and contribution for the latter can in some cases detect consanguinity unknown to the family. identification of new Alström patients. Mutations have been identified in 135 families (78%) whereas 39 fami- Method: In 2004-2008, we received 52 samples for ALMS1 gene anal- lies (22%) have no mutation detected and are explored for undetected ysis from 8 different countries, from patients with clinically established mutations (deletions, promoter) and new gene identification. We have diagnosis and also from patients clinically suspected for AS. Our ap- recorded 83 mutations in 11 BBS genes, of which 30 mutations are proach for the molecular genetic testing was the complete sequence novel, confirming the high level of private mutations in this very hetero- analysis of exons 10 and 16, plus a portion of exon 8. geneous condition and highlighting the difficult task of routine mutation Results: Causative mutations (missense) were identified in 13 patients identification in the perspective of genetic counseling for the families. in both alleles and also 6 new nonsense mutations. In 6 patients we We pinpoint the absence of BBS11 mutations, leaving this gene linked found a causative mutation only on one chromosome. to BBS through a single missense mutation reported in one family, Conclusion: Being a rare disorder and not commonly known, AS is while several other mutations are responsible for the very different most probably underdiagnosed, has delayed diagnosis or is even mis- phenotype of limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD2H). diagnosis. Genetic test allows an earlier diagnosis of the disease. Ef- forts are being made to increase the detection rate by detecting large P16.04 deletions. A homozygous mutation in BBs2 is responsible for Bardet-Biedl syndrome in the Hutterite population P16.02 J. S. Parboosingh1, K. M. Boycott2, T. Gillan3, D. Redl1, C. Beaulieu1, E. Analysis of the candidate gene PDE6B in families with Bardet- Puffenberger4, R. Perrier1, A. Wade5, M. Innes1; Biedl syndrome 1Department of Medical Genetics, Calgary, AB, Canada, 2Department of Genet- L. De Jorge1, I. Pereiro2, T. Piñeiro-Gallego2, M. Baiget3, D. Valverde2; ics, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, ON, Canada, 3Department of Pa- 1Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universi- thology and Laboratory Medicine, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4Clinic for Special dad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 3Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. Children, Strasburg, PA, United States, 5Department of Paediatrics, Calgary, Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, MIM 209900) is a rare multiorganic dis- AB, Canada. order which patients manifest a variable phenotype that includes reti- Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous rare nal dystrophy, polydactily, mental delay, obesity and also reproductive autosomal recessive ciliopathy characterized by retinopathy, obesity, tract and renal abnormalities. Until now 12 genes (BBS1-BBS12) have genitourinary malformations, polydactyly and cognitive impairment. been involved in 70% of the families, indicating that additional muta- At least 14 BBS genes have been identified to date. A Hutterite boy tions in known BBS genes and new BBS genes remain to be identified. was identified in infancy with polydactyly and renal cysts. Now age Previous studies* have pointed out, by different methods (homocigos- 15 years, he has typical features of BBS: learning disabilities, night ity mapping, comparative genomics and gene expression analysis), a blindness with a rod-cone dystrophy and obesity. The Hutterites are a total of 19 potential candidate BBS genes. One of them was PDE6B genetically isolated population of 40,000 individuals derived from 89 (Rod cGMP-specific 3’,5’-cyclic phosphodiesterase beta-subunit), this common founders. Thus, we assessed the known BBS loci for evi- gene (4p16.3) codifies for the primary effector enzyme in the photo- dence of identity-by-descent from a common ancestor. Genotypic in- transduction cascade in the rods, and it is implicated in congenital sta- formation from his three unaffected sibs was used to rule out regions of tionary night blindness and recessive retinosis pigmentaria. homozygosity in the patient present due to chance. Initially, microsatel- We analyzed the coding sequence of the PDE6B gene in 16 BBS fami- lite markers flanking the known BBS genes were used and segregation lies. In the probandus of the families, we found 7 sequence variants, analysis made them unlikely candidates. Genome-wide analysis using one in homozygous state (p.V320I, c.958A>G), and six in heterozy- a 10K SNP micorarray identified two regions of homozygosity present gous state, including a novel missense variant (p.G352V, c.1055T>G), in the patient but absent in his sibs. One of the regions included the a nonsense variant (p.T305T, c.915G>A) and several intron sequence BBS2 gene on 16q21, initially ruled out using microsatellite analysis. variants with no consequences in the splicing process (IVS9-117 C>T, Sequence analysis identified the splice variant c.472-2A>G; RNA anal- IVS18+63 G>A. IVS11+21C>T and IVS22+11A>G) ysis confirmed aberrant splicing. These findings demonstrate a pitfall The familial segregation and the nature of the variants showed that in using microsatellite markers in homozygosity mapping: homozygos- they are no disease causing mutations. So, we concluded that PDE6B ity at a locus can not be excluded in the presence of heterozygosity at is not, at least in the studied BBS families, a gene implicated in the a closely flanking microsatellite marker. The misleading marker in this Bardet-Biedl syndrome. case was approximately 207 kb from the BBS2 gene. Supported by grants from FIS PI060049 *Nishimura DY et al. 2005. Am J Hum Genet. 7(6):1021-33. P16.05 the natural history of primary arrhythmia syndromes P16.03 E. A. Nannenberg1, E. J. G. Sijbrands2, I. Christiaans1, I. M. van Langen1, A. A. Identification of 30 novel mutations in the Bardet-Biedl M. Wilde1; syndrome (BBs) genes: the burden of private mutations in 1Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC, Rot- extensively heterogeneous diseases terdam, The Netherlands. J. Muller1, C. Stoetzel2, V. Laurier2, J. Danse2, S. Hellé2, V. Green2, M. Cossé2, Introduction: Whereas for most hereditary arrhythmia syndromes the M. Vincent3, C. Thibault4, P. Bork1, J. Mandel4, H. Dollfus2; natural history is unknown, physicians face an increasing need for 1EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Laboratoire EA3949, Strasbourg, France, 3Lab- such data, when decisions on treatment options have to be taken for oratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Strasbourg, France, 4IGBMC, Strasbourg, the rapidly increasing number of asymptomatic gene carriers in various disorders with a definite but ill defined risk of sudden cardiac death.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  Methods: We used the Family Tree Mortality Ratio (FTMR) method to Regional Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Oxford, United Kingdom. study all cause mortality in times when the disease was not elucidated An Inherited Cardiac Clinic was established in the West of Scotland in and patients were untreated (i.e. the natural course). Four large pedi- 2007. Genotyping has been carried out in121 familes, 84 with hyper- grees dating back to the 19th century were obtained: a pedigree with trophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 33 with definite familial dilated cardio- carriers for LQTS1 (n=55 persons), LQTS2 (n=76), LQTS3 (n=179) myopathy (FDCM) and 4 with left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC). and CPVT (n=178). All persons in the pedigrees had a 100 % or 50% In HCM families we have detected sarcomeric protein mutations in probability of carriership. All cause mortality was compared to the gen- 59 (70%) , 58% of these are in MYBPC3, 27% in MYH7 and 7% in eral Dutch population in similar time intervals (SMR). TNNT2, 3 families have two mutations in MYH7/MYBPC3. In sporadic Results: For LQTS1; there was significant excess mortality in males HCM the detection rate was only 40%, in those with a FH it was 84%, (SMR 1.9, CI 1.2-2.9), especially in the age categories 1-9 years (SMR and in those with FH of sudden cardiac death detection rate 93%. 3.4,CI 1.3-7.4). For LQTS2 patients there was significant excess mor- In 33 with FDCM, 30 families have had sarcomeric proteins analysis, tality between 5-14 years (SMR 4.8, CI 1.3-12.3). For LQTS3; severe seven in addition had lamin A and three families had Lamin A only. excess mortality occurred in the age categories 10-49 (SMR 3.8, CI Only 6 mutations were detected (18%), 2 MYH7, 1 TNNT2, 1TNNI3 2.4-5.7). For CPVT patients there was significant excess mortality in and 2 Lamin A mutations (+ one variant of unknown significance) . the age category 20-29 years (SMR 3.91, CI 1.27-9.12). In 4 families with LVNC we have detected 2 sarcomeric mutations (1 Conclusions: We demonstrate by using the FTMR method signifi- MYH7 and 1 MYBPC3) cant excess mortality in specific age categories that differ between Conclusion. Mutations were identified in 70% of families with HCM, diseases. This information might help to guide timely screening and with a high detection of 93% in those with a family history of sudden treatment of (asymptomatic) patients who are carrier of an inherited cardiac death but only 40% in sporadic cases. The turn around time for (cardiac) disorder. results from the index case is now down to around 3 months making cascade screening efficient and realistic in patients with HCM. This P16.06 is not the case yet in FDCM and a reassessment of the genes to be Obstructive Left-sided cardiac Lesion in A saudi Family screened is underway. H. Y. Al-Abdulwahed1, E. H. Bou-Holaigha2, N. A. Al-Sannaa2; 1Dhahran Health Center, Dhahrab, Saudi Arabia, 2Dhahran Health Center, P16.09 Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. Novel desmocollin-2 gene mutation associated with Congenital cardiac defects are relatively common and occur in about arrhythmogenic biventricular cardiomyopathy 1 in 200 births (Harper, 2004). They are known to be associated with L. Núñez, L. Monserrat, R. Barriales-Villa, M. I. Rodríguez, M. Ortiz, E. Ma- many well described genetic disorders. Here, we reviewed a highly neiro, X. Fernández, L. Cazón, E. Veira, A. Castro-Beiras, M. Hermida-Prieto; consanguineous Saudi family with left-sided obstructive cardiac lesion. Instituto Universitario de Ciencias de la Salud-CHUAC, A Coruña, Spain. It was characterized by a small transverse aortic isthmus and small Introduction: Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) aortic valve annulus that was affecting several members. The segre- is a frequent cause of sudden death. The disease is usually caused gation of this observed congenital anomalies was suggestive of an by mutations in desmosomal genes (desmoplakin,desmocollin-2,des- autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. Karyotype and FISH study moglein-2,plakophilin-2 and plakoglobin), which have been associated for chromosome 22q11.2 was normal. There was no documented as- with left ventricular involvement. sociated malformation. Material and methods: Clinical, familial and genetic (direct sequenc- Carrying out a genetic study to identify the disease causing mutation ing of five desmosomal genes) study of a Spanish group of no related is necessary in order to provide appropriate genetic counseling inter- patients with ARVC was done. ventions. Results: A novel splice site mutation in intron 11 of desmocollin-2 gene (IVS11+2T>C) was detected in a 44 year old ex-professional pole- P16.07 vault-jumper who had suffered a cardiac arrest while jogging. This Progress in development of UK inherited cardiovascular change was absent in 100 caucasian healthy controls and a truncation conditions (ICC) services in the light of recent scientific of the protein in exon 11 was predicted. His baseline electrocardio- advances gram showed negative T-waves in right precordial leads. The echocar- H. Burton, C. Alberg, A. Stewart; diogram showed left ventricle dilation (56 mm) and systolic dysfunc- PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom. tion (ejection-fraction:45%), and mild global right ventricle dilation with There are many different forms of rare inherited disease that cause hypo- and akinetic areas in the outflow tract. A cardiac defibrillator was sudden cardiac death, arrhythmias and other cardiovascular condi- implanted and a single appropriate intervention was recorded five years tions. Together, individuals with these diseases represent a significant later. At family screening, the mutation was found in his asymptomatic component of both cardiac and genetics services. In the last ten years 70 year old father, who showed left ventricular dilation (60 mm) with rapid advances in our understanding of the pathological basis of in- systolic dysfunction (ejection-fraction:50%), and mild right ventricular herited cardiac disease, clinical features and associated risks has cre- dilation with doubtful areas of hypertrabeculation and hypokinesia. ated the potential for the effective clinical management of patients and Conclusions: Only 5 ARVC related mutations have been previously their families. In particular, highly specialised services combining both described desmocollin-2. Most of them have left ventricular involve- cardiology and genetics expertise are required. In 2008 -09 the PHG ment, as we found in our two carriers. Competitive sport practice could Foundation led a group of key experts and stakeholders including ge- have contributed to an earlier and more severe disease expression neticists, cardiologists, health service commissioners and managers with malignant ventricular arrhythmias. Desmocollin-2 gene mutations and representatives of relevant voluntary organisations, in a review could early affect left ventricle. of UK provision in inherited cardiovascular conditions. Findings will be presented including some estimates of current service need and P16.10 shortfall in the UK, a review of current services and agreed important sporadic arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy due features of a high quality specialist ICC service. The potential impact to a de novo mutation of new technologies will also be considered. E. Gandjbakhch1,2, V. Fressart3, G. Bertaux4, L. Faivre5, F. Simon3, R. Frank2, The presentation will include key recommendations for development G. Fontaine2, E. Villard1, C. Coirault6, B. Hainque3,6, P. Charron2,1; of ICC services in the UK that will be applicable in other European 1Inserm U956, Paris, France, 2Département de Cardiologie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpê- countries. trière, Paris, France, 3Service de Biochimie, Unité de Cardiogénétique et Myo- génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 4Département de Cardiolo- P16.08 gie, Centre hospitalier universitaire, Dijon, France, 5Département de Génétique, molecular testing of cardiomyopathy Families in the West of Centre hospitalier universitaire, Dijon, France, 6Inserm U582, Paris, France. scotland We report the case of a 41-year-old man with a diagnosis of sporadic I. N. Findlay1, V. A. Murday2, K. Thomson3; arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC). The diagno- 1Western Infirmary, Glasgow, United Kingdom, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 2Fer- sis fulfilled the International Task Force diagnostic criteria with exten- guson smith Centre for Clinical Genetics,, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Oxford sive T-wave inversion on the electrocardiogram (ECG), late potentialsMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 on the signal-averaged-ECG and typical abnormalities of the right ven- carriers (34.8±17.2 vs 28.5±16.3 years, p=0.004). The molecular tricle on cardiac imaging. We documented right ventricular arrhythmia genetic analysis identified mutations in one of the following disease with frequent spontaneous ventricular ectopies and fast ventricular genes: MYH7 (n=104, 27%), MYBPC3 (n=177, 45%), TNNT2 (n=25, tachycardia with left-bundle-branch block morphology induced by the 6%), TNNI3 (n=22, 6%), LAMP2 (n=3, 0.5%), PRKAG2 (n=3, 0.5%), electrophysiological study. The genetic screening of the four desmo- tCAP (n=8, 2%), MYOZ1 (n=2, 1%), mtDNA (n=15, 4%). Patients with somal genes known to be involved in ARVC (plakophilin-2, desmo- Anderson-Fabry disease were excluded. 31 patients (8%) were found plakin, desmoglein-2 and desmocollin-2) identified the heterozygous to carry a compound or double heterozigosity. After 90±70 months, missense mutation R49H in the desmoglein-2 gene. This mutation is 76 (27%) affected patients had dilatative (n=51) or restrictive (n=25) located in the highly conserved cleavage motif RXK/RR that is recog- evolution. Among the former 51 patients, 38 (74.5%) had one of the fol- nized by pro-protein convertases and is thus predicted to prevent ef- lowing events: CHF death while awaiting for HTx (n=10); HTx (n=13); ficient pro-desmoglein-2 maturation. The mutation was absent in both appropriate ICD intervention plus HTx (n=5); sudden cardiac death or parents, and we demonstrated that it was a de novo mutation. To our appropriate ICD intervention (n=10). One fourth of genotyped HCM knowledge, this is the first description of a de novo mutation in ARVC. patients developed dilatative or restrictive evolution. The HCM that Appearance of a de novo mutation in the desmoglein-2 gene (that is an evolves through dilatation show more HF-related events than those essential component of desmosome that mediates cell-to-cell adhe- that evolve through restrictive hemodynamics (p=0.004). sion) provides compelling genetic evidence for the involvement of this gene in ARVC. The recognition of de novo mutations has important im- P16.13 plications, including for clinical practice, since individuals with sporadic Phenotypic characterization of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy ARVC caused by a de novo mutation can transmit the disease gene associated with K600fs mutation in cardiac myosin-binding to 50% of their offspring. This suggests that the benefit of molecular protein c gene genetics can be extended to sporadic ARVC, and may improve genetic M. I. Rodríguez-García, L. Monserrat, E. Maneiro, X. Fernández, L. Cazón, counselling. L. Núñez, R. Barriales-Villa, M. Ortiz, E. Veira, A. Castro-Beiras, M. Hermida- Prieto; P16.11 Instituto Universitario Ciencias de la Salud-CHUAC, A Coruña, Spain. implications of consanguinity in families with hypertrophic Introduction: MyBPC3 mutations are the most frequent causes of hy- cardiomyopathy pertrophic cardiomyopathy. A high percentage of these mutations are K. van Engelen, M. J. H. Baars, A. A. M. Wilde, R. H. Lekanne dit Deprez, I. M. frameshift. K600fs was previously reported in only one French patient van Langen; and is predicted to encode a truncated peptide, that may be unable to Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. be incorporated into sarcomere A-bands. Introduction: By presenting two cases, we illustrate the implications Methods: Clinical study and phenotypic characterization of probands of consanguinity in families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), and family members of eight Spanish families where K600fs was de- with respect to patient care and DNA-analysis techniques. tected. Case reports: Case 1: A man with HCM due to the c.2609G>A muta- Results: We found 21 carriers in 8 families from a region of Galicia. tion in MYH7 died suddenly at age 43. His wife was asymptomatic, but Penetrance >90% in >30 years and cosegregation was found in all because she was a second cousin of the proband, we performed DNA- families. Mean maximal wall thickness was 20mm. Morphology of analysis on her. She carried the same mutation. DNA-analysis in their hypertrophy and late enhancement localization at cardiac MRI was asymptomatic 5 year-old son showed homozygosity for this mutation. reproducible in several families. Carriers were in NYHA-II and left At cardiologic exam, he had severe signs of HCM and is now carefully ventricular outflow tract obstruction was present in 4 patients. Left followed at a paediatric cardiology department. atrium dilation and early atrial fibrillation (AF) were present in 9 and Case 2: The son of an asymptomatic consanguineous couple (first 6 carriers, respectively. Surgical miectomy was done in 1 carrier and cousins) had a myectomy because of obstructive HCM at age 10 and automatic defibrillators were implanted in 2 (primary prevention at 26 ICD-implantation at age 17 because of ventricular tachycardia. Using and 37 years). Two sudden deaths (18 and 42 years) and one cardiac DHPLC, no mutations were identified in MYH7, MYBPC3 and TPM1. transplant (35 years) were reported in young family members. Stroke Because this boy had the same family name as the man in case 1, related death was reported in two young carriers (41 and 55 years). we performed sequence analysis to see if the c.2609G>A mutation Conclusions: Correct familial and clinical evaluation in suitable number in MYH7 could be detected. The mutation was found to be present in of mutation carriers allow us to establish genotype-phenotype correla- homozygous state, which had been missed by DHPLC. tions, which are difficult when the number of cases reported is limited. Conclusion: These cases illustrate that in consanguineous families with K600fs mutation could have a common founder effect in Galicia. Mu- HCM, presence of a pathogenic mutation in both persons of a couple tation carriers develop left ventricular hypertrophy at young age and must be considered, with the subsequent possibility of homozygosity main complications are AF and strokes. in their children. (Presymptomatic) DNA-analysis is recommended for at risk consanguineous partners and young children who are at risk for P16.14 homozygosity. Mutation analysis techniques that allow the detection of investigation of polymorphisms in non-coding region of human homozygous mutations must be used. mitochondrial DNA in 31 iranian Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Hcm) Patients P16.12 E. Mohamadi Pargo, M. Houshmand; Geno-phenotype characterisation of hypertrophic Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cardiomyopathy patients that evolve through end-stage heart The D-loop region is a hot spot for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) altera- failure tions, containing two HyperVariable Segments, HVS-I and HVS-II. In N. Marziliano, M. Grasso, M. Pasotti, M. Tagliani, A. Pilotto, E. Serafini, P. order to identify polymorphic sites and potential genetic background Cassini, B. Digiorgio, A. Serio, E. Arbustini; accounting for Hypertrophic CardioMyopathy (HCM) disease, the com- Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, PAVIA, Italy. plete non-coding region of mtDNA from 31 unrelated HCM patients Heart transplantation (HTx) is the sole therapeutic option for selected and 45 normal controls were sequenced. The sequences were aligned patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and congestive upon the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS) and any heart failure (CHF). We aimed at determining the prevalence and the incompatibilities were recorded as numerical changes in homoPoly- outcomes of a consecutive series of genotyped patients diagnosed meric C Tract (PCT), single base substitutions (SBS), insertions and with HCM with a dilatative or restrictive evolution. The clinical series is deletions (Indels). Nucleotide substitutions were found to make up the constituted of 146 unrelated probands diagnosed with HCM and 244 majority of the mutations, rather than indels. We drew significantly genotyped relatives. HCM was diagnosed according to the WHO cri- high transition rate (81.8%) versus lower frequency of transversions teria. Probands and relatives underwent genetic testing after genetic (18.2%). 12 polymorphisms were identified in this study which had not counselling and written consent. Of 390 genotyped individuals, 280 been published in the MitoMap database. PCT changes at position were affected and 110 healthy carriers. The mean age of affected 303-309 were detected in 83% of our samples. Our results suggest members was significantly higher compared to those of the healthy that an increased level of HVS-I and HVS-II substitutions may be anMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  indicator of mitochondrial DNA instability. Furthermore, mtDNA mu- P16.17 tations may play an important role in pathogenesis of cardiac arrest immunohistochemical analysis of tGF-beta receptor 1 and which has remained unexplained for long. mutation screening of tGFBR1 gene in patients with different types of cardiomyopathy P16.15 R. Valiev1, A. Pushkareva2, R. Khusainova1, G. Enikeeva2, G. Arutunov3, E. Possible role of accumulation mtDNA mutations in LQts Khusnutdinova1; Patients 1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State M. Khatami1, M. Houshmand2, M. Sadeghizadeh3, M. M. Heidari1, M. Eftekhar- Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Russian State Medical University, zadeh4, K. Banihashemi5, B. Scheiber-Mojdehkar6; Moscow, Russian Federation. 1Department of Biology, Science School, Yazd University, Yazd, Islamic Re- Transforming growth factor beta receptor I (TGFBR1) belongs to the public of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Institute for Genetic transmembrane-spanning protein serine/threonine (Ser/Thr) kinases. Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, TGFBR1 activates numerous signaling pathways by autophosphoryla- 3‎‎Department of Genetics, Science School, Tarbiat Modares University (TMU), tion and downstream signaling proteins on specific Ser/Thr residues. ‎Tehran, Iran.‎, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Heart Arrhythmia Center, Teh- TGFBR1 involved in several cellular processes, including growth in- ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic hibition, apoptosis, proliferation, and extracellular matrix production. of Iran, 6Department of Medical Chemistry, Medical University, Vienna, Austria. Mutations and abnormal expression of the TGFBR1 genes have been Syndrome of Long QT (LQTS) is among arrhythmia disorders of the associated with some cardiovascular diseases and several human heart that causes of sudden cardiac death in young individuals. As yet, cancers as well as TGF-beta 1 resistance. Our previous immunohis- most of investigations have focused on nuclear genome for finding of tochemical data showed hyperexpression level of TGFBR1 in myo- genetic defects in this disorder, but some of the cases with LQTS can- cardium in some individuals with hypertrophy of left ventricular (post- not be explained by mutations of identified genes. On the other hand, mortem study). We suppose that altered by mutations TGFB receptors it has been reported that the activity of ion channels in cardiomyocytes way involve in development of some types of cardiomyopathies. We is sensitive to ATP level. It prompted us to focus on the mitochondrial have screened half of TGFBR1 gene in groups of patients with dilated DNA and monitor the point mutations of genome which are probably cardiomyopathy (ejection fraction 20-45%; n = 83) and severe left ven- the cause of respiratory chain defects and reduced ATP generation. We tricular hypertrophy (wall thickness more than 1,5 mm; n=118). We searched about 55% of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) by temporal found one missense-mutation c.457G>A (V1531I) in third exon in one temperature gradient gel electrophoresis (TTGE) and DNA fragments patient with dilated cardiomyopathy. Mutation V1531I affects trans- showing abnormal banding patterns were sequenced for identification membrane domain of TGF-beta receptor I and therefore may alter the of exact mutations. In 39 patients (33 familial and 6 sporadic cases), localization of the receptor in cell membrane. Screening mutations of for the first time, we detected 35 mtDNA mutations which 8 were novel TGFBR1 gene continues. (23%) and 27 (77%) have been reported in other mitochondrial dis- eases. Our results showed that theses mutations in LQTS patients P16.18 were higher than normal controls (P<0.0001) and number of mutations survey of 6300 Finns for desmosomal gene mutations in LQT patients with syncope is higher than patients without syncope associated with risk of arrhythmogenic right ventricular (P<0.001). As the mitochondrion’s ATP synthesis is important in heart, cardiomyopathy it is possible that mutations and their accumulation in mtDNA could A. M. Lahtinen1,2, A. Marjamaa1,2, M. Kaartinen3, T. Heliö3, L. Toivonen3, H. constitute a predisposing factor that in combination with environmental Swan3, V. Salomaa4, E. Lehtonen5, V. Lehto5, K. Kontula1,2; risk factors may trigger the arrhythmia disorders and may be the link 1Research Program for Molecular Medicine, Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, between this syndrome and dysfunctions of mitochondria. Finland, 2Department of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Cardiology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4National P16.16 Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Pathology, A possible new Dutch founder in three families with University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, a more malignant phenotype of Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a severe the mYL2 mutation E22K arrhythmic disorder, mainly caused by dominant mutations of the des- Y. Arens1, M. Schouten1, W. Hermans-van Ast1, D. Huveners1, D. Dooijes2, J. mosomal cell adhesion proteins, including plakophilin-2 (PKP2), des- Sels3, D. Donker1, Y. Pinto4, P. Helderman1, A. van den Wijngaard1; moplakin (DSP), desmoglein-2 (DSG2) and desmocollin-2 (DSC2). 1Maastricht Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus Univer- Upon search of 29 Finnish ARVC probands, we have previously iden- sity Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Catharina Ziekenhuis, tified two apparently disease-causing mutations (Q59L and N613K) Eindhoven, The Netherlands, 4Amsterdam Medical Center, Amsterdam, The and one possibly disease-modifying variant (Q62K) of PKP2. As an Netherlands. extension of these studies, we screened our ARVC probands for Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a genetic cardiac dis- three other desmosomal genes and conducted a search for ARVC- order, which affects 1 in 500 subjects. HCM is characterized by left associated mutations in a large Finnish population sample (Health ventricular hypertrophy, arrhythmias and sudden death. Mutations in 2000 Study, n = 6300). A novel frameshift mutation (E1020fsX1037) the Myosin Light Chain 2 gene (MYL2) are rare ( 4%) and disease phe- of DSG2 appeared in one ARVC proband, and another patient carried notype is described as mild. We present three large Dutch families with a DSP variant T1373A, whereas DSC2 was not mutated in any of the MYL2 mutation E22K to demonstrate that the phenotype does also 29 patients. Ultrastructural changes compatible with ARVC were seen include severe hypertrophy and sudden death at a young age. DNA- in endomyocardial biopsies of two patients: one with mutation DSG2 analysis in 11 siblings of family 1, 11 siblings of family 2, and 2 of family E1020fsX1037 and another with both PKP2 N613K and Q62K. In the 3 showed an E22K mutation (c.64G>A) in MYL2. Other sarcomeric population sample, a total of 31 subjects (0.5%) carried a desmosomal genes were analysed and no mutations were found. There were 2 sud- gene mutation, PKP2 Q59L being the most prevalent form (n = 19). den deaths in family 1. In family 2 the index person had severe HCM Mutation carriers showed only limited phenotypic characteristics as and ICD. In family 3 sudden death was reported. The families reported judged by ECG recordings. Preliminary analyses suggest that heart in literature with the MYL2 mutation E22K showed late onset moderate failure and ventricular arrhythmias are slightly more prevalent in PKP2 septal hypertrophy with benign disease course and good prognosis. Q59L carriers than in non-carriers. In conclusion, up to 1 in 200 Finns Our families the disease showed a far more malignant character. Be- carry a mutation with a proposed risk of ARVC. However, our findings cause of the rarity of MYL2 mutations, haplotype analysis of the MYL2 suggest that penetrance of a typical ARVC phenotype may require ad- region was performed to link the three families. The families shared a ditional (genetic or nongenetic) factors, in addition to the mutant des- similar haplotype implying they are related. E22K might therefore be a mosomal gene itself. founder mutation. We’ll perform genealogy to establish the relationship between the three families to calculate the family tree mortality ratio of this mutation. These findings are relevant in the counseling and treat- ment of other patients carrying this mutation.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P16.19 Netherlands, 2Department of clinical genetics, Academic Medical Center, Am- Genetic screening of long Qt syndrome (LQts) in sweden sterdam, The Netherlands, 3Department of clinical genetics, Academic Medical A. Norberg1, K. Cederqvist1, J. Jonasson1, B. Jonsson1, A. Rydberg2,3, S. Jen- Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. sen4,3, E. Stattin1,3; Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by dilatation and 1Clinical Genetics, Umeå, Sweden, 2Barn- och ungdomskliniken, Umeå, Swe- systolic contractile dysfunction of the left and/or right ventricle and den, 3Center for Cardiovascular Genetics, Umeå, Sweden, 4Hjärtcentrum, consequently by an impaired systolic function. The origin of DCM is Umeå, Sweden. heterogeneous but genetic transmission of the disease accounts for Background: Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a hereditary cardiac dis- 10-35% of cases. We present a large three-generation family in which ease characterized by prolongation of the QT interval on ECG and DCM inherits as an autosomal dominant trait. Six family members presence of syncope, seizures, and sudden death. The most com- have DCM, with the age of diagnosis ranging from five months to 52 mon genes implicated in LQTS are the cardiac ion channel subunits years. The youngest one was initially diagnosed with non-compaction KCNQ1, KCNH2, SCN5A, KCNE1 and KCNE2, accounting for about cardiomyopathy (NCCM) and died at the age of five. Three additional 70% of the identified mutations in patients with a clinical diagnosis. young children died of suspected heart problems. We mapped the The symptoms are very variable in LQTS patients, and genotype influ- phenotype of this family to chromosome 15 and subsequently identi- ences the clinical course. fied a missense mutation in alpha-tropomyosin (TPM1), leading to a Objective: This study aims to report the spectrum of LQTS mutations p.D84N amino acid substitution. Tropomyosins are sarcomeric, thin in Sweden, as well as genotype-phenotype correlations. Knowledge of filament proteins that play fundamental, structural and regulatory roles founder mutations or certain subdiagnostic criteria for different muta- in skeletal and cardiac muscle cells. The far majority of mutations in tions will facilitate the molecular genetic analysis, thereby reducing the TPM1 are associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and turn-around time and cost. few with DCM. Our mutation has not been described before and was Methods: Twohundred consecutive, unrelated patients referred for not detected in 400 control chromosomes. It co-segregates with all LQTS genetic testing will be evaluated. Coding sequences and splice clinically affected family members, and is predicted, using existing sites of the five genes, as well as alternate transcript exon 1B of KCNQ1 atomic and protein models, to weaken the binding of tropomyosin to and KCNH2, will be screened for genomic variants by denaturing high- actin. In conclusion, DCM causing mutations in TPM1 are associated performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC) and DNA sequencing. with a divers phenotype including also lethal, early onset forms. The Furthermore, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) screening of patients and families with these forms of DCM for TPM1 will be performed in all patients to detect large deletions or duplica- is therefore warranted. tions. Selected patients will also be screened for mutations in RYR2, a gene known to be involved in the clinically overlapping disease cat- P16.22 echolaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT1). investigation of human mitochondrial DNA in iranian Results: So far, a total number of 180 probands have been included Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Hcm) patients in the study. Preliminary results have identified two common founder H. Aryan, M. Houshmand; mutations, as well as other mutations in about 63% of the patients, Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. whereas double mutations seem to be rare. Mitochondrial (mt) DNA defects, both deletions and tRNA point muta- tions, have been associated with cardiomyopathies. The aim of the P16.20 study was to determine the mtDNA mutations in Hypertrophic cardiomy- scN5A mutations in Brugada syndrome spanish patients opathy (HCM) Iranian patients. E. Coto Garcia1, M. Garcia-Castro1, J. R. Reguero2, V. Alvarez1; Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is widely accepted as a pluricausal 1Genetica-Huca, Oviedo, Spain, 2Cardiología-Huca, Oviedo, Spain. or multifactorial disease. Because of the linkage between energy me- Brugada syndrome (BS) is characterized by cardiac ST-segment tabolism in the mitochondria and cardiac muscle contraction, it is rea- abnormalities and a high risk of ventricular arrhythmias and sud- sonable to assume that mitochondrial abnormalities may be responsible den death. Age at diagnosis ranges from 2 days to 85 years. BS is for some forms of HCM. We analysed the whole mitochondrial genome diagnosed based on clinical findings, and SCN5A (α-subunit of the in a series of 31 patients with HCM for alterations and compared the sodium channel), is the only gene currently known to be associated findings with those of 30 control subjects. A total of X sequence changes with Brugada syndrome. Sequencing of SCN5A identified mutations could be identified. These sequence changes were distributed among in approximately 25% of individuals with BS. Mutation carriers are fre- the whole mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). An increased number of novel quently asymptomatic, even at advanced ages. The identification of missense mutations could be detected nearly in all genes encoding for asymptomatic mutation carriers enables the use of preventive mea- protein subunits in HCM patients subjects. Four mutations were found sures to avoid ventricular arrhythmias. Most of the SCN5A mutations that are unpublished. The c.4384T>C in tRNA glutamin, c.9063A>G in are private, and the 26 coding exons should be analysed to define the AtPase6, c.2071 T>C, c.3170C>A, in noncoding MTRNA2 16S. Also mutational status of BS patients. 33 polymorphisms were identified in this study which had not been pub- We sequenced this gene in 25 BS patients from the region of As- lished in the MitoMap database. The c.16189T>C mutation in the D-loop turias (Northern Spain) (81% male; mean age at diagnosis, 41±14 region that is associated with susceptibility to DCM could be detected in years, range 17-66). The 26 coding exons were PCR-amplified and 3% of patients as well as in 0% of controls. Furthermore, mtDNA muta- sequenced using BigDye chemistry in an ABI3130 system. All the vari- tions may play an important role in pathogenesis of cardiac arrest which ants found in the patients were also screened in 200 healthy popula- has remained unexplained for long. tion controls, using SSCA and DHPLC. We found 17 SCNA5 variants, and 13 were also found in the controls, P16.23 thus being DNA polymorphisms. Four were putative mutations, found severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in adults and children: only in one patient and none of the controls: three missense changes similar gene mutations for a wide spectrum of clinical (Ala2Thr; Ala739Thr; Val134Ile) and a splicing mutation (IVS18 -1G>A, manifestations intron 18). C. Simon1, L. Pezzoli2, D. Marchetti2, A. Iacovoni1, D. Barachetti2, A. R. Linces- We found relatives of these patients who were mutation carriers, some so2, S. Pentiricci1, P. Ferrazzi1, M. Iascone2; of them symptomatic. We discussed these findings, in particular the 1Dipartimento Cardiovascolare, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy, 2Genetica genetic counseling of SCN5A mutation carriers. Molecolare – USSD Lab Genetica Medica, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy. HCM is a myocardial disease characterized by huge phenotypic and P16.21 genotypic heterogeneity. Affecting 1 in 500 individuals, it’s the most A novel alpha-tropomyosin mutation in a large family with common cause of sudden death in young athletes. HCM is caused dilated cardiomyopathy by mutations in at least 13 genes, most commonly MYH7 (β-myosin J. B. A. van de Meerakker1, I. Christiaans2, P. Barnett1, R. H. Lekanne heavy chain) and MYBPC3 (myosin-binding protein C). We analysed Deprez2, A. Ilgun1, M. M. A. M. Mannens3, A. F. M. Moorman1, A. A. M. Wilde1, these genes in 105 patients: 41 with HCM diagnosed before 18 years A. V. Postma1; of age (group A: mean age, 7 years) and 64 adults (group B: mean 1Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The age, 52 years). From 2001 to 2006 the analysis was performed byMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  SSCP or DHPLC and then by sequencing. Forty-two patients (40%, 8 analysis by classical methods very time-consuming and expensive. group A, 34 group B) underwent surgical miectomy, 32 (30%, 19 group Mutation detection for HCM has a growing impact on the medical man- A, 13 group B) had heart failure requiring transplantation, 8 (8%, 6 agement of patients/families. We have developed a 30 Kbp HCM-DNA- group A, 2 group B) died suddenly and 23 (22%, 8 group A, 15 group resequencing-array (CustomSeq Affymetrix ) for all exons (n=160), B) were outpatients. splice-sites and 5’-UTR of 12 HCM genes (Fokstuen et al. 2008). This We identified 21 mutations in group A (51%) and 24 in group B (38%). HCM-array, which we currently use in clinical practice is very efficient The detection rate for SSCP/DHPLC was 21/59 mutations (36%), while to detect single nucleotide substitutions accounting for up to 86% of all by sequencing was 24/46 (52%). Twenty-five mutations were not pre- HCM mutations. Actually it does not detect small indels. We analysed viously reported. Four variants occurred in group A (10 patients) and 115 patients from 5 different centres. Overall, we identified 30 different group B (4 patients). They were associated with different outcomes single nucleotide substitutions in the coding regions or splice sites of and age at onset. MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2, TNNI3, TPM1 and MYL3 in 42 patients (37 No significant differences in genetic causes were found between child- %). Twelve variants were reported as known mutations and 14 were hood- and adulthood-onset HCM or between patients with diverse out- novel changes not found in a control population study (>200 chromo- comes. Although most patients had a severe HCM that could explain somes). Furthermore, we identified 4 known SNPs/variants previously this lack of differences, a wide genome approach should be useful to reported as mutations for HCM. Our DNA resequencing array appears detect potential genetic modifiers. to date as the most rapid and cost-effective technology for mutation screening in HCM. Further improvement of the software may detect P16.24 small insertions/deletions in the future. The HCM-array provides a first Complex sarcomeric genetic status is not an important modifier attempt of high throughput sequencing methodology which will further of disease severity in MYBPC associated hypertrophic develop and probably become the method of choice for routine mo- cardiomyopathy lecular diagnosis of heterogeneous disorders such as HCM. M. van Tienhoven, Y. M. Hoedemaekers, M. Michels, F. J. ten Cate, D. F. Ma- joor–Krakauer, D. J. J. Halley, D. Dooijes; P16.26 Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Haploinsufficiency of MYBPC3 as the genetic cause of Background: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a genetically het- sarcomeric hypertrophic cardiomyopathy erogeneous disorder with a high degree of inter- and intrafamilial vari- L. Pezzoli1, D. Marchetti1, A. Iacovoni2, C. Simon2, D. Barachetti1, A. R. Linces- ability in clinical expression. Mutations in more than 11 genes, mostly so1, S. Pentiricci2, P. Ferrazzi2, M. Iascone1; encoding sarcomeric proteins, are known to cause HCM. Variability in 1Genetica Molecolare - USSD Lab. Genetica Medica, Ospedali Riuniti, Berga- clinical expression is thought to be caused by the action of currently mo, Italy, 2Dipartimento Cardiovascolare, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy. unknown modifying factors. Current consensus partially explains the Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM, OMIM#192600) is an inherited variability in clinical expression by the effect of additional, secondary, myocardial disease that shows a large genetic and allelic heterogene- mutations in sarcomeric genes. ity. Over 300 mutations spread among several genes encoding myo- To analyse whether a complex HCM genotype is an important modifier filament, calcium-handling and mitochondrial proteins have been iden- of disease severity in HCM we completely analysed 11 HCM genes in tified. The most common form is sarcomeric HCM, with hundreds of a large cohort, homogeneous with respect to primary HCM causing disease-associated mutations found in more than 8 genes. Mutations mutation. in MYH7 (β-myosin heavy chain) and MYBPC3 (myosin-binding pro- Methods: We analysed the complete coding regions of MYH7, MYB- tein C) are responsible of about 60% of all HCM cases. The observa- PC3, MYL2, MYL3, TNNT2, TNNI3, TNNC1, ACTC1, TMP1, TCAP tion that most variants found in sarcomeric genes are missense muta- and CSRP3 in a large cohort of patients with a truncating MYBPC3 tions led to the proposal of dominant negative action as the pathogenic mutation as primary HCM defect. The patients from the cohort were mechanism. Instead, MYBPC3 point mutations generate frequently clinically diagnosed as either having a ‘mild’ (no cardiac complaints, truncated protein suggesting haploinsufficiency as the cause of the IVS<20mm) or a ‘severe’ phenotype (myectomy, HTX, (aborted) sud- disease. We hypothesized that larger gene rearrangements not de- den cardiac death, necessary ICD implantation, cardiac related stroke, tectable by sequencing may be found in HCM patients. We analyzed IVS30mm). MYBPC3 gene by MLPA in 36 patients referred to our laboratory with Results: no additional mutational “burden” was seen in the group with clinical and histological diagnosis of HCM. All patients were negative severe HCM compared to the group with milder HCM. for MYBPC3 and MYH7 point mutations. We found in 1 patient a par- Conclusion: Contrary to general consensus, the severity of phenotypic tial deletion spanning from exon 28 to 34 of MYBPC3. This patient expression of HCM is not primarily dependent on the modifying effects was a 31 years old male with an obstructive HCM, requiring surgical of secondary sarcomeric mutations. Disease prognosis and severity in miectomy at the age of 25. Similar severe clinical manifestations were HCM is more likely to be modified by environmental factors as well as found in patients with MYBPC3 missense mutation leading to trun- genetic factors, other than additional mutations in the analysed sarco- cated proteins. The observation that the phenotype of this patient is meric and Z-disk genes. indistinguishable from those of patients with point mutations supports the hypothesis that haploinsufficiency is the mechanism at the basis of P16.25 MYBPC3-associated HCM. Diagnostic mutation analysis in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy by DNA resequencing array P16.27 S. Fokstuen1, A. Munoz2, P. Melacini3, A. Perrot4, X. Jeanrenaud5, G. Smaniot- Genetic diagnostic of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy using mass to6, C. Calore3, M. Farr7, U. Sigwart8, R. Lerch9, S. E. Antonarakis1,2, J. L. spectrometry arrays and high resolution melting Blouin1; V. Lanca1, H. Oliveira1, D. Brito2, H. Madeira2, M. P. Bicho1, A. R. Fernandes1; 1Genetic Medicine University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2De- 1Centro de Metabolismo e Endocrinologia, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Centro de Cardio- partment of Genetic Medicine and Development University of Geneva School of logia da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM), a relatively common genetic Sciences University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 4Cardiology at Campus Buch/Ex- myocardial disorder (about 1:500), is the most frequent cause of sud- perimental & Clinical Research Center Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, den death in young athletes. This autosomal dominant genetic dis- Berlin, Germany, 5Cardiology University Hospitals of Lausanne, Lausanne, ease, caused frequently by mutations in sarcomeric genes, is charac- Switzerland, 6Department of Biology University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 7Kardi- terized by a hypertrophied, non-dilated left ventricle. Genetic testing of ologische Klinik, Herz-und Diabeteszentrum NRW, Bad-Oeynhausen, Germany, HCM-patients, valuable for diagnosis, is hampered by the multiplicity 8University of Geneva School of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 9Cardiology of genes (20) and mutations (609) involved. Available genetic diagnos- University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. tic services consist in the analysis of only the most frequently mutated Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common inherited genes, failing to detect a mutation in 1/3 of the probands. Coupling two cardiac disease (1/500) characterized by a remarkable clinical and ge- high-throughput techniques, Mass Spectroscopy Genotyping (MSG) netic heterogeneity. More than 450 different pathogenic mutations in and High Resolution Melting (HRM), enabled us to study all the 20 at least 20 genes have been identified so far, which makes molecular HCM-associated genes, thus finding mutations in CSRP3 (missedMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  in common analysis) and in MYBPC3(novel). The patient group con- This mutation has not been reported yet. sisted of 16 individuals with a clinical diagnostic of HCM. DNA extrac- Three recent case reports suggested that both LQTS and Takotsubo tion was extracted from peripheral blood. All samples from the patient syndrome may be causally related but no mutation in the LQTS genes group were genotyped by MSG using a MassARRAY MALDI-TOF. The have been identified yet.In conclusion, we describe a patient with Ta- samples with no mutation found were scanned for novel mutations by kotsubo uncovering a congenital form of LQTS. We show that LQTS is HRM. All variants found were confirmed by automatic sequencing. The caused by an unusual KCNH2 mutation that has been characterized CSRP3 c.128delC mutation was found in heterozygoty in a 50-year at the biophysical and biochemical levels. A putative causal relation- old patient with diffused left ventricle hypertrophy. A novel mutation ship between LQTS and Takotsubo is discussed. However, the mecha- of the MYBPC3 was discovered in another HCM patient: c.C>T817/ nisms underlying the link between the two disorders, if any, remain to p.Arg273Cys. Although still uncharacterized as disease-causing, be investigated. affects a codon known to harbor a known HCM-causing mutation - p.Arg253His. This coupling of innovative techniques allowed the de- P16.30 tection both of a known mutation on a seldom analyzed gene and a Does δ-sarcoglycan-associated autosomal dominant probably HCM-causing novel mutation. cardiomyopathy exist? A. Sarkozy1, R. Bauer1, J. Hudson1, H. D. Müller2, C. Sommer2, G. Dekomien3, P16.28 J. Bourke4, D. Routledge1, K. Bushby1, J. Klepper5, V. Straub1; Familial noncompaction cardiomyopathy: genetic and 1Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, International Centre for cardiologic features in adults and children Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Department of Neuropathology, Y. M. Hoedemaekers1, K. Caliskan1, M. Michels1, I. Frohn - Mulder1, J. van der University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Ruhr- Smagt2, J. E. Phefferkorn1, F. J. ten Cate1, D. Dooijes1, D. F. Majoor - Krakau- University Bochum,, Bochum, Germany, 4Department of Cardiology, Freeman er1; Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 5Department of Pediatrics, 1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2University Medical Klinikum Aschaffenburg, Aschaffenburg, Germany. Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. The sarcoglycans are part of the dystrophin-glycoprotein-complex Background: Noncompaction cardiomyopathy (NCCM) features a (DGC), an oligomeric complex spanning the plasma membrane of thickened bilayered left ventricular wall with a thin, compact epicardial skeletal and cardiac muscle fibres. The sarcoglycan deficient limb layer and a thick endocardial layer with prominent intertrabecular re- girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are characterized by progres- cesses. NCCM is genetically heterogeneous. Similarly to hypertrophic sive weakness of the pelvic and shoulder girdle musculature and af- (HCM) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), NCCM has been associ- fected patients often develop a progressive and potentially fatal dilated ated with mutations in sarcomere genes. In order to contribute to a ge- cardiomyopathy (DCM). Dominant inheritance has not been reported netic classification for NCCM a systematic cardiologic family study was in sarcoglycan-deficient LGMD. However, a previous report described performed in a cohort of 56 consecutively diagnosed and molecularly autosomal dominant mutations in the δ-sarcoglycan (SGCD) gene in screened patients with isolated NCCM (47 adults and nine children). patients with familial and sporadic cases of DCM without significant Methods and Results: Cardiologic screening with electrocardiogra- skeletal muscle involvement. Here we clinically and genetically char- phy, echocardiography and physical examination of 169 relatives acterize a consanguineous family with a homozygous novel missense from 46 unrelated NCCM probands revealed familial cardiomyopathy mutation (p.A131P) in the SGCD gene and a second δ-sarcoglycan in 34 families (74%), including NCCM, HCM and DCM. Seventy-four mutation that has previously been reported to cause a fatal autoso- percent of the relatives newly diagnosed with cardiomyopathy were mal dominant DCM at young age. This second heterozygous mutation asymptomatic, explaining that 54% of familial disease remained unde- (p.S151A) was found in 4 heterozygous carriers for the A131P muta- tected by ascertainment of family history prior to cardiologic screening. tion, aged 3 to 64 years. Comprehensive clinical and cardiac investiga- The molecular screening included analysis of 17 genes yielding 29 tion in all of the compound heterozygous family members revealed no different mutations in 23 probands (41%); 18 adult and five children. signs of cardiomyopathy or LGMD. Even in the presence of a second Fifteen single mutations and one double mutation on the same allele disease causing mutation, the p.S151A mutation in the SGCD gene were transmitted in an autosomal dominant mode. Six adults and two does not result in cardiomyopathy. This finding questions the patholog- children were compound or double heterozygous for two different mu- ical relevance of this sequence variant for causing familial autosomal tations. In 19/34 (56%) of familial NCCM the genetic defect remained dominant DCM and thereby the role of the SGCD gene in general as a unknown. disease causing gene for autosomal dominant DCM. Conclusion: NCCM is predominantly a genetic disorder, requiring ge- netic counseling, DNA diagnostics and, also in absence of a genetic P16.31 cause, cardiologic family screening. Blood pressure changes associated with eNOs gene polymorphism at patients with stress cardiomyopathy P16.29 E. Kovaleva, E. Zemtsovskiy, V. Larionova; takotsubo and congenital LQts in a patient with a novel Pediatric Medical Academy, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation. mutation in the KCNH gene Objective: Possibility of pathological changes in myocardium caused F. Fellmann1, E. Pruvot2, L. Sintra Grilo3, M. Grobéty4, V. Castella5, J. S. Beck- by acute stress influence is well-known at this moment. At the same mann1,6, H. Abriel3; time chronic psychoemotional stress (PES) could be an independent 1Service of Medical Genetics, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Service of Car- reason of stress cardiomyopathy (SKMP) at the high-risk professional diology, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Pharmacology and group’s person, which may have genetic markers of «low stress resis- Toxicology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Clinique Cécil, tance», associated with vascular reactions caused by PES. We inves- Lausanne, Switzerland, 5University Center of Legal Medicine, Lausanne, Swit- tigate blood pressure (BP) level and endothelial NO-synthase gene zerland, 6Dept of Medical Genetics, UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland. (eNOS) polymorphism at the persons exposed to chronic professional Delayed cardiac repolarization may be caused by inherited mutations PES’ influence and also with noncoronarogenic heart’ damages. in cardiac ion channel gene subunits (congenital long QT syndrome, Design and methods. The subjects of research were railway’ en- LQTS) or secondary to cardiac pathologies, including the recently-de- gine-drivers: 58 men with SKMP diagnosed in case finding clinically scribed Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. significant arrhythmia and electrical conductivity disturbance at 24-h We report the case of a female patient admitted at the emergency ECG monitoring and also non-ischemic repolarization abnormalities ward of the Lausanne university hospital because of a sudden con- on ECG and/or ECG stress test. Exception criteria were coronary dis- vulsive syncopal event. The observation of a transient alteration of the ease, arterial hypertension (above 140/90 mmHg), Primary/second- ECG repolarization with a torsades de pointes episode 9 days after a ary cardiomyopathy other genesis, including inflammatory compared surgical stress suggested a Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. After transient with 78 men without a cardiovascular pathology. All patients underwent normalization of the ECG, congenital LQTS was diagnosed on the ba- clinical BP measurement and analysis for 4a/4b eNOS gene polymor- sis of a persistent QT prolongation. Genetic analyses identified a 7 phism by PCR. amino-acid duplication (nc.343-363dup) located in the PAS domain of Results. The systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) blood pressure lev- hERG1 N-terminus in the gene KCNH2 coding for the hERG1 channel. els at 4a (genotypes 4a/4b and 4a/4a) SKMP patients were signifi-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  cant increased in comparison with 4b homozygous SKMP patients showed is geterozygosity for C490T-mutation. (123,07+8,3 vs 128,9+7,2 mm Hg, P <0,01; 78,8+5,7vs 82,4+5,6 mm This is the first experience in PD for CMT in Russians families in Hg ,P <0,02). There wasn’t any significant difference SBP and DBP South-West Siberia region. As conclusions we can accentuate that PD levels in 4a and 4b/4b patient in control. requires family mutation should be known previous to PD, so, prenatal Conclusions. 4a allele eNOS gene associated with increased SBP and analysis requires the DNA study in family before the prenatal proce- DBP levels at engine-drivers with SKMP that support the existence dure. of genetic predisposition of vascular reactions caused by emotional stress. P16.34 A novel missense mutation in the GJB1 gene in an iranian P16.32 cmtX1 family scapuloperoneal syndrome with facial weakness in Russian A. Abbasi1, M. Sadeghizadeh1, M. Behmanesh1, M. Houshmand2,3; family with 4q35 linkage 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Tarbiat Modares Uni- S. A. Kurbatov1, V. P. Fedotov1, O. A. Schagina2, E. Kamenec2, A. V. versity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Diagnostic Molecular Genetics Lab, Polyakov2; Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National Institute for 1VOCDC genetic counseling, Voronezh, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Iran. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHMD), is a dominantly X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMTX) neuropathy is the second most inherited, late onset, heterogeneous neuromuscular progressive dis- frequent form of CMT disease which is a genetically heterogenous ease. There is considerable clinical variability, even within families. group of hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies characterized 39 members of a big family with segregation disease in 3 generation by slowly progressive weakness and atrophy, primarily in the distal from Central region of Russia were investigating. 14 patients have leg muscles. The dominant CMTX1 locus on chromosome Xq13.1 ac- been revealed by the clinical and EMG examination were revealing. counts for about 90% of the X-linked cases and is usually associated Genomic DNA was isolated, using standard procedures, from pe- with mutations in the gap junction protein β1 (GJB1) gene which en- ripheral leukocytes. Linkage analysis was performed with D4S1523, codes for connexin 32 (Cx32), an integral transmembrane protein that D4S2930 markers from 4q35 and D10S212, D10S1711 from 10q26 involves in the transport of small molecules within Schwann cells. regions. The FSHD 10q26 loci were excluded by the result of linkage Blood samples from 32 Iranian families and more than 150 members analysis. of their families with diagnosis of CMT disease, either axonal or demy- The clinical picture is submitted with an atrophy and weakness m.m. elinating, were obtained for genetic analysis of PMP22, MPZ and GJB1 orbicularis oris, rhomboideus major, supraspinatus, pectoralis major, genes. Total genomic DNA was extracted from all family members us- gluteus maxima, quadriceps, and foot dorsiflexors. M.m. orbicularis ing standard procedures. The 1.5 Mb CMT1A duplication and point oculi, biceps brachii, latissimus dorsi are not involved in pathological mutations both in PMP22 and MPZ (CMT1B) genes were first exclud- process. A debut of disease in the age of 26±3,7 with dissymmetric ed using restriction enzymes and sequencing respectively. The GJB1 defeat m.scapular or m.orbicularis oris with slow progressing process gene was then investigated with three markers (DXS7132, DXS981 and long preservation of impellent functions. The degree of atrophies and DXS6789) linked to the gene. Then PCR amplification and direct and the list of the struck muscles considerably varied at separate pa- sequencing of coding exon 2 and nerve-specific P2 promoter region tients. In the unwrapped stage of disease was observed infringement performed for X-linked patients. In this study we describe a case of of gait on type “steppage”. Feature of clinic at all patients were pres- CMTX1 in 2 members of an Iranian family caused by a novel point ervation tendinous reflexes and absence of sensitive infringements. mutation in the GJB1 gene (M194I). This transversion wasn’t detected Established moderately expressed myopathic pattern were observed in normal subjects which supports the hypothesis that it is responsible by the needle EMG examination. Motor nerve conduction velocity up- for the CMTX phenotype. per and lower limbs are normal. Serum CK level was normal at all patients. P16.35 The addition of received clinical-molecula-genetic data of the submit- Genetic epidemiology of charcot-marie-tooth in the general ted family allows relating facioscapuloperoneal syndrome to the FSH- Norwegian population. A mutation analysis of PmP22, MD 1B variant. connexin32, mPZ, simPLE mFN2 and EGR2 G. J. Braathen1,2, J. C. Sand2, A. Lobato2, H. Høyer3, M. B. Russell1,2; P16.33 1Faculty Division Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, Nor- Prenatal diagnosis of the charcot-marie-tooth disease type i in way, 2Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University south-West siberia region of Russia Hospital, 1478 Lørenskog, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of Laboratory Medicine, O. Odinokova; Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway. Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Background. The frequency of the different genotypes of Charcot-Ma- CMT1 is the major form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. More than rie-Tooth (CMT) is not well described in population based samples. 70% cases of CMT1 are associated with 1,5-Mb duplication in 17p11.2- Methods. The CMT patients were recruited from the Institute of Medi- region containing PMP22 gene - CMT1A form; CMTX caused by Cx32 cal Genetics, University of Oslo and Departments of Neurology, Neu- gene mutations is the second most common form. We present here rophysiology and Paediatric in eastern part of Akershus County, Nor- our first experience in prenatal diagnosis (PD) for CMT in families at way. The probands and their families had a clinical medical genetic risk pregnancies: three cases - with 17p11.2-duplication, and one case investigation and a neurological examination by geneticist and neu- - with Cx32 gene point mutation. rologist GJB. Families without the PMP22 duplication had a sequential The most effective strategies for CMT1A molecular diagnosis is based mutation analysis of the genes: Connexin32, MPZ, PMP22, SIMPLE, on PCR-analysis of microsatellite STRs. We estimated the diag- MFN2 and EGR2 nostic potential of five STR-markers within the 17p11.2: D17S2224, Results. We identified 259 persons with CMT in eastern Akershus D17S2226, D17S2227, D17S2228, D17S2230 in Russian Siberian County. They were from 150 families. The estimated prevalence of population, and observed heterozygosities were 0.730, 0.826, 0.763, CMT is 1 in 1,200 in eastern Norway. The PMP22 duplication was 0.626, and 0.908. This STR-panel was greatly informative in Russians found in 7.3% of the families and in 14.3% of those with CMT. Point and was applied for analysis of 17p11.2-duplication in prenatal DNA- mutation of Connexin32, MPZ, MFN2, EGR2, PMP22 and SIMPLE diagnosis allowing very fast and reliable results, and even gene dos- were found 3.3%, 3.3%, 0.7%, 0.7%, 0.7% and 0.0% of the families, age reliable interpretation is available with this STR-marker panel. In and in 3.4%, 2.3%, 0.8%, 0.4%, 0.4% and 0.0% of those with CMT, three CMT-families with 17p11.2-duplication we predicted two healthy respectively. and one affected fetus. In CMTX-family gene mutation in Cx32 previously was detected by SSCP-analysis and DNA-sequencing: point nucleotide mutation C490T (Arg142Trp). In case of C490T-mutation MspI-site is lost, and we used restriction analysis for prenatal study for woman which wasMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  P16.36 University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 5Unité de Génétique Clinique, CHU A novel connexin32 mutation cause X-linked charcot-marie- Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France, 6Département de Neurologie, Hôpital Civil, tooth disease in Belarus family Strasbourg, France, 7Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Östra, Göteborg, Swe- T. Asadchuk, K. Mosse, N. Rumyantseva; den, 8Department of Neurology Ege, University Medical School Hospital, Izmir, National Center of Research and Applied Medicine «Mother and Child», Minsk, Turkey, 9National Health Laboratory Service (NHLS) & University of the Wit- Belarus. watersrand, Joannesburg, South Africa, 10Unité de Génétique Clinique, CHU The CMT1X is X-linked type of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, an in- Brabois, Nancy, France, 11Department of Human Gentics, Head, Hadassah herited demyelinating neuropathy, associated with mutations in Cx32 University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 12Muscle Unit, Medical Genetics, Univer- gene (GJB1) coding for the gap junction protein, connexin 32. The sity Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 13Centre de Référence Maladies Neuromusculaires, majority of GJB1 mutations are missense mutations. APHP, Hôpital Marin d’Hendaye, Hendaye, France, 14University of Helsinki and We report a family with asymptomatic mother and her two affected The Folkhälsan Institute of Gentics, Helsinki, Finland, 15NIFESP-EPM, Sao sons from different marriage. Males have severe motor and sensory Paulo, Brazil. neuropathy with walking difficulties, steppage gait, prominent muscu- Centronuclear (myotubular) myopathies (CNM) are characterized by lar atrophy of muscles below the knee, distal weakness, sensory loss, muscle weakness and abnormal centralization of nuclei in muscle fi- and decreased tendon reflexes. The symptoms are revealed in their bres. The severe neonatal X-linked form is due to mutations in the hands as well. Both brothers have shown clinical signs by the age of MTM1 gene. Mutations in the amphiphysin2 (BIN1) gene have been 10-11 years. identified in autosomal recessive cases with childhood onset and mod- At the first stage CMT1A was excluded by QF-PCR analysis of duplica- erate severity. tion in 17p11.2 region. Then direct DNA sequencing analysis of Cx32 Mutations in the Middle domain and in the Pleckstrin Homology (PH) gene revealed a novel exon 2 (part 1) mutation identified in all three domain of dynamin2 (DNM2) have been found in patients with autoso- samples. Mutation c.149C>G in E1 extracellular domain resulted in a mal dominant inheritance. Adulthood onset and mild severity are the serine at codon 50 being replaced by cysteine (Ser50Cys). This substi- common features in the majority of mutations. However some muta- tution was not detected in healthy members of the family. tions are associated with neonatal onset. Whereas many mutations For only 10% mutations in the GJB1 gene, family history of CMT1X are localised in PH domain, this domain has also been found mutated disease is documented so far. New mutation is associated with severe in patients with dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. phenotype and it’s analysis is crucial for CMT1X diagnosis and genetic We sequenced the DNM2 gene in 70 families with CNM, including 13 counseling for probands and their relatives. families with dominant inheritance. We found mutations in 10 families with dominant inheritance and in 24 sporadic cases. These mutations P16.37 included 21 missense in the Middle domain, 11 missense and 1 splice A novel mutation in mFN2 gene in a patient with cmt type 2A site deletion in the PH domain. M. T. Akbari1,2, S. Zare Karizi2, H. Nemat- Farahzadi2, G. A. Shahidi3, M. Kari- These results confirm that a DNM2 defect is the main cause of adult- mipoor4; hood form of CNM, but is also a significant cause of neonatal onset 1Department of Medical Genetics, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic CNM, as we found 9 cases with this form mutated in exons 8 or 16 (de Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Repub- novo). Our study, concerning 34 new families, confirms the variability lic of Iran, 3Iran Medical Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, in onset and severity and supports a screening strategy based on hot 44- Biotechnology Research Center , Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic spot mutations and genotype phenotype correlation. Republic of Iran. We will present the functional connections between the 3 known pro- Charcot-Marie-tooth neuropathies (CMT) are a group of genetically teins mutated in CNM. heterogeneous disease of the peripheral nervous system. Ten dif- ferent genes have so far been identified causing various subtypes of P16.39 CMT type 2. Mutations in the mitofusin 2 (MFN2) gene have been Merosin-deficient congenital muscular dystrophy (MDC1A) in related to the axonal type of CMT2A. CMT2A is inherited in an autoso- Russian patients. mal dominant manner. The clinical phenotype is known to be severe T. B. Tiburkova, O. A. Schagina, E. L. Dadaly, G. E. Rudenskaya, A. V. and symptoms develop early. MFN2 gene encodes a mitochondrial Polyakov; GTPase protein. Here we report a MFN2 mutation in a CMT Iranian Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. patient with late onset and mild phenotype. These features differ from MDC1A (MIM 607855) is a severe autosomal recessive disorder what was expected. All exons of MFN2 gene were screened by direct caused by LAMA2 mutations. The gene encodes alpha-2 chain of sequencing and a de novo novel missense mutation was detected. laminin, or else merosin. LAMA2 mutations produce complete or, less This missense mutation, c.1574 A>G (N525S), is in exon 13 and the often, partial merosin deficiency. In European populations, MDC1A amino acid is located in the region between the transmembrane do- amounts to 30-50% of all congenital muscular dystrophies cases. DNA main and the first coiled coil region of the polypeptide chain. To date, diagnostics of MDC1A is complicated by the gene large size and ab- most of the mutations reported in MFN2 gene were missense muta- sence of major mutations. Though, by now, about 100 LAMA2 muta- tions and most of them were located in the GTPase domain and the tions were registered in MDC1A patients. Immunohistochemical de- region linking the GTPase domain and the first coiled coil region. tection of merosin in muscles is another diagnostic possibility. Four The effect of this mutation and the consequent amino acid change on unrelated Russian patients with MDC1A presentation were examined the stability of the mitofusion 2 protein was studied by using Mupro for LAMA2 mutations by direct sequencing of all coding exons includ- (www.mupro.proteomics.ics.uci.edu) online software, which predicted ing exon-introns boundaries. In two patients, four mutations were de- that this mutation decreases the structural stability by 94 % score. tected. The genotypes were c.3829C>T/ c.7536delC, and c.5422C>T/ However, we feel further work; either functional or modeling studies c.7701delTinsGTGTCCCTAGGTGTCCCTA, two of the mutations are are required to establish the actual effect of this mutation. novel. The phenotypes were typical for ‘classic’ MDC1A, i.e. congenital muscular weakness with hypotonia, areflexia, and early contractures, P16.38 high CPK level (700-1300 U/l), EMG signs of muscle lesion with con- mutation spectrum and genotype phenotype correlation for comitant hypomyelinating polyneuropathy, unspecific dystrophic pat- dynamin 2 gene in autosomal dominant centronuclear myopathy tern on muscle biopsy, and characteristic periventricular white mat- : from neonatal to adult forms. ter abnormality on MRI. On follow-up to 4-6 years, the patients never E. Schaefer1, C. R. Pierson2, A. Toussaint3, E. Taylor DeChene2, C. Poirson3, walked and were severely disabled physically but showed no clinical C. Kretz3, A. Nicot3, J. Boehm3, N. Dondaine1, L. Bomme-Ousager4, V. Drouin- signs of cerebral involvement. Two patients in whom mutations were Garraud5, A. Echaniz-Laguna6, C. Jern7, H. Karasoy8, A. Krause9, B. Leheup10, not found may have extensive deletions undetectable by routine meth- J. Melki11, L. Merlini12, A. Urtizberea13, C. Wallgren-Petterson14, E. Zanoteli15, J. ods. These families need immunohistochemical MDC1A confirmation Mandel1,3, A. Beggs2, J. Laporte3, V. Biancalana1; after which indirect DNA prenatal testing with STR-markers for 6q22- 1Laboratoire Diagnostic Génétique et EA3949. Faculté de Médecine - CHRU, q23 region could be performed. Strasbourg, France, 2Genetics Division, Children’s Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, ME, United States, 3IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 4OdenseMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  P16.40 enne-like) is a pointer of such mechanisms. The rescue of the pheno- Post mortem Duchenne muscular dystrophy DNA diagnostics type results from the partial elimination of the truncating mutation from from archival milk teeth dystrophin mRNA by skipping of an in-frame exon. A large fraction of C. Stein1, W. M. Schmidt2, D. Jovanovic2, H. Rehder3, R. E. Bittner2; these mutations are supposed to exert their effects by disrupting the 1Department of Forensic Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Aus- activity of Exonic Splicing Enhancers (ESEs), but repression of splicing tria, 2Neuromuscular Research Department, Center of Anatomy & Cell Biology, may also be due to the creation of an Exonic Splicing Silencer (ESS). Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 3Department of Medical Genet- Using cDNA-based mutation detection analysis, we have identified 9 ics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. novel mutations in exons 19, 29, 38, 39, 59 and 66 of the DMD gene The X-linked Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) remains an un- that lead to different extents of misspliced transcripts in Duchenne treatable lethal disease causing the premature death of affected pa- (DMD) and Becker (BMD) patients. To further elucidate the underlying tients in their early twenties. DMD is caused by mutations in the highly mechanisms, disruption of cis-regulatory splicing sequences was as- complex, 79 exons spanning DMD gene. Since the characterization of sessed by using the Human Splicing Finder software (http://www.umd. the complete DMD coding sequence in the late 1980ies, thousands of be/HSF/). Seven out of the 9 mutations were found to abrogate one different mutations scattered throughout the gene have been reported. or several ESE(s). An ESE-dependent splicing assay has been set up If a DMD-patient has died prior to this era, the molecular basis for his to confirm the in silico predictions. This study illustrates how disease- disease remained unresolved, which hampers the accurate and direct causing mutations can contribute to shed light on new modulatory ele- genetic counseling of his family members, such as the establishment ments important for splicing in the DMD gene, which may be important of carrier-diagnosis in female relatives. for the exon-skipping therapeutic strategy. Here, we report on the successful post mortem analysis of the DMD gene in two different cases. In both cases, we could get hold of pre- P16.43 served milk teeth of the deceased patients and successfully isolated Analysis of the dystrophin gene in Duchenne muscular genomic DNA thereof. Subsequently, we subjected these DNA-sam- dystrophy patients from Bashkortostan Republic of Russia ples isolated from milk teeth to multiplex ligation-dependent probe I. Khidiyatova1, I. Gilyazova1, I. Khidiyatova2, R. Magzhanov2, E. Khusnutdi- amplification (MLPA)-based screening for whole exon deletions or nova1; duplications within the DMD gene. In both cases we could detect the 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir pathogenic mutation, i.e. an out-of-frame deletion of exon 21 in one State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. case and an out-of-frame consecutive deletion of exons 46-48 in the Duchenne muscular dystrophy is caused by mutations in the dystro- other. phin gene (DMD) consisting of 79 exons. It is known that 25%-75% In both cases reported here, the DNA samples extracted from teeth of all DMD gene mutations in different populations are huge deletions (which had been kept for more than 20 years and more than 40 years, covering one and more exons and located in 2 hot points - 5’ (6-19 respectively) were suitable for MLPA and PCR procedures and were exons) and 3’ (40-53 exons) regions. More than 6% of mutations are the biologic source for establishing the causative mutation within the large duplications, the rest are point mutations. largest gene known, the DMD gene, even decades after the patient’s Using the multiplex PCR we studied mutations spectrum of twenty ex- death. ons (3, 4, 6, 8, 13, 17, 19, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 60) and promoter region of DMD gene in patients from 60 unrelated P16.41 families, living in Bashkortostan Republic (the territory of the Southern comparative clinical and molecular analysis of DmD gene Urals). Exon deletions of the gene were revealed in 31.75% of families deletions and duplications - 30% in 5’-region, 70% - in 3’-region. SSCP-analysis and consequent E. Neagu1, G. Girbea1, A. Constantinescu1, C. Constantinescu1, D. Iancu1, G. sequencing of DNA samples without large deletions revealed 2 new Talpes1, E. Manole2, E. Ionica3, N. Butoianu4, D. Plesca5, A. Todoran6, L. Bar- point mutations not described before and 1 polymorphism. In 3 patients barii1; from 2 families of Russian ethnic origin we found c.401_404delCCAA 1National Institute of Legal Medicine “Mina Minovici”, Bucharest, Romania, (p.Thr134ThrfsX7) in the 6th exon; it’s frequency is 3.17% among unre- 2Neuropathology Clinic - Colentina Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3Multiuser lated patients. Mutation c.6626delA (p.Lys2210ArgfsX11) (1.6%) was Research Unit – University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 4Neuropediat- revealed in 46th exon in 1 patient in Tatar ethnic origin. We revealed ric Clinic - “Al.Obregia” Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 5Pediatric Hospital “V. mutation c.7728T>C (Asn2575Asn) in the 53th exon, the functional sig- Gomoiu, Bucharest, Romania, 6Medical University Targu Mures, Bucharest, nificant of which is unknown. Thus, specific mutation spectrum of DMD Romania. gene was found in patients from Bashkortostan Republic that is very Deletions and duplications in dystrophin gene are known to cause important for analysis of structural and functional features of the gene approximately 65% of Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies and for optimal DNA-diagnostics approaches development. (DMD/BMD). To detect these major DMD gene mutations multiplex li- gation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) was applied on samples P16.44 from 107 unrelated patients with clinical diagnostic or clinical suspi- mRNA-based analysis of point mutations in DmD gene in a cion of DMD/BMD. In our study, by comparing the major clinical and selected cohort of spanish patients mutational features (location, extent, predicted effect on gene reading J. Juan Mateu1,2, M. Rodriguez1,2, M. Moragues3, L. Gozalez-Quereda1,2, M. J. frame) of the 11 duplications lot and the 55 deletions lot, we have tried Barcelo1,2, J. Colomer4, A. Nascimento4, E. Tizzano1,2, P. Gallano1,2; to asses the usefulness of the molecular analysis for the prediction of 1Genetics Dept Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, Spain, the clinical form severity and natural history of DMD/BMD in order to 3CIBERNED, Barcelona, Spain, 4Neurology Dept Hospital Sant Joan De Déu, improve their clinical management. Barcelona, Spain. The most common form of Duchenne and Becker muscular dystro- P16.42 phies causing mutations are large intragenic deletions and duplica- mutation-associated exon skipping pinpoint localization of tions that account for 60 to 70% of all cases. The remaining cases are exonic splicing regulatory elements in the DmD gene due to small mutations consisting in nonsense mutations, missense S. Le Guedard-Mereuze1, D. Thorel2, D. Méchin2, C. Saquet2, J. Miro3, P. Khau mutations, splicing mutations, frameshift small deletions or insertions van Kien2, M. Claustres2,1,3, S. Tuffery-Giraud1,3; and midintronic insertions. The detection of these small mutations in 1Inserm U827 - Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, France, routine diagnosis have long been a difficult issue due to the complexity 2CHU Montpellier - Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, France, and large size of the DMD gene. In order to identify these mutations we 3Université Montpellier 1 - Faculté de Médecine, Montpellier, France. have chosen a previously described method based on whole sequenc- Mutation-associated exon skipping has been recognized in an increas- ing of mRNA from muscle biopsy. ing number of genes as a novel form of splicing mutation. Not only To validate the method, we studied a selected cohort of nine unre- nonsense mutations, but also missense and even translationally silent lated patients with clinical and immunohistochemical data compatible mutations can lead to alternative splicing events. In the DMD gene, with distrophinopathy and without deletions or duplications in the DMD the identification of a mutation introducing a premature stop codon in gene. A total of new seven mutations were found, six consisting in dif- patients with a milder (Becker-like) phenotype than expected (Duch- ferent nonsense mutations and the remaining consisting in a acceptorMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  splice change that produces the skipping of exon 25. Latvia, 5University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia. This strategy allows 1) straightforward and rapid analysis of the whole Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant, life-threat- DMD gene, 2) the detection of virtually all mutations, 3) further under- ening pharmacogenetic disorder that is one of the causes of death standing of the molecular effect of such changes. during anesthesia with volatile anesthetic agents and succinylcholine and in the early postoperative period. The disease is genetically het- P16.45 erogeneous, with mutations in the ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) at mutation Analysis of Limb Girdle muscular Dystrophy in the 19q13.1 accounting for up to 80% of the cases. To treat developed MH czech Republic Dantrolene is used. K. Stehlikova1, M. Hermanova2, P. Vondracek3, L. Fajkusova1; A 57 y.o. male patient underwent thyreoidectomia in 2003 in State 1University Hospital, Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Brno, Hospital in Riga and developed following symptoms: EtCO max 80 2 Czech Republic, 2University Hospital, Department of Pathology, Brno, Czech mmHg, HR till 150 beats/min, T 40,8ºC, CPK 1616 U/l after anaesthe- Republic, 3University Hospital, Department of Paediatric Neurology, Brno, sia with sevoflurane, fentanyl and succinylholine. Dantrolene was not Czech Republic. available in Latvia and patient died in 5 hours after anaesthesia. Ac- Limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A) is an autosomal cording to EMHG guidelines in vitro contracture test (IVCT) and DNA recessive disorder characterized by atrophy and weakness of proximal analysis were performed for the MHs patient’s relatives. girdle muscles. LGMD2A is caused by mutations in the CAPN3 gene IVCT revealed positive results with halothane and caffeine for two (15q15) that encodes the muscle specific protein, calpain-3 (p94). LG- of MH-like patient’s family members. The functional investigation of MD2A is the most frequent form of LGMD in many European coun- RYR1 function in ex vivo tissues discovered the significant statistical tries. difference in rest Ca2+ concentrations in MHs and MHn myotubes was Until now, more than 300 pathogenic mutations have been found in the found. The half-maximal action’s concentration with 4CmC was signifi- CAPN3 gene. We performed analysis of the CAPN3 gene in LGMD2A cantly lower in comparison with control group (p= 0.002). patients at both the mRNA level using reverse transcription-PCR or at Novel mutation G528T in gene RYR1 was found for four family mem- the DNA level using PCR and direct sequencing. We screened 138 bers. Mutation G528T is a missense mutation that affects the ryano- unrelated patients with preliminary diagnoses of limb girdle muscular dine receptor type1 protein structure. dystrophy for mutations in the CAPN3 gene. 39 patients (28%) were We consider that this novel mutation the G528T should be included found to carry mutations in the CAPN3 gene. We detected 16 pre- in MH causative RYR1 Mutations list, though the EMHG guidelines viously reported mutations and 3 novel mutations (c. 802_945del, c. reclaim the necessity to find the same mutation in other unrelated fam- 1783_1788del, p.Q619X). ily. Our results show that mutation 550 delA is the most frequent CAPN3 defect in Czech LGMD2A patients (53 %). In total, 33 % of the patients P16.48 with mutation in the CAPN3 gene are homozygous for c.550delA, and Alteration of expression of muscle-specific isoforms of FXR1P in 64 % carry it at least on one allele. Other frequent mutation is 598_ facio scapulohumeral muscular distrophy patients 612del (11%), both mutations are localised in the 4. exon. B. Bardoni1, S. Sacconi2, L. Davidovic1; This work was supported by grant MSMT LC06023. 1Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Valbonne, France, 2Cen- tre de Référence pour les Maladies Neuromusculaires, CHU de Nice, Nice, P16.46 France. cAPN3 mutations in Russian patients with limb-girdle muscular The Fragile X Mental Retardation-Related 1 (FXR1) gene belongs to dystrophy, type 2A the Fragile X Related family, that also include the Fragile X Mental re- O. Ryzhkova, G. Rudenskaya, E. Dadaly, O. Schagina, A. Polyakov; tardation (FMR1) gene involved in Fragile X syndrome, the most com- Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. mon form of inherited mental retardation. While the absence of FMRP Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, type 2A (LGMD2A, MIM 253600) is impairs cognitive functions, inactivation of FXR1 has been reported to considered the most frequent autosomal recessive MD almost every- have drastic effects in mouse and xenopus myogenesis. Seven alterna- where in the world. The causative gene is CAPN3 located in chromo- tively spliced FXR1 mRNA variants have been identified, three of them somal region 15q15.1-q21.1 and encoding a muscle-specific protease, being muscle-specific. Interestingly, they encode FXR1P isoforms dis- calpain 3. Common mutations are collected mostly in eight of CAPN3 playing selective RNA-binding properties. Since FacioScapuloHumer- 24 exons, namely, exons 4, 5, 10, 11,12, 20, 21, and 22. Forty-two al muscular Dystrophy (FSHD) is an inherited myopathy characterized unrelated Russian patients with clinical presentation of LGMD were by altered splicing of mRNAs encoding muscle-specific proteins, we screened for common CAPN3 mutations by direct sequencing of have studied the splicing pattern of FXR1 mRNA in myoblasts and the eight exons. In 17 patients (40.5%), seven already known muta- myotubes of FSHD patients. We show here that FSHD myoblasts dis- tions were detected: c.550delA, c.598-612del, c.649G>A, c.706G>A, play an abnormal pattern of expression of FXR1P isoforms. Moreover, c.1250C>T, c.2243G>A, and c.2305C>T. In 10 patients, mutations only we provide evidence that this altered pattern of expression is due to in one allele were identified which points to a significant proportion of a specific reduced stability of muscle-specific FXR1 mRNA variants, infrequent CAPN3 mutations. Mutation c.550delA was found in 13 of leading to a reduced expression of FXR1P muscle-specific isoforms. 17 patients (76.5%) in homozygous (3 cases), compound heterozy- Our data suggest that the molecular basis of FSHD not only involves gous (3) or heterozygous (7) state, thereby in 44.4% (16/34) of af- splicing alterations, as previously proposed, but may also involve a fected alleles. Thus, in Russia, c.550delA is the most common CAPN3 deregulation of mRNA stability. In addition, since FXR1P is an RNA- mutation, as well as in Bulgaria, Croatia, Slovenia, and North Italy. binding protein likely to regulate the metabolism of muscle-specific Other six mutations were detected in single patients and not in homo- mRNAs during myogenesis, its altered expression in FSHD myoblasts zygous state. Of 17 patients, 16 were of Slavic (Russian, Ukrainian, may contribute to the physiopathology of this disease. Byelorussian) and one of Korean ethnicity; only one case was familial. All patients showed typical involvement of pelvic and shoulder girdle P16.49 muscles, with no cardiomyopathy, and with calf hypertrophy in some. molecular diagnostics of DmD gene in Polish patient with Age of onset varied greatly (from 3 to 34 years) as well as the disease Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy progression. Serum creatine kinase level was also highly variable, M. Kaczmarek1, J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska1, A. Pławski1, N. Drwęska2, M. Sza- 350—9800 U/l. lata2,1, J. Wigowska-Sowińska3, J. Pilch4, R. Słomski2,1; 1Institut of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Life Sciences, P16.47 Poznan, Poland, 3Universty School of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 4Sile- A novel mutation in the Ryanodine-Receptor Gene (RYR1) in sian Academy of Medical Sciences, Katowice, Poland. malignant Hyperthermia: case report Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy is lethal, recessive, X-linked N. Pronina1,2, T. Kaulins3,4, M. Mihelsons5, O. Osipova1, O. Sterna1, R. Lugov- disease, characterized by progressive muscular weakness and de- ska1; generation of skeletal muscles. It is caused by mutations within the 1Children’s University Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga Stradins University, Riga, dystrophin gene. Approximately 60% of DMD and BMD patients carry Latvia, 3Latvian Maritime Medicine centre, Riga, Latvia, 4University of Latvia, large deletions comprising even several exons. The remaining mu-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  tations are duplications (6%) and point mutations (34%). Deletions and their available family members. Genomic leukocytic DNA samples and duplications causing frame shift result in the more severe DMD, were extracted using a salting out technique. A polymerase chain reac- whereas mutations maintain the reading frame cause the milder BMD. tion primer pair was used to amplify the designated fragment followed Deletions and duplications are focused in two “hot spots”. Point muta- by estimation of the CTG repeat length. A modified nucleotide mixture tions are scattered within whole DMD gene and difficult to identifica- was used for amplification of the expanded premutated and fully mu- tion. The most efficient method of deletion and duplication screening is tated CTG alleles. MLPA technique, which allows identifying 100% of this kind of mutation Results and discussion: Five families out of the nine showed abnormal and upgraded routine molecular diagnostics of this disease. Additional repeat expansion. The PCR products were directly detected on 8% advantage of MLPA is possibility of carrier status determination. To ethidium bromide stained-polyacrylamide gel. The utilization of mo- find a point changes we use electrophoretic screening techniques as lecular methods in DM management would not only lead to definitive single stranded conformers polymorphism, heteroduplex analysis and molecular diagnosis and proper genetic counseling for affected fami- sequencing to identifying. In our studies we analyzed 150 patients with lies but may also aid in future prenatal diagnosis. progressive muscular dystrophy from Great Poland and Silesia region. DNA from 72 patients was analyzed by MLPA and remaining 78 by P16.52 PCRmultiplex. Summarising, we identify 69 cases of deletion, 14 du- GtG repeat polymorphism in myotonic dystrophy patients plication and 3 point mutation. We did not observed deletion and am- F. Koc1, D. Erdogan2, S. Kocaturk Sel3, A. N. Nazli Basak4; plification of whole gene. Deletions and duplication included only one 1Cukurova University School of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Adana, exon occurred in 32% of patient. In central part of a gene appeared Turkey, 2Bogazici University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, 57% of this mutation and in proximal 43%. MLPA technique improoved Istanbul, Turkey, 3Cukurova University, Department of Medical Biology and significantly effeciveness of molecular diagnostics of DMD/BMD and Genetics, Adana, Turkey, 4Bogazici University, Department of Molecular Biology allows to identificate of carriers. and Genetics, İstanbul, Adana, Turkey. Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is a neuromuscular disorder with autosomal P16.50 dominant inheritance pattern. It affects various organs including skel- the novel mutation in CLCN gene resulting in recessive form of etal muscle, heart, brain, eye, endocrine, and gastrointestinal systems. the myotonia congenita. It is characterized with progressive muscle weakness and wasting and E. Ivanova1, V. Fedotov2, S. Kyrbatov2, A. Polyakov1; difficulty in muscles relaxation after contraction (myotonia). It is caused 1Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, by an excessive number of CTG repeats at chromosome 19q13.2-13.3 2Center of Genetic Consultation, Voronezh, Russian Federation. region. Myotonia congenita (MC) is a hereditary muscle disorder characterized It has four subtypes. These are classified as; premutation, mild, classi- by delayed relaxation of skeletal muscle after voluntary contraction cal and congenital. These subtypes are named according to changes (myotonia). MC caused by mutations in the skeletal muscle chloride in repeat numbers. In a normal person CTG repeat number can go up channel gene CLCN1 (7q35). The phenotypic spectrum of myotonia to 35. Trinucleotide repeat number between 35 and 50 is not attributed congenita is very diverse from mild myotonia detected only by clinical to a disease condition though they are not stabile and are inherited examination to severe myotonia with transitory weakness (TW) and from one generation to the next. myopathy especially in recessive cases. TW correspondents with a Low trinucleotide repeat numbers can be readily amplified with PCR. transitory depression (TD) of the compound muscle action potential High repeat numbers, however, are hard to amplify. In this study in (CMAP) during repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS). We analyzed 35 order to amplify alleles with high CTG trinucleotide repeat numbers, “ families with revealed myotonia by clinical examination in dominant or Triple PCR” was used. recessive forms and detected 11 mutations in 14 families. Two of these Study group was consisted of 13 unrelated DM1 patients admitted to mutations detected in several unrelated families: c.1436_1449del in the Department of Neurology in Çukurova University School of Medi- exon 13 of CLCN1 gene and p.493Ala>Glu. The last mutation is more cine. After the proband was diagnosed as DM1, other family members interest. This novel missense mutation is detected in compound with were assessed and the diagnosis was confirmed genetically. By the c.1436_1449del in one patient and in gomozygote in two out of three data obtained from the probands, the pedigrees were constructed. sibs in another family. Clinical symptoms of affected sibs are moderate Thirty nine members including 20 men and 19 women of 13 unrelated myotonia of masseter, transitory weakness in hands and “warm-up” DM families were analyzed for CTG trinucleotide repeat polymorphism effect, hypertrophy of calf, no exacerbation with decrease of tempera- to diagnose the DM1 patients on a molecular basis. ture, the myotonia of lid is absent, taking of alcohol provoke the al- Method of Triple PCR had positive results in all DM1 patients and prov- leviation of symptoms. The myotonia don’t progress in time (now sibs en to be a reliable diagnostic tool. are 36 and 40 years old). At the same time this mild form of myotonia caused by mutation 493Ala>Glu in homozygote combines with high P16.53 level of decrement CMAP RNS (70 and 78%). By now, routine analysis Paternal repeat length instability of myotonic dystrophy type 1 of CLCN1 gene for patients with myotonia is going on. pre- and protomutations M. M. Gerrits1, C. E. M. de Die - Smulders1,2, C. G. Faber1, M. J. Blok1,2, H. J. P16.51 M. Smeets1,2; molecular diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy type i in Egyptian 1Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Research Insti- patients tute GROW, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands. I. Somaia1, H. Radwan1, H. Hosny1, D. Helmy2, E. Salah2, L. Effat1; Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is an autosomal dominant disorder, 1National research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Department of Clinical pathology, and the most common form of muscular dystrophy in adults. The mo- Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt. lecular basis of DM1 lies in the instability of a CTG repeat in the 3’ The dominantly inherited myotonic dystrophy or myotonia dystrophica UTR of the DM1 protein kinase gene. Small expanded DM1 alleles (DM) disease belongs to a group of neurodegenerative disorders that are usually unstable and often increase in number in successive gen- results from the expansion of unstable trinucleotide repeats. In these erations. Here we evaluated the risk on expansion of an additional disorders, the number of repeats increases to a critical size, affect- 22 pre- (37-50 CTG repeats) and 41 protomutation (50-80 repeats) in ing the gene function and leading to disease. The DM disorder has a relation to sex and repeat length in DM1 transmitting parents for 63 peculiar and rare pattern of multisystemic clinical features, affecting DM1 parent-child pairs (33 males, 30 females). CTG-repeat lengths skeletal muscles, heart, eye and endocrine system. The underlying in the parents and children were determined by PCR and Genescan molecular basis of the disease entails excessive expansion of a repeti- analysis. For the transmitting males, 23/33 (70%) repeats expanded to tive sequence in the myotonin protein Kinase gene. a full mutation upon transmission, whereas 5/33 (15%) repeats were The aim of this study was to employ a molecular diagnostic technique stable and 5/33 (15%) slightly increased. For the transmitting females, for the disease among suspected Egyptian cases. these values were 5/30 (17%), 17/30 (57%) and 6/30 (20%), respec- Subjects and Methods: Nine probands complaining of clinical and neu- tively. When the results were subdivided by repeat length, only one rophysiological features suggestive of myotonic dystrophy diagnosis (1/8, 13%) transmitting male gave rise to a full mutation in the offspring were studied. Molecular studies were performed on the nine probands in the premutation range, and 9/11 (82%), 6/6 (100%) and 7/8 (86%)Genetic analysis, linkage ans association 0 in the protomutation ranges, 51-60, 61-70 and 71-80 repeats, respec- with %BF (P=0.018) and VAT (P=0.006), explaining 0.57% and 1.67% tively. For the transmitting females, full mutations were only seen in the of the variance, respectively. No significant interactions of the vari- 71-80 repeat range, and in 5/6 (83%) offspring. ants with ethnicity or gender were found for any of the obesity-related In conclusion, paternal repeat length instability occurs frequently and phenotypes. Compared to the most common haplotype, the haplotype mainly between 51-80 repeats, while maternal repeat length instability with both minor alleles showed higher weight (P=0.002), BMI (P=0.02), occurs infrequently and only above 70 repeats. This observation has %BF (P=0.004) and VAT (P=0.02). No significant effects were found implications for genetic counseling. on indices of IR after adjustment for BMI. Conclusions: The relatively large effect of these common variants near P16.54 MC4R with general and visceral adiposity in childhood could prove Unusual splice site mutation involved in a fatal form of tK2 helpful in elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying the devel- associated mitochondrial DNA depletion myopathy opment of obesity in early life. W. M. Schmidt1, M. Steiner1, D. Jovanovic1, B. Dellinger1, K. Moser-Thier1, R. Wegscheider1, M. Freilinger2, R. Seidl2, E. Hauser3, R. E. Bittner1; P17.02 1Neuromuscular Research Department, Center of Anatomy & Cell Biology, the frequencies of polymorphic alleles +49A/G CTLA, -1858c/t Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics, Medi- PTPN and -23HphiA/t INS genes in Belarusian population and cal University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 3Landesklinikum Thermenregion diabetic patients. Mödling, Austria. E. Aksyonova1, T. Pokladok1, D. Boiko1, L. Viasova2, A. Solntsava2, N. Danilen- Mutations in the TK2 gene are associated with the autosomal reces- ko1; sive mtDNA depletion myopathy. Here, we describe two dizygotic twins 1Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Minsk, Belarus, 2Belarusian State Medical who developed progressive, severe muscle hypotonia by age of 10 University, Minsk, Belarus. months. Both had elevated serum CK (>1000 U/L) and MRI disclosed Various genes were proved to control predisposition to autoimmune marked cortical atrophy. Muscle biopsy revealed red-ragged fibres, diabetes (T1D). Our aim was to study the genotype frequencies of multiple sarcoplasmic vacuoles, and numerous cytochrome-c-oxidase +49A/G CTLA4; 1858C/T PTPN22 and -23HphIA/T INS and their com- negative fibres. Activities of respiratory chain enzymes were massively binations in healthy Belarusians and diabetic patients. 474 native Be- reduced. After detection of pronounced mtDNA copy number reduction larusians from 6 ethnogeographic regions; 20 patients with comorbid- in muscle, we sequenced TK2. ity of autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) and type 1 diabetes, as well We found compound heterozygosity for two mutations in both sib- as 23 type 1 diabetic patients were genotyped. The risk genotype GG- lings: c.542C>T (p.A181V) and c.665-7A>G (IVS7). The mother was TT-AA (CTLA4-PTPN22-INS respectively) was revealed in 6 individu- heterozygous for c.542C>T, and the father carried the heterozygous als (1,27 %) of ethnic population. 14 individuals (2,95 %) possessed c.665-7A>G mutation. Whereas pathogenicity of c.542C>T had been protective homozygous genotype (AA-CC-TT) and 35 individuals (7,4 previously established, the second mutation has not been reported so %) were heterozygotes at all loci. The comparative study of CTLA4- far. Several in silico predictions for this mutation, which affects po- PTPN22 genotype frequencies was conducted in 741 individuals from sition -7 of the IVS7 acceptor splice site, failed to suggest any det- 6 ethnogeographic regions. The most common genotype GA-CC rimental effect on splicing. To investigate the potential pathogenicity (heterozygous of +49A/G CTLA4 locus and homozygous of 1858C/ of this intronic base substitution, RNA isolated from peripheral blood T PTPN22 locus) was revealed in 33,9 % of population studied. The was subjected to RT-PCR analysis, revealing that the mutation creates protective genotype (AA-CC) was detected in 22,5 % of investigated an aberrant acceptor splice site leading to inclusion of extra nucleo- Belarusians. The risk genotype (GG-TT) frequency was low - 0,9%. In tides (r.664_665insCCTCAG). This aberrant splicing pattern ultimately diabetic subjects the risk genotype GG-TT-AA (CTLA4-PTPN22-INS causes the predictable intolerable insertion of two additional amino respectively) was revealed in 1 case (2,3%). The GA-CT-AA genotype acids [p.(221_222insAlaSer)] into a highly conserved motif within the frequency was significantly (P<0,05) higher in patients (25,6 % ) in deoxyribonucleoside kinase domain. comparison with population (7,8%). Note that frequency of risk alleles Our work not only extends the TK2 mutational spectrum, it also high- (“T” - PTPN22 gene and “A” -INS gene) in the patients were also sig- lights the importance of experimental analysis of intronic mutations nificantly higher (31,4 % and 89,5% vs. control subjects 16,4% and detected during routine DNA diagnostics procedures, because algo- 71,3% respectively). Thus we proved the role of PTPN22 and insu- rithms to predict a splicing defect were uninformative in our case. lin genes and their risk alleles combinations in Belarus patient cohort comparing with general population. P17. Genetic analysis, linkage ans association P17.03 A polymorphism within the fructosamine-3-kinase gene P17.01 associates with HbA and the onset of type 2 diabetes 1c common variants near MCR are associated with general and M. Mohás1, P. Kisfali2, Á. Mérei1, E. Baricza2, B. Duga2, A. Maász2, J. Cseh1, E. visceral adiposity in European- and African-American Youth Mikolás1, I. A. Szijártó1, B. Melegh2, I. Wittmann1; G. Liu1, H. Zhu2, V. Lagou1, B. Gutin2, F. A. Treiber2, Y. Dong2, H. Snieder1,2; 12nd Department of Medicine and Nephrological Center, University of Pécs, 1University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, Uni- Netherlands, 2Georgia Prevention Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Medical versity of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. College of Georgia, Augusta, GA, United States. Background: Non-enzymatic glycation is a process, which leads to the Objectives: Rare functional mutations of melanocortin 4 receptor formation of advanced glycation endproducts. These compounds are (MC4R) are the leading cause of monogenic severe childhood-onset involved in the development of late diabetic microvascular complica- obesity. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) found com- tions. Fructosamine-3-kinase (FN3K) is an intracellular enzyme that mon variants near MC4R associated with obesity and insulin resis- phosphorylates fructosamines resulting in fructosamine-3-phosphate, tance (IR). This study aimed to assess the influence of the identified which subsequently decomposes to inorganic phosphate, 3-deoxy- single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs17782313 and rs17700633 glucasone and the unmodified amino residue. Recently, the C900G on general and visceral adiposity, and on IR in European-American (rs1056534) single nucleotide polymorpism (SNP) of the FN3K gene (EA) and African-American (AA) youth. was found to be associated with the enzyme activity. The aim of the Methods: In 1902 youth (48.9% European-American, 45.4% male, mean study was to investigate the impact of the SNP on clinical and bio- age 16.2 years), we examined the associations of the rs17782313 and chemical features and late complications of type 2 diabetes. rs17700633 with anthropometry, percent body fat (%BF) and visceral Methods: Total of 859 type 2 diabetic subjects were enrolled in the adipose tissue (VAT). Interactions of the SNPs with ethnicity or gender study and were genotyped with PCR-RFLP method. were investigated and haplotype analyses conducted. Results: Genotype frequencies were as follows, GG: 41%, GC: 54%, Results: Significant associations were found between rs17782313 and CC: 5%. Subjects with CC variant had higher HbA levels compared 1c body mass index (BMI) (P=0.004), weight (P=0.002), waist circumfer- with the others (CC: 6.48±0.15%; GC: 7.66±0.09%; GG: 7.68±0.09%; ence (P=0.004), and sum of skinfolds (P=0.032), explaining between p<0.001). Furthermore, in case of the CC allelic variant type 2 diabetes 0.30% and 1.0% of variance. Rs17700633 was significantly associated was diagnosed at a later age than in case of GC or GG variants (CC:Genetic analysis, linkage ans association  56.0±1.90 years; GC: 52.0±0.62 years; GG: 50.1±0.71 years; p<0.05). to type 2 diabetes by means of impaired insulin secretion. However, Logistic regression analysis did not reveal association between CC mechanisms remain unclear and absence of the effect in women has genotype and late diabetic complications, such as diabetic nephropa- to be elucidated in further studies. Finally, our results underline a role of thy, neuropathy and retinopathy (OR=0.796, CI 95% 0.364-1.744, KCNQ1 variants in type 2 diabetes and related traits in Caucasians. p=0.569; OR=1.754, CI 95% 0.806-3.393 p=0.170; OR=1.213, CI 95% 0.470-3.132, p=0.690, respectively).Conclusion: We conclude that the P17.06 C900G polymorphism associates with the level of HbA and the onset PIKR, SLCA and PTPN expression level analysis and its 1c of the disease, but not with either of the late diabetic microvascular assocaiation with insulin resistance development in type 2 complications. diabetes patients M. Malodobra1,2, D. Bednarska-Chabowska3, T. Dobosz1, R. Adamiec3; P17.04 1Silesian Pisat University of Medicine, Department of Forensic Medicine, Molec- Heritabilities of blood pressure, fasting glucose and ular Technique Unit, Wroclaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate School of Molecular Midi- triglycerides depend on body mass index: evidence for gene- cine, Warsaw, Poland, 3Silesian Pisat University of Medicine, Department and obesity interaction Clinic of Angiology, Arterial Hypertension and Diabetology, Wroclaw, Poland. T. Wu1,2, H. Snieder1,3, X. Wang3, X. Ding3, Y. Hu2; Background: After insulin binds to its receptor, further reactions trans- 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 2Peking mit the signal downstream the cell that results in glucose uptake. When University Health Science Center, Beijing, China, 3Medical College of Georgia, the pathway is impaired, insulin resistance appeared and finally type Augusta, GA, United States. 2 diabetes develops. Background: Evidence from candidate gene studies suggests that Methods: The SNP polymorphisms located in regulatory region of se- obesity may modify the genetic susceptibility to hypertension, type 2 lected genes implicated in insulin signal transduction as well as the diabetes and dyslipidemia. Gene-obesity interactions are expected to expression level of these genes were analyzed. The study was per- result in different heritability estimates at different obesity levels. formed in type 2 diabetes patients with and without insulin resistance Method: The present study included 1260 monozygotic and 842 di- (assessed by HOMA-IR) and in healthy subjects. Expression rate and zygotic twins (mean±SD age: 37.90±9.85; range: 19.14-81.36) from SNPs were tested in genes: PIK3R1 (rs3756668, rs1862162), PTPN1 the Chinese Twins Registry. Outcome measures were systolic blood (rs16989673) and SLC2A4 (rs5417, rs5418). SNPs were analyzed in pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), fasting glucose and minisequencig reaction followed by capillary electrophoresis. Gene triglycerides. Structural equation modeling was used to test whether expression analyses were carrying out as relative quantification with body mass index (BMI) interacted with latent genetic and environmen- β-actin as housekeeping gene. tal effects on the outcome measures. Results: PIK3R1 and PTPN1 exhibited correlation between HOMA-IR Results: Genetic influences on triglycerides increased with BMI and expression level (R=-0,5485 and R=-0,5257, respectively). Gene (p<0.001), which resulted in a higher heritability estimate at higher BMI expression level compared between tested groups revealed significant levels. However, the environmental influence on SBP, DBP and fasting difference in PIK3R1 expression rate (p=0,0172), furthermore we were glucose increased with BMI (p<0.001), which resulted in lower heri- close to achieve statistical importance for G/G carriers of rs3756668 tability estimates at higher BMI levels. This was confirmed by strati- and expression level of PIK3R1 (p=0,06). The results showed no fied analysis in twin pairs concordant for normal weight (BMI<25kg/m2) substantially difference in genes expression of PTPN1 and SLC2A4 and twin pairs concordant for overweight (BMI≥25mg/m2). Heritabilities between groups (p=0,7951 and p=0,5547 respectively), however we were 12 percentage points higher for triglycerides, whereas 29, 7 and revealed association for rs5417 and rs5418 heterozygotes with lower 6 percentage points lower for SBP, DBP and fasting glucose, respec- SLC2A4 expression rate (p=0,0235). tively, among twins concordant for overweight relative to twins concor- Conclusion: All presented data suggest that expression of genes im- dant for normal weight. plicated in insulin signal transduction is impaired in type 2 diabetes Conclusion: Our results suggest that the expression of genes influenc- patients and might be associated with insulin resistance development. ing triglyceride levels can vary as a function of obesity status. The Furthermore, some SNP polymorphisms in regulatory regions might substantial increase in the genetic contribution to the total variance in influence gene expression rate. triglyceride and decreases in SBP, DBP and fasting glucose may prove valuable in aiding gene finding efforts. P17.07 the vitamin E binding protein Afamin is associated with the P17.05 metabolic syndrome and underlies hormonal control Association of genetic variation in KcNQ1 with type 2 diabetes S. Olscher1, G. Wietzorrek2, S. Kiechl3, J. Willeit3, S. Schubert4, L. Wildt5, H. in KORA Klocker6, F. Kronenberg1, H. Dieplinger1; H. Grallert1, C. Herder2, C. Meisinger3, W. Rathmann4, H. Wichmann1,5, T. Illig1; 1Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Division of Molecular 1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, and Cellular Pharmacology, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Department of Neurology, 2Institute for Clinical Diabetes ResearchGerman Diabetes Centre, Leibniz In- Innsbruck, Austria, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, stitute at Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 3Helmholtz Zentrum Hannover, Germany, 5Department of Gynecological Endocrinology, Innsbruck, München, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Institute of Biometrics and Epidemiology, Austria, 6Department of Urology, Innsbruck, Austria. German Diabetes Centre, Leibniz Institute at Heinrich Heine University, Düs- The metabolic syndrome is characterised by metabolic risk factors in- seldorf, Germany, 5IBE, Chair of Epidemiology, University of Munich, Munich, cluding abdominal obesity, atherogenic dyslipidemia, elevated blood Germany. pressure or insulin resistance. Patients with the metabolic syndrome Recently, a significant association between variants of the KCNQ1 are at increased risk of coronary heart disease, other atherosclerotic gene and type 2 diabetes has been reported. Replication of polygenet- conditions and type 2 diabetes. ic disease associations has often revealed false positive findings and We have previously observed in the population-based Bruneck study overestimated effects in initial reports in the past. Therefore, this study (n=826) an association of the human vitamin E binding protein afamin aimed to replicate the association of the variant rs2237895, which was with several key parameters of the metabolic syndrome: by measuring originally found in an Asian population and assesses its effect on type its plasma concentration we found significant associations with waist- 2 diabetes in a case-control study of 2.697 KORA participants (1230 to-hip ratio, body mass index, obesity, systolic and diastolic blood cases/ 1467 controls). We further extended our analyses to the gly- pressure, diabetes, and plasma concentrations of LDL- and HDL-cho- cemic traits in a population based sub sample of 1092 fasting KORA lesterol, triglycerides, free fatty acids, glucose and Hba1c. In addition, participants. Results of our analyses confirmed the minor C allele as afamin concentrations were also positively correlated with increasing risk variant for type 2 diabetes (OR=1.12 [1.00,1.25]; p=0.049). This numbers of these parameters in a 10-years follow-up prospective ob- association could be ascribed to the association in men (OR=1.16 servation suggesting also a predictive potential of plasma concentra- [1.00,1.35]; p=0.040). Assessing effects for metabolic parameters, sig- tions of afamin for developing the metabolic syndrome. nificantly increased fasting glucose levels were found for the C allele The present study was undertaken to investigate possible influences of rs2237895 (beta estimate=1.39 mg/dl; p=0.01) in men, supporting on afamin expression. In mutant mice with a defective androgen recep- affection of pancreatic beta cell function by variants in KCNQ1 leading tor (Tfm mice) we found extremely low afamin concentrations in plas-Genetic analysis, linkage ans association  ma, suggesting an important hormonal regulation of afamin expres- very common cause of MODY in Italian population, whereas HNF1A/ sion (at least in mice). We therefore performed hormone substitution MODY3 an HNF4A/MODY1 have a low prevalence. Our data broad- experiments in Tfm and wild-type mice (by means of subcutaneously ens the knowledge of the naturally occurring mutations repertoire in applied hormone-saturated silicone implants). Estradiol had no effect these genes. on afamin concentrations in either mice. Testosterone, in contrast, led to diminished plasma concentrations in wildtype mice and normalized P17.10 the low afamin values in Tfm mice. These data suggest androgen-re- Non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus and insulin receptor ceptor- dependent and -independent influences of testosterone on the gene mutations expression of afamin. M. Bikhof Torbati1, M. Bandehpour2, N. Seyed2, F. Azizi3, N. Saadat3, B. Ka- zemi2; P17.08 1Islamic Azad University–Shahre Rey Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Association of mitochondrial DNA 16189 t/c polymorphism in 2Cellular and Molecular Biology Research center, Shaheed Beheshti University turkish patients with metabolic syndrome of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Metabolism and En- A. Cenk1, M. Akkiprik2, Ç. Sinan3, Ö. Ayşe2; docrine Research Center, Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 1Namik Kemal University, Faculty of Science and Art, Biology Division, Depart- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ment of Molecular Biology, Tekirdag, Turkey, 2Marmara University, School of Non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) is a metabolic disor- Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Gulhane Military der that is characterized by constant hyper glycemia and insulin resis- Medical School, Haydarpasa Teaching Hospital, Department of Endocrinology tance. Insulin receptor consists of two glycoprotein subunit, alpha and and Metabolism, Istanbul, Turkey. beta subunit. Beta subunit contains tyrosine kinase domain. Insulin Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a cluster of several clinical conditions receptor gene has twenty two exons. The mutations of insulin recep- including dyslipidemia, hypertension, and hyperglycemia. A common tor gene were found to be associated with development of NIDDM. In variant in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) at 16189 bp (T/C transition) has this background we have investigated whether mutations of tyrosine been suggested to be related to thinness, impaired glucose tolerance/ kinase domain of insulin receptor gene is associated with type II diabe- type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) and insulin resistance. The objective of tes mellitus in Iranian population. Exons fourteen to seventeen of insu- our study is to evaluate association between the 16189 variant of mtD- lin receptor gene related to tyrosine kinase domain. DNA of peripheral NA in Turkish patients with MetS. Seventy subjects with MetS and 150 blood of 128 cases was extracted and four related exons to tyrosine healthy controls were enrolled in the study. mtDNA was extracted from kinase domain separatly were amplified by specific primers and then peripheral leukocytes and the presence of the 16189 variant of mtDNA PCR products were sequenced. The different mutations of insulin re- was determined using the PCR-RFLP analysis. The statistical differ- ceptor gene in tyrosine kinase domain were detected in Iranian NIDDM ence in the frequency of occurrence of the 16189 variant of mtDNA patients. We reported for first time a polymorphism (C 2706 G) and two between patients and healthy controls and its association to type II DM missense mutations (C 2752 T) and (C 2753 G) in exon fourteen and was assessed by the Pearson’s chi-squire test. Patient variables were so a missense mutation (T 3257 A) in exon seventeen of insulin recep- compared between mtDNA 16189T and C carriers by Student’s t test. tor gene in Iranian NIDDM patients. These mutations in Iranian popula- P<0.01 was considered statistically significant. We found that 26% tion are different from previously reported mutations in insulin receptor (18/70) of patients and 16% (24/150) of healthy subjects had poly- gene of the other populations. There is not detected any mutation or morphic C variant and the difference was not statistically significant. polymorphism in other exons of tyrosine kinase gene. Also, mtDNA 16189C variant did not associated with variables includ- ing BMI, HDL, total cholesterol, cortizol, triglyceride, fasting insulin, fat P17.11 percentage, insulin resistance and presence of type II DM. On the oth- Apolipoprotein A1/c3/A5 gene cluster variants and serum lipids er hand, patients with 16189C variant had lower LDL value (p=0.006). levels in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus As a conclusion, mtDNA 1689 variant is not associated with metabolic A. A. Bystrova1, A. N. Voitovich2, E. I. Krasilnikova1, E. V. Shlyakhto E.V1, V. I. syndrome in Turkish patients. Larger population study is necessary to Larionova2; clarify the effect of this variant on LDL level of the patients. 1St. Petersburg Medical University after Pavlov IP, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St. Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Rus- P17.09 sian Federation. mutation analysis of GcK, HNF1A and HNF4A genes in italian OBJECTIVE: To evaluate if there is any association between apoA1/ mODY patients C3/A5 gene cluster polymorphisms and serum lipids levels in type 2 A. Di Rocco1, V. Mantovani2, N. Calza1, E. Marasco1, M. Cenci3, D. Bastia1, P. diabetic patients. PATIENTS AND METHODS: 225 patients with type 2 Garagnani1, G. Romeo3; diabetes mellitus (161 females and 64 males, mean age 57±0.4 years) 1CRBA, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 2U.O. Genetica Medica not taking lipid-lowering drugs. Serum lipids were evaluated in all pa- e CRBA, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 3U.O. Genetica Medica, tients by enzymatic method. G-75A and C83T apoA1, Sst1 apoC3, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. S19W and -1131TC apoA5 gene polymorphisms were identified by Maturity onset-diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically hetero- PCR-RFLP method. RESULTS: Allele frequencies for all investigated geneous group of disorders characterized by early onset non-insulin polymorphisms in type 2 diabetic patients were the same as in Cauca- diabetes mellitus, autosomal dominant inheritance and primary defect sian population. Fasting serum TG and VLDL-cholesterol levels were in pancreatic beta cell function. Six genes have been associated with significantly higher in female patients carrying the minor allele 19W different subtypes of disease. The most common forms are MODY2 than in patients with SS genotype (3.1±0.5 mmol/L vs. 2.1±0.1 mmol/L and MODY3, while MODY1, 4, 5 and 6 are rare disorders. Aim of for TG and 1.4±0.2 mmol/L vs. 1.0±0.1 mmol/L for VLDL-cholesterol, our study is to assess the relative prevalence of mutations in GCK/ p=0.033). Total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, and HDL-cholesterol lev- MODY2, HNF1A/MODY3 and HNF4A/MODY1 genes among Italian els were not significantly different between genotypes. No differences patients. 102 unrelated probands fitting MODY clinical criteria were were found between S19W apoA5 genotypes in the male patients. screened first for GCK mutations, when negative, for HNF1A and when Significantly higher levels of fasting serum TG and VLDL-cholesterol still negative, for HNF4A mutations. The analysis was performed by were also found in female patients with GA and AA genotypes of G- DHPLC and direct sequencing. Mutations in GCK gene were detected 75A apoA1 polymorphism compared to GG genotype patients (2.8±0.3 in 51 (50%) families: 14 mutations were previously unreported. Muta- mmol/L vs. 2.0±0.1 mmol/L for TG and 1.3±0.1 mmol/L vs. 0.9±0.1 tions in HNF1A gene were detected in 5 (4,9%) probands: two were mmol/L for VLDL-cholesterol, p=0.009). No differences were found in new and one was a de novo mutation. Only 2 (1,9%) patients showed serum lipids levels between C83T apoA1, -1131TC apoA5 and Sst1 defects in HNF4A gene. Noteworthy, one of these latter cases carried apoC3 genotypes in male and female type 2 diabetic patients. CON- also a mutation in HNF1A/MODY3 gene. This is the first report of a pa- CLUSION: We detected an association between apoA1/C3/A5 gene tient with mutations in two MODY genes. For the novel missense and cluster variants and serum lipids levels in female patients with type 2 splicing mutations bioinformatics analyses were performed to predict diabetes mellitus. the pathogenic effect. Unlike the studies on north European MODY patients, our study indicates that defects in GCK/MODY2 gene are aGenetic analysis, linkage ans association  P17.12 project CNCSIS- Human Resources- Young PhD no. 353/2008. Analysis of the combined discriminative value of 11 validated obesity genetic variants P17.14 C. H. Andreasen1, T. Sparsø1, N. Grarup1, A. Albrechtsen2, K. Borch-John- The β3-adrenergic receptor gene polymorphism, systolic blood sen3,4, A. Sandbæk5, T. Lauritzen5, T. Jørgensen6,7, O. Pedersen1,8, T. Hansen1,9; pressure and body mass index in children with systolic arterial 1Steno Diabetes Center & Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark, hypertension. 2Department of Biostatistics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Den- S. V. Kuzmina1, M. A. Bogdanova2, O. S. Romashkina2, A. N. Voitovich2, O. A. mark, 3Steno Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Denmark, 4Faculty of Health Science, Mutafyan1, V. I. Larionova2; University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark, 5Department of General Practice, Insti- 1Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federa- tute of Public Health, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 6Research Centre tion, 2Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation. for Prevention and Health, Glostrup University Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, Background: The β-adrenergic receptor (ADRB3) gene polymorphism 3 7Faculty of Health Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, was reported to be associated with obesity and arterial hypertension 8Faculty of Health Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Copenha- (AH) in adults, while there are a few reports on children. gen, Denmark, 9Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Aim: To investigate distribution of ADRB3 genotypes and allele fre- Denmark. quencies of Trp64Arg polymorphism in children with systolic AH, and Background: Within the last years, GWA studies have identified 20 study clinical systolic blood pressure (SBP) levels and body mass in- genetic variants associating with obesity or related phenotypes. The dex (BMI) values in carriers of the different genotypes. variants are common and exhibit moderate effect sizes in the general Mehtods: 84 children, aged 7-17, with the diagnosis of systolic AH population. The aim of this study is to investigate the combined ef- participated in this study. AH was defined as systolic/diastolic blood fect of these variants and their ability to discriminate between normal pressure measurements higher than 95 age-gender-height percentile weight and overweight/obese individuals in a cross-sectional popula- of the adopted reference values. The Trp64Arg polymorphism of the tion of Danes, by applying receiver operating characteristics (ROC). ADRB3 gene was detected by PCR, the amplified PCR products were Methods: 11 variants were genotyped in 3 study groups: the popu- digested with Bst 2UI. lation-based Inter99 study, the ADDITION Denmark screening study Results: There were identified 78.6%(66) Trp/Trp homozygotes, 19.0% cohort, and a type 2 diabetic patient group sampled at Steno Diabetes (16 ) Trp/Arg heterozygotes and 2.4% (2) Arg/Arg homozygotes. The Center. The combined study population included 5,512 normal weight, frequencies of Trp and Arg alleles were, respectively, 0.9 and 0.1. 7,458 overweight and 5,044 obese individuals. For the remaining 9 Clinical SBP in patients with Trp/Trp genotype was 133,5±9,1 mm Hg, variants genotyping is still ongoing. with Trp/Arg genotype was 135,5±7,9 mm Hg, with Arg/Arg genotype Results: Individual variant analyses demonstrated per allele odds ra- was 132,5±2,1 mm Hg. Clinical SBP difference among carriers of the tios for the 11 variants ranging from 1.04(0.98-1.08) to 1.21(1.14-1.27). different genotypes was not found. No significant difference was ob- When combining the variants, individuals with extreme risk profile (≥15 served in BMI among subjects carrying the of Trp/Arg, Arg/Arg and risk alleles) showed a significant increase in risk of both overweight Trp/Trp genotypes. However Arg carries with BMI < 25 percentile were 1.61(1.42-1.82), p=4.1×10-14 and obesity 1.68 (1.49-1.89), p=2.2×10- not found. 16, compared to individuals with minimal risk profile (<9 risk alleles). Conclusion: The significant differences in SBP levels and IMT values The area under ROC curved predicting overweight and obesity was among carriers of different genotypes of Trp64Arg polymorphism of ADRB3 determined to 0.55 and 0.54, respectively. gene were not found in children with systolic arterial hypertension. Conclusion: The 11 variants analysed out of the 20 variants confers a significantly increased combined risk of both overweight and obesity in P17.15 carriers of many risk alleles. The discriminative value of the 11 variants A study of the insertion-Deletion polymorphism of the gene is still sparse and too inaccurate for clinical preventive purposes, but is angiotensin-converting enzyme, AcE expected to increase when the remaining 9 variants are included. G. Gumerova, O. Gumerova, E. Vorobjeva, V. Gorbunova; Bashkir State Pedagogical University from after M. Akmulla, Ufa, Russian Fed- P17.13 eration. AcE polymorphisms in children with arterial hypertension Introduction: We studies gene, encoding angiotensin-converting en- C. Duicu1, C. Banescu2, E. Kiss1, R. Popp3, A. Trifa3, V. Bodescu1; zyme ACE is located on the chromosome 17 (17q23) consist of 26 ex- 1Pediatric Department No 2, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, ons and 25 introns. In given gene exists polymorphism, given by inser- Romania, 2Genetic Department , University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. tion 287 base pares in 16 intron region (the allele: *D - 192 bp, *I - 490 Mures, Romania, 3Genetic Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, bp.). The ferment, coded gene, is the important physiological regulator Cluj-Napoca, Romania. of arterial pressure and water-salt exchange. The various degree is Arterial hypertension (AH), either essential or secondary, is an impor- connected to the given polymorphism of expression the gene ACE. At tant issue in childhood for its short- and long-term cardiovascular mor- persons, homozygous on allele D, the contents of enzyme grows. bidity. The frequency of arterial hypertension in children was estimated Materials And Methods: We studied samples DNA of 319 individuals at the level of 1-5% of the population. Renal diseases are the most in the age of 18-35 years living in Republic Bashkortostan. Sample frequent causes of AH in children, but essential hypertension can also was divided into groups, depending on factor of intellectual develop- be detected early in life. Among the many potential causes of second- ment (IQ). Definition of a level of intellectual development is realized ary hypertension are renal parenchymal disease, occlusive renal arte- by the test of R.Kettell. The analysis genetic polymorphism is realized rial disease, adrenocortical abnormalities, and pheochromocytoma. It by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). is important for blood pressure to be checked regularly (at least once Results: We carried out the analysis of distribution of frequencies of every year) in healthy children and adolescents and at every medi- genotypes and alleles polymorphic marker I/D of gene ACE. It is es- cal visit in those belonging to at-risk categories (family history of AH, tablished, that in group with an attribute “endowments” increase of fre- low birth weight, obesity, etc). Essential hypertension is a multifactorial quency of genotype ACE*D/*D (OR=2.223; 95%CI 1.219-3.098) and disease in wich both genetic and enviromental factors play important allele*D (OR=2.641; 95%CI 1.219-7.074); allele*I meets in the given roles. The present study examines how polymorphisms of the inser- group authentically less often (OR=0.379; 95%CI 0.142-0.821). tion/deletion (I/D) angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) genes influ- Thus, the gene ACE is associated with a level of intellectual develop- ence presence and severity of hypertension. The I/D polymorphisms of ment of the person. the ACE genes were determined by RFLP (restriction fragment length polymorphism) and restriction analysis in all hypertensive patients ad- mitted in Pediatric Clinics from Tg. Mures, Romania. Genotyping was done in children diagnosed with primary and secondary AH. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood samples using standard meth- ods. PCR-RFLP was used for analysis. Detection was performed with agarose gel electrophoresis. First data of this study will be presented. Acknowledgements: The study was realized in the research programGenetic analysis, linkage ans association  P17.16 P17.18 Genetic markers of essential hypertension, located on Relationship of the APOE polymorphism and lipid profile: a chromosome 1q population-based study in the Azores islands (Portugal) Y. R. Timasheva1, T. R. Nasibullin1, A. N. Zakirova2, O. E. Mustafina1; M. Raposo1, Y. Dahmani1, F. Silva1, M. Tavares1, T. Cymbron1, C. Santos1,2, C. 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir Bettencourt1, R. Ferin1, C. Correia1, M. L. Pavão1, M. Lima1; State Medical Academy, Ufa, Russian Federation. 1Center of Research in Natural Resources (CIRN), University of the Azores, Elevated blood pressure is a complex trait regulated by multiple factors. Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 2Unitat Antropologia Biològica, Universitat Autònoma Genetic predisposition, along with lifestyle changes, plays the crucial de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. role in the development of essential hypertension (EH). Twin studies The factors leading to a two-fold mortality rate from coronary artery have demonstrated that almost 50 percent of the inter-individual vari- disease (CAD) in the Azores, as compared to Mainland Portugal, have ability in blood pressure level is heritable. Genome-wide linkage stud- not been elucidated. Previous studies reported a population tendency ies have associated the incidence of hypertension with some genomic for hypercholesterolemia, one of the main factors contributing to the regions (chromosome 1q, 2p, 2q, 3p, 6q, 16q, 15q, 18q, 19p). development of atherosclerosis (AT), considered the primary cause of We performed screening of genetic markers located on chromosome CAD. Apolipoprotein E has a key role in plasma lipid metabolism, given 1q. DNA samples, used in the study, were obtained from 1095 individu- its function as a ligand for cell-surface receptor mediated uptake of als (355 Tatars, 362 Bashkirs and 378 Russians residing in Bashkor- lipoproteins. Polymorphism in the apolipoprotein gene (APOE) results tostan, Russia). SNP-genotyping of 1q candidate loci was performed in three major isoforms encoded by three codominant alleles (E2, E3 using polymerase chain reaction followed by restriction enzyme diges- and E4). With the purpose of establishing the pattern of variation at the tion. Data were analyzed using Arlequine 2.0. APOE locus and determining its association with lipid profile, we stud- We found that haplotypes of polymorphic variants in E-selectine ied a random sample of 298 unrelated, apparently healthy individuals (SELE, rs2076059), P-selectine (SELP, rs6131), L-selectine (SELL, of Azorean origin. In nearly 50% of the sample total cholesterol (TC) rs3177980), beta 1 polypeptide of Na+/K+ transporting ATPase (AT- was above 200mg/dl; in 25% of the individuals LDL-cholesterol (LDL- P1B1, rs12731646) and regulator of G-protein signaling 5 (RGS5, C) was higher than 130 mg/dl. Allele frequencies were 0.0833, 0.8317 rs2255642) genes are associated with essential hypertension. TSLCG and 0.0850 for E2, E3 and E4, respectively. Genotype frequencies haplotype was associated with increased risk of EH in ethnic Rus- were higher for E3*E3 genotype (66.1%); genotype distribution dis- sians (OR=2.88, CI 1.45-5.72, P=0.002), while TALCA (OR=0.01, played conformity with Hardy-Weinberg expectations. No differences OR CI 0.01-0.82, P=0.042), TSFCA (OR=0.34, CI 0.12-0.93, P=0.033) in allelic frequencies were found in comparison with other Caucasian OR OR and TSFCG (OR=0.44, CI 0.21-0.90, P=0.022) haplotypes were populations, namely with mainland Portugal. E3*E4 individuals pre- OR found to be protective against EH. Increased risk of EH in Tatar ethnic sented the highest cholesterol levels. Analysis of variance performed group was associated with CAFTA haplotype (OR=29.64, CI 3.92- with the most represented genotypes (E2*E3, E3*E3 and E3*E4) re- OR 224.30, P=0.000), decreased - with TSFTA (OR=0.04, CI 0.01-0.31, vealed a clear association between the genotypic composition and TC, OR P=0.001) and TSLCA (OR=0.06, CI 0.01-0.49, P=0.033) haplotypes. as well as LDL-C, thus confirming in this population, the role of APOE OR Our data confirm the association between genetic markers on chromo- as one of the genetic determinants of AT. some 1q and human hypertension. P17.19 P17.17 Genetic risk factors for arterial ischemic stroke in children: a Haplotypic effect of three functional promoter polymorphisms of possible mtHFR and eNOs gene-gene interplay? mmP1 confers higher risk of myocardial infarction V. Djordjevic1, M. Stankovic1, V. Brankovic-Sreckovic2, L. Rakicevic1, D. Rado- P. Román-García, E. Coto, J. R. Reguero, I. Lozano, P. Avanzas, C. Morís, J. jkovic1; B. Cannata-Andía, I. Rodríguez; 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, Servicio de Salud del Principado de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain. 2Clinic for Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Belgrade, Serbia. Purpose Pediatric stroke has become increasingly recognized as an important Inherited and acquired risk factors contribute to the development of cause of morbidity and mortality. The etiological heterogenity of this the atherosclerotic lesion and its most serious clinical manifestation, disease implicates careful consideration of the complex interactions myocardial infarction (MI). Studies with human tissues and animal between genetic and acquired risk factors. In order to investigate the models have suggested a role for matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) in influence of genetic factors in childhood stroke, we compared the dis- atherosclerosis, and several functional polymorphisms in the MMP-1 tributions of mutations/polymorphisms affecting haemostasis and/or gene have been linked to the risk for MI. The aim of this study was to endothelial function (FVLeiden, FIIG20210A, MTHFRC677T, ACE ID evaluate the association between three promoter polymorphisms and and eNOSG894T) among children with stroke and controls. A total early MI in a Spanish cohort. number of 26 children with arterial ischemic stroke, and a control group Methods of 50 healthy children were included in the study. No statistically sig- We performed a case-control study with 261 unrelated male patients nificant differences in allelic and genotypic distribution were detected who had suffered an early MI and 194 healthy matched controls. All in comparisons between groups. However, when combined genotypes participants were smokers and younger than 60 years. The genotypes were analyzed, statistical significance was observed for the associa- for the three MMP-1 promoter polymorphisms (-1607 1G/2G; -519 A/ tion of MTHFR CT and eNOS TT gene variants. The results of our G; -340 T/C) were determined through restriction enzyme digestion study suggest that this genotype combination represents a risk factor of a PCR fragment (PCR-RFLP). Comparison of allele and genotype of 7.2 (p=0.017) for stroke in children. frequencies of individual polymorphisms and haplotypes was carried out using the chi-square test (SHEsis software). P17.20 Results HmOX1 polymorphism in patients with Atherosclerosis Allelic and genotypic frequencies of individual polymorphisms did not A. Aleyasin, Z. Mohammad; differ between patients and controls. Statistical analysis of the hap- NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. lotypes showed that the combination -1607 /-519 /-340, present in Introduction: Heme oxygenase (HO) is important in the defense against 2G G T 3.4 % of controls, had a higher frequency among patients (p=0.005; oxidative stress and as a factor in an antiatherogenic mechanism. OR=2.4; CI=[1.27-4.55]). Moreover, the haplotype -1607 /-519 /- Heme oxygenase (HO) leads to the generation of free iron, carbon 1G G 340 showed higher frequency in controls (p=0.02; OR=0.68; 95 % monoxide, and bilirubin. A length polymorphism of GT repeats in the T CI=[0.49-0.94]). This haplotype is the combination of alleles with a de- promoter of human HO-1 gene shows difference transcriptional activ- scribed less transcriptional activity. ity which modulate the transcription of the gene in vascular cells. The Conclusion aim of this study was to assess the association of the length of (GT)(n) Our results confirmed and extended the previously reported associa- repeats in the development of coronary artery disease (CAD). tion between MMP-1 promoter polymorphisms and MI, proving that its METHODS:We screened the allelic frequencies of (GT)(n) repeats action could be through the instability and rupture of the plaque. in the HO-1 gene promoter in 59 patients who underwent coronary angiography. Because the distribution of numbers of (GT)(n) repeatsGenetic analysis, linkage ans association  was bimodal, based on previously studies we divided the alleles into 2 P17.23 subclasses: class S included shorter (<27) repeats, and class L includ- CYPC* allele modifies the activity of the renin-angiotensin ed longer (> or =27) repeats. Multivariate logistic regression models system in hypertensive men including standard coronary risk factors revealed that the genotypes K. M. Donner1,2, T. P. Hiltunen1,2, T. Suonsyrjä1,2, T. Hannila-Handelberg1,2, I. were significantly related to CAD status . In this study, the patients with Tikkanen1, M. Antikainen3, A. Hirvonen3, K. Kontula1,2; shorter GT repeats were less likely to have CAD. 1Department of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Research CONCLUSIONS: Length polymorphism in the HO-1 gene promoter is Program for Molecular Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Finn- related to CAD susceptibility in Iranian people who also have coronary ish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland. disease risk . This study confirm HO-1 antiatherogenic role in Iranian CYP2C9 catalyses the formation of epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) patients with CAD. that have been described to show antihypertensive action in kidneys and vasculature. Two variants, CYP2C9*2 and *3, have reduced cata- P17.21 lytic activity. We studied the impact of these variants on the activity Genetic variations in nitric oxide synthase genes NOs1, NOs2A of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) in two cohorts of and NOs3 and cerebral small vessel disease hypertensive subjects. J. Wang1, M. Tscherner2, R. Schmidt2, F. Fazekas2, H. Schmidt2; The GENRES Study consisted of 219 hypertensive Finnish men, aged 1Xinjiang Medical University, Xinjiang, China, 2Medical University Graz, Graz, 35 to 60 years, who were treated with four different antihypertensive Austria. monotherapies for four weeks. Baseline laboratory values were mea- Background: Cerebral small vessel disease (cSVD) is the second most sured at the end of the first placebo period. The cohort with treatment- common endemic entity of the ageing brain following Alzheimer pa- resistant essential hypertension (TREH) consisted of 170 females and thology. Its hallmark lesions white matter lesions (WML) and lacunar 145 males who completed a captopril challenge test (CCT) and had no infarctions can be non-invasively depicted with brain MRI. Gait distur- interfering medications. bances and progressive cognitive impairment are frequent clinical con- Allele frequencies for CYP2C9*2 and *3 in both cohorts correspond to sequences. Major risk factors are hypertension and age. Its heritability reported Caucasian frequencies. In the GENRES group, CYP2C9*1*3 is in the range of 55-73%. Nitric oxide is an important regulator of blood genotype was associated with lower baseline plasma renin activity pressure and cerebral blood flow and has been implicated in ischemic (PRA) and serum aldosterone levels compared with CYP2C9*1*1 gen- stroke. Here we studied genetic variations of nitric oxide synthetases, otype (P=0.0008 and 0.009, respectively). In the TREH group, PRA NOS1, 2A and 3 in relation to cSVD. and aldosterone levels and their product were lower in male CYP2C9*3 Methods: The study was conducted in the Austrian Stroke Prevention allele carriers (P=0.09, 0.19, and 0.04, respectively), and these males Study a prospective, cohort study in the normal elderly in Graz, Aus- had a lower increase in PRA (P=0.24) and a lower reduction in serum tria. In total 787 participants underwent genotyping and MRI. Geno- aldosterone (P=0.003) upon CCT. In addition, these males had higher typing was done by Illumina Human610-Quad BeadChip. Association serum sodium levels (P=0.08). was tested by additive genetic model with 1-degree of freedom trend In conclusion, this study carried out in two independent cohorts of hy- test relating genotype dosage, 0 to 2 copies of the minor allele to WML pertensive men shows that CYP2C9*3 influences RAAS activity. These volume and lacunes. Adjustment was done for age and sex (model1) findings might reflect variations in CYP2C9-mediated EET metabolism and for age, sex and hypertension (model 2). and call for additional studies on the eicosanoid-related genetic effects Results: We selected 9 tagging SNPs in NOS1, 17 in NOS2A and in human hypertension. 12 SNPs in NOS3 gene. Several SNPs in NOS1 and NOS2A gene showed significant associations in both models with WML but not with P17.24 lacunes. Association was no longer significant after adjustment for Deletion allele in a tunisian healthy and myocardial infarction multiple comparison. population Discussion: Our results do not support the role of SNPs at the NOS1, S. Mehri1, B. Baudin2, S. Mahjoub1, B. Bénéteau-Burnat2, R. Mechmeche3, M. 2A and 3 genes in cerebral small vessel disease. Hammami4, S. Ben Arab1; 1Unité d`Epidémiologie Génétique et Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine de P17.22 Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Service de Biochimie A, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, NOtcH3 Gene and cerebral small Vessel Disease France, 3Services des Explorations Fonctionnelles Cardiologiques, Hôpital La M. Tscherner1, R. Schmidt2, F. Fazekas2, H. Schmidt1; Rabta de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 4Laboratoire de Biochimie, U.S.C.R de Spectro- 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Graz, Austria, 2University métrie de Masse, la Faculté de Médecine de Monastir, Tunis, Tunisia. Clinic of Neurology, Graz, Austria. Background: The role of the insertion/deletion polymorphism in the an- Background: Cerebral small vessel disease (cSVD) is the second most giotensin-converting enzyme gene (ACE I/D) on myocardial infarction common entity of the ageing brain following Alzheimer pathology. Its (MI) is controversial. Individuals homozygous for the deletion have a hallmarks are white matter lesions (WML) and lacunar infarctions, de- higher level of circulating enzyme and therefore may predispose to tected by brain MRI. Gait disturbances and cognitive impairment are cardiovascular damage. the clinical consequences. Risk factors are hypertension and age. Its Aim: to assesses the effect of the ACE polymorphism on MI and its heritability is in the range of 55-73%. In the present study we investi- relationship with serum ACE activity and to compare them with other gated the role of NOTCH3 gene in cSVD. Mutations in NOTCH3 cause populations. CADASIL, a monogenetic form of cSVD. Patients and Methods: 119 patients with MI compared to 380 healthy Methods: The study population consisted of 923 participants of the controls, originated from the same areas, and genotyped by PCR. Se- Austrian Stroke Prevention Study a population-based, prospective, rum ACE activity was measured by FAPGG as substrate. cohort study. cSVD was defined by MRI on T2 weighted images. Poly- Results: The ACE I/D was significantly associated with MI (p<0.001). morphisms in the NOTCH3 gene were screened in 88 persons with A significant association between the DD genotype and increased risk and 82 persons without cSVD by denaturing HPLC or by sequencing. of MI [ACE DD vs ID and II; OR=3.17 (95% CI, 2.31-4.33; p < 0.001)] SNPs (rs1043994, rs10423702, rs1043997) were genotyped in the and between II genotype and decreased risk of MI [ACE II vs. DD and whole cohort by TaqMan™ assay. ID, OR= 0.33 (95% CI, 0.14-0.47; p < 0.001)]. Results: We detected 35 SNPs in the NOTCH3 gene, 10 SNPs were Serum ACE activity was significantly higher (P<0.05) in patients with MI not described previously. In total 23 SNPs were located in exons, 4 in with the ACE DD genotype (99.2 ± 47.7 U/L) compared with subjects introns, 3 in the promoter and 2 in the 3`-UTR. There was a non signifi- with the ID (70.9 ± 31.4 U/L) and the II (57± 45.3 U/L) genotypes. cant difference in the distribution of the SNPs rs1043994, rs10423702 Conclusion: As ACE DD genotype has been associated with increased and rs1043997 between cSVD positive and negative subjects. serum ACE levels, these findings may implicate ACE I/D polymorphism Discussion: This is the first study investigating the whole NOTCH3 as a genetic marker of MI risk in Tunisian population. gene in healthy population and its role in cSVD. Our results show that SNPs in NOTCH3 gene appear with a high frequency in the elderly. So far our data do not support a role of NOTCH3 in cSVD.Genetic analysis, linkage ans association  P17.25 P17.27 Association study between variants in GAS-TAM genes and Large scale genome wide association study identifies new atheroma carotid plaque genetic loci determining homocysteine levels B. Hurtado1, N. Abasolo1,2, X. Muñoz1, N. García1, J. Krupinski3, P. García de J. B. J. van Meurs1, I. Cotlarciuc2, D. M. Waterworth3, F. Rivadeneira1, P. Vol- Frutos4, N. Sala1; lenweider4, G. Waeber4, B. Kato2, M. J. Brown5, J. Lindemans1, M. Breteler1, X. 1Catalan Institute of Oncology-IDIBELL, Hospitalet de LLobregat, Spain, 2Uni- Yuan3, K. Song3, K. Estrada1, T. Spector2, V. Mooser3, A. G. Uitterlinden1, K. R. versitat Rovira i Virgili, Reus, Spain, 3Hospital Universitari Mútua de Terrassa, Ahmadi2; Terrassa, Spain, 4Institute for Biomedical Research of Barcelona (IIBB-CSIC- 1ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2King’s college, London, United IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain. Kingdom, 3GlaxoSmithKline, King of Prussia, PA, United States, 4CHUV Uni- Previous studies of our group indicated an association between a SNP versity Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5University of Cambridge, Cambridge, and a haplotype of GAS6 and stroke. Carotid atherosclerosis (CA) is United Kingdom. a common cause of stroke and recent studies suggest that pathways Elevated levels of plasma homocysteine (Hcy) are a risk factor for initiated by the interaction of the plasma vitamin K-dependent protein many common clinical conditions, including cardiovascular disease. GAS6 with the tyrosine kinase receptors TYRO3, AXL and MERTK Inter-individual variation in Hcy levels is highly heritable (h2 ~70%), but (TAM) may have a relevant role in atherogenesis. the genetic component is poorly understood. We conducted the first The aim of this study was to analyze the genetic association between genome-wide association study (GWAS) of plasma Hcy levels using SNPs and haplotypes in GAS6-TAM genes and CA. four populations from Switzerland, the Netherlands and UK with a total We perfomed a case-control study with 145 patients who had CA con- sample size of 11,888 individuals. We identified five loci (seven inde- firmed by nuclear magnetic resonance and 162 patients who suffered pendent associations) reaching genome-wide significance. Five of the from cardioembolic (non atherogenic) stroke. For all patient and con- seven associations were present in or near three previous candidate trol samples there was information on traditional risk factors. Genotyp- genes: MTHFR (rs1801133, p=2x10-47; rs11121480, p=4x10-19), CBS ing of 19 selected SNPs was performed by real-time PCR, using both (rs6586282, p=5x10-12; rs1789953, p=2x10-11) and MTR (rs10925257, FRET or TaqMan probes. p=2x10-9). We identified two completely novel loci including one on Minor allele frequencies were different between atherogenic and non chromosome 16q24.3, rs908951 (p=2.1x10-11), located in dipeptidase atherogenic populations for the rs2277537 and rs16971872 SNPs 1 (DPEP1) and one on 11q14.3, rs7130284 (p=9x10-11) in the NADPH in TYRO3. Adjusted logistic regression (LR) analyses indicated that oxidase 4 gene (NOX4). Neither gene has any obvious functional link rs2277537 in TYRO3 and rs869016 in MERTK associated to CA, re- to Hcy, although 16q24.3 also contains the Fanconi anemia gene FAN- spectively increasing (OR:2.72 [0.95-7.78]) and decreasing (OR=0.39 CA and the top hit in this region (rs908951) is strongly associated with [0.10-0.79]) the risk of CA. Linkage disequilibrium results were in con- FANCA mRNA levels. A strong candidate gene in the 11q14.3 region cordance with the haplotype blocks described in HapMap and adjusted is the PSMAL gene, which is highly homologous to folate hydrolase LR analyses revealed that the haplotypes GCTCA in TYRO3 and the I, which is pivotal in the uptake of folate from the diet. Collectively, ACAA in MERTK, both containing the minor allele of the associated the 7 independent polymorphisms account for up to 4% of the varia- SNPs, were also associated to CA. The association between GAS6- tion in Hcy. We are currently investigating the impact of the 7 variants TAM SNPs and carotid atherosclerosis reinforce a physiological role of on cardiovascular disease. Our results provide a new insight into key the GAS6-TAM pathway in atherogenesis. physiological mechanisms that might underpin many complex diseas- es including cardiovascular disease and highlight novel therapeutic P17.26 targets. the study of GATA gene tagging sNP in patients with arterial hypertension and ischemic heart disease P17.28 O. G. Ivanova1, O. A. Makeeva1, A. A. Lezhnev2, I. V. Tsimbal’uk3, M. L. Hunting for young-onset hypertension genes using a genome- D´jakova2, K. V. Puzyrev2, V. A. Kazakov2, V. M. Shipulin2, V. P. Puzyrev1,3; wide gene-based association method 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Re- H. C. Yang1, Y. J. Liang1, K. M. Chiang2, W. H. Pan2; search Institute of Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Siberian State 1Institute of Statistical Science Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Institute of Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Biomedical Sciences Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. Numerous researches demonstrated that calcineurin pathway plays a Hypertension has high prevalence and large social impacts in various crucial role in cardiac hypertrophy and progression of heart failure. The ethnic populations. Known hypertension-associated genes provide aim was to study tagging SNPs in GATA4 gene in healthy individuals useful but not sufficient information to unravel this complex disorder. and patients with cardiovascular disease and cardiac hypertrophy. We conducted a genome-wide association study with 198 hyperten- We selected tagging SNP in GATA4 gene and analyzed polymor- sive patients and 192 normotensive controls of Han Chinese to identify phisms rs804271, rs8191515 in promoter and rs2898293 in intron of novel disease genes of young-onset hypertension. All samples were GATA4 gene in patients with essential hypertension (n=155), ischemic genotyped with the Affymetrix Human Mapping 500K Set. A two-stage heart disease (n=153), hypertension combined with diabetes mellitus genome-wide association analysis with a SNP-based association scan 2 (n= 90) and healthy volunteers (n=285). at the first stage and a gene-based association scan at the second Genotype frequencies were in accordance with Hardy-Weinberg equi- stage was performed. Logistic regression models with/without adjust- librium. Frequency of rs804271 rare allele in control group was 47%; ments of age, gender and body mass index were fitted to infer SNP rs8191515 - 10%; and rs2898293 - 32%. Patients did not differe from marginal effects and then a p-value combination method is applied healthy subjects in GATA4 gene allele and genotypes frequencies.To to study gene effects. Multiple-test problem is corrected by consid- further analyze the role of genetic variants in cardiac remodelling we ering a false discovery rate of one-thousandth, i.e., -log10(FDR)>3. divided patients with essential hypertension and hypertension com- Among 155,706 intergenic SNPs and 14,309 genes, we identify 23 bined diabetes mellitus 2 into subgroups with left ventricular hyper- intergenic SNPs and 134 genes, which contain novel genes/SNPs and trophy (LVH) and without LVH based on the left ventricle mass index. known genes involved in pathways of cardiovascular disease, meta- We had not revealed differences in GATA4 gene allele and genotypes bolic disease, immune disease and cell development. The identified frequencies between patients with and without LVH. genes cover 2 - 207 intragenic SNPs probed on Affymetrix 500K Set. In our previous studies it was shown that polymorphisms in two genes A gene-expression confirmation study and a SNP-replication study are of calcineurin pathway (PPP3R1 and NFATC4) may be involved in car- in preparation. diac remodeling in patients with arterial hypertension. It is essential to investigate polymorphisms of calcineurin pathway genes, including P17.29 tagging SNP, because functional genetic variants in these genes are Novel polymorphic AluYb8 insertion in hypertension candidate still unknown. gene WNK1 M. Putku1, K. Kepp1, E. Org1, P. Juhanson1, G. Veldre1,2, P. Kelgo1, D. Comas3, J. Bertranpetit3, V. Kozich4, E. Khusnutdinova5, M. Viigimaa6, M. Laan1; 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Cardiol- ogy, University of Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of Evolutionary Biology, UniversityGenetic analysis, linkage ans association  Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 4Institute of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, P17.31 Charles University – First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 5In- combined effect of the FABP2, PPARG2 and Pc1 gene stitute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Science Center, Russian Academy polymorhisms on the metabolic syndrome risk in a Romanian of Sciences, Bashkortostan, Russian Federation, 6Centre of Cardiology, North population Estonia Medical Centre, Tallinn, Estonia. K. Csep1, G. Dudutz1, M. Vitay2, I. Pascanu1, C. Banescu1, L. Koranyi2; Essential hypertension with its concurrent risk to other cardiovascular 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg Mures, Tg Mures, Romania, 2Drug diseases affects approximately 25% of population in industrialized so- Research Center, Balatonfured, Hungary. cieties. Determining the genetic component of the disease is crucial for Objective. Based on the supposed multifactorial inheritance, we pro- better understanding of the molecular basis of the phenotype and for posed to follow the joint effect of three SNPs in candidate genes of the developing more effective treatment of the disease. metabolic syndrome. We have studied the risk of the disease diag- I present the data on a novel, so far non-described human polymor- nosed according to the IDF reccommendations in the presence of the phic intronic AluYb8 element located in hypertension candidate gene FABP2-A54T, PPARG2-P12A and PC1-K121Q polymorphisms in the WNK1. WNK1 plays an important role in salt homeostasis through population from Tg. Mures. different mechanisms and thereby has functional importance in blood Material and methods. We carried out a case-control study on 144 pressure regulation. Over-expression of the WNK1 gene is associated patients and 73 healthy controls. Anthropometric measurements, bio- with high blood pressure. chemical assays were undertaken, fasting insulinemia was measured The comparative sequencing showed that the surrounding genomic by ELISA, and insulin sensitivity was assessed by the QUICKI indices. region of the human-specific WNK1 Alu insertion is highly conserved Genetic analysis was done by PCR followed by restriction enzyme di- between human and chimpanzee. Population genetic study targeting gestion with Hha I, BstU I and Ava II. the distribution of the Alu insertion in 22 human population samples Results. Regardless of their type, the increase of the number of predis- from Europe, Asia and Africa indicated an expansion of the Alu-bear- posing alleles on the three studied loci associates with a significantly ing chromosomes in Europe and Asia. The association between the increased risk to develop the syndrome (chi2 for trend = 7.99, df = 1, p carrier status of the intronic AluYb8 element and blood pressure was = 0.0047), and the risk was highest in the presence of the TT + PP/PA studied using 1211 untreated subjects from the HYPEST cohort (Es- + QQ/KQ genotype combination (OR = 4.31, p= 0.015). tonian population). Statistically significant association was detected Conclusion. Our results confirm the small but additive effect of certain between the carrier status of the WNK1 AluYb8 and systolic as well as predisposing gene polymorphisms as part of a polygenic system in the diastolic blood pressure (linear regression testing, p= 0.01 and p=0.03, development of the common metabolic syndrome, though individual respectively). Subjects with the Alu insertion had higher blood pres- gene combinations can be presumed and other gene interactions like sure readings. Real-time PCR analysis showed that Alu insertion af- epistasis seem also plausible. fects the profile of alternative WNK1 transcripts. In conclusion this study suggests a possible involvement of WNK1 in- P17.32 tronic polymorphic AluYb8 in increasing the susceptibility to essential Polymorphic genetic markers are of significance in developing hypertension. of cardiovascular complications of the metabolic syndrome A. N. Voitovich1, M. A. Bogdanova1, T. D. Glebovskaya2, B. I. Smirnov3, V. V. P17.30 Isakov4, S. I. Yagashkina4, O. N. Semenova4, N. N. Burova2, O. A. Berkovich5, Association Between Variants in the Genes for Leptin, Leptin E. V. Shliakhto5, V. I. Larionova1; Receptor and Proopiomelanocortin with chronic Heart Failure in 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian the czech Population Federation, 2Federal heart, blood end endocrinology center after V.A. Almazov, A. Vasku1, J. A. Bienertova Vasku2, L. Spinarova3, P. Bienert1; Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3St. Petersburg State Electrotechnical 1Masaryk University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathological Physi- University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Research Center for People, ology, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, who lived in Blockaded Leningrad, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5St. 3Masaryk University, Faculty of Medicine, 1st Clinic of Internal Medicine and Petersburg Pavlov State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa- Cardioangiology, Brno, Czech Republic. tion. Background: Patients with chronic heart failure (CHF) express en- The metabolic syndrome (MS) is a cluster of metabolic abnormalities hanced catabolic metabolism resulting in overall weight loss and adi- often associated with development of various complications including pokines are generally recognized to play the crucial role in adipose cardiovascular diseases. Recently, many studies showed some poly- tissue signaling. The aim of this study was to investigate the possible morphisms in apolipoprotein genes might be associated with develop- associations of defined variability in leptin (dbSNP ID rs7799039), ment of cardiovascular complications of MS. OBJECTIVE: to study the proopiomelanocortin (dbSNP ID rs3754860 and dbSNP ID rs1009388) association of several polymorphisms in apo-genes APOA1 G-75A, and leptin receptor gene (dbSNP rs1137101) with CHF and evaluate APOA1 C83T, APOC3 Sst1, APO E epsilon, APOA5 T-1131C, and their potential as the CHF susceptibility genes. APOA5 S19W with MS complicated with acute coronary syndrome Methods: The case-control study comprised a total of 372 patients of (MS/ACS). STUDY POPULATION: MS/ACS patients, among them 76 Caucasian origin with chronic heart failure (functional classes NYHA males and 61 females (average age 61.7±1.0), and the controls, among II-IV, ejection fraction (EF) < 40%) and 407 healthy controls. The sub- them 114 healthy males (average age 40.0±0.5) and 84 females (av- jects were genotyped for the LEP -2548 G/A, LEPR Gln223Arg and erage age 85.9±0.5) without any cardiovascular disease. All of them POMC RsaI (5´-UTR) and C1032G variants (intron 1) by means of were investigated clinically, biochemically and genetically. RESULTS: PCR-based methodology. Among male MS/ACS patients, there was a lower rate of carries of Results: No case-control differences in genotypes or allele frequen- APOE e4-allele compared to the controls (18% vs. 28%, OR=0.62, cies as well as POMC haplotypes were observed between CHF pa- 90%CI 0.38-1.02, p=0.075). Also among them, there was a higher rate tients and controls. In multivariate regression modeling, the LEPR of carries of APOA5 19W- allele compared to the controls (18% vs. Gln223Arg showed an independent prediction role for CHF, with the A 3%, OR=6.75, 95%CI 2.01-22.70, p<0.001). No significant difference allele being more frequent in CHF under 56y of age (p=0.0002, OR = in genotype distributions of the studied apo-genes was found between 1.29, 95% CI = 1.089 - 1.549). the female groups. All studied groups were shown to correspond with Conclusions: Based on our findings, the RR genotype of LEPR Gl- Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that n223Arg polymorphism might be considered a genetic marker for ear- the APOE and APOA5 S19W polymorphisms are of significance in lier CHF onset both in ischemic heart disease or dilated cardiomy- male MS patients with ACS. opathy patients. However, the role of the polymorphic variants in the genes encoding for adipokines as potential CHF susceptibility genes will require further investigation to elucidate the underlying pathophysi- ological consequences.Genetic analysis, linkage ans association  P17.33 P17.35 Cardiac- and muscle-specific microRNAs miR-1, miR-133 and molecular genetics investigation of myocardial infarction of the miR-208 dysregulation in human myocardial infarction Yakut population E. Boštjančič1, N. Zidar1, D. Štajer2, D. Glavač1; L. V. Grigorieva1, T. R. Nasibullin2, V. V. Pauk2, O. E. Mustafina2, E. K. Khus- 1Institute of Pathology, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Centre for Intensive Internal Medi- nutdinova2; cine, University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia. 1Yakut Scientific Center of complex medical problems, Siberian branch of Rus- MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small RNA molecules that regulate gene sian Academy of medical sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of expression in a variety of physiological functions, development and Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Center, Russian Academy of Sci- disease. They are believed to be new promising therapeutic targets, ences, Ufa, Russian Federation. biomarkers and/or prognostic factors. From 866 human miRNAs de- Myocardial infarction (MI) is a complex disease reflecting the interac- scribed so far, three miRNAs have been described as muscle and/or tion of multiple genes with environment. These data show that some cardiac specific: miR-1, miR-133, and miR-208, that contribute to heart single-nucleotide polymorphisms of the candidate genes are associ- development and heart diseases. In animal model of myocardial infarc- ated with myocardial infarction (MI) among the Yakuts. tion (MI), to the best of our knowledge, there is only miR-1 expression We have investigated 102 males having myocardial infarction of under pattern analysed so far. We therefore analysed expression of miR-1, 55 years of age and 152 males for control group. Both groups are miR-133a, miRNA-133b and miR-208 in human MI and fetal hearts in matched by age. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood comparison to the normal adult hearts. Autopsy samples of infarcted leukocytes. The APOÅ (158Arg/Cys and 112 Cys/Arg), APOB (EcoRI, heart tissue from 50 patients with MI were included, as well as heart XbaI), LPL (HindIII), CETP (421Ile/Val), eNOS (VNTR), PON1 (192Gln/ tissue from 8 healthy trauma victims and 8 fetuses that died in utero. Arg), ACE (I/D), AT1R (1166A/C) polymorphisms were determined miRNAs expression was analysed using real-time PCR. miR-208 was by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length up-regulated in all cases of MI compared to healthy adults and fe- polymorphism (RFLP) analyses on agarose, and polyacrylamide gel tuses. Significant miR-208 up-regulation (~4-fold) was detected in MI electrophoresis. Statistical tests were performed with the MS Excel XP patients, indicating stress-induced up-regulation, and ~2-fold in MI pa- (Microsoft), “Statistica for Windows 5.0” (StatSoft), “GENEPOP” and tient with ventricular fibrillation and/or tachycardia (VT/VF), indicating “RxC” (Rows x Columns). its contribution to arrhythmogenesis. miR-1 and miR-133 expression Results: The genotype frequencies were consistent with Hardy-Wein- analysis suggested time-depended expression pattern in MI, whereas berg equilibrium and not significantly different. We have detected as- all tested miRNAs were down-regulated in fetal in comparison to adult sociations with MI in Yakut population on APOE, APOB (XbaI), eNOS, hearts. In addition, some patterns of miR-1, miR-133a and miR-133b ACE, AT1R genes polymorphisms. The higher risk of MI showed in expression in MI were similar in MI and fetal hearts supporting the con- APOB (XbaI) genotypes X+/X+ (P=0.022, OR=4.02), X+/X- (P=0.022, cept of reprogramming of cardiac genes in remodeling of the heart. OR=2.02,) and allele X+ (P=0.0001, OR=2.56), in eNOS allele 4A (P=0.022, OR=2.35), in AT1R genotype A/C (P=0.021, OR=2.45). The P17.34 lower risk of MI have APOE genotype 3/3 (P=0.042, OR=0.55), APOB The left ventricular systolic heart insufficiency in normotensive genotype X-/X- (P=0.001, OR=0.38), ACE genotype D/D (P=0.063, cAD patients is associated with mtHFR 677tt genotype, OR=0.54), eNOS genotype 4B/4B (P=0.02, OR=0.2). whereas in hypertensive APOE 33 subjects with mtHFR 1298cc The latter association enables us to use genotyping polymorphisms for genotype prognosis recurrence in the Yakut myocardial infarction survives and E. Strauss1, W. Supinski2, J. Gluszek3, A. L. Pawlak1; it’s necessary for population researche. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Regional Hospital, Gorzow Wielkopolski, Poland, 3Department of Hyperten- P17.36 sion, University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Peripheral arterial disease and methylenetetrahydrofolate The methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677C>T and reductase (MTHFR) 677c>t mutations: a case-control study and 1298A>C genotypes, which influence homocysteine (tHcy) plasma meta-analysis level, were studied for the possible specificity of involvement in devel- B. A. Jennings1, N. Khandanpour2, F. J. Meyer2, Y. K. Loke1, G. Willis3; opment of the left ventricular systolic insufficiency (LVSI) as late effect 1UEA, Norwich, United Kingdom, 2Department of vascular surgery, Norfolk of coronary artery disease (CAD). and Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, United Kingdom, 3Department of A group of 190 men with CAD diagnosed by coronarography at age Molecular Genetics, Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, United <60 years was recruited. LVSI was recognized when the left ventricular Kingdom. ejection fraction value was below/equal 40%. Patients were divided Hyperhomocysteinaemia is associated with peripheral arterial disease into 4 subgroups according to the LVSI and hypertension occurrence: (PAD). Homocysteine metabolism is affected my multiple genetic, di- 105 patients qualified to have normal systolic function (44,8% hyper- etary and other environmental factors. tensive) and 85 patients qualified to have LVSI (47,1% hypertensive). This study considered the association of methylenetetrahydrofolate re- The MTHFR and APOE (apolipoprotein E) genotypes were ascer- ductase (MTHFR) 677C>T polymorphisms with the incidence of PAD tained by PCR-RFLP methods. tHcy and FA levels were measured by by performing a case-control study and a cross sectional study of ho- immunochemical methods. The differences in distribution of MTHFR mocysteine levels. We recruited 133 patients with PAD in Norfolk (for genotypes were studied in CAD patients in relation to the APOE33 a folic acid intervention study, FOLCLAUD) and compared the MTHFR genotype, hypertension and LVSI cooccurrence. allele distribution with 457 healthy individuals. We also carried out a The subgroup of normotensive subjects with LVSI, as compared to the meta-analysis to place our data within the context of other published rest of patients, was characterized by the 2,6-fold higher frequency of studies. We searched Medline, Embase and Cochrane databases up 677TT homozygotes (p<0,05) and the higher tHcy level (15,5 ±13,2 to March 2008 for any studies on the association between MTHFR µmol/L; 12,0 ±5,4 µmol/L; respectively; p=0,04). In the subgroup of 677C>T polymorphism and PAD. hypertensive patients with LVSI, the higher frequency of 1298CC ho- The MTHFR 677C>T allele frequencies in the cases and controls were mozygotes was found as compared to the other patients, but this dif- 0.37 and 0.33 and the odds ratios for the association of the 677 T al- ference was significant only among subjects with APOE 33 genotype lele or TT genotype with PAD were 1.18 [95% C.I. 0.89, 1.58] and 1.99 (OR=3,7; p<0,05). [95% C.I. 1.09, 3.63]. Homozygotes for the MTHFR 677C>T mutation In conclusions, the risk of LVSI development may be induced by differ- had higher concentrations of plasma total homocysteine, odds ratio ent mechanisms by MTHFR 677C>T and 1298A>C genotypes in nor- 2.82 [95% C.I. 1.03, 7.77] compared to wild types. motensive and hypertensive men with CAD, respectively. Grant from Twelve of 72 articles retrieved from the database search reported the Ministry of Education N40208131/2499. prevalence of mutations in PAD patients. A meta-analysis of 9 appro- priate studies, including our own, showed that being homozygous for the C677T allele was associated with an increased risk of PAD; pooled odds ratio 1.36 [95% C.I. 1.09, 1.68]. In conclusion, we have found a strong association between raised ho- mocysteine, the TT genotype and PAD.Genetic analysis, linkage ans association  P17.37 P17.39 Association of the ccttt repeat polymorphism in NOS (Nitric Genetic variability in the AcE gene region surrounding the Alu oxide synthase 2 gene) promoter region with susceptibility to i/D polymorphism is maintained by balancing selection in human pulmonary arterial hypertension populations D. Valverde1, T. Piñeiro-Gallego1, I. Pereiro1, C. Vilariño2, A. Baloira2; R. Cagliani1, M. Fumagalli1,2, S. Riva1, U. Pozzoli1, G. P. Comi3, N. Bresolin1,3, 1University of Vigo. Spain, Vigo, Spain, 2Servicio de Neumología. Complexo M. Sironi1; Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain. 1Scientific Institute IRCCS E. Medea, Bosisio Parini, Italy, 2Bioengineering De- Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a progressive disease in partment, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy, 3Dino Ferrari Centre, Department which the proportion of affected women is twice as men, with an inci- of Neurological Sciences, University of Milan, IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Poli- dence of 1/100000-1000000. Familial cases cover 10% of cases and a clinico, Mangiagalli and Regina Elena Foundation, Milan, Italy. model of autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) plays a critical role in the and genetic anticipation has been proposed. Mutations in the gene maintenance of cardiovascular homeostasis. Extensive research has BMPR2 have been described as responsible for 90% of familial cas- aimed at identifying ACE genetic variants responsible for variation in es, despite the fact that only 20% of the relatives of mutation carriers enzyme plasma concentrations and associated with human diseases. develop the disease. For idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension, These efforts have been hampered by the extensive linkage disequi- mutations in the BMPR2 gene have been described in a 9-26% of librium across the gene and the identity an location of the functional cases. These data support the hypothesis of the existence of other polymorphism(s) is at presently unknown. genes involved and the environmental effect on the development of Here, we characterize the sequence variation and haplotype structure this condition. of the ACE gene region surrounding the Alu insertion/deletion (Alu I/ Vasodilators such as nitric oxide (NO) and prostacyclin, along with pro- D) polymorphism in 4 human populations. We observed high levels longed overexpresion of vasoconstrictors such as endothelin (ET-1), of nucleotide diversity, an excess of intermediate-frequency alleles not only affect vascular tone but also promote vascular remodelling. and, at least in African populations, a higher level of within-species Both have been implicated in the pathogenesis of PAH. diversity compared to interspecific divergence. Analysis of haplotype NO is an endothelial-derived relaxing factor that is synthesized from genealogy indicated the presence of two major clades separated by L-arginine by nitric oxide synthase. NOS2 is the major source of NO deep branches with a coalescence time older than 1.5 million years. All production and polymorphisms in the NOS2 gene promoter are though these features strongly suggest the action of balancing selection and to regulate its transcription activity. we verified that the selection signature is restricted to the gene region The aim of this work was to investigate the association between the surrounding the Alu I/D. CCTTT polymorphism of the NOS2 gene and the susceptibility to Our data therefore imply the presence of a functional polymorphism in PAH. the Alu I/D region and illustrate the contribution of evolutionary models We analysed that polymorphism in 30 patients of PAH and 50 controls. to classic SNP-phenotype association approaches by providing infor- The data reveals that the shorter forms of the CCTTT repeat were as- mation about the localization of candidate functional variants. sociated with susceptibility of PAH. P17.40 P17.38 the effect of codon 71 polymorphism in the apolipoprotein B Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism foki is associated gene on parameters of lipid metabolism in a serbian school-age with severity of atherosclerosis and poor collateralization in child population angiographically documented cAD patients T. M. Damnjanovic1, I. Novakovic1, B. Jekic1, N. Maksimovic1, M. Vukotic1, S. H. Saghafi1, A. Hossein-nezhad1, B. Larijani2; Nedeljkovic1, S. Simeunovic2, L. Lukovic1; 1Bio & Nano Technology Unit of Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Cen- 1Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2University Child ter, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Hospital, Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. Center of Tehran University of medical sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Lipoproteins are vehicles for distribution of plasma lipids and polymor- Iran. phism in the genes encoding for apolipoproteins could influence the Introduction:Recent studies found a relationship between Vitamin D amount of lipid in plasma. We examined the effect of single nucleotide and atherosclerosis. The aim of this study was to evaluate severity of polymorphism in the codon 71 of the apolipoprotein B (apoB) gene on coronary artery disease (CAD) and collateral development in different levels of triglycerides and cholesterol in school-age child population. genotypes of vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene. Studied group included 530 Serbian children attending eight class of Methods:In a case-control study 114 participants with angiographically elementary school. In all participants standard clinical examination documented CAD and normal coronary were recruited. Severity of was performed. Levels of total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cho- CAD was defined by the numbers of involved coronary vessels. The lesterol and triglycerides were determined by standard biochemical modified TIMI scoring was used to grade the collateral development. methods. Polymorphism in apoB codon 71 was genotyped by PCR Whole blood DNA extraction was performed and FokI polymorphism amplification of specific fragment of genomic DNA followed by diges- (C27823T) was determined by PCR-RFLP method. tion with the Apa LI restriction enzyme. We found wild type genotype Results:The mean age of participants was 57.01±10.29 years. Single, CC in 265 (50%), heterozygous CT in 212 (40,0 %) and homozygous two and three-vessel were involved in 27.7, 16.9 and 34.5 percent of mutant genotype TT in 53 (10,3%) children. Triglycerides level was participants, respectively. Prevalence of genotype FF, ff and Ff were higher (p=0,0673) in TT than in two other genotype groups; this dif- 54.4%, 38.6% and 7% respectively. BMI, FBS, total cholesterol, triglyc- ference was statistically significant (p=0,0305) in boys. Also, apolipo- eride and LDL were higher among ff though only significant about BMI protein (a) level was significant higher (p=0,018) in TT group (boys and triglyceride (p=0.03). Age and HDL were lower among ff though p=0,040). Among child with arterial blood pressure under p25 for age only significant about age (p=0.003). in younger patients (age lower carriers of T allele had statistically significant higher total cholesterol than 55 years) with ff genotype compared with FF genotype had sig- (p=0,0078), LDL cholesterol (p=0,033) and triglyceride (p=0,0036) nificantly higher poor-developed (25% vs. 0%) and lower well-devel- levels comparing to the group without T allele. The increased arterial oped collaterals (0% vs.4%) (p=0.03). Significantly higher severity of blood pressure was associated with the significant decrease of HDL CAD also was found among patients with ff genotype (66% of ff vs. cholesterol levels (p=0, 0249), especially in children with T allele. Our 37.5% of FF had three-vessel involvement-p=0.01) in patients over study showed that apoB codon 71 polymorphism has effect on param- 55 years old. eters of lipid metabolism in school-age child. Conclusion: Our findings showed that sever CAD and poor collater- alization associated with ff genotype of VDR gene. VDR genotyping may be useful as early predictor of poor prognosis of coronary artery disease.Genetic analysis, linkage ans association 0 P17.41 cokinase regulatory protein (GCKR). Studies from genome-wide as- study for association between the polymorphism t/c of the sociation (GWA) have identified the SNP rs1260326 at the GCKR gene cYP17 promoter and the risk of premature coronary artery gene as a genetic marker for triglyceride concentrations. Moreover, disease the SNP rs1799884 at the GCK gene has been associated with in- C. Agiannitopoulos1, H. Kasparian2, V. Votteas2, K. Lamnissou1; creased type 2 diabetes risk (DT2) and lower TG concentrations. 1Department of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Department of However, the effects of these genetic variants in the Mediterranean Cardiology, “Laiko” Hospital, Athens, Greece. population remain to be investigated. Therefore, our aim was to ana- lyze the effects of GCKR rs1260326 (P446L) and the GCK rs1799884 Objective: It is well documented that sex hormones influence the risk -30G>A on fasting triglycerides and DT2 in a high cardiovascular risk of developing cardiovascular disease. Several genes are involved in Mediterranean population. We studied 945 subjects (340 men and 605 the synthesis of sex hormones. The CYP17 gene encodes the enzyme women) with high cardiovascular risk (age: 67+/-6 years) recruited cytochrome P450c17α which functions at key steps in the production in Valencia, Spain. The genotypic frequencies of GCKR rs1260326 of human sex steroid hormones. A T/C polymorphism in the 5’ promot- were 29.8%CC, 51%CT, 19.3%TT, and 64.9%GG; 32.2% GA, 2.9% er region of the CYP17 gene has been described. In the present study, AA for GCK rs1799884. The TT homozygous had significantly higher we investigated the possible association between the T/C polymor- triglycerides (CC: 111.4; CT: 124.22; TT: 126.23 mg/dl; p= 0.026) and phism of the promoter of CYP17 gene on risk of premature coronary a borderline lower fasting glucose (p=0.060). However, homozygous artery disease (CAD) in the Greek population. subjects (AA) for the promoter SNP had higher plasma glucose and Methods:A total of 180 CAD patients, documented by coronary angiog- lower triglyceride. Furthermore, the GCK -30AA was significantly as- raphy, aged less than 58 years and 120 healthy controls were studied. sociated with increased DT2 risk (adjusted OR: 2.05 [CI: 1.25-3.38]; To genotype the subjects we used the PCR-RFLP method. p=0.005) and the GCKR TT with higher hypertriglyceridemia risk (ad- Results: The frequencies of GG, GC, CC genotypes were 0.43, 0.38, justed OR: 1.39 [CI: 1.11-1.74]; p=0.005). Conclusion: GCKR and the 0.19, respectively, in the patient group and 0.32, 0.47, 0.21, respec- GCK genetic polymorphisms are significant determinants of triglyc- tively, in the control group. The frequencies of T and C alleles were eride concentration and fasting glucose in a high cardiovascular risk 0.62 and 0.38 in the patient group and 0.55 and 0.45 in the control Mediterranean population. group. The data between the two groups were analyzed by chi-square test. Our results showed that there are no patient/control significant P17.44 differences. PPAR-alpha gene polymorphism correlates with lipid and Conclusion: The results of this study suggest that there is no associa- glucose levels, physical activity and body mass index in tion of the T/C promoter polymorphism of the CYP17 gene with the risk children from families with history of cardio-vascular disease. of premature coronary artery disease. Thus, this polymorphism may A. Y. Vasina, A. P. Khmyrova, O. A. Kononova, L. O. Lubashova, T. S. Razore- not be used as genetic marker for CAD risk assessment. nova, V. V. Masalova, N. V. Slizovsky, M. D. Didur, V. I. Larionova; St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian P17.42 Federation. Analysis of GcKR and ApoA5 genes in Hungarian patients with BACKGROUND: Children whose parents suffered from cardiovascu- ischemic stroke lar disease (CVD) have hypoalphacholesterolemia quite often. Alpha L. Járomi1, V. Csöngei1, E. Sáfrány1, B. Faragó1, L. Magyari1, K. Horvatovich1, cholesterol levels are regulated by PPAR-alpha. It is well known that A. Maász1, C. Sipeky1, Z. Szolnoki2, B. Melegh1; HDL cholesterol concentration is regulated by physical activity concen- 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, tration. OBJECTIVES: To study an association between PPAR-alpha Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Neurology and Neurophysiology, Pándy Kálmán gene polymorphism and lipid and glucose levels, physical activity and County Hospital, Gyula, Hungary. body mass index (BMI) in children from families with a history of CVD. The development of ischemic stroke is caused by both environmental STUDY POPULATION: 58 children (average age 13.2±0.53) and ado- factors - especially triglyceride level increase - and complex genetic lescents with family history of CVD. METHODS: We have evaluated predisposition. Recently, several studies confirmed the role of Gluco- physical activity index per week and per day. Lipid spectrum in all kinase-hexokinase 4-regulator (GCKR) gene in triglyceride accumula- patients was determined by enzyme-linked immunoassay. In all pa- tion in patients with coronary artery diseases. The aim of our study tients we detected glucose concentration and BMI. Molecular testing of was to investigate the genetic association between ApoA5, GCKR PPAR-alpha gene polymorphism (L162V) was performed by PCR. RE- gene polymorphisms and the possible changes of triglyceride level in SULTS: Among 58 children and adolescents, 53 of them had LL-geno- Hungarian ischemic stroke patients. The genotype of the 513 Cauca- type and 5 had LV-genotype. Frequency of L-allele and V-allele were sian patients (207 males, 306 females; mean age: 65.1±0.62) strati- estimated to be 0.96 and 0.04, respectively. In children carried LV-gen- fied into three subgroups (“small-vessel occlusion type”, “large-vessel otype, we detected a higher level of cholesterol (5.08±0.08, 4.82±0.13 group” and “mixed group”) and 172 controls (49 males, 123 females; mmol/l) and lower triglycerides level (0.84±0.04 vs 1.49±0.116 mmol/l) mean age: 56.5±1.20) was determined by PCR-RFLP methods. The compared to children with LL-genotype. We determined correlations T-1131C, IVS3+G476A and C56G variants in ApoA5 gene increased between cholesterol and LDL level (r=0.82) in children with LL-geno- significantly the level of triglyceride, and associated with higher risk type and between physical activity intensivity and glucose level (r=- for the development for stroke disease. By contrast, in the case of 0.84) in children with LV-genotype. Also we have found a correlation T1259C in ApoA5 gene and the two polymorphisms of GCKR gene between BMI and glucose level (r=0.82) and between HDL and LDL (rs1260326, rs780094) we could not detect significant differences be- levels (r=-0.98) in children with LV-genotype. CONCLUSION: children tween the stroke patients and the control subjects. In conclusion, we from families with history of CVD carried LV-genotype need both an observed a significant association between the disease and elevated intensive physical activity and their lipid and glucose levels to be con- triglyceride levels in the presence of three variants of ApoA5 gene, but trolled. no correlation was found for the two polymorphisms of the GCKR gene in the Hungarian ischemic stroke population. P17.45 combined genetic variants 6A/6A of MMP- and i/i of ACE have a P17.43 strong preventive evidence in patients with dilatative pathology Variations in the glucokinase gene and its receptor are of ascending thoracic aorta simultaneously associated with higher fasting glucose and G. Sinkunaite1, A. Tamosiunas2, M. Jonikas1, R. Benetis3, V. Lesauskaite1; lower triglyceride 1Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, Institute of Cardiology, Kaunas University M. Sotos-Prieto1,2, M. Guillen1,2, P. Guillem-Saiz1,2, O. Portoles1,2, D. Corella1,3; of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Department of Preventive Medicine, Institute 1CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición, Valencia, Spain, 2Departe- of Cardiology, Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania, 3Department ment of Preventive Medicine, Valencia, Spain, 3Departement of Preventive of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Kaunas University of Medicine, Medicine, Valencia, Austria. Kaunas, Lithuania. The Glucokinase gene (GCK) is a regulator of glucose storage and Numerous studies have proved impact of genotypes 5A/5A of MMP-3 disposal in the liver and its activity is modulated by binding to glu- and D/D of ACE for cardiovascular diseases development. We haveGenetic analysis, linkage ans association  found genetic variants of MMP-3 and ACE genes that might be consid- acterization of patients and relatives with family history of premature ered to have a protective effect. CHD. The aim of the study was to evaluate combined effect of 5A/6A geno- Material And Methods: A clinical questionnaire of the “Portuguese FH types of MMP3 and I/D genotypes of ACE genes in development of Study” was filled for all patients which included the characterization dilatative pathology of ascending thoracic aorta (DPATA). of premature CHD and lipid profile. Mutations in LDLR, APOB, and Material and methods. We studied 94 (68 males, 25 females) patients PCSK9 genes were analysed by PCR amplification and sequencing, with DPATA, the age ranged from 31 to 81 years (median, 64 years) in a retrospective and prospective study including 80 index cases (IC) and a random sample of the population consisting of 248 males and and 110 relatives. 317 females aged 45 to 72 years (median, 60 years) all from Lithuania. Results: A total of 22/190 (11.57%) patients, 14/80 (17.5%) IC and Analysis was done on DNA using conventional and real time PCR to 8/110 (7.27%) relatives, had premature CHD, (15M/1F). The mean genotype polymorphism 5A/6A at a position -1171 of the MMP3 gene total cholesterol (CT) was 342.39±69.46mg/dl, before treatment (BT) promoter and polymorphism I/D of the ACE gene. and 269.28±22.09mgdl, after treatment (AT). The mean LDLC was Results. It was tendency of higher prevalence (p=0.09) of MMP-3 pro- 274.15±57.48mg/dl (BT) and 190.94±16.32mg/dl (AT). Five novel mu- moter 5A/5A and ACE D/D genotypes in the patients with DPATA com- tations resulting in a splicing error were identified: (c.2547+1 G>A), pared to the persons from the random sample of population, 8.51 % (c.2140 +5 G>A), (c.1359-5C>G), (c.190+4ins TG), and 1016_1017insG and 5.13%, respectively.We did not find any carrier of combined MMP- (L318fsX336). These mutations were characterized functionally by 3 promoter 6A/6A and ACE I/I genotypes in patients with DPATA. In LDLR mRNA studies. The other mutations are: c.-42C>G, (EX16_18 contrast, 7.61% of the random sample population have this combined del), c.1085delA (D341fsX348), c.530C>T (S156L) and a compound gene variant. The resulting p value was p=0.003. heterozygous [c.670G>A (D203N)] + [c.2146G>A (E695K)]. In conclusion, the frequency of MMP-3 promoter 6A/6A and ACE I/I Conclusion: Male patients with LDLR mutations present a more se- genotypes might be considered as a gene combination protecting from vere phenotype since they develop premature CHD more often than development of dilatative pathology of ascending thoracic aorta. women. The early identification of FH patients can preventing the de- velopment of premature CHD if patients receive appropriate pharma- P17.46 cological treatment. characterization of potential splice site mutations in the LDL receptor gene in patients with clinical diagnosis of Familial P17.48 Hypercholesterolaemia Portuguese FH study: the genetic screening of Familial A. C. Alves, V. Franscisco, A. M. Medeiros, L. Marques, M. Bourbon; Hypercholesterolaemia in Portugal Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal. A. M. Medeiros, A. C. Alves, S. Silva, V. Francisco, M. Bourbon, On behalf of Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is an inherited disorder charac- the investigators of the Portuguese FH Study; terized by a high concentration of serum low-density lipoprotein (LDL) Departamento de Promoção da Saúde e Doenças Crónicas, Unidade de I&D, cholesterol since birth, leading to early development of atherosclerosis Grupo de Investigação Cardiovascular, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo and coronary heart disease. FH is most commonly caused by muta- Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal. tions in LDLR gene. About 6% are located near a slice junction or with- Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disor- in intron, predicted to affect the correct splicing of the mRNA. der with a frequency of 1/500 in most European countries and Portugal A total of 11 potential splice site mutations, were found in the “Por- should have about 20000 cases. FH is clinically characterized by high tuguese FH Study”. Six alterations, five of them novel, needed fur- levels of plasma cholesterol, leading to premature atherosclerosis and ther investigation. RT-PCR of LDLR mRNA isolated from fresh blood coronary heart disease (CHD). mononuclear cells of each patient was performed to test the effect The aim of the Portuguese FH Study is to identify FH patients in order of the alteration on splicing. Three of these variants (c.1060+1G>A, to prevent the development of premature CHD. c.2140+1G>A, c.2547+1G>A) caused exon/exons skipping; c.190+4 The genetic diagnosis is based on molecular study of LDLR, APOB insTG caused retention of two nucleotides of intron 2, and c.818-2G>A and PCSK9 genes including techniques such as PCR, DHPLC, au- caused retention of 10 nucleotides of intron 5. One variant could not tomated sequencing and MLPA. Blood samples were collected from be tested experimentally, but it almost certainly affect splicing because 343 index patients with clinical diagnosis of FH and 686 affected/unaf- disrupts the invariant GT donor spice sites (1845+1delG). All these fected relatives. A total of 320 individuals were identified with a genetic alterations lead to a premature termination of the protein which means defect in one of these genes: 315 heterozygous, 3 compound hetero- that the protein coded by the affected allele is smaller and has no func- zygous and 2 true homozygous. Sixty eight different mutations were tion, most possible is degraded within the cell. To correctly estimate detected in LDLR gene, 38 previously described and 30 exclusive of the number of transcripts that are not correctly spliced, real time PCR Portuguese population, including 12 missense mutations, 1 nonsense, should be performed. This will be the next experimental step. 8 splice site mutations, 7 small deletion/insertion and 3 large deletions. It is important to functional assay the effect on splicing of the altera- APOB3500 mutation was identified in 9 individuals and one carried a tions found to prevent genetic misdiagnosis of FH patients and to de- non described mutation in APOB gene. One novel mutation in PCSK9 termine the severity of the disease. gene was identified in three individuals. Although the Portuguese FH Study only identified until now 1,7% of P17.47 FH cases estimated to exist in Portugal, the genetic diagnosis and Familial hypercholesterolemia and premature heart disease counselling of these patients should result in the establishment of ap- A. M. Gaspar1,2, I. M. Gaspar3,4, S. Martins1, R. Rossi4, R. Ferreira4, F. M. propriate treatment and adoption of a healthier lifestyle, allowing them Martins4, H. Santos5, I. Gomes6, O. Moldovan6, J. Henriques7, A. M. Silva8, N. to obtain a quality and life expectancy similar to a healthy person. Vasconcellos9, A. C. Alves10, A. C. Medeiros10, M. Bourbon10; 1Metabolic Unit, Pediatric Departement, Santa Maria Hospital, Lisboa, Portu- P17.49 gal, 2Santa Maria Hospital, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Medical Genetics Department, the molecular diagnostics of familial hypercholesterolemia in Egas Moniz Hospital, Lisboa, Portugal, 4Cardiologic Pediatric Department, czech population Santa Cruz Hospital, Lisboa, Portugal, 5GENOMED, Lisboa, Portugal, 6Medi- R. Goldmann1, L. Gojova1, P. Zapletalova1, L. Tichy1, T. Freiberger2, L. cal Genetics Department,, Santa Maria Hospital, Lisboa, Portugal, 7Medicine Fajkusova1; Department, Egas Moniz Hospital, Lisboa, Portugal, 8Medicine Department, 1Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Cen- Egas Moniz Hospital, Lisboa, Portugal, 9Cardiologic Department, Egas Moniz tre for Cardiovascular Surgery and Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic. Hospital, Lisboa, Portugal, 10Unidade I&D, Grupo Investigação Cardiovascular, Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disor- Instituto Nacional de Saúde, Lisboa, Portugal. der caused by mutations in the gene encoding the low density lipo- Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disor- protein receptor (LDLR). The frequency of heterozygotes is 1/500. der, usually caused by mutations on LDLR, APOB and PCSK9 genes The frequency of homozygotes or compound heterozygotes is 1/1 which is associated with premature atherosclerosis and premature 000 000. Mutations in the LDLR gene were determined using exon coronary heart disease (CHD). by exon screening methods based on individual exon amplification, Objective: To asses the ability to achieve clinical and molecular char- DHPLC analysis and sequencing. We found 14 novel causal mutationsGenetic analysis, linkage ans association  in Czech population. gave informed consent according to the declaration of Helsinki The However, many patients (about 50%) with a clinical diagnosis of FH genetic screening was performed by direct sequencing of the coding have no LDLR mutations identified by this approach. Part of the diag- region of CP gene for four variations and by restriction analysis for the nostic gap is attributable to the genetic heterogeneity of FH. Another other two variations. Each variation taken individually, did not show as- possible explanation is that mutation analysis using exon by exon sociation to PD and no significant differences were observed between screening may fail to detect the mutant allele in case of large intragenic cases and controls. Our results do not support a possible association rearrangements avoiding primer annealing in the deleted area. In or- between Cp variations and PD in Southern Italian population. der to explore the possibility that whole exon deletions or duplications could be the cause of the mutant phenotype, we used MLPA technique P17.52 in this study. Six different large deletions and three duplications were Association study between HFE, tF, tFR genes and Parkinson’s found in Czech population. disease We designed the APEX (arrayed primer extension) based genotyping V. Greco1, E. V. De Marco1, F. E. Rocca1,2, F. Annesi1, D. Civitelli1, G. Provenza- microarray for the simultaneous detection of 160 selected mutations no1,3, P. Tarantino1,3, V. Scornaienchi1, G. Annesi1; and 330 bp of resequencing area of the LDLR gene. The first validation 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone results indicate that the FH chip seems to be a suitable tool for the first (Cosenza), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, line screening of mutations in the LDLR gene. Italy, 3Department of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiology University This work was supported by grant MSMT 2B08060. of Messina, Messina, Italy. Iron overload increases oxidative stress and may lead to neurodegen- P17.50 erative disorders like Parkinson’s disease (PD). Alterations of iron-re- mitochondrial DNA haplogroups and the risk of Parkinson lated genes, therefore, might be involved in the pathogenesis of PD. disease in a cohort of patients from south italy The aim of this study was to investigate a possible association between V. Scornaienchi1, E. V. De Marco1, D. Civitelli1, F. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1,2, F. the polymorphisms C282Y and H63D of the haemochromatosis (HFE) E. Rocca1,3, V. Greco1, G. Provenzano1,2, C. Giordano1, W. Sproviero1,3, G. An- gene and the prevalence of PD in Southern Italy. These variants of the nesi1; HFE gene cause an iron overload disorder, known as hereditary hae- 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Piano Lago di mochromatosis. Contradictory evidence exists on the role of the HFE Mangone, Italy, 2Department of Neuroscience, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, variants as risk factors for PD. The HFE protein is thought to interact University of Messina, Policlinico Universitario, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neu- with the transferrin receptor (TFR), lowering its affinity for iron-bound rology, University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. transferrin (TF). Subsequently we also analyzed if the polymorphisms There is increasing evidence that European mitochondrial DNA (mtD- G258S of the TF gene and S82G of the TFR gene are other risk factors NA) haplogroups J and K, and their shared 10398G single-nucleotide for PD. We examined those four polymorphisms in 181 sporadic PD polymorphism (SNP) in the ND3 gene, have a protective role in the patients and 180 controls from Southern Italy. The clinical diagnosis cause of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (PD). We tested whether cer- of PD was based according to the UK PD Brain Bank Society criteria. tain polymorphisms in mtDNA can predispose to PD in a population We carried out a genetic analysis by standard PCR and restriction that is rather genetically homogeneous. Here, we determined the dis- digestion method. We did not find significant differences in genotype tributions of these mtSNPs, the constructed haplogroups and the clus- and allele frequencies between PD and controls for all polymorphisms ters or superclusters of these haplogroups in a large cohort of 363 PD studied. Our results suggest that the C282Y and H63D variants do not patients (213 males and 150 females, age at onset ≥50) from South contribute significantly to the risk of PD. Furthermore, there was no Italy with idiopathic PD vs a group of 400 unaffected individuals from association between the G258S TF gene and S82G TFR gene with the same geographyc area PD. However, it would be interesting to extend our study to other iron In a preliminarily analysis we found no mtSNP or mtDNA haplogroup related genes to verify their potential role in PD. that predisposes to PD in our South Italy population. Specifically our results indicated that the distributions of the nine major European hap- P17.53 logroups among South Italy PD patients did not differ significantly from sequence analysis of mtDNA in Parkinson‘s disease patients those of the surrounding European genetic landscape. In particular, from Bashkortostan Republic of Russia from the present study it can be deduced that no mtDNA variations I. Gilyazova1, I. Khidiyatova1, O. Derbeneva2, E. Ruiz-Pesini3, R. Khusainova1, predisposing to PD are present in the South Italy population, and that R. Magzhanov4, D. C. Wallace2, E. Khusnutdinova1; these results are in keeping with previous studies that failed to detect 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics,Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian causally related mtDNA sequence variations in this disorder. Federation, 2Centre for Molecular and Mitochondrial Medicine and Genetics, Irvine, CA, United States, 3cDepartamento de Bioquimica, Biologia Molecular y P17.51 Celular, Universidad de Zaragoza-CIBERER-ISCIII, Zaragoza, Spain, 4Bashkir ceruloplasmin gene variations and Parkinson’s disease: an State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. association study in southern italian population MtDNA common variation is reported to modify the risk of Parkinson’s F. E. Rocca1,2, V. Greco1, F. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1,3, E. V. De Marco1, D. Civi- disease (PD). We evaluated the impact of the mtDNA variant on PD telli1, G. Provenzano1,3, V. Scornaienchi1, W. Sproviero1, G. Annesi1; risk in 157 unrelated Tatar PD patients and 183 unrelated control sub- 1Institute of Neurological Sciences,National Research Council, Mangone jects. Whole mtDNA sequencing in two PD patients with haplogroup (Cosenza), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro,, H (H and H2) and two with haplogroup U (Uk1 and U4) PD patients Italy, 3Department of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiology University showed that haplogroup H mtDNA harbored one potentially functional of Messina, Messina, Italy. variant, tRNALys A8343G. The Tatar haplogroup H2 mtDNA harbored Ceruloplasmin (CP) regulates iron levels in the central nervous system another unusual variant, a homoplasmic ND2 gene missense muta- and prevents free radical injury. Iron-related oxidative stress is an im- tion (A64T, CI =82%), which could increase the risk of developing PD. portant component of the neurodegenerative process in Parkinson’s The haplogroup U mtDNAs, U4 and Uk1, both harbored the defining disease (PD). A possible involvement of ceruloplasmin in the patho- haplogroup U tRNALeu(CUN) variant A12308G and the 16S rRNA genesis of PD has been supported by immunohistochemical studies A1811G subhaplogroup U variant. They also shared common variants that reveal a colocalization of ceruloplasmin and Lewy bodies. It has A1438G in the 12S rRNA and A2706G in the 16S rRNA. The U4 mtD- been reported that there are alterations in ceruloplasmin concentra- NA had the defining cytochrome b gene variant T15693C (M316T). tion and ferrroxidase activity in serum from heteroallelic Pd patients. However, this mtDNA also harbored the rare ND4L missense mutation Some functional findings show that altered activity of ceruloplasmin at C10654T (A62V) (CI = 3%) and the polymorphic double missence may present a vulnerability factor for iron induced oxidative stress in variant at T8567C in the ATP8/ATP6 gene overlapping region (S68P/ PD. To elucidate the role of this gene in our population, we screened a I14T) (CI = 23% and 33%, respectively). TheUk1 mtDNA had the defin- total of 230 sporadic PD patients and 231 controls from Southern Italy ing subhaplogroup polypeptide missence mutations ATP6 nt G9055A for the six know variations (I63T,P477L, D544E, T551I, R793H and (A177T), ND3 nt A10398G (T114A), and cytochrome b nt T14798C T841R) identified in a german population. All the patients were diag- (F18L). However, the Uk1 mtDNA also contained a heteroplasmic mis- nosed with idiopathic PD according to the UK brain bank criteria and sense mutation in the COII gene at nt G7637G/A (E18K) (CI = 100%).Genetic analysis, linkage ans association  It almost certainly caused a functional defect in complex IV and thus public of Iran, 3Center of Excellence in Biomathematics, School of Mathematics, contributed to the PD development. Statistics and Computer Science, College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P17.54 Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen- Genetic association of Homer1 gene and Levodopa induced erative disease. PD is considered a complex disease, and both genetic dyskinesia and environmental factors are relevant to its etiology. Several genes V. De Luca1, G. Annesi2, E. De Marco2, F. Annesi2, G. Nicoletti2, P. Barone3, A. associated with PD have been identified by linkage analysis in multi- Quattrone2; case families. PARK2 on chromosome 6 , the second largest human 1University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 2CNR Instituto di Scienze gene reported to date, is one of the PD associated gene. Lesions in Neurologiche, Italy, 3Universita’ di Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy. this gene have most often been observed in familial and young onset Levodopa-induced dyskinesia is a frequent and disabling side-effect cases. PARK2 encodes Parkin, a protein of 456 amino acids that is an observed during the treatment of Parkinson disease. E3-ubiquitin ligase, a critical component of the pathway that covalently Homer is a postsynaptic density protein localized at excitatory synaps- attaches ubiquitin to a protein targeted for degradation. We sequenced es that interacts with the C-terminal intracellular domain tail of group 1 the PARK2 gene in 96 unrelated Iranian PD patients. A novel variation metabotropic glutamate receptor through a PDZ-like domain. Homer1 was observed in intron 9 (IVS9+1; c.1083 +1 G>A) of one patient in the is an immediate early gene (IEG) that is regulated by antipsychotics. homozygous state. The variation affects a highly conserved position in The aim of this analysis is to study the association between levodopa- the 5′ splice site of nucleus gene. Further analysis revealed the pres- induced dyskinesia and Homer1 gene variants. ence of the same variation in the homozygous state in the patient’s The study population consisted of 129 unrelated patients from South- affected sister. The variation was observed neither in 220 controls nor ern Italy recruited through the Institute of Neurology in Cosenza, Italy in 140 additional patients as assessed by ARMS-PCR. These observa- (64 males and 65 females) affected by idiopathic PD. The mean age tions are consistent with the proposal that the novel variation G IVS 9 at the time of the assessment was 67+/-8.3, the age of onset of Par- +1 A in PARK2 can cause Parkinson’s disease. kinson was 56.4+/-9.6 and the mean score for the UPDRS was 49.3+/- 19.4 in the overall sample. P17.57 We have analyzed three promoter markers in HOMER1 gene Analysis of the α-synuclein gene dosage in autosomal dominant (rs10942891, rs4704560, rs4704559). Parkinson’s disease The association with levodopa-induced dyskinesia was analyzed with E. Semenova1, M. Shadrina1, P. Slominsky1, S. Illarioshkin2, G. Bagyeva2, A. UNPHASED 3.0.9 regarding allele, genotype and haplotype. Haplo- Karabanov2, I. Ivanova-Smolenskaia2, S. Limborska1; type Odds-Ratio was calculated using the specific test haplotype. 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Rus- The SNP rs4704559 in Homer1 gene was associated with high inci- sian Federation, 2Department of Neurogenetics, Institute of Neurology, Moscow, dence of levodopa-induced dyskinesia (p<0.05). Russian Federation. Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen- P17.55 erative disorder, characterized by the progressive loss of dopamine the G399s and A141s variants in HTRA are not associated to neurons and the accumulation of Lewy bodies. Familial autosomal Parkinson´s disease in the Spanish population dominant PD accounts for up to 15% of all PD cases. The α-synuclein B. Quintáns1,2, Á. Sesar3, A. Castro3, E. Cebrián4, M. Zennaro5, S. Muñiz- (SNCA) gene was the first to be associated with familial autosomal Pérez5, Á. Carracedo5,2, M. Sobrido5,2; dominant PD. Besides three point mutations, a number of the SNCA 1Hospital Clínico Universitario-SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, gene duplications and triplications have been detected. The objec- 2Center for Network Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER)-In- tive of this study was to assess the frequency of SNCA multiplications stitute of Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 3Department of Neurology, Hospital among autosomal dominant PD patients from Russia. We screened a Clínico Universitario, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 4Department of Neurol- group of 52 autosomal dominant PD patients for duplications and tripli- ogy, Complejo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Spain, 5Fundación Pública Galega cations of exons 4-6 of the SNCA gene by TaqMan real-time PCR. The de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. analysis revealed no increase in exon dosage. Our results imply that Many studies supported a role for mitochondrial dysfunction as cause duplications and triplications of the SNCA gene play insignificant part of the neurodegeneration in some patients with Parkinson´s disease in the pathogenesis of autosomal dominant PD in Russia. (PD). Recently, the possible involvement of the mitochondrial serine protease HTRA2 gene in the pathogenesis of PD was evaluated in P17.58 different populations. Two variants (p.G399S and p.A141S) were first Young and Late onset Parkinson’s Disease: Insights from α- reported as pathogenic mutation and susceptibility polymorphism, re- synuclein and more spectively, in German PD patients. However, the lack of confirmation M. Das1,2,3, S. Chaudhary2, U. Muthane4, M. Behari5, B. K. Thelma2, P. Heutink1, of this association in other ethnic groups opened up a controversy R. C. Juyal3; regarding the role of HTRA2 in PD. Here, we present the results of 1Section Medical Genomics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The the screening of exons 1, 2, 7 and 8 of HTRA2 in 290 PD patients Netherlands, 2Department of Genetics, University of Delhi, South Campus, New (56%males, mean age 69.09 ± 10.08 ) and 219 healthy controls Delhi, India, 3National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India, 4Department of (47%males, mean age 75.16 ± 6,81) from Spain. We found no differ- Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, ence in allele frequency of p.G399S between patients and controls India, 5Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New (MAF-patients = 0.52, MAF-controls = 0.46, P = 1, OR = 1.134, CI 95% Delhi, India. = 0.19-6.85). Similarly, an association of the p.A141S variant to PD Objectives: Sporadic Parkinson’s disease (PD), often believed to be a was not replicated in the present study (MAF-patients = 2.07, MAF- disease of the elderly (late onset, LOPD, age of onset> 40yrs), however controls = 0.91, P = 0.201, OR = 2,320, CI 95% = 0.73-7.29). Analysis has ~ 10% cases with young onset (YOPD, onset< 40yrs). While trem- of nearby SNPs supported that the T allele of the p.A141S variant in ors and rapid progression of disease is seen in LOPD, patients with our population lays within the same rare haplotype as reported for the YOPD often show dystonia and slow progression. We investigated the Belgian population. Additionally, we found some novel sequence vari- role of polymorphisms in known PD genes (α-synuclein, Parkin, PINK1 ants in HTRA2, all of which were present in controls. In view of this and DJ1) in understanding the disparity in age of onset, symptoms and data, the contribution of HTRA2 and particularly the p.A141S variant to disease progression among YOPD (n =140, n =154) and LOPD cases controls the risk of PD is unlikely. (n =347, n =320). Based on our results, functional characteriza- cases controls tion of variants in regulatory regions of α-synuclein are being explored P17.56 to elucidate their role in gene expression and PD etiology. Novel splice site mutation in intron 9 of park2 observed in an Results: Significant associations (corrected for multiple corrections iranian patient affected with Parkinson‘s disease α=0.001) of Parkin IVS7-35G>A [OR (95%CI) =2.52(1.49-4.248) F. Ghazavi1, Z. Fazlali1, M. Kazemi2, S. Banihosseini2, E. Elahi1,3; for AA] with YOPD and Parkin promoter (-258T>G) [OR (95%CI) = 1School of Biology, College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic 2.05(1.46-2.88) for TG] with LOPD were observed. Further, 3’UTR Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Re- SNP (rs356165) of α-synuclein was found associated with both YOPDGenetic analysis, linkage ans association  [OR (95%CI) =3.47 (1.92-6.31) for CC] and LOPD [OR (95%CI)= 2.07 the SNCA gene duplication and thus was exclude from the sequenc- (1.43-2.99) for CC]. Promoter, using luciferase reporter gene assay ing screening. All PD patients were previously tested for the G2019S- and 3’ UTR variants in α-synuclein is currently under investigation. LRRK2 mutations and 8 were found to be carriers. Nevertheless these Conclusions: Similar to rare mutations, SNPs in regulatory regions of patients were not excluded from the SNCA analysis. known PD genes may confer susceptibility to PD. While some SNPs Up to now we have found one SNCA mutation, the p.A53T. show age specific associations [Parkin IVS7-35G>A with YOPD; and Parkin promoter (-258T>G) with LOPD], others (α-synuclein rs356165) P17.61 seems to have a role in etiology of both YO and LOPD. Functional GiGYF2 (tRNc15) mutation analysis in patients with familial characterization of variants in α synuclein regulatory region(s) may Parkinson’s disease with autosomal-dominant transmission provide additional insights. G. Provenzano1,2, P. Tarantino1,2, D. Civitelli1, F. Annesi1, E. V. De Marco1, F. E. Rocca1,3, V. Greco1, V. Scornaienchi1, G. Annesi1; P17.59 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of Neuro- Genetic analysis of scA2 and scA17 in familial Parkinson’s science, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, University of Messina, Policlinico Uni- disease versitario, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, ; University of Magna Graecia, P. Tarantino1,2, F. E. Rocca1,3, V. Greco1, V. Scornaienchi1, E. V. De Marco1, F. Catanzaro, Italy. Annesi1, D. Civitelli1, W. Sproviero1,3, G. Provenzano1,2, G. Annesi1; A study has provided a strong support for a role of mutations in the 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone GIGYF2 gene (PARK11) as frequent cause of familial Parkinson dis- (Cosenza), Italy, 2Department of Neuroscience, Psychiatry and Anesthesiol- ease (Lautier et al, 2008). The aim of this study is to perform muta- ogy, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University of tional analysis of the GIGYF2 gene in patients with familial PD with Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. autosomal dominant transmission, that have resulted negative by the Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) refer to a group of neurodegenerative screening of the SNCA, UCHL-1 and LRRK2 genes. A total of 90 index diseases characterized by cerebellar dysfunction alone or in combina- cases with familial PD from Southern Italy. Moreover 100 healthy con- tion with other neurological abnormalities. These disorders link to more trols with a negative family history from Southern Italy were used in our than 20 genetic loci. These diseases are often caused by expansion study. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood using stan- of triplet repeats encoding polyglutamine tracts. Parkinson’s disease dard protocols. The eight exons (2, 4, 8, 9, 11, 14 25, 26) of GIGYF2, (PD) has been related to mutations associated with SCAs. The aim of where the mutations have been found, are PCR amplified and se- this study was to investigate a selected group of familial PD patients quenced. 90 index cases with familial PD have resulted negative at the and healthy controls through genetic analysis of SCA2 and SCA17 mutations of SCNA, UCHL-1 and LRRK2 genes. Of these 90 we have genes. The patients did not carry either SNCA (A30P, A53T, E46K) or already analyzed the eight exons of GIGYF2 on 50 patients. Among 50 UCH-L1 (I93M) mutations and were negative for LRRK2 G2019S and patients screened, 2 carried an heterozygous mutation (c.3666G-A) in I2020T. intron 26, 1 had a heterozygous synonymous mutation (Gln1215) in Eighty-five PD unrelated patients with autosomal dominant inheri- exon 25. These mutations were absent in controls. Furthermore we tance, belonging to southern Italian families with at least three affected found two deletions and an insertion in exon 25 (Del LPQQQQQ 1209- members over three generations, and 100 controls were analyzed for 1215, Del Q 1216, Ins Q 1217), with similar frequencies in PD cases CAG expansions in the SCA2 and SCA17 genes. PCR products, am- and controls. Our future goal will be to continue the mutational analysis plified with fluorescent primers spanning the SCA expansions, were both in the remaining patients and in the other exons to look for novel separated onto a capillary ABI3130XL sequencer and analyzed by the mutations in the GIGYF2 gene. software Genemapper. SCA17 mutations were detected in 2 (2.3%) of the examined patients, P17.62 whereas no cases were positive for SCA2. Neither SCA17 nor SCA2 Rapid-onset dystonia parkinsonism (DYt12) and dysfunction expansions were identified in controls. The size of CAG repeats in of Na+/K+-AtPase Na+ transport caused by a novel mutation in SCA17 was small (43-44 repeats, usually associated with reduced ATPA penetrance) P. Blanco-Arias1,2, A. P. Einholm3, H. Mamsa4, C. Concheiro1, H. Gutiérrez- Our results show that SCA17 is a rare genetic cause of PD in our pop- de-Terán5, J. Romero6, M. Toustrup-Jensen3, Á. Carracedo1,2,5, J. C. Jen4, B. ulation. However, after exclusion of genetic mutations of other known Vilsen3, M. Sobrido2,5; PD genes, SCA17 should be taken into account for the molecular diag- 1Grupo de Medicina Genómica, USC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Centro nosis of familial PD with autosomal dominant inheritance. para Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain, 3Centre for Membrane Pumps in Cells and Disease P17.60 – PUMPKIN, Danish National Research Foundation, Department of Physiology Αlfa-synuclein point mutation analysis in Italian patients with and Biophysics, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark, 4Department of Neurol- autosomal dominant Parkinson disease ogy, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5Fundación F. Sironi1, L. Trotta1, P. Primignani1, T. Brambilla1, D. A. Coviello1, A. Antonini2, Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica- SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, G. Pezzoli2, S. Goldwurm2; Spain, 6Servicio de Neurología, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Vigo, 1Medical Genetics Laboratory - Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Po- Vigo, Spain. liclinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Parkinson Institute - Istituti ATP1A3 encodes the alpha3 isoform of the Na+/K+-ATPase pump. Clinici di Perfezionamento., Milan, Italy. Missense mutations in this gene have been reported to underlie rap- α-synuclein is the major component of Lewy Bodies (LB) and Lewy id-onset dystonia parkinsonism (RDP, DYT12), but the physiological neurites, the pathological hallmarks of sporadic Parkinson Disease processes altered in this disease are not well understood. The Na+/K+- (PD) and Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB). ATPase pump is a protein complex that exchange Na+ and K+ ions Point mutations in the SNCA gene are very rare and have been identi- across the plasma membrane coupled to ATP hydrolisis, playing a fied in few families with autosomal dominant inherited PD. fundamental role in maintaining the electrochemical gradient essential In this study we screened SNCA exons 2 and 3 by direct sequencing for neuronal function. The alpha subunit contains the catalytic site for to examine whether SNCA more common point mutations were pres- ATP hydrolysis as well as the sites for binding and translocation of the ent in our cohort of patients. All PD patients belonged to a single Ital- ions. Recently, the first X-ray crystal structure of a Na+/K+-ATPase was ian clinical centre (Parkinson Institute - I.C.P., Milan, Italy - http://www. reported for the pig renal enzyme. parkinson.it/dnabank.html). We identified a new mutation in a patient with RDP, consisting of a ty- One hundred forty-four unrelated PD patients with dominant PD family rosine insertion at the very C-terminus of ATP1A3 (p.1013Ydup). This history were included in the study. They all had at least one parent with mutation was not found either in her healthy parents or in 218 controls. a clear diagnosis of PD. Since SNCA gene rearrangements (triplica- Ouabain viability assays indicated a drastic cell survival reduction, tion as well as duplication) of the entire gene have been confirmed suggesting impaired pump function consistent with haploinsufficiency. to be the cause of autosomal dominant PD, all these patients were Confocal scanning and Western blot studies supported that the altered first analyzed using the MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe pump function is not related to biogenesis, protein stability or plasma Amplification) assay Kit “SALSA P51”. One patient was found to carry membrane targeting. Affinity studies in COS cells revealed a strikingGenetic analysis, linkage ans association  40-50 fold reduction in Na+ affinity. The structural basis for this impair- 4 (non-consanguineous parents), a dodecamer repeat expansion on ment in Na+ binding are provided by molecular modelling of ATP1A3 in both alleles. the E1 (Na+bound) conformation. Both the clinical presentation and the Conclusion: In these patients, the differences in symptomatology and biochemical findings associated with the p.1013Ydup mutation provide disability were striking and unexplained. Although the severity and rate in vivo and in vitro evidence for a crucial role of Na+ affinity in the of progression of ULD are known to be variable, the relationship to the pathophysiology of DYT12. type of mutation requires further study. P17.63 P17.65 A novel SCNA mutation in a family with GEFs+ and sudden Influence of polymorphism IVS5-91G>A in SCN1A gene in unexpected death in epilepsy (sUDEP) patients with partial epilepsia treated by carbamazepine R. Sanz1, R. Guerrero1, C. Almaraz1, A. Marinas1, B. Gonzalez-Giraldez1, J. monotherapy Macarron2, J. Serratosa1; C. Rooryck Thambo1,2, A. Pariente3, K. Forest3, C. Marchal4, V. Michel4, T. 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital General Yagüe, Burgos, Barnetche1, B. Arveiler1,2; Spain. 1Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine, Bordeaux, France, 2Service de Génétique Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is a rare and unex- Médicale CHU Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 3Department of Pharmacology plained cause of death in patients with epilepsy. Different risk factors CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 4Department of Neurology CHU Pellegrin, and mechanisms may lead to a final common pathway of cardio-respi- Bordeaux, France. ratory compromise. Mutations in the gene coding for the alfa-1 subunit Introduction: Carbamazepine is still widely used as a first-line drug to of the neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel (SCN1A) gene, have treat partial epilepsy. It acts by binding to the α-subunit of voltage- been described in families with generalized epilepsy with febrile sei- sensitive sodium channels in neurons. Despite its efficacy has been zures plus (GEFS+). Mutations in genes coding for ion channels have clearly proven, some discrepancies were observed in the treatment also been associated to cardiac channelopathies. SUDEP is the most response with 30% of non-responders patients. The aim of this study is important direct epilepsy-related cause of death, and it has been sug- to determine whether nine functional single-nucleotide polymorphisms gested that some of these deaths may be due to cardiac arrhythmias. in the SCN1A, SCN2A and SCN1B genes, coding for ion sodium chan- The neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel may have a role in pace- nels, correlate with epilepsy susceptibility and with response to carba- maker function of the sino-atrial node and blocking this channel slows mazepine. the heart and increases heart rate variability. Patients and methods: The population study included a French cohort The SCN1A gene was analyzed in a three generation GEFS+ family of 47 patients with partial epilepsy treated by carbamazepine mono- with two SUDEP cases. In this family, different epileptic phenotypes therapy and 95 healthy controls. Allele and genotype frequencies were were present: Dravet syndrome, Doose syndrome and febrile seizures compared between patients and controls, according to their response plus. Bi-directional sequencing of SCN1A revealed a new mutation to carbamazepine therapy. The patients were considered to be drug (M1427T) in the patient with Dravet syndrome. This mutation is located responsive if they had not experienced any seizure for one year af- in domain III, between transmembrane segments S5 and S6. Segrega- ter receiving carbamazepine monotherapy. We also observed clinical tion analysis in the family revealed that all living members affected with correlation with carbamazepine maximum doses. Genotypes were de- epilepsy carried the mutation. termined on genomic DNA extracted from whole blood, using primer Our findings suggest that SCN1A mutations may play a role, either extension method (SnapShot, ABI). directly or indirectly, in SUDEP. Results: No association was found between these nine SNPs and epi- lepsy susceptibility. A significant correlation was found between one P17.64 SNP (IVS5-91G/A) and response to treatment. A allele carriers get Phenotypic variability of neuropsychiatric symptoms in EPm1- a better response to carbamazepine therapy. These results show a Unverricht-Lundborg disease (ULD) trend opposite to that described in previous studies. Larger studies are D. R. Amrom1,2, M. Talani1,2, F. Andermann1,3, A. Lehesjoki4, E. Andermann1,5; needed to confirm the relevance of this association. 1Montreal Neurological Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Department of Neu- rology and Neurosurgery, and Neurogenetics Unit, Montreal, QC, Canada, P17.66 3Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Epilepsy Service, Department of study of the possible role of DRD2 and DAt1 gene Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Folkhalsan Institute of polymorphisms on behavioral characteristics in animal model of Genetics and Neuroscience Center, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Hel- epilepsy sinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, and Neu- A. Hannanova1, A. Kazantseva2, N. Leushkina1, L. Kalimullina1; rogenetics Unit, Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, 1Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry QC, Canada. and Genetics Ufa Scientific Centre Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Rus- Purpose: To present the differences in neuropsychiatric symptoms in sian Federation. two unrelated individuals and two siblings, all with molecularly con- Despite of the increasing interest in the study of epilepsy known to be firmed ULD. one of the severe psychoneurological disorders, mechanisms of its Method: Review of medical records and investigations. forming remain unclear. WAG/Rij strain rats belong to inbred line with Results: Our four Caucasian patients had disease onset at the age of genetically determined absens epilepsy and thus might be considered 8-10 years. They received valproic acid and various add-on medica- as model of epilepsy manifesting as result of sound sensitivity in par- tions. Patient 4 had a vagal nerve stimulator implanted. ticular. It has been reported earlier that dopaminergic system function- Patient 1, a 30-year-old woman, has mild motor disability and mild ing is associated with epilepsy. mental retardation, adjustment disorder, drug abuse, and has had sev- We aimed to define a single genotype effect of polymorphisms in eral suicide attempts. dopaminergic system genes: DRD2 rs8154872 in exon 7 and DAT1 Patient 2, her 31-year-old brother, walks independently, drinks alcohol rs13448119 in exon 2 - on audiogenic sensitivity and on behavioral since it has an antimyoclonic effect, has a history of drug abuse, and characteristics in WAG/Rij strain rats. mood disorder. The present study sample was comprised of 55 WAG/Rij rats gen- Patient 3, a 25-year-old man, is able to walk and perform some activi- otyped previously for DRD2 Taq1A polymorphism in order to reveal ties of daily living, but presents frequent drop attacks. He has a posi- inbred lines in direction to A1-allele and A2-allele. Audiogenic sensitiv- tive mood, no psychiatric symptoms. ity was assessed by the presence / absence of epileptic seizure as Patient 4, a 43-year-old man, is wheelchair bound. He is irritable and response to stimuli, while exploratory and locomotor activities were presents suicidal ideas, although these probably represent “acting-out” detected by means of open-field test and elevated plus maze. Geno- behaviour. typing of two polymorphisms was performed using PCR, PCR-RFLP DNA analysis of the cystatin B gene showed: in patients 1 and 2, a technique. dodecamer repeat expansion on one allele and a c.67-1G>C mutation According to genotyping of DAT1 rs13448119 polymorphism only on the other allele; in patient 3, a dodecamer repeat expansion on samples with T/T genotype were detected, while analyzing DRD2 one allele and an IVS1-1G→C mutation on the other allele; in patient rs8154872 polymorphism one C/T genotype was observed. Unfortu-Genetic analysis, linkage ans association  nately, revealed results did not allow performing statistical analyses. control groups were compared by either χ2 analysis or Fisher’s exact Since information involving SNPs heterozigosity in rats remains mainly test. unknown, following experiments based on other polymorphic loci in Results: We have identified some new intronic variants in SCN1B and DRD2 and DAT1 genes are required. new mutations too, in patients with IGE subtypes. P17.67 P17.69 Febrile seizure or Darvet syndrome: A clinical and molecular Influence of SCN1A, SCN2A and SYN2 gene polymorphisms in study of scN1A-related epilepsy in iranian families epilepsy susceptibility and therapeutic efficacy A. Ebrahimi1, S. Zeinali2, H. Tonekaboni3, M. Fallah1, G. Modaber1, S. Seied- B. Mittal, R. Lakhan, R. Shah, U. K. Misra; hassani1, M. Ataei1, r. alimohammadi1, M. Raeisi4, M. Houshmand1; Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, LUCKNOW, India. 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Biotechnology Research Center Epilepsy is a common multifactorial neurological disorder, with higher - Pasteur Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3TUMS, Tehran, Islamic prevalence in developing countries like India. Genetic variants of neu- Republic of Iran, 4KBC,Kowsar Biotechnolgy Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic ronal sodium channels; like SCN1A, SCN2A, SCN3A and other neu- of Iran. ronal genes such as SYN2 have been implicated for their contribution Introduction:SCN1A-related seizure disorders encompass a spectrum in epilepsy susceptibility and its therapy. To evaluate sodium chan- that ranges from simple febrile seizures (FS) and generalized epilepsy nel genes and synapsin vesicle associated gene SYN2 as candidates with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) at the mild end to Dravet syndrome for the epilepsy susceptibility and their role in therapeutic efficacy, at the severe end. The phenotype can vary even within the same fam- we screened two coding Single-nucleotide polymorphism of SCN1A ily. Probands with autosomal dominant SCN1A-related seizure may p.T1056A (rs2298771), SCN2A 56G>A (rs17183814) and rs3773364 have a de novo mutation. Most SCN1A-related SMEI are the result of A>G intronic polymorphism in SYN2 gene in north Indian epilepsy pa- a de novo heterozygous mutation. Early diagnosis prenatal diagnosis tients. A total of 372 patients with epilepsy and 199 control individu- for pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the disease causing als were enrolled for the study. The genotyping was performed using mutation in the family is known. PCR-RFLP assay in all individuals. Therapeutic drug monitoring for Material and methods: Classification of patients based on clinical phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and valproate was also per- examination and genetic counseling were done. DNA was obtained formed in 20% of the patients to confirm compliance. Among all 372 from 34 unrelated families with a spectrum of Idiopathic Epilepsy patients with epilepsy, 118 were drug resistant and 254, were drug (IE). In order to finding point mutations and SNPs, exons of SCNIA, responsive. AG genotype of SCN1A 3184 A>G polymorphism was sig- SCN1B and Mitochondrial common deletions, tRNA Lys tRNA Leu nificantly higher and associated in epilepsy patients (P=0.005, OR = in probands were Screened for any alteration using intronic primers 1.764, 95% CI =1.192-2.611) while G variant of SCN2A was associ- and were analyzed by Single Strand conformation Polymorphism gel ated with multiple drug resistance in north Indian patients with epilepsy electrophoresis(SSCP) and any variation confirmed by direct sequenc- (P=0.037; OR 1.625 95% CI=1.030-2.564). The AG genotype of SYN2 ing. Allele and genotype frequencies in the patients and in the control gene also was significantly higher in patients with epilepsy versus con- groups were compared by χ2 analysis, Fisher’s exact test and logistic trol subjects in north Indian population (P=0.02, OR = 1.55, 95% CI regration analysis methods. =1.066-2.269). Overall results indicate these genes and their variants Conclusions: We could found new intronic and exonic variants in can- have significant role in epilepsy susceptibility and could modulate drug didate genes, in Iranian patients with IE subtypes. The high rate of response behavior as well. heterogeneity and consanguinity, large families with many affected members in family as a social and healthy fact in Iranian populations P17.70 could be a golden gene pool for linkage analysis in common disease. two novel KcNQ2 mutations in Bulgarian patients with idiopathic neonatal epilepsy P17.68 I. Yordanova1,2, Y. Gofman3, D. Hristova4, R. Ralcheva5, A. Lofgren6, P. De Role of scN1B mutations in drug resistant in iranian epileptic Jonghe6, N. Ben-Tal3, I. Kremensky1,2, A. Jordanova7,6; families 1National Genetics Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular Medicine Center, M. -. Moghaddasi1, M. Mamarabadi2, A. Ebrahimi3, M. S. Fallah3, H. Toneka- Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Biochemistry, Tel Aviv Uni- boni4, S. Zeinali1, H. Razjouyan4; versity, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Department of Pediatrics, Medical University, Sofia, 1IUMS;Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Bulgaria, 5Department of Pediatrics, Medical University, Varna, Bulgaria, 6VIB 2Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3NIGEB; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 7Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. Republic of Iran, 4TUMS;Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Mutations in the KCNQ2 gene, encoding the voltage-gated potassium Republic of Iran. channel Kv7.2, have been identified as the underlying cause mainly Introduction: Many antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) prevent seizures by for benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC). They are located pre- blocking voltage-gated brain sodium channels such as SCN1A, SC- dominantly in the pore region or the C-terminus of the Kv7.2 protein. N2A, and SCN1B. However, treatment is ineffective in 30% of epilepsy We performed a point mutation screening of KCNQ2 in patients with patients, which might, at least in part, result from polymorphisms of idiopathic neonatal epilepsy, which included PCR analysis followed by the sodium channel genes. The R85C and R85H mutations of the β1 direct sequencing of all exons and exon-intron boundaries of the gene. subunitcause generalized epilepsy syndromes in humans and cause In addition, to determine the probable pathological effect of the muta- an increase in excitability but the R85H mutation was more excitable. tions we elaborated a computational model of the Kv7.2 channel struc- We investigated the Role of SCN1B mutations in drug resistant in Ira- ture, using homology modeling. The predicted structure was based on nian epileptic families. the known 3D structure of Kv1.2-Kv2.1 chimera. Material and methods: Diagnostic classification of patients followed the In this study, one novel de novo missense mutation and one novel proposal of the Commission on Classification and Terminology of the familial nonsense mutation in KCNQ2 were found. The missense mu- International League Against Epilepsy (1989).Family History, Electro- tation is located in the pore region of the Kv7.2 and disrupts the whole encephalography (EEG) recordings and CT Scan were obtained from channel structure. The mutation is arisen de novo in a girl with severe most patients . Written consent was obtained from all participants. intractable epilepsy and developmental delay. The nonsense mutation DNA was obtained from 34 unrelated families with idiopathic general- is situated in the C-terminus of the channel and is predicted to cause ized epilepsy as index families. The all coding exons of SCN1B were protein truncation. It was found in two sisters with BFNC and their fa- Screened for deletions and duplications by MLPA. In order to finding ther. point mutations and SNPs each exon individually amplified from ge- This is the first KCNQ2 study in Bulgarian epilepsy patients. Although nomic DNA in PCR reactions using intronic primers and were analyzed mutations in KCNQ2 are mostly considered to cause BFNC with AD in- by Single Strand conformation Polymorphism gel electrophoresis heritance, we show that in rare cases they can contribute to the patho- (SSCP) and conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis(CSGE) and genesis of sporadic forms of severe neonatal epilepsy. so the PCR products with mobility variants were sequenced by ABI Acknowledgement to the Flanders fellowship! sequencer.Allele and genotype frequencies in the patients and in theGenetic analysis, linkage ans association  P17.71 satellite marker analysis was performed on the known FS and GEFS+ Genetic screening of two tunisian families with Generalized loci. According to the results obtained by statistical analyses, GABRG2 Epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFs+) on GEFS+3 locus and SCN1A on GEFS+2 locus were considered as N. Fendri- Kriaa1, F. Kammoun1, A. Rebai2, D. Kolsi1, I. Hadj Salem3, F. Fakh- two of the potential candidate genes and were tested for mutations fakh3, C. Triki1; by direct sequencing. The mutation analysis and statistical test of the 1Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU Hédi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Unité de Bioin- GABRG2 gene revealed a disease association with rs211014 in intron formatique et de Biostatistique, Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Sfax, Tuni- 8 (χ2= 5.25, P= 0.021). A sequencing analysis of the SCN1A gene sia, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Faculté de Médecine de was performed for the two tested families and showed a known muta- Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia. tion (c.1811G>A) and a putative disease-associated haplotype in only Febrile Seizure can be associated with heterogeneous epilepsy pheno- one family. Our results support that SCN1A is the responsible gene types regrouped in a syndrome called generalized epilepsy with febrile for GEFS+ in one of the two studied Tunisian families and suggest a seizures plus (GEFS+). The aim of this report is to search for the gene positive association of an intronic SNP in the GABRG2 gene in both responsible for GEFS+ in two affected Tunisian families. The micro- families.