Plenary Lectures  Abstracts of EsHG Plenary sessions PL1.4 Genetics of cancer predisposition L. Aaltonen; University of Helsinki, Molecular and Cancer Biology Program, Helsinki, PL1.1 Peopling of the New World high-Arctic: A Genetic Finland. Perspective No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract M. Raghavan1, E. Willerslev2; section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- 1Centre for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of sible updates. Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Centre for GeoGenetics,Natural History Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark. PL2.1* the Effect of translocation-induced Nuclear Re- Distinct cultural waves swept through the New World high-Arctic organization on Gene Expression (Canada and Greenland), leaving behind well-preserved material and L. Harewood1, F. Schütz1,2,3, S. Boyle4, P. Perry4, M. Delorenzi3,2, W. A. biological traces in the permafrost. This talk will focus on a major pa- Bickmore4, A. Reymond1; leogenetic endeavor aimed at determining the genetic signatures of 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of the three ancient high-Arctic cultures - Saqqaq, Dorset and Thule - Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland, 3National Center of Competence and ascertaining any genetic relationships between them by analyzing in Research (NCCR) “Molecular Oncology”, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4MRC bone, hair and teeth samples from individuals excavated from sites Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, across the Canadian Arctic and Greenland. Current work constitutes United Kingdom. the use of state-of-the-art high throughput sequencing to identify ge- Translocations are known to affect expression of genes at the break- nome-wide markers that would help resolve the phylogenetic relation- points and, in the case of unbalanced translocations, alter gene copy ships of the Saqqaq, Dorset and Thule with respect to each other as number. However, a comprehensive understanding of the functional well as to modern Inuit and Native American populations. Results from impact of this class of variation is lacking. We have studied the ef- this analysis will help disentangle issues surrounding the origins of the fect of balanced chromosomal rearrangements on gene expression first humans in the region, the timing of these migrations, and provide by comparing transcriptomes of cell lines from controls and individuals some perspective on the extent to which they have individually contrib- with the t(11;22)(q23;q11) translocation. The number of differentially uted to the genetic history of the New World Arctic. expressed transcripts between translocation carrying and control co- horts is significantly higher than that observed between control sam- PL1.2 monogenic diabetes: the success of molecular genetics ples alone, suggesting that balanced rearrangements have a greater for improved diagnosis and treatment effect on gene expression than normal variation. Many of the affected P. Njølstad; genes are located on the derivative chromosome 11. We show that Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, and Department of this chromosome is concomitantly altered in its spatial organization, Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. occupying a more central position in the nucleus than its non-rear- Monogenic diabetes results from mutation in a single gene primarily ranged counterpart. Consistently, we observe nuclear repositioning affecting pancreatic beta or acinar cell function. The prevalence is 1-2 of genes that show differential expression in balanced translocation % of all diabetes. Monogenic diabetes is, however, frequently misdiag- carriers as compared to controls. The movement of the derivative 11 nosed as type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Knowledge of the genetic etiology also results in nuclear repositioning of other, non-translocated chro- of monogenic diabetes has proved essential for improved treatment, mosomes. Our results are consistent with recent studies that experi- prediction of prognosis, genetic counseling and identification and mentally altered nuclear organization and indicate that nuclear position screening of additional family members. plays a functional role in regulating the expression of some genes. Our Monogenic diabetes can be divided in two main groups; neonatal dia- study suggests that chromosomal translocations can result in hitherto betes and maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Neonatal unforeseen, large-scale changes in gene expression that are the con- diabetes is commonly used when diabetes occurs before the age of sequence of alterations in normal chromosome territory positioning. six months. Mutations in several beta cell genes can cause neonatal This has implications for the patterns of gene expression change seen diabetes, the most important being KCNJ11 and ABCC8 that encode during tumorigenesis associated genome instability and during karyo- the Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits of the ATP-sensitive potassium channel, type changes that lead to speciation. respectively. Children having a mutation in either of these genes can be treated with sulfonylurea rather than insulin injections and with bet- PL2.2* PDZD7 is a modifier of and digenic contributor to retinal ter glycemic control. disease in Usher syndrome Some ten genes can cause MODY. It is important to diagnose GCK- H. J. Bolz1,2, I. Ebermann1, J. B. Phillips3, M. C. Liebau4, R. K. Koenekoop5, MODY (MODY2) since this is a mild form for diabetes that seldom B. Schermer4,6, I. Lopez5, E. Schäfer7, A. F. Roux8,9, C. Dafinger1, A. Bernd10, requires treatment and in which late-diabetes complications are rare. E. Zrenner10, M. Claustres8,9, B. Blanco3, G. Nürnberg11, P. Nürnberg11,6, R. Two other common forms are due to mutations in the transcription fac- Ruland1, M. Westerfield3, T. Benzing4,6; tor genes HNF4A (MODY1) and HNF1A (MODY3). These are clinically 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, nearly indistinguishable and are commonly misdiagnosed as type 1 or Germany, 2Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, type 2 diabetes. Sulfonylurea sensitivity is retained why these forms 3Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, United States, can successfully be treated with low doses of sulfonylureas. Subjects 4Department of Medicine and Centre for Molecular Medicine, University with mutations in HNF1B (MODY5) or CEL (MODY8) often develop Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5McGill Ocular Genetics Laboratory, both exocrine and endocrine dysfunction, and hence require both pan- McGill University Health Centre Research Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada, creatic enzyme supplement and insulin. 6Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Monogenic diabetes should be suspected in subjects with diabetes Diseases, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7Praxis für Humangenetik, and an unusual presentation or development. Most will have a positive Hamburg, Germany, 8CHU Montpellier, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, family history of diabetes, a primary beta cell dysfunction and be nega- Montpellier, France, 9Inserm, U827, Montpellier, France, 10Centre for tive for antibodies associated with type 1 diabetes. Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 11Cologne Center for Genomics and Institute for Genetics, PL1.3 A human protein atlas to study human genetics Cologne, Germany. M. Uhlén; Usher syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous recessive disease KTH Biotechnology, AlbaNova University Center, Stockholm, Sweden. with hearing loss and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). It frequently presents No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract with unexplained, often intrafamilial, variability of the visual phenotype. section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- Here, we identify PDZD7, encoding a homolog of proteins mutated in sible updates. Usher subtypes 1C and 2D (USH1C, USH2D). We demonstrate in- teraction between PDZD7 and two Usher disease proteins, GPR98 (USH2C) and USH2A, and their colocalization in the photoreceptor’s connecting cilium region. On a homozygous USH2A mutation back- ground, PDZD7 aggravates RP. Heterozygous PDZD7 mutations Plenary Lectures  were present with truncating mutations in USH2A, GPR98, and an un- 4Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra, Coimbra, identified locus. We validated the human genotypes using zebrafish, Portugal, 5Centre for Human Genetics, Cliniques Universitaires St Luc, because visual defects are typically not evident in mouse models of Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 6Central and Southern Usher syndrome. Our findings in zebrafish were consistent with di- Regional Genetics Services, Wellington Hospital, Wellington, New Zealand, genic inheritance of PDZD7 and GPR98, and with PDZD7 as a retinal 7Centro de Genética Médica Doutor Jacinto Magalhães/INSA, Porto, Portugal, disease modifier in USH2A patients. Pdzd7 knockdown produced an 8Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children‘s Hospital, Sydney, Usher-like phenotype in zebrafish, exacerbated retinal cell death in Australia, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, The Children‘s Hospital at combination with ush2a or gpr98, and significantly reduced Gpr98 lo- Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 10Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women‘s calization in the region of the photoreceptor connecting cilium. Our Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 11Institute of Human Genetics, data challenge the view of Usher syndrome as a traditional Mendelian Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, United disorder. As in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, reclassification of Usher syn- Kingdom, 12Northern Regional Genetics Service, Auckland, New Zealand, drome as an oligogenic disease permits a better understanding of its 13SA Clinical Genetics Service, Women‘s & Children‘s Hospital site, Adelaide, phenotypic variability. Australia. Schinzel-Giedion syndrome is characterized by severe mental re- PL2.3* The identification of 180 genetic loci involved in adult tardation and characteristic facial features. Most patients die before height variation highlights the complex genetic architecture of the age of 10 years. Almost all patients occur sporadically raising the polygenic traits possibility that de novo dominant mutations could be the underlying K. Estrada1, G. Lettre2, H. Lango3, S. I. Berndt4, M. N. Weedon3, G. R. mechanism. The exomes of four affected individuals with Schinzel- Abecasis5, M. Boehnke6, C. Gieger7, D. Gudbjartsson8, N. L. Heard-Costa9, A. Giedion syndrome were sequenced to a mean coverage of 43-fold. On U. Jackson6, M. I. McCarthy10, A. Smith11, N. Soranzo12, A. G. Uitterlinden1, F. average 21,800 genetic variants were identified per patient. After filter- Rivadeneira1, T. M. Frayling3, J. N. Hirschhorn13; ing against known variants and selecting variants affecting the same 1Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, gene in all patients, only a single candidate gene remained, SETBP1 Netherlands, 2Montreal Heart Institute (Research Center), Université de which encodes SET binding protein 1. Sanger sequencing confirmed Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, 3Genetics of Complex Traits, Peninsula the presence of SETBP1 mutations in these 4 individuals as well as Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 4Division of Cancer Epidemiology and in 8 additional Schinzel-Giedion syndrome patients. All mutations oc- Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Department curred de novo, and two mutations were recurrent: c.2602G>A and of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Center for c.2612T>C in 4 and 5 patients, respectively. Because all mutations Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann were missense, and clustered to a ultra high conserved 11bp exonic Arbor, MI, United States, 6Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, region of SETBP1, it is highly likely that they cause disease through University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 7Institute of Epidemiology, either a dominant negative or a gain-of-function effect. In conclusion, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 8deCODE genetics, our study shows the potential of exome sequencing for disease gene Reykjavik, Iceland, 9Department of Neurology, Boston University School of identification by unraveling the first dominant Mendelian disorder. It is Medicine, Boston, MA, United States, 10Wellcome Trust Centre for Human highly likely that the mutations cause disease through either a domi- Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 11Icelandic Heart nant negative or a gain-of-function effect. Exome sequencing is par- Association, Kopavogur, Iceland, 12Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, ticularly useful for identifying these types of mutations for which no United Kingdom, 13Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute other genomewide approach is applicable. De novo mutations may be of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA, United a frequent cause of frequent sporadic conditions with reduced fecun- States. dity such as congenital malformations, mental retardation, and psychi- Height is a classic polygenic trait: it has been proposed for nearly 100 atric disorders. years that variants in multiple genes influence height; indeed up to 90% of variation in height is attributable to inherited variation. As part PL2.5 complete genome sequencing and analysis of diploid of the Genetic Investigation of ANthropometric Traits (GIANT) Con- African-American and mexican-American genomes: implications sortium, we performed a meta-analysis of genome-wide association for personal ancestry reconstruction and multi-ethnic medical studies of adult height, encompassing 2.8 million single nucleotide genomics polymorphisms (SNPs) and 133,800 individuals of European ancestry F. M. De La Vega1, J. D. Degehnardt2, S. Musharoff2, K. Bryc2, J. M. Kidd3, V. from 50 individual studies. We detected 207 distinct loci with a SNP Seth4, S. Stanley1, C. Monighetti1, E. Levandowsky4, M. Barker1, A. Brisbin2, A. associated with height at P<5x10-6 (versus 5 expected by chance). Keinan2, A. Clark2, C. D. Bustamante3,2; When we examined the 207 SNPs in a replication dataset of over 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Cornell University, Ithaca, 51,000 samples, 180 reached a combined P<5x10-8. Many loci have NY, United States, 3Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 4Life multiple associated variants: conditional analysis identified 19 loci that Technologies, Beverly, MA, United States. have additional independent strong associations. Together, the associ- Understanding the contribution of rare and common genetic variants ated variants explain up to 12% of height variation. Using a polygenic to disease susceptibility will likely require multi- and trans-ethnic se- model, the explained variance reached a maximum value of 16% when quencing studies that compare the genomes of many individuals with including signals associated at P < 5x10-3. The associated loci are and without a particular disease. Of particular importance will be ac- strongly enriched for genes known to be mutated in monogenic disor- counting for the role of population stratification at fine scales both in ders of skeletal growth (P<0.001), and implicate genes in relevant bio- terms of genomic and geographic location. Here, we present results logical pathways, including hedgehog signaling, TGF-beta signaling, from sequencing, assembly, and genomic analysis of two diploid ge- extracellular matrix, and growth hormone signaling. In conclusion, we nomes from Phase 3 HapMap sequenced to ~20X coverage using the have identified nearly 200 genetic loci influencing adult height. These SOLiD System. The donor individuals are of Mexican and African an- loci are enriched for genes in biological pathways relevant to human cestry and represent the first „admixed“ genomes to be sequenced growth, and support a notion that allelic heterogeneity may be a com- to high coverage. We demonstrate that genomic sequencing provides mon feature of polygenic traits. finer resolution of „admixture breakpoints“ based on allele frequency estimates from HapMap and the 1000 Genomes Project. For each ad- PL2.4* De novo mutations of SETBP1 cause schinzel-Giedion mixed genome, we use the distribution of admixture breakpoints to infer syndrome the personal admixture history of the sample and patterns of genomic A. Hoischen1, B. van Bon1, C. Gilissen1, P. Arts1, B. van Lier1, M. Steehouwer1, diversity to reconstruct the demographic history of European, African, P. de Vries1, R. de Reuver1, N. Wieskamp1, G. Mortier2, K. Devriendt3, M. Z. and Native American continental populations. Furthermore, we com- Amorim4, N. Revencu5, A. Kidd6, M. Barbosa7, A. Turner8, J. Smith9, C. Oley10, pare the distribution of functional and putatively neutral genetic varia- A. Henderson11, I. M. Hayes12, E. Thompson13, H. G. Brunner1, B. B. A. de tion among 12 sequenced genomes and find that difference in demo- Vries1, J. A. Veltman1; graphic history may account for statistically significant, differences in 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, distributions of synonymous vs. benign, possibly damaging, and prob- 2Centre for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, ably damaging non-synonymous coding variants. Finally, we use the 3Centre for Clinical Genetics, Leuven University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium, SOLiD comparative personal genomic data sets and 1000 Genomes Plenary Lectures  data to quantify the relative proportions of private, rare, and common directly regulated by FOXP2. Intriguingly, we found that CNTNAP2 is functional and neutral genetic within and among populations. itself associated with common cases of language impairment; this tar- get has also been implicated in language delays of autistic children. PL2.6 A mutation in the 3‘UtR of the HDAc6 gene abolishing High-throughput screening has enabled us to isolate additional pu- the post-transcriptional regulation mediated by hsa-miR-433 is tative targets of FOXP2, including multiple genes involved in neurite linked to a new form of dominant X-linked chondrodysplasia. outgrowth and synaptic plasticity. Moving to animal models of FOXP2 B. Arveiler1,2, D. Simon1, M. Barillot1, B. Laloo3, T. Barnetche1, C. Rooryck1,2, dysfunction, we have shown that point mutations implicated in human C. Blanchard1, I. Burgelin1, M. Marche1, I. Coupry1, N. Chassaing4,5, B. Gilbert- speech deficits yield impaired motor-skill learning in mutant mice. Dussardier6, C. Grosset3, D. Lacombe1,2; Electrophysiological recording suggests that this may be mediated by 1Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France, 2CHU de Bordeaux, altered plasticity of Foxp2-expressing circuitry. Together with findings Bordeaux, France, 3INSERM U889, Bordeaux, France, 4INSERM U563, from other model systems, these data indicate that the contributions Toulouse, France, 5CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 6CHU de Poitiers, of FOXP2 to human speech and language are built on evolutionarily Poitiers, France. ancient roles in neural circuits involved in sensorimotor integration and A family with dominant X-linked chondrodysplasia was previously de- motor-skill learning. Overall, this work demonstrates how we can be- scribed. The disease locus was ascribed to a 24 Mb interval in Xp11.3- gin to bridge gaps between molecules, neurons and the brain, helping q13.1. We have identified a variant (c.*281A>T) in the 3’UTR of the us to build more sophisticated models of the relationships between HDAC6 gene that totally segregates with the disease. The variant is genes, speech and language. located in the seed sequence of hsa-miR-433. Our data showed that, in MG63 osteosarcoma cells, hsa-miR-433 (miR433) down-regulated PL3.2 mice, chimpanzees and the molecular basis of speech both the expression of endogenous HDAC6 and that of an eGFP-re- W. Enard; porter mRNA bearing the wild-type 3’UTR of HDAC6. This effect was Max-Planck-Institute of Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. totally abrogated when the reporter mRNA bore the mutated HDAC6 Identifying the genetic changes responsible for the phenotypic differ- 3’UTR. The HDAC6 protein was found to be over-expressed in thymus ences between humans and their close primate relatives is important from an affected male foetus. Concomitantly, the level of total alpha- from an evolutionary, medical and cultural perspective. The primary tubulin, a target of HDAC6, was found to be increased in the affected challenge facing researchers today, after analyzing the genomic data, foetal thymus, whereas the level of acetylated alpha-tubulin was found is experimentally testing hypotheses concerning the genetic basis for to be profoundly decreased. Skin biopsies were obtained from a fe- human-specific traits. One of the more prominent hypotheses of this male patient who presented a striking body asymmetry with hypotro- kind states that two amino acid changes in the transcription factor phy of the left limbs. The mutated HDAC6 allele was expressed in 31% FOXP2 have been fixed in humans by positive selection due to some of left arm-derived fibroblasts, whereas it was not expressed in the effect on speech and language. We have introduced these substitu- right arm. Overexpression of HDAC6 was observed in left arm-derived tions into the endogenous Foxp2 gene of mice. Although these mice fibroblasts. Altogether these results strongly suggest that this HDAC6 are generally healthy, they have qualitatively different ultrasonic vo- 3’UTR variant suppressed hsa-miR-433-mediated post-transcriptional calizations, decreased exploratory behavior and decreased dopamine regulation causing the overexpression of HDAC6. This variant is likely concentrations in the brain suggesting that the humanized Foxp2 allele to constitute the molecular cause of this new form of X-linked chon- affects basal ganglia. In the striatum, a part of the basal ganglia af- drodysplasia. This represents to our knowledge the first example of a fected in humans with a speech deficit due to a non-functional FOXP2 skeletal disease caused by the loss of a miRNA-mediated post-tran- allele, we find that medium spiny neurons have increased dendrite scriptional regulation on its target mRNA. lengths and increased synaptic plasticity. Since mice carrying one non-functional Foxp2 allele show opposite effects, this suggests that PL2.7 the BRcA gene patent dispute: breaking news from alterations in cortico-basal ganglia circuits might have been important America for the evolution of speech and language in humans. G. Matthijs; Center for Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. PL3.3 Evolution of Human Language No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract W. T. Fitch; section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- University of St Andrews, School of Psychology, St. Andrews, Fife, Scotland, sible updates. United Kingdom. No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract PL3.1 Neurogenetic pathways regulated by FOXP2, a gene section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- implicated in speech and language sible updates. S. E. Fisher; Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. PL5.1 ESHG Award Lecture : DNA fingerprinting and the People who carry rare heterozygous mutations disrupting the FOXP2 turbulent genome gene have problems mastering the complex sequences of mouth A. Jeffreys; movements needed for speech, along with deficits in many aspects University of Leicester, Department of Genetics, Leicester, United Kingdom. of expressive and receptive language. The gene encodes a highly The accidental development of DNA fingerprinting 25 years ago conserved transcription factor that helps regulate development and marked the birth of DNA-based identification. I will discuss the origins function of neuronal subpopulations in a wide range of non-speak- and evolution of DNA testing, the creation of major national DNA data- ing vertebrates, although evidence suggests that its role(s) may have bases and the extraordinary impact that DNA has had on forensic and been modified during human evolution. It is emphasised that FOXP2 legal medicine. I will also discuss how DNA fingerprinting identified is not the mythical “gene for speech”, but represents one piece of a some of the most unstable regions in the human genome, allowing complex puzzle. I will describe how FOXP2 can be used as a unique us to study human DNA evolution in real time and explore the funda- window into key neurogenetic pathways via an array of complemen- mental processes of mutation and recombination that are the ultimate tary approaches. For example, using functional genomic screening of source of all human DNA variation. human neurons grown in the laboratory, we identified the CNTNAP2 gene (a member of the neurexin superfamily) as a downstream target Concurrent Symposia 7 Abstracts of EsHG concurrent symposia Genome architectural features consisting of low-copy repeats (LCRs), also called segmental duplications, can stimulate and mediate NAHR. There are positional hotspots for the crossovers within the LCRs. We s01.1 the cradle of constitutional chromosome rearrangements recently elucidated a DNA replication mechanism for nonrecurrent re- is the cleavage stage embryo arrangements that we termed FoSTeS - Fork Stalling and Template J. Vermeesch; Switching. A newer model, microhomology-mediated break-induced Center for Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. replication or MMBIR, provides further molecular mechanistic details We developed several novel tools to genome wide screen for CNVs and may be operative in all life forms as a means to process one-end- and SNPs in single cells. When applied to cleavage stage embryos ed, double-stranded DNA generated by collapsed forks. Rearrange- from young fertile couples we discovered, unexpectedly, an extremely ments introduce variation into our genome for selection to act upon high incidence of chromosomal instability, a hallmark of tumorigen- and as such serve an evolutionary function analogous to base pair esis. Not only mosaicisms for whole chromosome aneuploidies and changes. Genomic rearrangements may cause Mendelian diseases uniparental disomies but also frequent segmental deletions, duplica- and complex traits such as obesity and neurobehavioral phenotypes. tions and amplifications that were reciprocal in sister blastomeres were The mechanisms by which rearrangements convey phenotypes are di- detected in most cleavage stage embryos implying the occurrence of verse and include gene dosage, position effects, unmasking of coding breakage-fusion-bridge cycles. In addition, we demonstrate the exis- region mutations (cSNPs) or other functional SNPs, creating gain-of- tence of those rearrangements in interphase nuclei. The type of rear- function fusion genes at the breakpoints, and perhaps through effects rangements observed can likely explain the majority of constitutional of transvection. De novo genomic rearrangements have been shown to rearrangements seen in miscarriages as well as live births such as cause both chromosomal and Mendelian disease, as well as sporadic deletions, duplications, inverted deletions duplications, ring chromo- traits, but our understanding of the extent to which genomic rearrange- somes and mosaicisms of all of those rearrangements. The high fre- ments, gene CNV, and/or gene dosage alterations are responsible for quency of chromosomal imbalances in cleavage stage embryos make common and complex traits remains rudimentary. it likely that chromosomal disorders originate post-zygoticaly. 1. Hastings, PJ, Ira, G, Lupski, JR (2009) A microhomology-mediated break-in- duced replication model for the origin of copy number variation. PLoS Genetics s01.2 How common is somatic mosaicism for DNA copy 5 :1-9 [e100327]. Number Variations (cNVs)? 2. Lupski, JR (2009) Genomic disorders ten years on. Genome Medicine 1 :42.1 J. P. Dumanski; - 42.11. Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. 3. Zhang, F, Gu W, Hurles, ME, Lupski, JR (2009) Copy number variation in DNA Copy Number Variation (CNV) has emerged as the most common health, disease, and evolution. Annual Reviews of Genomics and Human Genet- form of human inter-individual genetic differences and this is important ics 19:451-481 for basic research in biology/genetics as well as for disease-oriented 4. Zhang, F, Carvalho, CMB, Lupski, JR (2009) Complex human chromosomal translational science. We have recently discovered that monozygotic and genomic rearrangements. Trends in Genetics 25:298-307. (MZ) twins frequently display within-pair differences in CNV profiles, 5. Hastings PJ, Lupski, JR, Rosenberg, SM, Ira, G (2009) Mechanisms of change which indicates the feasibility of studying MZ twins, discordant for in gene copy number. Nature Reviews Genetics 10:551-564. established phenotypes in search for disease-causing aberrations. 6. Stankiewicz, P. and Lupski, J.R. (2010). Structural variation in the human In addition, recent analysis of differentiated human tissues of normal genome and its role in disease. Annual Reviews of Medicine 61:437-455. deceased subjects supports the notion that somatic CNV mosaicism 7. Carvalho, C.M.B., Zhang, F., Lupski, J.R. (2010). Evolution in health and is underestimated. We tested multiple tissues from three people for medicine. Sackler colloqium; Genomic disorders - a window into human gene differences in CNV profiles and observed changes, affecting a single and genome evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107:1765-1771. organ or one or more tissues of the same person. Our results from MZ twins and CNV differences between normal differentiated human s02.1 Ethical issues in large scale genomics research tissues of the same person suggest that humans are commonly af- T. Caulfield; fected by mosaicism for stochastic CNVs, which occur in a substantial Health Law Institute, Law Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. fraction of normal cells and are detectable by available array-based Large, population based biobanking initiatives are in full swing in many methods. However, the somatic DNA copy number variation is not well countries throughout the world. These projects are principally motivat- studied. ed by a desire to understand the myriad factors that have an influence The work in the group focuses on establishment of “baseline of so- on human health, including the role and interaction of genetics and the matic CNV” (the normal frequency and genomic distribution of somatic environment. But despite this current research activity, a wide range CNVs) in phenotypically unselected, healthy, concordant MZ twins and of policy issues remain unresolved. In fact, the continued existence comparisons of different tissues from the same individuals. We also of these issues is quite remarkable - especially when one considers study differences in the CNV distribution and/or frequency in MZ twins that many have been debated for over a decade and that the actual discordant for various disease phenotypes in search for new disease- practice of biobanking, and the implementation of policy frameworks, related biomarkers. has continued notwithstanding this lack of consensus regarding key research ethics principles. s01.3 Genomic Disorders: mechanisms and assays for cNV This talk will focus on two of the most persistent and perplexing of the associated with neuropsychiatric and other disease traits policy issues associated with biobanks: getting consent and allowing J. R. Lupski; participants to withdraw consent. These are not the only issues associ- Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, ated with biobanks, far from it. But they are the two that have attracted Houston, TX, United States. much of the policy attention. In addition, getting and withdrawing con- Whereas Watson-Crick DNA base pair changes have long been rec- sent are fundamental principles in research ethics. Understanding the ognized as a mechanism for mutations, rearrangements of the human lack of resolution on these key points seems particularly essential. As genome including deletions, duplications, and inversions have been such, this talk will primarily focus on the reasons for and ramification of appreciated only more recently as a significant source for human ge- the lack of consensus, including an exploration of whom in the policy netic variation. Diseases that result from DNA rearrangements have community is forwarding the different position. I will analyze factors rel- been referred to as genomic disorders. Structural variation of our ge- evant to the debate, including the role of public perceptions regarding nome can be responsible for inherited as well as sporadic traits. Rear- different consent approaches, the law around “ownership” of samples rangements associated with genomic disorders can be recurrent, with and health information and the idea that this research is in the “public breakpoint clusters resulting in a common sized deletion/duplication, good”. In the end, we will see that none of these factors can resolve or nonrecurrent and of different sizes. The analyses of breakpoints the debate - at least in the absence of some fundamental and broadly in the proximal short arm of chromosome 17 (17p) reveal nonallelic based change in the norms of consent and withdrawal. Despite this homologous recombination (NAHR) as a major mechanism for recur- reality, I will argue that appropriate governance strategies that specifi- rent rearrangements, whereas nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) cally engage the issues associated with consent seem the only way can be responsible for many of the non-recurrent rearrangements. forward.Concurrent Symposia  s02.2 Ethical issues in expanded newborn screening tion of the current technology since residual transgene expression may E. W. Clayton; alter the biological properties of the resulting iPSCs derivatives or in- Vanderbilt University Center for Biomedical Ethics and Society, Nashville, TN, duce malignant transformation. We efficiently derived reprogramming United States. factor-free hiPSCs from several patients with PD using Cre-recombi- Ethical Issues Raised by Expanded Newborn Screening nase excisable viruses and subsequently differentiated these cells into Wilson and Jungner argued that newborns should be screened only for dopaminergic neurons, the cell type most affected in PD. Such fac- serious and well understood disorders that require early intervention of tor-free iPSCs maintain a pluripotent state and display a global gene proven efficacy prior to the development of symptoms to avert serious expression profile, more closely related to hESCs than to genetically or life-threatening sequelae. In recent years, newborn screening has identical hiPSCs carrying the transgenes. This is consistent with the expanded to include disorders that do not meet these criteria. Many possibility that residual transgene expression in virus-carrying hiPSCs factors have led to this expansion, including the availability of multiplex can affect their molecular and biological characteristics and that fac- technologies such as tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), parent tor-free hiPSCs therefore represent a more suitable source of cells for and provider advocacy, and assertions that the appropriate definition modeling of human disease. of benefit should be expanded. The technical possibility of performing (2) Efficient gene targeting strategies to generate markers for differ- inexpensive whole genome sequencing of newborns lies in the not- entiation and gene correction. Tracking, accentuating, or accelerating too-distant future. In this talk, I will consider what limits, if any, ought pathological phenotypes in the lab could greatly benefit from cell-type- to be placed on the expansion of newborn screening. I will consider specific lineage reporters, as well as reliable tools to disrupt, repair, specifically the critiques raised in the United States by the President’s or overexpress genes. However, current techniques of gene targeting Council on Bioethics in their report entitled The Changing Moral Focus are inefficient at best and thus are not routinely used. Here we report of Newborn Screening (2008) as well as reports of Sweden’s experi- the highly efficient targeting of several expressed and silent genes in ence with newborn screening for alpha-1-antitrypsin in early 1970s. hESCs and hiPSCs using zinc-finger nuclease (ZFN)-mediated ge- nome editing. s02.3 Ethical issues in preimplantation genetic diagnosis G. Pennings; s03.2 modeling and treating human genetic disease with Bioethics Institute Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. induced pluripotent stem (iPs) cells Although prenatal and preimplantation genetic diagnosis are frequently A. Raya1,2,3; considered as similar, there are two differences that have an enormous 1Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), Barcelona, Spain, 2ICREA, impact on the ethical evaluation of the applications: 1) the simultane- Barcelona, Spain, 3CIBER-BBN, Barcelona, Spain. ous availability of several embryos, and 2) the much larger contribution The generation of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells by ectopic of the clinician to the parental project. The first difference generates expression of a defined set of factors has enabled the derivation of the procreative beneficence principle and the lowering of the indica- patient-specific pluripotent cells and provided valuable experimental tions when in vitro fertilization is indicated for other reasons. Some platforms to model human disease. Patient-specific iPS cells are also people label this evolution as a slippery slope because they believe thought to hold great therapeutic potential, although several shortcom- that one adheres or should adhere to the strict medical model. This ings should be addressed before iPS cell technology can be imple- model is based on full penetrance, extreme severity and invariable mented clinically. Here, I will present recent results by our laboratory expression of the disease. Since there are (almost) no such diseases, and others on the usefulness of iPS cells to model human disease, the it is clear that even the currently accepted practice does not fulfill these generation of disease-corrected, patient-specific cells with potential conditions. We will illustrate this point by means of two examples: sex value for cell therapy applications, and novel strategies aimed at the selection for diseases with skewed sex ratio and variable sex linked generation of clinically-safe iPS cells. expression and selection of healthy carriers. In the second part, we will consider some of the ethical problems that s03.3 Using stem cells to model and treat neurodegenerative are generated by the new evolution of genetic screening by means diseases of microarrays. Testing for all chromosomal abnormalities and hun- A. D. Ebert; dreds of genetic diseases and susceptibilities will confront us with new University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Neurology, Stem Cell and questions: how to decide which embryo to replace? How to ascertain Regenerative Medicine Center, Madison, WI, United States. informed consent before testing? Should information to the parents Stem cells provide an important tool in which to study human develop- be limited and if so according to which principles? In essence, the ment and disease. Stem cells that naturally carry a genetic mutation, or evolution of new techniques always moves in the direction of higher those that have been genetically manipulated to over-express disease performance but it may confront us with the fact that in reality more causing mutations, have provided a way to better understand disease information is not necessarily better. processes and mechanisms for a variety of neurological disorders in- cluding Down syndrome and Parkinson’s disease. The recent advance s03.1 Human induced pluripotent stem cell based in vitro in stem cell technology in which embryonic stem cell-like cells can be modeling of Parkinson‘s disease produced by reprogramming somatic cells (termed induced pluripotent F. Soldner; stem cells (iPSCs)) has opened yet another window of opportunity to Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, United States. model and study human diseases. iPSCs can now be derived from a Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) as well as induced pluripotent multitude of patient populations for both genetically linked and spo- stem cells (iPSCs) derived from somatic cells of patients are predicted radic disorders, including Huntington’s disease, amyotrophic lateral to become a powerful tool for biomedical research and may provide sclerosis, and spinal muscular atrophy. Importantly, these iPSCs can a source for cell replacement therapies. Although the realization of be differentiated into the specific cell types that are affected in these hESC/iPSC based therapies is still at an early stage of development, brain and spinal cord diseases. Interestingly, in the case of spinal mus- the possibility to model human disease in vitro could make patient- cular atrophy, motor neurons derived from patient iPSCs have shown specific hiPSCs immediately valuable. This is particularly relevant for selective vulnerability in the culture dish, suggesting a faithful repre- diseases of the central nervous system (CNS) such as Parkinson’s sentation of the human disease process. Not only will iPSCs allow disease (PD) which are not always linked to known genetic mutations, for the examination of mechanisms involved in disease progression, where primary neuronal tissue is not available, and in vitro or in vivo but novel drug compound screening and therapeutic intervention may animal models only partially recapitulate the underlying pathophysiol- aid in developing more appropriate treatments for patients with these ogy. However, there are many technical challenges in generating and debilitating diseases. manipulating human pluripotent cells before they can be thought to be faithful models of human disease. Here, I will highlight some of the technical challenges and some emerging solutions: (1) Generation of reprogramming factor-free iPSCs to minimize or eliminate genetic alterations in the derived iPSC lines. The use of vi- ruses encoding the reprogramming factors represents a major limita-Concurrent Symposia  s04.1 From Galton to GWAs: the genetic architecture of Hospital, Melbourne, Australia. complex traits The centromere is a highly compacted (and morphologically constrict- P. Visscher; ed) structure of the chromosome that is essential for the proper seg- Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Australia. regation of replicated sister chromatids during cell division. A human Common complex disease is caused by a combination of multiple centromere typically carries 1-4 Mb of repetitive alpha satellite DNA genes and environmental effects. Traditionally the genetics of disease sequences. Human neocentromeres are fully functional centromeres has been studied using concepts that refer to the combined effect of that are formed ectopically on chromosome arms and are devoid of all genes (e.g., heritability or sibling risk), for example by studying the any alpha satellite DNA. The first case of human neocentromere was recurrence risk or phenotypic correlation of relatives. Genome-wide described by us on band q25 of a rearranged chromosome 10 in a association studies (GWAS) facilitate the dissection of heritability into child with mild speech impediment. To date, over 100 cases involving individual locus effect. They have been successful in finding many neocentromere formation have been reported with clinical phenotype SNPs associated with complex traits and have greatly increased the ranging from very severe to mild or normal, with some of the cases be- number of genes where variation is known to affect the trait. How- ing directly linked to cancer. In addition to humans, the ability of cells ever, GWAS have been criticised for not explaining more of the genetic to form neocentromeres has been observed in fly, fungi, and higher variation that we know exists in the population, and many hypotheses plants. have been put forward to explain the missing heritability. The most Because of their non-repetitive and fully sequenced nature, neocentro- plausible explanations are that (i) causal effects are too small to be de- meres are highly amenable to molecular analysis. Their study (in par- tected with statistical significance and (ii) causal variants are not well allel with normal centromeres) has led to a better understanding of: tagged by the SNPs on the commercial arrays, for example because (a) the regulatory requirements of the centromere, providing the best their minor allele frequency (MAF) is lower than genotyped SNPs. Ge- evidence that centromere formation is modulated by epigenetic chang- netic linkage and association analyses are typically implemented as es at the chromatin level that can occur independently of the underly- a genome scan, i.e. by generating and testing multiple hypotheses. ing DNA sequences. Our work and those of others have also shown Such approaches, in particular GWAS based upon SNP markers suf- that transcription of some of the underlying DNA sequences plays an fer from a high false negative rate because of the use of stringent important role in centromere formation and function; false positive thresholds. The use of all GWAS data simultaneously in (b) a novel mechanism of cancer development, where studies have an estimation rather than hypothesis testing framework is a powerful shown that a group of atypical lipomas and well-differentiated liposar- alternative to hypothesis testing. We show how such whole genome comas characteristically carry oncogenic giant supernumerary ring or methods can be used to better understand the genetic architecture of rod neochromosomes that are mitotically stabilised by the de novo for- complex traits, with applications in height and psychiatric disorders. In mation of a neocentromere; and particular, we show that using genome-wide marker data can provide (c) a novel mechanism of evolution, where molecular and phylogenetic unbiased estimates of narrow sense heritability and that GWAS SNP evidence have shown centromere repositioning via neocentromere data to estimate additive covariance between ‘unrelated’ individuals formation to be a powerful driving force in chromosome evolution and can uncover much more of the genetic variance than methods that rely speciation. on hypothesis testing. s05.2 Neocentromeres in candida albicans s04.2 Developments in the genetics of multiple sclerosis - L. S. Burrack, J. Berman; progress at last Department of Genetics, Cell Biology & Development, 6-170 Molecular and S. Sawcer; Cellular Biology Building, Minneapolis, MN, United States. University of Cambridge Neurology unit, Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, Cambridge, Centromeres are critical for chromosome segregation and genome United Kingdom. stability. Neocentromeres, functional kinetocores that appear at ecto- Multiple sclerosis is a disabling autoimmune disease of the central ner- pic loci, can form when centromere function is lost at the normal locus. vous system that affects approximately 2.5 million people worldwide In humans, neocentromeres can arise in cells with gross chromosome (http://www.atlasofms.org/). Little is known about the events that trigger rearrangements tohat rescue an acentric chromosome, but have also the disease or the factors that govern its highly variable course. Epide- been described in otherwise healthy individuals where the centromere miological studies confirm that genetic factors influence susceptibility appears to have been inactivated. The mechanisms of centromere in- but relevant genes have proven difficult to identify. Association with heritance and neocentromere formation remain unknown. Using the the MHC was established almost 40 years ago but alternate candidate yeast Candida albicans, which has small, regional centromeres, we gene studies and whole genome linkage screening were unrevealing. previously found that disruption of the native centromere in C. albicans Fortunately the advent of genome wide association studies (GWAS) results in neocentromere formation (Ketel et al. 2009 PLoS Genet- has revolutionised the genetic analysis of multiple sclerosis. To date ics 5(3):e1000400). These neocentromeres form proximal to the dis- 7 GWAS have been completed in the disease and 18 associated vari- rupted centromere or at distal loci on the chromosome arms far from ants have been identified. This year the International Multiple Sclerosis the disrupted centromere. Distal neocentromere loci characterized to Genetics Consortium (IMSGC) and the Wellcome Trust Case Control date share properties of low gene density and flanking repeated DNA Consortium (WTCCC) will completed a further, and considerably larg- sequences. We are also using the C. albicans neocentromere model er, GWAS involving almost 10,000 patients and 16,000 controls. These system to characterize the functional properties of neocentromeres new GWAS data will substantially expand the list of associated loci and such as the ability to bind cohesin proteins and other chromatin com- thereby illuminate pathogenesis. ponents and the ability to be stably maintained under stressful growth conditions. Finally, in a genome-wide analysis of replication timing, we s04.3 Genome-wide association studies in cancer: sorting out find that centromeres replicate at the earliest time during S-phase and the nuggets of truth that DNA that acquires a neocentromere also acquires this early DNA S. J. Chanock; replication property. Thus, C. albicans is a useful model for studying Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, Laboratory of Translational epigenetic activities involving centromeres, such as the establishment Genomics, Bethesda, MD, United States. of neocentromeres and the maintenance of functional kinetochores at No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract specific DNA loci. section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- sible updates. s05.3 centromere repositioning in evolution and in humans M. Rocchi; s05.1 Neocentromeres in human clinical cases Dip. di Genetica e Microbiologia, Bari, Italy. A. Choo1,2,3; In recent years we have used large panels of BAC clones to track the 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department of evolutionary history of chromosomes in primates and in non-primate Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Royal Children‘s mammals. This approach has disclosed an unprecedented phenom- enon: the “centromere repositioning”, that is the movement of the cen-Concurrent Symposia 10 tromere along the chromosome without marker order variation. Repo- model could be regarded as a novel mutational mechanism causing sitioned centromeres are relatively frequent. In macaque, for instance, human congenital malformations, and understanding it will certainly 9 out of 21 centromeres are evolutionarily new; in donkey at least 5 provide a powerful tool in establishing etiology for a broader range of such neocentromeres originated after its divergence from zebra (less human diseases. than 1 million years). A related phenomenon (clinical neocentromeres) has been reported in human clinical cases. Clinical neocentromeres s06.2 clustered gene co-regulation and enhancer sharing can are analphoid centromeres that emerge in ectopic chromosomal re- be modulated by developmentally regulated chromatin loops gions. Usually they stabilize supernumerary acentric chromosome J. Tena1, E. Alonso2, E. de la Calle-Mustienes1, E. Splinter3, W. de Laat3, M. which have detrimental phenotypic consequences. Studies on the evo- Manzanares2, J. L. Gomez-Skarmeta1; lution of the chromosomes where clustering of neocentromeres were 1Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Sevilla, Spain, 2Fundación Centro reported (3q, 13q, and 15q for instance) disclosed distinct, intriguing Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III,, Madrid, Spain, relationships between human clinical neocentromeres and evolution- 3Hubrecht Institute-KNAW & University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, ary neocentromeres. Additionally, examples are now available of cen- Netherlands. tromere repositioning events in humans, disclosed by chance because Gene clusters are paradigms to study transcriptional regulation during they do not result in phenotypic anomalies. development. Here, we present a general map of enhancer distribution along the 2 Mb of DNA spanning the IrxA cluster produced by means s06.1 Dysruption of long-distance highly conserved non coding of transgenic Xenopus, zebrafish and mouse embryos. Using Chro- sequences at the sOX9 locus matin Conformation Capture, we demonstrate that enhancer sharing S. Benko1, J. Amiel1, A. Munnich1, D. R. Fitzpatrick2, S. Lyonnet1; is widespread within the cluster, which explains the common expres- 1Département de Génétique et Unité INSERM U-781 , Université Paris sion domains of IrxA genes in particular tissues and the evolutionary Descartes Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 2MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute conserved architecture of the cluster. We also identify an insulator and of Genetic and Molecular Medicine, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, two chromatin loops within the cluster that may help partition it in two United Kingdom. independent regulatory domains in certain cell types. We finally show One of the key discoveries of vertebrate genome sequencing projects that this topology predicts gene expression in cases where cluster or- has been the identification of non-coding elements that remained evo- ganization has been disrupted during evolution. We conclude that the lutionarily conserved, and thus likely functional. Interestingly, two thirds regulatory constrains imposed by the linear arrangement of clustered of them do not correspond to transcribed gene sequences (exons and genes in the genome can be modulated by developmentally regulated UTRs); they have been named conserved non-coding sequences loops that facilitate the formation of gene-specific regulatory land- (CNCs) and represent a vast amount of DNA (3% of the human ge- scapes. nome). Interestingly, enrichment for CNCs has been demonstrated within gene deserts nearest to physically isolated genes known or s06.3 Far reaching consequences - mechanisms and problems suspected to be important developmental regulators. It has been sug- of long range control gested that in these cases CNCs may represent regulatory elements S. Mundlos; (enhancers or suppressors) necessary for the correct spatiotemporal Institute for Medical Genetics, Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Max expression of these genes needed for embryonic development, and Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. acting as modular, sometimes combinatorial, tissue-specific enhanc- The vast majority of most genomes consists of non-coding sequence ers of gene transcription. with more or less unknown function. This “dark side” of the genome In that particular context, we will discuss recent findings from our contains regions of diverse composition including sequences that are groups regarding: highly conserved throughout evolution. Some of these so called con- - A common non-coding enhancer genomic variant in a highly con- served non-coding elements (CNEs) have been identified as essen- served sequence located in a non-coding region of the RET gene, al- tial regulators of gene expression. CNEs are particularly abundant in tering the binding of a transcription factor expressed in neural crest cell “genes deserts” surrounding genes that have important functions dur- precursors to the enteric nervous system, which would predispose to ing development and may be as far as 1 Mb away from the gene they Hirschsprung disease. regulate. Gene regulation is achieved through the binding of transcrip- - More recently, the discovery of long-distance disruption of enhancer tion factors to the element and subsequent loop formation between CNCs on both side of the SOX9 gene coding sequences in Pierre the CNE and the gene’s promotor. Mutations that interfer with the cis Robin sequence (PRS), a common orofacial cleft anomaly with man- regulatory capacity of these elements can thus be expected to result dibular hypoplasia. The existence of a PRS locus at 17q24 was sup- in altered gene expression in a certain cell type at a given time point. ported by both linkage analysis and mapping of independent translo- We have been investigating the consequences of CNE-controled gene cation breakpoints that cluster 1.06-1.23 Mb upstream of SOX9. Also, regulation and the effect of mutations using cytogenetics and high-res- microdeletions or point mutation involved CNCs capable of driving olution array CGH in mouse models and patients. We identified several mandibular expression in transgenic mouse embryos. Moreover, the molecular mechanisms that cause abnormalities in long range control. pattern of histone modifications associated with both the centromeric These include the disconnection of control elements from their target and telomeric regions suggests tissue-specific enhancer function. gene by translocations, changes in presumed transcription factor bind- ChIP experiments demonstrated that a mutated or deleted CNC binds ing sites by point mutations, and altered gene regulation by deletions, endogenous MSX1 protein. In addition, a human CNC mutation both and duplications of CNEs. All abnormalities were detected in patients alters MSX1 binding and abrogates enhancer function in a mandibu- or mice with congenital malformations, i.e. brachydactyly, triphalan- lar mesenchymal cell line. Our data, combined with existing evidence geal thumb-polysyndactyly, Laurin-Sandrow syndrome, Cooks syn- from human and animal phenotypes, strongly suggests that the dis- drome, or syndactyly. We postulate that these conditions are caused ruption of distant, tissue-specific regulatory elements, required for the by alterations of fine tuning of gene expression which in consequence normal development of the mandibula, perturbs embryonic expression disturbs dosage-dependent signalling pathways. Due to the fact that of SOX9 and accounts for the PRS phenotype. this mutation mechanism interfers only with a certain regulatory event These observations suggest that the domains to study for genomic al- and not the entire gene function, the resulting phenotypes are distict terations, resulting in tissue-specific misregulation of a developmental from those associated with mutations in the coding region gene and a subsequent malformation, should be much broader than traditionally investigated. They also results strongly suggest that ge- s07.1 the impact of the early social environment on the adult nomic alteration of highly conserved non-coding elements of the ge- epigenome nome, located near to, or at a long distance from, coding sequences M. Szyf; of a gene might alter gene expression in a tissue-specific and tim- Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics , McGill University, Montreal, ing-specific manner. These evolutionarily constrained regions of the QC, Canada. genome are under purifying selection for function, and with no pro- No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract tein coding activity, may be disrupted in a modular fashion as many section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- such regulatory elements surround master developmental genes. This sible updates.Concurrent Symposia 11 s07.2 identifying parent of origin effects in the human genome ceptibility to ASDs; for instance, there are much higher concordance A. Sharp; rates for ASDs in monozygotic twins (92%) than dizygotic twins (10%), University of Geneva, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, while recent estimates for the sibling recurrence risk is greater than Geneva, Switzerland. 15. Although ASDs are highly heritable disorders, they exhibit hetero- No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract geneous clinical symptoms and genetic architecture which have hin- section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- dered identification of common genetic susceptibility factors. Although sible updates. previous linkage studies, candidate gene association studies and cy- togenetic studies have implicated several chromosomal regions for the s07.3 Using c. elegans to study chromatin regulators involved presence of autism susceptibility loci they have failed to consistently in human disease identify genes or genomic loci that increase risk of ASD presentations. I. J. Latorre1, M. Cheung1, J. Garrigues2, A. Vielle-Canonge1, T. Takasaki2, S. Using the genome wide association study (GWAS) approach, we Strome2, J. Ahringer1; have recently identified common genetic variants between two cad- 1Gurdon Institute, The Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK, Cambridge, herin genes (CDH10 and CDH9) as associated with ASDs (Wang et United Kingdom, 2University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, United States. al, Nature, 2009), as well as a collection of rare copy number variants Regulation of chromatin structure plays a central role in transcriptional in neuronal cell-adhesion genes (Glessner et al, Nature, 2009). The control. A large number of chromatin regulating enzymes and com- discovery cohorts in the GWAS contains 780 families (3,101 subjects) plexes are known, however, their mechanisms of action are poorly with affected children, and a second cohort of 1,204 affected subjects understood. Global chromatin factor mapping and loss of function and 6,491 control subjects, all of whom were genotyped by us in the studies in single-celled yeast have provided important insights, but Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP), representing the largest there is still little information on genome-wide targets and functions in ASDs genetics studies ever performed. The results from these studies multicellular organisms. Importantly, animals contain many chromatin- and our ongoing search for the causal variants and their potential influ- regulating complexes not found in yeast, such as the histone deacety- ence on the neuronal cell-adhesion molecules in the pathogenesis of lase NuRD chromatin-remodelling complex, and the DRM complex, ASDs will be presented. which includes the tumor suppressor Retinoblastoma. Components of both of these complexes have been implicated in human disease. S08.3 Behavioural genetics in mice C. elegans has many features that make it well-suited for studies of J. Flint; chromatin regulation. Of particular note are its small well-annotated The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. genome (30X smaller than human), the ease of RNAi, and the rich No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract resource of chromatin mutants for loss of function studies. Importantly, section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- C. elegans has a complement of chromatin factors very similar to that sible updates. of humans, allowing investigations of chromatin function in a multicel- lular organism. As a step toward understanding the functions of chro- s09.1 Prenatal diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias matin proteins implicated in disease, we are identifying their patterns S. Unger; of binding in C. elegans genome-wide using ChIP-chip and ChIP-seq. Centre for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg University Hospital, In addition, to provide a framework for these studies, we are also gen- Freiburg, Germany. erating genome-wide maps of the locations of histones and histone tail The delineation of skeletal dysplasias originated and still relies heavily modifications. on radiographic findings. Translation of this knowledge to ultrasound based diagnosis is not always evident or simple. Ultrasound provides S08.1 Genomic advances in Schizophrenia an indirect image that is often focused on details and it can be dif- M. J. Owen; ficult to get an overview (a form of prenatal babygram). For genetic MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics , Cardiff University, counseling purposes it is important to distinguish lethal and non-lethal Cardiff, United Kingdom. forms of dysplasia. Certain parameters, such as degree of long bone Recent studies have supported the hypothesis that the high heritabil- shortening, chest size relative to abdomen, and presence or absence ity of schizophrenia reflects a combination of relatively common al- of hydrops or other anomalies, are key to this interpretation. Few signs leles of small effect and some rare alleles with relatively large effects. are specific (and none are pathognomonic) thus Genome-wide association studies have identified several risk loci at a systematic approach to the skeleton is needed. This allows for the genome-wide levels of significance as well as evidence for a substan- best possible chance of diagnosis but this is not always possible pre- tial burden of common risk loci. Moreover these recent findings sug- natally and even the most experienced centers must often give gener- gest genetic overlap with bipolar disorder which has traditionally been alized counseling. This talk will review the most common diagnoses as assumed to be genetically distinct from schizophrenia. Genome-wide well as some of the pitfalls of ultrasound diagnosis. studies of at least one class of relatively uncommon variant, submicro- scopic chromosomal abnormalities often referred to as copy number s09.2 What you see depends on what you look at Genetics - variations (CNVs), suggest that these confer high risk of schizophre- Fetal ultrasound perspectives nia. There is evidence both for an increased burden of large (>100kb) R. Achiron; and rare (MAF <1%) CNVs in schizophrenia and that risk is conferred University of Tel Aviv, Tel Hashomer, Israel. by a number of specific large CNVs (including deletions at 22q11.2, Fetal medicine is a new evolving profession which requires a multidis- 1q21.1, 15q13.2 and 15q11.2 and duplications of 16p11.2) as well as ciplinary approach to confront with various fetal diseases. by deletions of NRXN1 which encodes the synaptic scaffolding pro- Objective: To review the perspectives of Genetic counselling and So- tein neurexin 1. Many of these CNVs have been implicated in autism, nographic evaluation in fetuses with abnormalities detected in utero. mental retardation, epilepsy and other neurodevelopment disorders. Methods: A retrospective survey of stimulating and interesting cases The implications of recent findings for the pathogenesis and noslogy of will be presneted. schizophrenia and related disorders will be discussed. Results: Four fetuses representing the following topics are described: 1) New Technology and Pandora Box S08.2 Genome-Wide Association Studies in Autism Spectrum 2) One Sees what One Knows Disorders 3) What you see is the Tip of the Iceberg H. Hakonarson; 4) Not Just Images Center for Applied Genomics, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Conclusion: In modern obstetrics Genetic and fetal medicine collabo- PA, United States. ration Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) represent a large group of child- is necessary for enhancing diagnosis and promoting accurate man- hood neurodevelopmental, neuropsychiatric disorders characterized agement. by restricted and repetitive patterns of interests and behavior, limited verbal communication and impairment of social interaction. Several sources of evidence suggest strong a genetic component in the sus-Concurrent Symposia 12 s09.3 Use of acGH in prenatal diagnosis s10.2 transitions between research and clinical practice: I. B. Van den Veyver; Families‘ experiences in a gene-hunting study Baylor College of Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology and Molecular and H. Statham1, M. Ponder1, M. P. M. Richards1, N. Hallowell2, L. Raymond3; Human Genetics, Houston, TX, United States. 1Centre for Family Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Current prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis for chromosomal abnormalities Kingdom, 2Public Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United is performed by karyotyping of fetal cells from chorionic villi or amniotic Kingdom, 3Dept of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, fluid to detect any aneuploidy and structural genomic rearrangements Cambridge, United Kingdom. of larger than ~5 Mb. In addition, fluorescence in situ hybridization is The GOLD study (Genetics of Learning Disability, a joint project un- used for rapid detection of common aneuploidies compatible with live dertaken by the Department of Medical Genetics (University of Cam- birth or detection of deletion and duplication syndromes for which there bridge) and The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute) to identify novel gene is high clinical suspicion because of family history or prenatal ultra- mutations on the X chromosome, recruited patients and families if: sound findings. In contrast, array-based Comparative Genomic Hy- • the family had multiple male individuals affected by significant Intel- bridization (aCGH) can survey the entire genome for submicroscopic lectual Disability deletions and duplications, aneuploidy and other unbalanced chromo- • the pattern of occurrence of the Intellectual Disability suggested an somal abnormalities. It is now widely used in the genetic evaluation of X-linked inheritance pattern pediatric patients and is being increasingly applied to prenatal diagno- • all genes known to be responsible for Intellectual Disability had been sis where it is already making significant impact. Principles of aCGH tested for and excluded. and different platforms that can be used for prenatal diagnosis, with This paper reports some of the findings of complementary research their benefits and challenges will be briefly reviewed. Our recent expe- with a subset of families who were part of the GOLD study. The ob- rience of over 600 cases suggests that aCGH-detection of copy num- jectives were to explore and document the experiences, beliefs, un- ber alterations of clinical significance from prenatally obtained samples derstandings, attitudes and behaviours of family members while they is as high as 8%, depending on the indication, with more than 2% not were participating and afterwards. otherwise detectable. The challenges of pre- and post-test counsel- Analysis revealed similarities between routine clinical practice and the ing, cost, and potential for finding copy number changes of unknown genetic research in terms of process and desired outcome. Thus, in significance continue to incite debate about the benefit of widespread trying to identify the nature of the Intellectual Disability prior to par- use of aCGH for prenatal diagnosis; a large multicenter trial is ongo- ticipation in the GOLD study, the diagnostic process would have been ing in the US to address some of these issues. However, the superior to take blood and for the blood to be investigated for known genes. diagnostic power of aCGH, the small number of findings of uncertain The process when the GOLD research was undertaken would also significance (1% or less) most of which can be resolved by analyzing have been to take blood and to investigate the DNA extracted from parents or by using data from ever-growing experience with diagnostic the blood, but for as-yet unknown gene mutations. Those undergoing aCGH, and the decreasing cost, will likely spur universal acceptance testing in either clinical practice or through research sought a genetic of aCGH as a first-line prenatal diagnostic test for fetal chromosomal diagnosis for a variety of reasons, the most common of which was to abnormalities in the near future. allow informed reproductive choices for themselves and other family members. These similarities raise important issues for clinicians in- s10.1 Patients‘ Organizations‘ Engagement in War on Rare volved with patients moving between clinical practice and research Genetic Diseases: Scientific Activism and New Forms of with regards consent processes at the beginning of research and the sociality information and care given to participants at the end of research when V. Rabeharisoa; they again become patients. Ecole Nationale Superieure des Mines de Paris, Paris, France. From the 1980’s onwards, both in Europe and North America, an in- s10.3 Genetics and mental illness: perceptions of affected creasing number of patients’ organizations actively engage in the individuals and their family members collection and circulation of knowledge on their conditions. Patients’ J. Austin; organizations concerned with rare genetic diseases offer a striking il- University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. lustration thereof. Some of them even intervene in research activities To date, there has been little in the way of systematic effort to provide and contribute to the shaping of research agenda on their diseases. education about what is known (based on research) about the causes This communication aims at documenting this phenomenon and high- of mental illnesses for affected individuals and their families. However, lighting its impact on the governance of knowledge, as well as on the because understanding cause of an illness is critical to adapting to it, in dynamics of patients’ organizations movements. the absence of being provided with an explanation affected individuals I will first show that patients’ organizations engagement in research and families create their own explanations, based on their experience. constitutes a watershed in the history of patients’ organizations. They For mental illness, these causal explanations often invoke powerful do no longer content to provide social and emotional support to their negative emotions like guilt and shame, and can contribute to feelings members and to advocate for their rights. They claim to take part in of powerlessness over the illness. This presentation will review the war on their diseases, alongside specialists. In the area of rare ge- potential psychosocial consequences of providing genetic counseling netic disorders, patients’ organizations are particularly assertive. Due for individuals with severe psychiatric illness and their family members, to the scarcity of knowledge on their conditions, the limited number illustrated with case examples from an ongoing randomized controlled of specialists interested in, and the difficulties for making rare genetic trial. diseases a public health issue, patients’ organizations soon decided to engage in research in order to foster war on their conditions. s11.1 mechanisms of miRNA-mediated gene silencing Drawing on various case studies, I will then detail different configura- E. Izaurralde; tions of patients’ scientific activism. In the area of rare genetic dis- Max-Planck-Institute for Developmental Biology, Tuebingen, Germany. eases, patients’ organizations do not only provide financial support to MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are genome-encoded ~22 nucleotide-long RNAs research. They mobilize patients’ experience and act as “lay-experts” that silence gene expression post-transcriptionally by base pairing in the process of knowledge production. They thus nurture specialists’ with the 3’ untranslated regions of target mRNAs. To exert their func- expertise with patients’ experience from bench to bedside, and give tion, miRNAs associate with Argonaute proteins (AGOs) in miRNA- raise to hybrid forms of knowledge on their diseases. induced silencing complexes (miRISCs), which silence the expression Finally, I will show that patients’ scientific activism does not only trans- of mRNAs containing partially or fully complementary miRNA-binding form the very nature of knowledge and research activities. It also im- sites. In animals, most miRNAs are only partially complementary to pinges on patients’ identity and lay ground for new forms of sociality their targets. In this case, our group has shown that the AGO proteins that the American anthropologist Paul Rabinow terms “biosociality”. are not sufficient to mediate silencing and require interaction with pro- To open the general discussion, I will offer a few examples and I will teins of the GW182 family. We have also shown that AGO-GW182 reflect on the social, political and ethical stakes pertaining this new complexes mediate silencing by promoting translational repression articulation between genetics and society. and mRNA deadenylation catalyzed by CAF1-CCR4-NOT, the major cytoplasmic deadenylase complex. Deadenylation decreases transla-Concurrent Symposia 1 tion efficiency and, in somatic cells, commits the mRNA to decapping s12.1 What can be learned from a large clinical cohort and 5’-to-3’ exonucleolytic degradation. Our analysis of GW182 pro- S. Bergmann; tein function has revealed two domains critical for silencing: an N-ter- Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, minal GW-repeat-containing region conferring binding to AGOs, and a Switzerland. bipartite silencing domain, consisting of Mid and C-terminal regions, The Cohorte Lausannoise (CoLaus) is a random population sample of which elicits translational repression and degradation of miRNA tar- more than 6‘000 individuals who were genotyped for 500.000 Single gets. Exactly how the bipartite silencing domain of GW182 proteins Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) using Affymetrix SNP-microarrays. interferes with translation and accelerates deadenylation is not com- Besides these genotypic markers also a large number of clinically rel- pletely understood. We have recently started to address this ques- evant parameters were measured. Comparing the country of origin tion by showing that the silencing domains of GW182 interact with the of these individual with the projection of their genotypic profile onto cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding protein 1 (PABPC1), suggesting GW182 the principal components of the entire genotypic dataset revealed an proteins are PABP-interacting proteins (Paips) that interfere with the astonishingly close correspondence between genetic and geographic function of PABPC1 in translation and mRNA stabilization. distances. Indeed, a geographical map of Europe arises naturally as an efficient two-dimensional summary of genetic variation in Europe- s11.2 the hidden layer of noncoding RNA in the epigenetic ans (see Figure). Whole-genome association studies for height, body- control of human development and cognition mass-index, serum lipid and calcium concentrations, blood pressure J. S. Mattick; and other clinical phenotypes using classical scans testing one SNP at Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, a time elucidated many loci with highly significant associations, which Australia. are promising candidates towards unraveling mechanisms of actions Bioinformatic, genomic and experimental evidence all suggest that the and malfunction. Yet, like in many other studies, together these vari- genetic programming of humans and other complex organisms has ants only explain a small fraction of the phenotypic variance, indicating been misunderstood for the past 50 years, because of the assumption that we still miss a comprehensive picture of: (a) what are the causal - largely true for the unicellular prokaryotes, but not for multicellular variants, (b) what effects are attributed by rare variants and/or copy eukaryotes - that most genetic information is transacted by proteins. number variations, (c) what fraction of the variance can be explained The human genome specifies the development of an anatomically and by SNP-SNP or SNP-environment interactions, and (d) what are the in- cognitively complex individual comprised of 100 trillion cells with hun- trinsic limitations of currently used algorithms in dealing with very large dreds of different and precisely sculptured muscles, bones and organs, sets of genotypic and phenotypic data, which are partially incomplete including the brain, but which contains only about 20,000 protein-cod- or noisy. I will outline our research dealing with these challenges. ing genes, similar in number and largely orthologous with those in nematodes that have only 1,000 somatic cells. On the other hand, the s12.2 Human genetics from genes to complex networks extent of non-protein-coding DNA increases with increasing complex- R. Xavier; ity, reaching 98.8% in humans, suggesting that much of the informa- Andrew D. Smith, Department of Biology, Boston, MA, United States. tion required to program development may reside in these sequences. No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract Moreover it is now evident the majority of the mammalian genome is section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- transcribed, mainly into non-protein-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), and that sible updates.S12.3 Pathway Discovery in Adipocyte Biology Using there are tens if not hundreds of thousands of long and short RNAs Epigenomics in mammals that show specific expression patterns and subcellular E. D. Rosen; locations. Our studies indicate that these RNAs form a massive hidden Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States. network of regulatory information that regulates epigenetic processes The epidemic of obesity and Type 2 diabetes has thrust the biology of and directs the precise patterns of gene expression during growth and the adipocyte into the forefront of biomedical research priorities. We development. It also appears that RNA is central to brain development, are interested in identifying the transcriptional basis by which adipo- learning and memory, and that animals, especially primates, have de- cytes govern their behavior. To this end we have utilized approaches veloped sophisticated RNA editing systems to modify hardwired ge- that leverage maps of epigenetic alterations in adipose tissue to pre- netic information in response to experience, that in turn can modulate dict novel transcriptional pathways. We have generated genome-wide epigenetic memory, some of which may be inherited. Thus RNA may chromatin state maps, PPARγ and CTCF localization maps and gene represent the computational engine of the cell and the substrate for expression profiles from both murine and human models of adipogen- epigenome-environment interactions. Moreover, what was dismissed esis. These data provide unprecedented views of chromatin remodel- as junk because it was not understood may hold the key to under- ing during cellular differentiation, and allow identification of thousands standing human evolution, development and cognition, as well as our of putative pre-adipocyte- and adipocyte-specific cis-regulatory ele- individual differences and susceptibilities to complex diseases. ments based on dynamic chromatin signatures. We find that the spe- cific locations of most such elements differ between the two models, s11.3 system genetics of non-coding RNA including at orthologous loci with similar expression patterns. Based L. Steinmetz; on sequence analysis and reporter assays, we show that these differ- EMBL Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. ences are determined in part by evolutionary turnover of transcription An unanticipatedly large proportion of eukaryotic genomes is tran- factor motifs in the genome sequences, and that this turnover may scribed. By profiling genome-wide transcription at high resolution on be facilitated by the presence of multiple distal regulatory elements at both strands of the complete yeast genome we have found hundreds adipogenesis-dependent loci. Finally, we also utilize the close relation- of novel intergenic and antisense non-coding RNA transcripts. By com- ship between open chromatin marks and transcription factor motifs to paring transcriptome profiles across multiple conditions and strains identify and validate several novel regulators of adipogenesis and lipid with shuffled genotypes, we have defined an annotated set of differen- homeostasis. tially expressed non-coding transcripts revealing differences in struc- ture and level. Hundreds of non-coding RNAs appear to arise from an s13.1 can breast cancer mortality be reduced with genetic inherent bi-directional transcription from eukaryotic promoters. Many testing? others originate from 3’ nucleosome depleted regions of genes and P. Hall; are transcribed antisense to the open reading frame. The arrangement Dept. Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, and regulatory patterns of these transcripts suggest mechanisms of Sweden. how they could be regulated and how they could regulate the expres- No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract sion of genes. section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- sible updates.Concurrent Symposia 1 s13.2 common genetic variants and cancer risks for BRcA1 noma (Australia and Canada) and entero-pancreatic endocrine tumors and BRcA2 mutation carriers (Italy); pediatric brain cancers (Germany); prostate cancer (Canada A. C. Antoniou, on behalf of the Consortium of Investigators of Modifiers of and United Kingdom); and renal cancer (European Union and France). BRCA1/2 (CIMBA); Each project is expected to involve specimens (tumor plus normal) Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and from approximately 500 patients. Over time, additional nations and or- Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. ganizations are expected to join the ICGC. Several lines of evidence suggest that genetic factors modify cancer Over the next ten years, the ICGC expects to produce comprehensive risks for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Past studies concen- catalogues of the full range of genetic mutations involved in 50 types trated on variants in candidate genes thought to be functionally rel- of cancer (i.e. 25,000 cancer and 25,000 germline genomes), with key evant to the diseases. However, these have not been very success- factors being the ability to detect all mutated cancer genes, data at ful and most studies were too small to provide enough power to de- the level of individual DNA bases, application of common standards tect the modest associations that are likely to be present. Recently, for pathology and technology and comparison data from matched, polymorphisms identified through genome-wide association studies non-tumour tissue. The ICGC’s informed consent and ethical oversight of unselected cancer patients and controls have been shown to be policies state that cancer patients enrolled in an ICGC-related study associated with cancer risk in large studies by the Consortium of In- should be informed that their participation is voluntary, that their clinical vestigators of Modifiers of BRCA1/2 (CIMBA). This approach identi- care will not be affected by their participation and that data obtained fied seven genetic variants (in FGFR2, TOX3, MAP3K1, LSP1,2q35, from analyses using their samples will be made available to the inter- 5p12 and SLC4A7) that are associated with the risk of breast cancer national research community. ICGC projects use common standards and one variant (in BNC2) that is associated with ovarian cancer risk of data collection and analysis. In April 2010, the ICGC launched its for BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 mutation carriers. Differential associations data portal at www.icgc.org, with the release of several cancer genome were found between these variants and breast cancer risk for BRCA1 datasets that are freely available to the global research community. and BRCA2 mutation carriers. These are in line with differences ob- In my presentation, I will use the examples of pancreatic cancer ge- served in the associations between these polymorphisms and different nome datasets generated by the Australian and Canadian teams. disease subtypes in the general population and suggest that studies of mutation carriers may be useful for identifying genetic variants as- s14.3 Next Generation Human Genetics sociated with different disease subtypes in the general population. All D. Nickerson; polymorphisms appear to interact multiplicatively on breast cancer risk University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences, Seattle, WA, for mutation carriers. Based on the joint genotype distribution of the 7 United States. risk associated SNPs in BRCA2 mutation carriers, the 5% of BRCA2 No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract mutation carriers at highest risk were predicted to have a probability section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- of 80-96% of developing the disease by age 80, compared with 42- sible updates. 50% for the 5% of carriers at lowest risk. Such risk differences may be sufficient to influence the clinical management of mutation carriers s15.1 Using simple cells to model complex Diseases and suggest that this is may be one of the first clinically useful impact S. L. Lindquist; of common, low penetrance variants identified through genome wide Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and HHMI, Dept. of Biology, MIT, association studies. Cambridge, MA, United States. It is now clear that an astonishing number of human diseases, es- s13.3 is breast cancer prognosis inherited? pecially neurodegenerative diseases, result from basic problems in H. Nevanlinna; protein folding. These diseases may appear to have little in common Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, with each other besides their devastating effects on patients and their Helsinki, Finland. families. Yet one feature they share is the occurrence of complexes No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract of misfolded, aggregated proteins in affected neurons. For each dis- section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- ease, a different protein is the major constituent of the aggregate: in sible updates. Parkinson’s disease alpha-synuclein, in Alzheimer’s disease Aβ and tau. We have developed simple cellular models these protein fold- s14.1 the 1000 Genomes project ing disorders by over-expressing human disease-associated proteins R. Durbin; in yeast. By combining the unique power of yeast genetics with the Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom. highly conserved biology of protein homeostasis in all eukaryotes, we No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract use yeast cells as “living test tubes” to investigate the mechanisms section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- of toxicity associated with problems in protein folding, trafficking, and sible updates. degradation and complement these basic studies with transcriptional analysis and high-throughput chemical and genetic screens for toxicity s14.2 international cancer Genome consortium modifiers. Progress will be presented on models for the misfolding of T. Hudson; α-syn and Aβ. Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, MaRS Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada. Supported by HHMI and NIH grants NS038372, NS060957. The International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) is coordinat- ing an international-scale research effort to obtain a comprehensive s15.2 C. elegans models for neurodegenerative diseases description of genomic, transcriptomic and epigenomic changes in the E. Nollen; major forms of cancer. This information will lead to better ways of diag- Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen and University of nosing, treating and preventing cancer. Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. The ICGC was launched in April 2008, with the announcement of the Various age-related neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkin- proposed strategies and policies to the international scientific com- son‘s disease, polyglutamine expansion diseases and Alzheimer‘s munity to enable funding agencies and research groups to plan their disease, are associated with the accumulation of misfolded proteins participation within the ICGC. As of April 2010, the ICGC has received in aggregates in the brain. However, how and why these proteins form commitments from funding organizations in Asia, Australia, Europe and aggregates and cause disease is still poorly understood. Using the North America for the following cancer genome projects: acute myeloid nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans to model these diseases and leukemia (United States); breast cancer, multiple subtypes (European high-throughput genetic screens, we have identified genes that modify Union, France, and the United Kingdom); chronic lymphocytic leuke- aggregation of the disease proteins and their toxicity. We have recently mia (Spain); colon cancer (United States); gastric adenocarcinoma identified an evolutionarily highly conserved modifier of aggregation, (China); glioblastoma multiforme (United States); hepatocellular car- moag-4, as a positive regulator of aggregate formation in C. elegans cinoma, alcohol and associated etiologies (France) and viral etiolo- models for misfolding diseases. We have shown that moag-4 drives gies (Japan); lung cancer (United States); oral cavity cancer (India); the formation of compact misfolding intermediates that are required ovarian cancer (Australia and United States); pancreatic adenocarci- for aggregate formation. We have also shown that loss of moag-4 pro-Concurrent Symposia 1 motes longevity in parallel to the core IGF/insulin (IIS) longevity path- of parenchymal plaques, and hyperphosphoylated tau intracellularly way, converging at the IIS transcription factors, daf-16 and hsf-1. Thus, as neurofibrillary tangles. To understand the mechanisms how abnor- moag-4 has a dual function as a regulator of protein aggregation and mal protein processing and aggregation leads to cerebral amyloido- of lifespan in C. elegans. moag-4 represents an unexplored protein sis and tangle formation, cellular dysfunction, and dementia, several quality control pathway and since there are two close human orthologs transgenic mouse models have been generated. These mouse models with conserved functions, our results will open up new avenues for have been instrumental to study the induction and spread of the AD research on aging-related neurodegenerative diseases. lesions and a mechanism reminescent of prions has been suggested. The observation that Aβ structural variants can be induced in vivo in s15.3 the prion-like aspect of Alzheimer´s disease these mouse models intensifies the search of the agent that drives M. Jucker; corruptive protein templating in AD pathogenesis. AD lesions and neu- Department of Cellular Neurology, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, rodegeneration likely occur many years before the clinical signs of the University of Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany. disease. Thus, an understanding of the earliest and initial events in the Cerebral proteopathy is a unifying term for cerebral neurodegenerative development of AD is crucial for the development of diagnostics and diseases in which aggregated proteins are abnormally deposited in the early mechanism-based intervention. brain. The hallmark proteopathy is Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in which fibrillar amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide is deposited extracellularly in the form Educational Sessions 11 Abstracts of EsHG Educational sessions data mining tool will be given with an emphasis on human data in gen- eral and variation data in particular. Es1.1 Genetics of Female Ovarian Dysfunction B. C. J. M. Fauser; Es3.1 Family matters: theory and practice in the communication Department of Reproductive Medicine and Gynecology, University Medical of genetic information Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands C. Gaff; Ovarian function is regulated by a complex endocrine (and paracrine) Departments of Paediatrics & Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, system involving the central nervous system, pituitary gonadotropins, Australia. and ovarian steroids. Numerous factors are involved such as kiss- Facilitating family communication about genetics is an integral part of peptin, GnRH, LH, FSH (its receptors and signal transduction path- genetic counselling practice. Although the research literature predomi- ways) and many enzymes and intermediate steroids (in the cascade of nantly focuses on the communication of test results, families inevitably converting cholesterol to estradiol), and finally steroid receptors. Rare, discuss other aspects of genetic conditions, sometimes deliberately, single gene mutations and resulting phenotypes have been described often as part of their regular social discourse. It is likely that commu- for all steps imaginable. Well known phenotypes include Kallman nication relating to inheritance and genetic conditions conforms to the syndrome, 21 hydroxylase deficiency, FSH receptor defect, McCune rules and patterns that govern communication generally in families. In- Albright. These “experiments of nature” greatly improved our under- sights from the discipline of family communication may therefore assist standing of physiology. practitioners work with families. They may also enhance awareness Normal menopause occurs between 40 and 60 yrs of age. The age of of the practitioner‘s own communication patterns and expectations. menopause between sisters (or between mothers and daughters) is After a brief introduction to genetic counselling practice in this field, closely linked, suggesting a strong genetic component. Age of meno- participants will be introduced to theories from the discipline of family pause is related to preceding fertility and has important implications communication - including Communication Privacy Management and for subsequent female health. Some candidate genes have been as- Family Communication Patterns. The relevance of these to genetic sociated with age of menopause and currently additional information is counselling will be explored, with case studies used as a basis for generated through the use of genome wide association studies (GWA) discussion. Throughout the workshop, there will be an emphasis on using large numbers of samples. Early menopause seems linked to reflective practice. poor IVF outcomes, as well as low response to ovarian stimulation. Pri- mary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is often associated with a premature Es3.2 Families and Genomics: A Biopsychosocial model for exhaustion of the primordial follicle pool. Turner Syndrome is linked clinical Practice with the most severe form of POI. Several regions have been identified J. Rolland; on the X-chromosome critical for normal ovarian function, and addi- Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Neuroscience, The University of tional mutations, SNPs and CNVs are currently being described on the Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States. X chromosome. Many transgenic animal models have been generated Groundbreaking advances in genomics are identifying genetic com- to further explore roles of specific genes in ovarian function. ponents in most major health and mental health disorders. This poses The current focus of genetic research beyond candidate genes in unprecedented challenges for families. How are family and couple female reproduction is completely geared towards the elucidation of relationships being affected by the ability to peer into their possible complex and common benign conditions such as polycystic ovary syn- health and mental health futures? How can we help families use the drome (PCOS), endometriosis, uterine fibroids. knowledge of genetic risk to become more resilient and live life more fully? Es1.2 Genetic Regulation of spermatogenesis Drawing from his recent book, Individuals, Families, and the New Era S. Repping; of Genetics, Dr. Rolland will first present an overview of his Family Professor Human Reproductive Biology, Center for Reproductive Medicine, System Genetic Illness model to address the psychosocial challenges Amsterdam, Netherlands. of genomic conditions for patients and their families, and to help orga- No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract nize this complex biopsychosocial landscape for clinical practice and section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- research. This model clusters genomic disorders based on key char- sible updates. acteristics that define types of disorders with similar patterns of psy- chosocial demands over time. For disorders in which genetic testing is Es2.1 Finding your feet in the Genome Database World available, core nonsymptomatic time phases with salient developmen- C. Béroud; tal challenges are described pre- and post-testing, including a long- Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France. term adaptation phase. The FSGI model builds on Rolland’s Family No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract System Illness model, which identifies psychosocial types and phases section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- of chronic disorders after clinical onset. The FSGI model is designed to sible updates. be flexible and responsive to future discoveries in genomic research. Dr Rolland then addresses core issues and cultural influences in deci- Es2.2 Browsing Genes and Genomes with Ensembl sion-making about genetic testing, communication with partners, chil- B. Overduin; dren, and other family members, and living with risk information across PANDA Coordination & Outreach, EMBL - European Bioinformatics Institute, the life cycle. Other key issues discussed include: privacy vs. right to Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. know of others at risk, belief conflicts, impact on childbearing deci- The Ensembl project provides a comprehensive source of annotation sions, multigenerational themes, and behavioral genetics. Guidelines for the human genome, along with other species of biomedical inter- are provided for healthcare and mental health professionals to help est. Ensembl automatically annotates genomic sequence and predicts families master these complex challenges. Its utility is discussed for re- the position of genes, to provide a comprehensive range of sequence search, preventive screening, family assessment, treatment planning, features and genome wide gene and protein sets. Ensembl also in- and service delivery in a wide range of healthcare settings. tegrates manually annotated gene structures from external sources where available. Apart from the gene sets, Ensembl contains exten- Es4.1 Alport syndrome sive comparative, variation and regulatory information. A rich variety of C. Antignac; links to external databases (e.g. OMIM, dbSNP and the NHGRI GWAS INSERM Division: U 423, Paris, France. catalogue) helps to make Ensembl a key starting and reference point No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract for studies in genetics and molecular biology. Ensembl data are ac- section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- cessible through an interactive web site (http://www.ensembl.org), flat sible updates. files, the data mining tool BioMart, direct database querying and a Perl API. In this presentation an overview of the Ensembl project and the BioMart Educational Sessions 17 Es4.2 Renal cystic disease achieved just by looking at the face. N. V. A. M. Knoers; In this educational session the different anatomical structures of the Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of Human Genetics face are explained and you will learn to recognize facial dysmorphisms 417, Nijmegen, Netherlands. of the eyes , nose, mouth, ears etc. In a second part of the course Cystic kidney diseases are among the most frequent incurable genetic syndromes with a recognizable face will be presented. The variable diseases. They are a clinically and genetically extremely heteroge- expression of facial features will be demonstrated by showing the mild neous group of disorders, encompassing autosomal dominant, au- and severe end of the spectrum. In addition changing of the face with tosomal recessive and X-linked traits, which are all characterized by time will be shown. Finally the participants can test their diagnostic perturbed tubular architecture leading to the formation of cysts. The skills in a quiz. most prominent examples are Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) and nephronophthisis (NPHP), which affect both adults and children. Es7.1 Overgrowth In this educational workshop, I will discuss the clinical and genetic as- P. Lapunzina; pects of the different types of PKD en NPHP. I will review studies that Section of Medical Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. link these disorders to disturbed structure and/or function of renal pri- No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract mary cilia. Primary cilia are microtubule-based organelles, protruding section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- from the apical surface of almost all cells in the mammalian body, with sible updates. an antenna-like sensory function. In recent years primary cilia have been shown to play important roles in embryonic development and Es7.2 Undergrowth tissue homeostasis. The ciliary connection also explains the frequent A. Rauch; association of extrarenal symptoms with cystic renal disorders, such University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Genetics, Zurich, Switzerland. as liver fibrosis/cysts, retinal degeneration, brain abnormalities, lateral- No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract ity defects, and others. Several examples of these syndromic forms of section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- cystic kidney disease will be highlighted. sible updates. Es5.1 Genetic deafness ES8.1 Cystic Fibrosis M. Bitner-Glindzicz; B. Kerem; Institute of Child Health, Ear Institute, Research Area Molecular, Clinical, The Hebrew University of Jerusaem, Dep. Genetics, Jerusalem, Israel. London, United Kingdom. The gene responsible for the cystic fibrosis (CF) disease defined as No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 9CFTR) was section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- cloned 20 years ago. The aim of cloning the “CF gene” was to uncover sible updates. new knowledge that will help to prevent, detect, diagnose and treat patients suffering from the CF disease. In this educational lecture I will Es5.2 Non-syndromic and syndromic retinitis pigmentosa overview and discuss: 1. The impact of cloning the CFTR gene on CF H. Bolz1,2; incidence and prevalence. 2. Our understanding of the effect of ge- 1Institute of Human Genetics , University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, netic modifiers on disease severity and 3. The current status of thera- 2Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany. peutic approaches based on “CFTR knowledge”. In the first part of the Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is characterized by progressive loss of night lecture I will show that in most countries, but not all, we succeeded in vision in adolescence and constriction of the visual field that may ul- finding the CF causing mutations in the majority of patients and by this timatively lead to tunnel vision. Loss of central vision may occur in generated the required basis for genetic testing. The incidence of new later life. Most patients are legally blind by the age of 40 years. RP CF live birth has decreased in recent years in several countries while results from loss of retinal rod and cone photoreceptor cells. Dimin- in others no change is found. I will discuss potential factors leading to ished retinal function is detectable by electroretinogram long before this difference. In the second part I will discuss the molecular basis for night blindness, usually the initial symptom, is noticed by the patient. disease variability among different patients and review the effect of The appearance of abnormal pigment deposits (so-called bone spicule genetic modifier on the disease severity. In the third part I will summa- pigmentation) along with retina atrophy/thinning is the hallmark of RP. rize the therapeutic approaches which are being developed based on RP is the leading cause of visual loss in individuals younger than 60 CFTR knowledge. This will include the current status of gene therapy years, with a prevalence of about 1 in 4000. RP is a major cause of for CF, activation of non-CFTR chloride channels, and mutation spe- blindness. Non-syndromic RP can have different modes of inheritance: cific therapies. In summary, a trend for preventions is already found autosomal dominant (ADRP, 30-40%), autosomal recessive (ARRP, in many countries, better tools for CF diagnosis were developed, and 50-60%) and X-linked (XLRP, 5-15%). Most isolated cases probably therapeutic approaches are being investigated. Overall, 20 years of represent recessive disease. Non-mendelian inheritance patterns, progress enabled us to develop new hopes for a better future for CF such as digenic inheritance and maternal (mitochondrial) inheritance, patients around the world. exist but are probably rare. RP genes encode for a variety of proteins, reflecting the functional ES8.2 Immotile cilia complexity of the retina and including gene products hitherto consid- H. Omran; ered crucial for life such as splice factors and an enzyme of the Krebs Universitätsklinikum Münster, Zentrum für Kinderheilkunde und Jugendmedizin, cycle. RP is part of many syndromes. In particular, it can be observed Münster, Germany. in several so-called ciliopathies, e.g. Usher- (with deafness), Joubert- No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract (a developmental disorder with brain malformations) and Bardet-Biedl section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos- syndrome. Some of these retinal ciliopathies bridge monogenic and sible updates. oligogenic inheritance, and variants in certain genes have been shown to act as modifiers of retinal disease. This presentation will give an overview of RP genes, the spectrum of phenotypes and future devel- opments in therapy and research. Es6.1 the Face Behind the syndrome G. Gillessen-Kaesbach; Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. Syndromes are typically diagnosed by a combination of clinical fea- tures. In many conditions the facial gestalt is of high diagnostic value. Recognition of syndromes like Cornelia de Lange syndrome, Ka- buki syndrome, Treacher Collins syndrome and many others can be Concurrent Sessions 1 Abstracts of EsHG concurrent sessions Barcelona, Spain, 3CEGEN _ Barcelona Node, Genoma España, Barcelona, Spain, 4Servei Anatomia Patologica, IDIBELL-Hospital de, Barcelona, Spain, c01.1 tracing the derivation of embryonic stem cells from the 5Pompeu Fabra University, Experimental and Health Sciences department, inner cell mass by single cell RNA-seq analysis Barcelona, Spain. K. Q. Lao1, F. Tang2, C. Barbacioru1, S. Bao2, C. Lee2, E. Nordman1, X. Wang1, DNA methylation is one of the most remarkable events within the epi- M. A. Surani2; genetic mechanisms of gene regulation, development and genetic 1Molecular Cell Biology Division, Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United imprinting in vertebrates. Alterations in the methylation pattern of regu- States, 2Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute of Cancer and latory regions have been linked to several pathologies, such as can- Developmental Biology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. cer and neuropsychiatric disorders (including schizophrenia and Rett The molecular mechanism underlying the transition from the inner cell syndrome). In addition, there is an emergent interest to elucidate the mass (ICM) of blastocysts to pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESC) is relationship between the ageing process, neurodegenerative diseases not fully understood. This is partly because of the apparent heteroge- and aberrant patterns of methylation. For this purpose, we have com- neity amongst a small group of cells, which poses difficulties in inves- pared the DNA methylation profile along seven relevant brain areas tigating this question. Using single cell analysis, including RNA-Seq between Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease samples and controls. transcriptome analysis at the resolution of single cells, we have ana- DNA extracted from prefrontal cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, hypo- lysed the dynamic molecular network within individual cells from the thalamus, pons, substantia nigra and cerebellar vermis, from cases ICM outgrowth and the established ESC. This study has identified mo- and controls, was bisulphate treated and hybridized on an Illumina In- lecular changes that accompany this transition. Our study shows that finium methylation array (HumanMethylation27), covering 27,578 CpG key genes that confer the property of self-renewal are up regulated as sites located in the regulatory region of 14,475 genes and 110 miRNAs ICM cells progress to ESC. We also detected very significant global promoters. First, an unsupervised hierarchical analysis was used to changes of transcript variants from individual genes, amongst which detect a methylation pattern dependent on brain area, as previously the general merabolism genes are strongly over-represented. Further- suggested by Ladd-Acosta et al. (2007). Our data show a clustering more, there was a global increase in the expression of repressive epi- of all the cerebellar samples (independent of disease status), confirm- genetic regulators with a concomitant decrease in gene activators. The ing the observation made by Ladd-Acosta, although the remaining unique ESC epigenotype may thus be sustained while retaining an brain areas did not show such a clear clustering effect. Secondly, we inherent plasticity for differentiation. Moreover, changes in microRNAs proposed to identify disease and tissue specific methylation changes. result in one set that targets early differentiation genes, and the sec- We observed methylation differences in genes previously described ond set targets ESC specific pluripotency genes to maintain a delicate as related to neurodegenerative disease (APOE, PSEN1, SIRT3, and balance between pluripotency and a capacity for rapid differentiation. MAOA/B) or to epigenetic mechanisms, as DNMT1, as well as in novel A similar paradigm may also subvert normal developmental sequence candidate genes. in specific adult cells during the formation of diseased tissues, includ- ing cancers. c01.4 Dissecting the regulatory network of p63 in p-related developmental disorders c01.2* Variation in transcription factor binding among humans J. Zhou, H. van Bokhoven; M. Kasowski1, F. Grubert2, C. Heffelfinger1, M. Hariharan2, A. Asabere1, S. Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Waszak3, L. Habegger1, J. Rozowsky1, M. Shi1, A. E. Urban1, M. Hong1, K. J. The transcription factor p63 is a key factor in ectodermal development. Karczewski2, W. Huber3, S. M. Weissman1, M. B. Gerstein1, J. O. Korbel3, M. Heterozygous mutations in p63 give rise to seven clinical conditions Snyder1; with autosomal dominant inheritance in human. These conditions are 1Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States, 2Stanford University, Palo characterized by different combinations of split hand-split foot malfor- Alto, CA, United States, 3European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, mation, cleft lip/palate and ectodermal dysplasia (ED). Numerous p63 Germany. target genes have been reported; however, their contributions to the Differences in gene expression may play a major role in speciation and phenotypes in the patients carrying a p63 mutation have remained un- phenotypic diversity. Although variations in gene expression among clear. To understand the regulatory network of p63 relevant to patient individuals have been documented, the origins of these differences are phenotypes, we used a disease model, human primary keratinocytes not clear, and studies that directly measure differences in transcrip- established from patients with p63 mutations. A combination of ge- tion factor binding sites among humans have not been performed. We nome-wide expression profiling and DNA-binding analysis by Chro- have examined genome-wide variation in transcription factor binding matin immunoprecipation followed by deep sequencing (ChIP-seq) in different individuals and a chimpanzee using chromatin immunopre- in primary keratinocytes revealed a subgroup of direct novel target cipitation followed by massively-parallel sequencing (ChIP-Seq). The genes relevant to ED syndromes. A number of validated p63 binding binding sites of RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) as well as a key regulator sites appear to be directly involved in related genetic disorders (cleft of immune responses, NFκB, have been mapped in ten lymphoblas- lip/palate and split hand-split foot malformation). These binding sites toid cell lines derived from individuals of African, European, and Asian can be found in promoter regions and introns, but in several instances ancestry, including a parent-offspring trio. Using a stringent threshold, also at distances up to 500 kb from the predicted target gene. Gene approximately 7.5% and 25% of the respective NFκB and Pol II binding expression controlled by p63 binding sites identified in our study was regions exhibit differences between any two individuals. To understand confirmed functionally in transgene reporter assays in zebrafish and the underlying basis of the variations, we examined the effect of SNPs mouse. Our study not only increases the repertoire of p63 target genes and genomic structural variations (SVs) on binding differences among but also provides a concrete molecular basis to elucidate the disease individuals. We find that many binding differences are associated with mechanism of p63 and p63-related developmental disorders. SNPs and SVs. Comparison of the binding data with gene expression data generated by RNA-Seq revealed that differences in binding often C01.5 Next generation sequencing-based mRNA profiling of correlate with gene expression differences. Furthermore, comparison total blood in a large human cohort of the Pol II human sites with binding sites identified in the chimpanzee P. A. C. ‚t Hoen1, J. T. den Dunnen1, E. J. C. de Geus2, D. I. Boomsma2, J. J. suggests a high level of divergence in binding relative to our closest Hottenga2, B. W. J. H. Penninx3, G. J. B. van Ommen1; evolutionary neighbor. Our results indicate that many differences in 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics - Leiden Genome Technology Center, individuals occur at the level of TF binding and provide insight into the Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of genetic events responsible for these differences. Biological psychology - Netherlands Twin Registry, VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Psychiatry - Netherlands Study of Depression and c01.3* Genomewide DNA methylation analysis in Anxiety, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. neurodegenerative disorders With rapidly decreasing sequencing cost, sequence-based gene ex- S. Iraola1, R. Rabionet1, G. Roma2, M. Montfort3, S. Carbonell3, I. Ferrer4, X. pression profiling becomes an attractive alternative over array-based Estivill1,5; studies. We report on one of the first sequence-based studies into 1Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG) and CIBERESP, Barcelona, Spain, the inter-individual variability of gene expression levels in total blood 2Center of Genomic Regulation (CRG), Bioinformatics Core Facilities, (n=104). Despite the high abundance of reticulocyte-derived hemoglo-Concurrent Sessions 1 bin mRNAs (20-80% of reads), the sequencing depth of 10±2.5 million stricted to band 16q24.3 have not been reported before reads per sample allows for the reliable quantification of mRNAs de- Methods: In this study we aimed to characterize the clinical and mo- rived from ~12,000 genes with an expression level down to 0.3 cop- lecular features of four patients with de novo submicroscopic interstitial ies per cell. The amount of hemoglobin transcripts shows a significant 16q24.3 microdeletions ascertained by genome-wide array analysis inverse correlation with white blood cell counts at the time of sample and to determine the shortest region of overlap (SRO) to identify can- collection. The absolute nature of the expression levels obtained with didate genes responsible for their overlapping phenotype next generation sequencing, the high sensitivity of the technology, and Results: Clinical features observed in these patients include facial dys- the presence of cell type-specific transcripts allow for the accurate es- morphisms comprising prominent forehead, large ears, smooth phil- timation of the relative amounts of white blood cells, including those trum, pointed chin and wide mouth, variable cognitive impairment, au- for low abundant basophils and eosinophils. Since differences in blood tism spectrum disorder, structural anomalies of the brain and seizures. cell content are a major confounding factor in blood-based expres- The common region of overlap of the deletions is only 90 kb and com- sion profiling studies, it is essential to correct for these differences prises two known genes, Ankyrin Repeat Domain 11 (ANKRD11) and before analyzing expression differences between subjects. Unlike ar- Zinc Finger 778 (ZNF778), and is located approximately 10kb distally ray-based studies, sequence-based studies enable the quantification to Cadherin 15 (CDH15). This region is not found as a copy number of allele-specific expression using variants in the mRNA-derived se- variation in controls. quence reads. We found that the majority of genes demonstrate pre- Discussion: We propose that these patients represent a novel and ferred expression of one of the two alleles. Furthermore, we observed distinctive microdeletion syndrome, characterized by autism spectrum remarkable inter-individual differences in the preference of one allele disorder, variable cognitive impairment, facial dysmorphisms and brain over the other. Another factor contributing to the inter-individual differ- anomalies. We suggest that haploinsufficiency of ANKRD11 and/or ences in gene expression is the preferred expression of specific splic- ZNF778 contribute to this phenotype and speculate that further inves- ing isoforms and/or use of shorter or longer 3’-UTRs. tigation of non-deletion patients who have features suggestive of this 16q24.3 microdeletion syndrome might uncover other mutations in one c01.6 mRNA-seq transcriptome analysis of human trisomy 21 or both of these genes. using monozygotic twins A. Letourneau1, S. B. Montgomery1, C. Borel1, E. Migliavacca1,2, D. Robyr1, c02.2 Prader-Willi like phenotype in 2pter deletion: a possible L. Farinelli3, S. Deutsch1, S. Dahoun-Hadorn1, E. T. Dermitzakis1, S. E. imprinted locus. Antonarakis1; M. Doco-Fenzy1, E. Landais1, M. Vincent2, A. Schneider2,3, J. Puechberty2,3, M. 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Girard3, M. Tournaire3, E. Sanchez4, M. Goossens5, D. Gaillard1, L. Taine6, G. Medical School and University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, Lefort2,3, P. Sarda2, B. Leheup7, D. Geneviève2,4; 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland, 3FASTERIS SA, Plan-les- 1Service de Génétique, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares Anomalies du Ouates, Switzerland. Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs Est, Hôpital Maison-Blanche. Trisomy 21 (T21) is the most widely studied model phenotype of whole CHRU Reims, UFR de Médecine, Reims, France, 2Département de Génétique chromosome aneuploidy. It is likely that the majority of the T21 phe- Médicale et chromosomique, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares Anomalies notypes are related to alterations of gene expression. Transcriptome du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs Sud-Languedoc Roussillon, sequencing now provides the opportunity to investigate in details the CHRU Montpellier, Université Montpellier 1, Faculté de Médecine Montpellier- perturbations of gene expression in T21 cells and tissues. Nîmes, Montpellier, France, 3Plateforme puce à ADN, Service de Génétique In this study we used fibroblasts derived from a pair of monozygotic Médicale et chromosomique, CHRU Montpellier, Université Montpellier twins discordant for T21. For the first time, the use of these samples 1, Montpellier, France, 4Unité Inserm U844, Institut des neurosciences de eliminates the bias of genome variability and thus all transcriptome Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5Laboratoire de Biochimie Génétique, AP-HP, differences observed are likely to be related to the supernumerary et INSERM U-841, CHU Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 6Service de Génétique chromosome 21. Médicale, centre promoteur du réseau télomères ACLF, CHU Pellegrin, The transcriptome (polyA+ mRNA) was studied by RNA-Seq; 29 mil- Bordeaux, France, 7Service de médecine infantile 3 et de génétique clinique, lion 76 bp paired-end reads were generated from each sample. We Hôpital d’enfants, CHU de Nancy - Brabois, Nancy, France. were able to compare the expression of 285’550 exons and 28’178 Pure subtelomeric deletion of the short arm of the chromosome 2 is genes between the samples. We observed that about 9% of exons an extremely rare chromosomal anomaly. To date only, 4 patients with are differentially expressed between the two samples (FDR<0.01). As a pure 2pter deletion have been reported in the literature. The pheno- expected, we found that the majority (93%) of chromosome 21 exons type of these patients correspond either to a Prader-Willi-like pheno- are overexpressed in the trisomic twin. Differentially expressed exons type (severe precocious obesity associated to mental retardation and and genes, chimeric transcripts, splicing variants and allelic expres- abnormal behavior in 1 patient) or an Angelman-like phenotype (IUGR, sion imbalances will be presented. We will also compare the data with mental retardation, speech delay, microcephaly and seizures in 2 pa- previous microarray studies in order to investigate which transcriptome tients). The last patient presented with a MCA/MR phenotype but the differences can be validated by sequencing and truly related to the 2pter deletion was different and distant from the 3 other patients. In trisomy 21 per se. addition, 2 other patients with Prader-Willi-like phenotype and unbal- anced translocation leading to a 2pter deletion have been reported in C02.1* Identification of ANKRD11 and ZNF77 as candidate the literature. genes for autism and variable cognitive impairment in the novel Here we report on two novel patients with small pure 2pter deletion 16q24.3 microdeletion syndrome and Prader-Willi like phenotype. Cytogenetic studies including FISH M. H. Willemsen1, B. A. Fernandez2, C. A. Bacino3, E. Gerkes4, A. P. M. de using BAC-PAC telomeric probes, BAC-PAC Array-CGH and Array- Brouwer1, R. Pfundt1, B. Sikkema-Raddatz4, S. W. Scherer5, C. R. Marshall6, L. SNP showed small 2pter deletions estimated to 3.15Mb and 1.96 Mb Potocki3, H. van Bokhoven1, T. Kleefstra1; respectively. Both deletions encompassed the TMEM18 gene. Inter- 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, estingly, a meta analysis of GWAS for obesity found a significative 2Memorial University of Newfoundland and Provincial Medical Genetic Program, association with a SNP (rs6548238) near to the TMEM18 gene. In ad- Eastern Health, St. John‘s, NL, Canada, 3Baylor College of Medicine, Texas dition, Dong et al suggested that 2pter is a possible human obesity- Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, 4University Medical Centre related imprinted locus. These data suggest that the short arm of the Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5The Centre forApplied Genomics, The chromosome 2 is an imprinted locus associated with phenotypes simi- Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 6The lar to those observed at the 15q11.2 imprinted locus. Parental origin of centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of the deletion in our patients is in progress in an attempt to accumulate Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. data in favour of an imprinted locus at 2p25.3. Introduction: The clinical utilization of array comparative genomic hy- bridization in the evaluation of patients with intellectual disablity has recently led to the discovery of a number of novel microdeletion and microduplication syndromes. Aberrations of chromosome 16q with clinical relevance have rarely been reported. Interstitial deletions re-Concurrent Sessions 20 c02.3 2q11.2 is a highly penetrant susceptibility locus for with obesity or other “complex traits”. In addition, we hypothesize that neurocognitive deficit clinical symptoms in carriers of the deletion and the duplication repre- H. Kilpinen1,2, A. Pittman3, M. Storer1,4, J. Dickerson5, B. Garg6, L. Willatt7, sent opposite manifestations of the same pathophysiologic process. In J. Rosenfeld8, N. Huang1, T. Fitzgerald1, D. Felik9, C. Ogilvie10, M. Irving10, Y. search of these “opposite manifestations” mediated by gene dosage, Shen11, B. Wu11, R. Pfundt12, B. de Vries12, L. Peltonen1,2, M. Hurles1, J. Barrett1, we are currently characterizing BMI, eating behavior, cognitive and L. Shaffer8, C. Shaw-Smith1,4; psychiatric phenotypes in carriers of both types of rearrangements. 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Preliminary data reveals that carriers of the duplication show a trend 2Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland, 3Institute of towards being underweight which may confirm this hypothesis. Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 5Riley Hospital for Children, Indianapolis, IN, United c02.5 mesomelia-synostoses syndrome results from deletion of States, 6Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States, SULF1 and SLCOA1 genes at 8q13 7Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8Signature Genomics, C. Le Caignec1,2, B. Isidor1, O. Pichon1, R. Redon2, D. Day-Salvatore3, A. Spokane, WA, United States, 9Bay Regional Medical Centre, MI, United States, Hamel1, L. Kjellén4, C. Kraus5, J. Leroy6, G. Mortier7, A. Rauch8, A. Verloes9, A. 10Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, David1; 11Children‘s Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, United States, 12Radboud University 1CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 2Inserm, UMR915, Nantes, France, 3Institute Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. for Genetic Medicine, Saint Peter’s University Hospital, New Brunswick, NJ, One possible explanation for the ‘missing heritability’ in ‘common’ United States, 4Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala, disorders such as autism and schizophrenia is the existence of rare Sweden, 5Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, alleles of high penetrance, which escape detection in genome-wide Erlangen, Germany, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Ghent University association studies. Recent large-scale studies of autism and schizo- Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp University phrenia have implicated copy number variation in the pathogenesis of Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 8Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, these disorders 1,2. Previously, a 1.3 Mb microdeletion flanked by seg- Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland, 9Department of Clinical Genetics and mental duplications at 2q11.2 was reported in a single patient referred INSERM U676, Robert Debré University Hospital, Paris, France. for CNV profiling, but no phenotypic information was provided 3. We Mesomelia-synostoses syndrome (MSS) or mesomelic dysplasia with now report five patients with microdeletions of similar size at this locus acral dysostoses Verloes-David-Pfeiffer type is a rare autosomal domi- (chr2: ~96.0 to ~97.3 Mb, Hg18). All five patients presented with some nant disorder characterized by mesomelic limb shortening, acral syn- form of neurocognitive deficit: four with developmental delay, three ostoses and multiple congenital malformations. So far, five patients with autism or autism-like features, and two with epilepsy. We found in four unrelated families have been reported worldwide with MMS. one further example of this microdeletion in a schizophrenia case in Using whole genome oligonucleotide array CGH, we have identified a publicly available CNV dataset 2. No examples of this deletion were an interstitial deletion at 8q13 in all patients. The deletions vary from identified in ~7,500 controls. Notwithstanding that two of the deletions 582 kb to 738 kb in size, but invariably encompass only two genes: were inherited from a neurocognitively normal father, (one de novo, SULF1, encoding the heparan sulfate 6-O-endosulfatase 1 and SL- testing of parental samples in the remaining two in progress), this ap- CO5A1, encoding the solute carrier organic anion transporter family pears to be a very rare but highly penetrant susceptibility locus for member 5A1. SULF1 acts as a regulator of numerous growth factors neurocognitive deficit. Six highly homologous (>97%) segmental dupli- in skeletal embryonic development while the function of SLCO5A1 is cations (SD’s), size 2.5-40 Kb, cluster at the breakpoints. The rarity of yet unknown. Breakpoint sequence analyses performed in two families this microdeletion syndrome may be a consequence of the relatively showed non-recurrent deletions. Our results strongly suggest that hap- short length of these SD‘s. loinsufficiency of SULF1 contributes to this mesomelic chondrodys- 1. Marshall CR et al. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Feb;82(2):477-88. plasia, highlighting the critical role of endosulfatase in human skeletal 2. International Schizophrenia Consortium. Nature. 2008 development. As co-deletion of SULF1 and SLCO5A1 - which does 455(7210):237-41. not result from a low-copy repeats (LCRs)-mediated recombination 3. Rudd MK et al.Hum Mol Genet. 2009 18(16):2957-62. event - was found in all patients, we suggest that haploinsufficiency of SULF1 combined with haploinsufficiency of SLCO5A1 (or the altered c02.4 the multiple phenotypes of the recurrent 593 kb, 16p11.2 expression of a neighbouring gene through a position effect) could be rearrangements: regulation of adiposity, language impairment necessary in the pathogenesis of MSS. and psychiatric symptoms. S. Jacquemont1, R. G. Walters2,3, S. Bouquillon4, F. Zufferey1, A. Valsesia5, c02.6 SHOX duplications are associated with type i mayer- D. Martinet1, L. Hippolyte1, J. Andrieux4, B. Delobel6, A. I. F. Blakemore2, P. Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser (mRKH) syndrome Froguel2,7, J. S. Beckmann1,8; M. Miozzo1, C. Gervasini1, F. Grati2, F. Lalatta3, S. De Toffol2, B. Gentilin3, P. 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Department Colapietro1, M. Silvia1, G. Frontino4, L. Fedele4, B. Dallapiccola5, L. Larizza1; of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial College London, London, United 1Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Medicina, Chirurgia e Odontoiatria, Kingdom, 3Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Imperial College Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 2Cytogenetics and Molecular London, London, United Kingdom, 4Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Biology Unit, Laboratorio TOMA, Busto Arsizio, Varese, Italy, 3UO Genetica CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 5Departement de Génétique Médicale, Université Medica, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Centre de génétique Chromosomique, Italy, 4UO Ostetrico-Ginecologica I, Università degli Studi, Milano, Fondazione Hopital Saint Vincent de Paul, GHICL, Lille, France, 7CNRS, 8090 - Institut de IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 5Ospedale Biologie, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France, 8Département de Génétique Médicale, Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy. Université de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Purpose: MRKH syndrome is defined as congenital aplasia of the The 16p11.2 deletion has been associated with childhood-onset de- structures derived from the Müllerian ducts in females with a normal velopmental disorders, macrocephaly and autism in multiple cohorts, 46,XX karyotype and secondary sexual characteristics. MRKH is fre- while the reciprocal duplication has been associated with microcephaly, quently sporadic, although familial cases with an unknown pattern of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. We report an association between inheritance have been described. Isolated (type I) and complex (type this deletion and obesity, regardless of the presence of cognitive or be- II) forms exist. The genetic basis of MRKH is largely unknown. Genetic havioral symptoms. This highly penetrant form of adolescent or adult- lesions, including WNT4 point mutations and genomic imbalances, onset obesity was initially observed in 31 carriers of the 593kb deletion have been identified in a small number of cases. The aim of the study ascertained for cognitive deficits. Nineteen similar deletions were iden- was to identify possible recurrent sub-microscopic imbalances in a co- tified from GWAS data of 16053 individuals from 8 European cohorts. hort of familial and sporadic MRKH cases. Methods: Multiplex ligation- Such deletions were absent from healthy non-obese controls and ac- dependent probe amplification (MLPA) was used to screen the sub- counted for 0.7% of morbid obesity cases (body mass index, BMI ≥ 40 telomeric sequences of all chromosomes in 30 MRKH patients (spo- kg.m-2 or BMI standard deviation score ≥ 4; p = 6.4x10-8, OR = 43.0), radic n= 27; familial n= 3). Segregation analysis and pyrosequencing demonstrating the potential etiological importance of rare variants with were applied to confirm MLPA data from the informative family. Twelve strong effects in common disease. These rare variants, which escape patients with clinical signs of hyperandrogenism were also screened detection by GWAS, might account for a substantial fraction of patients for WNT4 mutations.Concurrent Sessions 21 Results: A partial duplication in the Xpter PAR1 region containing the identified as associated with obesity in patients ascertained for de- SHOX gene was found in five MRKH patients (familial n=3; sporadic velopmental delay - account for ~0.7% of morbid obesity cases in the n=2). The duplications were not overlapping and SHOX was never en- general population (Walters et al (2010) Nature 463:671-675). tirely duplicated. Haplotyping in the informative family revealed that the We are now investigating other GSV regions, identified from cohorts SHOX duplication had been inherited from the normal father and was of patients with extreme obesity phenotypes or with severe early-onset absent in the two healthy sisters. No WNT4 mutations were identified obesity, by carrying out algorithmic analysis of genotyping data from in the 12 patients with clinical signs of hyperandrogenism. multiple cohorts. For one region, similar GSVs are found in non-obese Conclusions: SHOX, which is known to be responsible for Leri-Weill subjects, calling into question the putative association with obesity; Dyschondrosteosis and Langer Mesomelic Dysplasia, is associated for 4 others, GSVs are not found in our cohorts but we have instead with both familial and sporadic type I MRKH. identified haplotype signatures that are associated with (or protective against) obesity; and numerous smaller GSVs have helped to de- c03.1 in-depth metabolic characterization of genetic loci fine the limits of putative obesity-associated loci. Of particular note is underlying serum-lipids the identification of further instances of 220kb deletions surrounding A. K. Petersen1, S. Y. Shin2, W. Römisch-Margl3, G. Zhai4, K. Small4, R. Wang- SH2B1 (Bochukova et al (2010) Nature 463:666-670), exclusively in Sattler1, E. Grundberg2,4, J. S. Ried1, A. Peters1, B. Kato4, A. Döring1, H. E. obese subjects and accounting overall for ~0.5% of severe childhood Wichmann1,5,6, P. Deloukas2, M. Hrabé de Angelis7,8, H. W. Mewes3,9, T. Illig1, T. obesity. Targeted exome sequencing is being undertaken to screen for D. Spector4, J. Adamski7,8, K. Suhre3,10, N. Soranzo2,4, C. Gieger1; additional rare causal variants in these regions. 1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, c03.3* multiple common genetic variants for coeliac disease CB10 1HH, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, influencing immune gene expression Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Department of Twin G. Trynka1, P. C. A. Dubois2, L. Franke1, *. Coeliac Disease Genetics Research & Genetic Epidemology, King’s College London, London SE1 7EH, Consortium3, R. McManus4, D. Barisani5, P. Deloukas6, J. C. Barrett6, P. United Kingdom, 5Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, Saavalainen7, D. A. Van Heel2, C. Wijmenga1; Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany, 6Klinikum Grosshadern, 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Centre for Munich, Germany, 7Institute of Experimental Genetics, Genome Analysis Gastroenterology, Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and Center, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 8Institute The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom, of Experimental Genetics, Life and Food Science Center Weihenstephan, 3University Medical Center Groningen and Barts and The London School of Technische Universität Muenchen, Munich, Germany, 9Department of Genome- Medicine and Dentistry, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Departments of Clinical oriented Bioinformatics, Life and Food Science Center Weihenstephan, Medicine, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Technische Universität Muenchen, Munich, Germany, 10Faculty of Biology, Ireland, 5Department of Medical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany. 6Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Emerging technologies based on mass spectrometry and nuclear 7Department of Medical Genetics, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, magnetic resonance enable the monitoring of hundreds of small me- Helsinki, Finland. tabolites from tissues or body fluids. Because metabolites change Coeliac disease is a complex, highly heritable trait. In our previous rapidly in response to physiologic perturbations, such metabolite con- genome-wide association study (GWAS) and its follow-ups, we identi- centrations provide a direct readout of the physiological state in the fied 13 non-HLA genomic risk regions for coeliac disease. Known vari- human body, leading to the discovery of novel proximal biomarkers of ants, including HLA variants, explain around 35% of the heritability. disease phenotypes. Furthermore, profiling of metabolites in relevant We proposed that additional common genetic variants would underlie biological pathways can help elucidate the contribution of genetic vari- a further component of coeliac heritability. ants underlying inherited variation in established risk factors. Among We performed a new GWAS in 4,533 coeliac cases and 10,750 con- the major risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD) and myocar- trols from 4 populations of European descent. We integrated data from dial infarction (MI) are serum lipids, including total cholesterol (TC), our first GWAS and expanded genomic coverage in the new samples low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), high-density lipoprotein to 523,749 SNPs passing quality controls. We further tested 131 SNPs cholesterol (HDL-C), and triglycerides (TG). To dissect the effect of in an additional cohort of 4,918 cases and 5,684 controls. published genetic variants influencing serum lipid levels, we profiled Variants from 13 new regions showed genome-wide significance 151 metabolites covering a biologically relevant panel of amino acids, (P < 5 x 10-8), including regions containing TNFRSF14, RUNX3, combined sugars, acylcarnitines, and phospholipids in 1,797 participants from CCR4, CD80, BACH2, THEMIS, ZMIZ1, ETS1, CIITA/SOCS1/CLE- the KORA population (Germany) and replicated the results in 1,236 C16A, ICOSLG. A further 13 regions had suggestive association evi- participants of the TwinsUK cohort. By analysing lipid concentrations in dence (10-6<P <5x10-8, and/or P <0.01). Genes from most combined follow-up conjunction with genetic data and metabolite concentrations (and their of these regions have an immune function, while newly identified as- ratios), we aim to identify cases where a genetic locus is associated sociations to the TNFRSF14, RUNX3, ETS1 and THEMIS genes point with both a lipid and a metabolite concentration, which would provide to an unknown role for the thymic T cell selection pathway in the patho- new functional information about the underlying biological processes. genesis of coeliac disease. In a meta-analysis of expression quanti- We report here the initial results of this effort, as well as discussing tative traits in 1,469 whole blood samples, 20 out of the 38 (52.6%) methodological approaches to metabolite analyses. Among others, we tested loci had coeliac risk variants correlated (P < 0.0028, FDR 5%) identify associations of GCKR (glucokinase (hexokinase 4) regulator) with cis gene expression. variants with different ratios of plasmalogens and phosphatidylcho- Here we report multiple new common variants for coeliac disease and lines (P = 3.2 ξ 10-8). show that genetic determination of cis gene expression is a major mechanism by which these variants influence coeliac susceptibility. C03.2 Identification of novel obesity loci by analysis of genomic structural variants C03.4* Genetic variation in 22 loci influences QRS complex R. G. Walters1, L. J. M. Coin1, A. J. de Smith1, D. Meyre2, I. S. Farooqi3, P. duration Froguel1,2, A. I. F. Blakemore1; A. Isaacs1, N. Sotoodenhia2, P. de Bakker3, M. Dörr4, C. Newton-Cheh5, I. 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2CNRS 8090-Institute of Nolte6, P. van der Harst7, M. Müller8, M. Eijgelsheim9, A. Alonso10, A. Hicks11, Biology, Lille, France, 3Cambridge University, Cambridge, United Kingdom. S. Padmanabhan12, C. Hayward13, A. Smith14, O. Polasek15, S. Giovannone16, Only a small fraction of the strong genetic contribution to obesity is I. Rudan17,18, J. F. Wilson18, P. Pramstaller11, D. Siscovick19, T. Wang5, V. explained by common variants identified from genome-wide associa- Gudnason14, C. M. van Duijn1, S. B. Felix4, G. I. Fishman16, Y. Jamshidi20, tion studies. To explore the contribution to obesity of rare variants with B. Stricker9, N. J. Samani21, S. Kääb22, D. E. Arking23, The QRS-GWAS large effect, we are investigating the large genomic structural variants Consortium; (GSVs) that are routinely found in patients with extreme phenotypes 1Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Dep.of Epidemiology, Erasmus Univ.Medical that include obesity as a key feature, and analysing these regions in Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Cardiovascular Health Research Unit, Dep. case-control and population cohorts. Using this approach, we have of Medicine, Univ.of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Program in shown that deletions of ~740kb at chromosome 16p11.2 - initially Medical Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard & MIT, Cambridge, Concurrent Sessions 22 MA, United States, 4Dep.of Internal Medicine B, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Univ., sults from interactions between unknown environmental factors and Greifswald, Germany, 5Center for Human Genetic Research, Cardiovascular alleles of many susceptibility loci across the genome. Recent inves- Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, tigations of the genetics of MS have resulted in important advances, 6Unit of Genetic Epidemiology and Bioinformatics, Dep.of Epidemiology, Univ. driven largely by completion of the first genome-wide association Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 7Dep.of Cardiology, Univ. scans (GWAS). To detect additional loci, we performed a GWAS in 882 Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 8Institute Sardinian MS cases and 872 controls using 575,678 SNPs, genotyped of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center with the Affymetrix 6.0 chip, that passed quality checks. Using imputa- for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 9Dep.of Epidemiology, tion methods and haplotypes available from HapMap II, HapMap III Erasmus Univ.Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 10Div.of Epidemiology and 1000 Genomes projects, we then imputed 6,031,588 SNPs and & Community Health, School of Public Health, Univ.of Minnesota, Minneapolis, tested for association ~6.6 million variants. The strongest observed MN, United States, 11Inst.of Genetic Medicine, European Academy Bolzano signal was on the HLA locus (p=1.4x10-20), at a SNP tag (r2=0.83) for (EURAC) (Affiliated Inst. of Lübeck Univ., Germany), Bolzano, Italy, 12BHF the HLA-DRB1*0301 allele. We then ranked non-HLA SNPs based on Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre, Univ.of Glasgow, Glasgow, United their level of significance and proximity to functional candidate genes, Kingdom, 13MRC Human Genetics Unit, Inst.of Genetics and Molecular and selected 9 SNPs with pvalue <1x10-5 for follow-up. Of those, one Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 14Icelandic Heart Association Research on chr3q13 was successfully confirmed in an independent sample of Inst., Kopavogur, Iceland, 15Andrija Stampar School of Public Health, Univ. 1,775 MS cases and 2,005 controls (p=9.3x10-6), yielding to an overall of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 16Div.of Cardiology, New York Univ.School of pvalue of 1.6x10-10 (OR=1.40, C.I.=1.27-1.57). The most associated Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 17Croatian Centre for Global Health, markers at this locus fall in the promoter of a gene that encodes a Univ.of Split, Split, Croatia, 18Centre for Population Health Sciences, Univ.of negative regulator of adaptive immune responses. Mice deficient for Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 19Cardiovascular Health Research Unit, the ortholgoue are prone to experimental autoimmune encephalomy- Dep.of Medicine and Epidemiology, Univ.of Washington, Seattle, WA, United elitis, the animal model of MS but also spontaneously reject a variety of States, 20Div.of Clinical Developmental Sciences, St George‘s Univ., London, cancers. Hence, this gene appears critical for maintaining the balance United Kingdom, 21Dep.of Cardio Cardiovascular Sciences, Univ.of Leicester, between immune activation and tolerance. Leicester, United Kingdom, 22Dep.of Medicine I, Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, 23McKusick-Nathans Inst.of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins Univ. c03.6* Genome-wide association scan reveals major School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States susceptibility locus in IL28B for both chronic Hepatitis C and for QRS complex duration, an ECG measurement reflecting ventricular treatment failure depolarization, is associated with risk of heart failure, sudden death Z. Kutalik1,2, A. Rauch3, P. Descombes4, T. Cai5,6, J. di Iulio5, T. Mueller7, M. and mortality. The trait is known to have a heritable component (h2 Bochud8, M. Battegay9, J. Borovicka10, S. Colombo5, A. Cerny11, J. Dufour12, ranging from 20 - 40%), however few genes influencing the trait have H. Furrer3, M. Heim13, B. Hirschel14, R. Malinverni15, D. Moradpour16, B. been identified to date. In the current study, a large-scale fixed-ef- Müllhaupt17, A. Witteck18, J. S. Beckmann1,19, T. Berg7, S. Bergmann1,2, F. fects inverse variance weighted meta-analysis of GWAS data from 16 Negro20, A. Telenti5, P. Bochud5,6; studies consisting of >40,000 individuals of European ancestry was 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, performed. More than 2.5 million SNPs were imputed using the Hap- Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Map reference panel. Genomic control inflation factors were used to Lausanne, Switzerland, 3University Clinic of Infectious Diseases, University correct the test statistics at the individual population level as well as Hospital Bern and University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 4Genomics Platform, the final meta-analysis results. 612 SNPs achieved genome-wide sig- National Center of Competence in Research „Frontiers in Genetics“, University nificance levels (P<5e-8). These SNPs represented 30 independent of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Institute of Microbiology, University Hospital association signals (r2<0.05) in 22 distinct genomic regions, of which and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Infectious Diseases only four were previously reported. These loci included genes in rel- Service, Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital and University evant cardiac conduction pathways, including sodium-channels (SC- of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 7Medical Clinic for Hepatology and N10A and SCN5A), calcium handling (PLN/SLC35F1, STRN/HEAT- Gastroenterology, Medical University Charité Campus, Virchow-Klinikum R5B, CASQ2, TKT/CACNA1D, and PRKCA), and transcription factors Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 8University Institute for Social and Preventive (NFIA, HAND1, TBX3, TBX5, TBX20, and KLF12), in addition to novel Medicine, University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, pathways (including kinase inhibition and growth-factor related genes). Switzerland, 9Infectious Diseases and Infection Control Clinic, Department Multiple SNPs demonstrated pleiotropic effects with other ECG traits of Medicine, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 10Division of reflecting atrial conduction (PR interval) and myocardial repolarization Gastroenterology, Canton Hospital St Gallen, St Gallen, Switzerland, 11Liver (QT interval). Further, we showed experimentally that SCN10A, a gene Unit, Clinica Luganese Moncucco, Lugano, Lugano, Switzerland, 12University in our most significantly associated region, is expressed preferentially Clinic of Visceral Surgery and Medicine, Inselspital, University of Bern, in the mouse ventricular conduction system and affects mouse QRS Bern, Switzerland, 13Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University interval duration. These analyses greatly expand our understanding Hospital of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 14Division of Infectious Diseases, of the genetic basis for variation in QRS duration and provide insights University Hospital Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 15Pourtalès Hospital, into the biology of cardiac conduction. Neuchâtel, Neuchatel, Switzerland, 16Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 17Division c03.5* A genome-wide association scan in sardinians reveals a of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, novel gene associated with multiple sclerosis Switzerland, 18Infectious Diseases and Infection Control Unit, Canton Hospital S. Sanna1, M. Pitzalis2, M. Zoledziewska2, I. Zara3, C. Sidore4, R. Murru5, M. St Gallen, St Gallen, Switzerland, 19Service of Medical Genetics, Centre B. Whalen4, F. Busonero1, A. Maschio1, G. Costa5, M. Pugliatti6, S. Traccis7, A. Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Angius4, M. Melis8, G. Rosati6, G. R. Abecasis9, M. Uda1, M. G. Marrosu5, D. Switzerland, 20Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Schlessinger10, F. Cucca1,2; Hospitals, Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Monserrato, Italy, 2Dipartimento The hepatitis C virus (HCV) induces chronic infection in up to 80% di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 3CRS4, Laboratorio of infected individuals, half of whom do not respond to therapy. We di Bioinformatica, Parco tecnologico della Sardegna, Pula, Cagliari, Italy, conducted a genome-wide association study to screen for host ge- 4CRS4, Laboratorio di Genomica, Parco tecnologico della Sardegna, Pula, netic determinants of HCV persistence and response to therapy. Cagliari, Italy, 5Centro Sclerosi Multipla, Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche The analysis included 1362 hepatitis C infected individuals (448 of e Cardiovascolari, Università di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 6Istituto di Neurologia whom are co-infected with HIV): 1015 with chronic hepatitis C and Clinica, Università di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 7Presidio Ospedaliero, Divisione 347 that spontaneously cleared the virus. Responses to pegylated Neurologia, Sassari, Italy, 8AOBrotzu, S.C. Neurologia, Cagliari, Italy, interferon-alpha and ribavirin were assessed in 465 chronic hepatitis 9Department of Biostatistics, Center for Statistical Genetics, University of C patients. Associations between more than 2.5M single nucleotide Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 10Laboratory of Genetics, National polymorphisms (SNPs) and outcomes were computed using multi- Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States. variate logistic regression. Chronic hepatitis C was found to be as- Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a multi-factorial neuroinflammatory and au- sociated with SNPs in the IL28B locus, which encodes the antiviral toimmune disorder. A primary cause of disability in young adults, it re- cytokine interferon-lambda-3. The minor allele of the top hit rs8099917 Concurrent Sessions 2 was associated with progression to chronic HCV infection (OR=2.31, sive, but the rate of decline is variable within and between families. CI=1.74-3.06, P=6.07*10-9) explaining almost 3% of the phenotypic The observation of recurrences in siblings in some families suggested variance. The association was observed both in HCV mono-infected that the condition was probably autosomal recessive, however the (OR=2.49, CI=1.64-3.79, P=1.96*10-5) and HCV/HIV co-infected in- variable age of onset and clinical course raised the possibility that it dividuals (OR=2.16, CI=1.47-3.18, P=8.24*10-5). Interestingly, SNP may be aetiologically heterogeneous. We identified a candidate gene, rs8099917 was also associated with failure to respond to therapy C20orf54 by studying a consanguineous family with multiple affected (OR=5.19, CI=2.90-9.30, P= 3.11*10-8), with the strongest effects in individuals and subsequently demonstrated that mutations in this gene patients with HCV genotypes 1 or 4, where more than 11% of the vari- were the cause of disease in other, unrelated families. ance in response was explained by this genotype alone. Re-sequenc- ing of IL28B identified distinct haplotypes that were associated with c04.3* the microRNA miR-204 is required for vertebrate eye the clinical phenotype. The association of the IL28B locus with natural development and treatment-associated control of HCV indicates the importance of I. Conte1, S. Carrella1, R. Avellino1, M. Karali1, R. Marco-Ferreres2, P. innate immunity and interferon-lambda-3 in the pathogenesis of HCV Bovolenta2, S. Banfi1; infection. 1TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Departamento de Neurobiología Molecular Celular y del Desarrollo, Instituto Cajal, CSIC, and CIBER de Enfermedades Raras C04.1 Identification of novel deafness genes by homozygosity (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain. mapping in Dutch families The functional role of specific microRNAs in controlling the morpho- H. Kremer1,2, J. Oostrik3, P. L. M. Huygen2, J. A. Veltman1,4, L. H. Hoefsloot4, C. genetic and cell differentiation events involved in normal eye develop- W. R. J. Cremers5,2, H. P. M. Kunst5,2, R. J. C. Admiraal5,2, M. Schraders1,2; ment in vertebrates is still largely unknown. Here we show that a single 1Nijmegen Center for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Dept microRNA, miR-204, is capable to regulate multiple aspects of eye Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, development in medaka fish. Targeted ablation of miR-204 function by Netherlands, 3Dept. Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen morpholino injections in medaka determined a severe eye phenotype Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Dept Human Genetics, Radboud characterized by microphthalmia, aberrant lens formation, incorrect University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Donders Institute retinal cell differentiation and coloboma. Through a variety of in vitro for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, and in vivo approaches, we found that Meis2 is a key target of miR- Netherlands. 204 and plays a pivotal role in the generation of this phenotype via Locus heterogeneity of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing the regulation of the Pax6 pathway. These data demonstrate for the loss (arNSHI) is large. So far about 30 genes have been identified but first time that a specific microRNA is involved in the regulation of basic at least 50 genes await identification. Novel arNSHI loci are generally processes underlying eye development and open new avenues on a determined in large consanguineous families and are often large (10- better comprehension of the pathogenetic mechanisms underlying eye 30 Mb). Although next generation sequencing enables the simultane- developmental disorders. ous sequencing of exons and regulatory regions of all genes within a region, strategies to delimit the critical region and “intelligent” candi- C04.4* Phenotypic modifiers of DJ1 date gene selection remain attractive for disease gene identification. S. Jain, P. Heutink; Although the majority of the Dutch population is regarded to be mixed CNCR, Amsterdam, Netherlands. there are quite a number of regions with limited migration mainly until Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a slow progressing neurodegenerative about 1950. Therefore, we followed a strategy of homozygosity map- disease with devastating clinical symptoms. Current treatments are ping with high density SNP arrays in 125 patients with putative arNSHI only symptomatic which ultimately result in debilitating side effects from 77 families to delimited the critical region of known deafness loci thus there is an urgent need to develop therapeutics which stop and and/or identify novel loci. Homozygous regions smaller than 1 Mb were reverse disease progression. None of the 13 loci implicated in the not further investigated. We delimited the critical region for DFNB25 to PD pathogenesis represent viable drug targets at present. In addition an 0.8 Mb interval harbouring exons of two genes. Also, we obtained these genes have suggested that disruption of a myriad of molecu- indications for a novel locus, now DFNB84, of 3.2 Mb with 11 known lar pathways (e.g. ubiquitin and proteasome, mitochondrial function and predicted genes. Mutation analysis of all exons in the DFNB25 and protein misfolding) can lead to the degeneration of the substantia interval and selected candidate genes in the novel locus revealed pu- nigra. It remains unclear how mutation of these genes and disruption tatively pathogenic mutations in GRXCR1 and PTPRQ. Vestibular dys- of these pathways lead to PD and thus complicates the process for function can be associated with the hearing loss for both genes. Our drug discovery. results indicate that the demographic structure of the Dutch population To address these issues, we conducted a high content screening to is favourable for this method which is likely to be the case in more interactors of DJ1, a gene mutated in PD to determine if any of them European countries. is capable of affecting DJ1 function. Thus far we have been able to identify several genes which are able to rescue DJ1 deficits on cell c04.2 Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome, a ponto-bulbar palsy viability such as PPP2R2C and PSF and other genes which are able with deafness, is caused by mutation in C20orf to enhance the loss of DJ1 such as 4E-BP. 4E-BP is a translational D. J. Josifova1, P. Green2, M. Wiseman2, Y. J. Crow3, H. Houlden4, S. inhibitor to which many drugs are available thus the administration of Riphagen5, J. Lin5, F. Raymond6, A. Childs7, E. Sheridan8, S. Edwards2; 4E-BP activators, such as rapamycin may protect cells from apoptosis 1Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Kings College, London, United and thus an effective treatment to prevent or delay the onset of dis- Kingdom, 3Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, St. Mary‘s Hospital, ease. Using this approach we have been able to construct a detailed Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, molecular pathway of the proteins that are involved in the function of 5Evelina Children‘s‘ Hospital, St. Thomas Hospital, London, United Kingdom, DJ1 and identify additional therapeutic targets. 6Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Addenbrook’s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7The General Infirmary at Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, c04.5 miR-135b regulates two transcriptional cofactors, Pc4 8, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, St James‘s Hospital, Leeds, United and Psip1, in the mammalian inner ear, identified using an Kingdom. integrative transcriptomics and proteomic approach Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome is a rare neurological disorder T. Elkan1, R. Hertzano1, I. Ulitsky2, R. Elkon1,2, M. Irmler3, R. Shamir2, J. first reported by Brown in 1894 as familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Beckers3, K. B. Avraham1; with onset in infancy. Following the reports by Vialetto, in 1936 and Van 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty Laere, in 1966, the name, BVVLS was adopted. The key features are of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Blavatnik School of Computer progressive ponto-bulbar palsy and bilateral sensorineural deafness. Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Institute of Experimental Genetics, The disease usually presents with VII, IX, X, XI and XII cranial nerve Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany. palsies, which develop in a previously healthy individual. A complex MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 17-24 nucleotide-long non-coding RNAs neurological phenotype with a mixed picture of upper and lower mo- processed from transcripts of endogenous genes that function through tor neuron involvement reminiscent of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway. miRNAs regulate gene expres- evolves with disease progression. The course is invariably progres- sion by inducing degradation of mRNA of target genes and by inhib-Concurrent Sessions 2 iting translation. Their relevance to the inner ear has recently been 2Dept of Biochemistry, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Genetics Unit, Dept emphasized by the discovery of miRNA mutations leading to deafness of Pediatrics, Hacettepe Univ faculty of medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 4Dept in humans and mice. We integrated a comparative transcriptomic and of Paediatrics, Faculty of medicine and health sciences, Al Ain, United proteomic analyses and a miRNA screen of early post-natal cochlear Arab Emirates, 5Dept of Medical Genetics, Univ medical Center, Utrecht, and vestibular sensory epithelia derived from mice, with sequence- Netherlands, 6Jean Verdier hospital, Bondy, France, 7Dept of Medical Genetics, based predictions, to efficiently identify functional miRNAs and their UNICAMP, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 8Division of Paediatric Orthopedics, Orthopedic targets. We identified PC4 and Psip1, two transcriptional cofactors that Hospital Speising, Vienna, Austria, 9Dept of Medical Genetics, Antwerp interact with one another, as targets for miR-135b in the inner ear hair University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 10Dept of Pediatrics and Child Health, cells. PC4, Activated RNA polymerase II transcription cofactor 4, or Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, Sub1, mediates functional interactions between upstream activators 11Genetics Research Center, Univ of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation and general transcriptional machinery. Psip1, also known as PC4- Sciences, Teheran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 12Centre for Pediatrics and and SF-2 interacting protein or Lens epithelium-derived growth factor Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg Univ Hospital, Freiburg, Germany, 13Dept of (Ledgf), is involved in transcriptional regulation of stress related genes, Pathology, Campus Bio-Medico University, Roma, Italy. mRNA splicing, and cell survival. In order to prove the interaction be- Desbuquois dysplasia is an autosomal recessive chondrodysplasia tween the miRNA and its target proteins the miRNA was silenced or characterized by short stature, joint laxity, scoliosis and advanced car- over-expressed in cell line and the protein levels were studied using pal ossification with a delta phalanx. Studying 9 Desbuquois families, semi-quantitative western blot analysis. Our current work focuses on we identified 7 distinct mutations in the Calcium-Activated Nucleotid- how miR-135b regulation affects downstream pathways in the inner ase 1 gene (CANT1) which encodes a soluble UDP-preferring nucleo- ear. tidase. Among the 7 mutations, 4 were nonsense and 3 were missense mutations, located in the region encoding the 7th nucleotidase con- c04.6* Olfactory Expression of mutant A30P alpha-synuclein served region and changing arginine at position 300 in 5/9 families. in conditional mouse Brain: implications for Early stage of All children presented with characteristic skeletal manifestations. How- Parkinson’s Disease ever, an early death due to cardio-respiratory failure was observed in S. Nuber1, E. Petrasch-Parwez2, O. Arias-Carrion3, C. Wurst1, F. N. Gellerich4, the 4 children with non sense mutations. Z. Gizatullina5, M. Fendt6, H. Nguyen7, S. von Hörsten8, P. Teismann9, J. B. The function of CANT1 is unknown. Using RT-PCR analysis, we ob- Schulz10, T. P. Velavan11, T. Schmidt1, J. Boy1, I. Schmitt12, G. U. Höglinger13, J. served a specific expression in chondrocytes. We also found elec- Winkler14, O. Riess1; tron-dense material within distended rough endoplasmic reticulum in 1Medical Genetics, Univ. of Tübingen, Germany, 2Institute of Neuroanatomy and Desbuquois patient fibroblasts. Finally, Desbuquois dysplasia shares Molecular Brain Research, Univ. of Bochum, Germany, 3Inst. of Experimental phenotypic features with Diastrophic dysplasia and recessive Larsen Neurology, Philipps University of Marburg, Germany, 4KeyNeurotec, ZENIT syndrome, which are both due to a defect in proteoglycan sulfation, the Technology Park, Magdeburg, Germany, 5KeyNeurotek, ZENIT Technology final step of proteoglycan synthesis. To test whether CANT1 deficiency Park, Magdeburg, Germany, 6Novartis, Basel, Switzerland, 7Medical Genetics, interferes with the availability of UDP-sugars needed for proteoglycan Univ.of Tübingen, Germany, 8Department of Experimental Therapy, Univ. of synthesis, fibroblasts from two Desbuquois patients and four controls Erlangen, Germany, 9Inst. of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, United were double labeled with [35S]sulfate and [3H]glucosamine. Surpris- Kingdom, 10RWTH, Univ. of Aachen, Germany, 11Inst. for Tropical Medicine, ingly, in the patient cells glycosaminoglycan (GAG) synthesis was al- Univ. of Tübingen, Germany, 12Clinic for Neurology, Univ. of Bonn, Germany, most normal under basal conditions when compared to controls, but 13Experimental Neurology, Philipps University of Marburg, Germany, 14Division significant reduced GAG synthesis was observed in presence of β-D- of Molecular Neurology, Univ, of Erlangen, Germany. xyloside, a compound that increases GAG synthesis acting as a chain Growing evidence suggests that cognitive and psychiatric deficits pre- initiator. These data suggest that CANT1 plays a role in proteoglycan cede motor impairment in Parkinson’s disease (PD). In this premotor metabolism and supports its involvement in the rate of GAG synthe- stage neuropathology is detectable in the olfactory bulb and smell de- sis. ficiency is found in about 90% of PD patients. To explore the impact and reversibility of early pathological stages, we analyzed conditional c05.2* Disruption of the Podosome Adaptor Protein tKs4 transgenic mice, expressing high levels of human [A30P]alpha-synu- (SHPXD2B) causes Frank-ter Haar syndrome clein limited to the olfactory bulb. Further, as alpha-synuclein posi- Z. Iqbal1, P. Cejudo-Martin2, A. De Brouwer1, B. Van der Zwaag3, P. Ruiz- tive olfactorial lesions of early PD-stages appears not to advance to Lozano2, M. Cecilia Scimia2, J. D. Lindsey4, R. Weinreb4, B. Albrecht5, A. non-olfactorial cortical areas, which are increasingly affected at later Megarbane6, Y. Alanay7, Z. Ben-Neriah8, M. Amenduni9, R. Artuso9, J. A. stages, their contribution to disease progression is unknown. Thus, Veltman1, E. Van Beusekom1, A. Oudakker1,10, J. Luis Millan2, R. Hannekam11,12, the question raise of whether (i) mutated alpha-synuclein is able to B. Hamel1, S. A. Courtneidge2, H. van Bokhoven1,10; induce olfactorial pathology,(ii) these alterations influence non-olfacto- 1Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, rial brain structures and (iii) neurological dysfunction is reversible after Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, ceasing expression of transgene alpha-synuclein. Thus, we generated 2Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 N. Torrey Pines Road, and characterized a tet-off conditional mouse model expressing hu- La Jolla, CA 92037, USA, La Jolla, CA, United States, 3Department of man [A30P]alpha-synuclein in the olfactory bulb. We found that over- Neuroscience and Pharmacology. University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, expressing of mutated [A30P]alpha-synuclein led to a downregulation Netherlands, 4Hamilton Glaucoma Center, University of California at San of dopamine neurotransmission in the olfactory bulb which was paral- Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA., La Jolla, CA, United leled by hyperactivity and decreased anxiety in these mice. We further States, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum, Universität Duisburg- detected upregulation of neurotransmitter content in striatum and sub- Essen, Germany., Duisburg-Essen, Germany, 6Medical Genetics Unit, Saint stantia nigra and mitochondrial dysfunction in non-olfactory brain re- Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon., Beirut, Lebanon, 7Pediatric Genetics Unit, gions, both of which could be reversed in old-aged mice. Perspective: Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine,, Ankara, Using this regulatable transgenic mouse model, we may model and Turkey, 8Center for Human Genetics, Hadassah Medical Center, Hebrew explore in detail impact of olfactory alpha-synucleinopathy on other University of Jerusalem,, Jerusalem, Israel, 9Medical Genetics, Department of brain regions; this model is also a useful tool to study early interven- Molecular Biology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 10Department of Cognitive tion strategies, which may halt or even reverse the underlying disease Neurosciences, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud process in PD. University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 11Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 12Institute of Child Health, c05.1 cANt1 mutations in Desbuquois dysplasia are Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, UCL, London, United Kingdom. responsible for a defect in proteoglycan synthesis. Frank-Ter Haar syndrome (FTHS), also known as Ter Haar syndrome, C. Huber1, A. Rossi2, M. Bertoli1, M. Fradin1, M. Le Merrer1, Y. Alanay3, L. I. is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by skeletal, cardio- Al Gazali4, M. G. E. M. Ausems5, P. Bitoun6, D. P. Cavalcanti7, A. Krebs8, G. vascular and eye abnormalities, such as increased intraocular pres- Mortier9, S. P. Robertson10, Y. Shafeghati11, A. Superti-Furga12, A. O. Muda13, C. sure, prominent eyes and hypertelorism. We have conducted homo- Le Goff1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1; zygosity mapping on patients representing twelve FTHS families. A 1INSERM U781, Paris Descartes University, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, locus on chromosome 5q35.1 was identified for which patients from Concurrent Sessions 2 ten families shared homozygosity. For one family, a homozygous dele- Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 5Dept Pediatrics, Akdeniz Univ School of Medicine, tion mapped exactly to the smallest region of overlapping homozygos- Antalya, Turkey, 6Dept Medical Genetics, National Institute of Health, Rabat, ity, which contained a single gene, SH3PXD2B. This gene encodes Morocco, 7Dept Radiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Centre for the TKS4 protein, a PX and SH3 domain-containing adaptor protein Pediatrics, Univ of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. and Src substrate. This protein was recently shown to be involved in Spondylo-megaepiphyseal-metaphyseal dysplasia (SMMD) is a rare the formation of actin rich membrane protrusions called podosomes autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia with only a few cases re- or invadopodia, which coordinate pericellular proteolysis with cell mi- ported in the literature. Affected individuals have a disproportionate gration. Mice lacking Tks4 also show pronounced skeletal, eye and short stature with a short neck and trunk and relatively long limbs that cardiac abnormalities and phenocopied the majority of the defects as- may show flexion contractures of the distal joints. The most remark- sociated with FTHS. These findings establish a role for TKS4 in FTHS able radiographic features are the delayed and impaired ossification and embryonic development. Mutation analysis revealed five differ- of the vertebral bodies as well as the presence of large epiphyseal ent homozygous mutations in SH3PXD2B in seven FTHS families. ossification centers and wide growth plates in the long tubular bones. No SH3PXD2B mutations were detected in six other FTHS families, Genome wide homozygosity mapping followed by a candidate gene demonstrating the genetic heterogeneity of this condition. Interest- approach resulted in the elucidation of the genetic cause in three new ingly however, dermal fibroblasts from one of the individuals without consanguineous families with SMMD. Each proband was homozygous an SH3PXD2B mutation nevertheless expressed lower levels of the for a different inactivating mutation (c.336_337delGGinsT; c.337dupG; TKS4 protein, suggesting a common mechanism underlying disease c.104_110delCGCCCG) in NKX3-2, a homeobox-containing gene lo- causation.This is the first time that a developmental disorder is caused cated on chromosome 4p15.33. Expression studies in skin fibroblasts by the defect in podosomes. Further study on the role of podosomes showed partial nonsense mediated decay of the mutant transcripts may open a new horizon in identifying the genetic defects in related and upregulation of mutant NKX3-2 mRNA compared to control, the developmental disorders. latter suggesting a disturbed autoregulatory loop. We observed the highest expression of NKX3-2 in chondrocytes and gut. In contrast to c05.3* PTHLH deletion and point mutations are associated with previous reports we were also able to demonstrate NKX3-2 expres- Brachydactyly type E (BDE) sion in the brain. Striking similarities were found when comparing the E. Klopocki1, B. P. Hennig1, K. Dathe1, R. Koll1, T. de Ravel2, E. Baten3, E. vertebral ossification defects in SMMD patients with those observed in Blom4, Y. Gillerot5, J. F. W. Weigel6, G. Krüger7, O. Hiort8, P. Seemann9, S. the Nkx3-2 null mice. Distinguishing features were the asplenia found Mundlos1,10; in the mutant mice and the radiographic abnormalities in the limbs only 1Charite Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Centre for Human observed in SMMD patients. This study illustrates that NKX3-2 plays Genetics University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3AZ Saint Lucas, an important role in endochondral ossification of both the axial and ap- Brugge, Belgium, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University pendicular human skeleton. Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 5Centre de Génétique Humaine, Cliniques Universitaires St Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 6University Children’s Hospital, c05.5 copy Number and sequence Variants in FREM1 are Leipzig, Germany, 7Abteilung Medizinische Genetik, Universitätsklinikum Associated With an increased Risk of isolated metopic Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 8Departments of Pediatrics, University of Lübeck, craniosynostosis in Humans and mice Lübeck, Germany, 9Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies L. E. L. M. Vissers1, T. C. Cox2, I. M. Janssen1, K. M. Short3, I. Smyth4, F. (BCRT), Berlin, Germany, 10Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Jehee5, G. Yagnik6, S. A. Boyadjiev6, C. Marcelis1, P. J. Anderson7, M. L. Germany. Cunningham2, M. Passos-Bueno5, J. A. Veltman1, M. F. Buckley1, T. Roscioli1; Brachydactylies are a family of limb malformations characterized by 1Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Division of short hands/feet due to aplastic/hypoplastic skeletal elements. Autoso- Craniofacial Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, mal dominant brachydactyly type E (BDE, MIM 113300) is character- 3Cutaneous Developmental Biology Lab, Monash University, Melbourne, ized by shortening of metacarpals/metatarsals and/or phalanges. Here Australia, 4Cutaneous Developmental Biology Lab, Monash University, we describe a novel disease gene for BDE in five unrelated families. Melbourne, Australia, 5Centro de Estudos do Genoma Humano, Universidade Initially we detected a microdeletion encompassing PTHLH, the gene de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 6Section of Genetics, Department of coding for parathyroid hormone related protein (PTHRP) in a pedigree Pediatrics, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States, with BDE, short stature and learning disabilities. PTHRP regulates the 7Australian Craniofacial Unit, Adelaide, Australia. balance between chondrocyte proliferation and hypertrophic differen- Metopic craniosynostosis (MC), the premature fusion of the fron- tiation during endochondral bone development. Pthrp-/- mice show tal bone primordia, results in trigonocephaly and has a frequency of short limbed dwarfism due to premature differentiation of chondro- 1:10,000 live births. One form of MC is associated with monosomy cytes. Therefore we screened a cohort of individuals with BDE and for an 8Mb interval of chromosome 9p22.3 (OMIM 158170). Features short stature for mutations in PTHLH. We identified two missense include mental retardation, trigonocephaly and midface hypoplasia. (p.L44P and p.L60P), a nonstop (p.X178WextX*54), and a nonsense Overlapping copy number variants (CNVs) have been identified which (p.K120X) mutation. Functional testing of the L60P missense muta- include the FREM1 gene. We wished to investigate the role of FREM1 tion in chicken micromass culture showed an earlier differentiation of in more than 100 people with MC ascertained through an international chondrocytes compared to wildtype which indicates that the missense craniofacial consortium. The presence of 9p CNVs was assessed by mutation results in a loss of function. microarrays and FREM1 was screened for mutations by sequencing Since mutations of the primary mediator of PTHRP/PTH receptor sig- and MLPA. Frem1 knockout mice were also imaged with microCT to naling, GNAS1, are associated with Albright Hereditary Osteodystro- determine if craniofacial anomalies consistent with a human MC phe- phy (AHO) which includes a skeletal phenotype strikingly similar to the notype. BDE phenotype we conclude that the IHH/PTHRP pathway is of partic- Two de novo CNVs involving FREM1 and 3 human FREM1 alleles ular importance for cartilage differentiation and growth in the metacar- (one de novo) were identified. The two CNVs interrupt the FREM1 cod- pals. These results support the concept of molecular disease families ing sequence, likely resulting in structural abnormalities of the FREM1 based on phenotypic similarities and interacting signaling pathways. protein. Evidence that a p.Glu1500Val mutation may be involved in MC Taken together, mutations in PTHLH result in a specific type of skeletal includes that it is de novo in a single family and is present in a second disease which we suggest to name BDE with short stature, PTHLH family with a range of craniofacial abnormalities. Craniofacial imag- type. ing of homozygous Frem1 knock-out mice demonstrated craniofacial deformities consistent with MC. Taken together, these findings account c05.4 Homozygous inactivating mutations in the NKX3-2 gene for a significant percentage of a uni-sutural craniosynostosis and are result in spondylo-megaepiphyseal-metaphyseal dysplasia consistent with FREM1 variants increasing the risk of MC. We recom- G. R. Mortier1, M. Simon2, A. Dheedene3, Y. Alanay4, E. Mihci5, L. Rifai6, A. mend that all children with MC should have 9p CNV investigations and Sefiani6, Y. van Bever2, M. Meradji7, A. Superti-Furga8, J. Hellemans3; consideration be given to FREM1 mutation analysis. 1Dept Medical Genetics, Antwerp Univ Hosp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Dept Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Dept Medical Genetics, Ghent Univ Hosp, Ghent, Belgium, 4Dept Pediatrics, Hacettepe Univ School of Concurrent Sessions 2 c05.6 cranioectodermal dysplasia is a ciliary disorder caused this cohort. Genetic disorders were found in 110 children. Six children by defects in the iFt122 gene presented with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (0.04% vs 0.007% ex- J. Walczak-Sztulpa1, J. Eggenschwiler2, D. Osborn3, D. A. Brown2, F. Emma4, pected) and 5 with a retinoblastoma (0.03% vs 0.006%), both diseases C. Klingenberg5, R. C. Hennekam6, G. Torre7, M. Garshasbi1, A. Tzschach1, M. influenced by epigenetics. Szczepanska8, M. Krawczynski9, J. Zachwieja10, D. Zwolinska11, P. Beales3, H. More investigations will highlight detailed informations about factors Ropers1, A. Latos-Bielenska12, A. W. Kuss1; impacting on the occurrence of these abnormalities, as parental pat- 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Department terns, indications or ART technics. of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United States, 3Molecular Medicine Unit, University College London (UCL) Institute of Child c06.2 the origin of de novo chromosome deletions identified by Health, London, United Kingdom, 4Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, array cGH Children´s Hospital and Research Institute Bambino Gesu´, Rome, Italy, S. Thomas, C. Sibbons, H. Eisenhauer, J. Crolla, P. Jacobs; 5Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of North-Norway and University Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom. of Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway, 6Institute of Child Health, Great Ormond Street Among de novo cytogenetically visible chromosome imbalances with Hospital for Children, University College London, London, United Kingdom, non-recurrent breakpoints, there is an overall excess of paternal cas- 7Division of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Children´s Hospital and Research es: this effect is genome wide but varies according to the type of ab- Institute Bambino Gesu´, Rome, Italy, 8Department of Gynecology and normality and the chromosomal location. These imbalances are likely Obstetrics, Division of Reproduction, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, to arise meiotically and are not associated with increased parental Poznan, Poland, 9Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, Poznan age. In contrast, while non-recurrent balanced translocations are also University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 10Department of Paediatric predominantly paternal in origin, they display a significantly elevated Cardiology and Nephrology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, paternal age suggesting they may arise during mitosis in male germ Poland, 11Department and Clinic of Paediatric Nephrology, Wroclaw Medical cells prior to meiosis. University, Wroclaw, Poland, 12Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan The use of array CGH provides two significant advantages in the study University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. of chromosome abnormalities: it allows the aetiology of very small im- Cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED, Sensenbrenner syndrome, OMIM balances to be investigated and defines precisely the size of an imbal- 218330) is characterized by craniofacial, skeletal, and ectodermal ab- ance thus giving information on the sequence composition around the normalities. Most cases are sporadic, but a few familial ones support breakpoints. an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. We have investigated the parental origin of 37 deletions identified or We collected 13 CED patients from 12 independent families. In two characterised by array CGH using the Agilent 44K platform. Twenty families the patients had consanguineous parents, and in one of these, seven (73%) were paternal in origin and 10 maternal (27%). Analysis two siblings were affected, permitting linkage analysis and homozygos- of the breakpoint intervals showed that one of the maternal cases and ity mapping. This revealed a single region of homozygosity with a sig- five of the paternal cases contained segmental duplications suggest- nificant LOD score (3.57) on chromosome 3q21-3q24. By investigating ing formation by Non-Allelic Homologous Recombination. The aver- candidate genes from this interval we found a homozygous missense age size of the paternal deletions was 7.3Mb compared with 3.1Mb mutation in exon 15 (V->G) of the IFT122 gene that co-segregated with for the maternal cases. These results confirm the parental origin bias, the disease. In addition we identified another homozygous missense although among deletions below 6Mb the excess of paternal cases change (S->F) in exon 11 if IFT122 in the patient from the second con- was less pronounced. sanguineous family, and found compound heterozygosity for two differ- We will investigate the origin of further cases including duplications ent IFT122 mutations (a splice site change in intron 6 and a missense and complex abnormalities with multiple breakpoints and also look for change in exon 1) in a sporadic patient. All changes were absent in any association with increased parental age. 340 control chromosomes. The IFT122 protein is a component of the retrograde intraflagellar transport and important for in the assembly c06.3 Novel insights into the pathogenesis of common and maintenance of eukaryotic cilia. We therefore investigated the pri- aneuploidies using genomic analysis of cell-free amniotic fluid mary cilia in patient fibroblasts and found significantly reduced cilia D. W. Bianchi1, K. L. Johnson1, K. Koide1, L. Massingham1, J. L. Maron1, D. frequency and length in patient cells as compared to controls. We next Slonim2; transiently knocked down ift122 in zebrafish embryos and observed a 1Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States, 2Tufts University, Medford, characteristic ciliary phenotype, confirming that CED is a ciliary dis- MA, United States. order and suggesting that the causative mutations in the unresolved Background: As a novel means of identifying pathophysiologic changes cases are most likely to affect primary cilia function as well. in fetuses with common aneuploidies, we characterized developmen- tal gene expression using cell-free mRNA in residual second trimester c06.1 is there an increased risk of congenital malformations amniotic fluid (AF) supernatant samples. after Assisted Reproductive technologies (ARt)? Results of a Methods: RNA was extracted from AF in fetuses with trisomy 21 [T21] French cohort composed of 15 162 children (n=7), trisomy 18 [T18] (n=5), and euploid controls (n=13). cDNA G. B. Viot1, S. Epelboin2, F. Olivennes3, S. Follow-Up AMP vigilance4; synthesis and biotin labeling were performed prior to hybridization to 1Maternité Port Royal, Paris, France, 2Maternité Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 arrays. Initial analysis was done using the France, 3Clinique de la Muette, Paris, France, 4Poissy, Poissy, France. Affymetrix Gene Chip Microarray Suite 5.0, followed by comparative The aims of this study is to estimate the risk of major or minor congeni- t-tests and Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment. Differentially-expressed tal malformations and genetic disorders among children born after in genes were further examined by the Database for Annotation, Visual- vitro fertilization (IVF) or intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) in 33 ization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) and Ingenuity®. French centers registered for ART. Results: In T21 we identified 414 differentially-expressed genes vs. The survey was prospective from 2003 to 2007. The cohort was com- controls. Only 5/414 genes mapped to chromosome 21. In T18, only posed of 15 162 infants recruited from birth; medical data were col- 7/356 differentially-expressed genes were on chromosome 18. Heat lected regularly from birth to the age 60 months. Questionnaires were map and functional analyses of genes not on 18 or 21 showed a con- fulfilled by the paediatrician and the parents and 98% of them were ex- sistent pattern unique for each aneuploidy that significantly differed ploitable. The prevalence of each malformation identified among this from euploidy. Only 6 differentially-expressed transcripts were com- cohort was compared to the data of national registers. mon to both aneuploidies. T21 samples showed significant oxidative A major congenital malformation was found in 4.24% children (vs 2-3% stress and disruptions in ion transport, G-protein signaling, immune re- expected). This higher rate was partly due to an excess of heart dis- sponse, and circulatory system function. T18 showed down-regulation eases (0.45% vs 0.25%) and malformations in the urogenital system of the endocrine system and up-regulation of lipid metabolism. [uropathy : 1.25% (vs 0.08-0.65%), hypospadias : 0.37% (vs 0.29%)]. Conclusions: Our results question the conventional wisdom that the Among the minor malformations, a 5 times higher frequency of angio- pathophysiology of aneuploidy is due to a gene dosage effect, as the ma was reported with a totally skewed sex ratio (262 girls/103 boys). molecular abnormalities observed here are predominantly produced Surprisingly, the average age for parents of malformed children at the by genes on chromosomes other than 18 or 21. This discovery-driven time of the conception was not statically different from the all parents of genomic approach using discarded material suggests new avenues to Concurrent Sessions 27 further understand abnormal fetal development. c06.6* Prenatal anomalies in a cohort of 40 Noonan syndrome patients c06.4* Frequencies of 15q11-q13, 7q11.23 and 22q11.2 deletions G. Baldassarre1, C. Rossi2, E. Banaudi1, M. Tartaglia3, A. Marinosci1, M. and duplications in spermatozoa from Prader-Willi syndrome Silengo1, G. B. Ferrero1; fathers. 1Department of Pediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics - Ò. Molina, E. Anton, F. Vidal, J. Blanco; Policlinco S. Orsola Maplighi, Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Cell Biology and Unitat de Biologia Cel·lular (Facultat de Biociències). Universitat Autònoma de Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy. Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain. Noonan syndrome (NS) is a frequent autosomal dominant disorder Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genomic disorder mostly caused caused by mutations in the genes of the RAS/MAPK pathway, be- by 15q11-q13 deletions (70%) due to meiotic Non-allelic homologous ing the most frequent PTPN11 and SOS1. Besides the well known recombination (NAHR) between flanking Low Copy Repeats (LCR). A post-natal heterogeneous clinical presentation characterized by short higher rate of 15q11-q13-deletions and duplications was previously re- stature, congenital heart defects, facial and skeletal dysmorphisms, ported in spermatozoa of fathers with PWS affected offspring. The aim cryptorchidism, lymphatic dysplasia; the prenatal phenotype is not pre- of this work was to analyze the frequency of deletions and duplications cisely defined, as well as the related prognostic factors. Several NS of other regions with similar features (7q11.23 and 22q11.2) in order to anomalies can be observed in fetuses, such as those ones related assess whether a higher risk of transmitting other genomic disorders to lympathic dysplasia (increased nuchal translucency, cystic hygro- is present in this subjects. mas, hydrops fetalis, multiple effusions and polyhydramnios), cardiac Semen samples from 16 PWS fathers and 10 control donors were pro- defects, and growth retardation. In this retrospective study we evalu- cessed and analyzed by triple-color FISH as standardized in our labo- ated the incidence of abnormal prenatal findings in a cohort of 40 NS ratory. A customized combination of probes (Abbot Molecular Inc.) was patients including 28 PTPN11, 8 SOS1, 1 KRAS, 1 BRAF, 1 RAF1 and used to assess the target regions allowing the discrimination between 1 SHOC2 mutated patients. Prenatal anomalies were found in 42.5% normal, deleted and duplicated sperm genotypes. A minimum of 10000 (17/40) of them : 40% (16/40) polydramnios, 17.5 % (7/40) increased sperm were analized per sample and region. fetal nuchal translucency, 17.5 % (7/40) hydrothorax and multiple ef- As a whole, higher rates of deletions and duplications were observed for fusions, 12.5% (5/40) premature rupture of membranes, 2,5 % (1/40) 15q11-q13 (0.9%±0.14) and 22q11.23 region (0.44%±0.09) compared cardiac defects, 9 (22.5%) presenting multiple defects. In conclusion, with the control population (0.46%±0.07 and 0.27%±0.05 respectively) prenatal anomalies can be found in an elevated fraction of NS patients, (Mann-Whitney test; P<0.05). Interestingly, all individuals with signifi- being the most common polyhydramnios, with a consistent portion of cant increases of 7q11.23 and 22q11.2 had also been reported to have them presenting multiple anomalies. Interestingly, the observed anom- increases of 15q11q13-deletions and duplications. Moreover, a signifi- alies do not correlate with the severity of the postnatal phenotype, both cant correlation were observed between the frequencies of deletions at birth and in the first years of life, suggesting that prenatal diagnosis and duplications of 15q11-q13 and 7q11.23 regions (r=0.87; P=0.02) of NS is not burdened by an adverse prognosis. and between 15q11-q13 and 22q11.2 regions (r=0.89; P=0.002). Results suggest that other factors apart from architectural features in C07.1 Identification of biomarkers for acute lymphoblastic these regions could participate in the increases of NAHR events. leukemia (ALL) by allele-specific gene expression and DNA Acknowledgements: Grant UAB.PIF/2007. methylation analysis of primary ALL cells L. Milani1, A. Lundmark1, J. Nordlund1, A. Kiialainen1, K. L. Gunderson2, T. c06.5* Genome-wide single cell array analysis for Flaegstad3, E. Forestier4, M. Heyman5, G. Jonmundsson6, J. Kanerva7, K. preimplantation genetic diagnosis of a complex chromosomal Schmiegelov8, S. Söderhäll9, M. G. Gustafsson10, G. Lönnerholm11, A. C. rearrangement carrier Syvänen1; E. Vanneste1,2, C. Melotte1, U. Ullman3, C. Staessen3, I. Liebaers3, T. Voet1, 1Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, S. Debrock2, A. Pexsters2, C. Tomassetti2, J. Fryns1, T. D‘Hooghe2, J. R. Uppsala, Sweden, 2Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, United States, 3Nordic Society Vermeesch1; of Pediatric Oncology, Norway, 4Department of Clinical Sciences, University of 1Center for Human Genetics / K.U.Leuven - UZ Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Umeå,, Umeå, Sweden, 5Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, Belgium, 2Leuven University Fertility Center / UZ Gasthuisberg, Leuven, 6Nordic Society of Pediatric Oncology, Reykjavik, Iceland, 7Nordic Society of Belgium, 3Center for Medical Genetics / UZ Brussels, Brussels, Belgium. Pediatric Oncology, Helsinki, Finland, 8Nordic Society of Pediatric Oncology, Patients carrying a complex chromosomal rearrangement (CCR) have Copenhagen, Denmark, 9Nordic Society of Pediatric Oncology, Stockholm, an increased risk for chromosomally unbalanced conceptions, which Sweden, 10Clinical Pharmacology and Informatics, Department of Medical either do not implant, are spontaneously lost during gestation or lead Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 11Department of Women‘s and to severely handicapped children. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis Children‘s Health Medical Sciences, University Childrens Hospital,, Uppsala, (PGD) can select against these embryos carrying unbalanced rear- Sweden. rangements, however only 7 loci can be screened and an indication- We used genome-wide allele-specific expression (ASE) patterns to specific preparation is needed using the standard FISH-technique. identify genes with cis-acting factors that regulate gene expression in Microarray technology, on the contrary, can detect imbalances as acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells. We determined the allelic small as 10 Mb genome-wide at the single cell level. We performed for expression levels of 8,000 genes in bone marrow or peripheral blood the first time microarray-based PGD for a CCR-carrier with karyotype samples from 197 children with ALL, by quantitative genotyping of sin- 46,XY,ins(3;2)(p23; q23q14.2),t(6;14)(p12.2; q13). In concurrence with gle nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in RNA. This analysis identified the ethical committee, only the copy number status of the chromo- 391 genes that displayed ASE. Extended promoter regions of these somes involved in the CCR were diagnosed. genes were subjected to DNA methylation analysis in cells from 401 Two PGD cycles with single embryo transfer were performed, which patients with childhood ALL. We found that CpG sites located outside resulted in a clinical pregnancy. The embryo that gave rise to the preg- “CpG islands” had higher methylation levels and larger variability in nancy was normal (or balanced) for the inherited CCR, but carried CpG site methylation than CpG sites within “CpG islands”. We identi- however a trisomy 8 and nullisomy 9 in one of the two biopsied blas- fied 47 genes with an inverse correlation between CpG site methyla- tomeres. After 8 weeks of pregnancy the couple miscarried. Genetic tion and ASE in our ALL sample set, and for 24 genes we observed a analysis following embryo-hysteroscopy showed a diploid(90%)/tetra- correlation between CpG site methylation and ASE levels in individual ploid(10%) mosaic chorion, while the gestational sac was empty. No ALL samples. Using supervised learning, we constructed multivari- aneuploidy 8 was detected in the chorion, while 8% of the cells carried ate classifiers by external cross-validation procedures, and identified a monosomy for chromosome 9. genes where the DNA methylation levels allowed accurate discrimina- We demonstrate that microarray enables to screen against the trans- tion between ALL cells and control cells, between T-lineage and B-cell mission of the unbalanced meiotic products that can derive from (com- precursor (BCP) ALL and between the main cytogenetic subtypes of plex) chromosomal rearrangements. In addition, the findings demon- BCP ALL. We also identified 20 genes with DNA methylation levels that strate that the genomic constitution of the implanted embryo is not predicted relapse of ALL. Most of the genes high-lighted in our study representing the chromosomal rearrangements detected in a single are novel, with no reported connection with ALL. Our findings open blastomere. up perspectives for more detailed studies on DNA methylation as a Concurrent Sessions 2 molecular event that leads to ALL and affects the treatment response Würzburg, Germany, 4Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research, and clinical outcome. Universitäts-Frauenklinik Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. Screening is an unsolved problem for ovarian cancer, especially as c07.2* correlation of telomere length shortening with promoter late detection is equivalent to poor prognosis. Thus, we investigated methylation profile of p16/Rb and p53/p21 pathways in breast whether ovarian cancer patients display characteristically deregulated cancer miRNAs in blood cells that could form the basis of a test for disease Z. Barekati, R. Radpour, C. Kohler, R. Asadollahi, X. Zhong; progression or even for preventive screening. To this aim, blood-borne Laboratory for Prenatal Medicine and Gynecologic Oncology, Basel, miRNA profiles from 15 patients with ovarian cancer and 15 age- and Switzerland. sex-matched healthy controls were compared and biostatistically Unregulated cell growth, a major hallmark of cancer, is coupled with evaluated. This showed that 51 out of >900 tested miRNAs were de- telomere shortening. Measurement of telomere length could provide regulated by unadjusted Student´s t-test. While some candidates had important information on cell replication and proliferation state in already been linked with cancer (e.g. miR-155), most had never been cancer tissues. Telomere shortening and its potential correlation with connected to a specific disease before. Bioinformatics further enabled downregulation of cell-cycle regulatory elements were studied by the us to define a miRNA profile which allowed for discrimination between examination of relative telomere length and methylation status of the blood samples of ovarian cancer patients and healthy controls with TP53, P21 and P16 promoters in tissues from breast cancer patients. an accuracy and specificity of >70%. When only cancers of the se- Telomere length was measured in 104 samples (52 tumors and paired rous subtype were considered and compared with an extended control adjacent normal breast tissues) by quantitative PCR. Methylation group (n=37), sensitivity exceeded 90%. profile of selected genes was analyzed in all samples using a matrix- Taken together, our proof-of-principle study strengthens the hypothesis assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry that neoplastic diseases generate characteristic miRNA fingerprints in (MALDI-TOF MS). Our results demonstrated a significant shortening blood cells. Thus, we propose that the combination of microarray-based of tumor telomere regions compared to paired adjacent normal tis- miRNA-profiling from peripheral blood with other markers might improve sues (P<0.001). Similarly, telomere lengths were significantly shorter the notoriously difficult but important screening for ovarian cancer. in advanced stage cases and in those with higher histological grades (P<0.05). Telomere shortening in cancer tissues was correlated with a C07.5* Methylation Profiles of 22 Candidate Genes in Breast different level of hypermethylation in the TP53, P21 and P16 promoters cancer Using High-throughput mALDi-tOF mass Array (r=-0.33, P=0.001; r=-0.70, P<0.0001 and r=-0.71, P<0.0001, respec- R. Radpour, Z. Barekati, C. Kohler, X. Zhong; tively). The results suggested that inactivation of p16/Rb and/or p53/ Laboratory for Prenatal Medicine and Gynecologic Oncology, Women’s p21 pathways by hypermethylation may be linked to critical telomere Hospital/Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. shortening, leading to genome instability and ultimately to malignant Alterations of DNA methylation patterns have been suggested as bio- transformation. Thus, telomere shortening and promoter hypermethyl- markers for diagnostics and therapy of cancers. Every novel discovery ation of related genes both might serve as breast cancer biomarkers. in the epigenetic landscape and every development of an improved approach for accurate analysis of the events may offer new opportunity c07.3* Discovery of molecular targets for therapy by expression for the management of patients. Using a novel high-throughput mass profiling of thyroid cancer cases spectrometry on MALDI-TOF silico-chips, we determined quantitative D. Nikolova1,2, I. Dimova1, H. Zembutsu2, T. Sechanov3, K. Vidinov3, L. Kee4, R. methylation changes of 22 candidate genes in breast cancer tissues. Ivanova3, E. Becheva1, D. Toncheva1, Y. Nakamura2; For the first time we analysed the methylation status of a total of 42,528 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, CpG dinucleotides on 22 genes in 96 different paraffin-embedded tis- 2Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 3Clinic of sues (48 breast cancerous tissues and 48 paired normal tissues). A Endocrine Surgery, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4University of two-way hierarchical cluster analysis was used to classify methylation Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. profiles. In this study, 10 hypermethylated genes (APC, BIN1, BMP6, Thyroid cancer represents a heterogeneous entity and its clinical char- BRCA1, CST6, ESRb, GSTP1, P16, P21 and TIMP3) were identified acteristics vary widely. Gene-expression profiling studies have identi- to distinguish between cancerous and normal tissues according to the fied a variety of potential molecular markers to help distinguish benign extent of methylation. Individual assessment of the methylation status from malignant thyroid neoplasms. for each CpG dinucleotide indicated that cytosine hypermethylation in To elucidate the mechanisms underlying the progression and to iden- the cancerous tissue samples was mostly located near the consensus tify novel therapeutic targets, we assessed the genome-wide expres- sequences of the transcription factor binding sites. These hypermeth- sion in normal and tumor thyroid tissues. ylated genes may serve as biomarkers for clinical molecular diagnosis Pure populations of malignant and healthy cells were isolated by ap- and targeted treatments of patients with breast cancer. plying the technology of LCM. We compared the gene expression patterns of 18 malignant thyroid samples and 13 samples of normal c07.6 Unraveling the complexity of Primary and metastatic epithelial non-transformed cells using the GeneChip trademark from Ewing’s sarcoma Using Helicos single molecule sequencing Affymetrix. P. Kapranov1, R. J. Arceci2, J. Buckley3, G. Reaman4, P. Reynolds5, P. We identified 243 probes that were significantly differentially over-ex- Sorensen6, J. Thompson1, P. Milos1, T. Triche3; pressed and whose ratio tumor/control was more than 5 in more than 1Helicos BioSciences Corporation, Cambridge, MA, United States, 2John 50% of the analyzed samples. Among the top overexpressed genes Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States, 3University of Southern in thyroid carcinoma were: FN, CHI3L1, FAM20A, SEACAM6, NMU, California, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Children’s Oncology Group, LPL etc. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering separated papillary from Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, United medullar carcinoma samples. The differential expression of 7 genes States, 6University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. was validated by quantitative real-time PCR. Two of those candidates Ewing sarcoma is a high-risk childhood cancer that represents a major (RGS4 and QPCT) were confirmed by immunohistochemistry, North- treatment challenge, as survival has not improved significantly despite ern blot analyses and further functional analysis, including siRNA ex- aggressive chemotherapy. Elucidation of molecular changes in pro- periments.Based on this result, we consider RGS4 as a good molecu- gression of this cancer towards the metastatic and chemo-resistant lar target for therapy of thyroid cancer. Thus, the molecular signatures states offers the potential to better understand the fundamentals of unique to thyroid carcinoma provide a molecular basis for therapeutic biological processes responsible for poor disease outcome. We have target discovery. applied Helicos single-molecule sequencing to build unbiased whole- genome profiles of the transcriptome, methylome and DNA of two cell c07.4* A new approach for ovarian cancer screening - lines derived from the primary tumor of a Ewing sarcoma patient and characterization of miRNA profiles in peripheral blood her chemo-resistant metastasis. This simple system is ideal for gen- S. F. M. Häusler1, A. Keller2, A. Chandran3, J. Wischhusen4; eration of hypotheses on relationships between coding and non-cod- 1Universitäts-Frauenklinik Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 2Biomarker ing RNAs, the epigenome, primary DNA sequence, and the malignant Discovery Center Heidelberg and febit biomed GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany, phenotype. Unlike work on primary tumors, it also allows for biologic 3Graduate School for Life Sciences, Universitäts-Frauenklinik Würzburg, validation.Concurrent Sessions 2 Large differences between the primary and metastatic cells exist at Fmn1 play an important role in mouse and chick limb development. both the genomic and transcriptome levels, including differential ex- The mouse limb deformity (ld) phenotype with digit reduction, syndac- pression and methylation as well as copy number and sequence vari- tyly, radio-ulnar synostosis, variable renal defects and absent fibulae is ants suggesting clonal evolution from the primary to the metastatic caused by loss of Grem1 function. This could be due to either coding tumor. A significant fraction of the genome was found to represent Grem1 homozygous mutations or homozygous deletions of the neigh- RNAs expressed at different levels between the cell lines, of which bouring Fmn1 gene, which also removes limb specific regulatory se- ~60% corresponded to un-annotated transcripts. In some instances, quences of Grem1. Recent studies reinforce the hypothesis that a loss the latter could span large (100’s of kb) genomic regions that contain of Fmn1 protein could also contribute to the observed ld anomalies. no annotated transcripts. About 25% of the transcripts upregulated in In addition, an over-expression of Grem1 in developing chick limbs the metastatic clone were found to be associated with promoter de- represses the programmed cell death in the interdigital mesenchyme, methylation when compared to the primary tumor, suggesting that resulting in interdigital webbing and truncation of distal cartilage ele- promoter demethylation is specifically associated with up-regulation ments. of transcripts in the metastatic/chemo-resistant tumor in a selective We report here, for the first time, chromosomal imbalances in the manner. GREM1-FMN1 region in individuals with limb defects. A 263Kb homo- zygous deletion of FMN1 was associated with oligosyndactyly, radioul- C08.1 Treacher Collins syndrome - detailed genetic and nar synostosis, hearing loss and renal defects, features identical to ld phenotypic analysis mice. A 1.7Mb duplication encompassing both the GREM1 and FMN1 D. Wieczorek1, S. Seland1, H. J. Lüdecke1, S. Böhringer1,2, L. Klein-Hitpass3, genes was detected in an isolated Cenani-Lenz-like oligosyndactyly C. Daumer-Haas4, N. Elcioglu5, H. Hameister6, H. Kayserili7, A. Kobelt8, D. of the hands, resembling the transgenic chick wings in which Grem1 Müller8, O. Rittinger9, S. Spranger10, G. Strobl-Wildemann11, J. Vodopiutz12, R. was over-expressed. The phenotypes of the patients represent new Brekelmans13, D. R. Lohmann1, U. Hehr14; entities/syndromes within the Cenani-Lenz clinical spectrum- (1) an 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, autosomal recessive Oligosyndactyly, Radio-Ulnar Synostosis, Hear- 2Department of Medical Statistics and Bioinformatics, Leiden University Medical ing loss and Renal defect syndrome and (2) an autosomal dominant Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Cenani-Lenz-like non-syndromic Oligosyndactyly. BioChip-Labor, Essen, Germany, 4Pränatal-Medizin München, München, Germany, 5Department of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University Hospital, C08.3 An inherited arthritis is caused by mutations in TRPV4 Istanbul, Turkey, 6genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 7Department of Medical R. Savarirayan1, S. Lamande1, Y. Yuan2, I. Gresshoff1, C. Little3, L. Rowley1, K. Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Institut Kaluarachchi1, E. Botzenhart4, D. Amor1, W. Cole5, P. McIntrye6, J. Bateman1; für Medizinische Genetik, Klinikum Chemnitz gGmbH, Chemnitz, Germany, 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Dept. 9Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 33Raymond Austria, 10Praxis für Humangenetik, Klinikum Bremen-Mitte, Bremen, Germany, Purves Bone & Joint Research Laboratories, Sydney, Australia, 11Praxis für Humangenetik, Ingolstadt, Germany, 12Department of Pediatrics 44Universitatsklinikum Freiburn, Institut fur Humangenetik und Anthropologie, and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 13MRC Freiburg, Germany, 56Stollery Children’s Hospital/University of Alberta Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 14Zentrum für Humangenetik, Universität Hospital, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 6Department of Pharmacology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. Melbourne, Australia, Melbourne, Australia. The Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS, OMIM #154500) is an autoso- Familial Digital Arthropathy-Brachydactyly (FDAB; OMIM 606835) is mal dominant condition characterised by craniofacial dysmorphism a dominantly inherited condition involving aggressive osteoarthritis of consisting of downslanting palpebral fissures, lower eyelid coloboma, the fingers and toes and consequent shortening of the middle and dis- hypoplasia of facial bones and microtia. Mutation analysis of the tal phalanges. We show, in two unrelated families, that the disorder is TCOF1 gene identifies pathogenic mutations in more than 90% of pa- caused by missense substitutions (G270V, R271P and F273L) in the tients with typical TCS. intracellular ankyrin repeat domain of the transient receptor potential In 226 patients referred to us as having TCS, we performed TCOF1 cation channel TRPV4. Functional testing of mutant TRPV4 in stably sequence and MLPA (26/28 exons) analyses. Point mutations scat- transfected HEK293 cells revealed the mutant proteins showed poor tered throughout the gene were identified in 78 of them, but no deletion cell surface localization, despite being expressed at similar levels to or duplication was found in the remaining 148. By careful evaluation wild type protein, and calcium influx in response to the TRPV4 agonist of all available clinical data of these 148 patients, we could confirm GSK1016790A was significantly reduced. Others have recently shown the suspected diagnosis of TCS in only 10 of them. These were then that gain of function TRPV4 mutations cause a range of skeletal dys- subjected to SNP-array analyses, but no deletion or duplication was plasias and peripheral neuropathies. Our data, showing tightly clus- found. tered TRPV4 mutations that reduce channel activity in a third pheno- We will report in detail on the clinical findings in 49 index patients, in- type, inherited osteoarthritis, demonstrate the importance of TRPV4 cluding 21 new ones, and their affected family members with a patho- activity in articular cartilage homeostasis and raises the possibility that genic mutation in the TCOF1 gene and will show average 2D faces we this cation channel might play a role in age-related osteoarthritis. created from standardized photographs. We observed a wide inter- and intrafamilial phenotypic variability. Possibly stochastic variation or C08.4* Mutations in PITX1 cause a human patellar malformation unidentified genetic modifiers, most likely not in cis might contribute to syndrome: Delineation of a recognisable lower-limb phenotype the phenotypic variability. E. M. H. F. Bongers1, J. Schoots1, F. Stock2, N. V. A. M. Knoers1, J. W. M. Some members of families with molecularly proven TCS are so mildly Gardeniers3, A. van Kampen3, J. de Rooij4, L. Hoefsloot1; affected that they do not even fulfill the minimal diagnostic criteria de- 1Dept of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, fined earlier (Teber et al., 2004). Thus, a genotype phenotype corre- Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig lation can not be made. The widened phenotypic spectrum must be AöR, Leipzig, Germany, 3Dept of Orthopaedic Surgery, Radboud University considered in genetic counselling. Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Dept of Radiololy, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. C08.2 Genomic rearrangements of the GREM1-FMN1 locus The identification of gene defects in human patellar malformation syn- cause Oligosyndactyly, Radio-Ulnar synostosis, Hearing loss, dromes and mutant animal models proved to be important in unravel- Renal defects syndrome and cenani-Lenz-like non-syndromic ling key molecules involved in patellar development and musculosk- Oligosyndactyly eletal patterning. The nail patella syndrome phenotype emphasised B. I. Dimitrov1, T. Voet1, L. De Smet2, J. R. Vermeesch1, K. Devriendt1, J. that the LIM homeodomain transcription factor LMX1B is critical in Fryns1, P. Debeer1,2; dorsoventral and anteroposterior patterning of the upper- and lower- 1Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, limbs, as well as the formation of patellar/iliac/radial bones. Phenotype 2Department of Musculoskeletal Science, Division of Orthopaedics, University studies of the small patella syndrome (SPS) determined that the T-box Hospitals Leuven, Pellenberg, Belgium. transcription factor TBX4 is implicated in dorsoventral and anteropos- Limb development is a complex process requiring proper spatio-tem- terior patterning of the lower-limb and late skeletal development of poral expression of a network of limb specific morphogens. Grem1 and patellar/ischiopubic/(meta)tarsal bones. We aimed at elucidating the Concurrent Sessions 0 molecular cause in four classical SPS families and six families with a tients, aged eight months to 38 years) with FOP and on molecular SPS-like phenotype, in which sequencing of TBX4,TBX2, and LMX1B findings of 13 of them. Most of them show a typical hypoplasia/aplasia was found normal. The paired-like homeodomain transcription factor and valgus deviation of the great toe (17/20). A common symptom are PITX1 was selected as a strong candidate gene for congenital patellar, painful swellings on shoulders and face beginning to arise approxi- pelvic and foot malformations, based on its role as an upregulator of mately at an age of three years (15/20). Hand anomalies, such as Tbx4 in the determination of lower-limb identity in chicken and mice. thumb hypoplasia (18/20) and clinodactyly of the fifth finger (15/20) Pitx1 knockout mice showed absent patellae and lower-limb bones re- are common. Some patients have hypoacusis. Further features are re- sembling an upper limb-like morphology. We identified two different stricted mobility of the spine and contractures of other joints as a result putative loss-of-function mutations (one missense and one nonsense) of heterotopic ossifications. Some patients show craniofacial features in PITX1 in one four-generation and one two-generation SPS-like fam- like hypomimia, sparse eyebrows and hair and teeth anomalies. ily, respectively. The phenotypic spectrum comprised aberrant patellar Sequence analysis of the ACVR1 gene were performed on 13/20 pa- size and morphology, unilateral clubfoot and iliac/tibial/fibular/talus/cal- tients. Ten patients show the typical mutation p.R206H. Two patients caneal bone malformations. The present identification of PITX1 mu- with an atypical phenotype show different mutations (G328W and tations in man, together with the phenotype of animals lacking Pitx1 G356D). delineates a recognisable autosomal dominant patellar malformation We analysed the metacarpophalangeal profile (MCPP) on X-rays of syndrome resulting from disrupted anteroposterior patterning and left- seven patients. We suggest that there is a typical MCPP pattern in right directional asymmetry of the lower-limb. classical FOP, which could be used as an additional diagnostic tool. We discuss the clinical, radiological and molecular findings of our pa- C08.5* TRPV4-related skeletal dysplasias: a clinical, tients and compare them with the literature. Our study contributes to radiographic, and molecular study in 18 families. the understanding of the FOP phenotype and possible genotype-phe- E. Andreucci1,2, J. Bateman3, S. Aftimos4, E. Haan5, W. Hunter6, B. Kerr7, G. notype correlations. McGillivray2, R. J. McKinlay Gardner4, M. Patricelli8, D. Sillence9, S. Lamandé3, R. Savarirayan2; c09.1 chromosome-wide mapping of long-range interactions 1Dept. of Clinical Pathophysiology and Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children‘s involved in smith-magenis and Potocki-Lupski syndromes Hospital, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Genetic Health Services N. Gheldof1, B. Lajoie2, G. Ricard1, J. Chrast1, J. Molina3, J. R. Lupski4, K. Victoria and Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children‘s Hospital, Walz3, J. Dekker2, A. Reymond1; Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia, 3Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal 1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2University of Massachusetts Children‘s Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia, 4Northern Regional Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States, 3University of Miami, Miami, FL, Genetics Service, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zeland, 5South United States, 4Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. Australian Clinical Genetics Services, SA Pathology, Women‘s and Children‘s Copy number variations (CNVs) affect expression levels of the genes Hospital and Department of Paediatrics, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, that map within the affected region, but also of genes located in the Asutralia, 6Paediatrician Midcentral District Heath Board Palmerston North flanking regions. To understand the mechanisms at play, we studied New Zealand, 7Genetic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester M139WL, gene expression and chromatin conformation in mice models of Smith- UK, 8Servizio di Genetica, Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy, 9Department of Magenis (SMS) and Potocki-Lupski (PTLS) syndromes, containing a Genetic Medicine, University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. microdeletion and its reciprocal microduplication, respectively, on The transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 protein (TRPV4) is a cal- mouse chromosome 11 (MMU11). We profiled the transcriptome of cium-permeable ion channel that responds to many different stimuli, is embryonic fibroblasts of mice with one, two, three and uniallelic two widely expressed, and participates in an extraordinarily wide range of copies of the SMS/PTLS region in an otherwise identical genetic back- physiologic processes. ground. As expected, the most differentially expressed transcripts are Autosomal dominant brachyolmia, spondylometaphyseal dysplasia mapping to the SMS/PTLS interval, but a significant proportion of most Kozlowski type (SMDK) and metatropic dysplasia are three distinct differentially expressed genes also map to the rest of MMU11. We skeletal dysplasias which share some common features, including hypothesized that these chromosome-wide effects might be caused short stature, platyspondyly, and progressive scoliosis. SMDK and by changes in long-range interactions along the entire chromosome. metatropic dysplasia also have significant but variable metaphyseal We therefore analyzed the chromatin structure of these four mouse involvement on radiographs. strains by using the chromosome conformation capture carbon copy In the past two years, mutations in the gene encoding TRPV4 have (5C) technology. This will allow comparing the chromatin structure and been found to be responsible for these three skeletal phenotypes, con- the presence of physical contacts between functionally interacting ge- firming that they are allelic disorders and suggesting that they might nomic elements in genotypes differing only by the number of copies represent different parts of a phenotypic spectrum. of a CNV, and correlating these interaction maps with the observed We analysed the clinical, radiographic and molecular data on 21 pa- differential gene expression. Detailed investigations of the different tients from 18 families, all of whom had a clinical diagnosis of one of mechanisms by which CNVs alter the architecture of chromosomes the conditions described above: 12 with metatropic dysplasia; 3 with are warranted to shed light on how CNVs influence gene expression. SMKD; and 3 with brachyolmia. Our study identified 7 different muta- In addition, this study will provide a first comprehensive chromatin in- tions in 14 out of the 18 studied families, two previously described, teraction map of an entire mouse chromosome. and 5 novel. These data have uncovered new genotype-phenotype correlations C09.2* Kidney-specific inactivation of Ofd1 leads to renal cystic and suggest that these three conditions represent a continuum of disease associated to upregulation of the mtOR pathway severity with areas of phenotypic overlap between conditions, even B. Franco1, D. Iaconis1, A. Barra1, A. Cantone2, N. Messaddeq3, G. Capasso2, within the same family. We hope that these data will also add to the P. Dolle3, P. Igarashi4, A. Zullo1; understanding of the molecular basis of these disorders and identify 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine-TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Chair of possible pharmacologic targets for therapy. Nephrology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy, 3Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch Cedex, France, 4Department C08.6 Clinical and molecular findings on 20 patients with of Internal Medicine and Division of Basic Sciences, University of Texas fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States. I. Stefanova1, C. Grünberg2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1; The Oral-Facial-Digital type I syndrome (OFDI; MIM 311200) is a rare 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Klinik für Orthopädie und syndromic form of inherited renal cystic disease. It is transmitted as an Unfallchirurgie, Allg. Krankenhaus Hagen, Hagen, Germany. X-linked dominant, male lethal disorder and is caused by mutations Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) (MIM 135100) is a rare in the OFD1 gene. Previous studies demonstrated that OFDI belongs genetic disorder of progressive extraskeletal ossifications. The hetero- to the growing number of disorders ascribed to dysfunction of primary zygous mutation c.617G>A (p.R206H) in the ACVR1 gene is regard- cilia. We generated a conditional inactivation of the mouse Ofd1 gene ed as the cause of FOP in classically affected individuals worldwide using the Ksp-cre transgenic line, which resulted in a viable model (Shore et al.2006). characterized by renal cystic disease and progressive impairment of We report on clinical findings of 20 patients (10 female, 10 male pa- renal function. The study of this model allowed us to demonstrate that Concurrent Sessions 1 primary cilia initially form and then disappear after the development therapy may be an important option for parents faced with the prenatal of cysts, suggesting that the dysfunction of primary cilia is a conse- diagnosis of a genetically affected child. quence rather than the primary cause of renal cystic disease. Immu- nofluorescence and western blotting analysis revealed upregulation of c09.5* the forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 is sumoylated the mTOR pathway in both dilated and non dilated renal structures. in both human and mouse: sumoylation affects its stability, Treatment with rapamycin, a specific inhibitor of the mTOR pathway, localization, and activity resulted in a significant reduction in the number and size of renal cysts M. Marongiu1, M. Deiana1, A. Meloni1, L. Marcia1, A. Puddu1,2, A. Cao1, D. and a decrease in the cystic index compared with untreated mutant Schlessinger3, L. Crisponi1; animals, suggesting that dysregulation of this pathway in our model is 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle mTOR-dependent. The animal model we have generated could thus Ricerche, Monserrato (CA), Italy, 2Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, represent a valuable tool to understand the molecular link between Italy, 3National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD, United States. mTOR and cyst development, and eventually to the identification of The FOXL2 forkhead transcription factor is expressed in ovarian gran- novel drug targets for renal cystic disease. ulosa cells, and when mutated causes the Blepharophimosis, Ptosis and Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome (BPES) and predisposes to pre- c09.3 Lack of mid1, the mouse ortholog of the Opitz syndrome mature ovarian failure. Inactivation of Foxl2 in mice demonstrated its gene, causes abnormal development of the anterior cerebellar indispensability for female gonadal sex determination and ovary de- vermis velopment and revealed its antagonism of Sox9, the effector of male A. Lancioni1, M. Pizzo1, B. Fontanella1, R. Ferrentino1, L. M. R. Napolitano2, E. testis development. De Leonibus1, G. Meroni2,1; To define FOXL2 regulatory activities we looked for interacting proteins. 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2Cluster in Based on yeast two-hybrid screening, we found that FOXL2 interacts Biomedicine (CBM), Trieste, Italy. with PIAS1 and UBC9, both parts of the sumoylation machinery. We Opitz G/BBB Syndrome (OS) is a genetic disorder characterized by confirmed the interactions by co-immunoprecipitation and we demon- midline developmental defects. Male patients with the X-linked form of strated that human FOXL2 is sumoylated in transfected cell lines, and OS, caused by loss-of-function mutations in the MID1 gene, show high that endogenous mouse Foxl2 is comparably sumoylated. Confocal variability of the clinical signs. MID1 encodes a ubiquitin ligase that microscopy allowed us to demonstrate that FOXL2 co-localizes with controls Phosphatase 2A but its role in the pathogenesis of the disease SUMO-1 in structures resembling PML (promyelocytic leukaemia) is still unclear. Here we report a mouse line carrying a non-functional bodies in transfected cells and that FOXL2, SUMO1 and UBC9 co- ortholog of the human MID1 gene, Mid1. Mid1 null mice show the brain localize in vivo in 4 weeks old mouse ovary. anatomical defect observed in patients, i.e. hypoplasia of the anterior We identified 7 putative sumoylation sytes using Abgent portion of the medial cerebellum, the vermis. We found that the pres- SUMOplot™software, and created FOXL2 mutants in which the ly- ence of this defect correlates with motor coordination, procedural and sines of the higher score putative sumoylation sytes (K25, K87, K114, non-associative learning impairments. The defect is limited to the most K150) were changed to arginine. Our results indicate that K114 and anterior lobes of the vermis, the region of the developing cerebellum K150 are involved in FOXL2 sumoylation and nuclear localization adjacent to the dorsal midbrain. Analyses at mid-gestation reveal that and that all mutations influenced FOXL2 transcriptional activity. Fur- lack of Mid1 causes the shortening of the posterior dorsal midbrain; thermore we demonstrated that sumoylation results in an increase of the rostralization of the midbrain/cerebellum boundary; and the down- FOXL2 protein levels, likely due to an increase in protein stability. It is regulation of a key player in the development of this region, Fgf17. intriguing that similar sumoylation and regulatory consequences have Thus, lack of Mid1 causes a mis-specification of the midbrain/cerebel- also been reported for SOX9, the male counterpart of FOXL2 in so- lar boundary that results in an abnormal development of the most an- matic gonadal tissues. terior cerebellar lobes. This animal model provides a tool for further in vivo studies of the physiological and pathological role of the Mid1 gene c09.6 sAHA ameliorates the smA phenotype in two mouse and a system to investigate the development and function of anterior models for spinal muscular atrophy cerebellar domains. M. Riessland1, B. Ackermann1, A. Förster1, M. Jakubik1, J. Hauke1, L. Garbes1, I. Fritzsche2, Y. Mende1, I. Blumcke2, E. Hahnen1, B. Wirth1; c09.4* Global gene transfer in the cNs and phenotypic 1Institute of Human Genetics, Institute of Genetics and Center for Molecular correction of mLD model mice by systemic neonatal injection of Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Department of Neuropathology, serotype 9 AAV vector University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. N. Miyake, K. Miyake, N. Asakawa, M. Okabe, M. Yamamoto, T. Shimada; Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common autosomal re- Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan. cessively inherited neuromuscular disorder determined by functional Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are important targets for enzyme impairment of α-motor neurons within the spinal cord. SMA is caused replacement and gene therapy. The success of gene therapy for LSDs by functional loss of the survival motor neuron gene 1 (SMN1), where- with neurological involvement such as metachromatic leukodystro- as disease severity is mainly influenced by the number of SMN2 cop- phy (MLD) depends on the development of efficient delivery of lyso- ies. SMN2, which produces only low levels of full-length mRNA/pro- somal enzymes and/or vectors across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) to tein, can be modulated by small molecules and drugs, thus offering a achieve wide distribution of enzyme throughout the brain. Since both unique possibility for SMA therapy. the immune system and the BBB are developmentally immature during Here, we analysed suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a FDA- the perinatal period, neonatal gene transfer may be a highly promising approved histone deacetylase inhibitor, as potential drug in two severe strategy to treat genetic neurological disorders. To treat MLD mice, SMA mouse models each carrying two SMN2 transgenes: US-SMA we generated serotype 9 AAV vector expressing human arylsulfatase mice with one SMN2 per allele (Smn-/-;SMN2tg/tg) and Taiwanese-SMA A (AAV9/ASA) and IV injected into neonatal MLD mice (n=7). ELISA mice with two SMN2 per allele (Smn-/-;SMN2tg/wt), both on pure FVB/N analysis showed that sustained expression of ASA was detected in the background. The US-SMA mice were embryonically lethal with hetero- brain (cerebral cortex: 24.5±8.7, cerebellum: 7.8±4.5 ng/mg protein) for zygous males showing significantly reduced fertility. SAHA-treatment more than one year. Alcian blue staining and quantitative analysis of of pregnant mothers rescued the embryonic lethality giving rise to SMA sulfatide contents by biochemical assay showed significant decrease offspring. By using a novel breeding strategy for the Taiwanese model of the amount of stored sulfatide in AAV9/ASA treated MLD mice com- (Smn-/-;SMN2tg/tg x Smn-/+ mice) we obtained 50% SMA offspring that pared to non-treated mice (cerebral cortex: 12.0±5.3 vs. 29.7±12.7, survive ~10 days and 50% control carriers in each litter. Treatment p<0.03; cerebellum: 34.8±6.3 vs. 73.2±5.0, mg/mg protein, p<0.05). with 25 mg/kg/2x/day SAHA increased lifespan of SMA mice by 30%, Furthermore, in the behavior test, AAV9/ASA treated mice showed significantly improved motor function abilities, reduced degeneration a significant improvement in their ability to traverse narrow balance of motor neurons within the spinal cord and increased the size of neu- beams, as compared to non-treated MLD mice (Latency: 9.2±1.5 romuscular junctions and muscle fibers compared to vehicle-treated vs. 13.0±0.4 sec, P<0.05; Slips: 3.5±1.9 vs. 4.3±1.4 times, P<0.05). SMA mice. SMN RNA and protein levels were significantly elevated in These data clearly demonstrate that MLD model mice can be treated various tissues including spinal cord and muscle. Hence, SAHA, which by systemic neonatal injection of AAV9/ASA. Therefore, neonatal gene lessens the progression of SMA, might be suitable for SMA therapy.Concurrent Sessions 2 c10.1 copy number variable regions in 13 European type VIII OI (OMIM #610915). We have identified a LEPRE1 mutation, populations IVS5+1G>T, in unrelated African Americans (AA) and contemporary T. Esko1,2, G. Escramis3, R. Rabionet3, P. Palta2, M. Nelis1, F. Zimprich4, D. West Africans (WA) immigrants. Screening of gDNA from a Mid-At- Toncheva5, M. Macek6, L. Peltonen7,8, B. Melegh9, D. Toniolo10, P. Gasparini11, J. lantic AA cohort determined a carrier incidence of 0.30-0.50% for this Klovins12, V. Kučinskas13, J. Lubinski14, S. Limborska15, S. E. Antonarakis16, C. mutation, predicting occurrence of homozygous lethal type VIII OI in M. van Duijn17, M. Remm2, X. Estivill3, A. Metspalu1,2; about 1/250,000 births in this population. To trace the mutationorigin, 1Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute we screened gDNA from a contemporary WA cohort. Nineteen of 1284 of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Center unrelated individuals (1.48%) from Nigeria and Ghana were heterozy- for Genomic Regulation (CRG-UPF) and CIBERESP, Barcelona, Spain, gous carriers, half of whom were from the Yoruba or Ibo ethnic groups 4Department of Clinical Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, of Nigeria. The high carrier frequency for this founder mutation among Austria, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, WAs predicts that this mutation alone would cause recessive OI in Bulgaria, 6Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Cystic Fibrosis 1/18,250 births in WAs, equal to the incidence of de novo dominant OI Centre, University Hospital Motol and 2nd School of Medicine, Charles in North America. To estimate the mutation age, we examined micro- University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 7Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, satellites and short tandem repeats spanning 4.2 MB surrounding the Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8Institute of Molecular Medicine, Biomedicum, LEPRE1 gene. Disease allele haplotypes were determined from 12 Helsinki, Finland, 9Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, contemporary WA and 3 AA families. WA carriers share a haplotype of University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 10Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San 175-425Kb. Using the linkage disequilibrium analysis method of Ran- Raffaele Research Institute, Milano, Italy, 11Medical Genetics, Department of nala & Slatkin (2000), the mutation was estimated to have originated Reproductive Sciences and Development, IRCCS-Burlo Garofolo, University 800-960 years ago (1050-1210 C.E.). This timing is consistent with the of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 12Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Center, model that this West African allele was transported to the Americas via Riga, Latvia, 13Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, the Atlantic slave trade (1450-1860 C.E.). Vilnius, Lithuania, 14International Hereditary Cancer Center, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 15Institute of Molecular Genetics, c10.3 Paleogenetic study for reconstruction of genealogy of Russian Academy of Science, Moscow, Russian Federation, 16Department of first Moldavian princes from 14th century Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, A. Rodewald1, G. Cardos2, C. Tesio3; Geneva, Switzerland, 17Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, 1Institute of Human Biology, Hamburg, Germany, 2National Institute „Victor Rotterdam, Netherlands. Babes“, Bucharest, Romania, 3Faculty of Biology- University Bucharest, At present time there is no comprehensive copy number variable re- Bucharest, Romania. gion (CNVR) map of European population although it is a prerequisite We performed paleomolecular genetic analysis on skeletal remains of for the European-wide collaborative GWA studies. Most of the efforts 7 princes of Moldavia from the last half of the 14th century,buried in the so far have been directed into the characterization of the fine-scale „Saint Nicholas“ Church from Radauti-Romania, in order to reconstruct CNVR structure in HapMap but Europe as a whole, especially the their genealogy. We used the Amelogenin gene for identifying the ge- Eastern part, has not been covered in sufficient detail. netic sex of the old individuals and we analysed mitochondrial (HVR We have studied about 2,000 individuals from thirteen cohorts from I region)and nuclear DNA (VWA31A, TPOX, DYS392 and DYS393 Europe (including about 900 Estonians) and focused on describing Microsatellites)polymorphisms to reveal their genetic kinship along the genetic structure, especially the copy number variable regions both maternal and paternal lineages.Ancient DNA was extracted by (CNVR), in Eastern Europe and in Europe as whole. a phenol-chloroform-based method and amplified by PCR.The HVR In total we identified more than 2,500 CNVR in 1,080 individuals (in- I mitochondrial DNA sequences and nuclear DYS392 and DYS393 cluding only 100 randomly chosen Estonians). When analyzing only polymorphic markers were sequenced, and the other nuclear DNA the Estonians, we identified more than 5,010 CNVR (maf cut-off 1%) markers were separated and identified on Polyacrylamide gels( Ag- and the majority of CNVR’s had a very low frequency in the population. stained).Our results revealed the genetic kinship between the 7 Molda- For the identified regions, principal component (PC) analysis were ap- vian princes, showing two male lines with a maternal linkage between plied and the resulting map was not as informative geographically as the two groups. The first male line consisted of two individuals close in the case of SNP data. The CNVRs included in the 20 first PC show related to each other and differed from the other 5 individuals also an important contribution from the HLA region, and the Immunoglobu- closed related among them as concerns the paternal line. This evi- lin variable regions, while GO pathway analysis identifies a cluster of dence argued that two princely dynasties succeeded on the Moldavian genes for sensory perception of chemical stimulus. sceptre in the last half of the 14th century,contrary to the historiogra- In addition to SNP’s, CNV’s are being used as additional genetic mark- phy version which had considered the existence of only one dynasty ers in GWAS studies for disease gene mapping. The results presented and succession exclusively along the paternal line. here add new data to European genetic map of the structural varia- Acknowledgement:we thanks to:Dr. Nicolae Miritoiu and Lia and Adri- tions that will greatly facilitate inter-population genetic studies. an Batrana for providing skeletal remains;Angelika Kroll for technical support c10.2 A founder mutation in LEPRE1 causes lethal recessive type Viii Osteogenesis imperfecta and occurs in West Africans c10.4* modelling haplotype structure in isolate populations for and African Americans population sequencing W. A. Cabral1, A. M. Barnes1, A. Adeyemo2, K. Cushing3, D. Chitayat4, F. D. K. Palin, K. Rehnstrom, L. Peltonen, R. Durbin; Porter5, S. R. Panny6, F. Majid6, T. R. Rebbeck7, S. A. Tishkoff8, J. E. Bailey- The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Wilson9, L. C. Brody3, C. N. Rotimi2, J. C. Marini1; Isolated founder populations are a powerful tool for disease genetics. 1Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United By sequencing a modest number of individuals, we should be able States, 2Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, NHGRI, NIH, to identify most founding haplotypes present in current individuals, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Genome Technology Branch, NHGRI, NIH, then use long-range phasing and imputing to derive accurate and near Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Hospital for Sick Children, Mount Sinai Hospital, complete genome sequence for all genome wide genotyped individu- Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Heritable Disorders Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, als within the population. MD, United States, 6Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, To design such a study, we have developed a method to fit popula- Baltimore, MD, United States, 7University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine tion history simulations to the observed pairwise IBS segment length and Abramson Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 8Departments distribution from dense genotype data. Using this approach with 7505 of Genetics and Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United markers on chromosome 20, we created a genetic model for Kuusamo, States, 9Inherited Disease Research Branch, NHGRI, NIH, Baltimore, MD, a well known isolate population in North Eastern Finland. According to United States. historical records, Kuusamo had small indigenous Lapp population un- Recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is caused by defects in car- til its „resettlement“ by 34 families, totalling 136 chromosomes, in the tilage-associated protein (CRTAP) or prolyl 3-hydroxylase 1 (P3H1/ 1680s. The current census population size is 25108, including some LEPRE1), which form the collagen prolyl 3-hydroxylation complex recent immigrants. with cyclophilin B (PPIB). Deficiency of P3H1 causes severe to lethal Our best fit model has a population of 100 founding individuals ex-Concurrent Sessions  panding first rapidly, then more slowly, to a current effective population kg/m2 difference). Gene expression and genotyping data was gener- size of 7930 in 12 generations, rejecting significant historic immigration ated from 349 siblings using the Affymetrix Human U133 Plus 2.0 and after the initial resettlement. The simulation suggests that out of the Illumina Infinium Human 610K Quad platforms, respectively. RNA was 200 founding haplotypes only 108±10 survive today per locus, the rest extracted from subcutaneous adipose tissue and DNA was extracted having been lost by genetic drift. On average, 80% of a present day from blood. Analysis was performed modelling genotyping signal inten- chromosome is inherited from the founders in fragments of length 6cM sity levels (LogR Ratio and B Allele Frequency) and gene expression or more. The results suggest that a sample of 200 individuals would levels in a variance component framework. cover 93-98% of current indigenous chromosome population. We are Results: exploring using this approach to model other European isolates. We detected more than 10 genomic regions where signal intensity was significantly associated with expression levels. For example, in a c10.5* inverse mapping approach implies the role of large cNVs region on chromosome 6 overlapping the MHC, we identified 34 mark- in intellectual deficits and learning difficulties in a population ers associated with transcript expression level at genome wide signifi- cohort cance (p≤10-7). As expected, these regions are listed in the Database O. P. H. Pietiläinen1,2, K. Rehnström2, E. Jakkula1, S. Service3, E. Congdon3, of Genomic Variants, i.e. they are CNVs. C. Tilgmann2, T. Paunio1, S. Ripatti1, M. Järvelin4,5, M. Isohanni6, C. Sabatti7, A. Conclusions: Palotie2, N. B. Freimer3, L. Peltonen2,1; Using quantitative analysis of raw Illumina microarray data, we have 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2Wellcome identified more than 10 genomic regions that are associated with ex- Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Center for pression levels (p≤10-7). We will investigate these further, comparing Neurobehavioral Genetics, Gonda Center, University of California Los Angeles, them to the genes that are differentially expressed between obese and Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Department of Epidemiology and Public lean subjects, to identify candidate genes for obesity. Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 5Department of Child and Adolescent Health, Institute for Health and Welfare, Oulu, Finland, c11.1 Policy Recommendations of the PPPc on direct-to- 6Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oulu, consumer genetic testing for health purposes Oulu, Finland, 7Department of Human Genetics , University of California Los P. Borry1, C. Patch2, M. Cornel; on behalf of the PPPC3; Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States. 1Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, 3000, Belgium, 2Guy‘s Hospital, The availability of genome wide data on representative population London, United Kingdom, 3VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. samples provides an opportunity to apply a strategy of inverse map- An increasing number of private companies are now offering direct-to- ping for correlating human traits with genotypes. Whereas the tradi- consumer (DTC) genetic testing services, ranging from tests for single tional forward mapping aims to define genotypic sharing accounting gene, highly penetrant disorders to susceptibility testing for genetic for a common phenotype among group of individuals, the inverse map- variants associated with common complex diseases or with specific ping seeks to discover phenotypic features shared among individuals traits. The Professional and Public Policy Committee of the European demonstrating allelic similarity. This approach would avoid the inherent Society of Human Genetics is concerned about the way commercial imprecision in phenotype definition that makes it difficult to determine companies are currently introducing new genetic tests into the market a priori which individuals are sharing a phenotype. Here we provide a and outside of the scope of the traditional health care system. There- proof of principle of this inverse mapping approach by systematically fore, it is currently in the process of drafting policy recommendation on scanning all CNVs >500 kb in a population cohort (N= 4,932). The the topic of direct-to-consumer sales and/or advertising of genetic tests participants were drawn from a prospective birth cohort of all individu- for health purposes. This presentation wants to draw the attention to als born in 1966 in North of Finland. Routine follow-ups have resulted this document and intensify the debate on this topic. The presentation in extensive phenotype database collected from the study participants. will discuss following topics: the right to information, the advertising of We identified 634 large CNVs observed in 529 individuals. To narrow genetic tests, the quality of genetic testing services (the quality of the down our data inquiries to a reasonable number of phenotypes, we genetic tests -in terms of validity and utility-, the quality of laboratories focused on a category of traits postulated to relate with previous CNV and the quality of the persons providing the genetic services), the in- findings in neuropsychiatric deficits. We observed significantly higher dividualized medical supervision, information and genetic counseling, frequencies of cognitive defects defined as 8 among carriers of large informed consent, genetic testing of minors, respect for private life, deletions (5.0%) compared to non carriers (1.4%) (p <0.0024). Intrigu- research, oversight of genetic testing, and the impact on the health- ingly, the deletion carriers were also more likely to present with sub care system. clinical learning difficulties than the general population (10% vs. 3.9%; p=0.00088). The study highlights the opportunity to utilize inverse map- c11.2* Reporting genetic research results: A quasi-experimental ping as a strategy to characterize phenotypic consequences related to approach to understanding researchers‘ judgments genetic variants in an unbiased population sample. R. Z. Hayeems, F. A. Miller, L. Li, J. P. Bytautas; University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. c10.6* A novel approach to analysis of raw illumina microarray Background: Ethicists suggest that researchers are obliged to report data to assess the contribution of copy number variations to individual genetic research findings to study participants. Opponents obesity and gene expression contend that promising or reporting provisional knowledge may cause J. C. Andersson1,2, A. J. Walley1, J. S. El-Sayed Moustafa1, P. Jacobson2, M. harm and that clinical follow-up regarding these findings may not be Jernås2, A. Bibi3, A. Siddiq3, L. Sjöström2, A. I. F. Blakemore1, P. Froguel1,4, L. M. available to research participants. Methods: A cross-sectional quasi- S. Carlsson2, M. Falchi1; experimental survey using vignettes to understand factors that influ- 1Department of Genomics of Common Disease, School of Public Health, ence researchers’ judgments about this obligation was administered Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of to cystic fibrosis and autism researchers, internationally. Results: 80% Molecular and Clinical Medicine and Center for Cardiovascular and Metabolic of 342 researchers agreed that individuals in whom a genetic variation Research, The Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Department is identified should be informed of this finding if judged to be clinically of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Imperial College significant. Researchers felt 30-70% less confident that a given finding London, London, United Kingdom, 4CNRS 8090-Institute of Biology, Pasteur was clinically significant when it was related to autism research, less Institute, Lille, France. scientifically robust, incidental to the index condition, and when barri- Introduction: ers to receiving clinical services were perceived (p<.05). Research- Obesity is a major contributor to ill health worldwide. Exploration of the ers were 30% less likely to report scientifically weaker findings and genetic contribution to obesity using genome wide approaches has re- 40% less likely to report findings when they lacked capacity to provide vealed both SNP and CNV associations. Here, we have used a novel requisite medical care (p<.05). Compared to molecular and statistical approach to analysis of microarray-derived GWAS data to assess the researchers, clinical researchers were 1.8 times more likely to endorse contribution of CNVs to obesity and gene expression. the significance of a given finding and 1.5 times more likely to report it Subjects and Methods: to participants (p<.05). Conclusion: Judgments about reporting genetic The SOS SibPair cohort consists of 154 nuclear families (732 indi- research results are influenced not only by scientific parameters, but viduals), each containing a body mass index-discordant sib pair (≥10 also by the role of the researcher and his/her capacity to meet par-Concurrent Sessions  ticipants’ clinical needs when provisional knowledge is reported. Given cancer patients. the complexity reflected herein, we question the appropriateness of Objectives: We assessed patients’ experience and attitudes towards an unequivocal imperative to disclose individual research findings to the biobank informed consent process. study participants. Methods: A mixed-methods design was used. Nineteen patients (aged 28-82) were in-depth interviewed using grounded theory methodol- c11.3 Direct-to-consumer genetic testing companies: what are ogy and 574 patients (aged 20-89, response rate=77.0%) treated for their policies regarding testing in minors? colorectal, breast cancer or a haematological malignancy answered to H. C. Howard, P. Borry; a self-administered questionnaire. KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium. Findings: Two hundred thirteen patients (37.1%) declared they had Advances in genetic knowledge and technologies have increased the given consent. Among them less than the half (41.7%) understood that possibilities of testing asymptomatic minors for late-onset diseases, the consent included an authorisation to access to medical files. carrier status and susceptibility to common complex disorders. In ad- The interviews pointed out that while contribution to biobanks is con- dition, there has been a recent increase in companies offering genetic sidered an act of solidarity and reciprocity, persons were more reluc- tests directly-to-consumers and bypassing the traditional face-to-face tant to consider financial issues. Most of the patients (82.4%) would encounter with a health care professional from the established health- accept that a biological sample could be given to another public labo- care system. With this in mind, we gathered information regarding poli- ratory. This rate was higher than considering a transfer to a private cies on testing in minors from the websites of 29 companies offering laboratory (62.9%; p <0.001). Acceptance that tumour samples could direct-to-consumer (DTC) health-related genetic testing. The results be sold were very low for both types of laboratories even more for a of this study showed that almost half of the companies did not present public laboratory (10.6% vs 13.2%; p= 0.017). any information regarding a policy for testing in minors, and that many Conclusion: Quality of biobank informed consent should be improved. of the remaining companies had ambiguous statements regarding this Specific information should be provided on the potential transfer of issue. Therefore, as a follow up to this content analysis, we sent sur- samples and associated clinical data for large-scale multicentric re- veys to 37 companies (including the 29 companies that were part of search. Education should also stress financial issues in science, for our initial study) asking them specific questions about their policy on the purposes of transparency and efficacy. genetic testing in minors. The analysis of survey responses is under- way and will provide information not only about companies’ policies, c11.6 Biobanking cancer tissue. Patients consider excised but also about the actual demand for testing in this population. Given (tumour) tissue to be ‘connective tissue’. the concerns about the ethical, legal and psychological implications of E. Vermeulen; performing genetic tests in healthy children, it is important to monitor VUmc, Amsterdam, Netherlands. the activities of DTC genetic testing companies in this regard. Background Excised tissues are routinely stored in hospitals for fu- ture diagnostic use. These tissues are also important for scientific re- c11.4* Genetic counsellors‘ Views Regarding their Role in search. In the Netherlands ‘residual tissues’ are registered in a central Delivering a Pharmacogenetic service pathological registry (PALGA), which makes this collection, consisting A. V. E. Callard, W. Newman, K. Payne; of millions of samples, a very large biobank. University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Aim The presentation elucidates and analyses the underlying attitude Currently, there is no clear resolution on which healthcare profession of patients towards medical research with excised tissues and focuses should play a role in delivering a pharmacogenetic service. In addition, on the use of the tissue in genetic medical research. Concepts of own- there is limited published evidence on healthcare professionals’ views ership in the context of increasing (commercial) value of tissues are on pharmacogenetic services. This study aimed to explore the views discussed. of genetic counsellors on pharmacogenetic services. Semi-structured Methods The study is based on mixed methods design combining face-to-face interviews were carried out with 14 genetic counsellors quantitative data (questionnaires) with qualitative data (transcripts from two regional genetics clinics in England. The interviews com- from interviews) and observations during an intervention study at the prised open questions designed to explore their views on potential Netherlands Cancer Institute. In total 260 patients were interviewed, (dis)advantages of pharmacogenetic testing and the role of counsel- 61% of 426 patients who completed a written questionnaire. lors and other professionals in delivering a pharmacogenetic service. Results Many (38%) patients considered themselves to be owner of In addition, four vignettes describing types of pharmacogenetic tests stored tissue and 43% considered themselves owner of DNA in stored were used to elicit the counsellors’ views on specific clinical applica- tissue. Most, 98%, endorse medical research with this tissue. For pa- tions. Data were analysed using the constant comparative method to tients the stored tissue is ‘a hypercollective good’ that should remain in identify key themes. Opinions on whether genetic counsellors should the public sphere in order to facilitate research. Patients consider the be involved in a pharmacogenetic service were varied. The genetic tissue to be connective because it connects them to others through counsellors interviewed did see a potential role for their profession but research. Patients expect to be reciprocated by the tissue holder and further training may be needed due to their limited knowledge of phar- be informed about findings of the research. macogenetics and drug prescription. A regional genetics centre was Conclusion Information about medical research with residual tissue perceived to be an inappropriate clinical setting for a pharmacogenetic should be improved. A more participatory and reciprocal model of bio- service. However, employing genetic counsellors in a specialist role banking is required. within a multidisciplinary clinic could be beneficial. Genetic counsel- lors’ responses to the vignettes suggested that different pharmaco- c12.1 Homozygosity mapping of Primary microcephaly in 112 genetic tests are likely to have different issues, in terms of setting up iranian Families: Novel mutations and Phenotypes models of service delivery, and implications for patients. Therefore any H. Darvish1, S. Esmaeeli Nieh1, G. Bahrami Monajemi1, M. Mohseni1, F. clinical service model developed for pharmacogenetic testing will need Behjati1, S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, I. Bahman1, P. Jamali1, S. Azimi1, F. to be adapted according to the specific issues each test presents. Mojahedi1, A. Dehghan1, Y. Shafeghati1, A. Jankhah1, M. Falah1, M. Soltani Banavandi1, M. Ghani Kakhki2, M. Garshasbi3, S. Abedini1, s. Banihashemi1, s. c11.5 informed consent for large-scale biobank research: arjangi1, F. Rakhshani1, A. Naghavi1, A. Tzschach3, H. Neitzel2, H. Ropers3, A. experience and attitudes of cancer patients W. Kuss3, K. Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1; J. Mancini1,2, C. Chabannon3,4, I. Pellegrini1, F. Viret3,4, N. Vey3,4, C. Julian- 1GRC, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Charité Reynier1; Medical University, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 1Inserm UMR912 SE4S, Marseille, France, 2Aix-Marseillle Université, Marseille, Germany. France, 3Inserm UMR891 CRCM, Marseille, France, 4Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder Marseille, France. showing an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. Affected indi- Background: The transfer of biological samples between biobanks is viduals present with head circumferences more than three standard developed to foster the development of large-scale multicentric proj- deviations below the age- and sex-matched population mean, accom- ects. However, the “commercial” use of samples and the indispensable panied by mental retardation without further associated malformations. concomitant transfer of clinical data associated might be a concern for Five genes (mcph1, cdk5rap2, aspm, cenpj, STIL) and two genomic Concurrent Sessions  loci, MCPH2, and 4 have been identified so far. novel polymorphisms by genotyping all non-synonymous variants in In this study, we investigated all seven loci in patients with primary mi- 300 healthy controls. All but one variant was observed in the controls crocephaly from 112 Iranian families. In addition to a thorough clinical with allele frequencies of 0.003, 0.005, 0.016. These results indicate characterization, karyotype analyses were performed for all patients. that next generation sequencing is a powerful tool to identify mutations For linkage analyses, several microsatellite markers were selected for associated with rare diseases. each locus and used for genotyping. Table 1. Direct identification of a disease-associated Our investigation enabled us to detect linkage to the MCPH5 (ASPM) mutation by next generation sequencing. region in thirteen families. Three families showed linkage to MCPH2, carrier carrier Affected Affected eight to MCPH1 (Microcephalin), five to MCPH6 (CENPJ) and two mother father child 1 child 2 families were linked to MCPH7 (STIL). The remaining 81 families were Number of mapped bases 403,546,905 362,750,092 410,247,834 399,184,755 not linked to any of the seven known loci. Subsequent sequencing mean covarage 48.4x 40.5x 47.4x 48.9x revealed 10 novel mutations and one previously reported mutation in coverege of targeted regions ASPM, 8 novel mutations in MCPH1 as well as a novel mutation in 99.3% 99.2% 99.3% 99.2% (≥5) CENPJ. All variants 26,751 27,471 24,115 24,690 In some families, additional features such as short stature, seizures or dbsNP129 10,564 10,694 8,200 8,289 congenital hearing loss were observed in the microcephalic patients, Novel variants 16,157 16,777 15,915 16,401 which widens the spectrum of clinical manifestations of mutations in known microcephaly genes. High confidence variants Our results show that the molecular basis of microcephaly is more Heterozygous sNPs 4,874 5,076 408 596 heterogeneous in Iran than elsewhere, thus the Iranian population pro- Homozygous sNPs 4,647 4,523 7,095 7,563 vides a unique opportunity for finding additional genes underlying this Novel heterozygous variants 1,331 1,600 513 458 disorder. Novel homozygous variants 1,090 1,602 1,789 2,029 c12.2* combination of linkage mapping and microarray- common variants to all expression analysis identifies NF-κB signalling defect as a novel 1555 samples cause for autosomal recessive mental retardation G-1 (coding, splice site, O. Philippe1, M. Rio1, A. Carioux2, J. Plaza3, P. Guigue1, F. Molinari1, N. 26 RNA) Boddaert1, C. Bole-Feysot2, P. Nitschke3, A. Smahi1, A. Munnich1, L. Colleaux1; G-2 (5’’ and 3’’UtR) 24 1Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, France, 2Plateforme de génomique de G-3 (intronic) 929 la fondation Imagine Paris, Paris, France, 3Plateforme de Bioinformatique de G-4 (intergenic) 577 l’Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France. Autosomal recessive inheritance accounts for nearly 25% of non-syn- G-1 mendelian compatibility 4 dromic mental retardation (MR) but the extreme heterogeneity of these conditions markedly hampers gene identification. Combining autozy- After population screening 1 gosity mapping and RNA expression profiling in a consanguineous Tunisian family of three MR children with mild microcephaly and white c12.4* the Arg164X mutation in SAMHD1 leads to a novel matter abnormalities identified the NIBP/TRAPPC9 gene, which en- variant of Aicardi-Goutières syndrome by modulating cytokine codes a NF-κB inducing kinase (NIK) and IκB kinase complex β (IKKβ) expression binding protein, as a likely candidate. Sequencing analysis revealed a M. du Moulin1, H. Thiele2, K. Barczyk3, C. George1, M. Frosch1, W. Schwindt4, nonsense variant (c.1708C>T, p.R570X) within the exon 9 of this gene J. Roth3, P. Nuernberg2, F. Rutsch1; responsible for an undetectable level of NIBP protein in patient skin 1University Children‘s Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 2Cologne Center for fibroblasts. Moreover, TNF-a stimulation assays showed a defect in Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Institute for Immunology, IkBα degradation, suggesting an impaired NF-κB signalling in patient Muenster University Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 4Department of Clinical cells. This study provides the first evidence of a NF-κB signalling de- Radiology, Muenster University Hospital, Muenster, Germany. fect in isolated MR. Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS) is a rare inborn multisystemic dis- ease, resembling intrauterine viral infection resulting in psychomotor C12.3* Targeted next generation sequencing identifies a retardation, spasticity and chilblain-like skin lesions. Diagnostic criteria mutation associated with cerebellar hypoplasia and mental include intracerebral calcifications and elevated interferon-alpha and retardation with quadrupedal locomotion pterins in cerebrospinal fluid. Patients present early in infancy and S. I. Gulsuner1, K. Bilguvar2, M. Tan3, U. Tan4, M. Gunel2, T. Ozcelik1; death usually occurs during childhood in a state of decerebration. We 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University, Ankara, report on four adult siblings of Turkish origin with unknown neuro-de- Turkey, 2Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, generative disease presenting with stenoses of intracranial vessels, New Haven, CT, United States, 3Department of Neurology, Baskent University, stroke and glaucoma in childhood, two of whom died at the age of Ankara, Turkey, 4Department of Physiology, Cukurova University, Adana, 40 and 29 years. Genome wide homozygosity mapping identified 170 Turkey. candidate genes embedded in a common haplotype of 8Mb on chro- We describe the utilization of next generation sequencing in the identi- mosome 20q11-13. Next generation sequencing of the entire region fication of a mutation associated with a rare and heterogenous Mende- identified the c.490C>T (p.Arg164X) mutation in SAMHD1, a gene lian disorder characterized by cerebellar hypoplasia, mental retarda- most recently described in AGS, on both alleles in all affected siblings. tion and quadrupedal locomotion (Uner Tan syndrome). Homozygos- Clinical diagnosis of AGS was then confirmed by demonstrating intra- ity mapping, sequence capture (Nimblegen) of the disease locus on cerebral calcifications on cranial computed tomography and elevated chromosome 17p13 and massively parallel DNA sequencing (454 GS pterin levels in cerebrospinal fluid in the two surviving siblings. In pa- FLX) of two affected and two carrier individuals yielded 362 to 403 mil- tient fibroblasts SAMHD1 protein was undetectable, while basal ex- lion base pairs of sequence information from each sample. Between pression of interleukin-8 was increased and stimulated expression of 96.6%-96.7% of all reads fell within the minimal critical region. Variants interferon-ß was reduced. We conclude that the Arg164X mutation in common to all samples were selected and binned into four groups (G): SAMHD1 by modulating intravascular cytokine expression leads to a variants in coding regions, consensus splices-sites and RNA genes novel phenotypic variant of AGS. are G-1 (n=26), in 5‘UTRs & 3‘UTR s are G-2 (24), in introns are G-3 (929). All remaining variants were classified as G-4 (577) (Table-1). A c12.5 systematic mutation search in families with X-linked total of 17 novel exonic variants (four non-synonymous, two synony- mental retardation by next-generation sequencing mous, one 5‘UTR and ten 3‘UTR) compatible with the expected auto- V. M. M. Kalscheuer1, W. Chen1,2, S. Haas1, H. Hu1, A. Emde1, C. Menzel1, M. somal recessive inheritance model of the disease allele was observed Bienek1, T. Zemojtel1, R. Ullmann1, S. O‘Keeffe1, M. Vingron1, K. Wrogemann1, (Mendelian compatibility). An exclusion based population screening A. Tzschach1, A. de Brouwer3, H. van Bokhoven3, N. Lebrun4, M. Raynaud5, H. approach was adopted to distinguish the disease causing variant from Van Esch6, H. H. Ropers1; Concurrent Sessions  1Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Delbrück c13.1 A recurrent 14q32.2 microdeletion mediated by expanded Center, Berlin, Germany, 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University tGG repeats Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4INSERM 129-ICGM, Faculté de F. Béna1, S. Gimelli1, E. Migliavacca2, N. Brun-Druc3, K. Buiting4, S. E. Médecine Cochin, Paris, France, 5INSERM, U930; Centre Hospitalier Régional Antonarakis1,5, A. Sharp5; Universitaire de Tours, Service de Genetique, Tours, France, 6Center for 1Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Department of Genetic Medicine X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) affects 1-2/1,000 males and ac- and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, counts for 10% of all forms of mental retardation. Recent screening of 3Service of General Pediatrics, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, X-linked genes has revealed truncating mutations in 25% of the fami- Switzerland, 4Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, lies studied (Tarpey et al, 2009). Previous studies had indicated that Germany, 5Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of mutations in known XLMR genes account for at least 42% of XLMR Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. families (de Brouwer et al, 2007). To resolve this discrepancy and to Nearly all recurrent microdeletion/duplication syndromes described shed more light on the molecular causes of XLMR, we have combined to date are characterized by the presence of flanking low copy re- genome partitioning techniques and Next Generation Sequencing peats that act as substrates for non-allelic homologous recombina- (NGS) to find the causative gene defect in another 200 families from tion (NAHR) leading to the loss, gain or disruption of dosage sensi- the European MRX Consortium. tive genes. We describe an identical 1.11 Mb heterozygous deletion of Here we report the results on the first 100 families. About 25% of 14q32.2 including the DLK1/GTL2 imprinted gene cluster in two unre- the families carried potentially pathogenic mutations in known XLMR lated patients. In both patients the deleted chromosome 14 was of pa- genes. Many other families carried non-synonymous, possibly patho- ternal origin, and consistent with this both exhibit clinical features com- genic changes in novel genes, but only 3 pathogenic truncating muta- patible with UPD(14)mat. Using a high-resolution oligonucleotide array tions were observed. There are several plausible explanations for this: we mapped the breakpoints of this recurrent deletion to large flanking prior to these investigations, many of these large families had already (TGG) tandem repeats, each approximately 500bp in size and sharing n been screened for mutations in known XLMR genes and positional ≥ 88% homology. These expanded (TGG) motifs share features with n candidates. Secondly, the EuroMRX cohort is enriched for families known fragile sites and are predicted to form strong guanine quadru- with non-syndromic XLMR, and it is conceivable that complete loss of plex secondary structures. We suggest that this recurrent deletion is function will often result in severe syndromic forms or even lethality. mediated either by NAHR between the TGG repeats, or alternatively Thus, the majority of genes whose loss gives rise to non-syndromic results from their inherent instability and/or strong secondary structure. XLMR may already be known. Finally, the fundamental defect may not Our results define a recurrent microdeletion of the 14q32.2 imprinted reside in coding regions of the X-chromosome. Sequencing of entire gene cluster mediated by flanking (TGG) repeats, identifying a novel n sorted X-chromosomes is being performed to shed more light on these mechanism of recurrent genomic rearrangement. Our observation that issues. expanded repeats can act as catalysts for genomic rearrangement ex- Supported by BMBF and Max-Planck-Society. tends the role of triplet repeats in human disease, raising the possibil- ity that similar repeat structures may act as substrates for pathogenic C12.6 Deep sequencing leads to the identification of 3 rearrangements genome-wide. independent mutations in the st3GAL3 gene in patients with autosomal recessive intellectual disability from 3 c13.2 Recurrent chromosomal translocations mediated by consanguineous iranian families Genomic interchromosomal NAHR A. W. Kuss1, H. Hu1, M. Garshasbi1, I. Bahman2, S. Ghadami2, M. M. S. W. Cheung1, P. Stankiewicz1, A. M. Breman1, J. Wiszniewska1, L. M. Motazacker1, L. Abbasi-Moheb1, S. Esmaeeli-Nieh1, L. Puettmann1, M. Cooper1, S. T. South2, S. Kang1, A. Patel1, J. R. Lupski1, Z. Ou1; Mohseni2, M. J. Soltani Banavandi2, H. Darvish2, P. Jamali3, P. Nikoui4, F. 1Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Soleimani2, K. Kahrizi2, A. Tzschach1, W. Chen1, H. Ropers1, H. Najmabadi2; Houston, TX, United States, 2Department of Pediatrics and Pathology, 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Genetics University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. Research Center of the University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sequence analysis of the breakpoints were performed in 4 unrelated Sciences, Teheran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shahroud Welfare Institution, families with the same unbalanced translocation der(4)t(4;11)(p16.2;p Sharoud, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Bandar Abbas Welfare Institution, Bandar 15.4) and revealed the presence of large 200-300 kb low copy repeats Abbas, Islamic Republic of Iran. (LCRs) on 4p16.2 and 11p15.4 of 94% interchromosomal sequence Most mutations causing intellectual disability (ID) are thought to affect identity. The breakpoints for both the short arms of chromosomes 4 autosomal genes, yet to date only six are known to play a role in the and 11 were mapped within the homologous subunits; consistent with etiology of autosomal recessive ID (ARID). By identifying 12 additional nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) as the mechanism for loci in 78 families with non-syndromic ARID (NS-ARID) we have previ- translocation. To investigate the potential involvement of interchro- ously shown, that the molecular basis of NS-ARID is extremely hetero- mosomal LCRs in recurrent chromosomal translocation formation, geneous (Najmabadi et al., 2007, Hum.Genet. 121(1):43-8). Indeed, we performed computational genome-wide analysis and identified only twice have more than one independent NS-ARID causing muta- 470 interchromosomal LCRs substrate pairs, greater than 30 kb in tion so far been found to affect the same gene (TUSC3, TRAPPC9). size and sharing >94% sequence identity, that may mediate chro- We have now identified three consanguineous families where linkage mosomal translocations. Several predicted recurrent translocations analysis yielded overlapping homozygous intervals on chromosome were identified, initially at the G-band level of resolution from clinical 1p34. Using Chromosome sorting to enrich Chr1 from lymphoblas- cytogenetic databases; in two translocations, t(4;8)(p16.1;p23.1) and toid cell lines of patients from two of these families followed by deep t(8;12)(p23.1;p13.31), the breakpoints of seven cases and two cases, sequencing, we found two different missense mutations affecting the respectively, were mapped molecularly to the predicted LCRs. We ST3GAL3 gene. Subsequent screening of ST3GAL3 in the remaining show that interchromosomal LCRs in 11p15.4 mediate the recurrent family revealed an additional mutation with a putatively damaging splic- constitutional translocation t(4;11)(p16.2;p15.4) via NAHR, provide a ing effect. All three changes co-segregate with the disease and were computationally determined “recurrent translocation map” and demon- absent in more than 150 controls. This supports the assumption that strate its utility, and further suggest that NAHR may mediate recurrent ST3GAL3 might have a considerably increased mutation frequency in translocations throughout the human genome. ARID, at least in Iran. The ST3GAL3 gene product is a type II mem- brane protein, which catalyzes sialic acid transfer from CMP-sialic acid c13.3 the interpretation of copy number gains detected by to galactose-containing substrates. Together with colleagues from the high resolution array cGH in routine diagnostics; a practical Hannover Medical School (M. Muehlenhoff et al.), we are presently guideline investigating the impact of the mutations on ST3GAL3 protein function C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts, N. M. Hanemaaijer, G. van der Vries, T. to understand the pathology of MR in these patients and thus also gain Dijkhuizen, R. Hordijk, A. van Essen, B. Leegte, K. Kok, B. Sikkema-Raddatz; new insights into human brain function. Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Concurrent Sessions 7 Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. FANCD2 visibly localizes to telomeric foci and PML bodies in ALT, but The introduction of high resolution array Comparative Genomic Hy- not in telomerase-positive cells. FANCD2 almost always localizes to bridisation (CGH) has led to the detection of large numbers of copy telomeric foci containing BLM, and telomeric localization of FANCD2 number variations (CNVs) in patients with developmental delay and/or is BLM-dependent. FANCD2 depletion results in ALT-specific telomere multiple congenital anomalies (DD/MCA) as well as in healthy individu- dysfunction characterized by increases in telomeric DNA synthesis, als. The detection of a CNV in DD/MCA does not automatically imply entanglements, recombination events, and association with DNA dam- a phenotypic effect. The interpretation of copy number gains is even age response proteins. Amplified telomeric DNA in FANCD2-depleted more complicated than of copy number losses, because of the milder cells is primarily extrachromosomal, accumulating both outside of and and more variable phenotype associated with microduplications. The within PML bodies. We previously reported that BLM overexpression aim of the present study was to develop a guideline for the interpreta- causes a similar phenotype of rapid, large scale ALT-specific amplifica- tion of gains detected by array-CGH. tion of telomeric DNA. Co-depletion of BLM with FANCD2 completely All copy number gains of at least 4 adjacent oligonucleotides but less suppresses the telomere phenotypes caused by FANCD2 knockdown, than 10 Mb in size, detected in 300 consecutive patients analysed by suggesting that the FANCD2-depletion phenotype requires functional custom made105K Agilent oligo array were collected and the clinical BLM. In contrast, co-depletion of RAD51 with FANCD2 does not sup- relevance was evaluated using an interpretation scheme. press the FANCD2-depletion phenotype, suggesting that human ALT Of a total of 797 gains, 45% were de novo and 55% were familial. is RAD51 independent. 95% of all de novo and 87% of all familial gains were concluded to We propose that FANCD2 restrains BLM-dependent, RAD51-indepen- be benign CNVs. Fifteen pathogenic gains, sized 288-7,912 kb, were dent recombination and amplification of telomeric DNA in ALT cells by detected. These gains were significantly larger than benign gains and limiting production of ssDNA gapped regions in telomeric DNA, and/or gains of unknown clinical relevance (p<0.001). Surprisingly, they were by affecting stability of recombination/replication intermediates. more often familial (10/14) than de novo (4/14) (not statistically sig- nificant). c13.6 Delineating complex genomic architecture involving A threshold of 200 kb for the detection of gains in routine diagnostics chromosome segmental duplications was concluded to be satisfactory at the moment. A practical guideline W. A. Khan, J. H. M. Knoll, P. K. Rogan; to interpret copy number gains was formulated and validated using an University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. independent patient cohort. This guideline will be discussed. Complex genomic architectures predispose to chromosomal rearrange- ments. The rearrangements can cause a diverse range of phenotypes c13.4 Paternal origin of de novo constitutional t(11;22)(q23;q11) due to haploinsufficiency or positional effects from genes in cis with T. Ohye1, H. Inagaki1, H. Kogo1, M. Tsutsumi1, T. Kato1, M. Tong1, M. V. E. families of segmental duplications (SDs). Genomic regions flanked Macville2, L. Medne3, E. H. Zackai3, B. S. Emanuel3, H. Kurahashi1; by SDs in Angelman and Prader-Willi syndromes (AS/PWS) show a 1Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, great proclivity for such chromosomal structural changes. The most Toyoake, Japan, 2University of Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands, common rearrangements in AS/PWS involve large (Class I) and small 3The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. (Class II) deletions sharing a common telomeric region of breakage. The constitutional t(11;22)(q23;q11) is a well-known recurrent non- FISH can detect juxtaposed DNA sequences in normal and abnormal Robertsonian translocation in humans. While translocations generally chromosomes which can delineate the locations of these sequences occur in a random fashion, the breakpoints of t(11;22)s are concen- within individual SD elements based on differences in their respec- trated within several hundred base pairs on 11q23 and 22q11. These tive genomic contexts. In this study, we computationally designed and regions are characterized by palindromic AT-rich repeats (PATRRs), developed 47 single copy (sc) and low copy (lc) sequence-defined which could cause the genomic instability. De novo t(11;22)s are de- FISH probes to delineate proximal and distal ends of the chromosome tected in sperm from healthy males at a frequency of 1/104-105, but 15q11-q13 deletion in Class I and Class II deletions. Departure from never in lymphoblasts, fibroblasts or other human somatic cell lines, the expected fluorescent signals using a two-step hybridization algo- suggesting that the generation of a t(11;22) is linked to gametogenesis. rithm directed which sc and lc FISH probe combinations were used in However, female germ cells have not been tested since the number of subsequent hybridizations. In situ analysis demonstrated variations in human oocytes that can be examined is limited. To investigate whether deletion extent at both the proximal and distal ends within each patient the translocation is gametogenesis-specific or male germ cell specific, group. Delineated genomic intervals suggest that SDs of both high and we attempted to determine parental origin of de novo t(11;22) cases. low sequence homologies as well as regions adjacent to SD blocks are We studied 8 carriers of de novo t(11;22)s and their parents. The giving genesis to the dynamic breakage activity in this highly unstable PATRRs and flanking regions on chromosome 11, 22, der(11) and region. These strategies should be useful for delineation of rearrange- der(22) were amplified by PCR and the nucleotide sequences were ment boundaries for other disorders associated with SDs and can pro- determined. The highly polymorphic nature of the PATRRs allowed us vide unifying mechanisms by which complex genomic architectures to determine the parental origin of the de novo t(11;22)s. All of the cause instability in human chromosomes. eight translocations were found to be of paternal origin. This result implicates a possible novel mechanism of sperm-specific generation c14.1 Dysostin, a new gene involved in cDG and affecting pH of t(11;22)s. It is proposed that replication errors during the numer- homeostasis ous cell divisions in pre-meiotic spermatogenic cells or conformational F. Foulquier1, J. Jaeken2, M. Amyere3, R. Zeevaert2, L. Keldermans4, M. changes of the DNA during chromatin remodeling in the post-meiotic Vikkula3, E. Van Schaftingen3, G. Matthijs4; stages of spermatogenesis might contribute to male-specific formation 1Université des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, Lille, France, 2Center for of de novo t(11;22)s. Metabolic Disease, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 4Center for Human c13.5 ALt-immortalized human cells are critically dependent Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. on the Fanconi anemia protein FANcD2 to limit BLm-dependent The correct structure of the oligosaccharides on glycoproteins de- recombination and amplification of telomeric repeat DNA pends on the enzymatic activities of numerous glycosyltransferases H. Root, A. Larsen, D. Bazett-Jones, S. Meyn; and remodeling glycosidases, but also on a precise Golgi localization Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. of these enzymes and an adequate intracellular environment. Genetic Fanconi anemia (FA) is an inherited disorder characterized by bone defects affecting this glycosylation pathway cause a range of diseases marrow failure, cancer predisposition and congenital malformations. known as Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG). FA proteins are implicated in homologous recombination (HR), a pro- Through a combination of homozygosity mapping and expression cess involved in Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT) pathways. analysis in fibroblasts, we have been able to identify a novel gene The FA protein FANCD2 interacts with other HR proteins, however the involved in CDG in a single, nuclear family, and pinpoint the defect to precise role of FANCD2 in HR is unclear. We now find FANCD2’s abil- a deep intronic mutation. We subsequently identified missense muta- ity to limit BLM-dependent telomeric recombination and amplificiation tions in 2 other, unrelated cases. Because of the patients’ phenotype, events is critical for human ALT cell telomere maintenance and sur- we named it ‘dysostin’. vival. In the patients’ fibroblasts, a dilated Golgi morphology associated with Concurrent Sessions  a fragmentation of the trans Golgi network was observed. A slight de- the ten annotated genes in the candidate region revealed homozy- lay in the retrograde translocation of Golgi membranes to the endo- gosity for a single-nucleotide deletion at position c.-95 in the protea- plasmic reticulum was detected after treatment with brefeldin A, sug- some maturation protein (POMP) gene, in all patients. The deletion gesting that intracellular trafficking is compromised. Co-localization of was associated with a shift in expression of POMP transcript variants the fluorescently-tagged protein with relevant markers revealed a late with a marked increase of transcripts with elongated 5’ untranslated endosomal/lysosomal localization, which is peculiar in view of the gly- regions (UTRs) in keratinocytes. POMP functions as a chaperone for cosylation defect. pH measurements in late endocytic structures using proteasome maturation and immunohistochemical analysis of skin bi- the Lysosensor dye revealed a higher staining - and hence a more opsies from KLICK patients revealed an altered distribution of POMP, pronounced acidity - in those compartments in the patients. This result the proteasome subunit proteins α7 and β5 and the ER stress marker was reproducible in Hela cells, using a siRNA strategy to knockdown CHOP in the most differentiated skin layers. Furthermore, the KLICK dysostin. In summary, the powerful combination of genetic and expres- patients showed a deviant expression of the skin differentiation marker sion studies allowed us to discover a novel CDG gene; the cellular filaggrin. Our results suggest that KLICK syndrome is caused by a assays revealed completely novel connections between lysosomal pH, single-nucleotide deletion in the 5’ UTR of POMP, resulting in altered glycosylation and intracellular trafficking. distribution of POMP and proteasomes in epidermis and a perturbed formation of the outermost layers of the skin. These findings imply that c14.2 A new inborn error of glycosylation due to DPm2 the proteasome has a prominent role in the terminal differentiation of deficiency human epidermis and that elevated ER stress is a disease mechanism V. Race1, R. Bammens1, W. Vleugels1,2, R. Barone3,4, A. Fiumara4, F. Foulquier2, in genodermatoses. G. Matthijs1; 1Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Unité c14.4* mutation in SHOC2 promotes aberrant protein N- de Glycobiologie Structurale et Fonctionnelle UMR/CNRS 8576, IFR147, Lille, myristoylation and underlies Noonan-like syndrome with loose France, 3Department of Neuroscience, University of Catania, Catania, Italy, anagen hair 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy. V. Cordeddu1, E. Di Schiavi2, A. Ma’ayan3, A. Sarkozy4,5, V. Fodale1, S. Congenital Disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a group of complex Cecchetti1, G. Zampino6, L. Mazzanti7, M. C. Digilio8, S. Martinelli1, E. Flex1, F. metabolic diseases. About 40 types have been identified. Most CDG Lepri4, D. Bartholdi9, K. Kutsche10, G. B. Ferrero11, A. Selicorni12, C. Anichini13, with a type I pattern on transferrin isolectric focusing (CDG-I) result C. Rossi14, R. Tenconi15, M. Zenker16, B. Dallapiccola4, R. Iyengar3, P. from defects in the glycosyltransferases and sugar transporters, need- Bazzicalupo2, B. D. Gelb3, M. Tartaglia1; ed for glycan assembly in the endoplasmic reticulum. 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Istituto di Genetica e Biofisica “A. We report on a CDG-I patient with severe developmental delay, epi- Buzzati Traverso”, Naples, Italy, 3Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, lepsy and dysmorphic features,. Analysis of the lipid-linked oligosac- NY, United States, 4IRCCS-CSS Istituto Mendel, Rome, Italy, 5Institute of charides (LLO) showed an accumulation of dol-PP-GlcNAc2-Man5. Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, This pattern is compatible with a defect in DPM1, ALG3 or MPDU1, 6Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 7Università di Bologna, in which mutations have been described; however, no mutations were Bologna, Italy, 8Ospedale “Bambino Gesù”, Rome, Italy, 9Institute of Medical detected. We decided to further analyze the DPM2 and SAC1 genes. Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 10Universitätsklinikum The patient was found to be compound heterozygote for 2 mutations Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 11Università di Torino, Turin, Italy, in DPM2: a splice mutation (c.4-1G>C) and a missense mutation 12IRCCS Fondazione Policlinico Milano, Milan, Italy, 13Università di Siena, (c.68A>G, p.Y23C). Siena, Italy, 14Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 15Università di Hence, this patient presents with a novel type of CDG.The human doli- Padova, Padua, Italy, 16University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. chol-phosphate-mannose (DPM) synthase is a heterotrimeric complex N-myristoylation is a common form of co-translational protein fatty composed of DPM1, DPM2 and DPM3. Until now, only mutations in acylation resulting from the attachment of myristate to a required N- DPM1 (the catalytic subunit) and more recently in DPM3 have been terminal glycine residue. We show that aberrantly acquired N-myris- described. DPM2 is a hydrophobic protein of 84 amino acids, whose toylation of SHOC2, a leucine-rich repeat-containing protein that posi- function is still not clear. It is reported in the literature that DPM2 could tively modulates RAS-MAPK signal flow, underlies a clinically distinc- be involved in the regulation of the DPM synthase complex but also in tive condition of the neuro-cardio-facial-cutaneous disorders family. the regulation of the glycosylphosphatidylinositols-N-acetylglucosami- Twenty-five subjects with a relatively consistent phenotype previously nyltransferase, and a defect in DPM2 may also affect GPI-anchored termed Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair [OMIM 607721] proteins - a feature which has not been studied so far in CDG patients. shared the 4A>G missense change (Ser2Gly) in SHOC2 that introduc- Further investigation of the DPM2 mutations by complementation in es an N-myristoylation site, resulting in aberrant targeting of SHOC2 Lec15 hamster DPM2-deficient cells is ongoing. to the plasma membrane and impaired translocation to the nucleus upon growth factor stimulation. Expression of SHOC2S2G in vitro en- c14.3* A single-nucleotide deletion in the POMP 5’ UtR causes hanced MAPK activation in a cell type-specific fashion. Induction of a transcriptional switch and an altered epidermal proteasome SHOC2S2G in Caenorhabditis elegans engendered protruding vulva, a distribution in KLicK genodermatosis neomorphic phenotype previously associated with aberrant signaling. J. Dahlqvist1, J. Klar1, N. Tiwari2, J. Schuster1, H. Törmä3, J. Badhai1, R. Pujol4, These results document the first example of an acquired N-terminal M. van Steensel5, T. Brinkhuijzen5, L. Gijezen5, A. Chaves6, G. Tadini7, A. lipid modification of a protein causing human disease. Vahlquist3, N. Dahl1; 1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, c14.5* Another gene for autosomal recessive ALX-related Sweden, 2Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, frontonasal dysplasias: Disruption in ALX1 (CART1) causes Universtiy of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 3Department of Medical Sciences, anophthalmia and severe facial clefting Uppsala University and University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Department E. Uz1, Y. Alanay2, D. Aktas1,2, I. Vargel3,4, S. Gucer5, G. Tuncbilek4, F. von of Dermatology, Hospital del Mar IMAS, Barcelona, Spain, 5Department Eggeling6, E. Yilmaz7, O. Deren8, N. Posorski6, H. Ozdag9, T. Liehr6, S. Balci2, of Dermatology, University Hospital Maastricht, and the GROW school for M. Alikasifoglu1,2, B. Wollnik10,11, N. A. Akarsu1; oncology and developmental biology, University of Maastricht, Maastricht, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Gene Mapping Laboratory, Hacettepe Netherlands, 6Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Infanta Cristina, University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Pediatric Genetics Unit, Department of Badajoz, Spain, 7Institute of Dermatological Sciences, Fondazione Ospedale Pediatrics, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 3Department of Plastic and Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. Reconstructive Surgery, Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey, 4Department KLICK syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive skin disorder char- of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Hacettepe University, Ankara, acterized by palmoplantar keratoderma, linear hyperkeratotic papules Turkey, 5Pathology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University, over joints, sclerotic constrictions around fingers and ichthyosiform Ankara, Turkey, 6Jena University Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics and scaling. We identified twelve cases, from five European countries, Antropologie, Jena, Germany, 7Department of Medical Biology, Hacettepe that share the specific KLICK manifestations. Using genome-wide University, Ankara, Turkey, 8Department of Obstetrics and Gynocology, SNP-based homozygosity mapping we identified a 1.5-Mb homozy- Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 9Biotechnology Institute of Ankara gous candidate region on chromosome 13q. Sequence analysis of University, Ankara, Turkey, 10Center For Molecular Medicine, University of Concurrent Sessions  Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 11Institute of Human Genetics, University of c15.1* Genome-wide association study of regional brain volume Cologne, Cologne, Germany. suggests involvement of known psychiatry candidate genes, Molecular genetics of recessively inherited frontonasal dysplasias identifies new candidates for psychiatric disorders and points to (FNDs) are largely unknown. In 2009, two studies have drawn at- potential modes of their action tention to the critical role of aristales-related homeobox transcription A. Arias-Vásquez1, B. Franke1, J. Veltman2, H. Brunner2, P. Hagoort3, G. factors, ALX3 and ALX4, in the molecular pathogenesis of autosomal Fernandez3; recessive-FND in humans (Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2009; 84: 698 and 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Departments of Psychiatry Hum Mol Genet. 2009; 18: 4357, respectively). We present a new au- & Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Nijmegen tosomal recessive frontonasal dysplasia in two families characterized Medical Center, Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, by bilateral anophthalmia/microphthalmia, bilateral oblique facial cleft, 3Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, complete cleft palate, hypertelorism, wide nasal bridge with hypoplasia Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University Nijmegen (Medical Centre), of ala nasi, and low set and posteriorly rotated ears. Using Affymetrix Nijmegen, Netherlands. 250K SNP Array genotyping and homozygosity mapping, we mapped Psychiatric diseases are highly heritable disorders with complex etiol- this clinical entity to chromosome 12q21. In one of the families with ogy partially explained by combinations of genes with small effect size three affected sibs, CNV analysis of the critical region detected a ho- interacting with each other and with environmental factors. The small mozygous 3.7 Mb deletion containing the ALX1 (CART1) gene. In the effect sizes of genetic risk factors have hampered the identification of second family, we identified a homozygous donor splice site mutation genes predisposing to these diseases. A possible way to aid identifica- (c.537+1 G>A), which is predicted to disrupt the functionally essential tion of risk genes is the use of intermediate phenotypes. These can be homeodomain structure of the ALX1 protein. These results provide defined e.g. at the level of brain function and of regional brain struc- evidence that loss of ALX1 function causes severe impairment of early ture. Both are highly heritable, and regional brain structure is linked to craniofacial development. Unlike its murine ortholog, complete loss of brain function. human ALX1 does not result in neural tube defects, however, severely Within the Brain Imaging Genetics (BIG) study at the Radboud Uni- affects the orchestrated fusions between frontonasal, nasomedial, na- versity Nijmegen (Medical-Centre) we performed a genome-wide as- solateral, and maxillary processes in early embryogenesis. This study sociation study (GWAS) in 600 of the currently 1400 healthy study further expands the spectrum of the recently recognized autosomal participants. For all BIG participants, structural MRI brain images were recessive “ALX-related FND” phenotypes in humans. The study was available. Gray and white matter volumes were determined by brain done within the CRANIRARE consortium supported by the European segmentation using SPM software. FSL-FIRST was used to assess Research Area Network, “E-RARE” through Turkish Scientific Coun- volumes of specific brain structures. Genotyping was performed on cil. Affymetrix 6.0 arrays. Known candidates from studies on psychiatric genetics and mental c14.6* High-throughput mutation screening in combination with disorders are implicated in the regulation of regional brain structure. cellular complementation of rare variants aid gene identification E.g., CDH13, associated with ADHD, schizophrenia and substance in mitochondrial disorders abuse, was associated with amygdala, hippocampus and white matter K. Danhauser1, F. Madignier1, M. Herzer1, T. Haack1, B. Haberberger1, P. volumes (P<10E-05); CANA1C, associated with bipolar disorder, was Freisinger2, B. Rolinski3, R. Horvath2, H. Mayr4, W. Sperl4, V. Tiranti5, M. found associated with brainstem volume (p<10E-05) and three SNPs Tesarova6, B. Plecko7, S. Biskup8, D. Boehm8, A. Giovanetti5, B. Garavaglia5, M. on the PLXNA2 gene showed p-values <10E-05 with caudate nucleus Zeviani5, T. Meitinger1, H. Prokisch1; volume. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich and Our data suggests that genes involved in psychiatric and mental disor- Helmholtz Zentrum, München, Germany, 2Technical University of Munich, ders are also associated with the variance of intermediate phenotypes Stoffwechselzentrum Kinderklinik, München, Germany, 3Klinikum München based on brain volumes from healthy individuals. GmbH Medizet Stoffwechselzentrum, München, Germany, 4Universität Salzburg, Kinderklinik, Salzburg, Austria, 5Division of Molecular Neurogenetics, c15.2 NXF/ARNt2/sim2, RET Expression regulation and specific National Neurological Institute, „C. Besta“, Milano, Italy, 6University of Prague, HscR Associated DNA Variants Department of Paediatrics, Prag, Czech Republic, 7Department of Pediatrics, R. M. W. Hofstra1, Y. Sribudiani1, M. Metzger2, J. Osinga1, A. Rey1; Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria, 8CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany. 1UMCG, RUG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. Mitochondria are key players in the maintenance of cellular energy Two non-coding RET variations, the T allele of SNP rs2435357 (Enh1- metabolism through the process of oxidative phosphorylation. This T) and the A allele of SNP rs2506004 (Enh2-A) proved strongly as- task requires five multimeric respiratory chain complexes, with com- sociated with Hirschsprung (HSCR) susceptibility. Furthermore, in plex I with 45 subunits being the largest one. Complex I deficiency two SNPs are in strong linkage disequilibrium and both located in an is a major cause of mitochondrial diseases, presenting with an array enhancer element in intron 1 of the RET gene. For Enh1 it has been of phenotypic features and the elucidation of the molecular correlate shown that the disease associated T allele results in reduced expres- remains a challenge. sion in Luciferase experiments, via reduced SOX10 binding, when We performed a multi-centre large-scale mutation screen of 70 candi- compared to non-disease associated C allele. The goals of this study date genes in 150 patients with isolated complex I deficiency by high were to determine whether Enh2-A also is a functional variant, i.e. af- resolution melting curve analysis and Sanger sequencing. fect RET expression. We generated reporter constructs containing For the first time we identified pathogenic mutations in the mitochon- both alleles of the two SNPs, separately or in combinations, coupled drial respiratory chain complex I subunit NDUFB9. Additionally, we to the Luciferase gene. Luciferase assays showed that not only the identified causative mutations in another 16 genes, which have previ- Enh1-T allele but also the Enh2-A allele decreased reporter gene, ously been associated with complex I deficiency: 5 mtDNA encoded showing that both SNPs do contribute independently. MatsInspector subunits, 3 tRNA genes, 6 nuclear encoded subunits and 3 assembly software identified the sequences of Enh2-C (non-disease associated factors. The causality of newly identified missense mutations was es- variant) and its surroundings sequences (-ACGTG-) as a potential tablished by complementation of complex I activity in patient-derived binding site for the (heterodimer) transcripton activator NXF/ARNT2, fibroblast cell lines by lentiviral expression of wildtype cDNA. and the (heterodimer) transcription repressors SIM2/ARNT2. Binding We have initiated an exome sequencing approach starting with familial affinity of NXF/ARNT2 to Enh2-C was confirmed by Electrophoresis cases to identify mutations in the 70% of patients with no mutations Mobility Shift Assays and Supershift. Transfections of NXF/ARNT2 or found yet. Taking advantage of the complementation approach, we will SIM2/ARNT2 into Neuroblastoma cell lines increase and decrease be able to discriminate pathogenic from non-pathogenic variants. RET expression respectively as expected. Interestingly SIM2 is locat- ed on chromosome 21 and trisomy 21 strongly increases the risk on HSCR. Most importantly, our data shows that more than one SNP on an associated haplotype might influence disease development making polygenic diseases even more complex than originally thoughtConcurrent Sessions 0 c15.3 Genomewide association of single nucleotide c15.5 Functional analysis of fatty acid desaturase (FADs) gene polymorphisms with subcutaneous adipose tissue gene cluster polymorphisms expression. E. Lattka1, S. Eggers1, G. Moeller2, K. Heim3, M. Weber3, D. Mehta3, H. A. J. Walley1, M. F. Falchi1, J. Andersson1, P. Jacobson2, A. Bibi1, M. Jarnas2, A. Prokisch3,4, J. Adamski2,5, T. Illig1; Siddiq1, L. Sjostrom2, L. M. S. Carlsson2, P. Froguel1,3; 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Epidemiology, Neuherberg, Germany, 1Department of Genomics of Common Disease, School of Public Health, 2Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Experimental Genetics, Neuherberg, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Molecular Germany, 3Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Human Genetics, and Clinical Medicine and Center for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Technische Universität München, Institute of Human The Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3CNRS 8090-Institute of Genetics, Munich, Germany, 5Technische Universität München, Lehrstuhl für Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France. Experimentelle Genetik, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany. Exploration of the genetic control of gene expression in adipose tis- Fatty acid desaturases play a pivotal role in the endogenous forma- sue could provide valuable insights into the genetic architecture of tion of n-6 and n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFAs). common human obesity. Using whole genome microarrays, a genome Several studies reported associations of single nucleotide polymor- wide association analysis was carried out using gene expression lev- phisms (SNPs) in the human desaturase encoding genes (FADS1, els measured in subcutaneous adipose tissue samples from obesity- FADS2) with LC-PUFA levels, with an amazingly high genetically ex- discordant sibpairs as quantitative traits. plained variance (28.5%) for arachidonic acid. Moreover, SNPs in this The SOS SibPair cohort was utilised, which consists of 154 nuclear cluster were associated with more complex phenotypes such as cho- families (n=732), each containing an obesity-discordant sib pair (Body lesterol and triglyceride levels as well as glucose levels. The functional Mass Index difference ≥10 kg/m2). RNA was extracted from subcu- relevant SNP(s) could not be identified by these association studies, taneous adipose tissue and DNA was extracted from blood. Gene because all associated SNPs are in high linkage disequilibrium. The expression and genotyping data was generated from all 349 siblings aim of our study is therefore to identify the causative variant(s) to learn using the Affymetrix Human U133 Plus 2.0 and Illumina Human 610K more about the regulatory pathways involved in LC-PUFA homeosta- arrays, respectively. Analysis of the genomewide gene expression and sis. genotype data was carried out using Merlin. We identified two interesting polymorphisms (rs3834458 and rs968567) Approximately 10% of all transcripts (~5500) were associated with in the FADS2 gene promoter by bioinformatics analysis. Luciferase re- SNP markers in the genome, either in cis or in trans, using the very porter gene assays revealed that the minor T allele of SNP rs968567 stringent threshold of a Bonferroni correction of p=3.6 x 10-12. For a leads to a significant increase in promoter activity in cell lines, whereas False Discovery Rate of 10%, 4400 transcripts differentially expressed rs3834458 showed no significant effect. Competitive electrophoretic between lean and obese siblings were detected. Using a Bonferro- mobility shift assays showed allele-specific binding of nuclear proteins ni correction of p=1x10-7, approximately 350 of the differentially ex- for the rs968567 surrounding region, but no differential results were pressed transcripts were also cis-eQTLs and approximately 150 were obtained for rs3834458. One of the proteins binding to the rs968567 also trans-eQTLs. In the next stage, differential expression analysis surrounding region in an allele-specific manner was identified as tran- and incorporation of the obesity status in the association framework scription factor ELK1. Altogether, our results indicate that rs968567 will allow the identification of SNP markers and pathways involved in influences FADS2 transcription, probably by genotype dependent obesity susceptibility. ELK1 binding, and offer first insights into modulation of FADS2 gene transcription by SNPs. c15.4 mutations of VANGL1 in patients with neural tube defects P. De Marco1, C. M. Bosoi2, E. Merello1, A. Reynolds2, S. Lachance2, J. R. c15.6 mutation and functional analysis of the iRAK-m gene in McDearmid3, P. Gros4, A. G. Bassuk5, A. Cama1, K. Zoha2, V. Capra1; asthmatic patients. 1Neurosurgery Department, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 2CHU Sainte S. Sanna1,2, C. A. Caria1, F. Anedda1, A. Loi1, F. Virdis1, N. Olla1, L. Balaci1, G. Justine Research Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Sole1, M. Uda1, S. Naitza1; of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3The Center for Research in Neuroscience, 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle Research Institute of the McGill University Health Center, and Department of Ricerche, Monserrato, Monserrato, Italy, 2Regione Autonoma della Sardegna, Pathology and Cell Biology, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, Italy. 4Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, Asthma is a complex disease caused by the interaction between 5Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. genes and environment. Since its prevalence and associated mortal- Neural tube defects (NTD) are congenital malformations resulting ity is largely increasing in the latest years, there is a great interest from failure of neurulation. Recent years witnessed a breakthrough in in understanding the molecular basis of this pathology. In 2007 we elucidating the role of planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway in neurula- identified IRAK-M as an asthma susceptibility gene in the Sardinian tion and how molecular lesions in this pathway lead to NTD in animal population and replicated the study in two genetically distant popula- models and humans. PCP is controlled by the non canonical Fz/Dvl tions. To better understand the role of IRAK-M in the pathogenesis of signalling pathway that involves a number of additional core gene, in- asthma, we first conducted a mutation screen in affected individuals cluding Stbm/Vang, Fmi, Pk, and Dgo. The Loop-tail (Lp) mouse that and in controls to identify the functional variations responsible of the develops craniorachischisis carry missense mutations in the Vangl2 association. Our analysis revealed a clustering of rare coding muta- gene, that is the mammalian homolog of the Drosophila Stbm/Vang tions in patients and functional studies in different cell lines showed gene required for establishing planar cell polarity in many tissues. This that some affect downstream activation of NF-κB, a transcription fac- mouse provided the first line of evidence for involvement of PCP path- tors involved in innate immunity and inflammation negatively regulated way in NTD in mammals. Vangl1, a vertebrate homolog of Vangl2, en- by IRAK-M. Combining bioinformatics analysis and deletion studies codes for a transmembrane protein containing a PDZ-domain binding in cell lines, we identified a region upstream of IRAK-M with promoter motif involved in protein-protein interactions. We sequenced human activity, containing several binding sites for transcription factors known VANGL1 gene in a cohort of 810 NTD patients and we identified 8 to modulate inflammatory responses (c-REL, AP1, NFAT). EMSA ex- missense mutations both in familial (V239I, R274Q, S83L, and R181E) periments for the predicted binding sites demonstrated specific binding and sporadic (M238T, F153S, L202F, and A404S) cases. These mu- in monocyte cell lines stimulated with LPS, whereas site directed mu- tations affect highly conserved residues and were not found in 1200 tagenesis showed that destruction of the binding sites greatly reduced controls. We demonstrated that V239I mutation abrogates in vitro the activity of the IRAK-M promoter region. These data further support a interaction between VANGL protein and DVL, strongly suggesting a potential role of IRAK-M in the pathogenesis of chronic inflammation pathogenic effect on the protein function. Finally, we demonstrated that and asthma. two human mutations, V239I and M238T, affect convergent extension in zebrafish and we hypothesize that they most likely affect a similar process in humans. These results support a role for VANGL1 as ge- netic risk factor for NTD.Concurrent Sessions 1 c16.1 the revised Ghent nosology for the marfan syndrome GVMs, somatic UPID may have wide implications. (mFs) B. L. Loeys1, J. De Backer1, B. Callewaert1, H. Dietz2, A. De Paepe1; c16.3 ‘Lethal Vascular syndrome from south india due to a 1Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium, 2Johns Hopkins University, Novel mutation in Fibulin 4’ Baltimore, MD, United States. S. Nampoothiri1, M. Kappanayil1, A. De Paepe2, B. Loeys2, L. Van Laer2, R. The diagnosis of MFS relies on a set of international criteria, outlined Kannan1, M. Faiyaz-Ul-Haque3, R. Krishna Kumar1; by expert opinion. In 1996, the initial Berlin nosology was redefined 1Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Center, Cochin, Kerala, because of the risk of overdiagnosis into the Ghent nosology, a more India, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, stringent set of major and minor criteria. 3King Faizal Hospital, Saudi Arabia. These Ghent criteria have proven to work well since with improving We report a lethal disorder characterized by a distinct phenotype and molecular techniques, confirmation of the diagnosis is possible in arterial tortuosity in a unique cohort of sixteen infants, caused by a over 95% of patients. However, concerns with the Ghent criteria are novel mutation in the Fibulin 4 gene. that some of the diagnostic manifestations have not been validated Methods: Prospective, hospital-based study (Jan 2006 - Dec 2009)Re- as thresholds and others necessitate cumbersome imaging studies. sults: Sixteen children (9M / 7F) were identified with arterial tortuosity Moreover, in the absence of aortic dilation, the diagnosis can be stig- and a distinct phenotype, characterized by long philtrum and thin up- matizing, hamper career aspirations and restrict life-insurances op- per lip (87%), cutis laxa (53%), sagging cheeks (47%), hypertelorism portunities. The label “MFS” may cause psychosocial burden by “re- (53%),and long fingers(40%). All children presented with early onset stricted exercise permission”. respiratory symptoms (median age 1.5 months) and belonged to un- Following an international expert meeting, we propose a revised Ghent related families from the same geographical (South India) background nosology in which aortic root aneurym and ectopia lentis are cardi- with a history of third degree consanguinity in seven families. Cardio- nal features. In absence of family history, the presence of these two vascular features were documented by echocardiography,cardiac CT manifestations is sufficient for the unequivocal diagnosis of MFS. In and MRI which revealed marked dilatation and tortuosity of aorta and absence of any of these two, the presence of bonafide FBN1 mutation its branches. Thirteen patients died between 36 hours -17 months of or a combination of systemic features is required. For the latter a new age (median 2.5 months) due to respiratory failure. Genetic studies led scoring system has been designed and validated. In this way FBN1 to identification of a novel homozygous c.608A>C (p.Asp203Ala) muta- testing is not mandatory but useful when available. tion in exon 7 of the Fibulin 4 gene in 15/16 patients. In the only patient The proposed new nosology puts more weight on the cardiovascular surviving to the age of 6 years, compound heterozygosity was found manifestations of the disease. We anticipate that the new nosology for this mutation with a c.679C>T (p.Arg227Cys) mutation. Prenatal can delay a definitive diagnosis of MFS but decreases the risk of pre- study in one couple identified an affected foetus. Haplotype analysis mature or mis-diagnosis and facilitates discussion of risk and manage- revealed a shared haplotype with Fibulin 4 gene, which strongly sug- ment guidelines. gested common ancestry for all probands due a relatively old founder mutation. c16.2 Acquired uniparental isodisomy as a common somatic Conclusions: This is the first complete description of this lethal genetic 2nd-hit explains multifocality of glomuvenous malformations disorder and illustrates that Fibulin 4 is critical to human elastogenesis M. Vikkula1, V. Aerts1, F. Duhoux2, P. Brouillard1, M. Wassef3, O. Enjolras4, J. and vascular integrity. Mulliken5, H. Antoine-Poirel2, O. Devuyst6, L. Boon7, M. Amyere1; 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université c16.4 A new locus for a syndromic form of thoracic Aortic catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center for Human Genetics, Aneurysms maps to chromosome 15q Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, I. M. B. H. van de Laar1, R. A. Oldenburg1, B. de Graaf1, J. A. M. Verhagen1, Brussels, Belgium, 3Service d’anatomie et de cytologie pathologiques, Y. M. Hoedemaekers1, I. Frohn-Mulder2, J. Roos-Hesselink3, J. M. Kros4, B. A. Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, 4Pediatric Vascular Clinic, Departement of Oostra1, M. W. Wessels1, A. M. Bertoli-Avella1; Maxillofacial and Plastic Surgery, Hôpital d’enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, France, 5Vascular Anomalies Center, Division of Plastic Surgery, Children’s Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Erasmus Medical Center- Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 6Unit of Sophia, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Cardiology, Erasmus Medical nephrology, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 7Centre for Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Pathology, Erasmus Medical Vascular Anomalies, Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques Universitaires Saint- Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. Background: Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAA) are familial in at least Inherited vascular anomalies are commonly characterized by autoso- 15-20% of the cases and can be classified in syndromic and non-syn- mal dominant inheritance with high penetrance, highly variable expres- dromic forms. The TGF-beta signalling pathway plays a central role in sivity regarding size, number and localization of malformations, and the pathogenesis of both syndromic and non-syndromic TAA. small size of postnatal lesions. In 1994, when we identified the ge- Methods and results: We present a large four-generation family with a nomic locus linked to inherited cutaneomucosal venous malformations syndromic form of TAA. Thirty family members had an extensive physi- (VMCM), we hypothesized that the Knudson’s double-hit model for reti- cal and cardiologic examination. Eleven familymembers were consid- noblastoma could be applicable to inherited vascular anomalies. Rarity ered affected on the basis of cardiac and/or skeletal and connective of accessible resected inherited vascular malformations has hindered tissue abnormalities. Nine patients had an aortic or other large artery such studies. In 2002, we reported a somatic second-hit in one glomu- aneurysm. TAA patients had a high risk of aortic dissection or rupture venous malformation (GVM) and in 2009 another one in VMCM. In this at an early age. Many TAA patients had additional heart malforma- study, we screened 16 GVM tissues for somatic 2nd-hit mutations using tions, including mitral valve abnormalities, persistent ductus arteriosus DNA extracted from whole tissue or laser capture microdissected tis- and pulmonary valve stenosis. Histological examination of the aorta sue, cDNA made of total tissular RNA, or whole tissular DNA for DNA showed medial fragmentation, disarray of elastic fibres and excess of microarray-based analyses. We identified a somatic 2nd-hit in 11/16 le- collagen deposition. sions (65%). Three were intragenic changes leading to altered mRNA After excluding mutations in the known syndromic TAA genes (FBN1, splicing, one was a 1p21-22 deletion and seven were acquired uni- TGFBR1, TGFBR2, COL3A1), we performed a genome wide linkage parental isodisomies (aUPID) of the whole short arm of chromosome analysis in this family using the Affymetrix 250K Nsp arrays. A new 1. Difficulty of identification, enrichment of somatic mutations by LCM locus on chromosome 15q with a significant LOD score of 3.6 was and cDNA studies, and the need for pairwise copy number analysis identified within a critical region containing 120 genes. Sequencing of suggests important tissular heterogeneity for the 2nd-hits. The cellular positional candidate genes is ongoing. double-hits lead to localized complete glomulin loss-of-function. Thus, Conclusions: The clinical phenotype overlaps with known TAA syn- the inherited mutations are phenotypically recessive and need a co- dromes such as Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome and vascu- existing somatic mutation, a hallmark of paradominant mode of inheri- lar type Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Our data provide evidence for a new tance. The data demonstrate, for the first time, that aUPID is involved locus for a syndromic form of TAA. Identification of this novel gene will in non-malignant disorders and although the 1p aUPID was specific to provide insight into the pathogenesis of arterial aneurysms.Concurrent Sessions 2 c16.5 Loss of function ENPP1 mutations cause both NHS Trust, Harrow, United Kingdom, 2DNA laboratory, Department of Clinical generalized arterial calcification of infancy and autosomal Genetics, AMC University Hospital, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department recessive hypophosphatemic rickets of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, D. Schnabel2, D. Tiosano3,4, G. Häusler5, T. M. Strom1,6; 4Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital,, Salisbury, 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental United Kingdom, 5Section of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Department Health, Inst. of Human Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Charite- of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Birmingham, Birmingham Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Berlin, Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6Wessex Regional Genetics Germany, 3Meyer Children‘s Hospital, Rambam Medical Center, Pediatric Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 7Division Endocrinology, Haifa, Israel, 4Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Faculty of Human Genetics, University of Southampton, Southampton, United of Medicine, Haifa, Israel, 5Medizinische Universität Wien, Department of Kingdom, 8Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Pediatrics, Vienna, Austria, 6Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität Netherlands, 9Department of Pediatric Genetics, Emma Kinderziekenhuis AMC, München, Inst. of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany. Amsterdam, Netherlands. The analysis of rare genetic disorders affecting phosphate homeosta- Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is characterised by intrauterine growth sis led to the identification of several proteins that are essential for the restriction, poor postnatal growth, relative macrocephaly, triangular regulation of phosphate homeostasis, for example fibroblast growth face and asymmetry. Maternal uniparental disomy (mUPD) of chromo- factor 23 (FGF23) a phosphaturic factor, which inhibits phosphate some 7 and, hypomethylation of the imprinting control region (ICR)1 reabsorption and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D synthesis in the proximal on chromosome 11p15 are found in around 5-10% and up to 60% of renal tubules. Cases of hypophosphatemia remain, including familial patients with SRS, respectively. As many clinical features of SRS are and consanguineous ones, which do not show mutations in any of the non-specific and may change with time, the diagnosis remains diffi- three known genes - PHEX (XLH [MIM 307800]), FGF23 (ADHR [MIM cult. Studies of patients in whom the molecular diagnosis is confirmed 193100]) and DMP1 (ARHP [MIM 241520]) which, if mutated, causes therefore provide valuable clinical information regarding the condition. hypophosphatemic rickets. Here, we present three different homozy- We undertook a detailed, prospective study of 64 patients with mUPD7 gous, presumable loss of function mutations in a further gene, ENPP1 (n=20) or ICR1 hypomethylation (n=44). The considerable overlap in (ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase), in members of clinical phenotype makes it difficult to distinguish these two molecular four families affected with hypophosphatemic rickets. Intact plasma lev- subgroups reliably. ICR1 hypomethylation patients were more likely els of FGF23 were clearly elevated in one of five affected individuals, to be scored as ‘classical’ SRS. Asymmetry, fifth finger clinodactyly providing a possible explanation for the phosphaturia and inappropri- and congenital anomalies were more commonly seen with ICR1 hy- ately normal 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels. Surprisingly, ENPP1 loss pomethylation, whereas learning difficulties and referral for speech of function mutations have previously been described in generalized therapy were more likely with mUPD7. No correlation was found be- arterial calcification of infancy (GACI [MIM 208000]), a severe auto- tween clinical severity and level of ICR1 hypomethylation. Use of as- somal recessive disorder with a hypermineralizing phenotyp, suggest- sisted reproductive technology in association with ICR1 hypomethyl- ing an as yet elusive mechanism which balances arterial calcification ation appeared increased compared with the general population. ICR1 with bone mineralization. With the identification of ENPP1 mutations hypomethylation was also observed in siblings, though recurrence risk as the cause of hypophosphatemia, we added a further component remains low in the majority of cases. Overall, a wide range in sever- to the growing list of genes involved in the regulation of phosphate ity was observed, particularly with ICR1 hypomethylation. No clinical hoemostasis. feature was present in all cases and even low birth weight only in 78%. We would therefore recommend a low threshold for investigation of c16.6 Epigenotype-phenotype correlations in silver-Russell patients with features suggestive, but not typical, of SRS. syndrome E. L. Wakeling1, M. Alders2, J. Bliek3, H. Bullman4, D. H. Lim5, D. J. Mackay6,7, M. M. Van Haelst8, I. K. Temple6,7, J. M. Cobben9; 1North West Thames Regional Genetic Service, North West London Hospitals Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  Abstracts of EsHG Posters propose a solution that is both respectful of the child’s preferences and that poses not too much administrative overhead for the research- ers. Third, we discuss the issue of returning individual research results P01 Genetic counseling, including and incidental research findings for young participants. We argue that Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, such results, when minors are concerned, deserve special attention in guidelines and recommendations. Genetic services, and Public policy P01.03 the scope of prenatal diagnostics: broad or narrow? P01.01 misunderstanding and misuse of Genetics counseling Ethical reflections. at the Expenses of medical Genetics Rules and Basic Human A. de Jong1,2, W. J. Dondorp1,3, G. M. W. R. de Wert1,3; Rights 1Maastricht University, Research Institute GROW, Maastricht, Netherlands, M. Shariaty, A. Daneil; 2Centre for Society and Genomics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Maastricht Tehran Uni.Cancer Research Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. University, Research Institute CAPHRI, Maastricht, Netherlands. Genetic counseling began with the Eugenics movement in Europe Various new techniques of rapid aneuploidy diagnosis (RAD) challenge and USA around 1910 leading to very destructive inhuman negative the tenability of karyotyping as the gold standard of prenatal diagnosis effects on health and dignity of humankind. Fortunately the misuse for pregnancies at ‘increased risk’. RAD, targeted at a few chromo- of Eugenic was officially abandoned in 1944. Though it is persists somal abnormalities, generates less so-called unexpected findings. in many developed and developing countries up to today in a rather This would have the advantage of simplifying counselling, alleviating hidden manner. Clinical genetic counseling based on DIGNITY and the burden of choice and preventing unnecessary abortions. Further- EQUALITY of mankind was introduced by Reed in 1944. In Iran and more, RAD would allow mending the present rift between a narrow the Islamic countries Genetic counseling was introduced in 1968 by entrance gate to prenatal screening (risk-assessment for aneuploidy the first author on the same basic principles taught by his graduate of chromosomes 21, 18, 13) and the much wider scope of subsequent mentor professors Yamada, Fuhrmann, Vogel and Reed. These Prin- karyotyping. ciples give consideration to ALL of the Humanitarian, Ethical, Moral, However, RAD misses some clinically relevant abnormalities and Religious and Medical issues concerning the clients and their society may therefore be seen as making suboptimal use of foetal material On these principles, since 1968 in Iran the first author have provided obtained through invasive and risky procedures. Moreover, it can be a genetic counseling service to over 18500 couples seeking academic asked whether the advantages of having rapid and unequivocal results advice concerning consanguineous marriage, their risk assessments justify depriving pregnant women of potential useful information. Vari- and promer medical advices. ous views on possible aims of prenatal screening are relevant to this Since 1980 due to higher demand for counseling services some unau- debate, although not conclusive for determining the precise scope of thorized and un- or inadequately educated MD or PhD holders have prenatal testing. One possible option may be to provide women with a started genetic counseling with improper advices or test recommenda- choice between karyotyping and RAD. tions in many occasions. These inappropriate or misused issues are The opposing perspectives are also informed by various views on the NO Marriage, NO Child for many of carriers of monogenic diseases principle of autonomy: should the emphasis be on optimizing the pro- and clinically unjustified Karyotyping of quite normal and healthy young cess of decision-making or on maximising reproductive options? The couples and forecasting all of the genetics abnormalities of concep- latter view may imply welcoming the use of tests with an even broader tion from couples karyotypes .This last issue unfortunately is taken by scope than karyotyping. the lay people as a MUST test for avoiding genetic diseases in their Our preliminary moral assessment suggests that offering RAD as a offspring. False positive and negative hopes as well as spending a stand alone test would unjustifiable trespass on reproductive auton- very time consuming, expensive and inappropriate practice is among omy and amount to a rather restricted view on the aim of prenatal these malpractices of genetic counseling in Iran and many developing screening. countries. We feel it is time for WHO and international medical genetic congress- P01.04 EPmA: Predictive, Preventive & Personalised medicine es to address this very humanitarian and academic issue and draw a as a novel strategic trend in Europe very precise nomenclature for the practice of Genetic Counseling all D. Radojkovic1, O. Golubnitschaja2, V. Costigliola3; over the world. Also the very scientific fact of presence of a general 5- 1IMGGE, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Department of Radiology,University of Bonn, Bonn, 7% chance of having an abnormal child for every healthy, normal and Germany, 3European Medical Association, Brussels, Belgium. unrelated young couple without any clinical indications of a genetic Predictive diagnostics is considered as the basis for targeted preven- abnormality is a fix and fusible fact cannot be avoided through couple tive measures and consequent development of individualized treatment testing. This is the price of nature for unknown biological task of con- approaches. Of paramount importance is the communication among tinuing generations of mankind. professionals - medical doctors, biotechnologists, computer-scientists, healthcare providers, policy-makers, educators, who are obligatorily in- P01.02** the use of stored tissue samples from children for volved in the paradigm change from curative to predictive medicine. genetic research. Ethical issues. The paradigm change can be achieved only by well-coordinated action K. Hens, K. Dierickx; towards : adequate investment in creating novel technologies, devel- Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Leuven, Belgium. opment of non- or minimally-invasive diagnostic tools, well-organised Collections of biological samples have a great potential for genetic exchange and transfer of knowledge among biomedical research enti- research. Much has been written in the last decade on the ethical as- ties and biotech industries for production of the advanced diagnos- pects of the use of such samples from adults, but the ethical issues tic tools, quality assurance through the introduction of international surrounding the use of stored tissue samples from minors continue to standards for technological tools and devices, patenting and licenses, cause controversy. This was made clear this summer by the publica- professional education in terms of the application of biotechnological tion of a policy forum in Science. During the last three years we have high-tech in medicine, political regulations in the health-care sector: conducted theoretical and empirical research on this topic, and will introduction of the obligatory guidelines and clear regulations for the present the conclusions of this research in this talk. We discovered health insurance industry to ensure patients needs are met, measures three main areas of interest. First, the requirement that research on to ensure confidentiality of patient information and personal databank vulnerable populations such as children should pose no more than and distribution of relevant information among health-care profession- minimal risk is problematic for biobank research, as it is as of yet un- als and users. The mission of the European coordinator in this field clear what risk is entailed in such research. We propose an approach is performed by the “European Association for Predictive, Preventive of ‘burden and benefit’ rather than one of minimal risk to decide on and Personalised Medicine” (EPmA). The Association is clearly struc- the conditions for participation of children. Second, we reflected on tured in order to reach the possibly best coordination of the PPPM-re- the scope of parental consent. Should parents be allowed to give lated multifaceted activities over the whole Europe: there are National broad consent for any type of research and for an unlimited amount Representatives in all 27 Country-members of the European Union of time? If and when should the children themselves be involved? We and the Associated-Countries (e.g. Israel, Serbia, etc).Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  P01.05 timE-trial: A multicentre study on the behavioural and P01.07 Cardiac genetics: the first 250 clinic patients psychosocial effects of rapid genetic counselling and testing in J. McGaughran1, J. Atherton2; newly diagnosed breast cancer patients 1Genetic Health Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, 2Department of Cardiology, M. R. Wevers1,2, M. G. E. M. Ausems2, E. M. A. Bleiker1, D. E. E. Hahn1, T. Royal Brisbane and Women‘s Hospital, Brisbane, Australia. Brouwer2, E. T. J. Rutgers1, R. van Hillegersberg2, F. Hogervorst1, R. B. van der In February 2007, a monthly cardiac genetics clinic was commenced Luijt2, H. Valdimarsdottir3, S. Verhoef1, N. K. Aaronson1; at the Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital. The clinic was to ensure 1Netherlands Cancer Institute-Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, appropriate counselling, genetic testing and management of those Netherlands, 2University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Mount with or at risk of an inherited cardiac condition. A range of conditions Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States. have been seen including; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, familial di- Background: In 15% of high-risk families, a BRCA1or BRCA2 gene lated cardiomyopathy, arrythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, mutation can be found. Female carriers with breast cancer have an catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and long QT increased risk of new primary tumours and may opt for preventive sur- syndrome. Rarer conditions such a Fabry disease and Danon disease gery. Usually, genetic counselling and DNA-testing are offered after have also been seen. To date 250 patients have been seen through primary treatment and take 4-6 months. However, some Dutch labora- the clinic. Because of pressure on clinic space, a number of the pa- tories can generate test results within 3-6 weeks. Little is known about tients referred to the genetic service have been seen in genetics clin- the effect of such rapid genetic counselling and testing (RGCT) proce- ics at locations around the state. A number of challenges have been dures on treatment decisions and psychosocial health. encountered: management of those with a mutation but no phenotype; Methods: The TIME-trial is a prospective randomized study. Newly di- testing of at risk children; funding for testing; waiting times with in- agnosed breast cancer patients (N=255) with 10% or greater chance of creasing numbers of cases referred. The clinic also collaborates with having a BRCA mutation are being recruited from 12 Dutch hospitals. the forensic pathology service and coroner in the assessment of those They are randomized on a 2:1 basis to either a RGCT-group (referral families where there has been a sudden unexplained death in a young to a clinical geneticist within one week of diagnosis), or a usual care individual. The data from the clinic will be presented control-group. If needed, DNA-test results are made available within 3-6 weeks. The primary study outcome is choice of surgical treat- P01.08 Ethical aspects of Array Comparative Genomic ment. Secondary outcomes include perceived cancer risk, cancer-re- Hybridisation (cGH) for mental retardation diagnosis and lated distress, health-related quality of life and decisional satisfaction. genetic counselling Psychosocial assessments take place at study entry and at 6 and 12 S. JULIA1,2, A. Soulier2, D. Sanlaville3,4, E. Rial-Sebbag2, B. Keren5, D. Heron5, months follow-up. M. Till3, P. Edery3,4, P. Calvas1, G. Bourouillou1, A. Cambon-Thomsen2; Results: Patient recruitment started in November, 2008. To date, 124 1Service de Génétique Médicale,, toulouse, France, 2Inserm, U558, women (response 82%) have been entered into the trial. Of the 80 Epidemiology and analyses in public health and University Toulouse III, participants in the RGCT-arm, approximately one-third has opted for Toulouse, France, 3Service de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, CHU de Lyon, rapid DNA-testing. Bron, France, 4EA 4171, Université Claude Bernard, Lyon 1, Lyon, France, Conclusion: This multicenter clinical trial of RGCT is recruiting well 5Département de génétique, Hôpital de la Pitié Salpetrière, Paris, France. and, based on the figures available to date, a higher percentage of The recent rapid emergence of new technologies in genetic medicine women is opting for rapid genetic testing than had been anticipated. contributes to the diagnosis and the understanding of the molecular basis of numerous diseases. The high throughput and the sensitivity of P01.06 introducing a patient‘s choice in how to learn the results these technologies will create an unprecedented volume of information of presymptomatic DNA testing for hereditary cancer for patients, counsellors, and health care providers, raising also unique J. C. Oosterwijk, J. S. Voorwinden, J. ter Beest, B. K. Leegte, R. H. Sijmons, ethical challenges. J. P. C. Jaspers; Although the applications of many of these techniques are still lim- UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands. ited to research, Array Comparative Genomic Hybridisation (CGH) has AIM: To test whether coping after DNA testing for hereditary cancer, is evolved to a standard application in clinical genetics, especially in indi- similar when counselees have the choice to learn the results by letter viduals with syndromic or non-syndromic mental retardation. instead of in a face to face contact. CGH allows a whole genome analysis at a resolution, 10-10 000 times BACKGROUND: In pre-symptomatic testing for hereditary cancers, higher than that of routine chromosome analysis by karyotyping. This the availability of treatment /prevention seems to mitigate the impact of method has revolutionized the present clinical practice in the detection the test result, as compared to Huntingtons chorea. Moreover, coun- and diagnosis of human chromosome abnormalities in mental retarda- selees indicated they preferred to learn the test results by letter for tion. Some ethical issues specifically challenge the transfer of these several reasons. improved technologies from the research laboratory to their clinical METHODS: Cases referred for pre-symptomatic testing for BRCA or applications. In our experience we have identified several situations Lynch syndrome were randomised between ‘standard care protocol’ asking ethical difficulties. They will be presented according to two main (disclosure of DNA results in a face to face contact), and ‘choice pro- dimensions: uncertainty of results and incidental findings. tocol’ (the counselee gets the choice to either learn the result in a face Ethical issues of genetic disease diagnostics and various health ap- to face contact or to be sent the results in a letter with a subsequent plications have already been addressed in numerous reports, but with appointment). Included counselees filled out questionnaires covering the use of these screening technologies in the clinical setting, the “in- knowledge, coping, stress and satisfaction before the intake session cidental” becomes “usual,” representing new challenges for the clini- (t1), 2 days after DNA test result disclosure (t2) and 6 weeks later cian. (t3). Specific reference documents addressing the ethical issues of genetic RESULTS: In total 244 out of 340 ascertained cases consented in the testing in relation to CGH are still lacking. study and returned the first questionnaire: 205 BRCA1/2 and 39 Lynch syndrome. Some refrained from or postponed DNA testing after intake P01.09 Evidence-based information guides to rare chromosome and were excluded To date 48 cases got the standard protocol (20 disorders for families and professionals carriers, 28 non-carriers) and 82 cases got the choice protocol (26 car- B. A. Searle1, P. Middlemiss1, S. Wynn1, M. Hulten2; riers and 56 non-carriers). Of the 82 cases in the choice protocol, 58 1Unique, Caterham, United Kingdom, 2University of Warwick, Warwick, United chose disclosure by letter and 24 chose disclosure in an appointment. Kingdom. The results of our analysis will be presented. Purpose: To develop reliable, relevant, accurate leaflets for affected families and health professionals that fill an information gap about rare chromosome disorders . Method: In 2003 Unique surveyed information materials published in the UK about specific rare chromosome disorders: for over 93% of members no accessible disorder-specific information was available. Unique asked families what they most wanted to know at diagnosis Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  and what questions remained unanswered. Unique prioritised 66 dis- type C/C in the group of environmental risk orders according to frequency on its database (7122 member families (68.2% versus 59.87% in the comparison group, P = 0.0478). For a at February 2010) and absence of existing information accessible to comprehensive analysis was studied genotypes of the five polymor- families. Information was compiled from the medical literature; from phism in the studied genes. Revealed a statistically significant in- Unique’s database; and from detailed surveys sent to member fami- crease of genotypes for the study of polymorphism at environmental lies. Draft texts were reviewed for accuracy by Unique’s medical ad- risk (AADDAGCCCC: χ2 = 9,69, P = 0.0027, AGDDAACCCC: χ2 = viser and by medical and genetics professionals expert in the specific 9,47, P = 0.003), may determine that a combination of data most effi- disorders. Photographically illustrated draft leaflets were vetted for cient biotransformation of xenobiotics and reduces the negative impact content by families. of environmental factors and some carcinogens in the body. Results: Leaflets have been developed on 113 topics including numeri- cal and structural disorders; subtelomere deletions; mosaic disorders; P01.12 medical and genetic counseling of families with cystic emerging microdeletion and microduplication syndromes and a broad fibrosis in the Republic of Moldova range of less common diagnoses. N. I. Barbova; Discussion: Twenty-one leaflets have been translated into at least one State Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Moldova, European language. Leaflets, available to families and health profes- Republic of. sionals in print format and online at www. rarechromo.org, improve Cystic fibrosis is an important medico-social problem for the Republic families’ understanding and acceptance of a rare chromosome disor- of Moldova, which is associated with low life expectancy of patients der and help diminish the acute stress and anxiety associated with (average age - 13,5 years), the difficulties of clinical and molecular diagnosis. diagnostics, low economic level of the population and lack of social support for families with cystic fibrosis. P01.10 teaching the genetics of complex traits An important step in the prevention of cystic fibrosis is a medico-ge- M. J. Dougherty; netic counseling in families at high risk. We are presenting an 18-year American Society of Human Genetics, Bethesda, MD, United States. experience of retrospective counseling of 58 families in which there The primary goals of secondary and post secondary science education were 69 children suffering from cystic fibrosis aged from 1 month to 18 are to help prepare scientifically literate citizens and future scientists. years (35 boys and 34 girls). Efforts to improve science education have focused on competency In 56 families there were moral and ethical difficulties with improve- standards and the professional development of teachers, and recent ment of the diagnosis. Most families (63.8%) lived in rural areas, 66,4% efforts have promoted the use of high-stakes exams and benchmarks of parents had secondary education. The survey showed that 72% of for school performance. In spite of this work, students in the United parents knew that the disease has a genetic nature. The results of States continue to lag behind their peers in other countries. This un- DNA testing showed mutations in both alleles in 14 families, mutation derperformance is true for genetics and for science and math in gener- of one allele in 25 families and 19 families were non-informative for al, and it is particularly worrisome given the accelerating need for sci- molecular diagnosis. The prenatal diagnosis carried out in 6 families entists and engineers in an increasingly technology-driven economy. resulted to 4 healthy children. Unfortunately, even students in high-performing European countries, Of the 58 families observed in 52 families there are no children with such as Finland and Slovenia, have relatively small percentages of CF, that is, the effectiveness of genetic counseling was 89.7%. Infor- students performing at the higher levels of proficiency. mation of parents about the presence of high risk have genetic nature Perhaps nowhere is the need for scientific literacy more personally of CF lead to positive changes of reproductive behavior. The prenatal meaningful and urgent than in genetics--because of its connection diagnosis in affected families can allow decrease the frequency of ill with medicine. Rapid changes in human genetics--in particular recent children. insights into the genetics of complex traits--have the potential to trans- form healthcare. However, citizens are ill-prepared to participate in P01.13 the opinion of cF patient’s parents about different this transformation because the curriculum is outdated and remains aspects of genetic services in Russia focused on single-gene inheritance and simplified notions of risk. One L. Y. Ivanova1, V. L. Izhevskaya2, I. V. Zhuravleva1, E. K. Ginter2; potential solution is to modernize the genetics curriculum so that it 1Institute of Sociology of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian matches the science of the 21st-century. This paper outlines the prob- Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics of RAMS, Moscow, Russian lems with current genetics instruction, highlights changes in human Federation. genetics that support a curricular reorganization, and proposes a new The newborn screening for CF started in Russia in 2006. The opinion genetics curriculum for secondary and postsecondary education. of CF patient’s parents to different aspects of genetic services in Rus- sia was estimated. 68 respondents were participated in the research. P01.11 molecular genetic study of polymorphic variations Majority of parents (90 %) have learnt about hereditary character of in genes within the cascade of reactions detoxification of their child disease from the pediatrician, only 81 % of them have been xenobiotics with aromatic structure referred to genetisist, and 67 % have been held DNA testing. However E. M. Vasilyeva, E. V. Vorobjeva, V. Y. Gorbunova; 90% respondents have consider, that they have understood the infor- Bashkir State Pedagogical University of the name M. Akmulla, Ufa, Russian mation about repeated genetic risk for CF. However only 50% of them Federation. could correctly specify the value of recurrence risk of CF, and only 30 Development of industrial production around the world have led to a % of them could correctly attribute a risk category. The birth of the large number of chemical compounds that adversely affect human CF child has affected reproductive plans in 30 % of CF families, only health. Toxic substances violate the metabolism, the structure of cells 35% of families wanted to have more children. 80 % of CF children’s and tissues, resulting in abnormal reaction of the organism. The nega- parents knew about possibility of prenatal diagnostics of CF, however tive effect of xenobiotics depends on the activity of physical and bio- almost 40 % from them have learnt about it not from experts, but from chemical methods of protection, including the immune system and the the press. Prenatal diagnostics of CF was acceptable for 66% of re- system of biotransformation of alien connections. spondents, and the abortion of a CF foetus is morally acceptable for We studied DNA samples - 714 „apparently healthy“ individuals in the 82% of them. Only 4 % of respondents have answered that they didn’t two groups, differing in environmental conditions of residence in the want to terminate the CF foetus pregnancy. In 11/15 women who were same territory, examined polymorphism of genes within the cascade pregnant after the birth of CF child, prenatal diagnostics of CF was of reactions detoxification of xenobiotics with aromatic structure: CY- done: 7 foetuses were healthy, 4 - with CF. All CF foetus pregnancies P1A1/A4889G, CYP2E1/Ins 96,EPHX1/A4156,NQO1/C609T,C465T. have been terminated. A group of environmental risk revealed a significant increase in the frequency of the protective genotype D / D polymorphism Ins96 gene P01.14 Psychosocial aspects of genetic paternity testing CYP2E1 (79,74% against 58.44%). ordered by courts: does biological relatedness create a father? Comparative analysis of the frequency distribution of genotypes and H. Machado1, S. Silva2, S. Costa3, D. Miranda3, A. Amorim4, C. Alves5; alleles of polymorphism C609T gene NQO1 revealed a statistically sig- 1Department of Sociology, University of Minho and Center for Social nificant difference by increasing the frequency of the protective geno- Studies, University of Coimbra, Portugal, 2Institute of Public Health (ISPUP), Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Porto Medical School, Colentina Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 5Psychiatric Hospital, Poiana Mare, Portugal, 3Center for Social Studies, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Institute of Molecular Romania, 6Romanian Parent Project Association, Craiova, Romania. Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP) and Faculty The right management of Duchenne‘s muscular dystrophy (DMD) of Sciences, University of Porto, Portugal, 5Parentage testing and Genetic should include several steps: a) clinical and genetic diagnosis and Identification Unit, Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the counseling, b) refer to a specialist and multidisciplinary team, c) infor- University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Portugal. mation and support for the family. Many European societies support efforts to establish genetic parent- Our study was conducted for 16 Romanian boys affected by DMD and age of children born outside marriage when no father is listed on the their families. birth registration. This State effort is usually part of public policies to We examined how the diagnosis was made, the application of specific ensure that children are cared for not only financially but also with treatment with corticosteroids, tracking of supportive therapy protocol, regards to education and upbringing. There are also medical reasons involvement of a team of specialist in the disease management, ge- to establish genetic parentage, and the importance of parents in the netic counseling and psychosocial support for families. psychological development of infants. The results of this study revealed a system of management of this We discuss the benefits and/or disadvantages of genetic paternity disease “fractured” at all levels: testing from the point of view of mothers and fathers. We focus on - Late clinical diagnosis (4 cases), late genetic diagnosis (8 cases) cases ordered by Portuguese courts of law and rely on data proceed- - Incomplete diagnosis - lack of immunohistochemical diagnosis and/ ing from interviews conducted with women and men who went through or molecular diagnosis (6 cases) the process of DNA paternity testing. Some topics of debate are: psy- - Wrong diagnosis (2 cases, although diagnosed with DMD, after mo- chosocial aspects of submission to genetic paternity testing; informed lecular analysis it is being evaluated for a different type of dystrophy). consent; access to information about genetic testing procedures and - Lack of therapeutic instrument provided by a multidisciplinary team of communication of results; perceptions of the role of genetic related- specialists, inadequate treatment (15 cases) ness in defining fatherhood. - Lack of genetic counseling (5 cases) and psychosocial support to The results suggest that there are important psychosocial impacts families (15 cases) produced by genetic paternity testing which question the value of the From the 16 children, only one benefits by a correctly and completely legal primacy of biological relatedness in forming fatherhood and in mangement of the disease. serving the best interests of the child. We recommend better practices In the context of the emergence of the first innovative treatment (PTC of informed consent, communicating the results of paternity tests and 124, exon-skipping), if we want Romanian children to have access to even psychological counseling to motivate mothers and fathers for the clinical trials, it is vital to have a standard of care compatible with the necessity of creating and continuing a relationship with the child and European one; the management of DMD by a network of specialists between the progenitors. These practices demand a more effective can buy time for our children and stop the reappearance of the dis- coordination between courts of law and laboratories and specific train- ease. ing of personnel. P01.17 Population-based study of dystrophin mutations in P01.15 DOUBLE cOUsiN mARRiAGE iN tHE iRANiAN canada PROViNcE OF HORmOZGAN (2002-2009) G. Yoon1, J. K. Mah2, K. Selby3, C. Campbell4, A. Nadeau5, M. Tarnopolsky6, P. Nikuie, G. Tabasi, F. Hajizadeh; A. McCormick7, J. Dooley8, H. Kolski9, A. Skalsky10, G. Smith11, D. Buckley12, P. Bandarabbas soicial welfare organization, Bandarabbas, Islamic Republic of Bridge2, P. N. Ray1; Iran. 1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, Background: Double first cousins arise when siblings of one family re- 2University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 3University of British Columbia, produce with siblings of another family. The resulting children are re- Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, lated to each other through both parent‘s families. Double first cousins 5Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 6McMaster University, share both sets of grandparents in common and have double the de- Hamilton, ON, Canada, 7University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 8Dalhousie greeof consanguinity than ordinary first cousins.Genetically, they are University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 9University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, as related as half -sibling sharing 25 %of their DNA. A consanguineous 10University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada, 11Queen‘s University, couple especially double cousin couple is at increased risk for both Kingston, ON, Canada, 12Memorial University, St. John‘s, NL, Canada. autosomal recessive disorders and several congenital malformations. Background: Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy (DBMD) are Material and methods: In seven years from 2002 to 2009,we performed allelic disorders caused by mutations of the dystrophin gene on Xp21. genetic counseling for 2400 couples.The consanguinity between 34 This study describes the diagnostic methods and mutation frequency couples was double cousin.(1.4%)Familial pedigree established and among the patients of the Canadian Pediatric Neuromuscular Group risk of genetic disorders for their children was calculated. (CPNG). Results: 1428 couples (59.5%) had consanguinity and 34 couples Methods: De-identified data containing the clinical phenotypes, diag- (1.4%) were double cousins. nostic methods, and mutational reports from DBMD patients followed -13 couples (38.3%) came premariage, 17 couples preconception by CPNG centers during 2000-2009 were analyzed using descriptive (50%) and 4 couples (11.7%) during pregnancy. statistics. Patients were considered to have had complete genetic test- -inbreeding coefficient in 15 couples (44.1%) was more than 1/8. - ing if all 79 exons of the dystrophin gene were examined and if this was -18 couples (52.9%) had positive history of genetic disorders in family. negative, sequencing of the gene. Diagnosis solely by muscle biopsy -15couples had children and in 14 of them (93.3%) at least one child or PCR analysis of a subset of exons was considered incomplete ge- was involved with genetic disorders. netic testing. -3 couples (8.8%) were carrier of beta thalasemia and referred for pre- Results: 773 DBMD patients had a confirmed diagnosis based on ge- natal diagnosis. netic testing (97%), muscle biopsy (2.3%), or family history (0.7%). Conclusion: Based on high risks for genetic disorders in double cous- 573/773 (74%) had complete deletion/duplication analysis of all 79 in marriage and according to all of couples announced “if they knew exons or gene sequencing resulting in 366 (64%) deletions, 64 (11%) about these risks, they would avoid marriage“. Performing genetic duplications, and 143 (25%) point mutations. The most common point counseling is recommended before all consanguious marriages espe- mutations were nonsense (47%), followed by frameshift (31%), splic- cially double cousin type. ing (15%), and missense/amino acid deletions (7%). Access to com- plete genetic testing was variable and ranged from 88% for patients P01.16 Management deficiencies of Duchenne Muscular from ON to 35% for patients from NS. Dystrophy: A reality that we can changes Conclusion: This is the first comprehensive report of dystrophin muta- A. Dobrescu1, F. Leturcq2, M. Ioana3, M. Alexianu4, L. Sirbu5, I. Tudorache6; tions in Canada. It highlights the need for complete genetic testing 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, of patients with dystrophinopathy, and the necessity for collaboration Craiova, Romania, 2Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department, Cochin among academic centers and neuromuscular disease registries to en- Institut, Paris, France, 3Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of sure that patients are receiving optimal care and are eligible for muta- Medicine and Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania, 4Department of Neuropathology, tion-specific therapies.Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 7 P01.18 Influencing how genetics is taught in UK secondary disclosure of individual genetic data to research participants is ethi- schools: the Nowgen schools Genomics Programme cally imperative. On the other end of the spectrum, it is argued that no L. E. Holmes1,2, P. Finegold2, I. Starling1,2, K. Dack1,2, A. Hall3, J. Worthington2, individual genetic research results should be disclosed whatsoever. J. Harris2, A. Read2, H. R. Middleton-Price1,2, D. Donnai1,2; An intermediate position is defended by those who opt for a ‘qualified 1Nowgen, A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, Manchester, United Kingdom, disclosure’. 2Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Although most commentators adopted a variant of this latter position, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Nuffield Foundation, London, United Kingdom. their underlying argumentation and the conditions for disclosure varies Current research in human genomics has great potential for sparking widely. Some for example argue that individual genetic data should interest amongst secondary school students, yet it is not prominent only be disclosed when these data are of analytic validity and clini- in UK school curricula. The Nowgen Schools Genomics Programme cal relevance. Others argue that the decisive factor concerns the re- aims to redress that situation; narrowing the gap between genomics lationship between participant and researcher; for example, the more research and classroom genetics. intense this relationship, the stronger the obligation to disclose would The genetics content of UK school curricula currently concentrates on be. ‘single-gene’ genetics with few references to more recent approaches Clarity on the appropriate standard of disclosure is important in view exploring the human genome. Funded by a three-year grant from The of the changing genetic landscape, such as the current genome wide Wellcome Trust, the Nowgen Schools Genomics Programme brings association studies, the impending whole genome sequencing-studies together leading scientists, clinicians, educationalists and bioethicists and the upcoming commercial activities. In this paper, we present the to contribute to a range of approaches designed to equip young people results of our systematic search and explore whether and when indi- to assess the real potential of genomics, and to make informed deci- vidual genetic data should be returned to research participants. sions about future healthcare. The programme will introduce genome- wide association studies, pharmacogenetics and genetic medicine to P01.21 construction of an ethics policy for a bioinformatics teachers and their students, and will support them to: European project: GEN2PHEN - explore genetic and lifestyle contributions to disease; A. Cambon-Thomsen1, A. Pigeon1,2, E. Rial-Sebbag1, E. U. GEN2PHEN - consider the methodological challenges contemporary large popula- Consortium3; tion studies require; 1Inserm, U558 & University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 2Centre de droit - examine the social and ethical challenges to society; des affaires, Université Toulouse 1 Capitole, Toulouse, France, 3University of - explore the potential impact of data arising from contemporary genet- Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. ics. Genomic technologies including bioinformatics methods and creation of genomic databases have become increasingly important for the sci- P01.19 DNA Day:a good starting point to disseminate genetic entific community but have increased faster than its possible framing education in high school by an appropriate legislation. However theses activities must be de- B. Zanini1, M. Borriello2,3, V. Marini4, R. Ravazzolo1; veloped with respect to fundamental values such as dignity, privacy, 1University of Genoa,Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2University of autonomy. Naples,Federico II, Naples, Italy, 3Istituto Marco Polo, Genova, Italy, 4University The lack of a binding instrument regulating all aspects of these issues of Genoa, Genova, Italy. and the varied and disparate legal and ethical frameworks has resulted DNA Day-a special day-initiated in 2003 to commemorate the comple- in confusion for professionals working in genomics to construct their tion of the Human Genome Project in April of that year, and the discov- own ethics policies. Compliance with the various international, Euro- ery of the DNA double helix fifty years earlier! pean, and National ethical and legal instruments requires a more con- In 2008 The European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) joined the sidered approach. American Society of Human Genetics (ASHG) in making a Europe- We analysed how a specific bioinformatic European project, GEN- wide celebration of genetics and its promises and decided to expand a 2PHEN, is dealing with this issue in the development of its ethics policy. very successful initiative: the DNA Day Essay contest. To provide ethical oversight, analysis, and guidance for GEN2PHEN, That contest is one of several ongoing initiatives to promote knowl- we considered texts and existing guidelines reviews, an international edge and understanding of genetics in secondary schools. consortium questionnaire survey of opinions, discussion in general as- In Italy, the Dna Day contest has been a fantastic tool and occasion to sembly, consultation with relevant EU and international projects and propose an advandced knowledge in genetics, increasing need of an review of recent literature. accurate education at school. The main issues identified were requirements for entering data into The collaboration and support between teachers, the Italian Society the system, managing them over time in federated databases and of Human Genetics (SIGU) and the University of Genova has carried conditions for their accessibility. A process for checking the computer on inititives of lectures by geneticists in order to close high school stu- tools produced for ethics compliance was elaborated. The policy takes dents to research topics, facilitate and stimulate a much more wide into account the differences between various types of data, manda- reflection on the essays proposed by the contest. tory items of consent and modalities of their verification, clarification In 2008, in Genova 400 people (students and teachers) attended the of responsibilities within and outside the project, data and database conference at the Faculty of Medicine and in 2009, more than 250 peo- ownership issues and transparency of the process. It involves a project ple were present at the theatre of Advanced Centre of Biotecnology. ethics oversight committee and specifies relations with local research This year,the SIGU has set up a more strict plan to promote a genetic ethics committees. education project: - addressing a letter to the high school teachers P01.22 Eurogene: a pan-european e-learning service in human - publishing a banner on the national website genetics - having a national selection and awarding three italian students at the M. Dutto1, Z. Zdrahal2, E. Sklavounou3, M. D. Teare4, F. Clerget-Darpoux5, G. national meeting Romeo1; 1European Genetics Foundation, Bologna, Italy, 2The Open University P01.20 Feedback of individual genetic data to research (Knowledge Media Institute), Milton Keynes, United Kingdom, 3Systran, Paris, participants: a qualified disclosure? France, 4University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 5Université Paris- A. L. Bredenoord, J. J. M. van Delden; Sud, Paris, France. University Medical Center Utrecht, Julius Center, Utrecht, Netherlands. The primary objective of the Eurogene project is to develop the means Last years, a debate evolved regarding the question whether individual for accessing, sharing and reusing high quality educational resources genetic research results should be disclosed to research participants in human genetics with multilingual support. The Eurogene portal of- in genetic/genomic research, and if so, which data, and by whom. With fers access to learning resources produced by a network of profession- genetic research results we refer to a broad category of information, als in the field represented by universities, hospitals and educational including validated and non-validated, highly and poorly predictive, centres across Europe. The scope of Eurogene includes statistical, and more or less probabilistic genetic data generated by a medical medical and molecular genetics and the content is targeted at people scientific study. On the one end of the spectrum, it is argued that full with different levels of previous knowledge ranging from the lay person Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  to the expert practitioner. Cancer Registry is a population-based databank with all individual Working towards this goal Eurogene has created a genetic domain cancer information recorded since 1955. A database-generated pedi- ontology and a hierarchy of terms that are first used to annotate and gree (DGP) can be made by linking IGCD pedigrees to records in the enrich the e-learning resources. This automatic annotation forms struc- Cancer Registry using personal identification numbers. This results ture to support the suite of web based tools developed specifically for in a very comprehensive cancer family history, potentially supporting providing, finding and translating digital educational content in the field more efficient assessment of the individual’s inherited cancer risk. of genetics. Interactive machine translation tools allow approved us- In Iceland, cancer genetic counselling based on DGP has been offered ers to refine, train and hence validate the genetic context multilingual since 2007 and 310 counselees have used the service, the majority dictionary. (97%) because of a breast cancer family history. A counselee’s pedi- The Eurogene portal exploits technology which makes it easy to navi- gree is constructed as well as a DGP (3-4 generations with 150-1600 gate and explore the available articles, images and videos. Educators individuals on each side). The DGP is not revealed at the personal lev- can thus move toward “blended learning” in an interactive and natural el to the counselee for privacy reasons. Risk assessment for cancer, way, while students are given the opportunity to finally become “actors” including possible indication for molecular testing, is based on both the in the educational process.We will demonstrate the main features of counselee’s pedigree and the DGP. We are not aware of this approach the tools offered by the Portal. This will include viewing recent sample resulting in any problems or privacy concerns. content, illustration of the annotation process and machine translation The DGP and the counselee’s pedigree need to be compared includ- options, and construction of learning packages. ing cost efficiency and predictive power. If advantages are demonstrat- EUROGENE is a 36 month project supported by the EC’s e-Content ed, other communities could address legal issues and generate their Plus program. genealogical databases. P01.23 Detection of FMR1 cGG repeat expansions from P01.25 Participation of nurse in genetic counseling; present genomic DNA and single cells - a direct triplet-primed PcR status in Japan approach S. Izumi1,2, H. Yokoyama3,2, M. Ishii3, M. Mizoguchi3,2, A. Kondo1,2, K. C. Teo1, C. G. Lee2,3, S. S. Chong1,4; Takahashi1,2, Y. Onuki2,4; 1Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tokai University School of University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2Department of Biochemistry, Medicine, Isehara, Japan, 2Dept. Clinical Genetics, Tokai University Hospital, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Isehara, Japan, 3School of Health Sciences, Tokai University, Isehara, Japan, Singapore, 3Division of Medical Sciences, National Cancer Center, Singapore, 4Department of Neurology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan. Singapore, 4University Children’s Medical Institute and Department of Objective: Since 2005, Tokai University had started a Master course of Laboratory Medicine, National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. “genetic nursing” in School of Health Science, which is only one course Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common cause of heritable men- in Japan. To improve this condition, we are continuously emphasizing tal retardation. It is mostly caused by the hyperexpansion and hyper- several merits in participation of genetic nurses in genetic counseling methylation of CGG repeat expansions in the 5’ untranslated region of clinics. In this study we tried to elucidate the present status of partici- FMR1, leading to gene silencing. There are 4 allelic classes of FMR1 pation of nurse(s) in clinical genetic counseling in Japan, as well as the CGG repeats: normal (5-44 repeats), gray zone (45-54 repeats), pre- expected roles of nurse(s) from other medical professionals in genetic mutation (55-200 repeats), and full mutation (>200 repeats). Full muta- counseling team. tion alleles are associated with FXS, while unmethylated premutation Method: Questionnaires were mailed on January 2009 to 129 facilities, alleles have been associated with premature ovarian failure (POF) in which are registered as genetic counseling clinics in Japanese Society females and with late-onset fragile X-associated tremor ataxia syn- of Obstetrician and Gynecologist. We focus in the prenatal diagnosis, drome (FXTAS) in males. Molecular diagnosis of FXS usually involves which is the most common subject in the a genetic counseling clinic, PCR across the CGG repeat to determine repeat length, supplement- Results: Answers were retrieved from medical doctor, nurse, and psy- ed by Southern blot analysis for male samples with null amplification chologist, where the response rate was highest (36.2%) from doctors. or female samples with a single allele size by PCR. We describe a Nurses are incorporated in the team on 37.0% of responded facilities, highly specific direct triplet-primed PCR (dTP-PCR) approach to de- where their role is “guidance on the patient’s daily activity” before and tect FMR1 premutation and full mutation expansions. Unique capillary after the amniocentesis. On the other hand, they give crucial informa- electropherogram patterns also enable determination of repeat lengths tion about the procedure in fewer occasions. Medical doctors expect and structures of normal, gray zone and small premutation alleles in nurses in a future to collect the information for counseling, to make a all males and some females. Detection sensitivity is at the single cell precise pedigree, and to shape up the client’s will. level, paving the way for direct detection of expanded FMR1 alleles in Conclusion: Comparing our previous research result, more nurses par- preimplantation embryos. For more rapid single-step screening, dTP- ticipate in genetic counseling than double of those on 2000. However, PCR products can be immediately subjected to melting curve analysis the distribution imbalance between the facilities becomes more promi- in the presence of SYBR Green dye to yield distinct, clearly differenti- nent than the past. ated melting peaks from normal versus expanded alleles, demonstrat- ing the utility of this homogeneous assay as a rapid first-line screen for P01.26 Developments in Genetic counselling: a European FXS, POF and FXTAS. Perspective H. Skirton1, M. Voelckel2,2; P01.24 Linking a genealogical database and a cancer 1Faculty of Health, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 2Hôpital d‘Enfants de la Timone, Registry to generate comprehensive pedigrees for cancer risk Marseille, France. assessment. The European Network of Genetic Nurses and Counsellors was formed V. Stefansdottir1, O. T. Johannsson1, H. Skirton2, L. Tryggvadottir3, H. Tulinius4, in 2008 and now exists under the auspices of the Ad Hoc Genetic J. J. Jonsson1,5; Nurse and Counsellor Accreditation Committee of the European So- 1Landspitali, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United ciety of Human Genetics. Currently there are almost a hundred mem- Kingdom, 3Icelandic Cancer Society, Reykjavik, Iceland, 4The Icelandic bers. There is wide variation in the profession across Europe, with Genetics committee., Reykjavik, Iceland, 5The Department of Genetics and many registered practitioners in some countries, and few or none in Molecular Biology, Reykjavik, Iceland. others. In the interests of patient safety, common minimum standards Genetic cancer counselling is generally based the counselee’s pedi- are required. The aims of the network are to ensure that professionals gree, i.e. information provided by the counselee and confirmed, when using the title ‘genetic counsellor’ are competent to practice. Through a possible through hospital records and occasionally a cancer registry. series of workshops and consultation with the membership, guidance Electronic genealogical databases allow quick construction of an ex- for the future of the profession has been agreed. tensive pedigree, encompassing individuals beyond the counselee’s The role of the genetic counsellor includes: identifying the needs of knowledge. The Icelandic Genetics Committee Database (IGCD) the family, collecting and interpreting genetic information relevant to holds accurate genealogical information based on official demographic genetic counselling, making a genetic risk assessment and communi- records about individuals living in Iceland since 1850. The Icelandic cating information about the risk and options available to the family. It Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  is envisaged that by 2020 the standard training and education for a ge- P01.29 MPAG - first steps of a competences-centred programme netic counsellor will be the Master degree in genetic counselling. The for genetic counsellors in Portugal content of these educational and training programmes must include: M. Paneque, J. Sequeiros; human genetics, medical genetics, counselling skills and clinical expe- IBMC, ICBAS - Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. rience. Genetic counsellors will be expected to practice according to Genetic counselling is an essential area in healthcare. Educational the Code of Professional Practice for genetic counsellors in Europe. programmes for non-physicians exist since 1969, in the USA. In Eu- Further details will be presented and work is now required to consult rope, the first started in 1992, in the UK (Manchester and Cardiff). In widely with those from other professional disciplines to ensure that the last 5 years, new master courses began in Europe (Bergen, Mar- best practice in genetic counselling is adopted in Europe. seille, Genoa, Barcelona, Groningen and Uppsala). In 2009, we initiated a two-year full-time master programme (120 P01.27 Ethical Aspects of Genetic testing in Russia ECTS). It is limited to 5-6 students (nurses, clinical psychologists), with V. L. Izhevskaya, V. I. Ivanov; some previous clinical experience. Its main objective is to train profes- Research Centre for Medical Genetics of RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. sional counsellors, to join multidisciplinary teams at medical genetic Studies of ethical problems concerning the application of genomic services and consultations. technologies in public health care in Russia commenced in the late A structured curriculum was based on the ESHG core-competences 1980s in connection with the works according to the Russian pro- for genetic counsellors. The course consists mainly of small-group tu- gramme „Human Genome“. These studies showed that the majority torials and has a large practical component. Educational areas are (1) of Russian medical geneticists were inclined to be too directive, espe- principles and practice of genetic counselling; (2) human and medical cially in cases of genetic counselling concerning prenatal detection of genetics; (3) communication skills, clinical psychology, mental health, foetal pathology. A substantial part of the specialists (approximately 10 and psychosocial genetics; (4) public health, community genetics, or- - 20 %) were inclined to in some way or another exert pressure on the ganization of services, health policy and health economy; (5) quanti- woman‘s procreation choices (i.e., trying to impose or convey a feeling tative and qualitative methods and research methodologies; and (6) of an incorrect nature of the actions being taken, to persuade a woman bioethics and medical ethics. Nuclear disciplines in these areas are re- not to have children). Russian specialists turned out rather reluctant to quired, as are clinical rotations (prenatal diagnosis, paediatrics, neuro- reliably protect the patient‘s confidentiality. For example, a consider- logical disorders, cancer genetics, clinical psychology); a large range able part of geneticists in Russia (about 60 %) strongly believed that of optional disciplines and clinical rotations are also offered as part of bank-stored DNA samples should be readily available to the blood the first curricular year. The second year is fully in training at a medical relatives of the patient without prior consent of the latter. genetics unit, and includes a research seminar. Hence, the substantial part of Russian geneticists were inclined to both We expect this to harmonize with other European programmes and paternalistic decisions and directiveness. This was largely predeter- help moving toward recognition of the profession of genetic counsel- mined by insufficient legal regulation of the genetic service‘s activity lors in Portugal and in Europe. in Russia, the peculiarities of the system of organization of the genetic service, poor availability and accessibility of the facilities engaged in P01.30 Genetic counsellors and predictive medicine : the providing proper treatment of hereditary diseases, as well as medical profession and her evolution in France and social rehabilitation.Based on the obtained findings, studying of C. Cordier1,2, M. Voelckel3,2; ethical issues in medical genetics was included into the professional 1Department of Cytogenetic, Mulhouse, France, 2French Association of Genetic training programmes. Counsellors, Marseille, France, 3Department of medical genetic, Marseille, France. P01.28 Genetic Counselling in Forensic Medicine The professional master of Human Pathology, „Genetic Counsellor A. Kondo, I. Hasegawa, Y. Onuki, Y. Nishijima, M. Ikeda, H. Yokoyama, M. and Predictive Medicine“ welcomed the first students of this special- Mizoguchi, S. Izumi; ity in France in the academic year 2004-2005. Today, 72 graduates Tokai University, Isehara, Japan. have been trained to practise this new profession of health, which is Background: Genetic counselling is becoming more general medical governed by a law, in different genetics services throughout France service these days. In our country, this situation is same as other coun- and abroad. tries and Genetic Counsellor and Clinical Geneticist are increasing re- Using data from the French Association of Genetic Counsellors, we cently. However they are not enough for covering all patients still now. present this phase in the evolution of the dynamic and multidisciplinary In fact there is no report of collaboration between Clinical Genetics and profession of genetic counselling. This course has a vital role in the Forensic Medicine at present. recruitment and training of these practitioners. Aim: To develop good relationship with Forensic Medicine and provide The diversity of skills acquired through the course include, for ex- fair genetic support after sudden death of family member because of amples, to establish relationship and to clarify patient‘s concerns and genetic disease. expectations, to make appropriate and accurate genetic risk assess- Methods: To elucidate the better situation of genetic counselling, we ment, to work with a multidisciplinary health team, to integrate ethical examine our previous two cases and estimate needs of genetic sup- and legal aspects, to use information systems, and to contribute to the port from national and our University’s sudden death statistics. research and education. Result: In our previous medical service system, it was difficult to make Genetic counsellors have been integrated into multidisciplinary centers any contact with genetic staffs from the family members because fo- for prenatal diagnosis and are involved in consultations and the predic- rensic medicine is not a clinical department. However, at our University tive diagnosis of assisted reproduction. Graduates are also working in Hospital, we had 41(7.2%) sudden death cases related to genetic con- different services like medical genetics and oncology, cardiology and dition out of 569 sudden death in total (2005-2008). Most cases were neurology. male between 20’s - 40’s and had genetic heart condition (hypertrophic We also assist in the efforts made by the french genetic counsellors cardiomegaly, long QT syndrome, familial hypercholesterolemia, Bur- to integrate national professionals in genetics into the FFGH (French gada syndrome, etc), Marfan syndrome and Polycystic Kidney. Federation of Human Genetics) and the Group of Genetics and Can- Conclusion: For the bereaved family, we could provide more efficient cer. French genetic counsellors are also participating with the ESHG medical service not only physically but also mentally. It will make the and the European Network of Genetic Nurses and Counsellors to write family members to see doctors for regular check up and avoid another the professional and educational standards for genetic counsellors in future sudden death. It is very important that the collaboration between Europe. Genetics and Forensic medicine.Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 0 P01.31 Reporting on genetic disorders and syndromes in a half-day workshop for general practitioner (GP) trainers involved in cyprus supporting the genetic component of the national curriculum for gen- V. Christophidou Anastasiadou1,2, E. S. Aristidou1, A. Kotti2, T. Delikurt1; eral practice training. Instead of delivering the content as a series of 1Clinical Genetics Service, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, didactic lectures, the workshops were designed so that content was Cyprus, 2Clinical Genetics Service, Makarios Medical Center, Nicosia, Cyprus. provided using interactive case studies. This allowed GPs to draw on Cyprus is a small island, of 867,600 inhabitants, in the eastern Medi- their own clinical experience, and highlighted where genetics was rel- terranean. First human activity in 10,000 BC was followed by a Greek evant in primary care practice. Sessions were evaluated using a multi- settlement (1400BC-1050 BC) and many invaders added to the ge- staged approach, including evaluation forms immediately after the netic pool. workshop (n=51), and follow-up questionnaires (n=17) and interviews This study reports on the diversity of diagnosis established for 3400 (n=4) several months afterwards. Findings showed that the structure individuals in the years 1995-2009. A registry reports on medical and and delivery of the workshop served as a model for good teaching demographic data. The population, initially mainly Greek-Cypriots, practice, with participants using similar interactive case studies in their few Turkish Cypriots, Maronites, and Armenians, gradually became own teaching sessions. In addition, participants reported how using of mixed descent or more multiethnic. Referrals included all common the clinical scenarios in the workshops allowed reflection on their own indications. practice, which has resulted in GPs changing their clinical manage- 1007 patients were diagnosed. Monogenic disorders represented the ment. All GPs trainers (n=17) who returned the follow-up questionnaire largest category while chromosomal aberrations were less frequent. reporting changes in their clinical practice such as: changes to referral Neurofibromatosis type 1 and Trisomy 21 were the commonest ac- patterns; use of family history within consultations and improved com- cordingly. 96 patients were reported with multifactorial congenital munication with patients about genetic issues. The National Genetics anomalies and exposures accounted for 24 patients. 986 individuals Education and Development Centre is now offering this course to GP were referred for genetic counseling for various indications (except trainers throughout the UK. Thalassemia which is managed by the National Thalassemia center). Presymptomatic genetic counseling and testing was offered to 290 in- P01.34 Large normal („intermediate“) [27-35 cAGs] and dividuals. Several rare and very rare syndromes were recognized. reduced penetrance [36-39 cAGs] alelles are not a rare event in Discussion: Founders’ effect is evident in several communities and Huntington disease (HD) geographical areas. Congenital anomalies are under-represented J. Sequeiros1,2, E. Ramos1, J. Cerqueira1, M. Costa1, A. Sousa1,2, J. Pinto- probably due to the inconsistency in reporting and a high uptake of Basto1,2, I. Alonso1; prenatal surveillance leading several affected pregnancies to termina- 1IBMC, Univ. Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Portugal. tion. Genetic counselling initially was not appreciated but is now in- Four classes of alleles exist in HD, according to (CAG)n size; never- creasingly demanded. theless, only two outcomes (‘carrier’ or ‘non-carrier’) are usually dis- In conclusion, we are reporting on the evolution of clinical genetics cussed in genetic counselling, as the possible results of presymptom- services and the epidemiology of genetic disorders in Cyprus in the atic testing (PST). Though large normal alleles may produce ‘de novo’ years 1995-2009. expansions, little is known about their prevalence and impact in daily practice. P01.32 the genetic testing offer in Europe: the need for cross- We estimated the frequency of large normal (class 2) and reduced border testing penetrance (class 3) alleles, and the frequency of genotypes carrying M. Jovanovic1, E. Dequeker2, L. Desmet2, M. Morris2, J. Cassiman2, S. Aymé1; them, in (1) our diagnostic laboratory (1,214 samples, 350 families), 1Orphanet - INSERM SC11, Paris, France, 2EuroGentest, Leuven, Belgium. (2) our genetic counselling clinic (146 testees), and (3) our general Genetic tests are now offered internationally, through both public and population (2,000 control chromosomes). private sector genetic testing services. Physicians prescribing these Large normal alleles were 6% of population control alleles, 7% of con- tests and biologists receiving the samples need to know which tests sultands for PST, and 7% of all diagnostic samples (they represented are available, where they are performed and whether identified labo- 5% of all normal HD alleles at the laboratory). Reduced-penetrance ratories meet quality standards. To fulfill this need, www.orpha.net was alleles were found in only one control chromosome (0.1% individuals), launched thirteen years ago to set up a database of clinical labora- but in 5% of PST, and >2% of all lab samples (they were 4.3% of all tories in the field of rare diseases. Data was collected in 1 country in expansions found, and >9% in PST). 1997, 15 in 2003, 26 in 2006 and 38 in 2010, with resources from the Evidence thus showed that large normal alleles are relatively frequent EC DG Public Health. In collaboration with the EuroGentest Network in the general population, while reduced penetrance alleles are also of Excellence, information on quality management has been added to not rare at the lab or the clinic. Together, these two classes were pres- the Orphanet database over the past four years. Information on ge- ent in >10% of all consultands for PST. netic testing in Orphanet can be searched by disease name or gene The four existing classes of alleles must be addressed in pre-test (symbol or name in English) as well as by laboratory or professional. counselling. If not aware of all possible test outcomes, consultands The information provided on laboratories includes data on quality man- may become very distressed when learning that their results fall within agement. Currently, 956 laboratories offering tests for 1,559 genes are a grey-zone, rather than providing a definite prognosis for themselves registered. The test offer differs greatly from one large country to an- and/or their children (<90% cases). other: Germany (1,141 genes), France (874 genes), Italy (625 genes), Spain (582 genes), UK (414 genes). Medium and small-sized coun- P01.35 clinical coding of Rare and Genetic Diseases tries’ test offer ranges from 1 to 233 genes. This situation explains the M. Milicic Brandt, M. Cornell, A. Devereau; large cross-border flow of specimens, highlighting the need to provide National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom. access to services in other countries when necessary, especially for NGRL is participating in a clinical coding project that includes map- very rare diseases. According to available data, only testing for Cystic ping the Orphanet (www.orpha.net) rare disease catalogue to three fibrosis is provided by every country. The distribution of this test offer established medical terminologies, including SNOMED CT, in order to will be presented. improve the representation and traceability of rare diseases in health records and systems. Orphanet medical terminology contains data on P01.33 Achieving change in clinical management: results from a approximately 6,000 rare (largely genetic) diseases, relating clinical genetics education intervention signs and genes to diseases, including epidemiological data, as well M. Bishop1, S. Burke2, P. Farndon1; as classification of rare diseases. The Orphanet group are revising 1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, both their classification of rare diseases and the ICD-10 classification United Kingdom, 2Centre for Research in Medical and Dental Education, of rare diseases as part of this project and the development of ICD- University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. 11. While there is a continual emphasis on the need to educate non-genet- In order to enforce the consistency of Orphanet data we developed ic specialists in genetics, does education actually make any difference a logical (OWL) model and used automated reasoning to detect er- to the clinical management of patients? To answer this question, the rors. For example, we identified instances where epidemiological con- UK National Genetics Education and Development Centre developed straints were inconsistent between a disease and its sub-categories, Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 1 implying either errors in classification or in the epidemiological data. speech: he is not the unique information provider and his patient has Ensuring that the classification of diseases is correct is of great impor- his own opinion about genetic information. tance for producing valid mappings between different terminologies We therefore aim to discuss the potential impact of this evolution on and in ensuring the utility of the terminologies. patient/clinician relation and its incidence about clinical practice. The mapping process included several steps. The first, lexical map- ping, based on syntactic comparison of disease names, provided us P01.38 The study of polymorphic variants in the serotonin with a set of exact and partial matches. The second step included the receptor gene HtR2A have professional athletes. quality control of these mappings by clinical experts, and the last step A. Timkova, O. Gumerova, V. Gorbunova; used structural data, such as classifications of diseases, to provide Bashcir state pedagogical univercity from name it M.Akmulla, Ufa, Russian additional partial mappings. Our final goal is to revise SNOMED CT’s Federation. data on rare diseases by using mappings from Orphanet to this termi- Important indicators of the success of sporting activity is a resistance to nology. psychological stress, the ability to receive and processing of informa- tion, largely determined by the work of the neurotransmitter systems. P01.36 From newborn screening to primary prevention of One of the base genes neuromediator serotoninergic system is the hemoglobinopathies serotonin receptor gene HTR2A localized on 13.q -14 - q 21 chromo- J. O. Kaufmann1, I. Krapels2, B. Van Brussel1, R. C. Zekveld-Vroon3, J. C. some. The analysis of frequency distribution of alleles and genotypes Oosterwijk4, F. van Erp5, P. J. G. Zwijnenburg6, P. C. Giordano1; of the serotonin receptor in the group of sportsmans. The analysis of 1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, the frequency distribution of alleles and genotypes of the serotonin 3Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4University Medical Center receptor in the group of sportsmen. The analiz polymorphism A1438 Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5University Medical Center St Radboud, in the gene HTR2A conducted in 250 unrelated individuals by PCR Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6VuMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands. with subsequent processing amplifikons appropriate restriction endo- Newborn screening for sickle cell disease (SCD) started in the Neth- nuclease. Of these, 150 people who are not involved in sports, and erlands upon approval of the national health council. This was after 100 human professional athletes. Found a significant increase in the growing numbers of patients were born in the Netherlands, due to in- frequency of allele G (P = 0.01) and genotype GG (P = 0.005) in the creased immigration from endemic regions, their endogamous partner group of athletes on the background of reducing the frequency of allele choice, and their relative high number of consanguine marriages. The A (P = 0.002) and AA genotype (P = 0.005) in the comparison group.Al- first year of screening revealed a hemoglobinopathy in 64 children lele G polymorphic locus HTR2A in gene A1438G have may a positive (0.35‰) 41 of which had SCD and 806 (4.2 ‰) was a HbS carrier. potential for sports activities.This work was partially funded grant from The detection of carriers of sickle cell offers parents the chance to pre- the Ministry of Education of Russia „Thematic Plan for 2008-2010“. vent a possibly affected child in the next pregnancy. After indentifying a carrier the parents ought to be offered diagnostics and when both P01.39 Psychological well being and quality of life in are carriers the couple at risk should be referred to a genetic center. presymptomatic Huntington‘s Disease gene carriers. Therefore, we monitored the hemoglobinopathy intakes at the genetic S. Serpentini1, L. Dal Sasso1, P. Castellan1, E. Pasquin1, M. Balestrieri2, G. centers since the start of the newborn screening. Damante1, I. R. Lonigro1,3; We asked all 8 clinical genetic centers in the Netherlands for their HbP 1Istituto di Genetica - A.O.U., Udine, Italy, 2Clinica Psichiatrica - A.O.U., Udine, counseling’s and gave them a short questionnaire per case asking: Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche - Università, Udine, reason for referral, ethnic background, diagnosis and plans with re- Italy. gards to family planning. We got cooperation of 7 centers that provided Purpose: The aim of the study is to describe some preliminary data us with their anonymized data. Preliminary results show incidental re- about psychological well being and quality of life in presymthomatic ferrals after newborn screening. Reasons for not seeing these families Huntington’s Disease (HD) gene carriers after 6-12 months from DNA in the genetic centers may vary and remains unknown. One of the testing. The study is part of a larger, long-term research and has only a reasons maybe the pediatricians treating the affected children counsel descriptive purpose because of the small number of the sample. these families themselves, but in a worse case scenario parents get Methods: From May to December 2009, at the Institute of Genetics of no counseling and may be confronted with another ill child, without this Hospital/University “S. Maria della Misericordia” of Udine (Italy), we being an informed choice. evaluated 10 presymthomatic subjects resulted carriers of HD gene. The instruments used are: 1) a semi-structured interview; 2) the Psy- P01.37 clinical geneticists tomorrow: Are quantity & diversity of chological General Well-being Index (PWBGI); 3) the Short Form 36 information an opportunity or a trap? Health Survey Questionnaire (SF-36). S. Julia1,2, A. Soulier1, A. Cambon-Thomsen1; Results: Until now we assessed 10 patients (M:4, F: 6; mean age: 1UMR 558 Inserm, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, 2Service de 50,20, range age:28-75). The means and standard deviations of the Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France. PWBGI scales are: Anxiety 15,60 (4,90), Depression 10,80 (2,57), Clinical geneticists have to interpret genetic data coming from the lab- Well-being 10,40 (3,56), Self control 9,70 (3,53), Global health 9,60 oratory and to position themselves in the “information society”. Their (4,55), Vitality 10,20 (4,18). The means and standard deviations of the interpretative task tightly depends on 1. the nature of data provided SF-36 scales are: Physical functioning 70 (30,83), Role-Physical 47,5 by genetic testing technologies and 2. the knowledge of the patient. (50,62), Bodily pain 78,6 (30,13), General health 53,22 (31,66), Vitality Patients can indeed access information and their own understanding 51,11 (25,34), Social functioning 72,50 (28,75), Role-emotional 60,00 of genetics is a relevant parameter in the patient/clinician communica- (51,64), Mental health 62,22 (18,98). Our mean scores found to be tion. Through the development of new technologies - both in the labo- lower than normative scores. ratory and in the society - clinical geneticists will therefore have to face Conclusions: Our preliminary descriptive results indicate a critical con- new kinds and new sources of information. dition in the psychological well being and the quality of life of the pre- Rapid developments of high throughput technology (HTT) let expect sympotamic HD gene carriers and suggest the importance of a specific that new genetic testing technologies will be implemented soon in psychological intervention. Therefore, we consider necessary to con- clinical laboratories. Sequencing genes generates quantitatively abun- tinue this study with a larger sample. dance of data and qualitatively complex and heterogeneous informa- tion with different levels of clinical relevance. As data interpretation P01.40 An analysis of the impact of illness representation in becomes tougher and unexpected health related information are more predicting distress in breast cancer patients; implications for common, emerging technologies will obviously challenge medical genetic counselling practices. R. Moldovan; At the same time as clinicians deal with growing uncertainty, new Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj Napoca, Romania. technologies of communication provide diverse sources of informa- The role played by psychological, social and cultural factors in health tion to patients. Networks strengthen patients’ communities, websites and illness related behavioral and emotional responses is no longer make genetic testing available directly to consumers and information breaking news. Individual differences such as various cognitions have flows literally on line. Diversity of information challenges the clinician’s been shown to contribute in variability in distress when confronted with Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 2 stressful events or certain illnesses. Still, there is considerable lack of community acceptance of depression-risk genotyping, even though empirical data concerning the impact that illness representation has in a predisposition to depression may only manifest upon exposure to predicting distress for patients diagnosed with breast cancer. The pur- stressful life events. Our results suggest there will be a strong demand pose of this mixed methods study was to investigate the interrelations for predictive genetic testing for complex multifactorial disorders. between illness representation and distress levels in breast cancer patients. The illness representation of 30 breast cancer patients was P01.43 Genetic counselling and testing in inherited monogenic evaluated with semi-structured interviews; distressed was assessed cardiac disorders : interviews with patients and their families using the Beck Depression Inventory, State Trait Anxiety Inventory S. Fokstuen1, D. Kumar2, J. L. Blouin1, A. Clarke2; and the Profile of Mood States. Results revealed no significant differ- 1Genetic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, ences between levels of distress for different representations of illness United Kingdom. (p>0.05). Implications for genetic counselling are discussed. Experience with genetic counselling and testing for monogenic cardiac disorders is limited. What has been learned from dealing with other P01.41 Genetic causes of intellectual disability conditions like Huntington’s disease or familial cancer disorders may G. Cozaru, C. Papari; be applicable in these families too but the context of inherited cardiac “Andrei Şaguna” University, Constanta, Romania. conditions present very particular problems, especially sudden cardiac This paper reviews several genetic syndromes that are associated with death in young adults, restrictions placed on exercise and uncertainty intellectual disability (ID). ID is a condition characterized by significant- regarding the prognosis. In addition to the advantages and disadvan- ly sub-average intellectual functioning (often expressed as I.Q. < 70 to tages of diagnostic testing from a clinical perspective, there are issues 75) combined with limitations of > 2 of the following: communication, of privacy or disclosure and coping within the family with the risk of self-direction, social skills, self-care, use of community resources, and transmission and the possible psychological consequences. One is- maintenance of personal safety. Between 1 % and 3 % of a population sue that requires particular attention is how families experience and have an intellectual disability. Management consists of education, fam- cope with being told that several of them may die at any moment. ily counseling, and social support. Problems with the transmission of such information take different forms We want to present 5 cases: Cri du chat syndrome, Down syndrome, depending upon whether the information is to be passed “vertically” to Turner syndrome, Coffin-Lowry syndrome and Sotos syndrome. All a child or “horizontally” to a sibling or other relative and also depending this cases have in common: delayed intellectual development, imma- upon the availability of preventive and/or therapeutic strategies. These ture behavior, limited self-care skills, but genetic causes are different. issues were discussed in a small number of interviews with patients All children with an intellectual disability (mental retardation) or global and/or their families, who have experienced cardiac death due to an developmental delay should have a comprehensive evaluation to es- inherited cardiomyopathy in a young adult first degree relative. We tablish the etiology of the disability. present their comments about genetic counselling and genetic test- Family support and counseling are crucial. As soon as ID is confirmed ing. It clearly emerges that genetic counselling is a key component in or strongly suspected, the parents should be informed and given am- the overall management of families affected with inherited monogenic ple time to discuss causes, effects, prognosis, genetic recurrence risk, cardiac disorders and that more research in the personal experience education and training of the child, and the importance of balancing of these families is necessary to improve medical management and known prognostic risks against negative self-fulfilling prophecies in support. which diminished expectations result in poor functional outcomes later in life. P01.44 Genetic counselling and testing in cardiomyopathies A diagnosis also avoids unnecessary testing and can lead to oppor- N. Marziliano, P. Merlini, M. Frigerio, G. Masciocco, S. Veronese, F. Orsini, A. tunities for improved health and functional outcomes. Finally, early Colosimo, C. Lauricella, M. Gambacorta, F. Mauri; comprehensive prenatal care and preventive measures prior to and Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedale Cà Granda Niguarda, MILANO, Italy. during pregnancy increase a woman‘s chances of preventing intellec- The recent and major breakthrough in the molecular genetics of Car- tual disability. diomyopathies has created a new understanding of these diseases, and also new expectations regarding the applications in clinical prac- P01.42** Public interest in depression-risk genotyping in a large tice. A new task for Cardiologists and geneticists in the cardiovascu- national sample. lar settings is therefore to integrate this new knowledge in order to A. Wilde1,2, B. Meiser3, P. B. Mitchell1,2,4, D. Hadzi-Pavlovic1,2, P. R. Schofield5,4,6; improve the management of the patients and their families. Beyond 1School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia, the traditional goal of genetic counselling, defined as “a communica- 2Black Dog Institute, Sydney, Australia, 3Prince of Wales Clinical School, tion process which deals with the human and psychological problems University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 4Brain Sciences associated with the occurrence or the risk of occurrence of a genetic UNSW, Sydney, Australia, 5Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, disorder in a family”, the main goals are (i) to inform the patients and Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6School of Medical Sciences, University of New South family about the genetic aspects of the disease, including the risk of Wales, Sydney, Australia. transmitting the disease within the family; (ii) organise appropriate Introduction: Despite international concern about unregulated predic- cardiac screening and follow-up of the relatives; (iii) discuss genetic tive genetic testing, there is surprisingly little data on both the deter- testing, which may improve the medical management in various situ- minants of community interest in such testing and its psychosocial ations. impacts. By showing a clinical and diagnostic work-up of a family with a com- Methods: A large population-based public survey with community pound heterozigosity in the MYBPC3 gene, these objectives are dwelling adults (N=1046) ascertained through random digit dialling. At- achieved taken into account the specific issues related to a genetic dis- titudes were assessed via structured interviews. ease, such as the psychological, social, professional, ethical and legal Results: The study found strong interest in predictive genetic testing for implications. Genetic counselling and genetic testing should therefore a reported susceptibility to major depression. Once perceived benefits be performed by trained health care providers and usually through a and disadvantages of such testing had been considered, there was sig- close collaboration between different and complimentary specialties. nificantly greater interest in seeking such a test through a health care provider (62%) compared to direct-to-consumer (40%) (p<0.001). Per- P01.45 the neonatal screening programme in Leningrad sonal history of mental illness (OR= 2.53, p<0.001); self-estimation of province: 2009 being at higher than average risk for depression (OR = 1.84, p<0.001); I. A. Ivanov1, M. O. Mkheidze2,1, E. S. Davidova1, I. F. Mamontova1, I. M. belief that evidence of genetic component for a mental illness would Andreeva1, S. E. Khalchitsky1; increase rather than decrease stigma (OR=1.51, p<0.001); sexual 1District Children Hospital, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical abuse as a casual attribution for depression (OR = 1.24, p <0.001) Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. and endorsement of perceived benefits of genetic testing (OR=3.18, Genetic neonatal screening is an important public health and clinical p<0.001) significantly predicted interest in having such a test. activity. In Leningrad province the neonatal screening programme was Conclusions: Despite finding attitudes that genetic links to mental ill- expanded from 2 to 5 disorders for which screening met the Wilson ness would increase rather than decrease stigma, we found strong and Jungner criteria, especially regarding treatability. In 2009 Labora-Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  tory of molecular genetics and cytogenetics (LMGC) as a unit of the the groups of the subjects (100%) agreed that the destruction of an District Children Hospital realized neonatal screening for phenylketon- embryo prior to implantation less wrong than destruction of the fetus uria (PKU), galactosemia (Gal), congenital hypothyroidism (CH), con- inside the uterus in comparison to only 30% of the PGD group. Views genital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), cystic fibrosis (CF). Guthrie blanks were more mixed for the other (IVF) procedure. spotted with newborn’s blood (12800 infants) were analyzed with au- Conclusion The outcomes of this study demonstrate that PGD might tomatic fluorescent methods and fluoroimmunoassay. The “PKU-neo- be considered as a valid alternative to prenatal diagnosis. However, screen” reagents (ZAO “Immunoscreen” Moscow, Russia) were used couples referred for PGD must be selected and counselled appropri- in PKU screening. Screening for Gal was realized with Neonatal Total ately, considering the complexity of the treatment and the relatively low Galactose kit (PerkinElmer.Inc). The Delfia® Neonatal hTSH assay take-home baby rate. was used in CH screening. A risk group for CAH was formed accord- ing to the data of the Delfia® Neonatal 17-α-OH-progesterone kit. CF P01.48 The structure of the public attitude toward the genome screening was based on the Delfia® Neonatal IRT assay. Two infants research by the latent class analysis in Japan had constantly high levels of Phe and were found to be PKU infants. Z. Yamagata1, T. Maeda2, K. Muto3, A. Nagai1, A. Tamakoshi4, I. Ishiyama5; 30 babies were found to be a risk group of CH. 17 infants formed a 1Department of Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Yamanashi, risk group of CAH. Nobody was shown to be included in risk lists of Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan, 2The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tokyo, Gal and CF. Clinical geneticists of LMGC confirm hereditary disorders, Japan, 3The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, tokyo, carry out long-term outpatient care, dietary management and genetic Japan, 4Aichi Medical University, Aichi, Japan, 5Teikyo-Gakuen Junior College, counselling Yamanashi, Japan. The purpose of this study was to clarify the structure of the public at- P01.46 Newborn hearing screening titude toward the genome research by the latent class analysis. The E. Severin1, A. Toma2, C. Albu1, D. Albu1, C. Sarafoleanu1, C. Dragomir3, A. nationalwide surveys about the attitude toward the genome research Stan3, D. T. Stefanescu3, L. Savu3; were conducted in 2005 and 2009 in Japan. The participants were 1“Carol Davila“ Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Panait Sirbu“ Hospital, comprised of 4,000 people (age, 20-69) in 2005 and in 2009, selected Bucharest, Romania, 3Genetic Lab, Bucharest, Romania. from the Japanese general population by using the two-step stratified Background: newborn hearing screening has been instituted in many random sampling method. Five clusters were assumed as an explana- countries since the identification of congenital hearing loss in the neo- tion model of six variables related to the knowledge of genome and nate period, followed by intervention within the first few months, is criti- attitudes toward genomic research promotion about three themes; cal for limited communication, low school achievements and life-long basic genome research, genome research related to agriculture and dependency. In the absence of newborn screening, the hearing loss medicine at the survey in 2005. They were able to be named “Group might not be noticed by parents until the child begins to have difficul- of aggressive promotion” (40.8%), “Group of passive support” (20.2%), ties at speaking and learning at a later age. Approximately 90% of “Group not making judgment” (18.5), “Group making prudent judg- children with deafness are born to hearing parents. Most cases with ment” (16.5%), and “Group not interested in genome”. The results in non-syndromic deafness inherited the disorder in an autosomal reces- 2009 were almost the same as that in 2005. It is possible to forecast sive manner. to which cluster to belong according to respondent‘s attribute, and we Aims of the study: identification of congenital hearing loss in children can forecast the reaction to other questions by using a cluster oppo- before three months of age; detection of risk factors known to be as- sitely. For examples, “Group of aggressive promotion” is the layer of a sociated with congenital hearing loss. high academic background, and is positive to donate their blood for the Methods and Subjects: Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) and auditory genome research, “Group making prudent judgment” is high academic brainstem response (ABR) were performed for 4303 newborns. Physi- background persons as same as “Group of aggressive promotion”, cal examinations and family history were used to get information about and is interesting in the science and technology, but is negative to the hereditary / syndromic hearing loss. blood donation for the research. Results: 23 newborns did not pass the OAEs and ABR. All of them were referred to audiologic evaluation to confirm if the hearing loss is P01.49 cross-disease support group present. Physical examination revealed no other findings associated R. Rupps1,2, C. J. Condin3, I. Jordan2, C. du Souich1,2, C. F. Boerkoel1,2, W. H. with a syndrome. Four newborns with hearing parents were found to McKellin3,2; have sensorineural hearing loss. They were referred to genetic coun- 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, seling and testing for the etiologic diagnosis. BC, Canada, 2Rare Disease Foundation, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Department Conclusion: screening newborns for hearing loss is highly accurate of Anthropology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. and leads to earlier identification and treatment of infants with hear- Background: Rare diseases are individually uncommon (affecting few- ing loss. All newborns identified with congenital hearing loss require a er than 1 in 2000) but collectively affect approximately 1 in 10. Parents comprehensive genetic evaluation. of children with very rare and undiagnosed diseases often feel hope- less and alone. P01.47 Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis in saudi Arabia: Hypothesis: Support addressing the needs and isolation of individu- Parents Experience and Attitudes als and families with very rare and undiagnosed diseases is possible A. Al Suliaman; within a diverse community. Department of Genetics, Research Centre, King Faisal Hospital and Research Results: To test this hypothesis, we profiled a series of individuals and Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. families with very rare and undiagnosed diseases. Shared features Background preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) has been pro- that we identified included sense of isolation, need for story-sharing posed as a valuable alternative to prenatal diagnosis (PND) to select and desire for more information. Distinguishing features that we identi- genetically ‘normal’ human embryos and transfer them to the uterus of fied included parents experiencing greater anxiety with new compared a woman. This study evaluates a range of social and moral concerns to more established diagnoses and having an undiagnosed compared of Saudi couples with and without experience of the IVF procedure to a known condition. The parents identified common themes of ba- might have about the various procedures available. sic medical, educational, social and advocacy needs. Based on these Methods A total of 184 subjects attending the King Faisal Special- commonalities, we formed a trial support group composed of 19 fami- ist Hospital and Research Centre in Riyadh were interviewed using lies with 18 diagnoses. Over the course of 2 years, our observations a semi-structured questionnaire. 87 of the subjects have complete at are that it is possible to provide cross-disease support on issues rel- least one cycle of the in vitro fertilization (IVF) procedure. evant to a variety of disorders. Results Forty-nine (100%) of the oncology group and forty-three (90%) Conclusion: Cross-disease support groups are very effective for ad- of the ENT group were personally accept PGD technology. All the on- dressing the shared medical, educational, social, advocacy, and re- cology and ENT group who would personally consider PGD were will- search needs of the community with very rare and undiagnosed dis- ing for others to be offered the procedure. Specific concerns about eases. Our model allows universal establishment of such local support PGD related to the IVF procedure, waiting for the pregnancy results groups and egg collection were the most commonly mentioned concerns. All Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  P01.50 WHO International Classification of Diseases (ICD) tion allows for best management of at-risk individuals and prevents un- Revision Process: state of Art for genetic diseases necessary examination under anaesthetic (EUA), which can be trau- S. Aymé, B. Bellet, A. Rath; matic for the child and family. This review identified families who had Orphanet - INSERM SC11, Paris, France. attended West of Scotland genetics over the past twenty years with WHO has established various Topic Advisory Groups to serve as plan- unilateral or bilateral retinoblastoma. We identified 12 families who ning and coordinating advisory bodies in the update and revision pro- had stored DNA samples but not had complete analysis. The samples cess for specific areas of the ICD. A TAG for rare diseases (including were sent for analysis of RB1 by bi-directional sequencing and MLPA. all genetic diseases) was established in April 2007 as rare diseases Germline mutations were identified in six bilateral cases, including one should now be traceable in mortality and morbidity information sys- mosaic, and testing is now available to relatives. One bilateral case tems. The production of the basic information needed to establish an requires additional analysis by RT-PCR. No mutation was identified in Alpha draft of the classification of rare diseases has been assigned to the five individuals with unilateral retinoblastoma and no other known Orphanet. The Orphanet database includes over 6,000 distinct phe- family history. Unnecessary EUA may now be avoided in their relatives notypes which are classified according to published classifications. and their families reassured. These families highlight the challenges of These classification systems are mainly based on scientific grounds rare conditions, where results may take many years and families may (aetiology and mechanism). Orphanet has developed a complemen- need support to adapt to new information many years after diagnosis. tary, strictly clinical in-house classification to meet clinicians’ needs. Available on Orphanet’s website, this classification serves to elaborate P01.53 conceptual frameworks determine experts’ views on an ICD revision proposal. The revised chapters currently circulating clinical use of schizophrenia genetics results among experts for review are Haematology, Endocrinology, Nutrition, T. Vrijenhoek1, C. van El2, H. G. Brunner1, A. Geurts van Kessel1, M. C. Metabolism and Immunology, Neurology and Malformation. Revised Cornel2, J. A. Veltman1, A. Nelis3; chapters follow a primarily clinical approach, only secondarily an ae- 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical tiological one up to the gene level. When several names are possible Centre, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, for a disease, descriptive names formed in accordance with a clinical 2Department of Clinical Genetics and EMGO Institute for Health and Care approach are preferred. Every entity is assigned a unique identifying Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Centre for number. Rare diseases affecting several body systems are included in Society and Genomics (CSG), Institute for Science, Innovation and Society, every relevant chapter, as ICD11 will be polyaxial: a main code is also Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. selected for linearisation purposes, according to the severest involve- Recent developments in microarray technology have enabled large- ment and/or the specialist most likely to manage the disease. In some scale genetic studies on schizophrenia, and have led to the discov- cases, the choice is open for debate. Input from the Rare Disease ery of many risk alleles. This development has been accompanied by Community is expected. promising expectations regarding clinical applications. However, most of the known genetic variants meet validity nor utility requirements for P01.51 An overview of rare diseases research in Europe based application in clinical practice. Ongoing discussions are not only about on data from the Orphanet database. when or under what conditions, but also if results from large-scale N. Martin, N. Doulet, V. Hivert, S. Aymé; schizophrenia genetics studies are relevant for clinical use. Based on a Orphanet - INSERM SC11, Paris, France. literature review and in-depth interviews with experts, we explored the Orphanet compiles 6500 research projects. This information been arguments used in these discussions. We have identified four different analysed to identify areas needing collaborative research projects and lines of arguing, which state that high-throughput schizophrenia stud- to target future calls for proposals. The analysis of the distribution of ies will: (1) eventually reveal clinically relevant data; (2) not reveal clini- number of diseases by number of treatments in development shows cally relevant data directly; (3) only reveal clinically relevant data when that most RD have no more than 3 products in development, whereas combined with non-genetic (environmental) factors; or (4) eventually 53 RD have over three such products. Similar analysis results were be translated into a clinical setting, irrespective of clinical relevance. obtained for clinical trials, marketed drugs, patient registries and pre- We show that the experts’ perception of the relevance of large scale clinical/epidemiological/basic research. Some of the diseases over- genetic data predominantly depends on their conceptual framework of represented upstream in the process of R&D (with a treatment on the the relationship between genes and schizophrenia. This is exemplified market or drugs in development) are well represented regarding ongo- by discussions around the development of direct-to-consumer (DTC) ing research (Cystic fibrosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension, some genetic tests. Furthermore, the experts’ conceptual framework deter- rare cancers). Diseases with a higher prevalence are anticipated to mines their perception of ‘schizophrenia’ itself, which is partly reflected have more treatments in development: this assumption is not backed in recent discussions on DSM-V. The challenges resulting from large up by our data analysis. The most developed areas where the ones scale genetic research and the demand from consumers and patients for which large European networks and consortium have been estab- for genetic testing call for a solid infrastructural and translational strat- lished as it is the only way to achieve the critical mass necessary in egy for schizophrenia genetic research. terms of resources and expertise. However the sustainability of the structures which have been created during the development of these P01.54 screening tests for Genetic counselling in tURKEY collaborations, such as patient registries, biobanks, and technological Y. Erdem1, F. Teksen2; platforms, is very difficult to ensure to date. The EC could be involved 1Ankara University Faculty of Health Sciences, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara in the financing of the coordination and maintenance of these struc- University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. tures through a specific call for proposals. This work was supported Turkey is a country where consanguineous marriages are quite com- by the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (HEALTH- mon. Approximately of one-fourth of marriages in Turkey is consan- F2-2008-201230). guineous and as a result, the incidence of autosomal recessive dis- eases are very high. P01.52 Review of Retinoblastoma families and RB1 mutational In order to avoid the recurrence of these diseases, Ministry of Health analysis in the West of scotland genetics service has started screening programmes. For instance, in 1995, a premarital S. Gibson, V. Murday; screening programme aiming to reduce the incidence of thalassemia Ferguson Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics, Glasgow, United Kingdom. major at 33 city center; in 2002, “Phenylketonuria (PKU) Screening Rare inherited diseases can cause challenges for genetic services, Programme”; in 2003, national newborn hearing screening program both clinical and molecular. Retinoblastoma is a rare childhood cancer (NNHSP); in 2006, congenital hypothyroidism screening program; in of the eye. Bilateral retinoblastoma is caused by de novo or inherited 2008, a metabolic disorder, Biotinidase screening programmes were germline RB1 mutations. Most unilateral cases are due to somatic mu- established. tations. As the germline and somatic forms cannot be distinguished Beta-thalassemia prevalence in the country is 2.1%. There are approx- clinically, molecular diagnosis is essential for affected families. It is imately 1.300.000 carriers and 4000 patients in Turkey. The frequency important that testing is conducted by an experienced laboratory; that of PKU is 1 in 4500 live births and 1 in 10,000 live births in the United results are given to families in a timely manner and at-risk relatives are States comparatively. The newborn hearing, PKU, hypothyroidism, and identified in order to target screening. Identification of a genetic muta- Biotinidase screening programmes were applied nearly to 95.1% of all Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  newborns in last five years according to Ministry of Health report. P01.57 Providing access to genetic variation: The SNP & SEQ In conclusion, it was observed that, premarital screening is a very use- technology Platform at Uppsala University ful tool for detecting carrier couples and an effective way of controlling T. Axelsson, L. Bäckström, E. Englund, C. Enström, O. Karlberg, K. Larsson, the recurrence of some of the autosomal recessive genetic diseases. U. Liljedahl, M. Lindersson, P. Lundmark, D. Magnusdottir, C. Pöntinen, I. Ö. Also, there is the necessity to newborn screening programmes. Thorsteinsson, A. Wiman, T. Öst, A. Syvänen; In addition to screening programmes, the establishment of Genetic Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. Counseling Services is also very important and the employment of high The SNP & SEQ Technology Platform (www.genotyping.se) performs quality educated genetic counselors in these centers is of great value SNP genotyping and next generation DNA sequencing (NGS) as a ser- as they have critical roles in the prevention of inherited diseases. vice to academic groups in Sweden and the other Nordic countries and as partner in international collaborative projects. The platform offers P01.55 Prevalent mutant alleles in connexin 26 ( GJB2 ) to genotyping services to research projects from single SNP-markers to romanian children with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic genome-wide panels of 1 million SNPs in hundreds or thousands of deafness samples, both for association studies and analysis of copy number C. Strugaru1, L. Bohaltea1, R. Calarasu2, A. Branzan3; alterations and DNA-methylation. The genotyping services include 1Department of Genetics „Carol Davila“ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, all steps from target selection and assay design, to production scale Bucharest,, Romania, 2Department of Oto-rhino-laringology - „Prof. Dr. Dorin genotyping and quality assessment of the data. Small panels of 1- Hociota“ Phonoaudiology and Laringology Hospital, Bucharest,, Romania, 12 SNPs are analyzed by fluorescent single base primer extension, 3Department of Pediatrics „Dr. Victor Babes“ Diagnostic & Treatment Center, medium multiplex genotyping is performed by the Golden Gate assay, Bucharest,, Romania. and highly multiplexed and genome-wide genotyping by the Infinium II Inherited hearing impairment affects about 1 in 1000 newborns. Up assay (Illumina). Sequencing services are provided for all NGS-appli- to 50 percent of all patients with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic cations using two Genome Analyzer instruments (Illumina). We have IIx deafness in different populations have mutations in the gene encod- developed a lab-data system for handling and storing information on ing the gap-junction protein connexin 26 ( GJB2 ) at locus DFNB1 on samples, markers and genotypes, and for quality control and delivery chromosome 13q12. of the genotype data. The genotyping process is accredited according We performed mutation screening of 50 probands for GJB2 in non- to the European ISO/IEC 17025:2005 quality standard. For storing and syndromic hearing loss families, including those with cases of sporadic analyzing NGS data using computer cluster hardware we collaborate deafness, which were compatible with recessive inheritance. with UPPMAX (Uppsala Multidisciplinary Center for Advanced Compu- 35delG and 167delT are two GJB2 alleles that cause nonsyndromic tational Science). Most of the completed genotyping and sequencing recessive deafness, and carrier rates for these mutant alleles may be projects have studied human complex diseases but several projects in as high as 4% in some ethnic populations (Estivill et al. 1998; Morell other species in evolutionary studies and comparative genomics have et al.1998). also been conducted. For a complete list of publications to which the However, a large fraction (20 to 63 percent) of patients with GJB2 mu- SNP & SEQ Technology Platform has contributed, see www.genotyp- tations have only one mutant allele; the accompanying mutation has ing.se. not been identified. In our study, these results highlight the usefulness of Cx26 mutation P01.58 Ethical Aspects of Prenatal Testing for screening for genetic counseling and suggest importance of entire se- Neurodegenerative and Nervous-muscle Hereditary Diseases in quencing of the gene responsible for DNFB1. sakha (Yakutia S. K. Kononova1, O. G. Sidorova1, V. L. Izhevskaya2; P01.56 A practice framework for promoting appropriate 1Yakut Research Center of Complex Medical Problems, Siberian Branch of reporting and use of molecular genetic test results: combining RAMS, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, education, test result reporting, and information resources Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. I. M. Lubin1, M. Scheuner2,3, J. V. Henderson4, W. A. Faucett1,5, L. Hilborne2; Genetic counseling of total 38 pregnant women at risk for spinocer- 1Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States, ebellar ataxia type 1 (SCAI, n=26) and muscular dystrophy (MD, 2RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, United States, 3VA Greater Los n=12) have been carried out. All individuals were sakha nationality; Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States, women at risk for SCAI significantly more often had higher education 4Dartmouth Medical School, Dartmouth, NH, United States, 5Emory University than women at risk for MD (76.9% and 33.3%, p<0.05). Also, pregnant School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States. women at risk for SCAI were more likely than individuals with MD to Clinical molecular genetic testing for heritable conditions is a growing perceive that prenatal diagnostics would influence their life. In SCAI segment of laboratory medicine. However, studies suggest that clini- group 14(53.8%) women requested prenatal testing then in MD group cians are challenged in staying up to date with knowledge about the -10 (83,3%). Pregnant women at risk for SCAI more often didn’t want genetic tests used in their medical practices and this increases the prenatal testing than in MD group (46.2% and 16.2% respectively, risk that patient care will be compromised. To address this concern, p<0.05). The relation of women at risk to prenatal diagnostics can be we propose a practice model to promote appropriate clinical decision caused a number of the reasons. The first reason is poor information making that combines education, effective laboratory reporting of test about prenatal diagnostics, confirmed by questionnaire‘s data of the results, and access to credible and useful information relevant to the sakha rural population. The second one is financial reason, so as not test ordered and result reported. This model is based upon several every rural family has a possibility to get to Yakutsk for a genetic coun- studies that are now complete and will be summarized. Some of the seling and DNA testing. Another possible reason is the ethnical fea- issues that the model addresses include 1) variations in the use of tures of sakha character: in interpretation of such a philosophical cat- terminology and nomenclature, 2) understanding the relevance of the egory as a destiny, that is patience in confronting of destiny‘s strokes indication(s) for testing, 3) effectively communicating the limitations of such as hereditary disease transmitting in the generation. the test method and result interpretation, 4) integrating knowledge of family history, race ethnicity, and other factors that are necessary for P01.59 Teaching genetic counseling to first year medical interpreting the test result, and 5) using the test result report as a tool students for clinical decision making. An interactive, multimedia education pro- R. Dragotoiu; gram targeting clinicians has been developed to support this practice Medical and Pharmacy University „Carol Davila“, Bucuresti, Romania. model. We facilitated collaboration between clinicians and laboratory Should genetic counseling be taught or is it encompassed in the over- professionals who evaluated test result reporting processes and de- all ethical concepts first year medical students bear among their knowl- veloped a clinician-friendly laboratory test result report that has been edge? Philosophers have assumed that morality is an inborn human adapted to a number of clinical scenarios. Combining these tools with trait and science has nowadays established the cortical regions which access to readily available information resources should prove use- are activated while making explicit right or wrong judgments as well ful to practicing clinicians by enhancing professional competency and as while facing situations containing implicit moral issues. Whether a promoting good clinical decision making. result of specific inborn brain development or interneuronal connec- tions, a question raises: „Can genetic counseling issues prove that Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy  their ethical aspects show a tendency of being either inherited or al- tized (M=2.39) if carrier status would be identified. Awareness and ready gained through learning until becoming a student?“ attitude towards carrier testing explained future reproductive choice After having read an article about the discovery of the CF gene, stu- (R2=.21; p < .001). dents had to answer 3 questions motivating their opinion. They were Conclusion: All responding mothers showed high interest in receiving asked if considering right or not, that persons with genetic disorders information on both thalassemia and carrier testing. The less educated took part in the researches concerning their disease, acknowledg- and/ or the more deprived they were, the keener they were on receiv- ing that genetic disorders are rare and often severe; then, if in case ing this information. Awareness of thalassemia was low. Even mothers of monogenic diseases with known gene anomalies they believed with affected children seemed unaware of the inheritance pattern of (thought) a screening in the teaching units to detect carriers of auto- the disease, showing the need for genetic counseling in Indonesia. It somal or X-linked genes could now cause in Romania unhappiness, is therefore advised not only to raise awareness on thalassemia, but to discomfort, panic, because those persons would feel ‘labeled’ as ‚ill‘ in better educate healthcare professionals as well. front of friends and society, in general; lastly, if they considered useful or not the premarital carrier state detection. No discussions had taken P01.62** Usefulness of Factor V Leiden mutation testing in place about genetic counseling during the workshops (and lectures), clinical practice the results reflecting only the students’ personal views. E. Ø. Blinkenberg1, A. Kristoffersen2, S. Sandberg2, V. M. Steen1,3, G. Houge1,3; The pitfalls of the study and the students’ answers are discussed for 1Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University asserting the conclusion. Hospital, Norway, NO-5021 Bergen, Norway, 2Laboratory of Clinical Biochemistry, Haukeland University Hospital, Norway, NO-5021 Bergen, P01.60 co-presence of deletional mutations on alpha globin Norway, 3Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway. genes in the beta thalassemia carriers in tehran We have investigated the clinical usefulness of the Activated protein B. Zarbakhsh, E. Farshadi, F. Eghbalpour, m. Mohammadi, A. Amirian, M. C resistance (APCR)/factor V Leiden mutation (FVL) test by send- Jafari, S. Jamali, S. Zeinali; ing out questionnaires to all Norwegian physicians who ordered Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. these tests from our publicly funded service laboratory during a three The exact determination of gene defect for thalassemia carriers is es- months period, and 70% (267/383) responded. Indications for testing, sential for premarital screening. It will also help the genetic counselor patient follow-up, the use of APCR versus FVL tests, and differences to advise the family accordingly. Among 142 blood samples from PND in practice between hospital doctors and GP‘s were examined. We (prenatal diagnosis) center of Pasteur Institute of Iran which had ex- found that 46% of the APCR/FVL tests were predictive tests, ordered act mutation on beta globin gene, we performed simultaneously some for risk assessment in healthy individuals with no previous history of molecular experiences such as Multiplex gap-PCR, ARMS-PCR and VTE. Among these, 42% of the tests were taken on the initiative of sequencing for detecting probable mutation on their alpha globin gene the patient, and 24% were screening tests before prescription of oral cluster. contraceptives. Fifty-four per cent of the tests were classified as diag- All samples (142) had 25 different mutations on their beta globin gene, nostic, among which 42% were ordered due to a previous history of but just one mutation on alpha globin gene in 16 samples successively VTE, and 22% due to a history of brain stroke or myocardial infarction. identified. 15 samples were heterozygote and one sample was homo- The prevalence of FVL heterozygotes was not significantly different zygote for deletional alpha mutation named-α3.7. All these 16 samples between the predictive and diagnostic test groups, 26% and 20%, re- had 8 different mutations on their beta globin gene, on which 7 sam- spectively. Only the predictive tests influenced patient follow-up. Here, ples were IVSII-I and 3 samples were IVSI-5 and simultaneously all 16 physician‘s advice to patients depended on the test result. In general, samples had -α3.7mutation on their alpha globin gene cluster. the clinical usefulness of APCR/FVL testing was low. Many tests were Through these 16 samples, the descriptive statistics of the mean performed on unsubstantiated or vague indications. Furthermore, nor- value of HbA2, were 4.2± 1.0, and for MCV: 67.3±5.8, and for MCH: mal test results led to unwarranted refrain from giving advice about 20.9±2.7. antithrombotic measures, to the potential harm of the patient. Type and frequency of mutations in population with high prevalence of hemoglobin disorder is very variable. In the several publications from P01.63 How do clinical geneticists-in-training spend their our geographical region, it is obvious that IVSII-I is the most prevalent working hours? mutation in the beta thalassemia patients and the most prevalent mu- B. R. Diness; tation among alpha thalassemia carriers is -α3.7. Co-presence of both Department of Clinical Genetics, Juliane Marie Centret, Rigshospitalet, mutation in globin genes in chromosome 16 and chromosome11, is Copenhagen OE, Denmark. distinctly -α3.7 with IVSII-I. Aim: To determine how clinical geneticists in training spend their time and to compare this to doctors in other specialties. P01.61 Feasibility of Preconception screening for thalassaemia Method: Time-motion study. A clinical geneticist-in-training recorded in indonesia: Exploring the Opinion of Javanese mothers her activities prompted by an alarm clock at ten minutes intervals dur- C. G. Widayanti1, A. Ediati1,2, M. Tamam3, S. M. H. Faradz1,2, E. A. Sistermans4, ing five consecutive workdays. Activities were categorised as direct M. C. Cornel4,5, A. C. Plass4,5; patient care, indirect patient care, administrative tasks, conference 1Diponegoro University, Semarang, Indonesia, 2Center for Biomedical Research participation, external professional communication of laboratory re- (CEBIOR), Semarang, Indonesia, 3Dr Kariadi Hospital Diponegoro University, sults and test options, research, break, and other. Semarang, Indonesia, 4VU University medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Results: 235 observations were recorded. The proportion of time spent 5The EMGO-institute for Health and Care research, Amsterdam, Netherlands. on different categories of work is shown in table 1. Approximately half Background: Thalassaemia has become a major health problem in of the time was used on patient care, but less than a third of this time Indonesia. It has been estimated that about 10% of the population car- was spent directly interacting with patients. ries the mutated gene. However, there are no formal recommendations Discussion: Studies of doctors-in-training are sparse, but one large for thalassaemia screening. This study aimed to explore awareness of study from Australia documenting the activities of doctors-in-training thalassemia, and attitude regarding carrier testing among Javanese in internal medicine reported similar time fractions spent on direct and mothers. indirect patient. Other studies of how doctors in various specialties Methods: A Quantitative questionnaire was applied cross sectional, us- spend their time report with few exceptions that less than half of the ing constructs of the Theory of Planned Behavior. time is spent on patient care and that most patient care takes place Results: 180 mothers were invited: 74 had a child affected with thalas- without the presence of the patient (charting, reviewing test results, semia (RR=100%). Both, attitude towards receiving information about etc.). thalassemia (M=4.08), and attitude towards carrier testing (M=4.09) Conclusion: The workday of doctors-in-training in clinical genetics may were high. Awareness was low: mothers whose children were not af- not differ as much from other medical specialties as commonly per- fected hardly ever heard of thalassemia (N=106; M=1.58), whereas ceived. mothers with an affected child showed high interest in carrier testing (N=74; M=4.02). Respondents did not perceived control over carrier testing (M=3.02), and feared being discriminated against or stigma-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 7 Table 1 results in the affected children are similar to those previously reported with evidence of increased growth in the pre-puberal age and an av- category of activity Proportion of time spent erage incidence of congenital malformation and health needs. Mean Direct patient care 14 % age at first word was 15 months, showing a slight delay in language Indirect patient care 32 % skills which tended to improve by the time they reached school age. Administrative tasks 11 % Parental responses to the interview demonstrated residual anxiety but Conference participation 8 % with a satisfactory adaptation to and a positive recall of the prenatal External communication 17 % counselling session. Research/project 4 % We believe that an integrated approach to prenatal counselling is the Break 6 % best way to manage the anxiety and falsely imagined consequences Other 8 % which parents feel after being told that their fetus bears such a genetic abnormality. P01.64 Professional training for the new era of genetic medicine A. C. Davies1,2, K. Dack1,2, M. Leech1,2, D. Donnai1,2, H. R. Middleton-Price1,2; P01.66 Influence of associations of patients in rare diseases 1Nowgen A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, Manchester, United Kingdom, (Williams syndrome and smith magenis syndrome) in clinical 2Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, Research. Research centers of reference United Kingdom. M. Fernández-Prieto1, E. Garayzábal2, M. Lens1, A. Sampaio3, M. Buceta4, Á. Genetics and genomics are making a dynamic and expanding con- Carracedo5; tribution to mainstream healthcare, for example: the increasing use 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, of pharmacogenetics and companion diagnostic testing to personalise Spain, 2Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 3Universidade do medicine. In addition, genetic knowledge is increasing at such a pace Minho, Department of Psychology, Braga, Portugal, 4Universidade de Santiago that the rate of data generation is at risk of overtaking the capacity for de Compostela, Department of Evolutive Psychology, Santiago de Compostela, its interpretation. Spain, 5Group for Genomic Medicine of University of Santiago de Compostela, Nowgen, a Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, is at the forefront of Santiago de Compostela, Spain. training provision in the arena of genetic medicine. In collaboration In rare genetic diseases research it is a critical issue to build national with our colleagues in the Central Manchester University Hospitals and international networks of study. Platforms providing the necessary NHS Foundation Trust, The University of Manchester and the National logistics to carry out the proposed work of researchers and clinicians Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, we have developed a are also needed, due to geographic dispersion. This usually occurs portfolio of training courses for health professionals, industry profes- because of the low incidence of rare diseases. Logistic platforms inte- sionals and research academics in response to expressed needs for grating information and centralized federations of rare diseases allow training in these diverse areas. associations concerned to coordinate their activities, ranging from re- Here we demonstrate Nowgen’s role in training provision, including the search to therapeutic activities, including leisure and family entertain- following areas: Bioinformatics for clinicians and scientists working in ment. Also, they allow to overcome the barrier of geographical disper- genetic medicine, to help develop skills interpreting genetic data; Ge- sion. netics for research ethics committees, to provide a tool-kit to support In this context, the Association of Williams Syndrome of Spain has committee members in their ethical review of genetic research studies; a long tradition in the collaboration with researchers. By other hand, Oncology-based pharmacogenetics, which aims to provide an intro- the Spanish Association of Smith Magenis has been recently created. duction to this area, including the regulatory issues, effect on clinical Both associations have joined together to promote research, integrat- trial design, diagnostic testing and data interpretation; and Molecular ing professionals who study these diseases, in order to develop differ- genetics for cytogeneticists and genetic counsellors, which aims to ent projects and clinical programs. They found strategic support in the provide attendees with an understanding of molecular techniques and Regional Center for Rare Diseases (CREER) that allows cooperation analytical methods used in molecular genetics laboratories. All courses among associationism and research. The Spanish Federation for Rare have been developed in close consultation with senior representatives Diseases also supported them, and also another specific centers of from the relevant professional groups. genetics as the Galician Public Foundation of Genomic Medicine did so. P01.65 clinical characterization and analysis of temperamental This allows to establish a real national internal network of detection traits and impact on their parents in 42 italian young girl with and early diagnosis of these diseases, facilitating research. It also triple X syndrome. helps to develop a better understanding of the neurocognitive, clini- E. Folliero1, D. Quagliarini2, U. Cavallari3, B. Gentilin1, P. Castorina1, F. cian and educational profiles affected and to publish specific materials Forzano4, S. Forzano5, E. Grosso6, S. Gattone7, F. Faravelli8, L. Gargantini9, F. for different diseases. Lalatta1; The main objective of this paper is to present the existing networks in 1UOS Dipartimentale di Genetica Medica, Milano, Italy, 2UO Ostetricia e Spain studying rare diseases. Ginecologia, Milano, Italy, 3Centro Malattie rare cardiologiche, UO cardiologia AO Sacco, Milano, Italy, 4SSD Genetica medica E.O. Ospedali Galliera P01.67 Role of genetic family testing in Wilson disease. Genova, Genova, Italy, 5Genetica Medica AOU S. Giovanni Battista and N. Mocanu, S. Groppa; Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università di Torino, Torino, Italy, 6Genetica Medica, National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, AOU S. Giovanni Battista, Torino, Italy, 7Genetica Medica, Genova, Italy, 8SSD Moldova, Republic of. di Genetica Medica, EO Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy, 9UO Pediatria A.O Wilson‘s disease (WD) represents a severe hereditary disorder that Treviglio, Treviglio, Italy. predominantly affects liver and brain which in case of late revealing We report clinical and temperament evaluation data in a large Italian and inefficient treatment or its absence leads to severe disabilities, cohort of young girls with triple X syndrome whose diagnosis was made demands considerable financial expenses and even might be fatal. prenatally between 1998 and 2006 in three Italian Centres. At initial Affected individuals may require health, financial and personal care for evaluation reproductive and medical histories were collected. Clinical 10-15 years. This care is frequently undertaken by family members. assessment of the child was performed by a clinical geneticist and in- We investigated Moldavian families with WD for identification of muta- cluded a detailed personal history, physical evaluation and auxological tions at members of families for the purpose of carrying out of prelimi- measurements. To analyze how parents coped with specific events in nary presymptomatic therapy. the prenatal and postnatal periods, we conducted an interview which We analyzed 34 Moldavian WD patients and family members who were included 35 specific questions designed to elicit retrospective judge- genetically confirmed. In 8 (23,5 %) cases we revealed diseases in ments on prenatal communication, present and future worries, needs siblings of probands on presymptomatic stage, that given us a chance and expectations. In a subset of probands we also administered the to carry out required therapy and to avoid appearance of clinical WD formal Italian Temperament Questionnaire assessment test which symptoms and physical disability in these patients. investigates adaptation, general environment and socialization. This Disease identification in 23, 5 % presymptomatic patients has a ma- test also assesses the emotional component of temperament. Clinical jor importance for diagnosis of WD in Moldova. These cases highlight Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  the importance of accessible and accurate information about rare dis- Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania, 5University Hospital ‚San Carlos‘, Madrid, Spain. eases. Genetic counseling in WD family and molecular testing has a A mutation of the fibrillin-1 gene gives an inherited multisystemic con- major practical importance for diagnosis what due to early revealing of nective-tissue disease, called Marfan syndrome. It is characterized by patients without clinical symptoms of disease gives a chance to begin a wide range of clinical manifestations. The major mortality generators appropriate therapy in time, to avoid physical disability and to keep a are the cardiovascular manifestations: annuloaortic ectasia, aortic dis- life in such patients. section, aortic aneurysm, pulmonary artery dilatation and mitral valve prolapse. Common musculoskeletal manifestations include: scoliosis, P01.68 Written information to patients in clinical genetics: pectus excavatum and carinatum, arachnodactyly and acetabular pro- what‘s the impact? trusion. Dural ectasia is a characteristic nervous system affection. In C. Cassini1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, F. Coron1, S. Vinault2, C. Binquet2, S. some patients there is also pulmonary and ocular involvement. To im- Mercier3, N. Laguette3, L. Faivre1; prove the life expectancy and quality, an early identification and treat- 1Centre de Génétique, Dijon, France, 2Centre d’Investigations Clinique ment of these clinical aspects is a must. Geneticists play a key role – Épidémiologie Clinique, CHU Bocage, Dijon, France, 3Direction des Droits in Marfan syndrome diagnosis. For a better patient care, a compre- des Patients, de la Qualité et de la Gestion des Risques, CHU Bocage, Dijon, hensive diagnostic is driven by a prenatal genetic counseling and the France. knowledge about the various manifestations of Marfan syndrome. In all countries of the European Union, oral information must be given to the patient. Written information is generally optional, but physicians J01.3 Genetic screening in Europe are tending more and more to send a copy of the clinical report to the P. Javaher1, E. Nyoungui1, H. Kääriäinen2, U. Kristoffersson3, I. Nippert4, J. patient. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the impact on patients of Sequeiros5, J. Schmidtke1; sending them written information after a clinical consultation in the ge- 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, netics department. During a three months period, two geneticists and Germany, 2Department of Medical genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland one genetic counselor offered to send each patient a copy of the letter and National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of sent to their general practitioners. A questionnaire was sent with this Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 4Department of Human copy. 375 patients were seen, 60% of the questionnaires were sent Genetics, Universitaetsklinikum Muenster, Muenster, Germany, 5UnIGENe and back. Of these, 99% showed that this practice was considered a good CGPP, IBMC – Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology and ICBAS, University idea, and 82% reported that the letter reflected the clinical aspects Porto, Porto, Portugal. well. 72% thought that receiving this letter improved their understand- Background: Genetic screening has been defined as any kind of test ing, and only 9% found the letter confusing. In general, patients found performed systematically for the early detection or exclusion of a ge- the words understandable (83%) and only 2% were shocked. 58% netic disease, genetic predisposition or resistance to a disease, or to would have preferred a letter sent specifically to them, and 63% said determine whether a person carries a gene variant, that may produce that they would have asked their general practitioner to show them disease in his or her offspring. the letter. Their main motivation for wanting a copy of this letter was Methods: The data were collected from answers of experts via a self- to have the information to pass on to other physicians involved in their designed questionnaire, which addressed the conditions screened, health in the future, or to have information concerning the family. There screening methods, organisational aspects of screening programmes, were no significant differences depending on the physician, the indica- and conditions screened in prenatal, population-based carrier, and tion for the clinical consultation, the age or gender of the patients, or cascade screening programmes, as well as data from websites of na- their level of general understanding. tional screening authorities and societies and several organisations dealing with neonatal screening issues. J01.1 Early Diagnosis and screening of congenital Heart Results and conclusion: The current (2006-2008) status of genetic Anomalies screening and the organisation of genetic screening programmes in M. Taghizadeh, S. Dastgiri, M. Heidarzadeh; selected European countries is presented in this survey as a back- Department of Community and Family Medicine, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of ground for future attempts of harmonizing standards and procedures Iran. of genetic screening, an explicit aim of the European Network of Excel- There are many cases of congenital heart anomalies missed at the lence, EuroGentest (www.eurogentest.org). time of birth. Literature demonstrates that CH anomalies are the sec- ond most common birth defect in many countries. Despite this fact, our previous study showed that the prevalence of CH anomalies is the P02 clinical genetics and Dysmorphology fifth most common one indicating that many of these defects are not diagnosed at the time of birth. The aim of this study was to estimate the P02.001 interstitial deletion of 10p12-p11: A novel micro-deletion missing frequency of CH anomalies at the time of birth. The popula- syndrome associated with mental retardation and a distinct tion of the study was 185650 births (183579 live births and 2071 still phenotype births) in the northwest of Iran covered by Tabriz Registry of Congeni- C. Wentzel; tal Anomalies (TRoCA). A total of 451 children with CH anomalies were Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. studied in this region from 2000 to 2009. The expected prevalence The ability to detect cryptic unbalanced rearrangements in patients of CH anomalies at birth was estimated to be 24.2 per 10000 births with syndromic mental retardation has improved considerably with the (CI 95%: 22.1-26.5) while a prevalence of 9.2 per 10000 births (CI clinical implementation of genomic microarrays. Here we report on the 95%: 7.8-10.6) was observed at the same time/place. This indicated molecular karyotyping of three unrelated patients with partially over- that 59.1 percent of children with CH anomalies were not identified at lapping microdeletions at chromosome 10p11.23-p12.1 ranging from birth (P<0.05). the same proportion increased by 13 percent over the 0.99 Mb to 4.03 Mb in size. The smallest region of overlap (SMO) be- study from 2000 to 2009 (P>0.1). The result indicated that a remark- tween the deletions is 400 kb. Yet another patient has previously been able frequency of CH anomalies was not diagnosed at birth because described with a 10 Mb deletion, partially overlapping with our three there was no pediatric cardiologist available at birth in the gynecology patients {Shahdadpuri, 2008 #1}. All four patients have a developmen- and obstetrics wards. This may necessitate the presence of pediatric tal delay and growth retardation. cardiologist at the time of delivery or soon after birth for early diagnosis Apart from the SMO, the genomic region could be divided into three and screening of CH anomalies. separate intervals when related to phenotypic expression and symp- toms. Together with the previously reported patient our study suggests J01.2 marfan syndrome in children that the deletions may represent a novel micro-deletion syndrome with R. Pakai1, D. Iacob2, R. E. Iacob3, P. Stancu4, M. Puiu2, M. Manescu5; a distinct clinical expression associated with haploinsufficiency for 1Louis Ţurcanu Children‘s Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, genes in this region. 2University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Victor Babeş, Timisoara, Romania, 3Pediatric Surgery, SCJU, Arad, Romania, 4University of Medicine and Reference Shahdadpuri R, de Vries B, Pfundt R, de Leeuw N and Reardon W. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A 146A: 233-237 (2008)Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.002 Deletion of 13q32.3-34: A genotype-phenotype Amiens University hospital, amiens, France, 6department of genetics, Nantes correlation of three cases University hospital, Nantes, France, 7department of genetics, Lille University J. Davidsson1, H. Ågerstam1, M. Öreberg2, M. Soller1; hospital, Lille, France. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University and Regional Laboratories, Skåne Duplication of the critical Rubinstein Taybi deletion region on the chro- University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 2Department of Pediatrics, Kalmar Hospital, mosome 16p13.3 have recently been proposed to be a cause of a rec- Kalmar, Sweden. ognizable syndrome, characterized by normal to moderately retarded Background: Partial deletions of chromosome 13 are rare. Based on mental development, normal growth, mild arthrogryposis, mild abnor- their clinical and cytogenetic features patients have been categorized malities of the hands, characteristic facial features, and occasional into three groups: 1) deletions proximal to 13q32, 2) deletions involv- anomalies of the heart. Up to date, only 13 patients with an interstitial ing 13q32; and 3) deletions of 13q33-34. Of these, group 2 has the duplication of the 16p13.3 region encompassing the CREBBP gene most severe phenotype, including, among others, dysmorphology of have been reported. the brain, eyes, gastrointestinal tract and distal limbs. We report 4 new cases with such 16p13.3 microduplication. They pres- Methods: We have collected clinical data and performed molecular ent mental retardation (4/4), normal growth (4/4), mild arthrogryposis cytogenetic mapping of three cases with de novo deletions of 13q32.3- anomalies (2/4), and no anomalies of the heart. Remarkable facial fea- 34, using metaphase FISH and genome-wide array CGH. tures such as microretrognathia (4/4), broad nose (4/4), dolicocephaly Results: In case 1, FISH analysis mapped the deletion to range from (2/4) were noted, and also frequent eye involvement (4/4) with upslant- 99.53 Mb to pter on chromosome 13. The clinical symptoms included, ing eyes with narrow palpebral fissures (4/4), ptosis (3/4), bilateral epi- among others, developmental delay, an intracranial dural arteriove- canthi (3/4). Minor anomalies of the extremities- hands and feet- were nous fistula and low levels of clotting factors 7 and 10. In case 2, FISH always found (4/4), with frequent involvement of the thumb: proximally analysis mapped the deletion to span from 107.74 Mb to pter. The adducted thumbs (3/4), adducted thumbs (2/4). Several other occa- clinical symptoms included, among others, developmental delay, mi- sional findings reported before were also noted : cleft palate (2/4)/ bifid crocephaly, hypertelorism and low levels of clotting factors 7 and 10. uvula (1/4), inguinal hernia (2/4), hyperconvex nails (2/4) and hammer In case 3, array CGH mapped the deletion to range from 101.07 Mb halluces (1/4)/short halluces (1/4). One patient also presents retinal to pter. The clinical symptoms included, among others, developmental hypogmentation. A detailed clinical description of the 4 patients with delay, microcephaly and hypotonia. review of the literature will be made, confirming the recognizable mi- Conclusions: We present three cases with 13q32.3-34 deletions, char- croduplication syndrome, and helping to delineate the associated phe- acterized at the molecular cytogenetic level. In the deleted regions, notype. several candidate genes responsible for the diverse phenotypes of the patients could be identified. Characterization of additional patients har- P02.005 microduplication of 17p13.3 including YWHAE in a boring similar distal deletions might lead to better, and clinically more patient with strongly increased nuchal translucency as a fetus, useful, description of the 13q deletion syndrome. and postnatal abnormal phenotype. D. Svaneby1, J. Graakjaer1, G. Dybmose2, C. Fagerberg1; P02.003 Narrowing down the minimal critical deletion region of 1Department of clinical Genetics, 7100 Vejle, Denmark, 2Department of recurrent 16p11.2-p12.2 microdeletion syndrome pediatrics, Esbjerg, Denmark. K. M. Roetzer1, A. C. Obenauf1, B. Plecko-Startinig2, M. Brunner-Krainz2, M. R. Background: Deletion of 17p13.3 causes Miller-Dieker syndrome. Du- Speicher1; plications in this region have been described with a variable pheno- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics, Graz, type depending on which genes are included. The genes PAFAH1B1, Austria. encoding LIS1, and YWHAE seem to be important for the genotype- Microdeletions in16p11.2-p12.2 were recently described in a number phenotype correlation. Duplications including the YWHAE gene but of patients exhibiting mental retardation, speech delay, developmental not PAFAH1B1 have been described in a few patients, with common delay, hypotonia, dysmorphic features, and recurrent infections. Yet, features being facial dysmorphism, macrosomia, and mild develop- due to the size of the deletions (~ 8Mb) and the number of genes con- mental delay. Individuals with duplications including PAFAH1B1 have tained it was difficult to link the deleted genes to the phenotype. no particularly dysmorphic features, but more severe developmental Here we report the case of an 11-year-old girl with muscular hypo- delay, and brain defects. tonia, speech delay, ptosis, recurrent infections and dysmorphic Case: Our patient is a boy, 2 years old. The prenatal ultrasound scan features similar to those reported in patients with microdeletions in showed an increased nuchal translucency of 7,5 mm, no malformations 16p11.2-p12.2. A muscle biopsy at the age of 1 year showed unspe- were seen. A normal male karyotype was found. At the age of 2 years cific changes, whereas the altered structure of the mitochondria was the patient showed increased growth and psychomotor retardation. He most striking. However, biochemical investigations for mitochondriopa- was hypotonic, had a bad temper, and expressive and impressive lan- thies were inconclusive. Array-CGH analysis revealed a 205kb micro- guage delay. Facial dysmorphism included epicanthus, low set ears, deletion in 16p11.2, overlapping the deleted regions in the 6 patients smooth philtrum, thin upper lip, and short nose. Array-CGH showed a recently reported. The microdeletion in our patient was inherited from de novo 1.02 MB duplication on chromosome 17p13.3. The duplication the mother, who following anamnesis and physical examination, also included the YWHAE gene, but not the PAFAH1B1 gene. exhibited mild muscular hypotonia, ptosis, and recurrent ear infections. Conclusion: A few cases of duplication 17p13.3 have been described The microdeletion contains only three disease causing genes: TUFM, with variable phenotype depending on whether YWHAE or PAFAH1B1 ATP2A1 and CD19. We hypothesize that the muscular hypotonia could is involved. We here describe a patient with duplication including be due to a deletion of ATP2A1 and the recurrent infections might be YWHAE with very similar features to previous cases, but also with an associated with CD19 deficiency. This theory is further supported by increased nuchal translucency, thus extending the phenotypic spec- the observation that only one patient reported so far did not exhibit trum. It can be considered in pregnancies with very high nuchal trans- muscular hypotonia, and this was also the only patient with a microde- lucency combined with normal karyotype to investigate for duplications letion not including ATP2A1. However, further investigations to confirm in 17p13.3. the central role of ATP2A1 and CD19 in the phenotypic presentation of patients with 16p11.2-p12.2 microdeletions are necessary. P02.006** the 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome D. A. Koolen, B. B. A. de Vries; P02.004 16p13.3 microduplication syndrome : report of 4 cases Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. and futher phenotype delineation The 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome is a novel genomic disorder B. Demeer1, G. Morin1, S. Julia2, D. Martin-Coignard3, G. Plessis4, F. Amram1, with a prevalence of around 1/16,000. We present an update of the A. Receveur5, H. copin5, G. Bourrouillou2, C. Le Caignec6, J. Andrieux7, M. delineation of the phenotype based on the clinical description of 47 Mathieu1; individuals with the recurrent 17q21.31 deletion and call for an interna- 1department of genetics, Amiens University hospital, amiens, France, tional collaboration to collect information on this emerging syndrome 2department of genetics, Toulouse University hospital, Toulouse, France, (www.17q21.com). In our cohort of patients the most consistent fea- 3department of genetics, Le Mans hospital, Le Mans, France, 4department of tures are hypotonia and mild to severe global psychomotor develop- genetics, Caen University hospital, Caen, France, 5department of cytogenetics, mental delay. The facial dysmorphisms include a high/broad forehead, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 0 long face, upward slanting palpebral fissures, epicanthic folds, an ab- gion at 1p36.31 for ,dysgenesis of the corpus callosum and epilepsy. normally shaped nose, large prominent ears and an everted lower lip. Abnormal hair pigmentation and texture is also frequently present. The P02.009 severe Lysosomal Lipid storage Disease of the Liver in facial phenotype may evolve with age, leading to coarsening and elon- monosomy1p36: New Presentation Extending the Phenotype gation of the face. Short stature, pectus excavatum, spine anomalies, M. Haimi1, T. Iancu2, L. Shaffer3, A. Lerner4; dislocation of the hip(s), long slender fingers and slender lower limbs, 1Children‘s Health Center, Clalit Health Services, Haifa, Israel, 2Pediatric and positional deformities of the hand/feet are also reported. A history Research and Electron Microscopy Unit, Technion-Rappaport Faculty of of epilepsy is noted in ~50% of all cases. Other serious abnormalities Medicine, Haifa, Israel, 3Health Research and Education Center, Washington include atrial and ventricular septal defects, kidney/ urologic anoma- State University & Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, WA, United lies, and cryptorchidism. Our data show that the 17q21.31 microdele- States, 4Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Carmel Medical Center, tion syndrome is a clinically well recognizable genomic disorder. Long- Haifa, Israel. term studies, however, are required to further define the syndrome and Background /Aim : Monosomy 1p36 has been increasingly recognized to determine the prognosis in adult patients. as a distinct chromosome deletion syndrome in the past few years. Acknowledgements: Many thanks to our collaborators, for providing Monosomy 1p36 is mostly associated with severe mental retardation, DNA samples and clinical and/or molecular data. developmental delay, behavioral difficulties and self-injury. There are several distinct dysmorphic features, including large anterior fontanels, P02.007 Loss of cytochrome P450 17A1 Protein Expression in a microcephaly, brachycephaly, deep-set eyes, flat nose, nasal bridge 17α-Hydroxylase/17,20-Lyase-Deficient 46,XY Female Caused by and pointed chin. In contrast to the “classical” phenotype, several chil- two Novel mutations in the CYP17A1 Gene dren with a 1p deletion have had overgrowth and hyperphagia with a S. Kofman-Alfaro1, N. Nájera1, I. Palma1, R. Peña2, G. Queipo1; clinical presentation similar to Prader -Willi syndrome (PWS). 1Hospital General de Mexico-Facultad de Medicina UNAM, Mexico City, Methods: Here we describe an 11-year-old girl with 1p36 deletion Mexico, 2Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, Mexico City, Mexico. demonstrating the classical dysmorphological features, having devel- 17α-hydroxylase deficiency (17OHD) is a rare form of congenital ad- oped an uncontrolled voracious appetite and severe truncal obesity. renal hyperplasia (CAH) caused by mutations in the CYP17A1 gene. Gastroenterological evaluation revealed elevated liver enzymes. Liver This condition shows considerable clinical and biochemical variation. biopsy disclosed severe fatty liver: in addition to medium-size triglycer- Molecular characterization of novel mutations in the CYP17A1 gene ide droplets, hepatocytes showed excessive lipofuscin accumulation. and detailed study of their structural, enzymatic, and clinical conse- A most unusual feature was the presence of frequent, extremely large quences are required to fully understand enzyme behavior. Here, we lipolysosomes, never previously reported in this condition. present the first molecular characterization of two novel mutations in Results: Oligonucleotide-based microarray analysis was performed CYP17A1 in a 15-year-old female Mexican mestizo 46,XY female with using a 105K-feature whole-genome microarray. It showed copy-num- primary amenorrhea and lack of pubertal development, and severe ber loss of 177 oligonucleotide probes from the short arm of chromo- hypertension that manifested only after surgery. A complete clinical some 1 at 1p36.33p36.32, approximately 2.2 Mb in size. and biochemical evaluation was compatible with 17OHD. Structural Conclusions: We suggest that the chromosome segment 1p36.33- anomalies in the CYP17A1 gene were discovered by direct auto- 36.32 harbour a critical region for the manifestation of obesity and hy- mated sequencing, which revealed a novel compound heterozygous perphagia. We also suggest that monosomy 1p36 syndrome should be K110X/R362H mutation that leads to a complete lack of enzyme ac- considered in patients with hypotonia, developmental delay, obesity, tivity. Immunohistochemical analyses performed to determine protein hyperphagia, behavioral disorders, learning difficulties and a negative expression and localization showed that cytochrome P450 17A1 was genetic test for PWS, even in the absence of the striking facial features completely absent in the patient’s testicular tissue. Studies of novel of the syndrome. mutations, such as those described here, provide important informa- tion that allows us to better understand the effect of a given mutation P02.010 BAc array analysis detects microdeletions on on enzyme function and to observe the impact of the mutation on clini- chromosome region 20p12.1 in two unrelated individuals with cal phenotype. mR/ mcA syndrome L. Grozdanova1, R. Stoeva2,3, J. Vermeesch3, J. P. Fryns3, B. Dimitrov3, R. P02.008 Three Interrupted Deletions at 1p36 in a Patient with Thoelen3, M. Stefanova4; Lateral Ventricular Enlargement, Epilepsy and corpus callosum 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, Abnormality 2Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical University, Plovdiv, S. Cingöz1, A. Ünalp2, S. Betinoğlu1, S. Kurul3, Z. Tümer4; Bulgaria, 3Center for Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetic, School of Medicine, Dokuz Eylül Belgium, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, University, İzmir, Turkey, 22Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Gothenburg, Sweden. Neurology, Behcet Uz Child Disease and Pediatric Surgery Training and One patient with a de novo deletion spanning a 250kb region of Research Hospital, İzmir, Turkey, 33Department of Pediatrics, Division of Child 20p12.1 and clinical features of Kabuki syndrome was described pre- Neurology, Dokuz Eylül University School of Medicine, İzmir, Turkey, 4Kennedy viously (J Med Genet 2007 44:562-569). Center, Glostrup, Denmark. Here we report a detailed clinical and molecular investigation of two Monosomy 1p36 is a frequent terminal microdeletion syndrome char- unrelated individuals, a 15-years-old and a 7½-years-old boys with acterized by distinct craniofacial features, developmental delay, mental respectively paternally and maternally inherited overlapping deletions retardation, hypotonia, seizures, visual, auditory, structural brain and of 20p12.1, detected by BAC array CGH at 1 Mb resolution. Clinically cardiovascular malformations. they both presented with characteristic dysmorphic features, dental ab- The 1p36 deletion syndrome is likely to be associated with haploinsuf- normalities, gum hypertrophy, brain malformations and severe mental ficiency of contiguous genes. In previous studies KCNAB29 (voltage- retardation. Common dysmorphism include sloping forehead, arched gated potassium channel β-subunit gene) and GABRD (the human eyebrows, long palpebral fissures, long eyelashes with unusual growth γ-aminobutyricacid A receptor delta-subunit gene) were suggested as pattern at the lower eyelid, short philtrum, open-mouth appearance, candidate genes for epilepsy. Genes within the 2.2 Mb smallest region high palate, posterior rotated ears with massive earlobes. Failure to of overlap have also been suggested as potential candidate genes for thrive during infancy, periorbital and generalized oedema, hallux val- periventricular nodular heterotopias (PH). gus were noted. Additionally, the 15-years-old patient presented with Here we report a case with three consecutive interstitial deletions at nasolacrimal duct stenosis, single palmar crease, thenar hypoplasia, 1p36.22-p36.23, 1p36.31 and 1p36.32array CGH. All the three dele- cubitus valgus, pes planus, stereotypic movements. The 7½-years-old tions were within the common deletion region (1pter-p36.23) of classi- boy developed a short stature (SD-4.7) and microcephaly (SD-2.5). He cal monosomy 1p36 patiens.The present case has mental retardation, showed epilepsy, retinal pigment changes, cataract, myopia, bilateral developmental delay, dysgenesis of the corpus callosum, epilepsy, lat- congenital hip luxation and cryptorchid testes. A deletion of the BAC eral ventricular enlargement and facial dysmorphism. In this study we clone RP5-855L24 (14609853-14755918 bp, HG18) was detected in comparedthe phenotypes and the deletion sizes of the present case all cells with the 15-years-old patient and his father and as well as with with previously published cases. Our study suggests a new critical re- the other and his mother.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 1 The similar clinical presentation in both individuals suggests the caus- Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. ative effect of the aberration. Epigenetic factors could be potential Subtelomeric deletions of chromosome 6q have emerged as a charac- reasons for the healthy parents carrier. To our knowledge these are teristic microdeletion syndrome, characterized by mental retardation, the first two cases reported with microdeletions 20p12.1 and inherited seizures, mild dysmorphic features, and brain anomalies. The latter from the healthy parent. most commonly include enlarged ventricles or hydrocephalus and aplasia/hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. Thus far, aplasia of the ol- P02.011** Drosophila as a model organism to establish a factory bulbs and tracts has only been reported as autopsy findings genotype-phenotype correlation in 2q23.1 deletion syndrome in two patients with a ring chromosome 6 and in one patient with a B. W. M. van Bon, J. Kramer, A. Schenck, B. B. A. de Vries; 6q23-deletion. Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. We report on two patients with a de novo subtelomeric rearrangement In general, patients with a 2q23.1 microdeletion are mentally retarded involving the long arm of chromosome 6 (6q27) detected by molecular and present with speech delay, short stature, microcephaly, seizures, karyotyping using Array-CGH analysis. Both patients had aplasia of coarse facies, sleep disturbances and behavioral problems. These the olfactory bulbs and hydrocephalus due to aqueduct stenosis as features may lead to the initial clinical impression of Angelman, Rett well as additional brain malformations. The first patient presented with and/or Smith-Magenis syndromes. global developmental impairment, facial dysmorphism, and had an un- The overlapping 2q23.1 deletion region in all reported patients com- balanced reciprocal translocation of chromosome 3 and 6, resulting in prises one gene, MBD5, which is a member of the methyl CpG-bind- a 6q27 deletion and an additional 3q29 duplication. The second patient ing domain protein family. Another gene in this region, EPC2, is also presented with complete anosmia as the only clinical symptom and deleted in the majority of patients, who appear to have a more severe showed no signs of delayed physical or mental development. phenotype than those with a deletion of MBD5 only. EPC2 is a member Thus we conclude that there is considerable variability in the pheno- of the polycomb protein family, involved in heterochromatin formation. typic spectrum of the disorder and that the degree of developmental Several genes with a role in modulation of chromatin structures are impairment does not correlate with the extent of brain findings. There- associated with mental retardation. Therefore, EPC2 might be consid- fore the “6q Terminal Deletion Syndrome” might actually be underdi- ered as a mental retardation gene. agnosed as it can manifest by anosmia only. Moreover, since olfactory In the absence of patients with mutations or deletions of EPC2 only, bulb aplasia seems to belong to the phenotypic spectrum of the 6q we used Drosophila melanogaster as model organism to elucidate terminal deletion syndrome we suggest screening these patients for possible pathogenicity of this gene. Ubiquitous knockdown of the fly this malformation by high resolution brain imaging. ortholog epc induces lethality, mainly during pupal stages. Drosophila also offers the possibility of tissue and cell-specific gene ablation. Epc P02.014 A case report of Achondroplasia (AD inheritance) in knockdown in wings and eyes, severely disturbes morphogenesis of a family with consanguineous marriage( both parents are not these organs. These results point to an important function of epc dur- affected). ing development and suggest a significant contribution to the pathol- S. Akbaroghli1,2, M. T. Akbari3; ogy of the 2q23.1 microdeletion syndrome. We will now focus on the 1Dr. Akbaroghli Genetic Counselling Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, role of epc in neuronal function and behaviour. 2Deputy for Cultural Affairs and Prevention of Iran Welfare Organization, This study aims to establish the relevance of fly models in understand- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, ing gene-phenotype correlations in microdeletion syndromes. Islamic Republic of Iran. An eight years old boy with clinical manifestations including: P02.012 situs inversus totalis with 47,XXX; A case report megalocephaly,short stature ( height = 108 cm , weight =24) ,low na- H. Kocak Eker1, M. Ikbal2, A. H. Cebi2, M. Y. ALP2, T. Tos3; sal bridge, prominent forehead,lumbar lordosis, short tubular bones 1Dıskapı Children Hospital, Dept of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, and radiologic manifestations including: rhizomelic dwarfism, V shape 2Karadeniz Technical University Medical Faculty, Medical Genetics, Trabzon, deformity, narrow sacrosciatic notches, small iliac wings,short trident Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, SB Sami Ulus Women’s and hand. He is the result of a consanguineous marriage ( second cous- Children‘s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. ins).In the molecular study, he has G1138A mutation in FGFR3 gene We report a case of a 1,5 year old female situs inversus totalis with in heterozygote form. 47,XXX. We think that this is the first case in the literature situs inver- His unaffected parents ( 33 years old woman and 39 years old man) sus totalis with 47,XXX. She is the first child of the family and has no came for preconceptional genetic counseling because of their affected sister or brother. She was taken to our genetic polyclinic because of child and consanguineous marriage and they are candidates for pre- her puffy face. She had situs inversus totalis and large VSD on her natal diagnosis because of the probability of gonadal mosaicism. history. We want to see the karyotype of the patient because she had some abnormalities with her phenotype and we know some cases si- P02.015 Unbalanced translocation t(1;5)(p31.3;q23.2) in a child tus inversus with chromosomal abnormalities. Chromosomal analysis with congenital malformations and a disorder of glycosylation performed on a peripheral blood lymphocyte culture showed a 47,XXX (cDG) affecting ALG6 gene, and characterized by sNP and cGH female karyotype. Further studies are needed to explain situs inversus arrays totalis connexion with X chromosome abnormalities. M. D. Sanchez-Izquierdo1, E. Bermejo1,2, A. I. Vega3, B. Pérez3,4, M. L. Martínez-Fernández1,4, C. Pérez-Cerdá3, G. Arriola5, A. García5, M. Ugarte3,4, M. P02.013 Expanding the clinical and neuroradiological L. Martínez-Frías1,6; phenotype of 6q terminal deletion syndrome: olfactory bulb 1CIAC, ECEMC, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain, aplasia and aqueductal stenosis. 2Research Institute for Rare Diseases (IIER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3CEDEM, K. Becker1, T. Neuhann1, N. Tyshchenko1, D. Podlesek2, M. Smitka3, S. CBMSO-UAM, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 4CIBER Tinschert1, G. Hahn4, T. Hummel5, E. Schrock1, J. Gerber6, K. Hackmann1; de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Spain, 5Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, Universitario de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Spain, 6Departamento de Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Klinik und Poliklinik Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain. für Neurochirurgie, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische The genetic study of a 3 year old child with mild psychomotor delay, Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 3Abteilung für Neuropädiatrie an der joint hyperlaxity, talipes valgus, flat frontal hemangioma, total agen- Klinik und Poliklinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Universitätsklinikum Carl esis of the corpus callosum and some dysmorphic features, revealed Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 4Abteilung a ‘de novo’ translocation detected by a high resolution karyotype and Kinderradiologie am Institut und Poliklinik für Radiologische Diagnostik, involving chromosome bands 1p31.3 and 5q23.2. For a better charac- Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, terization of the breakpoint regions, CGH array (244K) and SNP array Dresden, Germany, 5Klinik und Poliklinik für Hals-Nasen-Ohren-Heilkunde, (500K) analyses were performed, both showing a hemizygous deletion Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, next to ALG6, a gene containing 15 exons and involved in defective Dresden, Germany, 6Abteilung Neuroradiologie am Institut und Poliklinik für glycosylation. The CGH array deletion was 3.5 Mb in size and started Radiologische Diagnostik, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische at exon 10 of ALG6, while the SNP array deletion was centromeric, and ALG6 was not included in the deleted region. Other genes such Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 2 PGM1 and LEPR where also lost in both arrays analyses. For a better Neurology, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto,, Toronto, ON, delimitation of the deletion boundaries, PCR amplification of all ALG6 Canada. exons was applied to genomic DNA. No product was obtained for ex- Alström syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive multisystemic disor- ons 11 to 14 when compared to controls, but the amplification of the der caused by mutations in the ALMS1 gene. The gene is located on terminal 3’ exon 15 showed a positive result, suggesting an intragenic 2p13, contains 23 exons and encodes a protein of 4169 amino acids homozygotic deletion, undetectable by both arrays. An aberrant tran- (Collins et al and Hearn et al 2002). Alström syndrome is characterized script was obtained using RT-PCR for the detection of ALG6 mRNA. by cone-rod retinal dystrophy causing blindness, sensorineural hear- These results suggest a deletion of ALG6 in this patient, affecting both ing loss and major organ involvement such as dilated cardiomyopathy, alleles, in a different and non-previously described mode of protein hepatic and renal failure. Childhood obesity, type 2 diabetes, hypertri- inactivation. Products obtained from the detected rearrangement must glyceridemia and hypothyroidism are other common features. Clinical be further characterized. manifestations are highly variable even within family members. We Funding for this study provided by: CIBERER (Intra 07/746.1) and report two siblings with a clinical diagnosis of Alström syndrome who ISCIII. Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación, Madrid, Spain. presented with early onset rod monochromatism, cardiomyopathy, congenital nystagmus, truncal obesity and mild developmental delay. P02.016 isolated autosomal recessive hypotrichosis in Pakistan These 2 sisters are both heterozygotes for a novel pathologic mutation caused by P2RY and LIPH gene mutations (c.5098A>T) in exon 8 of ALMS1 gene , which causes truncation of the M. Tariq1,2, A. Azhar2, J. Klar1, I. Ahmad2, S. M. Bakhtiar2, S. M. Baig2, N. Dahl1; ALMS1 protein. Previous studies suggest that the classical syndrome 1Rudbeck Laboratory, Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala occurs only in patients with homozygous or compound heterozygous University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic mutations of the ALMS1 gene thus the heterozygosity for this novel Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan. mutation does not explain the severity of this disease in our patients. Autosomal recessive hypotrichosis (LAH) is characterised by diffuse Array-CGH studies for both siblings were normal and MLPA studies of hair loss without associated abnormalities. Typically, hair thinning the ALMS1 region are currently pending. starts in early childhood and progresses through adolescence. The Little is known about phenotype-genotype correlation in Alström syn- expression is variable with differences in age of onset and severity of drome, although patients with clinical symptoms of Alström syndrome baldness, as well as in hair density and texture. The clinical variation were found to have disease-causing mutations in exon 16 (Marshall et is observed between, as well as within, families segregating hypotri- al 2007). We hypothesize that rearrangement of the ALMS1 gene in chosis. Recently, the genetic basis of LAH was shown to involve muta- addition to this pathologic mutation is the basis for the severe pheno- tions in the P2RY5 gene on chromosome 13q14.3 (OMIM 609239) or type of our patients. the LIPH gene on chromosome 3q27.3 (OMIM 607365). In the pres- ent study, we identified eight unrelated consanguineous families from P02.019 Ambiguous external genitalia in newborns different areas of Pakistan segregating autosomal recessive hypotri- E. Kiss1, C. Duicu1, C. Banescu2, I. Pascanu3, H. Gozar4; chosis. The families were investigated by homozygosity mapping for 1Pediatric Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg Mures, linkage to P2RY5 and LIPH. Six families showed linkage to the P2RY5 Romania, 2Genetic Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg gene and sequencing revealed a single known missense mutation in Mures, Romania, 3Endocrinology Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, five families and a novel insertion mutation in one family. The previ- Tg Mures, Romania, 4Pediatric Surgey Clinic, Emergency County Hospital Tg. ously known missense mutation was accompanied by a shared hap- Mures, Tg Mures, Romania. lotype amongst all affected. The remaining two families showed link- A newborn infant with ambiguous genitalia is a medical emergency, age to the LIPH gene and segregated known mutations. The P2RY5 and the choice of gender must take into account the chromosomal gene encodes a 344 amino acids long G protein-coupled receptor and the gonadal sex, the hormonal influence during fetal life, surgi- (GPCR). LIPH produces the ligand for P2RY5, acyl-lysophosphatidic cal aspects, and the anatomy of the internal genitalia. A newborn with acid (LPA). Both genes are highly expressed in the inner root sheaths ambiguous genitalia needs prompt evaluation that will permit gender of the hair follicle and play an essential role in the maintenance of hair assignment and detection of life-threatening conditions (salt-losing cri- growth and texture. From our results, we suggest that a few ances- sis due to congenital adrenal hyperplasia -CAH). The classification of tral mutations cause isolated autosomal recessive hypotrichosis in the this disorder in newborns is difficult because similar phenotypes could Pakistani population. have several different etiologies. In most cases it is impossible to cor- relate the etiology of the disorder and the appearance of the external P02.017 carrier frequency for alpha triplication in individuals genitalia. Diagnostic criteria applied are similar for all (physical exam, with normal hematologic indices karyotype, investigation of hormones and their derivates, genital ultra- F. Moosavi1,2, A. Amirian1, H. Mirzahoseini1, S. Zeinali1, M. Karimipoor1; sound, radiological examination), but medical and surgical treatment is 1Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Science & Research applied to each patient individually. Branch, Azad Islamic University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. We present 2 cases of ambiguous genitalia admitted in our depart- The α3.7 deletion is the most frequent α-globin mutation in Iran, one ment in the last year. RESULTS: In one patients (normal karyotype: would then expect that the anti 3.7 triplication is common in Iran as 46, XX) the underlying cause of ambiguous genitalia was CAH, while well. the frequency of β-thalassemia gene is close to %10 in highly the aethiology of sexual ambiguity in the other case was the chromo- prevalent regions of Iran, so we expect to see frequent co-inheri- somal structural anomalies 46,XY,t(X;21)(p11;q21). CONCLUSION: tance of alpha triplication with β-thalassemia.Blood samples were se- The etiology of ambiguous genitalia is variable. The physician man- lected from individuals with normal hematological indices (MCV>80, aging these families could minimize the trauma of having a child with MCH>27) (n=153) in Iran population.DNA extraction from peripheral unidentified sex by providing appropriate genetic counseling so that blood leukocytes was performed by salting out method and multiplex the parents can make an early decision. A proper diagnosis requires PCR was used to detect alpha triplication.Carrier frequency in individu- a team working: pediatrician, endocrinologist, genetician and pediatric als with normal hematological indices (n=153) was %3.26. This carrier urologist/surgeon. Prenatal diagnosis in at-risk families should be con- frequency of α-triplication is relatively high (3-26) in this study. the co- sidered and appropriate therapy offered to minimize or prevent genital inheritance of this determinant could interfere with genotype-pheno- ambiguity. type correlation in minor β-thalassemia carriers, and could cause thal- assemia intermedia. further characterization by southern blot or MLPA P02.020 Recurrence of complete arhinia in two siblings with is needed to determine the allele frequency in our population. clinical picture of treacher-collins syndrome negative for tcOF1 mutations P02.018 Alström syndrome in two sisters. F. Lalatta1, C. Cesaretti1, B. Gentilin1, E. Folliero1, V. Bianchi1, G. Melloni1, C. S. Jougheh Doust1, M. Nagel2, G. Yoon1,3; Rossi2, C. Meazzini3, M. Bedeschi1, F. Natacci1, R. Brusati4; 1Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, 1UOS Dipartimentale di Genetica Medica, Milano, Italy, 2Laboratory of Medical University of Toronto,, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Center for Nephrology and Genetics, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Maxillo- Metabolic Disorders, Laboratory for Molecular Diagnostics, Weisswasser, Facial Surgery San Paolo Universitry Hospital, Milano, Italy, 4Department of Germany, Weiswasser, Germany, 3Department of Paediatrics, Division of Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  Maxillo-Facial Surgery San Paolo University Hospital, Milano, Italy. patients with mild MR, hyperactivity and, occasionally, late onset sei- Congenital arhinia is an extremely rare malformation derived from an zures. ASPM is the most commonly involved gene, explaining roughly anomalous embryological development of the nose which normally de- 25 to 50% of all cases (MCPH5). Careful clinical, neurological and velops between the third and the tenth week of intra-uterine life. The neuroradiological investigation of 12 patients with homozygous or pathogenesis of this anomaly is not clearly understood. Congenital ab- compound heterozygous mutations in ASPM revealed that 1) pheno- sence of the nose is often associated with other defects, including ear, type may encompass pyramidal signs and short stature (< -2 SD) ; 2) palatal and ocular malformations, central nervous system and skeletal intelligence may be within normal values (IQ > 70) ; 3) more important- anomalies. We report the case of two siblings, a 9-year-old girl and a ly, simplified gyration pattern with anteroposterior gradient is present in 2-year-old boy, with congenital total arhinia. Both had a complete ab- most cases,. Migration defects (heterotopias), and infratentorial anom- sence of external nose and nasal cavities associated with dysmorphic alies are present in some patients. We investigated regional cerebral facial features including downslanting of palpebral fissures, maxillary organization through 3D morphometric analysis of MRI scans in 7/12 hypoplasia and external ear anomalies. Since congenital absence of patients and showed that 1) reduction of brain volume affects equally the nose has been described in a few patients affected by Treacher- white and grey matter. 2) Reduction of cortical volume (and surface) Collins Syndrome, we conducted a molecular study of TCOF1 gene affects more the caudal part of frontal lobes and the rostral part of on the mother and first child DNA, which were negative for both point parietal areas, whereas 3) mediotemporal areas and basal structures mutations and large deletions (PCR and DNA analysis through se- are preserved, which is in accordance with preserved mnseic perfor- quencing of the exons 1-26 and the contiguous intronic sequences). mances. These data allow us to allow us to broaden the phenotype of As congenital absence of the nose is an extraordinary occurrence in MCPH and to redefine its diagnostic criteria. a family and most cases are sporadic, the recurrence of arhinia in the same family, as described here, suggests a common genetic and he- P02.023 Mutations of codon 2085 in the helicase domain reditary origin. The consanguinity of parents supports the hypothesis of ATRX are recurrent and cause a moderate form of AtRX of an autosomal recessive disorder; nevertheless, we can not exclude syndrome a gonadic mosaicism or an autosomal dominant inheritance, as we are C. Lacoste1, B. Leheup2, I. Agouti1, D. Mowat3, N. Levy1, C. Badens1; not able to verify if the father had pathological features. 1Department of Genetics, Hôpital d‘enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 2Department of genetics, Hôpital Brabois, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, P02.021 complex genotypes in arrhythmogenic right ventricular 3Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randswick, cardiomyopathy patients from North West spain Sydney, Australia. M. Hermida-Prieto, L. Núñez, M. I. Rodríguez-García, M. Ortiz, R. Barriales- ATRX syndrome is characterised by the association of profound men- Villa, E. Maneiro, X. Fernández, L. Cazón, D. García, E. Veira, A. Castro- tal retardation, facial dysmorphism, urogenital abnormalities and al- Beiras, L. Monserrat; pha-thalassemia. A large number of ATRX mutations have been de- Instituto Universitario de Ciencias de la Salud-CHUAC, A Coruña, Spain. scribed as causative in ATRX syndrome, the majority being missense Purpose: Desmosomal genes mutations are detected in nearly 50% of mutations. Most of the 80 missense mutations reported so far, have arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) patients from been described in one or two families with exception of the R246C different series. Our objective was to analyze the prevalence of muta- which was found in 20% of the ATRX syndromes. Here, we described tions in these genes in an ARVC cohort from North West Spain. mutations localised on codon 2085, in one of the 2 major functional Methods: Twenty no related index cases with ARVC diagnosis were domains, the helicase domain, and associated with a mild form of the clinical evaluated in a dedicated cardiomyopathies clinic. Sequence disease. analysis of main desmosomal genes (PKP2, DSP, DSG2 and DSC2) Among the patients addressed to our lab for ATRX analysis, we was performed from fresh blood samples, taken after written consent. found 5 patients from 3 families carrying a mutation on codon 2085, Results: We found 10 different mutations in 13 index patients (65%). a highly conserved residue of the helicase domain. The substitution Four patients (20%) had complex genotypes: 1 was homozygous for a was R2085H in 2 families and R2085C in the last one. Clinical data DSC2 gene mutation, 1 was compound heterozygous (two mutations in were as follow: the 5 patients have discrete but characteristic facial PKP2 gene) and 2 were double heterozygous (two mutations in differ- dysmorphism and present with mental retardation: all of them acquired ent genes). All mutations were novel and two (R375X, S329RfsX351) autonomous walking between 18 and 24 months, three has no speech were present in more than one patient. Both mutations are predicted skill, one can say words, the last one sentences. None of them have to produce a truncated peptide. R375X in DSC2 gene was detected in genital abnormalities nor seizure. The 3 mothers are carriers and have two patients: one was homozygous and developed early and severe highly skewed chromosome X inactivation. No mutation of the codon phenotype and the other patient had a second mutation in PKP2 gene 2085 was found after testing 250 control chromosomes. (S329RfsX351). Moreover, this PKP2 mutation was found in 6 differ- In conclusion, missense mutations localised on residue 2085 should ent cases. clearly be considered as causative mutations even though they lead to Conclusions: Nearly, 20% of patients could have complex genotypes in moderate and incomplete forms of ATRX syndrome. the main desmosomal genes. The complex genotypes could develop early and severe phenotype. North West Spain have a highly preva- P02.024 Detection of genomic imbalances by arraycGH in two lence (65%) of ARVC patients with desmosomal gene mutations. children with syndromic autism. D. Avdjieva-Tzavella1, S. Hadjidekova2, B. Rukova2, D. Nesheva2, E. P02.022 Further delineation of the cerebral morphology in Simeonov3, R. Tincheva1, D. Toncheva2; AsPm-related primitive microcephaly : microcephalia ver ais not 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital, Medical a small, normally organized cortex ! University, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Genetics, S. Passemard1, M. Schaer2, M. El Maleh3, O. Boespflug-Tanguy4, T. Billette de Medical Faculty, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Pediatrics, Villemeur5, B. Isidor6, B. Gérard1, S. Eliez7, P. Gressens8, A. Verloes1; University Hospital “Alexandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria. 1Dept of Genetics, Robert DEBRE Univ. Hospital, PARIS, France, 2Service Autism is a complex behaviorally-defined disorder of the immature Médico-Pédagogique, Département de psychiatrie, Université de Genève, brain. It is not a disease but a syndrome with multiple non genetic Geneva, Switzerland, 3Dept of Medical Imaging, Robert DEBRE Univ. Hospital, and/or genetic causes. Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are condi- PARIS, France, 4Dept of Pediatric Neurology, Robert DEBRE Univ. Hospital, tions which can be either isolated or syndromic, that is associated PARIS, France, 5Dept of Pediatric Neurology, Armand TROUSSEAU Univ. with other clinical features such as facial dysmorphism, limb or vis- Hospital, PARIS, France, 6Dept of Genetics,Nantes Univ. Hospital, Nantes, ceral malformations, and growth abnormalities. Currently, diagnosable France, 7Service Médico-Pédagogique, Département de psychiatrie, Université medical conditions, cytogenetic abnormalities, environmental factors, de Genève, Genève, Switzerland, 8INSERM U676, Robert DEBRE Univ. and single-gene defects associated with autism, together account for Hospital, PARIS, France. 10-20% of cases. Primary microcephalies (MicroCephaly Primary Hereditary, MCPH) We report two children with autistic behavior, mental retardation and have often been presented as a developmental disorders resulting in dysmorphic features. We have used genomic array CytoChip (BlueG- homogeneous reduction of grey matter in the cortex, without obvious nome, Cambridge, UK), covering the entire genome at a median 565 developmental defect except neuronal apauverishment, occurring in kb, a resolution optimised to detect pathogenic imbalances while mini-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  mizing polymorphisms. Array CGH- analysis revealed cryptic ampli- still undergoing periton dialysis at the end of the evaluation period. Be- fication of 16p11.2 region spanning 1,362 Mb in first patient and an cause of the morbidity and mortality associated with renal abnormali- amplification spanning 1,274Mb of 7p12.3 region in second patient. ties in BBS, this study demonstrates the importance of long-term follow The microdeletion and a reciprocal microduplication of 16p11.2 region up so that proper care and treatment can be provided. carry substantial susceptibility to autism and appear to account for ap- proximately 1% of cases. 7p12.3 is a region of shared genetic associa- P02.027 A micro-duplication of the centromeric domain of the tion between ASD and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). 11p15.5 imprinted gene cluster is associated with loss of DNA These data strongly support the idea that only a whole-genome high- methylation and familial BWs resolution analysis such as array-CGH is able to provide an accurate N. Chiesa1, A. De Crescenzo2, A. Mussa1, G. Baldassarre1, L. Perone3, M. diagnosis for chromosomal imbalance in patients with ASD. Confirma- Carella4, M. Cirillo Silengo1, A. Riccio2, G. B. Ferrero1; tory FISH studies with BAC clones are planned for accurate confirma- 1Department of Paediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Department tion of CytoChip result. of Environmental Science, University of Naples, Caserta, Italy, 3Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine,, Naples, Italy, 4IRCCS, Casa Sollievo della P02.025** Autism spectrum Disorders: emerging data from Sofferenza, Genetica Medica, San Giovanni Rotondo - Foggia, Italy. copy Number Variations analysis Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an overgrowth disorder M. Mucciolo1, R. Canitano2, M. Mencarelli1, F. Papa1, E. Katzaki1, A. Marozza1, caused by a variety of molecular lesions affecting a two-domain clus- L. Radice2, C. Castagnini1, L. Dosa1, M. Pollazzon1, G. Hayek2, A. Renieri1, F. ter of imprinted genes at chromosome 11p15.5. Most cases are spo- Mari1; radic and result from DNA methylation defects at either one of the two 1Medical Genetics-Molecular Biology Department-University of Siena, 53100 imprinting centres (IC1 and IC2). Here, we describe a familial case Siena, Italy, 2Child Neuropsichiatry, University Hospital of Siena, 53100 Siena, with a 166 kb duplication of the centromeric domain and loss of IC2 Italy. methylation. The proband is an infant with macroglossia, macroso- Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) have a complex and heteroge- mia, onfalocele and hexadactylism, her mother and uncle presented neous aetiology with a strong evidence of a genetic involvement. To with abdominal wall defects. The duplication that comprises IC2 and assess the frequency and type of copy number variations (CNVs) in the 5’ part of the anti-sense KCNQ1OT1 gene was identified by MS- ASD, a cohort of 95 patients has been selected and analyzed by oligo MLPA (methylation-sensitive multiple-ligation-probe-amplification), array-CGH with a functional resolution of nearly 100 kb. Array-CGH confirmed by SNPa analysis and demonstrated to be in-cis by FISH. resulted negative in 57 patients while in 38 at least one rearrangement This genomic lesion cosegregates with BWS phenotype and IC2 hy- was identified. A total of 51 rearrangements was identified: 23 dele- pomethylation, but does not affect IC1 methylation. cDNA sequencing tions and 28 duplications. Among the 38 patients with CNVs the M: of KCNQ1OT1 demonstrated that both the maternal and paternal al- F ratio is higher than expected resulting in 6.6:1. Seven CNVs turned leles were expressed in the proband and her mother, indicating loss to be pathogenic: one de novo (del Xq12) and 6 located in known of KCNQ1OT1 imprinting. The results obtained are consistent with autism susceptibility regions (dup15q13.3, dup16p13.1, delXp22.31, the presence of a maternal IC2 duplication that results in partial hy- del15q11.2, del11p12, dup17q12). The 7 patients with pathogenic pomethylation at IC2 and activation of the maternal KCNQ1OT1, likely CNVs were all males with intellectual disability (ID). The majority pre- silencing the imprinted genes of the IC2 domain (e.g. CDKN1C). This sented with congenital anomalies (MCA) and dysmorphisms (57.1%); is the first familial case of BWS with IC2 hypomethylation in which none suffered from epilepsy. Among the cohort of 57 patients without the molecular defect is identified. Maternal 11p15.5 duplications are CNVs the M:F ratio resulted in 4.7:1, as currently reported in ASDs. ID generally associated with the Silver-Russell syndrome phenotype and was present in 96.5%; MCA and dysmorphisms were present respec- include the CDKN1C gene. On the contrary, in the reported case, the tively in 21% and 63.2%. Epilepsy rate was 19.3%. The detection rate duplication does not include any full-length genes, affects IC2 methyla- of CNVs in our series of patients is 7.4%. Patients with pathogenic tion and causes BWS. CNVs differed from the cohort without any CNVs for the presence of congenital anomalies, more frequent in the first group. Furthermore, P02.028 Microdeletions within the “Imprinting region 2” on the rate of epilepsy found in the all group was 19.3%, while in the 11p15 identify a distinct category of Beckwith-Wiedemann subgroup of patients with pathogenic CNVs (n=7) epilepsy was not syndrome phenotype at risk for cardiac arrythmia. detected. M. Zollino1, F. Gurrieri1, G. Marangi1, D. Orteschi1, R. Pietrobono1, F. Bellocci2, G. Neri1; P02.026 Evaluation of clinical findings in 20 patients with 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, Bardet-Biedl syndrome 2Istituto di Cardiologia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy. O. Altiok Clark1, E. Mihci1,2, S. Akman3; Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an overgrowth condition 1Department of Medical Genetics, Akdeniz University School of Medicine, characterized by clinical variability and genetic heterogeneity. Psycho- Antalya, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Genetics, motor retardation is uncommon and familiar recurrence rare. Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 3Department of BWS is caused by disregulation of two imprinting domains (ICR1 and Pediatric Nephrology, Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey. ICR2) on 11p15, ICR2 being involved in most cases. Abnormalities of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder ICR2 include loss of methylation on the maternal allele, or point muta- characterized by one or more of the following six major features: retinal tions of CDKN1C. degeneration, early-onset obesity, cognitive impairment, genitourinary We observed a 11p15 microdeletion involving ICR2 in two unrelated tract malformations, renal dysfunction and polydactyly. According to females , aged 16 and 19 years, respectively. The deletion spanned recent studies, defects in the basal bodies of ciliated cells appear to about 900 kb in the first case, including CDKN1C, KCNQ1 and addi- be the underlying cause of the syndrome. Although BBS was originally tional 15 flanking genes. The size of the deletion in the second patient thought to be a recessive disorder, it has since been shown that some was 200 kb, encompassing the entire KCNQ1OT1 antisense tran- forms of BBS are passed on via triallelic inheritance. script, ICR2 and part of KCNQ1. Loss-of-function mutations of KCNQ1 We retrospectively evaluated 20 patients with BBS because of asso- can be responsible for long QT syndrome type 1. ciated abnormalities. between January 2001 and January 2009. We Both patients presented with an atypical BWS phenotype, including found both classical and rare findings of BBS in our patients. We iden- mental retardation in the first patient, a long QT syndrome in the sec- tifed a patient with persistent urogenital sinus, urethrovaginal fistule ond and overgrowth and facial dysmorphisms in both. The long QT together with BBS as rare findings. Our special attention was given to syndrome was responsible for a cluster of life-threatening ventricular monitoring those patients with renal abnormalities, because renal dis- fibrillation episodes, needing an urgent implant of intra-cardiac defibril- ease is a major cause of premature mortality in patients with BBS. We lator. found renal abnormalities in 10 of the patients. The renal abnormalities Literature deals with only one additional BWS patient with microdele- observed ranged from minimal pelvicalyceal dilatation (PKD) to end- tion of ICR2. However this event might be under-estimated. A search stage renal failure. Among of these, four had a polycystic kidney and for a ICR2 microdeletion should be performed in each BWS patient with six had PKD. Due to end-stage renal failure, three of these patients impaired methylation of ICR2, and patients hemizygous for KCNQ1 received a renal transplant from a relative. Four of the patients were should be monitored for long QT syndrome. If a ICR2 microdeletion Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  is diagnosed in female patients, a 50% recurrence risk of BWS is ex- P02.031** Larger cohort of Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome pected in the offspring. (BOFs) patients: phenotype description and TFAP2A genotype findings P02.029 Orofaciodigital syndromes: a case series. Y. J. Sznajer1,2, L. Burglen3, S. Blesson4, E. Bieth5, S. Lyonnet6, C. Baumann7, I. Panigrahi, R. R. Das, R. K. Marwaha; D. Lacombe8, A. David9, E. Galliani10, W. Just11; Post Graduate Institute of Medical Rducation and Research, Chandigarh, India. 1Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center for Introduction: Orofaciodigital syndrome (OFD), an inherited syndrome, Human Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 3Service de génétique, Hôpital Trousseau, with varying combinations of defects of the oral cavity, face, and hands, Paris, France, 4Service de génétique, Pôle Biologie, CHRU de Tours - Hôpital including lobulated or bifid tongue, cleft or pseudocleft palate, tongue Bretonneau, Tours, France, 5Service de Génétique médicale; Hôpital Purpan, tumours, missing or malpositioned teeth, hypoplastic nasal alar carti- Toulouse, France, 6Dept of Genetics, University Paris Descartes and Hôpital lage, depressed nasal bridge, bifid nasal tip, brachydactyly, clinodac- Necker Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, 7Dept of Clinical Genetics, tyly, incomplete syndactyly, and, frequently, mental retardation. They Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 8Service de Gééntique Médicale, CHU have variable presentations as well as inheritance patterns. Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 9Service de Génétique médicale, CHU Nantes, Objectives: To study clinical variability of orofaciodigital syndrome in Nantes, France, 10Maxillo-Facial/Plastic Surgery Dept, Centre de Référence subjects who were seen in genetic clinic in last 3 years. Malformations de la Face, Hôpital d’enfants Armand-Trousseau (AP-HP), Paris, Methods: Subjects with OFDs seen in Genetic unit in APC were sub- France, 11Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. jects of this retro-spective analysis. BOFS patients develop distinctive features: abnormal external ear; Results: There were 4 cases with OFD with M:F ratio = 1:3 and the retro-auricular overlying skin; clefts or pseudocleft; eye involvement consultations were from age of 4 years to 21 years. On database (microphthalmia or coloboma) and premature grey hair. Patients may search, the clinical diagnoses made were: OFD I, OFD II and OFD IX have mental retardation and all type of deafness. TFAP2A gene dele- in 3 cases each with 4th subject having overlapping features of both tion or missense mutations were identified in one familial and 5 spo- OFD II & VI. The last case had lingual nodules, central polydactyly, radic patients (1). Stoetzel et al. confirmed these findings in one family bifid thumb, cardiac defect and bilateral renal parenchymal disease. and 3 sporadic patients (2). No precise phenotype criteria was validat- Predominant clinical presentations were developmental delay, abnor- ed to diagnose BOFS. A checklist was elaborated based on the pub- mal facies, digital anomaly and short stature. lished reports available in BOFS patients. Four familial and 9 sporadic Conclusions: Subjects with OFDs can have varying clinical presen- patients with BOFS were included in this study. All patients developed tation and should be differentiated from craniosynostosis syndromes any type of clefts (lip, palate and/or pseudo-). Pre auricular pits/fistula and oral-cardio-digital syndromes. Digital anomalies may not be pres- and abnormal external ears were noted in familial presentations as ent in all. A high clinical suspicion, examination of parents and ap- for 6 sporadic patients. Nasolacrymal duct stenosis and malformed propriate investigations are required to arrive at early diagnosis and nose was diagnosed for two sporadic and one familial presentations. provide proper genetic counseling. OFD II and OFD VI may represent Overlying skin was found in one familial and one sporadic patients. a clinical continuum of same underlying gene defect. Premature grey hair was noted in three familial and in one sporadic patients. Ophthalmic anomalies were diagnosed in the two familial as P02.030 two siblings with blepharophimosis, psychomotor in 7 sporadic patients. One family had neurosensorial deafness as 4 delay and severe growth failure: a new autosomal recessive sporadic patients. Three sporadic patients developed mental retarda- blepharophimosis-mental retardation syndrome? tion. In all affected patients but one, TFAP2A gene sequencing was M. Dentici1, R. Mingarelli1, B. Dallapiccola2; diagnostic for missense/nonsense mutations or gene deletion. Hotspot 1IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS- mutations in exons 4 and 5 in the gene encoding the transcription fac- Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Bambino Gesú Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, tor AP2A were found. Rome, Italy. References Blepharophimosis is characterized by a fixed reduction in the vertical (1) Milunsky et al. Am J Hum Genet 2008;82:1171-1177 distance between the upper and lower eyelids with short palpebral fis- (2) Stoetzel C. et al. Am J Med Genet 2009;149A:2141-2146 sures. It is commonly associated to other periocular anomalies that may occur either as isolated features or as part of multiple congenital P02.032 A new case of blepharophimosis syndrome (BPEs) anomaly (MCA) syndromes. Many syndromic blepharophimosis pa- associated with translocation between chromosomes 3q and 8q tients show variable degree of mental retardation and are referred to E. Braha1, M. Volosciuc2, V. Gorduza1, C. Bujoran2; as BMR (blepharophimosis mental retardation), a term which includes 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Pediatric Hospital Iasi, a clinical and etiological heterogeneous group of disorders. We report Iasi, Romania. on two siblings, a 6 year old girl and a 18 month old male, present- We report a case of 2 month old girl with hort stature, dolichocephaly, ing overlapping clinical findings. Striking facial dysmorphisms included blepharophimosis, ptosis and epicanthus inversus. The proband was upward slanted palpebral fissures, blepharophimosis, telecanthus, the first child of a healthy, nonconsanguineous couple. Family anam- hypertelorism, posteriorly rotated ears with over-folded helices and nesis was negative. Evolution of pregnancy was with hydramnios; micrognathia. Ectodermal abnormalities included fine hair, sparse preterm delivery at 35 months of age. Chromosomal analisys showed eyebrows and thin skin. Both patients had feeding difficulties with gas- an apparently balanced karyotype with translocation between chromo- troesophageal reflux and growth retardation. Psychomotor skills were somes 8q and 3q. Genetic testing for parents should be performed severely delayed and with no verbal capacity. The male sib displayed in the context of genetic counseling (the karyotype of the parents - in low GH levels, while the older sister had low cholesterol and mildly work). raised TSH levels. Numerous metabolic/genetic investigations, includ- Blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES) is a complex eyelid malforma- ing cholesterol precursors dosage and high resolution array-CGH, tion characterized by four major features: blepharophimosis, ptosis, were negative. The clinical history of the siblings was uploaded to the epicanthus inversus, and telecanthus. The diagnosis of BPES is es- Dysmorphology Diagnostic System (DDS) developed by DYSCERNE. sentially based on clinical findings. Differential diagnosis with BMR syndromes, including Dubowitz syn- It is possible that our patient has a contiguous gene defect including at drome, Marden-Walker syndrome, Ohdo/Ohdo-like syndromes and least one locus from chromosome 3q for a type of blepharophimosis, cholesterol storage disorders was discussed with the DDS experts further suggesting that multiple loci exist on chromosome 3q for eyelid which concluded that these two siblings likely represent a previously development. Cytogenetic rearrangements are rare, estimated to oc- unreported autosomal recessive-BMR syndrome. cur in 2% of individuals with BPES. [Beysen et al 2009] This study was supported by DYSCERNE, A European Network of Cen- tres of Expertise for Dysmorphology (DG Sanco), Project 2006122. P02.033 interstitial deletion of chromosome 3q24 to 3q25.33 associated with an unusual brachydactly, facial telangectasia and brisk reflexes C. M. Brewer1, C. John2, F. Katka3, R. Evans3; 1Clinical Genetics Department, Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  Kingdom, 3Derriford Hospital, Plymouth, United Kingdom. 19p13.13p13.12 deletion encompassing the CACNA1A gene. We report a girl with developmental delay, neurological, dermatological This microdeletion overlapped the deletion recently reported by Auvin and immune features, facial dysmorphism and unusual brachydactyly (Epilepsia, 50(11):2501-2505, 2009) concerning a patient presenting with a 10.7Mb interstitial deletion within 3q24 to 3q25.33. infantile spasms, neonatal hypotonia, macrocephaly, advance stature The 4th and 5th metacarpals, and 3rd and 4th metatarsals are short, con- and bone age. In the overlapping region of the 2 deletions is located sistent with the overlapping conditions of brachydactylys type D and E. the CACNA1A gene (calcium channel alpha 1A subunit) encoding a She has marked joint laxity and brisk reflexes, facial telangectasia and sub-unit of voltage-dependant calcium channel. Mutations of this gene recurrent infections. Growth is normal. are responsible of familial hemiplegic migraine and episodic ataxia The deleted interval contains 55 annotated genes, but none is an obvi- type 2. The haploinsufficiency of CACNA1A probably plays an impor- ous candidate for any of the features observed here. tant role in the phenotype of these 2 patients. Deletions of this region of chromosome 3 are rare, with only one fur- ther case reported in the literature. No photos of the other case were P02.036** sHOc2 mutations in patients with cardio-facio- published, but the description is of 1st and 2nd toes that were unusually cutaneous syndrome long compared with the other toes. This sounds remarkably similar to E. M. M. Burkitt Wright1,2, J. Shorto3, B. Kerr1,2; the findings in our case. 1Genetic and Developmental Medicine, Manchester Biomedical Research This case is noteworthy because this case represents a new microde- Centre, St Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Medical Genetics letion syndrome, and we suggest that an key feature of this may be an Research Group, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, unusual form of brachydactyly. 3Manchester Regional Genetics Laboratory, Central Manchester Hospitals Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom. P02.034 Brachyphalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/ Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC), Noonan syndrome (NS) and hypoplasia syndrome (Omim 609945) in a girl born to Costello syndrome (CS) show both considerable phenotypic heteroge- consanguineous parents neity and overlap, and arise due to mutations in several genes whose Y. Shafeghati1, K. Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1, A. W. Kuss2, H. Ropers2, A. products interact within the RAS-MAPK pathway. Whilst HRAS muta- Tzschach2; tions cause CS, many different genes (PTPN11, SOS1, KRAS, NRAS, 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation BRAF, MEK1 and MEK2) cause NS and CFC, and a significant propor- Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular tion of NS/CFC patients have no mutation identified currently. Patients Genetics, Berlin, Germany. in whom CS is clinically suspected but no HRAS mutation is found are Brachyphalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/hypoplasia syndrome generally considered to have CFC. De novo S2G mutations in SHOC2 (OMIM 609945) is a rare syndrome characterized by severe limb mal- were recently reported in patients with a variant NS phenotype, ‘Noon- formations, facial dysmorphic features and additional clinical prob- an-like syndrome with loose anagen hair’. This mutation generates a lems. Only seven patients have been reported to date, and the etiol- myristoylation site, the myristoylated protein then being targeted to the ogy of this disorder is unknown. Autosomal dominant inheritance with cell membrane, where it interacts with RAS and RAF proteins. variable expression has been suggested based on the presence of Samples from 84 patients referred for molecular diagnostic testing of minor features in some parents and the fact that neither parental con- BRAF, KRAS, MEK1, MEK2 and HRAS because of a clinical suspicion sanguinity nor pairs of affected siblings were reported. of CFC or CS, in whom no mutation was found in these genes, were We report on the first patient with this syndrome who was born to con- screened for the S2G mutation in SHOC2. 11 such mutations were sanguineous parents. Neither the mother nor the father, who were first identified, confirming that this mutation is a common and important cousins, had clinical features suggestive of a manifestation of brachy- cause of a CFC/CS/Noonan-like phenotype. Further work to character- phalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/hypoplasia syndrome. The pa- ise this patient group is underway. These results emphasise the signifi- tient had no siblings, and the family history was unremarkable. Clinical cance of SHOC2 in germline disorders of the RAS-MAPK pathway and problems included brachydactyly of hands and feet, splaying of fingers indicate that molecular diagnostic testing for the S2G mutation is likely and toes, preaxial polydactyly of feet, bilateral tibial aplasia, shortened to yield positive results in groups of patients in whom the diagnoses of radius and ulna and characteristic facial dysmorphic signs. CFC, CS or severe Noonan syndrome are being considered. Consanguinity in this patient indicates an autosomal recessive etiol- ogy, a mode of inheritance that should not be dismissed in genetic P02.037 Desmin mutations as a cause of right ventricular counseling as long as the causative gene defect of this disorder re- cardiac failure affect the intercalated disk. mains elusive. E. Otten1, A. Asimaki2, A. Maass1, I. M. van Langen3, A. van der Wal3, N. de Jonge4, M. P. van den Berg1, J. E. Saffitz2, A. A. M. Wilde3,5, J. D. H. P02.035 A 1.6 mb deletion of the 19p13.13p13.12 region Jongbloed1, J. P. van Tintelen1; detected by array-cGH and encompassing the cAcNA1A gene 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Beth Israel is responsible of a non evolutive epileptic encephalopathy with Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States, 3Academic Medical macrocephaly, connective tissue dysplasia and urinary reflux. Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, F. Amram1, G. Morin1, J. Barois-Guilliot1, R. Gouron1, A. Leke1, B. Demeer1, A. Netherlands, 5Interuniversity Cardiology Institute of the Netherlands, Utrecht, Receveur1, S. Kanafani1, J. Andrieux2, H. Copin1, M. Mathieu1; Netherlands. 1University Hospital, Amiens, France, 2Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, Lille, Background: Desmin is the main intermediate filament in skeletal France. and cardiac muscle cells. Abnormal desmin causes skeletal mus- This female patient is the third daughter of unrelated parents. After a cle weakness and/or cardiomyopathy. Desmin related myopathy pregnancy characterized by a polyhydramnios during the second tri- (DRM)(MIM#601419) is associated with dilated (DCM), restrictive or mester and an oligoamnios at the end of the third trimester, the deliv- hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Recently, we observed both DCM and ery occurred spontaneously at 41 WA. At birth, the patient presented (probable) Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC) a severe hypotonia, marfanoïd habitus, hyperelastic skin and severe in three Dutch families carrying an identical desmin (DES) mutation. gastro-oesophageal reflux requiring Nissen surgical treatment. In the This suggests DES mutations to cause cardiomyopathy affecting both first months she presented numerous urinary infections secondary to the left and right ventricle. Because of this overlap with ARVC, we urinary tract reflux. Dysmorphic features were noticed: high and large studied the prevalence of DES mutations in (probable) ARVC patients forehead, frontal bossing, down slanting palpebral fissures, external and we studied the cardiac desmosomal composition in DES mutation strabismus, and arachnodactyly of fingers and toes. The outcome was carriers. severe: non evolutive epileptic encephalopathy, absence of speech, Methods: DES was screened for mutations in 50 ARVC(-like) pa- absence of walking. She also presented an advance of the stature tients. (+2.5 SD) and the bone age, and a macrocephaly (+2.5 SD). At age Besides, immunohistochemistry of desmosomal proteins was per- 11, a dorsal-lumbar scoliosis was surgically repaired. formed in myocardial tissue from 3 patients carrying two different DES All etiological investigations were normal: karyotype with FISH mutations, causing an ARVC(-like) phenotype in one and a severe bi- 15q11q13, ophtalmological examination, EEG and EMG, cerebral ventricular cardiomyopathy in two other patients. MRI, muscucular and cutaneous biopsy. Array-CGH showed a de novo Results: No additional DES mutations were found in our patient group. Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 7 Immunohistochemistry demonstrated accumulation of desmin aggre- P02.040 A novel splice mutation in CYP27A1 associated with gates with abnormally shaped intercalated disks and normal amounts cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (and pulverulent cataract) of desmosomal proteins in p.S13F mutation carriers but a decreased S. J. Joyce1, R. Bourkiza2, E. Meyer1, A. Reddy1, H. Patel2, M. Chan2, E. R. amount of connexin 43, desmoplakin and plakophilin 2 in two patients Maher1; carrying the p.R454W mutation. 1The University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Barts and the Conclusions: (Probable) ARVC or severe cardiomyopathy with right London NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom. ventricular involvement are possible phenotypes in DRM. Moreover, Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) is a lipid storage metabolism we demonstrated that DES mutations may affect the architecture and/ disorder, inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. CTX is charac- or the localisation of multiple proteins at the intercalated disk, suggest- terized by neurological findings (such as cerebellar ataxia and demen- ing a common pathophysiological pathway between arrhythmogenic tia), premature atherosclerosis, tendon xanthomas and cataracts. It is cardiomyopathies caused by desmosomal gene mutations (mainly af- caused by mutations in CYP27A1, leading to sterol 27-hydroxylase fecting the right ventricle) and cardiomyopathies caused by DES muta- deficiency and abnormal cholestanol tissue deposition. tions. A consanguineous Bangladeshi family with three children with pulveru- lent cataract and global developmental delay were ascertained. Since P02.038 The importance of genetic examination in sex learning difficulties could also be observed in two of the other siblings assessment in the new born who showed no evidence of cataract, the underlying diagnosis and O. D. Marginean, I. I. Simedrea, A. D. Anghel, E. P. Pavel; inheritance pattern was unclear. 1 Ist Pediatric Clinic, Timisoara, Romania. Genetic linkage studies, employing an autozygosity mapping approach, Case report: RR, a male infant, 7 months years old, referred in our were undertaken to ascertain the underlying genetic cause. The results department, from chirurgery department, for micropenia and facial di- showed linkage to the chromosomal region 2q35-q36 which contained morphism. The child was born at 32 week of gestation, with 1800 g. the CYP27A1 gene. Direct sequencing of CYP27A1 revealed a homo- There was no significant personal or family history for birth defects and zygous splice mutation in all family members with cataracts. genetic disorders. Examinations reveled: weigh 4500gms (< 3th per- This finding confirms the validity of this approach when identifying centile), height of 61 cms (< 3th percentile);dysmorphic facial features genes responsible for disorders, even when the aetiology of the condi- (macrocephaly- head circumference of 40 cms, frontal bossing, hypo- tion and diagnosis are uncertain. It highlights the importance of evalu- telorism, prominent eyes, proeminent philtrum), anterior ears, micrope- ating if CTX is an appropriate diagnosis when the proband has cata- nis ( 0.8 cms), small scrotum and no palbably testis, without associated racts, especially since the condition can be treated if identified before external genitalia ambiguity. According to the clinical appearance small irreversible brain damage. phallus and scrotum the child get a male sex at birth. After inadequate growth of genitalia the parents decided to have a chirurgery procedure P02.041 clinical and genetic analysis of the CHD7 gene in for solve the problem. Laboratory and exams reveals : TSH, Ft3, LH, Korean patients with cHARGE syndrome FSH, Testosterone normal, 17OHP (16.9ng/ml), DHEA (1.57ng/ml). Y. Lee1, S. Kim1, Y. Shin1, J. Kim2, H. Hong1, Y. Lee1, C. Ki2; Bone age concordant with chronological age. Ultrashall of the pelvis- a 1Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital, Bucheon, Korea, Republic of, uterus may be present; The hyperplasia of the adrenal glands:1/0.9/08 2Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea, Republic mms. MRI - no evidence of the uterus. Cariotipe 46XX. The DNA testis of. for Y chromosome - negative for Y chromosome. In this moment refuse Background: CHARGE syndrome (CS; OMIM 214800) is a rare au- to change the social sex of child. tosomal dominant disease associated with coloboma, heart defects, Conclusions: choanal atresia, retarded growth and development, genital abnormali- 1. The clinical appearance of external genitalia may be not sufficient to ties, and ear anomalies. Mutations in the CHD7 gene have been sug- give the social sex of children. gested to be a genetic background of CS. 2. The micropenis in the infant is a real challenge to diagnose and Methods: In this study, sequence analysis of the CHD7 gene was per- treat. formed in four Korean sporadic CS patients who showed clinical mani- 3. The congenital adrenal hyperplasia with psudohermafroditism is a festations of typical or atypical CS. rare disease with severe psychological implications for the child and Results: Four novel mutations, three nonsense mutations (Ser705X, his family. Arg1069X, and Trp1534X) and one frameshift mutation (Asn- 603ThrfsX4), were identified in the CHD7 gene in the patients. Con- P02.039 cerebrofaciothoracic syndrome: twin presentation genital heart disease, aplasia of the semicircular canal, sensoryneural C. Ruggiero, M. Reyes, A. I. Corominas; hearing loss, and developmental delay were observed in all patients; Centro de Estudios Genéticos, Buenos Aires, Argentina. however, choanal atresia was not seen in any of them. Objective: To describe two female dizygotic twins, born to non con- Conclusions: The phenotypic expressions of these Korean patients sanguineous parents by means of assisted fertilization, who had facial with CS were different from those of other ethnicities, and allelic het- dysmorphism, complex anomalies of vertebrae and ribs (such as bifid erogeneity was found in the CHD7 gene in Korean patients with CS. ribs, hemivertebrae and costal synostosis), and global developmental Mutation analysis of the CHD7 gene should be performed in Korean delay. subjects to rule out the possibility of CS, even when clinical manifesta- Methodology: Presentation of two girls who were studied because of tions are not typical of CS. facial and thoracic dysmorphism and mental retardation. Conclusion and Discussion: The features are similar to those initially P02.042** congenital heart defects in patients with a CHD7- described by Pascual-Castroviejo et al in 1975 and thus represent new mutation cases of cerebrofaciothoracic dysplasia (OMIM 213980). Only 13 cases N. Janssen1, M. Baardman2, G. J. du Marchie Servaas3, L. Kapusta4, L. H. have been previously described. The information obtained through the Hoefsloot5, W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse1, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1; few cases described so far suggests that most likely this is a hereditary 1Dept. Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, condition transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait. There is a broad Groningen, Netherlands, 2Dept. Genetics & EUROCAT, University Medical spectrum of differences in the phenotypic presentation between the sis- Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Dept. ters and also compared with the 13 cases previously described ), which Paediatric Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of suggest an autosomal recessive form with wide clinical variability. This Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Children‘s Heart Centre, Radboud may reflect an interaction with other loci, or epigenetic modifications. University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Dept. The interaction with a particular intrauterin factor should be discarded Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, in this case, owing to the twinning state of the sibs. We also describe Netherlands. some anomalies unreported to date in this syndrome such as cardiac Loss of function mutations in the CHD7 gene cause CHARGE-syn- malformations, affectation of the auditory conduits, umbilical hernia, drome, an autosomal dominantly inherited combination of multiple fifth finger clinodactyly and Arnold Chiari type I.As more patients with congenital malformations, including congenital heart defects (CHDs) this condition are described, the main features of this syndrome are in 66-92% of the patients. The pathogenesis and type of CHDs in becoming clearer, and also the inheritance pattern. CHARGE syndrome are still largely unknown. Most malformations in Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  CHARGE syndrome are related to the neural crest (NC), which is in primary teeth. On panoramic radiographic examination unerupted su- line with our observation of a high CHD7 expression in isolated mouse pernumerary teeth in both maxilla and mandible were seen (total of progenitor NC cells. Cardiac NC cells are involved in pharyngeal arch 19). The probands granmother was also said to have abnormalities in and conotruncal defects. We hypothesise that CHDs in CHARGE syn- the numbers and eruption of the permanent teeth. In the management drome are NC-related. of the disease dental procedures, speech therapy, head protection, We are collecting detailed clinical information on almost 350 patients preventive treatment for osteoporosis are considered. with a CHD7-mutation detected by our group, and compared their CHDs with 381 non-syndromic CHD-patients collected between 2004 P02.045 Array-cGH detects mosaic tetrasomy 12p (Pallister- and 2008 by EUROCAT. Killian syndrome) in peripheral blood without invasive skin The first results show a heart defect in 189 out of 231 CHARGE-pa- biopsy tients (82%). Detailed cardiac information is available for 163 of these U. Koehler1, M. Locher1, S. Balg1, K. Reiter2, E. Holinski-Feder1; 189 patients. Of all CHDs 31% were NC-related (e.g. tetralogy of Fal- 1Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum München, München, Germany, 2von lot, right descending aorta), 56% possibly NC-related (e.g. non-speci- Haunersches Kinderspital, München, Germany. fied VSDs) and only 13% were non-NC-related (e.g. muscular and We report on a 3 month old girl presenting with multiple dysmorphic membranous VSDs, hypoplastic left heart). In the control group these features including hypotonia, irregular respiration, hypertelorism, long figures were 15%, 40% and 45% respectively (p<0.000). philtrum, prominent forehead, retrognathy, low set, dysplastic ears, These data confirm an important role for the cardiac neural crest in the and impaired hearing. She is the second child of a non consanguine- pathogenesis of CHDs in CHARGE syndrome. ous couple. Karyotyping of peripheral blood revealed an inconspicu- ous karyotype. Because of the profound psychomotor retardation at P02.043 Dental abnormalities associated with cherubism the age of six months, Array-CGH-analysis was requested. L. Preda1, O. Dinca1, A. Bucur1, C. Dragomir2, E. Severin1; Array-CGH with genomic DNA from peripheral blood using 105K oligo 1“Carol Davila“ Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania, 2Genetic Lab, arrays, revealed an amplification of the complete short arm of chromo- Bucharest, Romania. some 12, which led to the assumption of an additional marker chromo- Cherubism is an abnormal hereditary condition characterized by pro- some 12 and most probably of a mosaic isochromosome 12p which is gressive bilateral swelling of the mandible, especially in children. In common in patients presenting with Pallister-Killian syndrome. Karyo- some cases of cherubism, the entire jaw swells and the eyes turn up, typing of 100 metaphases and interphase FISH analysis on nuclei from enhancing the cherubic facial appearance. Frequently, dental abnor- cultured T-lymphocytes using a chromosome 12 centromeric probe malities are associated with cherubism: congenitally missing second failed, simply because detection of an isochromosome 12p in stimu- and third molars; premature exfoliation of the deciduous teeth and dis- lated T-lymphocytes is hard to achieve as only 1-2% of lymphocyte placement of permanent teeth secondary to the jaw lesions. Mutations metaphases contain the additional isochromosome 12p. in SH3BP2 gene cause cherubism. The subsequent karyotyping on fibroblasts of a cultured skin biopsy Case report: A 9-year-old girl, youngest of three siblings, was diag- confirmed the presence of an isochromosome 12p (tetrasomy 12p) in nosed with cherubism based on clinical findings, radiological manifes- 56% of cells. These results refer to Pallister-Killian syndrome and the tations and molecular genetic testing. There was no family history of girl reported shows several correlating features. similar findings. Up to now, analysis of fibroblasts from invasive skin biopsies was the Results and conclusions: Clinical examination revealed swellings at only opportunity to detect the additional isochromosome 12p in Pal- angles of mandible, an asymmetrical enlargement of the mandible and lister-Killian syndrome patients. Array-CGH with genomic DNA from chubbiness of the face. Mixed dentition and poor occlusion were no- peripheral blood, however, is an adequate and powerful tool to investi- ticed. No ocular, respiratory or cardiovascular problems were found. gate children suspected of having Pallister-Killian syndrome. An inva- Except her facial appearance, bad alignment of the teeth and maloclu- sive skin biopsy is no longer required. sion, the patient did not exhibit any physical abnormality and showed no signs of mental retardation. Panoramic radiograph showed clearly P02.046 High-Level expression of functional recombinant that the facial enlargement is the result of bone changes. Orthopanto- human coagulation factor Vii in insect cells mogram revealed bilateral multilocular areas of diminished density in N. Masroori1,2, M. Habibi Roudkenar2, R. Halabian2, M. Mohammadipour2, M. the mandible and congenitally missing second and third lower molars. Amani2, P. Bahmani2; The maxillary dentition was not affected. A mutation was identified in 1Islamic Azad University, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic the SH3BP2 gene in proband and her asymptomatic mother. Lack of Republic of Iran, 2Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization, Tehran, Islamic signs in mother and the difference in clinical presentation between pa- Republic of Iran. tient and her carrier mother are consistent with incomplete penetrance Recombinant coagulation factor VII (FVII) has been introduced as a in females and variable expression of mutation in SH3BP2 gene. potential therapeutic intervention in hemophilia patients who produce antibodies against the coagulation factors. Mammalian cell lines pro- P02.044 Familial supernumerary teeth due to cleidocranial vide only low levels of expression, however the Spodoptera frugiperda dysplasia cell line Sf9 and baculovirus have proved to be a powerful system for D. Belengeanu, D. Stoicanescu, S. Farcas, N. Meszaros; high-level expression of recombinant proteins. Due to the lack of en- University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. dogenous vitamin K-dependent carboxylase, expression of functional Cleidocranial dysplasia is a rare generalized dysplasia of osseous and FVII through this system is impossible. In the present study, we report dental tissues with an autosomal dominant inheritance. The disorder a simple but versatile method to overcome the defect for high-level is characterized by typical facial and dental appearance, skeletal dys- expression of the functional recombinant coagulation FVII in Sf9 cells. plasia and short stature, the two most striking features being hypo or This method involves expression of both the human gamma-carboxyl- aplastic clavicles and a surprisingly increased number of supernumer- ase (hGC) and human FVII genes in the host. The cDNAs of hGC and ary teeth. Intrafamilial variations of the skeletal abnormalities have FVII were isolated and cloned into appropriate vectors. Recombinant been described , but those of dental abnormalities are obscure yet. The baculoviruses carrying the human FVII and hGC genes were gener- majority of cases occur due to loss of function mutations in the RUNX2 ated and insect cells were directly coinfected with the recombinant gene, which encodes for a transcription factor that is essential for os- baculoviruses. Expression of the recombinant FVII (rFVII) was veri- teoblast differentiation and chondrocyte maturation. It is estimated that fied, purified, and the biological activity was determined. The expres- the proportion of cases caused by a de novo mutation is high. We sion of FVII and hGC mRNAs in coinfected Sf9 cells were detected present the case of a newborn female with skeletal findings consistent by RT-PCR and further confirmed by Western blot analysis. A fourfold with cleidocranial dysplasia, facial dysmorphism with bossing of the decrease in clotting time was observed. Whereas no decrease in pro- forehead, hypertelorism and a depressed nasal bridge, widely open thrombin time was noted when the rFVII expressed in the absence of anterior fontanelle, high-arched palate. On lateral and postero-anterior hGC, the results indicate that the expression of hGC confers functional cephalometric radiographs, we could find unclosed coronal suture. Her activity of rFVII. Therefore it may possible to express other vitamin K- mother, 31 years old, has short stature, the same dysmorphic features dependent coagulation factors using this method in the future. of the face, patent anterior fontanelle, short, broad thumbs, retained Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.047 Ophthalmic findings in the Greek isolate of Cohen P02.049 P628L and G624D COLA mutations do not cause syndrome. classic X-linked Alport syndrome but a milder nephropathy S. Douzgou1, J. R. Samples2,3, N. Georgoudi4, M. B. Petersen1; resembling thin Basement membrane Nephropathy 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s P. Demosthenous1, K. Voskarides1, M. Hadjigavriel2, M. Arsali3, C. Patsias3, P. Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Rocky Vista University, Parker, CO, United States, Zirogiannis4, C. Stavrou5, E. Alexopoulos6, A. Pierides7, C. Deltas1; 3Department of Opthalmology, Oregon Health & Sciences University, Portland, 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department of Nephrology, Larnaca OR, United States, 4Department of Mental Health and Social Welfare, Institute General Hospital, Larnaca, Cyprus, 3Department of Nephrology, Nicosia of Child Health, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece. General Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Lamia Hospital, Lamia, Greece, Cohen syndrome is a rare condition of mild to moderate developmen- 5Evangelismos Hospital, Paphos, Cyprus, 6Department of Nephrology, Aristotle tal delay, characteristic craniofacial features, childhood hypotonia, joint University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, 7Department of Nephrology, hyperextensibility, neutropenia, and a variety of ophthalmic abnormali- Hippocrateon Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. ties. A high frequency of the syndrome has been observed in a Greek Classical X-linked Alport syndrome (XLAS), caused by mutations in island with 2,000 inhabitants and a high degree of inbreeding. All pa- COL4A5, is associated with childhood hematuria progressing to pro- tients were homozygous for a COH1 deletion of exons 6 to 16, sug- teinuria, chronic renal failure (CRF) and end-stage kidney disease gesting a founder effect. We present the results of their first systematic (ESKD), often accompanied by deafness. Renal biopsies present ophthalmologic assessment. splitting, lamellation and thickening of the glomerular basement mem- Myopia and chorioretinal atrophy were present in all patients of this brane. cohort. Yet, in contrast to all groups previously reported, the major- We studied clinically and genetically two Greek and two Cypriot fami- ity presented corneal changes, independently from age, gender and lies with a clinical and pedigree based suspicion of XLAS despite pre- family history. A pair of sisters, aged 11 and 15 years old, presented senting mild characteristics of the syndrome. DNA linkage analysis bilateral keratoconus. More frequently (86%) than in any other ethnic and direct sequencing resulted in the identification of mutation CO- group, Greek patients presented cataracts that were bilateral and often L4A5-G624D in the Greek families and COL4A5-P628L mutation in graded as high as 3, even at a young age. As a whole, the ophthalmic the Cypriot families. The clinical characteristics of most male patients phenotype of the Greek isolate of Cohen syndrome was characterized in these four families are surprisingly mild. Four males currying G624D by the involvement of both the posterior and the anterior eye segment, reached ESKD after the age of 39 and one showed Thin Basement bilaterally, in the majority of cases (93%). Membrane Nephropathy (TBMN, a mild nephropathy caused in many Greek Cohen subjects that share a founder mutation are at a higher cases by heterozygous COL4A3 or COL4A4 mutations) on Electron risk of developing blindness in respect to those of other ethnicities and Microscope. Another five of nine males with mild mutation P628L de- genotypes. This study added to the range of visual problems seen in veloped ESKD between 30 and 57 years while three show mild CRF at children and adults with Cohen syndrome the finding of thin corneas similar ages. Biopsy in one of them showed TBMN. Mutations G624D and highlighted the need for pachymetry measurement as a means and P628L are very near the 12th natural interruption of the COL4A5 of surveillance and prediction of the visual impairment frequently ob- triple helical domain and this may explain the much milder phenotype. served. Concluding, some COL4A5 mutations may not lead to ESKD until the 40’s and 50’s. The phenotypic spectrum may extend to milder forms P02.048 Two years experience of VPS1B gene sequencing: such as TBMN and late-onset ESKD. This wider or milder spectrum of confirmation of diagnostic criteria, value of array-CGH in symptoms may be attributed to the position of the mutation relative to identifying large rearrangements and identification of a new the collagenic interruptions. phenotype L. Faivre1, P. Sarda2, A. Moncla3, S. El Chedadeh1, P. Callier1, N. Gigot1, D. P02.050 Familial congenital diaphragmatic hernia, cystic Lacombe4, L. Burglen5, M. Rio6, P. Edery7, C. Missirian3, C. Popovici3, B. Aral1, kidneys and cardiac anomalies: A new X-linked syndrome? C. Thauvin-Robinet1; A. T. Yeung1, S. Keating2, R. Silver3, D. Chitayat1,3; 1Génétique, Dijon, France, 2Génétique, Montpellier, France, 3Cytogénétique, 1Division of Metabolic and Clinical Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, Marseille, France, 4Génétique, Bordeaux, France, 5Génétique, Trouseau, Paris, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, France, 6Génétique, Necker, Paris, France, 7Génétique, Lyon, France. 2Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Cohen syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive inherited disorder that University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3The Prenatal Diagnosis and results from mutations in the VPS13B gene. Clinical features consist Medical Genetics Program, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mount of a combination of mental retardation, facial dysmorphism, post-natal Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. microcephaly, truncal obesity, slender extremities, joint hyperexten- Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) occurs in approximately 1 in sibility, myopia, progressive chorioretinal dystrophy and intermittent 3000 live births and is associated with significant morbidity and mor- neutropenia. From the experience of 42 patients (36 families) referred tality. Etiologically, CDH is a heterogeneous with most isolated cases for molecular analysis of VPS13B for suspicion of Cohen syndrome, being multifactorial. About 50% of the cases are ‘non-isolated’, with as- two mutations were found in 7 families, one mutation was found in 2 sociated extra-pulmonary anomalies. Some of these cases are single families, and none in 27 families. 244K array-CGH revealed two intra- gene disorders and 5-10% have a chromosomal aetiology. genic rearrangements in the two families with only one mutation (one We describe two male siblings of non-consanguineous Caucasian deletion and one duplication). We found that the presence of chorioret- parents with CDH, distinctive facial dysmorphism, cardiac anomalies inal dystrophy (92% versus 32%, p=0.0023), intermittent neutropenia and renal cysts - a constellation of features not consistent with other (92% versus 5%, p<0.001) and postnatal microcephaly (100% versus previously described CDH syndromes. Both siblings exhibited coarse 48%, p=0.0045) was significantly higher in the group of patients with facial features, hypertelorism, brachydactyly, dilatation of the ascend- VPS13B gene mutations compared to the group of patients without ing aorta, valvular dysplasia and enlarged cystic kidneys. In addition, mutations. All patients with VPS13B mutations had chorioretinal dys- sibling two had hepatomegaly, splenomegaly and enlarged thymus as trophy and/or intermittent neutropenia. The Kolehmainen diagnostic well some intracranial white matter calcification. Karyotype in both sib- criteria provided 100% sensitivity and 77% specificity. Interestingly, we lings was 46, XY and microarray analysis in the second sib was nor- found an adult aged 34 years compound heterozygous for two splicing mal. A maternal uncle had died in infancy as the result of CDH. Thus, variants (IVS34+2T_+3AinsT and IVS57+2T>C) with dysmorphic fea- the pedigree is strongly suggestive of X-linked inheritance. tures, normal incisors, microcephaly, severe neutropenia responible We review the features of other known X-linked CDH syndromes of recurrent infections at age 2 years and chorioretinal dystrophy at which include Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome, Craniofrontonasal age 22 years but absence of obesity and mental retardation (total IQ = syndrome, Thoracolumbar syndrome and X-linked Cornelia De Lange 100). This observation enlarges the phenotype of the VPS13B gene, syndrome. None of these are reconciled by the phenotype in our two but further underscores the importance of the two key features in the cases and indeed, genetic testing for GPC3 to rule out Simpson-Gola- indication for a VPS13B gene study. bi-Behmel syndrome was negative. We believe that this family exhibits a new X-linked genetic syndrome of which congenital diaphragmatic hernia is a principal feature.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 70 P02.051 molecular karyotyping provides etiological diagnosis P02.053 Further case of 12q duplication: Wolf- Hirschhorn in two malformative patients with blurred chromosomal syndrome phenocopy or distinct syndrome? aberrations M. Bertoli1,2, V. Alesi2, M. Abate3, C. Palmieri3, G. Barrano2, S. Zampatti1,3, M. S. P. Hadjidekova1, D. M. Avdjieva-Tzavella2, I. I. Dimova1, B. B. Rukova1, D. V. Frontali3, A. M. Nardone3; Nesheva1, R. S. Tincheva2, D. I. Toncheva1; 1Dipartmento di Biopatologia e Diagnostica per Immagine, Universita’ di Tor 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, Vergata, Roma, Italia, Rome, Italy, 2Ospedale San Pietro Fatebenefratelli, 2State University Pediatrics Hospital “Queen Evdokia”, Medical Faculty, Medical Roma. Centro Ricerche, Unita’ di Genetica Medica., Rome, Italy, 3Fondazione University, Sofia, Bulgaria. Policlinico Tor Vergata Roma, U.O.C. Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Rome, Array CGH has proved useful as a diagnostic tool for patients with Italy. developmental delay and congenital malformations. We screened 2 Interstitial duplication of short arm of chromosome 12 is a very rare patients with ambiguous cytogenetic results in order to disclosure the cytogenetic syndrome previously reported as a phenocopy of Wolf- molecular basis of the mutations. We have used genomic array Cyto- Hirschhorn Syndrome (DallaPiccola et al.,2008). Chip (BlueGnome, Cambridge, UK), covering the entire genome at a We present a new case of 12q13 duplication in a 6 years old girl with median 565Kb. It investigate sub-telomeres at a median 250Kb resolu- similar dysmorphic features in early infancy, but with a facial pheno- tion, reliably detect mosaicism and examine 90 known genetic condi- type evolving with age and suggesting a possible different gestalt in tions at a median 100Kb resolution. older patients. Case 1. 10 years old girl with Kabuki make-up syndrome characterized She was born at 31weeks of gestation after uneventful pregnancy. Ex- by craniofacial dysmorphism: hypertelorism, up slanting palpebral fis- amination in neonatal period showed measurements under 3rd cen- sures, ptosis, short philtrum, depressed nasal bridge, microretrogna- tile, palatoschisis, lacrimal duct obstruction, malar hypoplasia, shallow thia, preauricular tag; generalized hypotonia, bilateral simian creases, orbit with exophtalmo,hypertelorism, down-slanting palpebral fissures, wide spaced nipples, four toes clinodactyly of the toes. The karyo- high arched eyebrows,cleft palate, corneal opacity. type was 46,XX,add(4)(q35) and array CGH revealed a duplication of Early motor development was slightly delayed.At the age of 2 some (6)(q25.1;q25.3) spanning 6.377Mb as well as a 4q35.1 duplication of similarities with Wolf- Hirschhorn Syndrome dysmorphic features were 3.815Mb. noted. Case 2. In the second case with karyotype 46,XX,add(17)(q25) array At 6 years she presents with an ataxic but autonomous walk and a bor- CGH detected duplication of (17)(q24.2;q25.1) region encompassing der line - mild mental retardation. In addition to previous dysmorphic 9.58Mb in a 1 year old girl with polydactily of toes and fingers and features, she has a longer face, prominent nasal bridge, and promi- craniofacial dysmorphism: microcephaly, hypertelorism, low-set ears, nent superior-orbit ridge. Hands are small and show a thick, slightly high palate. redundant and hypercheratinized skin. Confirmatory FISH studies with BAC clones are planned for accurate CGH Array analysis (CytoChipOligo ISCA 4X44K) with a resolution confirmation of CytoChip result. The influence of the known genes in of 75Kb, revealed a duplication of the long arm of chromosome 12 the imbalanced regions and their correlation to the phenotype will be (dup12q13.13). discussed. Compared to the previous case, our patient carries a smaller duplica- In conclusion, we demonstrate that molecular karyotyping enables a tion. Although some features of the present patient at birth and at the diagnosis in patients with unclear cytogenetic results. Furthermore, we age of 2 are reminiscent of the Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome, the actual demonstrate the effect of causal CNVs on the development of dys- clinical picture appears different. morphism. Differences with the previously reported case will be discussed in terms of age and of size of duplication region. P02.052 Associated malformations in patients with limb reduction deficiencies P02.054 Prenatal diagnosis of Apert syndrome-case report C. Stoll, Y. Alembik, B. Dott, M. Roth; V. Varlas, L. Turculet, F. Nedelea, G. Peltecu; genetique medicale, strasbourg, France. Clinical Hospital Filantropia, Bucharest, Romania. Infants with limb reduction deficiencies (LRD) often have other as- Apert syndrome is one of the craniosynostosis syndromes. It has an sociated congenital malformations. The purpose of this investigation autosomal dominant inheritance and is characterized by the associa- was to assess the prevalence and the types of associated malforma- tion of craniostenosys and osseous and membranous syndactyly of tions in a defined population. This study included special strengths: the four extremities. The incidence has been estimated at 1/50000 each affected child was examined by a geneticist, all elective termina- births. The craniosynostosis is bicoronal and is present at birth. Most tions were ascertained, and the surveillance for malformations was of the cases are “de novo” mutations, and could be associated with continued until 1 year of age. The associated malformations in infants advanced paternal age. with LRD were collected in all livebirths, stillbirths and terminations of We present a case of pregnant woman who came for second opinion pregnancy during 26 years in 347,810 consecutive births in the area of ultrasound investigation for severe anomalies of extremities, detect- covered by our population based registry of congenital malformations. ed at 21 weeks of pregnancy. Those was characterized by complete Of the 271 LRD infants born during this period, representing a preva- syndactyly of all extremities,with absence of movements and also as- lence of 7.8 per 10,000, 57.9% had associated malformations. There sociated anamaly of cranian shape, bilateral cleft lip and palat. Those were 17(6.3%) patients with chromosomal abnormalities including 10 dates rised the suspicion of Apert syndrome. It is worth mentioning ad- trisomies 18, and 62 (22.9%) nonchromosomal recognized dysmor- vance paternal age of 55 years old. Because of the severity of anoma- phic conditions. There were no predominant recognised dysmorphic lies detected the family decided to interrupt the pregnancy and clinical conditions, but VA(C)TER(L) association. However numerous recog- examination of the fetus confirm the diagnosis of Apert syndrome. nised dysmorphic conditions were registered. Seventy eight (28.8 %) of the patients were multiply, non syndromic, non chromosomal mal- P02.055 First cases of craniosynostosis diagnosed by custom formed infants (MCA). Malformations in the urogenital system (n=50, molecular microarray (Array cGc) 14.2%), the cardiovascular system (n=40, 11.4%), the central nervous P. Tavares1, L. Lameiras1, L. Dias1, L. Nunes2, J. Saraiva3, A. Fortuna4, M. system (n=27, 7.7%), and the digestive system (n=16, 4.6%) were Cunha5, M. H. Carreiro6, M. Rosa7, J. Sá1,3, S. Almeida1,2, A. Palmeiro1, P. the most common other malformations. The prevalence of associated Rendeiro1; malformations, which was more than one in two infants, emphasizes 1CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal, 2Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Central, E.P.E., the need for a thorough investigation of infants with LRD. A routine Lisboa, Portugal, 3Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, screening for other malformations especially cardiovascular system, 4Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, IP, Porto, Portugal, 5Centro urogenital system, central nervous system, and digestive system may Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes Alto Douro EPE, Vila Real, Portugal, 6Hospital be considered in infants and in fetuses with LRD. Professor Doutor Fernando Fonseca EPE, Amadora, Portugal, 7Hospital Garcia de Orta EPE, Almada, Portugal. Introduction: Craniosynostosis is a condition of variable aetiology char- acterized by premature closure of calvarial skull bones. With many sutures closing prematurely, the skull cannot expand to accommodate Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 71 the growing brain, which leads to several consequences, including de- the deceased children and our patient. An inspection of the genes in velopmental delay, mental retardation and vision and hearing problems these regions identified Fibulin 4 (EFEMP2) as a likely candidate, and can also appear. Most cases are diagnosed during the neonatal period a homozygous nonsynonymous mutation at c.376 G>A (p.E126K) in but many cases are detected sooner by the ultrasound during the pre- exon 4 was identified in the patient. The obligate carriers were hetero- natal period. Because this disorder is clinically heterogeneous, some zygous at this position, and the mutation was not present in healthy carriers are not detected until late in infancy or only detected after the controls. All amino acid changes at this highly conserved region in the birth of an affected child. The major conditions, Muenke, Pfeiffer, Apert, EGF binding domain are predicted to be damaging. This is only the Crouzon, Jackson-Weiss, and Seathre-Chotzen-like Syndromes, are fourth family, to our knowledge, with ARCL due to Fibulin 4 deficiency related with mutations located in the different genes of the Fibroblast and the emerging phenotype of this subgroup of patients will be re- Growth Factor Receptors (FGFR) 1, 2 and 3. viewed. Although postulated in the literature to be universally lethal, Method: Using new custom microarray panel (Arrays CGC - Patent our experience suggests that early and aggressive treatment of aortic Pending) that contains a panel of 10 point mutations, identified in 4 aneurysms can result in longer term survival. main genes involved on syndromic craniosynostosis it is possible to identify the molecular basis of the most frequent and severe forms. We P02.058 Trisomy 21 and false positive sweat test report here our experience using this new methodology. L. Pop1, Z. Popa2, C. Nicolicea3, I. Ciuca3, A. Lacatusu3, C. Gug4, L. Tamas5, I. Results: We analyzed 9 cases (8 peripheral blood and 1 amniotic fluid) Popa3; and in two we detected the c.866A>C (p.Gln289Pro) mutation in het- 1Pediatric II Department UMF V Babes, Timisoara, Romania, 2National Cystic erozygozity in the FGFR2 gene and the c.755C>G (p.Ser252Trp) in Fibrosis Centre, Timisoara, Romania, 3Pediatric II Department, UMF V Babes, the FGFR2 gene. Turnaround time was 2 weeks. Timisoara, Romania, 4Department of Genetics, UMF V Babes, Timisoara, Conclusion: This approach drastically reduces turnaround time, main- Romania, 5Biochemistry Department, UMF V Babes, Timisoara, Romania. taining accuracy and liability. Faster diagnostic is achieved, allowing The paper evaluates the possible relation of 21 trisomy and sweat early decision-making process in patient management. test result in cystic fibrosis. Material and method: 5 month old girl in- fant was admitted to hospital for evaluation of a particular phenotype. P02.056 craniosynostosis, pigmentary disorder and The clinical examination at admission revealed hypotrophyc child with hemimegalencephaly in a patient with fibroblast growth factor particular phenotype (epicanthic skin folds, eyelid slit, low-seat ears, receptor 3 (FGFR) mutation. hypertelorism, epicanthus, a slightly open mouth with tongue protru- G. M. H. Abdel-Salam1, L. Flores-Sarnat2, M. O. El-Ruby3, J. Parboosingh4, T. sion, simian crease, a groove between the great toe and the second El-Badry5, L. Effat6, P. Curatolo7, S. A. Temtamy1; toe = the sandal sign), pallor, globally reduced tissue, a hypotonia, no 1Clinical Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt, pathological change in lungs at auscultation, systolic murmur of III /VI 2Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Neurology, Alberta Children’s degrees well-beating peripheral pulse, abdominal hypotonia with right Hospital, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 3Clinical Genetics abdominal diastasis, liver and spleen within normal limits. The particu- Departmnt, National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt, 4Molecular Diagnostic lar phenotype was assimilated to a Langdon-Down syndrome Results: Lab, Alberta Children’s Hospital, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, The kariotype has confirmed a structural chromosomal abnormality of 5Orodental Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt, robertsonian translocation type between acrocentric chromosomes 21 6Human Molecular Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Giza, and 22, and a numerical chromosomal abnormality consistent with a Egypt, 7Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Neuroscience ,Tor Vergata total trisomy 21 type, the cytopenic formula being: 46, XX, -22, +21, University of Rome, Rome, Italy. trob (21;22). The sweat test was positive; NaCl 86 mmol/l and 98 mmol/ We describe a 2-year-old Egyptian boy, born with abnormal skull shape l the second test. The genetic analysis for cystic fibrosis was negative to healthy consanguineous young parents. At 2 months he showed: for the 29 most common mutations for central-eastern european area. midface hypoplasia, proptosis, and low-set ears, not associated with Echocardiography revealed a common atrioventricular canal complete acanthosis nigricans. He had several oval hypomelanotic patches on form. An abdominal ultrasonography showed several images interpret- the skin. Mutation analysis of exons IIIa and IIIc in FGFR2 and FGFR3 ed as cholelithiasis. Conclusion: The question is if there is an associa- and screening of the two genes of TSC mutations were performed. tion between trisomy 21 and cystic fibrosis or another condition is the A 3D CT scan of the cranium showed synostosis of the uni-coronal, leading cause of false positive sweat test still has to be answered. sagittal and lambdoid sutures, whereas brain MRI showed left hemi- megalencephaly, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and abnormal P02.059 trends in median Age at Death from cystic Fibrosis in hippocampus. The patient was found to have a de novo point muta- Brazil from 1979 to 2005 tion of the FGFR3 gene. A major screening of the two genes of TSC C. L. A. Paiva, V. G. de Carvalho, J. S. Corrêa, S. R. Middleton; mutations was negative. At 18 months of age he developed obstruc- Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro, tive hydrocephalus. His development is normal and his neurological Brazil. examination showed no asymmetry of movements, tone and reflexes. The aim of this work is to display the temporal trends in median age at Apart from febrile seizures, there is no history of epilepsy until now. We death (MAD) from cystic fibrosis (CF) in Brazil, and to compare these think this is a previously unreported association which could be a new findings with other international trends in CF MAD. Fogarty et al (2000) syndrome allelic to Crouzon dermoskeletal syndrome. There is pheno- investigating the same parameter for developed countries from 1974 typical overlap with Muenke syndrome and craniofacial dyssynostosis. to 1994, came to the conclusion that MAD from CF was increasing, but Hydrocephalus should be detected early for opportune treatment. their data implied that clinically significant differences in survival with CF persist between countries. Therefore, we investigated all persons P02.057 Longer term survival of a child with autosomal registered in Brazil as having died of CF in specified years. Mortality recessive cutis laxa due to a novel FiBULiN 4 mutation. data for CF (International Classification Disease CID- 9 code 277.0 S. L. Sawyer1, J. Parboosingh1, F. Dicke2, B. McInnes1, F. P. Bernier1; between 1979 and 1995; and CID-10 codes E84.0; E84.1; E84.8 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, and E84.9 between 1996 and 2005) were obtained from the Brazilian 2Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children‘s Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada. System for Mortality Information - SIM Data SUS. In Brazil, the total Autosomal recessive cutis laxa (ARCL) is a heterogeneous connective number of notified deaths from CF was 1455 from 1979 to 2005. We tissue disorder which continues to be further sub classified by molecu- found that, in 1979, the MAD was 3,57 years, and, in 2005, it was lar etiology. We describe a six year old boy who presented with severe 23,45 years. The Brazilian means are much lower than those found by aortic root dilatation at one year of age requiring semi urgent surgical Forgaty and collaborators for developed countries. In 1994, they found repair. He also has arterial tortuosity, generalized hypermobility, mild a MAD of 21 y. and in Brazil it was 12, 5 y. In 1979, the MAD for our cutis laxa and a history of bilateral inguinal hernias. His parents are country was 3,39 y, while five years earlier, in 1974, they found a MAD consanguineous and related to the parents of three distant cousins of 8 y for developed countries. Furthermore, our results have shown who all died in the first few years of life. These children were originally that no increase of MAD occurred in Brazil from 1979 to 1984, however published by Welsh et al in 1971 as a novel connective tissue disor- from 1984 to 2005 it had a sixfold increase. der. We identified candidate regions using homozygosity mapping and a high density SNP array; genotyping the obligate carrier parents of Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 72 P02.060 De novo interstitial 8p23.1 deletions identified by array- P02.062 15.9 mb terminal deletion in 9p24.3-p22.3: clinical CGH in two patients: definition of the critical region for cardiac description of an adult patient with deletion 9p syndrome malformation. S. Azzarello-Burri, A. Schinzel, M. Riegel, A. Rauch; C. Rigon, M. Cassina, K. Ludwig, M. Forzan, A. Bruson, R. Tenconi, M. Institute of Medical Genetics, 8603 Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. Clementi; Descriptions of adult patients are rare in the literature. As a conse- Department of pediatrics, Padova, Italy. quence, the natural history of many chromosomal disorders is largely 8p23.1 deletions have recently been described as cause of complex unknown, which hampers adequate genetic counselling and keeps congenital heart defects and diaphragmatic hernias. Moreover haplo- parents in the dark about the problems their children may be faced with insufficiency of GATA4, located at 8p23.1, is thought to play a critical in the future. Therefore it is important to describe older patients when- role in the cardiac development. ever possible, so that informations about the prognosis and course can An interstitial deletion of 8p23.1 has been reported only in 9 children; be provided for the families. in 4 of them it has been characterized using array-CGH analysis, while Here we report a 23 year-old women with deletion 9p syndrome. She in the remaining 5 cases it was detected by FISH analysis. All cases was of short stature with microcephaly and showed narrow fingers and reported to date are de novo. feet. The major problems in this patient were a marked scoliosis which We describe two unrelated patients with complex congenital heart was operated at the age of 9 years, chewing problems because of malformation, microcephaly, plagiocephaly and similar face dysmor- micrognathia which was operated at the age of 22 years, pain after phisms. Array-CGH analysis (Agilent platform, 44K) revealed a micro- walking because of pressures sores on her narrow feet and aggressive deletion of 8p23.1 in both patients (3.5 Mb and 4.9 Mb in size, respec- behaviour in unfamiliar crowded places. There was precocious puberty tively). with menses occurring at the age of 10 years. Because of regular men- In the 6 children investigated by array-CGH (our 2 patients and the 4 struation she underwent tubal ligation. After the age of about 10 years cases in literature) we could identify a common region spanning from there were no more incontinence problems. The young lady was able 8,850,913 bp to 11,770,357 bp. GATA4 is the only gene in this deleted to communicate and to speak in simple words, but not to read or write. region with a suggested role in heart development and more studies She liked very much drawing and listening to music and was described are needed to clarify its involvement in determining the cardiac phe- as a very social and usually friendly person. notype. Our observation further stresses the importance of performing array- P02.063 Dento-maxillary abnormalies in Prader Willi syndrome CGH in children with complex heart malformations and minor dysmor- C. Bortun, L. Ardelean, M. Puiu; phisms, as it is possible that other genes mapping within the deleted University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. region might contribute to the described characteristic phenotype of Prader Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic disease, characterized del8p23.1 syndrome. by multi-systemic damage, predominantly neuro-hormonal. The main Investigating the precise size of the deleted region is mandatory to clinical features are hypotonia in the newborn, and feeding difficul- delineate the critical region of the del8p23.1 syndrome. ties later in childhood, hyperphagia and obesity, small stature, small hands and feet, hypogonadism, variable mental retardation, behav- P02.061 Deletion 3p syndrome and phenotypic change with age: ioral problems. Clinical characteristics (viscous saliva in small quantity, an adult case report dry mouth, small jaw, dental anomalies various) make in the current I. J. Garcia-Gonzalez1, V. M. Anguiano-Alvarez1, J. L. Villarreal-Salgado2, G. H. measures of care, to require and dental. Galicia-Hernandez1, I. González-Godinez3, C. A. Galvan-Diaz4, A. M. Franco- In a multicentric project started in Romania universities, hospital and Martinez1, N. O. Davalos1,5; Prader Willi Association of Romania, the study of oro-dento-maxillary 1Instituto de Genética Humana “Dr. Enrique Corona”, CUCS, UdeG;, issues revealed some interesting aspects. In all 8 cases during 2009 Guadalajara, Mexico, 2Hospital Regional de Zona “Valentín Gómez Farías”, followed PWS were identified serious dental problems. 5 of the pa- ISSSTE, Cirugia reconstructiva, Zapopan, Mexico, 3Universidad Autonoma de tients were children (5-12 years) and 3 were adults (22-28 years). In 7 Ciudad Juarez, Cd. Juarez, Mexico, 4Centro De Investigación Biomédica De cases (87.5%) were identified caries and bacteriological investigations Occidente IMSS, Guadalajara, Mexico, 5Hospital Regional de Zona “Valentín has highlighted the presence of germs over limit. One of the patients Gómez Farías”, ISSSTE Servicio de Genética, Zapopan, Mexico. had a Class III Angle malocclusion, maxilar hipoplasie and severe de- Introduction: The deletion of the short arm of the chromosome 3 is a ficiency of enamel. Dental examination and discussions with parents rare disorder characterized by growth failure, psychomotor and mental revealed deficiencies in preventative measures: first oral examination retardation and craniofacial anomalies and less commonly others car- when teeth eruption is temporary, carefully supervised oral hygiene diac, renal and gastrointestinal malformations. parents or guardians, the use of topical fluoride, regular checks and Case report: The propositus is male reported at the age of 20 months dental treatment, if necessary. These flaws are due to be capacity lim- for the presence of congenital malformation and hypotonia. The karyo- ited collaboration of patients or lack indications for periodicals dental type was 46,XY,del(3p26). Currently he is 18 years old and exhibits examination. evidence of phenotype changes no characteristics of the syndrome Because of the complexity of medical issues present in these patients, at pediatric ages. Physical examination revealed a height of 167 cm, the study reveals the importance of the participation of multidisciplinary weight of 47 kg. He is normocephalic with triangular face, malformed teams that can provide an integrate treatment. Issues brought before ears, low frontal hairline; low nasal base and bridge, absent and long opening new areas for further study. philtrum, full inferior lip, narrow and high arched palate; hypotrophyc limbs, hands with cutaneous syndactyly and bilateral clinodactyly in P02.064 Functional impact of transitional developmental defects the fifth finger. Neurological examination is normal. of the lumbar spine Discusion: The deletion 3p syndrome it has a characteristic pheno- D. Stoicanescu1, M. Cevei2, V. Belengeanu1, C. Popa1; type, nevertheless a few adult cases were reported. The patient shows 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, some physical findings not compatible with the syndrome and could 2University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania. be age-related. Other are more associated with the extension of the The restructuring process of the spine for adaptation to the new me- deletion. chanical conditions imposed by biped position required complex struc- Conclusion: This syndrome presents a strong connection between the tural changes. There are individual predisposing factors with important severity of the disease and the portion of the deletion. The previous contributions to the changes of the spine: phylogenetic variations of statement justifies the importance of delimit the affected chromosomic cranial or caudal spine development, spina bifida occulta, spondyloly- area with molecular characterization and the phenotype-genotype cor- sis and spondylolisthesis. Variations in the number, position, shape relation. We also consider the existence of a phenotypic variability that of the vertebrae are common developmental anomalies. A genetic is related with the age in this syndrome. predisposition is believed to be involved, as for some of these, family members have incidences of 28-69%. The aim of the current study was to reveal the presence of the lumbar vertebral anomalies and their functional impact in patients with low back pain treated in the Rehabili- tation Clinical Hospital Baile Felix. Out of 262 examined cases, 32.82 Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 7 % had vertebral anomalies, 42 women and 44 men, with an average anti-TG were present in 16.6% of cases. The rate of thyroid antibod- age of 29.82 ± 3.42 years. To highlight the impact of low back pain due ies was 7.5% in SH and 7.1% in OH. The time-course between the to vertebral anomalies on functionality and daily activities we used Os- first finding of hyperthyrotropinemia and TSH>10 ranged from 1 to westry questionnaire. Average score was 33.79 ± 13.21%, revealing 13.8 years: 33.3% of patients reached TSH>10 after 11.6-24 months, a moderate disability. Oswestry score revealed loss of 40% for good 14.9% after 24-36 months and 51.7% over 36 months. physical condition, lifting weights, and walking. A deficit of 44.28% was Autoantibodies were present in 13.3%, 23% and 17.7% of cases of the noticed for standing, 30% for social life and 27.14% for professional first, the second and the third group, respectively. In 4.4% of cases, life. The majority of congenital transitional vertebral anomalies pose no TSH>10 spontaneously normalized without therapy. The prevalence problems for the patient during childhood and thus go undetected, but of SH was independent from age. they may be the cause of low back pain. Physical therapy, therapeutic Conclusion: The prevalence of SH in DS is high. The occurrence of SH tool of choice, is able to solve several issues related to the functional is age-independent. Autoimmunity is not a prognostic factor for SH or impact of these defects. OH. Because of the different time-course of TSH levels, blood screen- ing can be carried-out every 12 months. P02.065 survey of DFNB59 gene mutations in exon 2 association with deafness children in Kohkeloiye va BoerAhmad P02.068 Clinical diagnosis problems - Cockayne or Dubowitz s. Ghasemi, m. taherzadeh, E. Farokhi, M. Hashemzade; syndrome? Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord Univ of Med. Sci. Iran, M. Volosciuc1, E. Braha2, C. Rusu2, L. Caba2, M. Covic2; shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Pediatric Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Introduction: Hearing loss is a heterogeneous disorder and may be Romania. due to genetic or environmental cause. PEJVAKIN (DFNB59) a newly We present a 12 years 5 months old girl with postnatal growth retar- identified gene on chromosome 2q31.1-q31.3 encodes a 325-residue dation, microcephaly, peculiar facial dysmorphism, mental retardation protein. This gene mutated in some deaf people with autosomal reces- and recidivant eczema on legs and hands (first time appeared at 8 sive heredity. This study aims to determine the frequency of the PEJ- years age). She was born un term after an uncomplicated pregnancy VAKIN gene mutations in 88 deaf children in Kohkeloiye va BoerAhmad as the first child of a healthy, nonconsanguineous couple. Initially she province. This gene was surveyed with PCR-SSCP method. SSCP is was diagnosis with observation. Cockayne syndrome and fellow up defined as conformational difference of single stranded nucleotide. attentively (but neurologic dysfunction are not progressive). Based an Methods and materials: In this descriptive-lab based study, the blood phenotypic features she was diagnosis with Dubowitz syndrome. sampling for these children was done. Then, DNA was extracted from The Dubowitz syndrome is a rare, autosomal, recessively inherited all patients following the standard phenol-chloroform produce. Then, disorder of intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation leading to mi- the fragment was amplified by Touch-down PCR. So, denaturing buf- crocephaly, moderate mental retardation and such characteristic facial fer was added to PCR products, and then was taken in boiling water. anomalies as telecanthus, epicanthic folds, blepharophimosis, ptosis, Finality, the single stranded was surveyed by 6% polyacrilamid gel. broadening of the bridge and tip of the nose, abnormal ears and ret- Results: Based on data from the present study, was concluded that rogenia. Further findings include hyperactivity, eczema and brachy- DFNB59 gene mutations in exon 2 have not contribution in deaf chil- clinodactyly of the fifth fingers. dren in Kohkeloiye va boerAhmad province. Proband‘ karyotype was normal.As a particularity the proband present- ed hypercholesterolemia. P02.066 DK phocomelia syndrome with thrombocytopenia, The diagnostic symptoms and the differential diagnosis are dis- encephalocele and choanal atresia in an adult male with cussed. moderate learning difficulties K. Becker1,2, K. Howard1, H. Hughes1,2; P02.069 Prenatally diagnosed siblings with dysgnathia complex 1North Wales Clinical Genetics Service, Glan Clwyd Hospital, Rhyl, United A. Yesilyurt1, Z. Candemir2, O. R. Rosti3; Kingdom, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, 1Zekai Tahir Burak Women Health and Research Hospital, Department of United Kingdom. Medical Genetic, Ankara, Turkey, 2Zekai Tahir Burak Women Health and We report a 29 year old male, second child of unrelated parents, who Research Hospital Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 3Gulhane was born at term by normal delivery with bilateral choanal atresia, a Military Medical Academy, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, posterior encephalocele, and bilateral upper limb defects involving Ankara, Turkey. both radial and ulnar rays. He was treated for a left convergent squint Dysgnathia complex is an extremely rare multiple congenital anoma- as a baby by patching, and he was found to have moderate global ly syndrome. It is characterized by severe mandibular hypoplasia or learning difficulties. His height is on the 0.4th centile and his head cir- agenesis, ear anomalies, microstomia, and microglossia. It is thought cumference on the 97th centile. His platelet count was below the nor- to have an autosomal recessive etiology. mal range on two occasions. He had surgery for undescended testes We describe a newborn with dysgnathia complex born to a second aged 12 years, and he was commenced on androgen replacement degree cousin marriage. He was found to have hypoplastic mandibule therapy for hypogonadism aged 27 years. He has a severe thoraco- and ear migration anomalies at prenatal ultrasonography. He died an lumbar scoliosis with dorsal kyphosis. We propose a diagnosis of DK hour after birth. phocomelia syndrome. The first pregnancy of the family had resulted in an unembryonic pregnancy. Second pregnancy had ended in a missed abortion. The P02.067 Prognostic insights in subjects with subclinical third pregnancy was diagnosed as having otocephaly in the second hypothyroidism and Down syndrome trimester. During the follow up of the fourth pregnancy, antenatal ultra- I. Scala, E. Scarpato, G. Cappuccio, G. Andria, R. Della Casa; sonography showed similar clinical findings. The infant was born and Department of Pediatrics, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy. deceased during the first hour of life. Introduction: Down syndrome (DS) is associated with thyroid disorders We will discuss the ultrasonograpic and postnatal features of the sib- including hyperthyroidism, overt hypothyroidim (OH) and subclinical lings in comparison with previous patients in the literature. This fam- hypothyroidism (SH;5<TSH<10 mU/L, normal free thyroxine). In DS ily is a further evidence for the autosomal recessive etiology of dys- with SH, there is a controversy regarding the frequency of thyroid test- gnathia complex. ing, recommended every 3-12 months, and the identification of autoim- munity as a prognostic factor. P02.070 A de novo partial trisomy of distal 6p in patient with Methods: 240 DS subjects (130M,110F; 1 month-21 years) were eval- severe dysmorphic features uated at the Federico II University, Department of Pediatrics, Naples. A. Matulevičienė1,2, B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, V. Dirsė1, V. Kučinskas1,2; Thyroid function was tested yearly; in case of 5<TSH<10 mU/L, TSH, 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius FT, FT, anti-TG and anti-TPO were screened quarterly. In case of University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre of Medical Genetics, Vilnius University 3 4 TSH>10, the test was repeted prior to thyroxine therapy. Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. Results: The prevalence of thyroid disorders was 65.4%: 73.8% of pa- We report on an eight-year-old boy with chromosome 6 unbalanced tients had SH, 24.2% OH and 1.9% hyperthyroidism. Anti-TPO and abberration and severe dysmorphic features. Our patient is the first Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 7 child of the first complicated pregnancy from non-consanguineous par- Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, ents. The boy‘s phenotype is characterised by brachycephaly, round 5Instytut Pomnik-Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka, Warsaw, Poland, 6Assistance face, unilateral ptosis of upper eyelid, short, broad nose with flat nasal Publique - Hospitaux De Marseille, Marseille, France. tip, long flat philtrum, thin vermilion of upper lip, high arched palate, The rarity of dysmorphic conditions means that even in Centres of Ex- microstomia, large and prominent pinnae, short neck, several café pertise experience may be limited resulting in delayed or uncertain di- au lait spots on the abdomen, waist and right thigh, hypertrichosis on agnosis. Correct diagnosis is the cornerstone of patient management, the back, pilonidal sinus, psychomotor retardation and growth delay. enabling clinicians to locate other patients with the same condition, Clinical follow-up showed these clinical findings: Xray showed thymus share clinical experience and increase individual and collective knowl- hyperplasia, heart ultrasound - atrial septal defect and recurrent respi- edge. ratory infections. The web-based Dysmorphology Diagnostic System (DDS) developed Conventional G-banded karyotype analysis from GTG banded meta- by DYSCERNE (www.dyscerne.org) links thirty-two European Centres phases revealed the primary karyotype of 46, XY, der(6)add(6)(q24) of Expertise for Dysmorphology to form a powerful diagnostic resource in all cells. Chromosomal analyses of the proband’s parents showed for rare dysmorphic conditions. normal karyotypes, indicating that the above abnormality was de novo. Eighty-five submitting nodes are licensed to submit patients’ clinical In order to identify the origin of additional material, FISH analysis using data and images via an online case submission form, which is then subtelomeric specific probes for all the long and short arm of chromo- reviewed by thirty-seven Expert Dysmorphologists. some was performed. FISH analysis revealed duplication of the 6p Results since the full launch of the DDS show the number of case subtelomeric region to the 6q subtelomere region and deletion of 6q submissions and expert reviews per case have steadily increased subtelomeric region. throughout the year. Summary diagnostic reports are prepared from We make a suggestion that the derivative 6 chromosome comprised the consensus of expert opinions and sent to the submitting node an due to pericentric inversion which occurred from aberrant homologous average of 5 weeks after case acceptance onto the system. Cases recombination in the germline of a parent (germline mosaicism) or receive 3-12 expert reviews, with diagnoses and investigations being shortly after fertilization in the proband cells. suggested for 98% and 88% of cases, respectively. The DDS suggested diagnosis has been confirmed at molecular level P02.071 DYscERNE: Developing clinical management for one case and there have been 2 separate suggestions of new re- Guidelines for selected Dysmorphic syndromes cessive conditions based on affected sibling pairs. Five cases have P. M. Griffiths1, K. Strong1, S. Gardner1, R. Day1, C. Harrison1, D. Donnai1, B. also had a consensus confirmed clinical diagnoses. Overall the diag- Kerr1, K. Metcalfe1, H. Brunner2, B. Dallapiccola3, K. Devriendt4, M. Krajewska- nostic rate for DDS cases is 15%. Walasek5, N. Philip6, J. Clayton-Smith1; These results show that the DDS is a workable and effective diagnos- 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Universitair Medisch tic system facilitating timely and equitable access for clinicians from Centrum Sint Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Instituto Mendel, San across Europe to expert opinions. Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Instytut Pomnik-Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka, Warsaw, Poland, 6Assistance P02.073 Application of western blot for analyzing of dystrophin Publique - Hospitaux De Marseille, Marseille, France. in iranian patients with mild dystrophinopathy The DYSCERNE Network of Centres of Expertise for dysmorphology E. Keyhani,J. Gharesouran, K. Kahrizi, Y. Shafeghati, M. Banan, E. Darabi, F. (www.dyscerne.org), is developing clinical management guidelines for A.Moghadam; Williams (WS), Angelman (AS), Noonan (NS) and Kabuki (KS) syn- Genetics Research Center-University Welfare & Rehabilitation Sciences, dromes. An initial scoping exercise identified these conditions as rare, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. complex, multi-system disorders, for which it was felt that affected pa- Introduction: Dystrophinophaties (Duchenne muscular dystrophy and tients, families and health/social care professionals would benefit from Becker muscular dystrophy)are X-linked recessive disorders manifest- access to up-to-date evidence based management guidelines. ing with muscle degeneration and weakness. The gene which is de- Published evidence from which to develop management recommenda- fective in dystrophinophaties is the largest know gene , consisting of tions for these conditions is very limited, and devising a systematic and almost 0.1% of the human genome(2.500kbp) . The product of this robust methodology has been challenging. Our approach is based on gene in normal muscle, dystrophin , is a 427 kDa rod - shaped protein. the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) method, which The value of analyzing dystrophin on western blots of skeletal muscle we modified placing more emphasis on expert opinion and consensus, for the differential diagnosis of Xp21 musclar dystrophies is now well whilst maintaining systematic rigour and transparency of processes. established especially for mild forms of the disease (BMD) which im- The development process includes: munohistochemistry techniques are not sufficient for the definite di- - Identification of key management issues by guideline group leaders. agnosis. - Targeted, systematic literature searches using PubMed. Material & Methods: Here We describe a sensitive system based on - Review, identification and grading of results by panel of invited ex- monoclonal antibodies against dystrophin. System has been set up perts. using GAPDH protein as control that extracted from k562 cells. In our - Consensus meetings at which experts present, discuss and agree study which was the first application of western blot analysis in muscle recommendations. disorders in Iran , we examind muscle sample taken from 10 clinically - Initial drafting of guideline document which is circulated amongst ex- suspected BMD first by immunohistochemistry methods and then by perts and stakeholders for comments. western blot analysis. - Amendments incorporated and guideline finalised. Results: Clinically and immunohistochemically suspected cases of - Guidelines piloted and evaluated. BMD were confirmed by western blot analysis. These finding are not - International dissemination. evident in other forms of muscular dystrophies ( Limb- Girdle MD) The process has involved 49 experts from 8 countries reviewing be- which are closely resemble to BMD clinically. tween them, over 1000 papers. The WS guidelines are currently being Conclusion: Results show the necessity of blotting techniques in diag- piloted in 20 centres, by paediatricians and geneticists. The first draft nosis panel of mild forms of dystrophinopathies. of AS guidelines has been circulated for feedback. Consensus meet- ings for NS and KS will be held very shortly. The finished guidelines will P02.074 Ebstein anomaly: genetic heterogeneity and be available from the DYSCERNE website. association with microdeletions 1p36 and 8p23.1 M. Digilio1, L. Bernardini2, F. Lepri2, M. Giuffrida2, V. Guida2, A. Baban1, P. P02.072 DYscERNE: Results from the full European launch of Versacci3, R. Capolino1, B. Torres2, A. De Luca2, A. Novelli2, B. Marino3, B. the Electronic Dysmorphology Diagnostic system (DDs) Dallapiccola1; S. Gardner1, R. Day1, P. M. Griffiths1, K. Strong1, C. Harrison1, D. Donnai1, B. 1Medical Genetics and Pediatric Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, Kerr1, K. Metcalfe1, H. Brunner2, B. Dallapiccola3, K. Devriendt4, M. Krajewska- IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 2Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San Walasek5, N. Philip6, J. Clayton-Smith1; Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Cardiology, 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Universitair Medisch Centrum Sint Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Instituto Mendel, San Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 7 University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy. limb shortening symmetrically affecting the forearms and lower legs, Ebstein anomaly (EA) is an uncommon congenital heart defect (CHD), brachydactyly and bilateral postaxial polydactyly, hypoplastic bilateral characterized by downward displacement of the tricuspid valve into fibulae; ecocardiography: large ASD ostium primum, cleft anterior mi- the right ventricle. Aim of the study was: 1) search for chromosomal tral valve, hypoplastic tricuspid valve. imbalances (using standard cytogenetic and array-CGH analysis) and P.G.M. (6 days - deceased): disproportionate dwarfism, dysmorphic single gene conditions associated with syndromic EA; 2) screening of craniofacies (accessory gingival frenulae, neonatal teeth), narrow tho- GATA4 and NKX2.5 mutations in patients with non-syndromic EA. Be- rax, distal limb shortening symmetrically affecting the forearms and tween January 2000 and October 2009, 44 patients with EA were en- lower legs, bilateral postaxial polydactyly (feet); echocardiography: rolled. Syndromic EA was found in 12 (27%) patients, non-syndromic ASD, enlarged right ventricle. EA in 32 (73%). A distinct syndrome was diagnosed by clinical crite- T.M. (5y old, female): disproportionate dwarfism, craniofacial dysmor- ria in 7 individuals (CHARGE syndrome in 2, VACTERL association, phy (accessory gingival frenulae, conical teeth), distal limb shorten- Noonan, Kabuki, Holt-Oram, and Cornelia de Lange syndromes each ing symmetrically affecting the forearms and lower legs, brachydactyly in one patient). In one syndromic patient a 18q deletion was diagnosed and bilateral postaxial polydactyly, hypoplastic nails. by standard cytogenetic analysis. Array-CGH analysis in 5 syndromic In conclusion, we present four cases of EVCS in order to illustrate this patients disclosed an interstitial deletion at 8p23.1 in one subject, and rare genetic disorder but also to discuss the variable expression of a del 1pter>1p36.32 /dup Xpter->Xp22.32 in another case. No muta- heart defects, long term follow-up, management and genetic counsel- tion in GATA4 and NKX2.5 genes were detected in 11 non-syndromic ing. patients studied. In conclusion: 1) EA is genetically heterogeneous; 2) the present study and published data suggest the following: a) del P02.077 study of a lot of newborn with extremely low birth 1p36 and del 8p23.1 are the more frequent chromosomal imbalances weight and malformative association associated with EA; b) likely candidate genes include GATA4 (patients A. Manea1, M. Boia1, D. Iacob1, R. Pakai2; with del 8p23.1), NKX2.5 (published patients with isolated EA), and an 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Clinical hypothetic locus in the 1p36 region (patients with del 1p36). Emergency Hospital for Children “L. Turcanu” Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania. Extremely low birth weigh is defined as a birth weight less than 1000 P02.075 cloacal impaired development associated with multiple grams. Extreme prematurity implies high risk of perinatal mortality and malformations in a young girl - case report neonatal morbidity. T. Marcovici, I. Simedrea, O. Marginean, O. Belei, C. Daescu, L. Tunea, M. Material and method: The study was carried out in the Prematurity and Puiu; Neonatology Department during two years, on a group of 20 prema- University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. ture newborns with birth weight under 1000 grams (800 grams-1000 Background: The ectopic anus is among the five most important types grams), with gestational age between 27-32 weeks and follows the of cloacal malformations. It’s incidence is higher in females. Occasion- congenital malformation association at this lot. ally, several anomalies exist, producing complex malformations. Some Results: In the group the distribution by sex show a number of 11 (55% patients present associated congenital defects of mesonephric origin. ) male newborns and 9 (45% ) female newborns. The direct cause of the majority of these anomalies is unknown. Vi- The patent ductus arteriosus was revealed by ultrasound in 4 cases ral infections, teratogenic drugs, metabolic alterations and placental (20%), in 2 cases was associated with septal atrial defect. In 1 case anomalies could be involved. The karyotype is generally normal. A septal atrial defect was associated with septal ventricular defect. In 2 superficially approach of these patients can facilitate the misdiagno- cases septal atrial defect had no association. sis of the associated defects. Material and methods: We present a At 1 case was present agenesis of corpus callosum diagnosed by girl aged 4 years, diagnosed with anal ectopia since neonatal period. transfontanelar ultrasound.. One single case presented plurimalforma- Pediatric and surgical follow-up was done for a three years period. tiv syndrome with cheilognatopalatoschisis, varus equin and congeni- In our department, by persevering assessment, the case investiga- tal heart disease but he died in the 3rd day of life. tion was fulfilled. Anamnesis, clinical examination, genetic evaluation, Conclusions: Extreme prematurity is an important risk factor in increas- biological and imaging studies were done. Results: Abdominal ultra- ing neonatal morbidity and mortality and requires care in intensive care sonographic examination identified agenesia of the right kidney. Car- unit; association of congenital malformations increases that risk and diac echography detected atrial septal defect. Abdominal and pelvic influences further development. MRI specified congenital single left kidney, normal urinary bladder and uterus,inguinal right ovarian ectopia. Standard karyotype couldn’t ex- P02.078 Genetic heterogeneity in the Facio-Audio- clude some anomalies under optical resolution limit. Conclusions: As- symphalangism syndrome sociated malformations research was initiated due to the presence of J. J. van den Ende, V. Borra, W. Van Hul; the anal ectopia. Multifactorial mechanism could create propitious cir- Department of Medical Genetics, university of Antwerp, Edegem (Antwerp), cumstances for these anomalies. Patient’s interdisciplinary integrated Belgium. management is essential. Further genetic evaluations and counselling In the past years it has become clear that many aspects of develop- are required. ment are regulated by opposing activities of secreted ligands and their intra-and extracellular antagonists. This is also the case in the BMP P02.076 congenital heart defects in Ellis van creveld syndrome signaling in vertebrates. The BMPs (Bone-Morphogenetic Proteins) M. C. Panzaru1, M. Volosciuc2, E. Braha1, L. Caba1, C. Rusu1; are multifunctional proteins, and they are very important in bone and 1”Gr. T. Popa” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Medical cartilage formation. Mutations in several genes involved in this cas- Genetics Centre, Iasi, Romania. cade have shown to be responsible for many syndromes with synos- Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EVCS) is an autosomal recessive skeletal tosis/ symphalangism. dysplasia characterized by short ribs, short limbs, postaxial polydac- One of these genes causing symphalangism is the NOG gene on chro- tyly, dysplastic nails and teeth, frequently associated with congenital mosome 17q21-22, coding for the polypeptide Nogging, which binds heart defects. We present four cases in order to illustrate this rare and antagonizes BMP 2, 4 and 7. entity and to discuss the variability of heart defects. Noggin also interacts with GDF-5 (Growth differentiation factor 5). H.B.I. (5,8 y old female): disproportionate dwarfism, dysmorphic cra- Recently mutations have also been described in the GDF-5 gene in niofacies (sparse, fine hair; proeminent metopic suture, accessory gin- families with symphalangism, and also in the BMP receptor BMPR1A gival frenulae, conical teeth), narrow thorax, pectus carinatum, distal to which GDF-5 binds. This binding leads to activation and regulation limb shortening symmetrically affecting the forearms and lower legs, of transcription of target genes involved in bone formation. brachydactyly and bilateral postaxial polydactyly, hypoplastic nails, Very recently also a mutation in another growth factor (FGF9) was fused proximal and medium falanges (finger II - V); ecocardiography: found in a family with multiple synostosis. ASD ostium secundum, pulmonary valvular stenosis, hypertrophic car- We report a patient with a clinical phenotype that is very suggestive diomyopathy. of the Facio-Audio-Symphalangism syndrome. Patients with this syn- T.L.A. (1,6 old male): disproportionate dwarfism, craniofacial dysmor- drome show proximal symphalangism, in combination with deafness phy (sparse hair, accessory gingival frenulae), narrow thorax, distal due to stapes ankylosis, and a typical face, with a broad, hemicylin-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 7 drical nose. We could however not show a causative mutation in the ular analysis was performed with Fragile X PCR Test kit (Abbott) and genes that are thusfar known to cause this phenotype, giving evidence with methylation-sensitive Southern blot using the StB12.3 probe. for further genetic heterogeneity of this syndrome. Two children with FXS in this family showed mosaic pattern of premu- tation and full mutations. The boy presenting mental retardation and P02.079 involvement of the neuromuscular junction in fetal behavioral problems at age 7 had expanded fragments with 81-370 akinesia deformation sequence (FADs) CGG repeats. The girl showed 135-950 CGG repeats in the expanded S. Whalen1, M. Gonzales2,3, A. Laquerrière4,5, S. Quijano-Roy6, A. Delezoide7, F. allele of the FMR1 gene and had only 5-10% normal allele band in- Giuliano8, P. Richard9, A. Le Bail9, B. Hainque9,10, A. Chevallier11, E. Bieth12, D. tensity. Their mother showed full mutation between 350-460 CGG re- Avila-Smirnow6, D. Héron1, D. Sternberg9; peats and had normal allele activated in 95% of blood cells. Mitotically 1Département de Génétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, unstable expansion around 600 repeats and normal allele activation France, 2Unité de Pathologie Foetale et Placentaire, Service de Génétique et about 90% was detected on her sister. The grandmother had mosaic d’Embryologie Médicales, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 3UFR de pattern of premutation of 102, 109 and 186 CGG repeats and clinically Médecine, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 4Service d’Anatomie presents signs of mood lability and anxiety. et Cytologies Pathologiques, Hôpital Charles Nicolle, CHU Rouen, Rouen, Molecular investigation of mitotically unstable expansions is challeng- France, 5UFR de Médecine et de Pharmacie, Université de Rouen, Rouen, ing and requires combining of PCR with Southern hybridization analy- France, 6Service de Pédiatrie, Réanimation et Rééducation Infantiles, Hôpital ses. The latter allows to discover large mosaic fragments and to study Raymond Poincaré, Garches, France, 7Unité de Foetopathologie, Service de methylation patterns Biologie du Développement, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 8Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre de Référence des Anomalies du Développement P02.081 New ALX phenotype due to novel homozygous et Syndromes Malformatifs, CHU de Nice, Nice, France, 9Service de Biochimie mutation: p.Q225E Métabolique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 10Faculté H. Kayserili, U. Altunoglu, H. Ozgur, S. Basaran, Z. O. Uyguner; des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Université René Descartes, Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Paris, France, 11Laboratoire d’Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, CHU de Istanbul, Turkey. Nice, Nice, France, 12Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux de Toulouse, Frontonasal Dysplasia (FND;OMIM#136760) results from abnormal Toulouse, France. frontonasal development. Craniofacial anomalies in FND include ante- Introduction: Recently, neuromuscular junction (NMJ) genes have rior cranium bifidum, hypertelorism, orofacial clefting, notching of alae been implicated in FADS, mainly in multiple pterygium syndromes, nasi. Most cases are sporadic and EFNB1 is the first gene identified to lethal (LMPS) or not (Escobar syndrome). Recessive mutated geno- be responsible from the X-linked subgroup, craniofrontonasal Dyspla- types have been identified in CHRNG, RAPSN, CHRND, CHRNA1 sia (CFND;OMIM#304110). Autosomal dominant mutations in MSX2 and DOK7. and ALX4 have been associated with parietal foramina. Recently, au- Patients and Methods: We received 32 patients with FADS for analysis tosomal recessive (AR) mutations in ALX3 were associated with fron- of NMJ genes. Among those patients, 8 were alive and had arthro- torhiny, while AR ALX4 cases were shown to have additional features gryposis (+/- ptérygiums), 21 foetuses had FADS leading to pregnan- of alopecia, genital anomalies, craniosynostosis. cy termination, 1 foetus died in utero, and 5 patients died in the first Here we report a 6,5 year-old boy, who presented with distinctive fa- year. cial appearance; severe hypertelorism, wide-bifid nasal tip, anteverted An analysis of CHRNG, RAPSN, CHRND, CHRNA1, DOK7 and MUSK nares, broad columella, notched alae nasi, unilateral preauricular tag, genes was undertaken by PCR-sequencing, in order to (i) determine broad frenulum, missing permanent left upper incisor, bilateral parietal etiological diagnosis (ii), estimate the frequency of NMJ dysfunction foramina of 3x3 cm. He was born to consanguineous parents after and (iii) try to determine genotype-phenotype correlations. an un-eventful pregnancy and delivery. His motor milestones were Preliminary results: Three patients were identified with biallelic muta- achieved within normal limits and he has good school performance. tions of CHRNG, coding for the foetal sub-unit of the acetylcholine Physical examination prompted the clinical diagnosis of frontorhiny as- receptor. Two of these patients were children diagnosed with Escobar sociated with parietal foramina. syndrome and one was a foetus with LMPS (pregnancy termination at EFNB1, ALX3, ALX4, MSX2 genes were sequenced and homozygous 13 weeks). Different types of mutations were identified: stop, splice or p.Q225E mutation, changing neutral-polar glutamine to acidic-polar frameshift, either at homozygous or compound heterozygous state. glutamic acid in the homeobox domain, was found in ALX4. This varia- A heterozygous frameshift mutation of DOK7 was identified in a foetus tion was not identified in 100 control chromosomes. with FADS and pterygiums (pregnancy termination at 22 weeks). Stud- To our knowledge, this is the second recessive mutation identified in ies are underway to find a second mutation. ALX4 gene. The first reported recessive ALX4 mutation (p.R2655X) Conclusion-PerspectivesScreening of NMJ genes is still underway in was responsible from an atypical frontonasal malformation in a large our cohort. Genetic confirmation is important for genetic counselling. consanguineous Turkish family. Our findings demonstrate that ALX4 However, up to date, sequencing of the NMJ genes has a low yield of cases may show variable clinical expressivity with overlapping fea- positive diagnoses. Therefore, its use in FADS diagnostic algorithm tures of ALX3 and MSX2 phenotypes. remains to be defined. P02.082** Geleophysic dysplasia is a clinically and genetically P02.080 A Fragile X family with mitotically unstable premutation/ heterogenous disease full mutation mosaics. P. Piccolo1, J. Hicks2, V. Fano3, S. A. Caino3, M. G. Obregon3, R. Sutton2, M. T. Kahre1,2, T. Reimand1,3, G. Dekomien4, N. Tõnisson1,5, P. Hämäläinen6, E. García-Barcina4, J. Tolmie5, G. Andria6, G. Parenti1,6, L. Titomanlio7, S. K. Law8, Õiglane-Šlik2,7, K. Õunap1,2; V. Sabatino1, R. Polishchuk1, B. Lee9,10, N. Brunetti-Pierri1,6,10; 1Dept of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Estonia, 1Telethon Insitute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2Department of 2Dept.of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Estonia, 3Dept of Obstetrics and Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Hospital Gyneacology, University of Tartu, Estonia, 4Human Genetics, Ruhr University J. P. Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 4Unidad de Genética, Hospital de Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 5Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University Basurto Avda, Bilbao, Spain, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, Yorkhill Hospital, of Tartu, Estonia, 6Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics University Glasgow, United Kingdom, 6Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University, of Turku, Finland, 7Children´s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Estonia. Naples, Italy, 7Pediatric Neurology, University Hospital Robert Debré, APHP, Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by CGG triplet expansion in the Paris, France, 8Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, first exon of FMR1 gene >200 repeats. In childhood, full mutation as- CA, United States, 9Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Houston, TX, United sociates with mental retardation, characteristic behavior and physical States, 10Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of phenotype. Premutation (55-200 CGG) carriers have a higher risk of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. developing premature ovarian failure and/or fragile X associated trem- Geleophysic dysplasia (OMIM 231050) is an autosomal recessive or ataxia syndrome. About 15-40% FXS patients show mosaic pattern disorder characterized by short-limb dwarfism, brachydactyly, and a of full mutation and premutation. ‘happy-looking’ facial appearance. It is frequently associated with car- Here we report a FXS family with mitotically very unstable expansion in diac valvular disease although the incidence and natural history of the both premutation and full mutation region in three generations. Molec- heart complications remain unclear. Mutations in the ADAMTSL2 gene Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 77 resulting in dysregulation of TGF-β signaling have been recently rec- diagnosis. Enzyme study suggested the same, and finally GCDH gene ognized to be responsible for this condition. We screened for ADAMT- molecular analysis revealed a missense mutation at codon 181 . In SL2 mutations fourteen cases of geleophysic dysplasia diagnosed other case, whose sister was deceased with just the same symptoms on the basis of clinical and radiological findings. Novel pathogenic at, MRI study suggested (GA-1) as the first diagnosis, and then or- mutations were found in three of the fourteen cases suggesting that ganic acids in urine showed the typical pattern for the disease. In third additional and yet unknown gene(s) are involved in the pathogenesis case, the MRI diagnosis and enzyme study had suggested (GA-1) the of the disease. Short stature and brachydactyly were present in most same. In the girl with 27 months age compound heterozygosity for of the cases while laryngeal stenosis, cardiac disease, and Perthes GCDH gene at codon 181 & 255 was observed. In two desease cases disease were variably present. Taken together, these findings show a with high GA we found no mutations in GCDH gene. significant clinical variability and are consistent with a broad disease Conclusion: The results suggest that exact study of MRI in suspicious spectrum. In 3 of 4 cases in which skin fibroblasts were available, we patients could help in diagnosis. detected by electron microscopy cytoplasmic lysosome-like inclusions which have been previously reported as a characteristic finding of the P02.085 Goldenhar syndrome-possible microdeletion disease. Inclusions were also detectable in lymphoblasts in one pa- syndrome? tient with mutations in ADAMTSL2. Analysis for glycosphingolipids in D. Raskova, M. Trkova, D. Stejskal; geleophysic dysplasia fibroblasts did not reveal significant abnormali- Institute of Medical Genetics and Reproductive Medicine GENNET,, Prague 7, ties compared to control cells. Therefore, the nature of the accumulat- Czech Republic. ed material remains unclear and whether TGF-β signaling plays a role Goldenhar syndrome (oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia) is extremely in the pathogenesis of the inclusions requires further investigations. variable congenital defect with incidence 1:3 000- 1:5 000. It results from the anomaly of the first and second branchial arches and is char- P02.083 GJB2 (Cx2) mutations and hearing impairment in acterized by unilateral deformity of external ear and small ipsilateral southern Finland - experiences from a diagnostic genetic half of the face, praeauricular tags, epibulbar dermoid and vertebral laboratory anomalies. Most cases are sporadic, some families clearly support E. Jakkula1, M. Ridanpää1, A. Orpana1, K. Aittomäki1,2, S. Kivirikko1,2; autosomal dominant and rarely autosomal recessive inheritance. The 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, HUSLAB, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of exact cause is not known, but it is possible, that it is caused by micro- Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. deletion. Hearing impairment is the most common sensory disorder and it is We present the collection of 6 patients with Goldenhar syndrome and 2 present in approximately 1 of every 500 newborns. The most frequent patients with microtia - atresia syndrome, which we intend investigate gene causing autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss (ARN- by Illumina SNP array. SHL) is GJB2 (Cx26) and its mutations are responsible for 30-60% of congenital ARNSHL. There is a single common mutation, c.35delG in P02.086 Co-occurrence of severe Goltz-Gorlin syndrome and GJB2 that may account for up to 70% of all GJB2 mutations. pentalogy of cantrell - clinical and molecular analysis. Our diagnostic laboratory has offered GJB2 mutation screening since R. Smigiel1, A. Jakubiak1, P. Lombardi2, W. Jaworski3, R. Slezak1, D. 2004 as either targeted screening for the most common c.35delG mu- Patkowski3, R. Hennekam4; tation or full-sequencing analysis of GJB2. Using the patient samples 1Genetics Department Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland, with diagnosis of hearing impairment, referred for us for GJB2 muta- 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, University of tion screening during the years 2004-2009, we wanted to investigate Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Pediatric Surgery Department, Wroclaw how commonly mutations were identified, what was the mutation spec- Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 4Department of Pediatrics, Academic trum and if there were any obvious genotype-phenotype correlations. Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Majority of the patients were Finnish. Goltz-Gorlin syndrome is a highly variable multisystem defects of Results: Altogether 125 patient samples had been analysed in our lab- meso-ectodermal origin. Major manifestations include atrophic skin oratory and GJB2 gene mutations were identified in 33 patients (26%, lesions with fat herniation, papillomas, ocular defects, hypodontia, n=33/125) confirming diagnosis of ARNSHL. Of the mutation positive hearing loss, limb malformations. Mutations in the X-linked PORCN patients, 22 (67 %, n=22/33) were homozygous for the c.35delG muta- gene can be identified in all patients with a classical Goltz-Gorlin phe- tion, 10 (30 %, n=10/33) were compound heterozygous and 1 patient notype. was homozygous for the c.71G>A (p.Trp24X) mutation. The following The pentalogy of Cantrell is a specific combination of usually five six mutation combinations were identified in compound heterozygous anomalies: a midline abdominal wall defect; defect of lower sternum; patients: c.35delG + c.101T>C (p.Met34Thr), c.35delG + c.269T>C deficiency of the diaphragmatic pericardium and anterior diaphragm (p.Leu90Pro), c.35delG + c.456C>G (p.Tyr152X), c.35delG + c.550C>T and congenital heart anomalies. Cantrell pentalogy is infrequently re- (p.Arg184Trp), c.427C>T (p.Arg143Trp) + c.101T>C (p.Met34Thr) and ported. The pathogenesis is still unknown. c.109G>A (p.Val137Ile) + c.233delC( p.Leu79CysfsX3). The patients We report an infant with both findings fitting Cantrell pentalogy (lack of with compound heterozygosity seemed to have either later onset or the lower sternum; diaphragmatic hernia; ectopia cordis; omphalocele) diagnosis of hearing impairment. and other findings fittig Goltz-Gorlin syndrome (sparse hair; anophthal- mia; clefting; bifid nose; irregular vermillion of both lips; asymmetrical P02.084 High correlation of MRI, Chemical and Genetic finding limb malformations; caudal appendage; linear aplastic skin defects; of Glutaric Acidemia type 1 unilateral hearing loss). She shows a psychomotor and somatic re- G. Mohammadian1, G. Baghal Shooshtari1, N. Athari1, J. , Ghavabesh1, A. tardation. Foroughmand2, H. Galehdari2, H. Galehdari2; Genetype analysis showed a normal karyotype, absence of subtelo- 1Khozestan walfare organizatio, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2shahid meric deletions and CGH imbalances, but presence of a PORCN mu- chamran university, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. tation, which confirmed the diagnosis of Goltz-Gorlin syndrome. Background and aim: Glutaric acidemia type 1 (GA-1), one of the most This combination of Goltz-Gorlin syndrome and pentalogy of Cantrell common organic acidemia, and autosomal inheritance, is due to de- has been reported recently in two patients with a confirmed PORCN ficiency of glutaril-CoA dehydrogenase. Patients are often macroce- mutation. The present patient confirms that the pentalogy of Cantrell is phalic and develop other signs before age of 48 months. MRI shows caused at least in some cases by a PORCN mutation. It remains as yet widening of Sylvian fissure, acute striatal degeneration and shrinkage uncertain whether this can be explained by the type of localization of of caudate and putamen. High concentration of glutaric acid in the the mutation within PORCN, or whether the phenotype is additionally urine, body fluids is usual. Treatment before symptoms presentation determined by mutations of polymorphisms in other genes, environ- may prevent brain damage in most patients. mental factors, and/or epigenetic influences. Material and method: Five cases in four families were studied, three girls with ages of 24, 27 and 31 months with clinical symptoms. The P02.087 Gorlin syndrome - case report family with history of two deceased children was the last. F. F. Cionca1, L. Cionca2, C. Vizitiu2, C. Ardeleanu3; Results: In two cases no definite diagnosis was achieved in neurology 1“Victor Babes“ National Institute for Research and Development in Pathology surveys. But MRI report had exactly proved GA-1 as the most probable and Biomedical Sciences, Bucharest, Romania, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Prof. Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 7 Dr. Dan Teodorescu“ Clinical Hospital of Oro-Maxilo-Facial Surgery, Bucharest, P02.089 MODY type 2 with Greig Cephalopolysyndactyly Romania, Bucharest, Romania, 31“Victor Babes“ National Institute for Research syndrome (GcPs) patient - a part of a contiguous gene deletion and Development in Pathology and Biomedical Sciences, Bucharest, Romania,, syndrome (GcPs-cGs). Bucharest, Romania. A. Singer1, S. Josefsberg2, J. Rosensaft2, C. Vinkler3; Introduction: The nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome or Gorlin- 1Genetic Institute, Ashkelon, Israel, 2Genetic Institute Kaplan Medical Center, Goltz syndrome is an autosomal dominant inherited disease with com- Rehovot, Israel, 3Genetic Institute Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel. plete penetrance, intra and interfamilial variation in expression and no The Greig Cephalopolysyndactyly Syndrome (GCPS) is a rare (1- evidence of anticipation. The syndrome is characterized by the de- 9/1,000,000), pleiotropic, multiple congenital anomaly syndrome that velopment of multiple. recurrent jaw odontogenic keratocysts (90%), is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. The primary findings frequently beginning in the second decade of life, multiple basal cell include a triad of digital anomalies, ocular hypertelorisim, and macro- carcinomas, frequently on the cephaly. Other low frequency findings include central nervous system face, the back, and the chest, hyperkeratosis of palms and soles, ec- (CNS) anomalies, hernias, and cognitive impairment. GCPS is caused topic calcifications (particularly intracranial), skeletal abnormalities, fa- by loss of function mutations in the GLI3 trascription factor gene, lo- cial dysmorphism, ocular disorders, cardiac and ovarian fibromas, cated on chromosome 7p13. These include point mutations, frameshift The diagnosis is established using clinical diagnostic criteria. PTCH, mutations, translocation, and gross deletion mutations. Treatment in- located on chromosome 9q22.3-q31, is the only gene known to be as- clude plastic or orthopedic surgery of limb malformations when needed sociated with NBCCS and normally functions as a tumor suppressor and care by child developmental team if there is cognitive impairment. gene, controlling growth and development of the normal tissues. Mo- Contiguous gene syndrome (CGS) have been previously reported to lecular genetic testing, available on a clinical basis, detects mutations be associated with GCPS often with additional problems related to ad- in the majority of affected individuals. jacent genes on chromosome 7p13. Some CGS have stereotypical Case presentation: A 30 years old female presented with unilateral breakpoints while others not. In most CGS, the extent of the deletions enlargement of the mandible and no other clinical findings in physical is correlated with the severity of the symptoms. To date, several re- examination. ports of GCPS-CGS have been published with no common/hotspots Radiological examination revealed unilateral multicystic lesions of the breakpoint. lower jaw. Histological examination demonstrated the presence of mul- We present a 9 y old girl who presented with clinical diagnosis of GCPS tiple unilateral odontogenic keratocysts with mental retardation and newly onset diabetes mellitus. Laboratory The patient presented in the past other three similar lesions of the work-up was compatible with a diagnosis of maturity onset diabetes lower jaw and two facial basal cell carcinomas. of the young (MODY). A contiguous gene deletion syndrome was sus- Family history identified other two members with similar lesions. pected. Chromosomal analysis reveled a 46,XX,del(7)(p13;p15) karyo- Conclusion: The case present two major diagnostic criteria for Gorlin type. The deleted area includes the glucokinas gene (GCK) causing syndrome. MODY type 2 located at 7p15-p13. The patient will require, long-term follow-up, treatment of the new or This is the second report of MODY in GCPS-CGS patient. recurrent manifestations and molecular genetic testing to detect PTCH Our results further emphasize the importance of chromosomal analy- mutation. sis in cases of GCPS. P02.088** Cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome with agenesis of P02.090 Role of connexin genes (cx26, cx30 and cx31) in the corpus callosum: the contribution of array comparative hereditary hearing loss genomic hybridisation E. I. Sharonova, R. A. Zinchenko; E. Chabchoub1, P. Debeer2, J. R. Vermeesch1, P. Decock3, J. P. Fryns1; Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 1Centre for Human Genetics - University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, Moscow, Russian Federation. 2Department of Orthopedics - University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, Connexins are the key components of the gap junction, which regu- 3Department of Paediatric Neurology - University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium. lates various physiological and development processes. The impor- In 1928, Greig reported a rare multiple congenital anomaly syndrome tance of the gap junction for human physiology has been identified as named Greig cephalopolysyndactyly (GCPS - MIM # 175700) char- a result of detection of multiple genetic diseases that are associated acterised by hypertelorism, macrocephaly with frontal bossing, poly- with different connexin genes. Hearing loss is the most important in syndactyly in the upper and lower limbs and other findings including terms of incidence. Since mapping and identification of Cx26 gene we central nervous system malformations with variable cognitive impair- conducted comprehensive medical- and population-genetic studies in ment. The pattern of inheritance is autosomal dominant by loss of several regions of Russia. According to recent data, mutations in dif- function mutations in the GLI3 (7p14) transcription factor gene. Later, ferent connexin genes are associated with non-syndromic hereditary other cephalopolysyndactyly clinical variants have been reported (e.g. hearing loss (NSHL). In some populations of Europe and Asia muta- the acrocallosal syndrome (ACS) (MIM #200990), …) expanding the tions in these genes are described in 70-90% cases of all NSHL pa- clinical spectrum and making the differential diagnosis challenging tients. DNA studies of NSHL patients in Russia were made only for the since the findings in GCPS are relatively non-specific. The ACS has Cx26, while identification of mutations in other connexin genes has not substantial overlap with GCPS including mental retardation, preaxial been previously conducted. polysyndactyly, facial dysmorphism with macrocephaly, prominent This study aims to determine the spectrum of mutations in Cx26 and broad forehead and hypertelorism, agenesis of the corpus callosum Cx31 and two big deletions - del(GJB6-D13S1830) and del(GJB6- and mental retardation. It is autosomal recessive but many cases are d13S1854) in Cx30. 240 NSHL patients from Kirov region were an- sporadic. One patient had a mutation in GLI3. alyzed . Different mutations in Cx26 gene were found, and 35delG Here we report a series of 15 patients presenting with a cephalopoly- (25,2%) was the most frequent. 150 patients with no mutations or het- syndactyly and agenesis of the corpus callosum. Conventional karyo- erozygous in the Cx26, were analyzed at Cx31. Mutations in Cx31 typing, FISH using the BAC clone RP11-706L12 (7p14) and sequencing 798c> t (13,67%), R32W (4,67%), and 357c> t (3,67%) were present GLI3 were all normal. Subsequently, we performed array comparative in a large number of cases. Deletions in Cx30 were not found in our genomic hybridisation (aCGH) using a 1 Mb resolution BAC aCGH and group of patients. a 200 kb resolution oligo aCGH (105k OGT). We identified causal ge- We plan to conduct further analysis of connexin genes and create a nomic rearrangements in 3 patients (i.e. a complex chromosomal rear- system for searching mutations for NSHL patients based on pheno- rangement involving chromosomes 1 and 21q, a dup(X)(q13.3;q21.1), typic manifestations. and a deletion on chromosome 22q13.1). Clinical and genotyping cor- relations will be discussed together with the value of aCGH in the mo- P02.091 Application of chromosomal microarray Analysis in lecular diagnosis workup of CPS of unknown aetiology. Patients with Early Onset Hearing Loss and mild Dysmorphism K. Õunap1,2, R. Teek1,2, M. Nelis3,4, O. Zilina4, K. Kruustük5, T. Reimand1,2; 1Department of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian Biocentre, Genotyping Core Facility, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Biotechnology, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 7 Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 5Ear Clinic, Tartu were detected in SPG4, six of them new. We identified two previously University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. described mutations in SPG3A in two families with pure AD-HSP and The aim of our study was to find out new etiological causes for early childhood onset. All new sequence variations were screened for in 250 onset hearing loss (HL). We performed whole-genome analysis in 24 neurologically normal control individuals. We confirm the high preva- children with still unknown HL and mild dysmorphism and/or other de- lence of SPG4 among AD-HSP also in Spain (21% of all cases, 52% velopmental complaints. of the AD-HSP). The frequency of mutations in SPG3A was similar to Our study group consisted of 233 children with early onset HL as a previous reports (3% of all cases, 7,4% of AD-HSP). Together, screen- main complaint collected during 2000-2009. Of the 233 investigated ing of SPG4 and SPG3A provides a diagnostic confirmation in over probands we found 126 patients (54%) with GJB2 or other gene 25% of all HSP and over 60% AD-HSP families and should be the first mutation(s). The clinical data of the rest of this investigation group step in the study of these patients. was carefully reexamined. We selected out 24 patients who had in addition to early onset HL subtle facial dysmorphism, failure to thrive P02.094 craniofacial syndromes caused by endoplasmic and/or developmental or behavioral problems. In order to detect copy reticulim export defects number changes in selected patients, whole-genome genotyping was S. A. Boyadjiev1, S. D. Kim1, J. Helms2, J. Kim1; performed, using the Illumina platform. Three regions in three separate 1University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States, 2Stanford patients with the loss of one allele were found. All findings were con- University, Palo Alto, CA, United States. firmed by quantitative PCR analysis. We identified a novel autosomal recessive syndrome, cranio-lenticulo- One 8.5-year-old girl has peculiar facial phenotype, developmental sutural dysplasia (CLSD, Boyadjiev-Jabs syndrome) due to SEC23A delay, mild sensorineural HL (SNHL) and ~2.94-Mb size deletion in missense mutations. Characteristic features of this disease are late- chromosomal region 12q13.3-q41.1. She has haploinsufficiency of co- closing fontanels, sutural cataracts, facial dysmorphisms and skeletal chlear-expressed MYO1A gene (DFNA48). The 10-year-old girl with defects. Prominent cellular features of skin fibroblasts from these pa- subtle facial dysmorphism and mild SNHL has ~0.74-Mb size deletion tients are secretion defect and marked distension of the endoplasmic in 3p26.2 region, which she inherited from her father. In this region is reticulum (ER), concordant with the function of SEC23A in protein ex- located DFNB6 locus, however, the association between patient’s phe- port from the ER. Knockout mice model for a partner of SEC23A within notype and deletion is unclear, as her father has normal hearing. Third the COPII mediated vesicular export of secretory proteins from the patient (10-year-old) has severe SNHL, subtle facial dysmorphism and endoplasmic reticulum exhibit an embryonically lethal phenotype of 0.54-Mb size deletion in 1p33 region. There are not known previously holoprosencephaly and severe craniofacial anomalies with the spec- identified SNHL locus in this area. trum of Pierre Robin-otocephaly phenotype. Our results suggest that deficiency of COPII components cause craniofacial and brain pheno- P02.092 A Report of three Egyptian Patients with Hereditary types that have thus far escaped classification. Osteolysis S. I. I. Soliman; P02.095 Hereditary spastic paraplegia in 25 Egyptian families National Research Centre (NRC), Cairo, Egypt. M. S. Zaki1, M. Y. Eissa1, A. K. Abdel Aleem2, J. C. Tolentino3, J. L. Silhavy3, J. Introduction: Diseases exhibiting osteolysis in children are rare heredi- G. Gleeson3; tary disorders. Osteolysis disorders are characterized by destruction 1Clinical Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, and resorption of affected bones. Several types have been recognized 2Molecular Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, with different clinical manifestations. Subjects & Methods: The current 3Neurogenetics Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of study added three new cases from two unrelated consanguineous fam- Neurosciences, University of California., San Diego, CA, United States. ilies with severe form of inherited osteolysis. Meticulous history taking, Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is characterized by progressive clinical examination, radiological and biochemical investigations are spasticity of the lower limbs that can be inherited in an autosomal re- included. Results & Conclusions: The clinical and radiological findings cessive, autosomal dominant or X-linked manner. The heterogeneity in our patients were best compatible with the diagnosis of Winchester of the disease is not only demonstrated by the various forms of HSP, syndrome (WS) and Torg/ Nodulosis-arthropathy-osteolysis syndrome but also by the numerous HSP loci that have already been identified. (Torg/NAO). Our findings confirm that Torg/NAO and WS represent a We have recruited 63 patients from 25 Egyptian families with compli- continuous clinical spectrum. The present study is a great opportunity cated or uncomplicated forms of recessive HSP to identify additional for further molecular analysis to emphasize that Torg/NAO and WS HSP loci. One of these families with apparent X-linked inheritance dis- are allelic disorders causing the clinical and radiological overlapping played a mutation in PLP1 gene. We excluded linkage to known loci in manifestations. 15 families, which were subsequently evaluated by genome-wide 5K SNP linkage scan to identify new loci. Positive consanguinity was in P02.093 complete screening of SPG and SPGA in a spanish 23 families (92%) and patients‘ age ranged from 2 years to 40 years. patient cohort. The onset varied from 1 year to 18 years and complicated HSP was B. Quintáns1,2, S. Muñiz-Pérez3, M. García-Murias3, J. Pardo4, M. Zennaro3, Á. in 17 families. The only presenting symptom in uncomplicated HSP Carracedo3,2, M. J. Sobrido3,2; was spasticity of lower limbs while in complicated HSP there were 1University Clinical Hospital of Santiago de Compostela-SERGAS, Spain, variable manifestations in the form of dysarthria, mental retardation, 2Genomic Medicine Group. University of Santiago de Compostela. Center nystagmus, peripheral neuropathy and acropathy with self mutilation for Network Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Spain, that was excluded from linkage to Cct5 gene. Neuroimaging findings 3Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, were thin corpus callosum, defective myelination, cerebellar atrophy Spain, 4Department of Neurology, University Clinical Hospital of Santiago de and retrocerebellar cyst. Our analysis revealed that 8 families defined Compostela-SERGAS, Spain. novel HSP loci, and 2 families mapped to known loci. These results Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) comprises a group of inherited demonstrate the genetic heterogeneity of the disease and that there neurodegenerative disorders with weakness and spasticity of the limbs are still many more causes yet to be explored. Our cohort shows the (pure) or additional features (complicated). HSP shows genetic hetero- likelihood of identifying more novel HSP genes. geneity and can be autosomal-dominant (AD-HSP), autosomal-reces- sive and X-linked-recessive. At least 45 different genes/loci can cause P02.096 molecular evidence of chimera formation resulting from HSP. Mutations in SPG4 and SPG3A account for approximately 40% parthenogenetic division and dispermic fertilization and 10% of all AD-HSP cases, respectively. The frequency of muta- J. Winberg1, P. Gustavsson1, K. Lagerstedt Robinson1, E. Blennow1, J. Lundin1, tions in the Spanish population needs to be explored. Our preliminary E. Iwarsson1, A. Nordenström1, B. Anderlid1, M. Bondeson2, A. Nordenskjöld3, study of 43 families indicated a high frequency of SPG4. Now we pres- A. Nordgren1; ent the results of the complete analysis of an extended series of 92 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institute, Spanish patients (67 families: 46 from Galicia, 21 from other regions Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala of Spain). We performed direct sequencing of the whole coding region University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Department of Woman and Child Health, of SPG4 and SPG3A. Additionally, we searched for small and medium size structural abnormalities in both genes by MLPA. Ten mutations Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 0 Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. P02.099 Analysis of four patients withinv dup del(8): clinical, Whole-body human chimerism is the result of two fertilization events cytogenetic and molecular characterization of this alteration. giving rise to one individual, and is a rarely detected condition reported F. García-Santiago1,2, A. Delicado3,2, F. Santos1,2, E. Vallespin1,2, L. in the literature. We have studied the molecular background and dis- Fernandez1,2, M. Palomares1,2, J. Nevado1,2, E. Mansilla1,2, A. González- cuss the likely mechanism for the detected chimerism in a patient with Meneses4, P. Lapunzina1,2; a 46,XX/47,XY,+14 karyotype and ambiguous genitalia, chryptorchi- 1INGEMM-IDIPAZ. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de dism, pigmentary anomalies and normal psychomotor development. Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid. We have used karyotyping, interphase-FISH and array CGH analysis ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3IINGEMM-IDIPAZ. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, as well as molecular analysis of polymorphic markers at 48 loci in or- Spain, 4Unidad de Dismorfología. Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain. der to define the origin and percentage of 47,XY,+14 cells in different Inverted duplication 8p associated with deletion of the short arms of tissues. Our results indicate that the chimerism in our patient is a re- chromosome 8 (inv dup del(8p)) is a complex chromosomal rearrange- sult of dispermic fertilization of a parthenogenetically activated oocyte. ment relatively common, with an estimated prevalence in the general Our report underlines that cytogenetic findings suggesting mosaicism population of 1/10000-30000 liveborns. Clinical manifestations of this might actually indicate chimerism as an underlying cause in patients. alteration include generally severe to moderate mental delay and typi- It also highlights the difficulties in predicting the clinical outcome in cal facial features. Furthermore, there are associated malformations of patients with genetic aberrations in mosaic or chimeric form. the CNS such as hypoplasia/agenesia of the corpus callosum (80%), skeletal abnormalities (scoliosis/kyphosis) (60%) and congenital heart P02.097 An emerging chromosome X duplication hot-spot, defects (25%) (Guo WJ. Am J Med Genet 58(3):230-6). Xp11.21, involved in developmental delay; two new families The rearrangement of the chromosome consists of a deletion of the B. Argiropoulos1, M. Lines1, J. McGowan-Jordan1, P. Chakraborty1,2, M. T. telomeric region 8p23-pter, and an inverted duplication of the 8p11.2- Geraghty1,2; p23 region. We present four children with this anomaly, which deletion 1Department of Genetics, Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, and duplication size is variable and has been estimated by SNP array Canada, 2Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, and array-CGH techniques. In the attached table, the deletion and du- Ottawa, ON, Canada. plication sizes and the highly variable clinical outcome of every one of To date, six unrelated families presenting with predominantly nonsyn- the patients are correlated. dromic developmental delay have been reported with a microduplica- A microsatellite segregation study of the short arms of chromosome tion of chromosome Xp11.2 (Am J Hum Genet. 2008;82(2):432-43). 8 in these patients has been made, detecting the maternal origin of Here, we present two additional families with similar/overlapping this chromosome in all of them. The inversion of the duplication of the Xp11.2 duplications. The first family consists of two boys, aged 8 and region within 8p11.2-p23 has been confirmed with FISH technique. 10, who presented with triangular face, prominent forehead, high pal- It is important to characterize the size of both, the deletion and the ate and developmental delay. Microarray-comparative genomic hy- duplication in every patient, as this might be related with the severity of bridization (array-CGH) identified a 513 kb duplication at Xp11.22 in the clinical manifestations. this family. The second family consists of a boy, age 7, with mild facial features and developmental delay. G-band analysis showed an appar- P02.100 is it iPEX syndrome? case Report ent duplication of band Xq21.2 that was maternally inherited. Array- O. N. Belei, M. Marazan, I. Micle, I. Simedrea, T. Marcovici, C. Daescu, G. CGH and FISH revealed a 4.6 Mb duplication of the Xp11.21-p11.22 Brad, M. Puiu; region that inserted into the X chromosome at Xq21.2. Comparison of First Pediatric Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes” the duplicated region in the eight families revealed that the minimal, Timisoara, Romania, Timisoara, Romania. commonly duplicated region encompasses the HUWE1 gene. HUWE1 The authors present the case of a male patient aged 14 years old, encodes an E3-ubiquitin ligase involved in neuronal cell cycle and pre- diagnosed with polyendocrine autoimmune association (mellitus dia- viously linked to developmental delay. Other commonly duplicated betes type 1, autoimmune thyroiditis and hypo-gonadotrophic hypogo- genes in this region linked to X-linked developmental delay include nadism) by the occasion of keto-acidotic diabetes onset. This patient PHF8, HSD17B10, and JARID1C. Our study underscores the utility of associated celiac disease, sustained on clinical, immunological and metaphase FISH to acquire positional information of the genomic im- histological changes: recurrent diarrhea, positive IgA anti-endomisium balances revealed by array-CGH and provides support that increased and anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies and total villous atrophy gene dosage of HUWE1 and PHF8, or both, contribute to the etiology on intestinal biopsy sample. He also presented recurrent eczematous of this disease. Finally, it is known that several genes in this region dermatitis associated to elevated serum concentration of immunoglob- escape X-inactivation. We propose that the sequence elements that ulin E. The authors sustain the diagnosis of IPEX syndrome in this facilitate the escape of X-inactivation contribute to the genomic insta- case based on clinical and laboratory aspects presented, along with a bility, namely, the recurrence of duplications, in this region. positive family history of unexplained early deaths in the mother-side male relatives (two of patients’ uncles). Immune Dysregulation, Poly- P02.098 Haploinsufficiency of IGF1R is not always associated endocrinopathy, Enteropathy X-Linked (IPEX) Syndrome represents with short stature, ARVD can be caused by a deletion of the a rare X linkated disorder, characterised by development of systemic entire PKP2 gene, and other things that i have learned from autoimmunity from the first year of life. Life expectancy is reduced, ordering arrays. but there were described several cases as this one, associating late S. M. Nikkel; onset, that reached the second or the third decade of life. IPEX is Department of Genetics, Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, a rare genetic autoimmune disease due to mutations in the FOXP3 Canada. gene, located on the X-chromosome. There are no specific laboratory Karyotype analysis was the standard of care for patients with devel- tests to confirm the diagnosis. Molecular analysis of the FOXP3 gene opmental delays; however, arrays are now first line investigations in (Xp11.2-q13.3) is required for the diagnosis. Drug treatment includes many clinical practices. More patients are receiving diagnoses as mi- immunosuppression, nutritional support and hormone replacement. crodeletion/duplication syndromes are detected. With better coverage, The unique definitive treatment for IPEX is hematopoietic stem cells smaller alterations are detected, which can help localize which genes transplantation. may be responsible for a particular phenotype. Often these alterations contain only a single gene. From arrays that are ordered in a clinical P02.101 Unusual case of bilateral iridocorneal endothelial practice, the results can add to our knowledge of clinical genetics. Ex- syndrome with extraocular anomalies amples of such insights include: arrhythmogenic right ventricular dys- M. Lamp1,2, K. Kaljurand3, R. Mikelsaar1; plasia (ARVD) can be due to a 112-kp deletion the contains the entire 1Department of Human Biology and Genetics, Institute of General and PKP2 gene, a 1.3 Mb deletion at 15q26.3 containing IGF1R is NOT Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of associated with short stature, there appears to be a facial phenotype Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Eye Clinic, associated with partial deletion of NRXN1, and the threshold for order- Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. ing arrays should be very low. Iridocorneal endothelial (ICE) syndrome is a rare chronic ocular dis- order with three subtypes: Chandler’s syndrome, Cogan-Reese syn-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 1 drome, and essential (progressive) iris atrophy. It is characterized by Dutch JBS cases. abnormal corneal endothelium, iridocorneal adhesions, corectopia, iris Results: data from 22 Dutch JBS cases (17 males, 5 females) aged atrophy and increased intraocular pressure. In up to 82% of cases it 3 to 40 years were available. In 14 cases audiological investigations progresses to glaucoma. The ICE syndrome is usually unilateral, how- were successfully performed. Three cases (from 17 to 26 years old) ever some bilateral and a few familial cases have been reported. The showed very mild sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) at different fre- etiology of this syndrome is unclear, but the most common theory thus quencies. Conductive hearing loss due to middle ear infections oc- far suggests a potential viral origin. curred frequently in young JBS children (6 out of 22 cases). In three We report a new case of bilateral ICE syndrome in a 38-year-old wom- cases (from 3 to 13 years old) the parents reported hypersensitivity to an with a family history (41 members) positive for genetic ocular dis- sound. In the five cases with two pathogenic AHI1 mutations only one eases from the paternal side: pseudoexfoliation glaucoma (proband’s subject had very mild SNHL. uncle) and macular degeneration (proband’s grandmother). Patient’s Conclusion: There is no evidence for significant hearing loss in Joubert main bilateral ocular symptoms were corectopia, iris atrophy and in- syndrome. However, given the already compromised speech develop- creased intraocular pressure. Gonioscopy of the right eye revealed ment in JBS, conductive hearing loss due to middle ear infections in also extensive iridocorneal adhesions and narrow, partly closed ante- young patients should be treated vigorously. SNHL at a later age can- rior chamber angle. Visual acuity and visual fields were normal. Unlike not be excluded on the basis of our data, since three of the cases in most reported ICE syndrome cases with an unremarkable medical his- the older age range showed discretely increased hearing thresholds. tory, our patient suffered also from endometriosis and allergic rhinitis, Analogous to the ciliopathy Bardet Biedl syndrome, where subclinically and had several extraocular facial anomalies such as prominent max- increased hearing thresholds were reported in a group of adolescents illa, retrognathia, triangular-shaped opened mouth and high palate, as patients, follow-up of JBS patients is important in view of the possibility well as skeletal anomalies like mild kyphoscoliosis. Karyotype 46,XX. of progressive late onset SNHL. In conclusion, both the previously reported bilateral and a few familial cases, as well as our patient with bilateral ICE syndrome and extra- P02.104 Bilateral mucinous cystadenoma of ovary in a patient ocular anomalies, indicate the possibility that genetic factors might be with 10q23 microdeletion involved in the etiology of this syndrome. N. Babovic1, P. S. Simmons2, C. Moir2, E. C. Thorland2, B. Scheithauer2, D. Babovic-Vuksanovic2; P02.102 Jeune syndrome: A case Description study. 1Mayo Medical School, Rochester, MN, United States, 2Mayo Clinic, Rochester, V. Egorov1, N. Usurelu1, V. Sacara1, M. Stratila1, P. Stratulat2, A. Magulceac2, MN, United States. G. Covalciuc2; Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) is a rare hereditary condition 1National Center of Human Reproduction and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, caused by mutations in SMAD4 or BMPR1A genes. Multiple juvenile Moldova, Republic of, 2Scientific Research Institute Motherhood and Childhood polyps can also be found in a related group of syndromes with mul- Health, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of. tisystemic involvement including Cowden disease, Lhermitte-Duclos Jeune syndrome (OMIM 208500, Q77.2) is characterized by poten- disease, Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, and Proteus-like syn- tially lethal dwarfism, autosomal-recessive asphyxiating thoracic dys- drome, all grouped as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes (PHTS). trophy with short horizontally ribs, short limbs, a respiratory distress All forms of juvenile polyposis manifest in older childhood or early which can be rapidly fatal. As well as is characteristic lung hypoplasia, adulthood. Infantile juvenile polyposis is a rare entity, presenting in the polydactyly, cardiac anomalies, and renal failure. Incidence is 1 per first year of life with severe gastrointestinal symptoms. Many of these 100000 - 130000. patients have associated macrocephaly, hypotonia, and congenital A newly-born female child was born in 7. 07. 2009, admitted to hospital anomalies. It was recently recognized that patients with infantile pol- in 9. 07. 2009, and died in 23. 07. 2009. The newborn was from first yposis have a 10q23 microdeletion, involving both BMPR1A and PTEN 39-weeks pregnancy, bodyweight 3300, length 49 cm. genes. There is a major risk for gastrointestinal malignancies in these During the pregnancy in mother was diagnosed unilateral doubling of patients, but the risk for development of other tumors is not known. We kidney, on the background of aggravation of chronic pyelonephritis. describe a patient with a history of infantile polyposis, macrocephaly, The pregnancy was evidenced as late as in 22 weeks, and anomaly developmental delay, hypotonia and a 10q23 microdeletion. At age was diagnosed in fetus on 34 - 35 weeks of gestation, when was dis- 14 she presented with bilateral mucinous cystadenoma of the ovary. covered skeletal malformation and was suspected hypochondropla- This type of tumor was not previously reported in association with JPS, sia. 10q23 microdeletion syndrome, or infantile polyposis. We believe that On X-ray investigation from was diagnosed significant chest constric- ovarian cystadenomas may be another neoplastic complication of in- tion with short ribs and secondary pulmonary hypoplasia, presumably fantile polyposis, and that our report widens the spectrum of the 10q23 Jeunes syndrome, cardiomegaly and signs of intrauterine pneumonia. microdeletion phenotype. the child was karyotyped with normal result. On Doppler echocardiography - the presence of fetal communications, P02.105 Evidence for genetic heterogeneity of Keutel syndrome aortic coarctation and severe pulmonary hypertension. S. A. Boyadjiev1, J. Liu1, M. Bober2, A. Yuksel3, E. Karaca3, L. Lambie4, K. On the 16-th day of life the status heavily worsened with progressive Bolton4; respiratory insufficiency and prominent bradycardia and following car- 1University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States, 2A.I. Dupont diac arrest. Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, United States, 3Cerrahpasa Medical In this case the prenatal diagnosis is possible if DNA diagnosis is avail- Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Division of Human able, and is recommended ultrasonographic scan of fetus during next Genetics, University of the Witwatersrand,, Johannesburg, South Africa. pregnancy. Keutel syndrome (KS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder char- acterized by abnormal cartilage calcifications, peripheral pulmonary P02.103 is hearing loss a feature of Joubert syndrome? stenosis, midfacial hypoplasia, and brachytelephalangia. Mutations in H. Y. Kroes1, G. A. Van Zanten2, S. A. De Ru2, M. Boon3, G. M. S. Mancini4, M. the MGP gene have been identified in four families. X-linked chondro- S. Van der Knaap5, B. T. Poll-The6, D. Lindhout1; dysplasia punctata (CDPX1) is caused by ARSE deficiency, and has 1Dept. Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, clinical overlap with KS. We present the clinical manifestations of five 2Dept. Otonasopharyngology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, new patients from three families, with a clinical diagnosis of KS. Muta- 3Dept. Child Neurology, University Medical Center, Groningen, Netherlands, tion analysis of the MGP and ARSE was performed. RESULTS: Three 4Dept. Medical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, siblings born to a consanguineous Turkish couple had facial features 5Dept. Child Neurology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, and skeletal features of KS and carried a novel homozygous nonsense Netherlands, 6Dept. Child Neurology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, mutation, c.79G>T (E27X).. A fourth male patient, of Korean ances- Netherlands. try had typical facial features, hearing loss and brachytelephalangia Objective: to asses if hearing loss is a feature of Joubert syndrome and a deletion of the entire ARSE gene was documented. The final (JBS), one of the ciliopathies and therefore possibly associated with female patient of South African descent had similar facial features, hearing loss. brachytelephalangia and laryngeal and tracheal calcifications, but no Study design: we retrospectively collected the audiological data of MGP or ARSE mutations were identified. CONCLUSION: MGP en-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 2 codes vitamin K-dependent matrix Gla protein that acts as a calcifica- P02.108 Identification of mitochondrial mutations in LHON tion inhibitor by repressing BMP2. Despite the complete loss of MGP patients in the Turkish family, the mild clinical manifestations suggest functional M. Kumar1, P. Sharma2, R. Saxena2, R. Dada1; redundancy of the mechanisms preventing cartilage calcification. Clini- 1Lab for Molecular Reproduction & Genetics, Department of Anatomy, All India cal overlap of KS and CDPX1 suggests that MGP and ARSE share Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for a common biological pathway and/or substrate. As neither MGP nor Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. ARSE mutations were identified in the South African patient, we sug- LHON (Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy) is a maternally inherited gest that further genetic heterogeneity exists for KS. disease typically leading to acute bilateral blindness due to loss of optic nerve and papillomacular bundle nerve fibers, predominantly in adult P02.106 clinical heterogeneity in a large family with a mutation males with prevalence estimated to be 1:50,000. Many factors like in LMNA gene mtDNA background, heteroplasmy of mtDNA mutation, nuclear genes, L. Gonzalez-Quereda1, M. Olive2, J. Juan1, E. Verdura1, M. J. Rodriguez1, E. and environmental factors, have been shown to play active roles in Companys1, J. Bautista3, C. Paradas4, M. Baiget1, P. Gallano1; pathogenesis of LHON. It has been well established that optic atrophy 1Genetics. Hospital Sant Pau. Ciberer, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institute of is a very common and sometimes the singular pathological feature in Neuropathology. Hospital Bellvitge, Hospitalet de llobregat, Spain, 3Neurology. mitochondrial disorders. We studied the prevalence of primary LHON Hospital Virgen del Rocio, Sevilla, Spain, 4Neurology. Hospital Virgen del Rocio, mutations and other mitochondrial abnormalities by sequencing the Sevilla, Spain. entire mtDNA coding region. 10 LHON diagnosed cases were enrolled Mutations in LMNA gene, which is located in 1q21.2 and codifies for for this study. DNA was extracted from whole blood samples and PCR twelve exons, can be considered to cause four different groups of were done for coding region of the mitochondrial genome. All frag- overlapping disorders: 1) Diseases of striated muscle, 2) Lipodystro- ments were sequenced in both forward and reverse directions for con- phy syndromes, 3) A peripheral neuropathy and 4) Accelerating aging firmation of any detected variant. Total 31 variants were found in this disorders. study, 12 (38.70%) were nonsynonymous and 19 (61.30%) were syn- We present a large family including four generations, with limb girdle onymous. Our results imply a broader association between potentially muscular dystrophy Type 1B LGMD1B showing a particular heteroge- pathologic mtDNA sequence changes and severity of optic nerve injury neity in the cardiological involvement. Eight patients present limb girdle in LHON. As the percentage of mutant mtDNAs increases, mitochon- muscular dystrophy, mainly in proximal lower muscles and pelvic gir- drial energy production declines and ROS increases. Increased ROS dle. From a cardiological point of view three patients presented sudden acts as a mitogen, but excessive ROS together with reduced energy death and three others have a pacemaker. The genetic analysis was production can lead to apoptosis. We report a fairly small group of performed in genomic DNA of the patients and relatives. All patients patients from a restricted ethnic population and highlight the need for showed a frameshift mutation in exon 1 of LMNA gene in heterozy- analysis of large number of samples to identify primary casual muta- gous state: c.240delG, p.Ala80Ala_fsX16. The mutation has not been tions in Indian population. previously described and 180 control chromosomes were analysed in order to exclude a polymorphism. The analysis of different markers in P02.109 Ligneous conjunctivitis with severe ligneous LMNA locus as well as the absence of mutation in desmin gene (DES) periodontitis and decreased serum plasminogen: the first shows that the disease is caused by the LMNA mutation. Egyptian case report. Four out of the eight fourth generation children presented the mutation M. I. Mostafa1, G. Y. El Kamah1, A. Zayed2, M. El Darouti2; although they remained asymptomatic at the moment of the molecu- 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. lar study. The genetic diagnosis is useful to offer close cardiological Ligneous conjunctivitis (MIM 217090) is a rare autosomal recessive monitoring of the patients in order to prevent a possible sudden death. hereditary disorder. We report a 12 year old girl with dysmorphic fea- Moreover the detection of the mutation allows for genetic counselling tures with both ligneous periodontitis and ligneous conjunctivitis in in the family. association with plasminogen type I deficiency. Intra-oral examination revealed remarkable gingival enlargement, with pinkish, waxy, pain- P02.107 First deletion mutation in SPRED1 in Legius syndrome less masses. The gingival papillae were hyperplastic concealing most S. Kivirikko1, S. Järvinen2, E. Sankila3, J. Ramsey4, F. Mikhail4, L. Messiaen4, of the teeth. Areas of the gingival tissues were covered with a dull and M. Pöyhönen1,2; rather tough whitish yellowish membrane. A thin pseudomembrane 1Department of Clinical Genetics, HUSLAB, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of that could be wiped away overlay the tough part of the membrane. Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Helsinki University Ophthalmic examination revealed mild swelling of both eye lids, white Eye Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Genetics, University of Alabama pseudomembranes on the upper and lower tarsal conjunctivae with at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States. slight involvement of the bulbar conjunctivae and scarring of the tar- The proband was born as a second child of healthy, non-consanguine- sal conjunctivae Diagnosis was based on the clinical and histological ous Caucasian parents at week 35 because of mothers diabetes mel- findings and most importantly, decreased serum level of plasminogen litus. Birth measurements were 4035 g/ 51 cm/ 34 cm. As a newborn type I. ptosis of her left eye was noticed. She was initially referred to a clinical geneticist at the age of 14 months for evaluation of multiple small cafe P02.110 A French experience of limb malformation gene au lait macules (CALM). At the age of 4 years she had 6 CALM over 1 analyses: stringent clinical selection guaranties better cm in diameter and several smaller ones and ptosis of the left eye. She percentage of mutation identification. had no freckling, no neurofibromas and no iris Lisch nodules. Her brain S. Manouvrier-Hanu1,2,3, M. Holder-Espinasse1,2,3, A. Verloes4,5, S. Odent6,7, MRI, speech and motor development are normal. In ophthalmological L. Olivier-Faivre8,9, P. Edery10,11, N. Philip12,13, P. Sarda14,15, D. Lacombe16,17, follow ups her vision has been normal. A. Mezel18, P. Saugier-Veber19, A. Dieux-Coeslier1,2, O. Boute-Bénéjean1,2, C. Her 7-year-old brother has 10 CALM over 1 cm, flat feet, no freck- Vincent-Delorme1,2, F. Petit1,2, J. Andrieux20, M. Buisine21,3, N. Porchet21,3, F. ling, no neurofibromas, no Lisch nodules, a normal brain MRI, normal Escance-Narducci21; milestones, and mild learning difficulties. The 41-year old father has 6 1Clinical Genetics University Hospital, Lille, France, 2Rare disease reference CALM larger than 1.5 cm, a few xanthelasmas under the eyelids, no centre for MCA syndromes “North of France”, Lille, France, 3Lille 2 University, freckling, no neurofibromas, no Lisch nodules and his brain MRI was Lille, France, 4Genetic Department University Hospital Robert Debré, Paris, normal. France, 5Rare disease reference centre for MCA syndromes “Ile de France”, Comprehensive mutation analysis of NF1 was negative. Because of Paris, France, 6Clinical Genetics University Hospital, Rennes, France, 7Rare multiple CALMs SPRED1 mutation analysis was performed but no disease reference centre for MCA syndromes “West of France”, Rennes, mutation was found by direct sequencing of the entire coding region. France, 8Genetic Department University Hospital, Dijon, France, 9Rare disease Further analysis for presence/absence of copy number changes using reference centre for MCA syndromes “East of France”, Dijon, France, 10Genetic MLPA, qPCR and aCGH showed presence of a deletion of the first Department University Hospital, Lyon, France, 11Rare disease reference exon and the promoter region in SPRED1 in this family. This report centre for MCA syndromes “East-Centre of France”, Lyon, France, 12Genetic shows the importance of copy number studies in Legius syndrome. Department University Hospital, Marseille, France, 13Rare disease reference centre for MCA syndromes “Sud-East of France”, Marseille, France, 14Genetic Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  Department University Hospital, Montpellier, France, 15Rare disease reference 3Department of Medical Genetics. Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences. centre for MCA syndromes “Languedoc-Roussillon Region”, Montpellier, University Hospital, Gent, Belgium. France, 16Genetic Department University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 17Rare Introduction: Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is characterized by vascu- disease reference centre for MCA syndromes “Sud-West of France”, Bordeaux, lar and skeletal manifestations, with aggressive arterial aneurysms France, 18Paediatric orthopaedics, University hospital, Lille, France, 19Genetics and high incidence of pregnancy-related complications. Autosomal Department University hospital, Rouen, France, 20Cytogenetics Laboratory dominant inheritance pattern with clinical variability. No genotype-phe- University Hospital, Lille, France, 21Molecular Genetics University Hospital, Lille, notype correlation. France. Objective: Clinical and molecular characterization of four patients with Our objective was to evaluate the consequences of accurate clinical LDS. selection in the mutation identification for genes implicated in limb de- Results: Three patients are members of the same family and the fourth velopment patient is an isolated case. All of them were sent to consultation with Patients: 403 DNAs from index patients (30% familial) were sent to our Marfan syndrome diagnosis. All of them have aortic root dilatation, with laboratory with a diagnosis and a request for molecular analyses. progressive course. Two of them required surgery. One patient also Methods: For each syndrome, we classified the cases as “typical”, has dilatation of intracranial arteries. All of them have marfanoid-like “atypical” or “excluded”. 451 PCR-sequence of exonic and flanking habitus with no true dolichostenomelia, severe scoliosis, and normal intronic regions as well as MLPA or Q-PCR were performed for each ophtalmologicall evaluation. Two of them have bifid uvula. Two pa- analysed gene (133 TBX5, 83 SALL4, 69 TP63, 47 SALL1, 37 LMX1B, tients have atopic dermatitis. TGFBR2 mutations have been identified 28 CDMP1, 22 ROR2, 13 TBX3, 11 IHH, 4 TBX4, 4 ZRS). in both families (one with autosomal dominant inheritance-c.1273A>G Results : 192 cases were considered “typical”, 164 “atypical” and 47 exon 5 (p.M425V); and the other case is de novo-c.1583G>T exon 7 “excluded”. (p.R528H)). All patients have been sent for strict follow up by cardiolo- 139 (34.5%) deleterious anomalies were identified. 134 among “typi- gist, total body angioMRI, and given risk assessments of pregnancy. cal” (70%), 5 among “atypical” (3%), and none among “excluded” cas- Conclusions: 1) Loeys Dietz syndrome must be considered in the dif- es. In the atypical group referred for Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), four ferential diagnosis of Marfan syndrome. 2) An early diagnosis is impor- cases were mutated for SALL4 and one carried a TBX3-5 deletion. tant due to the natural history of this condition (worse prognosis of aor- Further tests (Array-CGH or molecular analyses) lead to a diagnosis in tic root dilatation-dissection, risk of uterine rupture during pregnancy 22 additional cases. The final diagnostic rate was 53%. etc). 3) Clinical variability is present in the family described suggesting The mutation rate differed among diseases: 95% Nail-Patella pa- other modifying genetic factors. 4) The identification of mutations in tients were considered “typical”, 83% of whom were LMX1B mutated. TGFBR2 in our patients allows adequate genetic counselling. 5) To our When typical (47 %), 81% HOS patients were carrying TBX5 muta- knowledge this is the first report of LDS in Spanish patients. tion. CDMP1 mutation rate reached 94% in typical patients with type C brachydactyly or Grebe syndrome. TP63 associated diseases were P02.113 mitochondrial 4917 A>G mutation in a iranian Family more difficult to diagnose (41% typical) and a mutation was identified with Long QT Syndrome (LQTs) in 46%. M. Heidari, M. Khatami; Conclusion: an accurate clinical diagnosis allows improving mutation Department of Biology, Science School, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran, Yazd, detection rate for limb malformation genes. Islamic Republic of Iran. LQTS are inherited or acquired disorders of repolarization identified P02.111 congenital muscular Dystrophy associated with a de by the electrocardiographic (EKG) abnormalities of prolongation of the novo LmNA variant: Pathogenic mutation or polymorphism? QT interval corrected for heart rate (QTs) usually above 460 -480 ms. S. G. Mehta1, E. Graham2, J. Hudson2, D. Booth3, K. Bushby4; Several reports indicate a relationship between mitochondrial DNA 1Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United mutation and heart disorders. We identified a homoplasmic 4917 A>G Kingdom, 2Northern Molecular Genetics Service, Newcastle, United Kingdom, mutation in the Mitochondrial ND2 gene in 14 members of a family with 3Department of Paediatrics, Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, Norwich, United Long QT syndrome by PCR-SSCP. This Mutation causes a change of Kingdom, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle, United Kingdom. Asn to Asp (N150D Missense mutation). In this study, the effects of Aims: To describe a newly emerging congenital muscular dystrophy this Missense mutation upon transmembrane helixes were assayed by phenotype associated with a de novo LMNA variant means of SOSUI System (transmembrane helix prediction).The result Methods: Extensive genetic, histological, neurological and radiological of this prediction showed that N150D mutation caused to decrease investigations were undertaken. nine to eight transmembrane helixes. Thus, this mutation might trigger Results: A term baby, born with bilateral severe positional talipes, was syncope or sudden death with emotional stress and exercise. investigated after initial respiratory distress, developed an oxygen re- Key words: Long QT syndrome, mt DNA, Muration, SSCP. quirement and was eventually ventilated due to progressive respira- tory muscle weakness. Central hypotonia was noted initially, but then P02.114 was shown to have absent reflexes and profound axial hypotonia yet madelung’s deformity in a girl with a novel GNAS mutation milder peripheral hypotonia and muscle weakness. There was facial P. Rump1, J. D. H. Jongbloed1, R. B. van der Luijt2; weakness as well. There was progressive right atrial enlargement 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University on echocardiogram. Muscle CK was 1243 U/L , brain MRI and nerve of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of Medical Genetics, conduction studies were unremarkable, muscle biopsy showed only Division of Biomedical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, mild myopathic change. LMNA mutation analysis identified a de novo Netherlands. heterozygous change that is likely to be associated with the severe Madelung’s deformity is an uncommon congenital anomaly of the presentation. This patient died after developing seizures and interstitial wrist. It is characterized by a decreased carpal angle with a triangular pneumonitis as an end stage event. arrangement of the carpal bones, a shortened and curved radius, a Conclusion: LMNA mutations can cause a severe congenital muscular widened distal radioulnar joint and a posterior displacement of the ulna dystrophy that have been hitherto under recognised. Functional stud- head. The deformity is progressive and usually seen in adolescent ies and further reports of a similar presentation with the same variant girls. Although some asymmetry can occur, the anomaly is typically may help provide proof of pathogenicity. Awareness of this phenotype bilateral and symmetrical. The presumed cause is a partial early fusion may allow increasing diagnosis of this rare presentation in the future. of the ulnar side of the radial epiphysis. Turner syndrome and Leri- Weill dyschondrosteosis are disorders most commonly associated P02.112 Loeys Dietz syndome: clinical and molecular with Madelung’s deformity. Here we present a 14-year-old girl with a characterization of 4 spanish patients Madelung’s deformity, mild mental retardation, some dysmorphic fa- V. López-González1, M. Ballesta-Martínez1, E. Guillén-Navarro1, F. Escudero- cial features and a relative short stature. She also has a brachydac- Cárceles2, B. Loeys3; tyly type E, with brachymetacarpia and brachytelephalangy. Standard 1Unidad de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Universitario chromosome analysis, array-CGH and analysis of the SHOXab gene Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 2Unidad de Cardiología Infantil. Servicio showed no abnormalities. However, we did identify a novel and de de Pediatría. Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, novo mutation (c.476T>C; p.Val159Ala) in exon 6 of the GNAS gene, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  the gene associated with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. To our Table 1: Yield of molecular studies in knowledge, this is the first report of Madelung’s deformity in a patient our series of patients with marfanoid features with a GNAS mutation. Total number of Clinical Molecular study Result patients referred diagnosis performed P02.115 mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly, cleft FBN1+ 55 (81%) palate, and anomalous ears MFS 87 68 Pending 7 (10%) M. A. Lines1, S. Douglas2, M. Guion-Almeida3, Y. Alanay4, G. Utine4, D. Böhm5, Negative 6 (9%) A. Grix6, C. Nava7, D. Wieczorek8, L. Huang2, J. Kohlhase5, G. Baujat7, D. 154 FBN1+ 2 Bulman2, K. Boycott1; 22.7% TGFBR1 3 1Department of Genetics, Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, MF-like 36 22 Pending 5 (22.7%) Canada, 2Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 3Clinical Negative 12 (54.5%) Genetics, Hospital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, University of Săo Paulo, Săo Paulo, Brazil, 4Clinical Genetics Unit, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 5Center for Human Genetics Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, Table 2: Evaluation of clinical data (following Ghent Nosology) 6Department of Genetics, The Permanente Medical Group, Sacramento, CA, after molecular diagnosis of FBN1+ United States, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Université Paris Descartes, Family history Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 8Institute für Humangenetik, FBN1+ Only 1 > criterion and involvement (2nd > criterion) Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. of other organs/systems positive negative Mandibulofacial dysostosis (MFD) is an inborn error of craniofacial development affecting structures derived from the first and second 57 Cardiovascular 7 branchial arches. Treacher Collins syndrome is the prototypical form index 15 Skeletal 6 8 7 (7.8%) of MFD, however, MFD is also a feature of several other syndromes cases Ophtalmological 2 whose genetic basis remain largely unknown. Two previously published reports describe seven patients with a novel MFD phenotype charac- P02.117 the case report of causal mutation of neonatal marfan terized by microcephaly, cleft palate, and anomalous ears (Guion-Al- syndrome meida et al, Clin Dysmorphol 15(3):171-4; Wieczorek et al, Am J Med H. Slavikova1, E. Prusova1, A. Baxova2, A. Boday1; Genet A 149A(5):837-43); we believe these reports describe the same 1P&R lab a.s., Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2First Faculty of Medicine of Charles phenotype, and have provisionally termed this conditon ‘MFD with mi- University, Prague, Czech Republic. crocephaly’ (MFDM). Building upon these earlier reports, and incorpo- Neonatal Marfan syndrome is a rare and serious illness of connec- rating five additional cases, we present an updated clinical description tive tissue with atypical features of Marfan syndrome. It is a hereditary of the MFDM phenotype. Cardinal features of this condition are short disease, but its neonatal form has a spontaneous mutation tendency. stature, developmental delay, microcephaly, metopic craniosynostosis, Neonatal Marfan syndrome also differs from classical form not only in midface hypoplasia, micrognathia, and cleft palate. A highly specific certain symptoms, but in higher mortality rates during young age. Life ear phenotype is also observed, characterized by small, low-set ears, span of patients with neonatal Marfan syndrome is less than 2 years, preauricular tags, auditory canal stenosis, and hypoplastic lobe/tragus. and it depends on the severity of cardiovascular complications. Other, inconsistently observed anomalies include cardiac septal de- Mutation analysis of neonatal form is different from the classical form, fects, polydactyly, choanal atresia, and epilepsy. which is due to mutations in all 65 exons of the gene FBN1. Screening We are presently studying the molecular basis of this condition. is associated with ,,neonatal region“ of the FBN1 gene, that includes TCOF1 mutations have been excluded in several probands, confirm- exons 24 to 32. Direct sequencing of these exons allows quick detec- ing that MFDM is both genetically and clinically distinct from Treacher tion of mutation. Collins syndrome. Genomic microarray delineated a complex de novo We described the case of this rare form of Marfan syndrome. Our pa- rearrangement in one proband; this individual has a microdeletion of tient after birth showed a clear phenotype: tall stature, thin body build, an agenic region of 4p12, in conjunction with a deletion/duplication long arms, legs, fingers and toes and other symptoms typical for neo- situated at 17q21.31. The latter region contains a number of appealing natal Marfan syndrome. positional candidates for the causative gene underlying this condition. Based on the patient‘s phenotype without family history, we have de- cided to do molecular genetic analysis of this region of FBN1 gene. We P02.116 molecular studies in patients with marfanoid features detected mutation in exon 29 and we confirmed the neonatal Marfan V. A. Seidel1,2, M. del Campo2,3; syndrome. Heart failure was the reason of death of our patient in the 1IMIM, Barcelona, Spain, 2Programa de Medicina Molecular y Genética, second month after birth. Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Unidad de Genética, Departamento de Ciencias Experimentales, Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain. P02.118 Marshall syndrome in a nine-year-old Turkish girl The Marfan Syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant disorder A. G. Zamani1, M. S. Yıldırım1, A. Karalezli2, A. Yıldırım3; caused by mutations in the fibrillin-1 (FBN1) gene. Ghent criteria are 1Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, commonly followed for the clinical diagnosis of MFS. Konya, Turkey, 2Baskent University, Konya Practice and Research Center, The purpose of our study is to evaluate the diagnostic approach to Department of Ophthalmology, Konya, Turkey, 3Public Health Physician, MFS. We have analyzed the medical histories of 154 patients with Şükriye Sert Village Clinic, Konya, Turkey. “marfanoid features” referred to the Marfan multidisciplinary clinic. The Marshall syndrome is a rare, autosomal dominant trait which is charac- results are shown in tables 1&2. terized by ocular abnormalities, early sensorineural hearing loss, high Several observations are relevant: Altogether 5 “new” mutations have myopia and a distinct craniofacial anomalies. been found, 2 in the group not fulfilling the Ghent criteria (MF-like). We present a nine-year-old girl who was the second child of a non- On the other hand, 3 cases with mutation in the TGFBR1 gene were consanguineous couple. She was referred to our department for dys- detected, thus confirming the suspicion of the Loeys-Dietz Syndrome. morphic appearence. Her karyotype was found 46.XX. In addition, 7.8% of our confirmed MFS cases would not have a diag- She was diagnosed with Marshall syndrome based on the clinical fea- nosis of MFS if molecular analysis had not been performed. tures of a depressed nasal bridge, anteverted nares, hypertelorism, We conclude that in patients with “marfanoid features”, molecular stud- short strature, micrognatia, high palate, and ophthalmologic anoma- ies are relevant to confirm or sometimes change our clinical diagnosis, lies. Ophthalmologic examination revealed cataracts, strabismus and and particularly for reproductive counseling and evaluation of relatives severe degenerative myopia. Audiologic test showed sensorineural at risk. Finally, our experience contributes to expanding the clinical hearing loss. Her mother had osteoporosis, sensorineural hearing loss phenotype of FBN1 and other genes´ mutations, and may elicit minor and severe myopia. It was evaluated the result of decreased pene- revisions to the current Ghent criteria. trance. Marshall syndrome proceeds variable ocular, otologic and skeletal symptoms so these patients require regular folllow up to insure early detection of problems.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.119 mEcP2 gene duplication in a czech family with four 5IRCCS Fondazione C. Mondino, Italy. affected boys Recently, submicroscopic deletions of the 5q14.3 region have been M. Simandlova, M. Vlčkova, P. Hedvicakova, M. Hancarova, A. Vazna, Z. described in patients with severe mental retardation, stereotypic move- Sedlacek, M. Havlovicova; ments, epilepsy and cerebral malformations. Further delineation of a Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of critical region of overlap in these patients pointed to MEF2C as the Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. responsible gene. This finding was further reinforced by the identifica- Duplications of a part of Xq28 involving the methyl CpG binding protein tion of a nonsense mutation in a patient with a similar phenotype. In 2 (MECP2) gene have been described in male patients with severe brain, MEF2C is essential for early neurogenesis, neuronal migration mental disability, delayed milestones, absence of language, hypoto- and differentiation. Here we present two additional patients with se- nia replaced by spasticity and retractions, and recurrent severe infec- vere MR, autism spectrum disorder and epilepsy, carrying a very small tions. We present a family with four affected boys in two generations. deletion encompassing the MEF2C gene. This finding strengthens the Three of the boys died in childhood due to respiratory infections. The role of this gene in severe MR, and enables further delineation of the proband, an eight-year-old boy, was found to carry a submicroscopic clinical phenotype. duplication of approximately 1.25 Mb in Xq28 including the MECP2 gene. He suffered from severe mental retardation, epilepsy and au- P02.122 melnick-Fraser syndrome in Four Generations tistic features. The duplicated region contained about 56 protein-cod- R. Tajbakhsh1, B. Bozorgmehr2, J. Abedi Asl3; ing genes. These included 13 genes where loss-of-function mutations 1Golestan Medical University, Gorgan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad- are known to cause X-linked disease. The MECP2 gene is essential Najmabadi Genetic center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran Medical in neuronal development, and is the only gene in the aberration of University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. our patient where duplications have a known phenotypic effect. The Brancio-Oto-Renal (BOR) Syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant mother of the patient, his maternal grandmother and aunt also car- disorder.The association of branchial arch anomalies (Ear malforma- ried the duplication. All of them were asymptomatic. The mother and tions, preauricular pits,branchial fistula) ,hearing loss and renal hypo- the maternal grandmother of the patient showed skewed X-inactivation plasia.The hearing loss is variable cunductive , mixed forms,and sen- (15:85 and 7:93, respectively). In addition, the proband and his mother, sorineural cause usually in lower frequencies from 20 to 100 db.The but not the maternal grandmother and aunt, carried a duplication of the more severe disiase ,the grater degree of hearing loss patients have. terminal 0.5 Mb of Xp. This de novo aberration most likely exerted no Renal anomalies have included: bilateral renal dysplasia,bilateral poly- phenotypical effect, in accord with other published cases, and the phe- cystic kidneys and various malformations of collecting system which notype observed in the family was most likely attributable solely to the end to chronic renal failure.We are repoting four generations with dif- duplication of the MECP2 region. This work was supported by grants ferent type of renal anomalies and hearing loss in a large family with MZOFNM2005 and CHERISH (EC FP7 223692). 14 affected patients.They have variable expression of BOR syndrome, which confirmed by detection of EYA1 gene.For one of families we did P02.120 Duplication of Xq28, including MECP2, in a boy with the prenatal diagnosis becuse they had two affected offsprigs. de novo cryptic unbalanced t(X;6)(q28;q27) translocation M. Krajewska-Walasek, A. Gutkowska, M. Juszczak, M. Pelc, D. Jurkiewicz, P02.123 Duplications of 17q12-q21 in patients with mental M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, M. Kugaudo, A. Jezela-Stanek, K. H. Chrzanowska, retardation, growth disturbances and facial dysmorphism E. Ciara; L. L. Klitten1,2, R. S. Møller1,2, B. Dallapiccola3, M. C. Digilio3, H. C. Mefford4, R. Department of Medical Genetics, The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, C. M. Hennekam5, N. Tommerup1, H. Hjalgrim2; Warsaw, Poland. 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, University of Duplication of the distal long arm of the X chromosome is a rare chro- Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, mosomal abnormality. It may result from an intrachromosomal dupli- Denmark, 3Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS Rome, Italy, 4Department cation or an unbalanced translocation with an autosome or with a Y of Pediatrics, Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, chromosome. WA, United States, 5Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Centre, We report a case of de novo duplication of Xq28-qter resulting from University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. translocation onto the long arm of chromosome 6 in a boy with severe Purpose: In recent years, small genomic rearrangements of 17q12 and developmental delay, microcephaly, axial hypotonia, spasticity of upper 17q21.31 have been described in patients with autism, cognitive im- and lower limbs, seizures, and severe recurrent infections. Apart from pairment/ mental retardation, renal disease, epilepsy, and/or growth an open mouth and protruding tongue no other specific dysmorphic retardation. We present three unrelated patients with partially overlap- facial signs were seen. Feeding difficulties with poor sucking, general- ping duplications in the 17q12-q21.32 region. ized hypotonia and cryptorchidism were observed during the neonatal Methods: Microarray analysis (Affymetrix SNP_6.0, BAC array, or oligo period. Prader-Willi syndrome was excluded in differential diagnosis. array) was performed on purified DNA from peripheral lymphocytes. Routine cytogenetic analysis results were normal. Using FISH, MLPA, FISH analysis was done on cultured lymphocytes according to stan- and array CGH (Affymetrix Whole Genome 2,7M Array), we identified dard protocols. and characterized a terminal duplication of chromosome X at q28-qter Results: We identified three unrelated patients with partially overlap- (approx. 3.346 Mb in size) involving MECP2 and a 6q terminal deletion ping de novo duplications in the 17q12-q21.32 region. All patients were with the breakpoint in q27 (approx. 1.89 MB). This is the second report investigated with genome wide array platforms, showing sizes of the of a boy with a cryptic unbalanced Xq-autosome translocation. duplications of 1.5 Mb, 6.6 Mb, and 7.7 Mb respectively. Though the Subtelomeric 6q27 deletion due to relatively mild phenotypic presenta- patients had diverse clinical features as well, all presented with mental tion is difficult to recognize clinically. Disomy for the Xq28 chromosome retardation, facial dysmorphism and growth disturbances. region yields a more characteristic phenotype, however, so that a clini- Conclusion: We report three patients with mental retardation, growth cally oriented FISH study using subtelomeric probes or MLPA can eas- disturbances and facial dysmorphism carrying partially overlapping du- ily detect a cryptic rearrangement. plications of the gene-rich locus on chromosome 17q12-q21.32. We We strongly recommend the use of MLPA as the first screening method add new clinical features to the variable phenotype of 17q12-q21.32 for the detection of copy number aberrations in such patients because duplications. of its cost-effectiveness. P02.124 screening for common submicroscopic deletions P02.121 Refining the phenotype associated with MEF2C /duplications in Bulgarian mR/DD patients haploinsufficiency R. V. Vazharova1, S. Bichev1, I. Bradinova1, E. Simeonov2, V. Bojinova3, I. H. Van Esch1, F. Novara2, S. Beri3, R. Giorda3, S. Nageshappa1, F. Darra4, B. Kremensky1; dalla Bernardina4, O. Zuffardi2,5; 1Medical University Sofia, Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Genetica Medica, Università Genetics Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital Alexandrovska, di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Biologia Molecolare, IRCCS “E. Medea”, Bosisio Parini, Pediatric Clinic, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3University Hospital of Neurology and Lecco, Italy, 4Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Policlinico GB Rossi, Verona, Italy, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  Psychiatry “St Naum”, Sofia, Bulgaria. P02.126 Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification Introduction: Since the discovery that humans possess 46 chromo- (mLPA) analysis of subtelomeric chromosome rearrangements somes and association of different aneuploidies with specific pheno- in individuals with idiopathic mental retardation. types karyotyping was rapidly introduced into workup of patients with A. P. Marques-de-Faria1, C. R. Lincoln-de-Carvalho2, D. R. B. Belgini3, M. P. mental retardation (MR) and birth defects. With the introduction of fluo- de Mello4; rescence in situ hybridization the detection of submicroscopic chro- 1Departamento de Genética Médica - Faculdade de Ciências Médicas mosomal imbalance became possible. Methods as MLPA, QF-PCR - UNICAMP, 2Departamento de Genética Médica – Faculdade de Ciências and array based CGH blur the boundaries between karyotyping and Médicas – UNICAMP, 3Laboratório de Genética Humana do Centro de Biologia molecular genetics. Submicroscopic deletions and duplications are Molecular e Engenharia Genética (CBMEG) – UNICAMP, 4Laboratório de observed in at least 3-5% of patients with variable degree of MR/DD. Genética Humana do Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética MLPA is shown to be a rapid, inexpensive alternative of FISH, allowing (CBMEG) – UNICAMP, Campinas,SP, Brazil. simultaneous screening of multiple specific submicroscopic deletions/ duplications. INTRODUCTION: Described in approximately 5% to 7% of individuals Material and methods: A cohort of 30 preselected patients with varying with unexplained MR, subtelomeric rearrangements have emerged as degree of developmental delay or MR was screened for subtelomeric a significant cause of both idiopathic and familial mental retardation. imbalances using MLPA. The Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) tech- Results: In this pilot study we started screening for known disease nique has been considered as a suitable alternative to identify these related microdeletion/duplications of our patients using MRC’s MLPA anomalies. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the contribution of subtelo- kit P245-A2. In patients showing normal results additional testing for meric rearrangements among the causes of idiopathic MR using the subtelomeric rearrangements using P070-B1 was performed. Patients MLPA technique. METHODS: 141 unrelated patients were selected were pre-selected by karyotyping and when needed by metabolic based on clinical criteria; all of them had previously been subjected screening. Using P245-A2 we found 3 (10%) aberrations - 2 deletions to karyotyping and molecular analysis for fragile X syndrome. DNA and 1 duplication. Screening for subtelomeric regions revealed aber- samples were extracted and purified from peripheral blood leukocytes. rations in 10 patients (43%) - 7 deletions and 3 duplications. High de- They were tested using specific subtelomeric MLPA kits SALSA P036- tection rate in our pilot study could be explained by the strong clinical E1 and P070-A2 HUMAN TELOMERE according to manufacturer’s selection of patients. instructions. The amplification products were separated by capillary electrophoresis using an ABI PRISM 310 automated sequencer and P02.125 cHERisH - improving Diagnoses of mental Retardation size standard. MLPA data were extracted and analysed by GeneS- in children in Eastern Europe and central Asia through Genetic can®, Genotyper® and specific Microsoft Excel® spreadsheet for characterisation and Bioinformatics/statistics each kit. RESULTS: Until now, 91 patients with idiopathic MR were C. Graziano1, E. Bonora1, P. Magini1, J. Baptista1, G. Tortora1, S. Miccoli1, P. analyzed and four subtelomeric deletions/duplications were identified C. Patsalis2, J. A. Hettinger2, V. Anastasiadou2, L. Kousoulidou2, A. Kurg3, K. (4.4%): one case with a 1p36 deletion and one with a 6p deletion, be- Männik3, S. Parkel3, O. Zilina3, M. Nõukas3, E. Õiglane-Slik3, V. Kučinskas4, sides two cases with a combined deletion/duplication, involving 5p/9p J. Kasnauskienè4, I. Lebedev5, A. Latos-Bieleńska6, M. Badura-Stronka6, and 4p/12p regions, respectively. These subtelomeric rearrangements B. Budny6, Z. Sedlacek7, M. Havlovicova7, M. Vlckova7, M. Hancarova7, T. had not been previously identified by conventional technique and FISH Sarkisian8, D. Babikyan8, S. Midyan8, L. A. Livshits9, A. Cuppoletti10, G. Romeo1; tests are being provided in order to confirm them. CONCLUSION: 1U.O. Genetica Medica, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Department Subtelomeric rearrangements must be investigated in individuals with of Cytogenetics and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and unexplained MR and MLPA is a rapid and effective technique for de- Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology University tecting these abnormalities. of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk Scientific P02.127 A New case of metaphyseal Acroscyphodysplasia Centre, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 6Department of Medical Genetics Poznań M. Gabaldo1, F. Benedicenti1, C. Castellan1, F. Stanzial1, G. Canepa2,3; University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 7Department of Biology and 1Servizio di Consulenza Genetica dell’Alto Adige, Ospedale Generale di Medical Genetics Charles University 2nd Medical School, Prague, Czech Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy, 2Primario Ortopedico Emerito, Ospedale di Merate, Republic, 8Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Merate (LC), Italy, 3Scuola di Specializzazione in Genetica Medica, Università Armenia, 9IMBG National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine, di Siena, Siena, Italy. 10Molecular Stamping (SME), Trento, Italy. Metaphyseal acroscyphodysplasia (MASD), also known as Bellini’s The CHERISH consortium, funded by EU FP7 under grant agreement metaphyseal dysplasia, is a particularly rare skeletal dysplasia with #223692, is made mainly of Eastern European countries. It aims at presumed autosomal recessive inheritance. So far, no disease-genes creating a large collection of patients affected with developmental de- have been identified. The main clinical features of MASD are dishar- lay (syndromic and non-syndromic). The project will enhance the diag- monic dwarfism, micromelia predominating in the lower limbs, severe nostic possibilities for these patients and gather epidemiologic data on brachydactyly, cranio-facial dysmorphism, scoliosis, flexion contracture the genetic causes of mental retardation in Eastern Europe. General of knees, and mental retardation. The diagnosis is based on typical information and updates can be retrieved through http://www.cherish- radiographic findings such as cupped metaphyses (‘scypho-’ comes project.eu/. from the word ‘scyphus’, meaning cup) and cone-shaped epiphyses During the first year of the project, partners started the collection of clini- of long bones, especially appreciable at the knees, coxa valga, genua cal data using a specific questionnaire. So far, data of more than 400 pa- vara, short and broad femurs, tibial bowing, mild humeral shortening, tients have been uploaded on the dedicated database. Search of cryptic short metacarpals, metatarsals and phalanges, and advanced bone chromosome rearrangements is carried out through array-CGH or SNP- age. CGH analysis in the laboratories of University of Bologna and University We report the case of a 12-year-old boy with clinical and radiological of Tartu. Candidate genes from aberrant regions will be sequenced in features that are consistent with the diagnosis of MASD (dwarfism, patients with similar phenotypes. Families with X-linked mental retarda- short limbs with marked acromelic shortness, coxa valga, cup-shaped tion are being analyzed, on a first approach, through an all-exons X-chro- metaphyses and cone-shaped epiphyses of knees, flexion contracture mosome array, available in the Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genet- of knees, cranio-facial dysmorphisms, and mental retardation). The ics, while the laboratory of Poznan University of Medical Sciences will family history was negative for mental retardation, short stature and analyze specific genes on the X chromosome for patients with normal other signs suggestive of skeletal dysplasia. Although the parents de- array results. In sporadic cases with normal array analysis and in families nied consanguinity, they were both born in the same small town, which with apparent autosomal dominant inheritance, sequence analysis of the counts only 11,000 inhabitants. So far this is the 14th case of MASD SYNGAP1 and STXBP1 genes is performed in Bologna. Special atten- described in the literature. tion is dedicated to siblings affected with mental retardation born from consanguineous parents, who are suitable for homozygosity mapping. The final results on the first cohort of up to 100 families will be dis- cussed in details.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 7 P02.128 Micro syndrome: report of a two-year old boy P02.130 C677T and A1298C mutations in M. S. Yildirim, A. Zamani, B. Bozkurt; methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene in mothers of Selcuk University, KONYA, Turkey. children with trisomy 21 Micro syndrome is a rare, severe autosomal recessive disorder and S. Bucerzan1, R. Popp2, A. P. Trifa2, C. Al-Khzouz1, P. Grigorescu-Sido1; characterized by microcephaly, microcornea, congenital cataract, 1First Pediatric Clinic - UMF „Iuliu Hatieganu“, Cluj, Romania, 2Department of mental retardation, optic atrophy, and hypogenitalism.Third child of a Medical Genetics - U.M.F.“Iuliu Hatieganu”, Cluj, Romania. consanguineous couple was referred to our clinic because of facial introduction. Deficiency of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase dysmorphism and neurodevelopmental delay. Two death children in (MTHFR) causes a deficiency of the active metabolic form of folic acid. this family were also thought to be affected. Physical examination of This deficiency is cited as a promoting factor of chromosomal non- 2-year-old boy revaled that he had microcephaly, hypertrichosis on his disjunction in gametogenesis, with increased risk for the appearance forehead, prominent nasal root, thin and overhanging upper lip, short of aneuploidies, therefore folic acid therapy could interfere with their philtrum, large prominent ears, high arched palate, a pointed chin, con- prophylaxis. The study aims to evaluate the prevalence of C677T and tracture at the hands, obesity,mental-motor retardation and hypotonia. A1298C mutations in MTHFR gene for mothers of children with trisomy His weight was 15 kg, length 88 cm(25th centile), and OFC 47 cm (10th 21. centile). Chromosomal analysis showed a normal 46,XY karyotype. He Patients and methods. The study group consisted of 58 mothers of had congenital hypothyroidism. children with trisomy 21, ages between 18- 47 at the time of gesta- Ocular findigs are the most reliable diagnostic findings of Micro syn- tion, who were registered at the Genetic Pathology Centre of the First drome. Our patient had ophthalmologic signs include: microphthalmia, Paediatric Clinic, in the range 2008-2009. DNA analyse was performed microcornea, congenital cataract, bilateral mild ptosis, and severe cor- using a PCR-RFLP technique. tical vision impairment. Cataract surgery was performed at 7th month. Results. The two mutation prevalence (the evaluated group, in com- Hypogenitalism is an another major feature of this sydrome. This case parison with other studies), is presented in the table below: had micropenis, cryptorchidism and small scrotum. Urether dilatation and bladder diverticul detected by ultrasonogrphy(US). His cryptorchi- the dism confirmed by US,too stuppia L. Acacio G.L. Kohli U. mutation present Neurological examination showed hypotonia. He had no seizures but (italy,2002) (Brasil,2005) (India,2008) study electroencephalogram revealed left hemisphere asymmetry with ce- Homozygous c667t 8.6 % 44 % 7.1 % 0 rebral bioelectric dysfunction. Brain MRI showed enlarged lateral and Homozygous A1298C 13.7% 4.3 % third ventricles, hypoplasia of corpus callosum and cerebellum in both All Homozygous 22.3% 11.4 % hemispheres and hypotrophy of the white matter. The symptoms and compound features of our case compared with the previous Micro syndrome cas- 18.9% 27.1 % 28 % heterozygous es in literature. P02.129 How a non-compaction left ventricle detect a conclusions. Our study, a priority on a national scale, reveals im- monosomy 1p36 syndrome portant differences regarding the prevalence of the two mutations, in G. Doros1, V. Stan2, M. Gafencu2, M. Puiu2, G. Miclaus3, B. Zoica2; comparison with studies conducted on other population groups. For a 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „V. Babes“, Timisoara, Romania, reliable assessment of their role, studies conducted on larger groups 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 3Neuromed Clinic, compared to control groups are necessary. Timisoara, Romania. Aim: To present how a 1p36 monosomy syndrome was detected, due P02.131 myhre syndrome: report of three unrelated patients to a cardiac examination, after many years of neurologic follow up. Our E. F. Belligni, E. Biamino, C. Molinatto, G. Baldassarre, N. Chiesa, A. patient, a 10 yo. boy, was treated for recurrent seizures; he associated Marinosci, G. B. Ferrero, M. Silengo; right small cerebral cavernoma and arachnoid cyst. From birth he had Department of Pediatrics, Torino, Italy. distinct facial features and intellectual disability. Myhre syndrome (MS) is a very rare condition mainly characterized Material and methods: This patient was sent for a cardiologic examina- by short stature with rhizomelia, muscular hypertrophy in males, a tion due to a muscular hypotrophy. We performed clinical examination, non-progressive joint stiffness, mixed deafness, hypertension and a ECG, Echocardiography and angio MRI. A genetic examination was peculiar facial appearance consisting in midfacial hypoplasia, short done. philtrum, thin lips and prognathism. Sixteen sporadic cases (11 males Results: No cardiac murmur and normal ECG was registered. Non- and 5 females) have been reported so far. The higher predominance compaction of the left ventricle (NCLV), with deep trabeculations and of males and the milder manifestation in the females suggested an deep inter-trabecular spaces were detected in apical, mid ventricular X-linked recessive inheritance, even if a de novo dominant mutation inferior and lateral wall; normal ejection fraction. Angio MRI confirmed is still a possibility. Here we describe 3 unrelated patients (2 females the diagnose. The laboratory tests were normal, so a muscular pathol- and 1 male), fitting the clinical diagnosis of MS. One female patient ogy was excluded. Genetic examination mentioned a normal karyo- presented megacolon, whilst the male developed multiple neoplastic type. In the context of particular face, with deep-set eyes, straight eye- lesions. Both these striking clinical findings haven’t been previously brows, midface hypoplasia, flat nose and associated cardiomyopathy, reported in this condition, allowing to expand the clinical phenotype of mental delay, seizures and cerebral tumors, an extended FISH test MS. Moreover we performed array-CGH analysis in the patients, but it was performed. The suspicion of monosomy 1p36 syndrome was con- gave normal results in all of them. firmed. Conclusions: Muscular hypotrophy in a patient with particular face and P02.132 myotonia congenita (mc) in Russia: the two frequent complex neurologic modifications conduct to a cardiac exploration, be- mutations in cLcN1 gene allows to reveal 14% mutant cause a muscular disease was suspected. Left ventricular non-com- chromosomes of patients with mc. paction was detected; it is a rare cardiomyopathy, present in muscular E. Ivanova1, V. Fedotov2, E. Dadali1, G. Rudenskaya1, S. Kurbatov2; diasease, which were excluded and in other genetic syndromes. In 1Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, the clinical context , a monosomy 1p36 syndrome was suspected and 2VOCDC Genetic Conseling, Medical Diagnostic Center, Voronezh, Russian confirmed by FISH. NCLV when present, the genetic involvement has Federation. to be searched. Myotonia congenita (MC) is a hereditary muscle disorder character- ized by delayed relaxation of skeletal muscle after voluntary contrac- tion (myotonia). MC is caused by mutations in the skeletal muscle chloride channel gene CLCN1 (7q35). The study group was consisted of 61 unrelated patients (12 dominant, 9 recessive and 40 sporadic cases) with myotonia revealed by clinical examination. We analyzed all DNA samples by direct sequensing of exons 3, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 22 of CLCN1 gene and detected Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  16 different mutations for 29 patients (21 patients had one mutant al- normal. Genetic testing of PMP22, MPZ, GJB1, SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 17 lele and 8 ones had two mutant alleles). Seven of them have not been and mitochondrial mutations m.3243A>G and m.8993T>C/G revealed described earlier (c.912A>C, c.1024C>T, c.1699A>C, c.1679T>C, no abnormality. Direct PCR at the DMPK locus revealed expansions of c.1720C>A, c.2555_2558delCCTT, c.2284+9_2284+10insg). Other approximately 53 and 71 CTG repeats. mutations were brought in mutation data bases (Leu198Val, Thr268Met, Our patient’s clinical presentation will be discussed and compared to Phe413Cys, c.1447_1450del, Ivs13+1G>A, Ala493Glu, Tyr686Stop, that reported in both atypical myotonic dystrophy and DMPK expan- Ivs18+5C>T, Ivs19+2T>A). Two of these mutations were detected in sion homozygotes. several unrelated patients: c.1436_1449del in exon 13 of CLCN1 gene and Ala493Glu in exon 14 of CLCN1 gene. The c.1436_1449del in P02.135 Phenotypic variability in patients with deletions in the exon 13 was detected at the compound geterozygous state in 6 spo- neurexin-1alpha gene radic cases and in 3 recessive cases and in 1 dominant case. The Ala- J. Schoumans1,2, N. Hanemaaijer3, M. Eriksson4, A. Liedén1, J. Lundin1, E. 493Glu in exon 14 was detected at the compound geterozygous state Fernell5, M. Giacobini1, B. Anderlid1,4; in 3 sporadic cases and in gomozygous state in one reccesive case. 1Department of molecular medicine and surgery, CMM, Karolinska Institutet, The c.1436_1449del and Ala493Glu mutations were found in Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne,, 29 % and 13 % accordingly of all mutant chromosomes. Diagnostics Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre only two these mutations allows to reveal 14% mutant chromosomes Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Neuropediatic Department, Astrid of patients with MC. The investigation is in progress now. Lindgrens Childrens Hospital, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, Child psychiatry, P02.133 Clinical and molecular findings of an Italian family with Göteborgs Universitet, Göteborg, Sweden. atypical myotonic dystrophy type 1 (Dm1) associated with a ccG Deletions in the neurexin-1alpha gene (NRXN1 α) have been identified repetition in the 3’UtR of the DmPK gene in large-scale screens for copy-number variations in patients with au- C. Catalli1, A. Morgante1, R. Iraci2, F. Rinaldi1, V. Pisani3, C. Terracciano3, R. tism or schizophrenia. In addition, homozygous deletions in the gene Massa3,4, A. Botta1, G. Novelli1,2; were recently described in a patient with Pitt-Hopins like phenotyope. 1Biopathology and diagnosing imaging, Tor Vergata University of Rome, Roma, Neurexin-1alpha codes for a cell-surface receptor that binds to neuroli- Italy, 2Policlinico Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy, 3Department of Neurosciences, Tor gin and is associated with synaptogenesis and neurotransmission. Vergata University of Rome, Roma, Italy, 4Policlinico Tor Vergata, Austria. Here we report 4 patients with NRNX1α deletions, ranging in size be- Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1, MIM #160900) is the most frequent tween 110 and 400 Kb and located in the 5´end of the gene, identified form of adult muscular dystrophy and is caused by a CTG expansion by array-CGH. Three of them had unexplained learning difficulties and/ located in the 3’ UTR of DMPK gene. It is a multisystemic disorder or autism. In the first patient the deletion was inherited from his mildly characterized by dystrophic changes of muscles, electrical or clinical affected mother and in the second the deletion had occurred de novo myotonia, bilateral cataract, and variable involvement of other tissues in addition to a de novo 16p11.2 deletion. The third patient was com- and organs, including central nervous, cardiac, gastrointestinal, endo- pound heterozygote with two different, partly overlapping deletions crine and immune systems. In some patients, other symptoms may inherited from the healthy parents. This patient demonstrated a more be present, but the causes for this widely variable expression are still severe phenotype. In addition, a deletion was identified in a newborn largely unknown. Here, we describe the clinical and molecular features child with persistent neonatal hypoglycemia and feeding difficulties. of a large Italian family whose affected members show an atypical form Our data confirms previous findings and suggest that deletions of the of DM1, manifesting in adult age, with encephalopathy, aspects of neu- neurexin-1alpha gene are highly associated with neurodevelopmental rogenic atrophy of muscles, pes cavus, deafness and variable features symptoms but with a very variable penetrance. Homozygous deletions of classic DM1. Analysis of the DMPK gene revealed the presence of are expected to cause a more severe phenotype and the recurrence unusual molecular findings, with CCG repeats interspersed at the 5’ risk for next pregnancy is in this family very high with two carrier par- and 3’ portion of the CTG repeated region. This is the first description ents. of patients with atypical DM1 associated with triplets repeats different The variable penetrance and the detection of a deletion in the NRNX1α from CTG. The contribution of the CCG repetition to the clinical phe- as a coincidental finding in a newborn child illustrate some of the dif- notype and variable expression of DM1 in this Italian family is currently ficulties in genetic counseling of array findings. under investigation. P02.136 Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and genetic diagnostic P02.134 severe demyelinating polyneuropathy, sensorineural shown with a case hearing loss, spasticity, vestibular dysfunction and stroke like A. K. Eek1, B. S. Henrichsen2, G. J. Braathen1; episodes in homozygous myotonic dystrophy 1Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hosptal, Skien, Norway, 2Departments J. Rankin1, T. Antoniadi2, E. Woodward2, M. Sadler3; of Pediatrics,Telemark Hosptal, Skien, Norway. 1Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Bristol Genetics Background: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a clinical diagnosis. Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3Department of Neurology, Derriford NF1 includes symtomatology from different organ systems and ana- Hospital, Plymouth, United Kingdom. tomic localizations such as macrocephali, iris hamartomas, hyper- In 2009, a family with atypical myotonic dystrophy, characterised by telorism, glaucoma, hypertension, scoliosis, spina bifida, pseudoar- intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth, sensorineural hearing loss and at- throsis, plexiforme neurofibromas, café-au-lait spots, axillar and ingui- tacks of impaired consciousness with focal neurological signs, was re- nal freckling, mental retardation, learning disabilities, hydrocephalus ported by Spaans and colleagues. We report a 40 year old male with and different types of cancer. a similar phenotype. Patients and families with NF1 are regularly referred to Telemark Hos- His mother and maternal uncle have very mild late onset myotonic pital for diagnostics and genetic counselling. dystrophy type 1, both being heterozygous for a small expansion at Methods: We present a child with primary unknown diagnosis. The the DMPK locus. There is no information about his father. Our patient presentation illustrates genetic methods, FISH, mlpa and aCGH, used developed progressive sensorineural hearing loss from childhood re- to diagnose NF1 in this child and the family. quiring hearing aids from age 10 years. Since the age of 14 years he Possibilities and limitations with todays diagnostics will be presented. suffered with episodes of vertigo and by age 30 had persistent vestibu- Results: Our results will be presented at the conference. lar impairment resulting in use of a wheelchair. Aged 39 he suffered two stroke-like episodes during which there was reduced conscious- P02.137 Gonadal function in male patients with Nijmegen ness, dysphasia, dysarthria and left hemiplegia following which he had breakage syndrome, a cancer-prone disease with the DNA repair residual left sided weakness. Examination aged 39 revealed lower defect. limb spasticity with pes cavus and sustained clonus along with signs K. H. Chrzanowska1, M. Szarras-Czapnik1, M. Kalina2, M. Gajdulewicz1, M. of peripheral neuropathy and left hemiplegia. Cerebellar signs and Gajtko-Metera1, H. Rysiewski1, B. Dembowska-Bagińska1, H. Gregorek1, D. myotonia were absent. Neurophysiology confirmed a severe demye- Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, E. Ciara1, M. Syczewska1, R. Janas1, M. Krajewska- linating sensorimotor neuropathy but myotonia was absent. Brain MRI Walasek1; showed non specific periventricular high signal and spinal MRI was 1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical University Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. Otolaryngology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Cluj- Napoca, Romania., Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a severe chromosomal insta- Cluj-Napoca, Romania. bility disorder, caused by hypomorphic mutations in the NBN gene, Objective: To determine for the first time in Romania the prevalence of which product is critical for processing DNA double strand breaks. It is the most frequent GJB2 mutations (c35delG and p.W24X) in healthy characterized by microcephaly, growth retardation, immune deficiency, subjects and in patients with non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL). and predisposition for malignancy. Due to diverse information on the Material: 300 healthy adults (group A) and 75 unrelated children with reproductive function, depending on the Nbs1 murine model, we in- NSHL (group B) from North-West Romania. vestigated the course of puberty with respect to humans with NBS. Methods: a. Group A : phonic acumetry and detection of the c.35delG Previously we presented hypergonadotropic hypogonadism in NBS (semi-nested-PCR, RFLP and ARMS-PCR analysis) and p.W24X females, however data on gonadal function in male patients are still (ARMS-PCR and RFLP analysis) mutations; b. Group B: audiologi- limited. cal examination (otoscopy, tympanogram, acoustic otoemission and The aim of the study was to evaluate sexual development along with tonal audiogram or auditory evoked potentials) and detection of the hormonal assays in 18 NBS males (ages 1.17-25.92), homozygous c.35delG (semi-nested-PCR, RFLP and ARMS-PCR analysis) and for c.657_661del5 mutation, followed between years 1993 and 2008. p.W24X (ARMS-PCR analysis) mutations. They were divided in 6 subgroups, according to the age and pubertal Results: Group A: The c.35delG mutation was present in heterozy- Tanner stages. Concentrations of gonadotropins (FSH, LH) and tes- gous state in 11 cases (1.83% of the total 600 alleles examined), while tosterone were evaluated. the p.W24X mutation was absent. Group B: The number of reported Puberty in NBS boys was initiated spontaneously and progressed sim- mutation cases as against the number of alleles indicates a 33.3% ilarly as in healthy peers. Gonadotropin levels in the prepubertal period frequency for c.35delG mutation and respectively 5.3% for p.W24X were normal, whereas in older subjects the mean values tended to be mutation. All 22 patients with 35delG/c.35delG genotype (19 patients), slightly higher than the references ranges. Testosterone levels were c.35delG/p.W24X genotype (2 patients) or p.W24X/p.W24X genotype normal in all groups. (1 patient) presented profound/severe hearing loss. Despite normal pubertal development in our group of NBS males, in- Conclusion: Our study confirms that the frequency of the c.35delG mu- creasing gonadotropin levels in older patients may be indicative of go- tation in healthy subjects and the c.35delG and p.W24x mutations in nadal dysfunction, which demands further supervision. patients with NSHL from North-West Romania is comparable to that The study was supported in parts by the Polish Ministry of Science seen in other Central and South-Eastern European countries. The ho- and Higher Education (grant No 2 P05E 066 28) and by the Children’s mozygot or compound heterozygot states represent a major risk factor Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland (grant No 112/09). for profound or severe deafness. Acknowledgements: The screening part of this study was supported by P02.138 Family anamnesis with Nijmegen breakage syndrome Fundatia „Dinu Patriciu“- Romania. with regard to the bronchial asthma N. Kitsera1, H. Àkîpyan1, N. Markevych1, R. Polishchuk2, L. Kostyuchenko2; 1Institute of Hereditary Pathology, Lviv, Ukraine, 2Lviv Regional Children P02.140 systemic lupus erythematosus in a patient with Noonan Specialized Clinical Hospital, Lviv, Ukraine. syndrome and KRAs mutation Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is autosomal-recessive disease G. Leventopoulos1, E. Denayer2, K. Kritikos1, E. Kanavakis1, H. Fryssira1; (homozygous carriage of 657del5 gene mutation NBS1) characterized 1Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Department of phenotypically by microcephalia, “bird” face, combined immunodefi- Clinical Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium, Leuven, Belgium. ciency and susceptibility to malignant growths. It is the most spread Noonan syndrome is characterized by dysmorphic facial features, in the Czech Republic, Poland and the Western Ukraine and carriers short stature and congenital heart defects. It is associated with co- approximately 1% of population. agulation factor deficiencies and thrombocytopenia. Development of Purpose: to analyse genealogical peculiarities in families of patients Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) has been described as a rare (Ukraine) with NBS and cases of bronchial asthma in relatives of pro- complication. PTPN11, RAF1, SOS1 and KRAS are the responsible bands. genes for the Noonan syndrome. PTPN11 mutations concern 50% of Patients and methods: Among 17 families there are four families the patients. (23,5%), in which NBS was diagnosed in two own siblings. In seven The 11 year old female was referred to the clinic due to morphologia- families (41,2%) the child with NBS was the only child. The clinical- cal stigmata and psychomotor retardation. The patient had short stat- genealogical method was used. ure, a broad forehead, ptosis pf eyelids, low set ears, curly hair and Results: In the 17 families, where a child with NBS was born, in 4 pectus excavatum. She also presented hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (23,5%) families bronchial asthma cases have occurred: from 1 to 4 After clinical evaluation DNA sequencing was performed. The mutation cases. In the seven families, where a malignant tumor has developed c77A>T, pAsn 26Ile was deleted in the KRAS gene. KRAS mutations in a child with NBS, there had been only one case of bronchial asthma are detected only in 2% of Noonan patients and this particular mutation (14,3%). has never been described before in the literature. Onset of Throm- In the 10 families, where a child has been diagnosed NBS without botic Thrombocytopenic Puprpura (TTP) associated with positive di- oncopathology, the cases of bronchial asthma had been revealed in 3 rect Coombs implied an immunological substrate which was confirmed families (30%) from 1 to 2 cases, which is by 2,1 times more frequent, by anti ds DNA. The TTP manifestations belonged to the SLE clinical than in the families, where a proband had had oncopathology. Prob- spectrum. ably, in such families the cases of bronchial asthma act as a protective Follow up is mandatory for the proper diagnosis of clinical signs and mechanism with regard to the development of malignant tumors in a symptoms related to Noonan syndrome. Genetic testing should not proband. be limited to the most frequent responsible gene PTPN11, because Conclusion: Medical-genetic consultation with the use of clinical-ge- Noonan syndrome has high genetic heterogenity nealogical method is necessary for the families, where a child with NBS was born. P02.141 A case of Noonan syndrome with late onset of bleeding disorder P02.139 Prevalence of the c.35delG and p.W24X mutations in M. T. Bataneant1, M. Serban2, E. Boia2, L. Pop2, M. Baica2, M. Lelik2, D. the GJB2 Gene in North-West Romania Savescu2; C. Lazăr1, R. Popp2, A. Trifa2, C. Mocanu3, G. Mihut3, C. Al-Khzouz1, M. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes“, Timisoara, Romania, Farcas4, E. Tomescu5, P. Grigorescu-Sido1; 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. 11- Department of Pediatrics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj- Introduction. Noonan syndrome (NS) is an inherited disorder charac- Napoca, Romania, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine terized by typical various phenotypic features. Bleeding disorders are and Pharmacy Cluj-Napoca, Romania, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 3Department one of the most serious and common complications associated with of Otolaryngology, Clinical Pediatric Hospital Cluj-Napoca, Romania, Cluj- NS. Napoca, Romania, 4- Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine Case report. A 17 years old male with typical Noonan features was and Pharmacy Cluj-Napoca, Romania, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 5Department of admitted for a giant post-traumatic right buttock hematoma. He didn’t Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 0 present bleeding tendency in childhood and at 7 years of age he had the c.923A>G (p.N308S) mutation in two patients. In total, mutations a heart surgical intervention without abnormal bleeding. At clinical affecting the 308 amino acid position were identified in 12% of investi- examination splenomegaly was detected. Laboratory test show mild gated patients. Three mutations were of maternal origin, one appeared thrombocytopenia, with small platelet and reduced cloth retraction, de novo, in three cases parental DNA probes were not available for normal bleeding and cloth time, prolonged APTT (40”), decreased pro- the analysis. Moreover, the mutations were revealed in other mem- thrombine consume (25”), normal level of factors VIII, XI, IX, X, VII, bers of patients’ families. All the patients presented clinical features V, vonWillebrand and decreased factor XIII (20%). He needed three typical for NS, although in various degree, e.g. short stature (height < surgical interventions to cure the hematoma: first with Novo Seven, 3 pc) was noted in five patients, chest deformity in all cases, bilateral second with Feiba - both with important bleeding despite of high dos- undescended testes in all male cases, relative macrocephaly in three es of concentrate factors and the third intervention with Novo Seven, patients. Of note, the high frequency of congenital heart defects (PVS, platelet concentrate and plasma with a good intra- and post- surgery ASD, VSD, PFO, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy) and learning difficul- control of hemorrhage. ties (with normal / borderline IQ level) were observed. Conclusions. In our case the bleeding disorder had a proved late onset The study was supported by MNiSW Project PB 0056/B/P01/2008/35 and consists in a complex anomaly: thrombocytopenia with abnormal and by CMHI project 190/08. platelet function, factor XIII deficiency and possible von Willebrand dis- ease with normal antigen and activity. P02.144 Cardiac findings in 61 Noonan syndrome patients with The existence of various types of bleeding disorders within one syn- proven mutations in genes of the RAs/mAPK signaling pathway. drome is unusual and the relation between abnormal bleeding and the D. R. Bertola1, A. S. Brasil1,2, A. Jorge3, A. Malaquias3, L. Wanderley2, C. A. underlying cause of Noonan syndrome is not clear. It is recommended Kim1, J. Krieger2, A. Pereira2; to screen for bleeding disorders every patient with NS for improvement 1Instituto da Criança - HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Laboratório de the clinical care of these patients. Cardiologia e Biologia Molecular do InCor/HC - FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Endocrinologia - HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil. P02.142 increased lifetime risk of cancer in patients with Noonan syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder due to muta- Noonan syndrome carrying a PTPN11 mutation. tions in genes of the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway. The cardiac in- M. Jongmans, I. van der Burgt, P. M. Hoogerbrugge, K. Noordam, H. G. volvement is the one that poses more threatening outcomes. Ijntema, W. M. Nillesen, M. J. L. Ligtenberg, A. Geurts van Kessel, J. J. J. M. We evaluated the cardiac findings in 43 patients presenting PTPN11, van Krieken, L. A. L. M. van Kiemeney, N. Hoogerbrugge; 13 with SOS1 and 5 with RAF1 gene mutations. Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Cardiac abnormality was present in 53/61 patients (87%). The most Noonan syndrome (NS) is characterized by short stature, facial dys- frequent one was pulmonary stenosis (37/53 -70%), followed by hy- morphisms and congenital heart defects. Mutations in PTPN11 are the pertrophic cardiomiopathy (8/53 - 15%), atrioventricular septal defect most common cause of NS. Patients with NS have a predisposition for (3/53 - 6%), isolated septal defects (2/53 - 4%), mitral valve prolapse developing leukemia and specific solid tumors. Exact data on the inci- (2/53 - 4%) and Ebstein anomaly (1/53 - 2%). In the group of patients dence of malignancies in NS are lacking. Consequently, the necessity with pulmonary stenosis, 20/37 (54%) required a surgical procedure of a surveillance program is unclear. and in 2/6 a ballon pulmonary valvuloplasty was not effective. In accor- We performed a historical cohort study among 297 Dutch NS patients dance to the literature, in patients presenting RAF1 gene mutations, with a germline mutation in PTPN11 (median age 12.7 years, range 4/5 presented hypertrophic cardiomiopathy and among the individuals 0.6-94.8 years). The cancer histories were derived based on the re- with PTPN11 gene mutations, 26/36 (72%) presented pulmonary ste- ferral forms for DNA diagnostics, by consulting PALGA, a nationwide nosis. Ebstein anomaly (disclosed here in a patient with SOS1 gene registry of pathology in the Netherlands, and the Netherlands Cancer mutation) was rarely described in Noonan syndrome and its genetic Registry. The reported numbers of cancer in the patients with NS were mechanisms are still uncovered. Based on these data, 26 patients pre- compared with the expected numbers based on population-based in- senting this cardiac anomaly as an isolated form was screened for cidence rates. SOS1 gene mutations, but no abnormalities in the coding region of Twelve patients with NS developed a malignancy, yielding a cumula- this gene was found, suggesting that this gene is not a main one in the tive risk of developing cancer of 23.0% [95% confidence interval (CI), etiology of this particular cardiac abnormality. 7.6-38.4%] up to age 55, which represents a 3.5-fold [95% CI, 2.0-5.9] Our data supports preview reports emphasizing that cardiac abnor- increased risk compared to the general population. Haematological malities in Noonan syndrome are particularly important, with high fre- malignancies occurred most frequently. Two rare malignancies were quency of surgical procedures in patients presenting pulmonary ste- found not yet observed in NS, being malignant mastocytosis and ma- nosis. (FAPESP). lignant epithelioid angiosarcoma. We did not find a correlation between specific mutations in PTPN11 and the occurrence of cancer. P02.145 Identification of co-occurring SHOC2 and PTPN11 This first large cohort study of cancer incidence in patients with NS muations in a patient with Noonan syndrome and a mutation in PTPN11, shows an excess risk of cancer compared S. Ekvall1, L. Hagenäs2, G. Annerén1, M. Bondeson1; to the general population. Our data do not warrant a specific cancer 1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, surveillance program for patients with NS. 2Department of Neuropediatrics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. P02.143 spectrum of anomalies in Polish patients with Noonan Noonan Syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder associated syndrome and N308D, N308S mutations in PTPN11 gene with short stature, congenital heart defect and facial dysmorphism, and D. Jurkiewicz, E. Ciara, A. Jezela-Stanek, A. Tanska, M. Kugaudo, S. Luczak, a variable clinical expression. NS is a heterogeneous disorder caused M. Pelc, P. Kowalski, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, K. by activating mutations in PTPN11 (50%), or in SOS1, RAF1, KRAS Chrzanowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; and BRAF located in the RAS-MAPK signalling pathway. Recently, Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. mutations have also been reported in SHOC2 in a few NS patients Noonan syndrome (NS) is a congenital condition inherited in an auto- with loose anagen hair and in NRAS. somal dominant manner. The associated abnormalities include short Here, we present a clinical and molecular characterization of a patient stature, facial and skeletal dysmorphisms, cardiovascular and hae- with NS phenotype and associated features including mild psychomo- matological defects and lymphatic dysplasias. Approximately 50% of tor developmental delay, hoarse voice, osteoporosis, loose anagen NS cases are caused by mutations in the PTPN11 gene encoding the hair, gingival hyperplasia, spinal neuroblastoma and liver haeman- Src homology protein-tyrosine phosphatase-2 (SHP-2) acting in the gioma. Mutation analysis of PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, KRAS, BRAF, Ras-MAPK signaling pathway. The p.N308D amino acid substitution MEK1, MEK2, NRAS and SHOC2 was conducted revealing the co- represents the most prevalent mutation (nearly 20%) in NS patients. occurrence of two previously identified mutations in the index patient. We present Polish patients with Noonan syndrome and mutations The mutation SHOC2 c.4A>G; p.S2G represents a de novo mutation, p.N308D and p.N308S in PTPN11 gene. The molecular analysis of whereas the mutation in PTPN11 c.1226G>C; p.G409A is of maternal PTPN11 gene in a group of 58 unrelated patients with Noonan syn- origin. The mother had no clincial evidence of NS but short stature, drome revealed the c.922A>G (p.N308D) mutation in five patients and supporting that the PTPN11 p.G409A mutation represents a mild par-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 1 tial mutation. P02.148 Investigation of “extreme” patients sheds light on new We propose that the atypical phenotype of the NS patient reported mechanisms of obesity here is the result of an additive effect where the mild PTPN11 mu- A. J. de Smith1, R. G. Walters1, R. J. Ellis2, M. M. van Haelst3, I. S. Farooqi4, P. tation acts as a modifier. Interestingly, co-occurrence of RAS-MAPK Froguel1,5, A. I. F. Blakemore1; mutations has previously been found in a few patients with variable 1Department of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial College London, NS or NFNS phenotypes. Taken together, the results suggest that the London, United Kingdom, 2North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, concurrence of mutations in the RAS-MAPK pathway may contribute Harrow, United Kingdom, 3UMC Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Metabolic Research to the clinical variability observed among NS patients. Laboratories, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5CNRS 8090-Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France. P02.146 sOs1 gene mutations in Polish patients with Noonan Investigation of carefully-selected patients with extreme phenotypes syndrome may shed light on the mechanisms of common diseases. We aimed to E. Ciara, S. Luczak, A. Jezela-Stanek, D. Jurkiewicz, A. Tanska, M. Kugaudo, identify genomic structural variants that could underlie the phenotypes M. Pelc, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, P. Kowalski, K. of 34 dysmorphic children with obesity and mental retardation, with Chrzanowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; the hope of uncovering new loci that may be associated with common The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. obesity. We have previously reported the discovery of causative dele- Noonan syndrome (NS), an autosomal dominant disorder is character- tions at chromosome 15q11-3 (the Prader-Willi syndrome region) and ized by congenital heart defects, short stature, facial dysmorphism, at chromosome 16p11.2. Also detected in this cohort were 19 further chest deformity, scoliosis, hearing loss, motor and neurocognitive de- aberrations over 50kb in size and not overlapping known copy number lay, various coagulation defects, lymphatic dysplasias and tumorigen- variants, including: a ~1Mb duplicated region at chromosome Xq12; esis predisposition. Heterozygous gain of function mutations in various a ~500kb duplication at Xq13.2; a ~500kb duplication at 6p12.3; and genes (PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, KRAS) encoding proteins of the Ras- a ~175kb deletion at 19p13.3. Characterisation of the latter deletion MAPK signaling pathway have been identified as the genetic basis showed that it had arisen de novo, as it was not found in the patient’s of NS. Mutations of SOS1, the gene encoding a guanine nucleotide parents, and that one of the breakpoints lay within the MAP2K2 gene, exchange factor for Ras, are the second major cause of Noonan syn- mutations in which cause cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome. The dele- drome after PTPN11 mutations and account for 17-20% individuals. tion includes ZBTB7A, a good candidate gene for the patient’s obesity The aim of the study was to determine the SOS1 gene mutation rate and cognitive phenotypes: this gene is involved in adipogenesis and and profile in a cohort of well-characterized 43 unrelated Polish patients mouse knockout models have revealed disruption of the Notch path- with Noonan syndrome lacking PTPN11 mutations and to study the way, which is central for neuronal development. Similar analysis of the genotype-phenotype correlation. Molecular analysis of SOS1 gene re- other candidate regions is ongoing, and it is possible that additional vealed six recurrent mutations (p.M269T, p.M269R, p.G434K, p.L550P rare variants contributing to the genetics of common obesity may be p.R552K, p.R552G) in 8 affected individuals (18,6%). All mutations oc- identified, as for the 16p11.2 deletion which accounts for 0.7% of mor- curred de novo and are known or predicted to disrupt autoinhibition bid obesity in the general population. of SOS1 RAS-EGF activity. The various congenital heart anomalies (pulmonary valve stenosis, ventricular septal defect, and mitral valve P02.149 Odontoonychodermal Displasia: A case report anomaly) and short stature were observed as being the most frequent. S. Kayipmaz1, M. Ikbal2, A. Kusgoz3, M. Y. ALP2, O. S. Sezgin1, A. H. Cebi2; Retarded speech development was observed in one patient, while all 1Karadeniz Technical Universirty, Faculty of Dentistry, Oral Diagnosis and cases have normal level of cognitive function. In comparison to the Radiology, Trabzon, Turkey, 2Karadeniz Technical University, Medicalf Faculty, group of cases with PTPN11 gene mutations, patients with SOS1 gene Medical Genetics, Trabzon, Turkey, 3Karadeniz Technical Universirty, Faculty of mutations show higher frequency of ectodermal abnormalities (kerato- Dentistry, Pediatric Dentistry, Trabzon, Turkey. sis pilaris, wavy hair, sparse eyebrows, ulerythema ophryogenes). The Odontoonychodermal Displasia (OD)(OMIM 257980) which is also study was supported by MNiSW Project PB 0056/B/P01/2008/35 and called Fadhil Syndrome is an otosomal recessive disorder character- by CMHI project 190/08. ized by ectoderm anomalies including hyperhidrosis, hyperkeratosis palmaris, distrophy of nails, dry and sparse hair, facial erithema, geg- P02.147 De novo deletion of NRXN1 in a girl with mild shaped incisors and malformated teeth. The aim of this case report is developmental delay and speech development disorder to present a patient with odontoonychodermal dysplasia with clinical I. M. Bader1, S. Nagl2, M. Cohen1, C. Nevinny-Stickel-Hinzpeter2, C. Schulz1, and radiographical features. Our case is a 10-year-old boy was attend- M. Marton1, M. Hardt1; ed to clinic with a chief complaint of teeth crowding . He has sparse 1Kinderzentrum München, Munich, Germany, 2Synlab Medizinisches hair , dry skin , plantar fissur on the feet . Clinical and radiographical Versorgungszentrum Humane Genetik GmbH, Munich, Germany. examination revealed Angle Class I malocclusion , oligodontia , erup- Mutations in the NRXN1 gene have been associated with a wide range tion cyst on right upper first molar teeth, and conical-shaped tooth. In of neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders, such as au- accordance of this findings a diagnosis of odontoonychodermal dys- tism spectrum disorder, mental retardation and schizophrenia. Recent- plasia was made. ly, dominant as well as recessive mutations in the NRXN1 gene have been described to cause developmental delay of variable degrees. P02.150 A case report:Onycotrichodysplasia with mental Here we report the phenotype of a 6 year old girl who was referred retardation but without neutropenia to our clinic because of discrete facial dysmorphisms, mild develop- M. Ikbal1, H. Kocak Eker2, M. Y. Alp1, A. H. Cebi1, T. Tos3; mental delay with an emphasis on speech development problems. Mo- 1Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey, 2Ankara Dıskapı Children lecular karyotyping was performed on the patient showing an approxi- Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, SB Sami Ulus mately 462 kb loss of genomic material in 2p16.3 encompassing the Women’s and Children‘s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. 5` region and several exons of the NRXN1 gene. Array-CGH analysis A four years old boy who presented with abnormal hair was found to of the parents revealed no aberration indicating that the deletion in the have sparse, short, dry, curly hair. His hair was never been cut. Hair patient has occurred de novo. The clinical implication of NRXN1 dele- microscopy concluded as trichoreksis nodosa. He has dysplastic nails. tions is not clear. The NRXN1 gene locus is known to harbor a number His nails of hand and foot finger is spoon-shaped.Eyebrow is sparse of benign copy number variants (CNVs). High phenotypical variability at medial and absent at lateral. Eyelash is absent at down eyelid. He and reduced penetrance make NRXN1 deletions difficult to assess. It has mild mental retardation (IQ:70). Cranial Magnetic Resonance has been proposed that exon disrupting deletions in NRXN1 are more Imaging and skeletal radiography showed normal findings.A diagno- likely to be pathogenic. Our case report supports this idea and broad- sis of onycotrichodysplasia with mental retardation was made. Ony- ens the spectrum of phenotypes. chotrichodysplasia is a rare autosomal recessive disorder. First case is shown by Cantu et al. (1975) Cantu et al. (1975) described a male infant with hypoplastic fingernails, trichorrhexis, chronic neutropenia, and psychomotor retardation. In contrast to cases described earlier, our patient has normal neutrophil .Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 2 P02.151 Osteogenesis Imperfecta subtypes - importance to the dation, described in the syndrome. Our data could suggest that the clinic? 6q22-23 duplication cause a mild “6q syndrome”. A. Beleza1, S. Sousa1,2, S. Maia1, L. Ramos1, P. Garcia3, J. Saraiva1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Coimbra‘s Paediatric Hospital, Coimbra, P02.154 Nail Patella syndrome: A case Report Portugal, 2Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit, Institute of Child Health, A. H. Cebi1, K. Shermatov2, M. Ikbal1, B. Kırhan2, M. Alp1, N. Cebi3; London, United Kingdom, 3Center for Child‘s Development, Coimbra‘s 1Karadeniz Technical Universiry Medical Faculty, Medical Genetics, Trabzon, Paediatric Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal. Turkey, 2Harran University Medical Faculty Department of Pediatrics, Şanlıurfa, Osteogenesis Imperfecta - OI - is a heterogeneous group of diseases Turkey, 3Karadeniz Technical Universiry Medical Faculty, Medical Biochemistry, characterized by susceptibility to bone fractures with variable severity Trabzon, Turkey. and presumed or evidenced defects in collagen type I biosynthesis. An 11 year-old-boy was taken to the orthopedy clinic because of the The definition and classification of OI have been subject of debate, pain on his right knee. Patellar hypoplasia was determined in the MR with recent addition to four new types (V-VIII) to the original Sillence report at the right knee. Then the patient refered to the pediatry clinic classification. This has, indeed, generated confusing statements in the for futher investigation. In the physical examination the supination literature, and added complexity to the diagnosis. and extantion of the right elbow was restricted, nail of the first and The present work describes 10 cases of Portuguese children and ado- second fingers were dysplastic and there was morphological defect lescents with OI. There is no consensus on how to classify these cases on the both knee. X-ray imaging of the right elbow revealed that the among specialists. Should further diagnostic tests, including the analy- medial chondyle of the humerus ,the head of the proximal radius was sis of bone histology and mutation screening in the genes LEPRE1, hypoplastic and the lateral angulation was seen ,also dislocation was CRTAP and PPIB, which are not yet routinely performed, be pursued found. Both patellar contours were irregular and hypoplastic at the X- irrespective of the desire of prenatal diagnosis? How important is it to ray imaging of the knee. Patella laterally dislocated. Bilateral distance subclassify these patients? What will it add to the management and of knee joints were laterally narrowed. The spina bifida was detected at care of these patients? The aim of this poster is to generate debate the anteroposterior pelvic X-ray. The patient thoght to be the Nail Pa- and consensus. tella Syndrome and refered to the ophtalmologist for the investigation of the glaucoma,microcornea and cataract. No pathology was found. P02.152 case Report - Autosomal Recessive infantile malignant There were no pathological findings at the other laboratory findings Osteopetrosis in india with novel mutation in tciRG1 gene and physical examinations except of the urinary incontinence R. Devi1, S. Siddaiahgari1, L. Lingappa1, E. Bliznetz2; 1Rainbow Children’s Hospital and Perinatal Centre, Hyderabad, India, P02.155 Identification of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease in a two- 2Research Center for Medical Genetic, Moscow, Russian Federation. year-old boy Autosomal recessive malignant osteopetrosis (OPTB, OMIM no. A. Blomhoff, T. Barøy, O. Rødningen, M. Fannemel; 259700) is a severe form of inherited osteosclerosis. The disease is Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. rare and is found all over the world. We report the first case of OPTB A two year old boy was referred due to psychomotor developmental proven by mutation analysis in India. A boy at the age of 4 months delay, nystagmus and hypotonia. He could not crawl, walk, nor sit. had neonatal seizure with hypoglycaemia and hypocalcaemia. On The nystagmus was first noticed when he was six weeks old. He had examination he was found to have mild hepatomegaly and moderate five words and no distinct dysmorphic features. He had an abnormal splenomegaly; mild anemia (11.4 gm%), thrombocytopenia (68,000/ fat distribution on his thighs and pubic area. The family history was cumm), increased retic count (8%), increased alkaline phosphatase negative. serum level (1883 IU/L). His X rays revealed evidence of osteopetrosis Investigations: SMA, Myotonic Dystrophy, Prader-Willi, CDG Ia and with dense cortex and obliteration of marrow. The patient is first born karyotype were normal. MRI scans showed thin corpus callosum and child on second degree consangineous parents; there is no family his- marked dysmyelination. ArrayCGH identified a 500kb duplication of tory of similar illness. The DNA sequencing of the entire coding re- Xq22.2, including the PLP1 gene. gion and exon-intron junctions of TCIRG1 gene revealed the mutation Background: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher (PMD) disease is a rare X-linked c.1276C>T at the homozygous state in a patient. The mutation results genetic disorder caused by deletions, duplications or pointmutations in premature stop-codon formation (p.Arg426X) in osteoclastspecific in the proteolipid protein 1 (PLP1) gene. PLP1 is the major structural a3 subunit of the vacuolar ATPase proton pump, in which various de- protein of the CNS myelin and mutations in the gene result in dysmy- fects cause most cases of OPTB. elination. Mutations in PLP1 produce a wide spectrum of clinical phe- notypes, from PMD to spastic paraplegia type 2. Boys are affected and P02.153 Partial trisomy of the long arm of chromosome 6 in a their mothers are usually asymptomatic carriers. In common with most family: clinical variability among affected members cases (50-70%)our patient had a duplication of PLP1 as the causative D. Melis1, G. Cappuccio1, R. Genesio2, M. Cozzolino1, P. Boemio1, F. Vitiello1, P. mechanism and presented with classic PMD. Some patients have Tedeschi2, R. Della Casa1, L. Nitsch2, G. Andria1; three or more copies of PLP1, which usually causes a more severe 1Department of Pediatrics „Federico II“ University, Naples, Italy, 2Department of phenotype. Missense mutations often result in the connatal form, the Cellular and Molecular Biology and Pathology „Federico II“ University, Naples, most severe form of PMD. Clinical signs may be nystagmus, hypoto- Italy. nia, ataxia, titubation, cognitive impairment and spastic quadriparesis Partial duplication of the long arm of chromosome 6 is a rare cytoge- beginning in the first five years. In severe cases perinatal stridor and netic abnormality identified in about 40 patients. It causes a recog- seizures may develop. nizable syndrome characterized by: microcephaly, downward slanting palpebral fissures, telecanthus, micrognathia, carp shaped mouth, P02.156 Genetic variants in DRD2 gene and therapeutic short neck and severe psychomotor retardation. The minimal critical response to antipsychotic treatment in schizophrenia patients region for the clinical phenotypic manifestations of the syndrome in- from Volga-Ural region of Russia: pharmacogenetic study cludes the 6q25-26 bands. A. Gareeva, E. Khusnutdinova; We describe a partial 6q trisomy in four related patients, as the re- Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Scientific center of RAS, Ufa, sult of an abnormal segregation of balanced maternal interchromo- Russian Federation. somal insertion. Probands facial dysmorphisms included: telecanthus, Antipsychotic drugs exert both therapeutic and adverse effects through depressed nasal bridge, anteverted nostrils, short neck. One patient dopamine D2 rceptor (DRD2) antagonism. Genetic variants of this re- showed moderate mental retardation, another one only mild neurologi- ceptor may be responsible for individual variations in antipsychotics cal impairment and interatrial septum defect. The remaining two pa- response and may therefore be useful in predicting response. In this tients had normal psychomotor development. The probands’ karyotype study we evaluated the role of two polymorphic loci: TaqI A and Nco confirmed by FISH and array-CGH analysis showed: “dup(6)(q22q23)”. of DRD2 gene in 120 drug-naive patients (Russians and Tatars) with Karyotype analysis of balanced translocation carriers confirmed by first-episode schizophrenia, from Volga-Ural region of Russia who FISH showed: 46 XX, ins(12;6)(q22;q22q23). treated with typical antipsychothics for 45 days. Improvement and re- The patients showing 6q22-23 partial trisomy share the dysmorphisms sponse was assesed by using the Positive and Negative Syndrome of the so called “6q syndrome”; they didn’t have severe mental retar- Scale (PANSS) on the day of admission and subsequently after 21 and Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  45 days following the treatment. Association tests between genotypes drome (p=0.005) and 2.57-fold higher risk for septic shock (p=0.015) and percentage improvement in total PANSS score, as well as Posi- than 5G/5G carriers. The multivariate logistic regression analysis ad- tive and Negative subscale scores were performed using analysis of justed for independent predictors, such as age, nosocomial pneumo- variance (ANOVA). TaqI A polymorphic locus of DRD2 gene was as- nia and positive blood culture also supported that carriers of the 4G sociated with Positive symptom response to treatment. Patients with allele have higher prevalence of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome DRD2*A1/A1 genotype showed substantial improvement as regards (p=0.009) and septic shock (p=0.024) than patients bearing the 5G/5G. Positive symptom response (F4.867; df 2; P=0.009) compared with However, genotype and allele analyses have not shown any significant patients who carried DRD2*A1/A2 and DRD2*A2/A2 genotypes. No difference regarding mortality in models non-adjusted or adjusted with association was observed between Nco polymorphic locus of DRD2 APACHE II. gene and changes in PANSS scores.The results suggest that TaqI A Carriers of the 4G allele of PAI-1 polymorphism have higher risk for polymorphic locus of DRD2 gene may be a useful predictor of reduc- multiple organ dysfunction syndrome and septic shock in Caucasian tion in positive symptoms in schizophrenia patients treated with typical patients with severe sepsis due to pneumonia. antipsychotics. P02.159 Quantitative SNRPN methylation analysis in neonates P02.157 A family with Pierre Robin syndrome caused by a with central hypotonia microdeletion in the long arm of chromosome 17 (17q24.3) G. Queipo1, J. Pérez-Duran1, N. Nájera1, L. González1, N. Garibay2, E. W. Courtens1, L. Desmyter2, B. Bayet3, M. Vikkula2; Barragan3, S. Kofman-Alfaro1; 1Center of Human Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Cliniques 1Hospital General de México-Facultad de Medicina UNAM, México DF, Mexico, Universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 2Human Molecular Genetics, de 2Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, México DF, Mexico, 3Hospital Duve institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Centre Infantil de México Federico Gonzalez, México DF, Mexico. Labiopalatin, Division of Plastic Surgery, Université Catholique de Louvain, The hypotonic infant is an issue in pediatric neurology, this condition Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium. can be due to many different pathological processes in brain or any Pierre Robin syndrome or sequence (OMIM 261800) is defined by structure in the motor unit. In a central hypotonic baby approach is micrognathia, cleft palate and glossoptosis, resulting in upper airway important discard syndromic causes, being the most frequent, Prader obstruction, neonatal distress and feeding problems that can be life- Willi Syndrome (PWS) caused by the loss of expression of the paternal threatening. This sequence appears also as a feature of campomelic allele in a group of imprinted genes located in a 2 Mb domain within dysplasia, an autosomal dominant short limb dwarfism, caused by mu- 15q11-q13. PWS is characterized by severe prenatal and postnatal tations in the SOX9 gene. hypotonia. SNURF-SNRPN gene methylation analysis in the critical We report on a male child, his mother and grandmother. The child region detect 99% of the cases but does not provide information about presented at birth with an important retromicrognathia, a posterior U- the etiology of the syndrome, FISH analysis the choice tool to detect shaped cleft palate, a left palmar crease, and normal birth measure- microdeletions. Real time PCR analysis could make the diagnosis, ments. His mother also had a Pierre Robin syndrome (with cleft pal- verify deletions and detect mosaicism in one reaction. In infants the ate), diagnosed at birth, that was followed by multiple hospitalisations diagnosis is difficult, clinical approach alone is not enough to differenti- and surgical interventions. The maternal grandmother also had a his- ate this condition from others. It has been proposed that around 40% of tory of cleft palate and surgery. Further family history revealed that 3 the hypotonic patients have PWS but an accurate percentage has not brothers and 1 sister of the maternal grandmother died in the neonatal been established. SNRP-Quantification of methylated alleles (QAMA) period because of “problems of the face”. The child, mother nor grand- in 24 central hypotonic infants showed in 5/13 patients (41.5%) with mother have other associated anomalies. Chromosome analyses and PWS. QAMA permits calculate gene dosage with the comparative C T FISH 22q11.2 were normal. method and detect those cases with microdeletion. Affymetrix SNP chip analyses (250K NspI) revealed a small deletion of approximately 249 kb localized in 17q24.3 in the child, the mother and P02.160 Prader - Willi syndrome - classic Disorder, New the maternal grandmother. There is no known gene or polymorphism Features in this region but it is situated at 1.3Mb of the SOX9 gene. This micro- C. Rusu1, E. Braha1, M. Volosciuc2, D. Dan3, M. Puiu4; deletion is thus very probably causative for the Pierre Robin syndrome 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2“Sf Maria“ Children‘s in this autosomal dominant family. A possible role of SOX9 in the etiol- Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 3Prader Willi Association, Zalau, Romania, 4University ogy of Pierre Robin sequence seems to be confirmed by recent find- of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. ings in the literature. Prader Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a relatively common disorder (1/15,000 newborns) due to abnormalities in the 15q11.2-q13 region (microdele- P02.158 4G/5G Polymorphism of PAI-1 Gene is Associated with tion, uniparental disomy, methylation defect, deletion). multiple Organ Dysfunction and septic shock in Pneumonia Major manifestations include hypotonia with poor suck and poor weight induced severe sepsis gain in infancy, early childhood-onset hyperphagia and obesity, char- I. Aladzsity1, K. Madách2, Á. Szilágyi1,3, G. Fust1, J. Gál2, I. Pénzes2, Z. acteristic appearance, hypogonadism, growth hormone insufficiency Prohászka1,3; causing short stature, mild mental retardation and characteristic be- 13rd Department of Internal Medicine, Research Laboratory, Semmelweis haviour. Diagnostic is based on a clinical score (Cassidy 2005). Se- University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive lected cases follow investigations (methylation test, FISH, karyotype). Therapy, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 3Research Group of We present the clinical study of 50 cases with PWS (diagnosis con- Inflammation Biology and Immunogenomics, Semmelweis University and firmed by genetic tests), in order to illustrate and discuss particular Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary. clinical features. Some of them are relatively frequent in our patients Activation of inflammation and coagulation are closely related and mu- (e.g. multiple allergies, tall/ normal stature in childhood, long ears, ear- tually interdependent in sepsis. The acute-phase protein, plasminogen ly onset puberty, particular behavior, normal appetite etc) and should activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is a key element in the inhibition of fibrino- be considered when evaluating a patient. Our results are comprehen- lysis. Elevated levels of PAI-1 have been related to worse outcome in sively illustrated, discussed and compared with literature data.In con- pneumonia. We aimed to evaluate the effect of functionally relevant clusion, we present a clinical study of PWS that illustrates particular 4G/5G polymorphism of PAI-1 gene in pneumonia-induced sepsis. features relatively frequently found in our patients. We enrolled 207 Caucasian patients with severe sepsis due to pneu- monia admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU). Patients were fol- P02.161 New perspectives on Prader-Willi syndrome: report of 2 lowed up until ICU discharge or death. Clinical data were collected patients and review of the literature prospectively and the PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism was genotyped by M. Martins1, P. Botelho1, M. Souto1, J. Guedes1, I. Soares1, F. Pereira2, O. polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism Moutinho1, R. Pinto Leite1; technique. Patients were stratified according to occurrence of multiple 1Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 2Centro organ dysfunction syndrome, septic shock or death. Hospitalar do Nordeste, Mirandela, Portugal. Our results showed that carriers of the PAI-1 4G/4G and 4G/5G geno- Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS; MIM #176270 ), a rare genetic disorder, types have 2.74-fold higher risk for multiple organ dysfunction syn- is an example of a genetic condition involving genomic imprinting and Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  the first shown to be caused by uniparental disomy. It can occur by stature = 30 cm and varus equine. three main mechanisms, which lead to absence of expression of pa- Diagnosis was also supported by other investigations: ternally inherited genes in the 15q11.2-q13 region: paternal microdele- Radiographic findings: shortened long bones of the limbs with epiphy- tion (70%), maternal uniparental disomy (25%), and mutation or other sis osteocondritis abnormality in the imprinting process (2% to 5%). Althought caused by Genetic study: without changes in karyotype the disturbed expression of genes from the imprinted region of 15q11- Evolution during neonatal period was difficult with slow growth in q13, the specific contributions of individual genes remain unknown. weight, due to infections, (especially respiratory) and eating difficul- PWS is a neurodevelopment disorder, with an estimated prevalence ties. of 1 in 15.000, with a complex phenotype that changes with age. The Conclusion: Achondroplasia is a rare disease in current medical prac- most consistent major manifestations include neonatal hypotonia, tice. Diagnosis is established easily, both antenatal and postnatal pe- short stature, global developmental delay and mental deficiency, be- riod, based on clinical data, imaging and cytogenetic testing. havioral and sometimes psychiatric abnormalities, early childhood-on- set hyperphagia and obesity, hypothalamic hypogonadism, and char- P02.164 mitochondrial DNA analysis in primary congenital acteristic appearance. glaucoma Diagnosis of PWS on a clinical basis only is difficult in newborns and M. Tanwar1, T. Dada2, R. Sihota2, R. Dada1; young infants; thus cytogenetic approaches such as fluorescent in situ 1Laboratory for Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, Department of Anatomy, hybridization combined with molecular tests like DNA methylation test All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Dr. R.P. Centre for and UPD studies are essential. Selection of suitable patients based on Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,, New Delhi, India. clinical criteria according to age, enhances diagnostic yield. Purpose: To identify mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) nucleotide changes We describe the clinical, cytogenetic and molecular characterization of in primary congenital glaucoma (PCG). Methods: The entire coding 2 patients with PWS and discuss the new perspectives on therapeutic region of the mitochondrial genome was amplified by polymerase and educational programmes, rehabilitation issues and the potential chain reaction from 35 patients and 40 controls. Whole mtDNA ge- role of the genes within the deleted region in the pathogenesis of these nome except D-loop was sequenced. All sequences were analyzed various phenotypic abnormalities. against mitochondrial reference sequence NC_012920. Results: MtD- NA sequencing revealed a total of 132 and 58 nucleotide variations P02.162 Prevalence of Prader-Willi and FRAXA syndromes in PCG and controls respectively. Thirty one novel mtDNA variations among patients with mental retardation were detected in PCG. Of 132 nucleotide variations, 41 (31.06%) were A. R. Shorina1,2, A. B. Maslennikov1, V. A. Makasheva2, E. N. Tolmacheva3, E. non-synonymous and 83 (62.87%) were synonymous changes, and A. Sazhenova3, I. N. Lebedev3; 8 were in RNA genes. Highest numbers of nucleotide variations were 1State Novosibirsk Regional Clinical Diagnostic Center, Novosibirsk, Russian recorded in complex I followed by complex IV then complex V. Two Federation, 2Novosibirsk Regional Children’s Psychoneurological Dispensary, non-synonymous changes (p.W239C in ND2 and p.A20T in ATPase6) Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Medical Genetics SB RAMS, were present both in cases and controls. Discussion: Mitochondrial Tomsk, Russian Federation. function can be affected by mutations in mitochondrial and nuclear One of the main tasks of medical genetic consulting is timely and DNA. MtDNA variations result in reduced mitochondrial respiration correct diagnostics of diseases. However, there are several groups and elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Reduced mi- of pathologies including mental retardation, which are characterized tochondrial respiration may lead to trabecular dysgenesis which is a by broad clinical polymorphism and genetic heterogeneity. The aim characterstic feature of PCG. OS affects both TM and retinal ganglion of present investigation was assessment of Prader-Willi and FRAXA cells (RGCs) and is involved in the neuronal cell death affecting the syndromes prevalence among children with intellectual disorders in optic nerve. Conclusion: Mitochondrial DNA variations adversely affect Novosibirsk region. Among 433 patients clinical diagnosis of Prader- respiratory chain and impair OXPHOS pathway and result in reduced Willi syndrome (PWS) was suspected for 22 children (5.1%). Results mitochondrial respiration and elevated ROS production. This leads to of molecular genetic analyses were positive in 10 cases (45%). One oxidative injury to TM and RGCs. Thus, early identification of mito- family with two affected sibs and unusual mechanism of inheritance chondrial DNA variations and prompt antioxidant administration may was described. One child had microdeletion of 15q11-q13 on paternal delay oxidative stress induced injury to TM and RGCs and, therefore, chromosome, whereas the other UPD(15)mat. FRAXA syndrome was improve visual prognosis. suspected for 25 patients (5.8%) on the basis of clinical examination. Combined cytogenetic and molecular genetic tests were positive for P02.165 salt Loosing Form of cystic Fibrosis (Pseudo-Bartter 11 children only (44%). Our experience indicates that about a half of syndrome): A case Report the patients with clinical features of frequent mental retardation syn- N. Cebi1, K. Shermatov2, A. Cakmak2, M. Ikbal3, M. Y. Alp3, A. H. Cebi3; dromes and negative testing results require more detailed molecular 1Karadeniz Technical University Medical Faculty, Medical Biochemistry, genetic analysis. Trabzon, Turkey, 2Harran University Medical Faculty Department of Pediatrics, Sanlıurfa, Turkey, 3Karadeniz Technical University Medical Faculty, Medical P02.163 Achondroplasia - case report Genetics, Trabzon, Turkey. M. Boia, A. Manea, D. Iacob; 11 months girl patient admitted to our emergency clinic with vomiting University of Medicine and Pharmacy V. Babes, Timisoara, Romania. , cough and diarrhea complaints. She had clinical picture of PBS and Introduction: Achondroplasia, a non lethal form of chondrodysplasia, her sweat test results was suspicious and to confirm CF diagnosis we is the most common form of short-limb dwarfism. Positive diagnosis is apply to supporting findings. Patient diagnosed with salt loosing form relatively easily established based on salient phenotypic features that of CF (Pseudo Bartter’s Syndrome). Treatment with appropriate anti- include: disproportionate short stature, megalencephaly, a prominent biotics, intravenous fluid and electrolyte replacement biochemical find- forehead (frontal bossing), middle face hypoplasia, rhizomelic shorten- ing and general condition of patient improved. She discharged from a ing of the arms and legs, a normal trunk length, thoraco lumbar gibbus hospital with an oral salt and potassium support. (lumbar kyphosis) genu varum, and a trident hand configuration. This case presented on purpose to underline the distinctive diagnosis Materials and method: Premature newborn - cytogenetic, imaging and of PBS related with CF infants which are applied with an electrolyte clinical examination. imbalance and metabolic alkalosis particularly in a hot climate. Results: L.M new born, aged 4 days was admitted to our clinic pre- senting a plurimalformativ syndrome. The patient comes from clinically P02.166 A new storage disorder resembling morquio syndrome healthy parents, gestational age was 37 weeks, birth weight was 2260g, in two sibs the length = 35 cm and Apgar index 1 to 5 minutes. The disease was L. Perrin, O. Fenneteau, C. Baumann, M. Gerard-Blanluet, K. Mazda, A. diagnosed in the 6th month of pregnancy by fetal ultrasonography. Verloes; Positive diagnosis was established based on salient phenotypic fea- Robert Debré Hospital, 75019 paris, France. tures: middle face hypoplasia, a prominent forehead (frontal bossing), We report two brothers born to unrelated French Caribbean parents moderate exophthalmia, posterior palatoschizis, shortening of the presenting with an unclassifiable storage disorder. Pregnancy and arms and legs (the arms = 13 cm), short global stature, sitting down delivery were uneventful. They have short stature (below - 4SD) with Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  short trunk, barrel chest, micromelia with rhizomelic shortening, severe consanguineous parents and his older brothers of whom were unaf- kyphoscoliosis, pectus carinatum, ulnar deviation of the hands, short fected. He was born full-term by normal vaginal delivery and his birth hands and feet with metatarsus adductus, excessive joint laxity of the weight was 2kg. Developmental milestones were delayed. Reportedly, small joints and umbilical hernia. Mild developmental delay was pres- he attended regular school up to 9th grade. Our patient had mental de- ent in both. There was no hepatomegaly or splenomegaly, nor dysmor- ficiency, epilepsy, gingival fibromatosis, cherubism due to the fibrous phia. Skeletal X rays demonstrated generalized platyspondyly with a dysplasia of the maxillae, hypertrichosis and pigmentary changes in tongue-like deformity of the anterior part of the vertebral bodies (remi- the retina. Chromosomal study of peripheral blood lymphocytes con- niscent of Morquio syndrome), and hypoplasia of the odontoid. Gener- firmed the 46, XY karyotype. alized epiphyseal dysplasia and abnormally shaped metaphyses were Ocular features were not described in the original report on this syn- also present. Ophthalmologic examination was normal. Spine defor- drome. Recent reports of other families with R.S. describe pigmentary mity required surgical correction in one of the patient at age 4. retinopathy and optic disc pallor. It may be concluded that ocular ab- Despite similarities with mucopolysacaccharidosis IV, lysosomal en- normalities are another feature of Ramon syndrome and are develop- zymes assays including alpha galactose-6-sulfatase and beta-galac- ing later. tosidase were normal on lymphocytes. Traces of urinary glycoamino- glycans were found in one of the two brothers. They were no vacuol- P02.169 A novel mild phenotype associated with FOXG1 gene ized lymphocytes, but abnormal coarse inclusions were present in the R. De Filippis, I. Meloni, M. Amenduni, A. Spanhol Rosseto, D. Rondinella, M. eosinophils. The azurophiles granulations of the polymorphonuclears Mencarelli, M. Pollazzon, F. Mari, F. Ariani, A. Renieri; were also abnormal. Those morphological anomalies are indicative of Medical Genetics, Molecular Biology Department, University of Siena, Siena, a lysosomal dysfunction. Skin biopsy was normal. Ultrastructural ex- Italy. amination of the cartilage is pending. We recently identified FOXG1 gene as responsible for the congenital We hypothetize that these two boys have an undescribed lysosomal variantof Rett syndrome. This is the severe variant of the syndrome in storage disorder of unknown origin that share clinical and radiological which thenormal perinatal period is very short or absent. After the first features with Morquio disease. twoItalian patients more than 20 patients have been further described. These patients represent a quite homogenous group showing mild P02.167 An atypical case of pseudoxanthoma elasticum with postnatal growth deficiency,severe postnatal microcephaly, severe abdominal cutis laxa: evidence for a clinical disease spectrum mental retardation with absentlanguage development, midline stereo- O. M. Vanakker1, B. P. Leroy1,2, L. J. Schurgers3, I. Pasquali-Ronchetti4, P. J. typies and jearky movements, poor eyecontact, irritability in infancy Coucke1, A. De Paepe1; and gastroesofageal reflux. In this form,patients can neither speak 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, nor walk and have severe dispraxia. We present here a12.5 year-old 2Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, female with postnatal microcephaly (48 cm, 7.5 y), ataxicgait, hyper- 3VitaK & Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Biochemistry, activity, seizures, stereotypies, protruding tongue, prognatism,midface University of Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Department of Biomedical hypoplasia resembling 9qter microdeletion syndrome, normal karioty- Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. peand normal EHMT1 gene. Although she was able to walk, listen- Introduction. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), featuring papular skin ing music, andmanipulate objects (with moderate apraxia) we decided lesions, a retinopathy and cardiovascular complications, results from to test FOXG1 gene. A de novo early truncating mutation (c136C>T; elastic fibre calcification and fragmentation due to ABCC6 mutations. p.Q46X) has been identified in this gene. To our knowledge this is the The PXE-like syndrome (PXEL), caused by GGCX mutations, features first report with a mild phenotype associated with FOXG1 mutation. generalized cutis laxa, mild retinopathy and a clotting deficiency. The This discovery paves the way to the possibility that also FOXG1 may GGCX carboxylase activates vitamin K (VK)-dependent calcification be associated with mild variants, as for MECP2 gene in Zappella vari- inhibitors {matrix gla protein (MGP), osteocalcin (OC)}. We present a ant. patient with a clinical and histochemical overlap phenotype between PXE and PXEL. P02.170 A systematic metabolic approach to the evaluation of Methods & Results. The proband presented typical PXE features nutrition in Rett syndrome according to the cardiorespiratory - yellowish papules in the neck and severe retinopathy - together phenotype in Dutch Rett girls. with marked abdominal cutis laxa, as in PXEL. Dermal ultrastructural N. S. J. Halbach1,2, E. E. J. Smeets1,2, J. Bierau1, I. Keularts1, J. Bakker1, L. M. evaluation revealed mineralization in the periphery of elastic fibres, G. Curfs1,2; typical for PXEL. Immunohistochemistry showed marked staining for 1Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Governor Kremers uncarboxylated (uc) MGP and ucOC, seen in PXE and PXEL, though Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands. not confined to the middermis - as in PXE - but affecting the whole Background: Despite their good appetite, many females with Rett syn- dermis as in PXEL. Measuring circulating levels of carboxylated (c) drome (RTT) meet the criteria for moderate to severe malnutrition. Al- and ucMGP and OC revealed elevated ucOC/cOC ratios, as in PXEL though feeding difficulties may play a part in this, other constitutional (normal in PXE), but normal ucMGP/cMGP ratios, as in PXE (elevated factors as altered metabolic processes are suspected. Irregular breath- in PXEL). Molecular analysis unveiled two known compound hetero- ing is a common clinical feature, which leads to chronic respiratory al- zygous ABCC6 mutations, while GGCX harboured a gain-of-function kalosis or acidosis. The aim of this study was to examine the influence polymorphism. Circulating VK levels were severely decreased, pos- of breathing irregularities on metabolic processes, as a possible cause sibly neutralising the effect of the latter. of impaired nutritional status. Conclusion. This phenotype, reminiscent of PXE and PXEL, suggests Methods: The study population consisted of a well-defined group of that PXEL may represent a spectrum of ectopic calcification disorders thirteen Dutch RTT girls with complete clinical, molecular and neuro- who are clinically and pathogenetically related to PXE. The low VK se- physiological work-up. A complete nutrition assessment and measure- rum levels suggest a pathophysiological role for a deficient VK status ment of body composition was carried out. Blood and urine samples in these disorders. for biochemical screening of metabolites from multiple pathways were collected. P02.168 Ramon Syndrome in a 38-year-old male Results: Six RTT girls had a significantly elevated creatine concentra- S. Turyk, M. Sakurai, C. Galliuss, E. Maloberti; tion in plasma and creatine/creatinine ratio in urine. Five girls were Hospital Britanico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. forceful breathers, one girl had an undetermined cardiorespiratory phe- Ramon Syndrome (RS) was initially described by Ramon et al. (Oral notype. A significantly elevated creatine/creatinine ratio in urine only Surg. 24:436-48, 1967). Since that time there have been few patients was seen in one girl, she was a feeble breather. reported in the literature with this rare, presumed autosomal reces- Conclusion: Chronic respiratory alkalosis may alter the creatine metab- sive syndrome. Described patients were mostly children. We report olism in females with RTT. Furthermore, MeCP2 deficiency may cause a new case of RS, a rare disorder, characterized primarily by gingival epigenetic aberrations affecting the expression of the creatine-trans- overgrowth, congenital generalized hypertrichosis, mental retardation porter gene, which is located at Xq28. Further studies concerning the and epilepsy. nutritional and cardiorespiratory requirements of RTT girls are impor- Our proband was a Caucasian, 38-year-old male. Third son of non- tant in order for them to receive appropriate and effective treatment.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  P02.171 Ophthalmologic findings in one case of Rieger Lancaster County, PA, United States. syndrome Cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED, Sensenbrenner syndrome, OMIM O. K. Janvareva1, M. O. Mkheidze2; 218220) is a rare syndrome characterized by dolicocephaly/sagittal 1Medical Centre of St.Petersburg University, St.Petersburg, Russian craniosynostosis and ectodermal anomalies. The majority of individu- Federation, 2Medical Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, als have short stature and normal intelligence although developmen- Russian Federation. tal delay has been reported. CED is presumably autosomal recessive Rieger syndrome or mesodermal dysgenesis of the iris and retina based on sibling recurrence, and parental consanguinity. Several CED (MIM180500, 4q25-q27) is a consequence of abnormal cleavage of patients have developed tubulo-interstitial renal disease, hepatic fibro- the anterior chamber. This results in iris hypoplasia and strands run- sis and retinitis pigmentosa supporting that CED is a congenital hepa- ning from the iris to the posterior surface of the cornea (synachiae). tofibrocystic syndrome (CHFS). The majority of CHFS are now known Posterior embriotoxon is usually present and glaucoma may be a to be members of the growing class of human ciliopathies. Several of complication. Here we report on 14 years old girl suffered form Rieger the early cases of CED were reported in the literature multiple times syndrome. Her parents deny consanguinity. She is under our observa- which was not appreciated in some of the previous published reviews tion during 5 years. Proband’s phenotype included short proportionate of this condition. stature, shield-shaped chest, arachnodactyly, oligodontia, peg-shaped Herein we report our experience with several new cases of CED. This teeth. Extensive ophthalmologic studies showed bilateral inborn glau- includes a child born to consanguineous Tatarian parents with con- coma and pronounced mesodermal dysgenesis of the iris and retina, firmed situs inversus- a prototypic ciliopathy feature. We have also posterior embriotoxon, microcornea (d~8mm vs. 11.5-12mm). In the seen 3 Hutterite children with CED features and developmental delay, angle of the anterior chamber residual mesodermal tissue was shown and we have mapped their disorder to the short arm of chromosome with biomicroscopy. Congenital stromal prelimbal cloudy cornea was 17. The nearly 400 genes in this region are currently being priorized found here. In addition proband’s phenotype included the irregular oval for sequencing based on published ciliary databases-an update will be pupils displaced towards nasal area and turned vis-à-vis. There were provided. We will also review all the published CED cases and the core two false congenital pupils (the left eye). Using gonioscopy the angels phenotype. If CED is indeed a ciliopathy a number of predictions can of the anterior chambers were found to be closed but intraocular pres- be made prior to the first gene being identified- genetic heterogeneity sure was below 22 mmHg without hypotensive medication. Refractive can be anticipated, patients will be seen with CED and features over- myopia was revealed. Her mental intellectual faculties were excellent. lapping other known ciliopathies, and that alleles at other ciliary loci will Trophic medication and optic correction were applied. modify phenotypic expression. P02.172 Autistic features and unusual behavior in a girl with P02.174 sHORt syndrome: autosomal dominant transmission ring chromosome 11: clinical, psychological and molecular and prenatal diagnosis cytogenetic characterization M. Mathieu1, B. Devauchelle1, B. Demeer1, P. Bitoun2, S. Lanta1, A. De Sandre- E. A. Saprina1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,3, Y. B. Yurov1,3, V. Y. Voinova3,2, O. S. Giovannoli3, G. Viot4, P. Naepels1, J. Gondry1, G. Morin1; Kurinnaia1,3, A. D. Kolotii1,3, I. Y. Iourov1,3; 1Amiens University Hospital, Amiens, France, 2Jean Verdier Hospital, Bondy, 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian France, 3La Timone Hospital, Marseille, France, 4Saint-Vincent-de-Paul Federation, 2Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Hospital, Paris, France. Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, The SHORT syndrome was first described by Gorlin and Sensen- Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, Russian Federation. brenner in 1975 where the acronym stands for: S stature, H hyperex- We report an 8 year-old Caucasian girl with a ring 11 chromosome pre- tensible joints and/or hernia, O ocular depression, R Rieger anomaly senting with microcephaly, short stature, intellectual disabilities, spas- (iris stroma hypoplasia,posterior embryotoxon and iridocorneal syn- tic-ataxic syndrome and autistic features. The majority of phenotypic echia), T teething delay. It has now been reported in more than 24 features resemble those previously reported for r(11), whereas spas- patients of the two sexes. A partial lipodystrophy of the thorax and the tic-ataxic syndrome and autistic features are not. The proposita is a face gives them a progeroid facial appearance. Intellect is generally girl delivered at term to non-consanguineous parents. She has severe normal .Some inconstant features can be present as hearing loss and growth and psychomotor retardation, bicuspid aortic valve, congenital renal anomalies. Adults present a high risk of mellitus diabetes with in- strabismus, hipoplastic thymus gland, pancreas dysfunction, “cafe- sulin resistance. The inheritance is autosomal dominant and until now, au-lait” pigmentary skin changes, partial ptosis, abnormal ear shape, the etiopathogeny remains unknown. high-arched palate, broad nasal bridge, shortening of III metatarsal In 2001, we reported the observation of a 27-year-old affected woman bone. MRI has showed slight frontal lobe atrophy, hydrocephalus and with absence of familial history. A first pregnancy was complicated by myelination deficit. She has inconsistent eye contact, increased anxi- severe diabetes requiring high doses of insulin allowing the birth of an ety/fears and ritualistic, stereotyped, self-injurious behavior, and is ner- unaffected girl born prematurely at 29 weeks. At the age of 8, she is vous, depressive and tearfulness. Total CARS score is 36 (moderate in good health. The watch of a second pregnancy of the 33years-old autism). Repetitive Behavior Scale-Revised score is 37 (high scores index case confirmed the event of gestational diabetes. Ultrasound ex- for self-injurious, restricted and ritualistic/sameness behavior; median amination shows a craniofacial fetal microsomia with dysmorphic fea- scores for stereotyped behavior; low score for compulsive behavior). tures at 27 weeks of gestation. This confirmed the autosomal dominant Speech difficulties refer to rhinolalia and poor vocabulary. The girl has inheritance from mother to the fetus. The pregnancy was terminated good concentration span and long-term verbal memory, being ex- Even if features are common with Rieger or progeroid syndromes, no tremely good in gestalt recognition with occasional difficulties of com- mutations in PITX2 or lamine A/C genes was detected. Array-CGH mon things recognition. Molecular cytogenetic characterization was was normal. performed by FISH with site-specific DNA probes for subtelomeric and interstitial chromosome 11 regions as well as by whole-genome BAC P02.175 small duplication of the GPc3 gene in a spanish array 1Mb CGH. We found ring chromosome to be associated with family as a newly recognized cause of simpson-Golabi-Behmel loss of 11q24.1->11qter (121,411,392-134,916,587 or ~13.5Mb) with- syndrome. out chromosomal DNA loss within 11pter. To the best our knowledge, B. Gener1, C. Romano2, A. Schinzel3, G. Ariceta4, D. Di Benedetto5, M. this is the first case of r(11) characterized by array CGH. Fichera5; 1Clinical Genetics. Hospital de Cruces, Baracaldo, Spain, 2Unit of Pediatrics P02.173 sensenbrenner syndrome (cranioectodermal and Medical Genetics. Oasi Institute (I.R.C.C.S.) for Research and Care in Dysplasia): A candidate human ciliopathy. Presentation of new Mental Retardation and Brain Aging, Troina, Italy, 3Institute of Medical Genetics. cases, review of the literature and possible mechanisms. University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 4Pediatric Nephrology Unit. A. Innes1, C. Loucks1, M. Thomas1, D. McLeod1, A. Wade1, E. Puffenberger2, J. Hospital de Cruces, Baracaldo, Spain, 5Laboratorio di Diagnosi Genetica. Parboosingh1; IRCCS Oasi Maria Santísima, Troina, Italy. 1University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 2Clinic for Special Children, Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome (SGBS) is an X-linked recessive overgrowth disorder characterized by prenatal onset of overgrowth, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 7 characteristic facies, frequently mild to severe mental retardation and was found in both children on sequence analysis. Their mother, who different associated congenital anomalies. Up to date only mutations had isolated HH with no eye or other anomalies, was found to har- or deletions of the glypican 3 (GPC3) gene have been reported associ- bour the same SOX2 mutation at mosaic levels in a peripheral blood ated to this syndrome. sample. Although most SOX2 mutations arise de novo, the recurrence Here we describe a three generation Spanish family with a clinically in this family as a result of mosaicism in the mother highlights the im- recognizable SGBS Subsequently to negative mutational screening of portance of clinical and molecular evaluation of parents of children with GPC3 gene in the proband, we decided to perform array-CGH analy- anophthalmia due to a SOX2 mutation to enable accurate recurrence sis (180K Agilent array), and identified a small duplication of about risk counselling. 35 kb within GPC3 gene whereas no other significant copy number This is the first report of HH in the absence of eye involvement in a variants were recognized in the rest of the genome. The rearrange- SOX2 mutation patient. The SOX2 mutation was present in mosaic ment, was checked using a SALSA MLPA KIT P154 SGBS-GPC3-4 form in a peripheral blood sample and it was detectable using routine (MRC-Holland) assay which confirmed the duplication of exon 6 lead- sequencing methods. Most SOX2 mutations have been ascertained ing to disruption of the GPC3 gene. Further analysis in the pedigree through the study of patients with ocular abnormalities, and it is not demonstrated that the rearrangement co-segregated with the disease. known what proportion of patients with HH may harbour SOX2 mu- A total of eleven family members have been molecularly investigated. tations. This report has important implications for the evaluation of Two affected males presented basically with neonatal hypoglycaemia patients with isolated HH, particularly in the setting of infertility treat- (in one), coarse face, macroglossia, overgrowth, normal or mild learn- ment. ing difficulties, and renal anomalies. The clinical phenotype in the four female carriers varies from absolute normal to mild clinical manifesta- P02.178 Stickler Syndrome and mental retardation in a patient tions. with a de novo 12q13.11 microdeletion To our knowledge this is the first case of SGBS encompassing dupli- S. Gimelli1, M. Periklis1, C. Stouder1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2, A. Bottani1, F. Béna1; cation of the GPC3 gene reported so far. As already demonstrated for 1Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, other genes, the molecular screening of the GPC3 gene should always Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of include a gene dosage analysis in order to exclude small deletions / Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. duplications. Proximal 12q deletions are rare events. To date only 2 cases have been reported with a 12q13 partially overlapping deletion [Gallego et P02.176 A De Novo Deletion of the SMC1A gene at Xp11.2 in a al., 2000 (Case1); Tonoki et al., 1998 (Case2)]. We describe an 11- female associated with cleft lip and palate, overlapping fingers, year-old girl with mental retardation, microcephaly, cleft palate and refractory seizures and hemivertebrae severe bilateral myopia. E. S. Goh, G. De Veber, D. J. Stavropoulos, D. Chitayat; Array-CGH analysis (Agilent 244K) revealed a de novo interstitial Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. 12q13.11 deletion of 1.3 Mb. The deleted region encompasses 16 The SMC1A (OMIM 300040) gene located at Xp11.2 is reported to genes including COL2A1 and AMIGO2. The former gene is known to escape X inactivation and is associated with a variant of Cornelia de cause Stickler Syndrome type I ‘OMIM 108300’ when haploinsufficient, Lange (CdLS). Previous research suggested that mechanistically the while the latter is specifically expressed on fiber tracts of neuronal tis- SMC1A-related CdLS is due to the mutant proteins that maintain a sues and involved in their formation [Kuja-Panula et al.,2003]. We hy- residual function in males and cause a dominant negative effect in pothesize that AMIGO2 haploinsufficiency is responsible for the men- females. We report a case of a de novo deletion at Xp11.2 which in- tal handicap of our patient, providing further arguments for the role of cluded a partial deletion of exons 19-25 in SMC1A. The proband is a AMIGO2 in mental development. Our findings support the hypothesis term female born to non-consanguineous healthy parents. Her birth that the haploinsufficiency of AMIGO2 is probably responsible for the parameters and APGAR scores were normal. On examination, she mental handicap of our patient. Characterization of additional patients had hypotonia, left cleft lip and cleft of the anterior part of the second- with intragenic mutations of this gene will help advance our under- ary palate, bilateral camptodactyly and overlapping of the 2nd and 3rd standing of its involvement in mental retardation. digits. She also had a small VSD and hemivertebrae at C4-C5 and T9-T11. Brain MRI showed mild increased T2 signal in the white mat- P02.179 Stuve- Wiedemann: a newly confirmed case in a ter of the frontal and parietal lobes and suggestion of volume loss. At chilean infant 2 months of age she developed intractable seizures with episodes of M. I. Aracena1, A. Superti-Furga2, V. Cormier Daire3, N. Dagoneau3, J. Kattan4, apnea, desaturation and bradycardia. Her karyotype was 46,XX and T. P. Solís5, G. Córdova6; microarray analysis also showed a maternally inherited duplication at 1Departamento Pediatría Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile - Genética 15q11.2 which did not include the SNRPN locus. To our knowledge, H. Luis Calvo Mackenna, Santiago, Chile, 2Chair, Department of Pediatrics, our case is the largest known deletion in SMC1A. Analysis of SMC1A University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 3Departement de Genetique Unite expression is undertaken in the patient’s lymphoblast line. If this shows de Genetique Clinique Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4Departamento lack of the mutant proteins, it will question the validity of the theory that de Pediatría- Unidad Neonatología Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, in females, the condition is the result of a dominant negative effect (Liu Santiago, Chile, 5Residente Neonatología Pontificia Universidad Católica de et al., 2009). Chile, Santiago, Chile, 6Unidad de Cuidados Intensivo Pediátrico- Hospital Clínico Pontifica Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. P02.177 Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism due to mosaic sOX2 Introduction: Stuve- Wiedemann syndrome (STWS) is a rare autoso- mutation, and anophthalmia/microphthalmia in two offspring mal recessive disorder characterized by a congenital bone dysplasia born after assisted reproductive treatment and autonomous dysregulation, frequently associated with early death. Z. Stark1, R. Storen2, R. Savarirayan1,3, R. Jamieson2; It was described by Stuve and Wiedemann in 1971. In 2004 Dagoneau 1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Australia, 2Eye Genetics Research et al. identified mutations in the leukaemia inhibitory factor receptor Group, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Children’s Medical Research (LIFR) gene. We describe a Chilean infant whose diagnosis and con- Institute, Save Sight Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, firmation was done with the cooperation of the Skeldys network. 3Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Case Report: first daughter of consanguineous parents. Prenatal ul- Heterozygous mutations in the transcription factor SOX2 are the com- trasound showed long bones <p5. BW: 3140g, BL: 46cm, CC:33.3cm. monest single-gene cause of anophthalmia/microphthalmia (A/M). In She developed severe respiratory distress at birth requiring mechani- some patients with eye anomalies and SOX2 mutations, hypogonado- cal ventilation for 10 days. trophic hypogonadism (HH) has been reported. Deficiency of lutein- Physical examination showed a normocephalic newborn, with rhizo- izing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone secretion often neces- melic shortening of the limbs, slightly bowed legs. She had a round sitates the use of assisted reproductive technology to assist fertility in face with low nasal bridge, high palate, short neck, and overlapping fin- individuals with HH. gers. Intraoral reflexes were diminished, with absent corneal reflexes, We report two children with anophthalmia/microphthalmia who were and normal patellar reflexes. She was unable to swallow requiring a born following infertility treatment of their mother who had HH. A novel gastrostomy. She has presented frequent hyperthermic episodes ac- heterozygous frameshift mutation in the SOX2 transactivation domain companied by dehydration, sweating, respiratory distress and poor Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  perfusion. Infectious screening have been repeatedly negative. Now affected individuals. she is 7m old and despite several hospitalizations, growth develop- ment is adequate to her age. P02.182 Tetraploid/diploid mosaicism - An easily overlooked Skeletal survey showed mild osteopenia, irregular metaphysis, short- cause of dysmorphism ening and bowing of femur and tibia. Molecular study confirmed a LIFR S. Berland, G. Houge; mutation present at the homozygote state. Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. We stress the importance of sharing the history and radiological stud- Chromosomal mosaicism not detectable in blood lymphocyte meta- ies of patients with a suspected though infrequent skeletal dysplasia in phases is an easily overlooked cause of dysmorphism. We present the skeldys group. This permitted to achieve a prompt and confirmed a boy with tetraploid/diploid mosaicism, a type of mosaicism that also diagnosis in this case. remains undetectable upon DNA diagnostic screening on genomic mi- croarrays. Clinical suspicion of the mosaicism is therefore essential. P02.180 RARE SUBMICROSCOPIC REARRANGEMENTS The boy is mentally retarded (walked at age 2 years, no oral language E. Gean1, I. Plensa1, C. Garrido2, V. Catala2, M. Pineda1, J. Campistol1; at age 4,5 years, normal behaviour) with distinctive dysmorphic fea- 1Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Esplugues, Barcelona, Spain, 2Prenatal Genetics, tures: Triangular face, marked hypertelorism, short/downslanting pal- Barcelona, Spain. pebral fissures, posteriorly rotated simple ears with narrow auditory Submicroscopic rearrangements involving chromosome ends are channels, short neck, asymmetric thorax and one café-au-lait spot. He responsible for the unexplained mental retardation and multiple con- also suffers from early loss of all deciduous incisors due to aggressive genital anomalies observed in some patients. These results provide a periodontitis. Height, weight and head circumference are in the low new and useful tool to inform families and for genetic counselling. We normal range (2.5-10 centile). present three families with a cryptic reciprocal translocation, detected In this case, despite normal blood karyotype 46,XY and normal HR- using subtelomere specific FISH probes, where proband inherited an CGH, a chromosomal mosaicism was suspected because of a „chro- unbalanced segregant from the mother. mosomal appearance“ and slight asymmetry. Fibroblast culture from Case 1. A 9-years-old girl, affected of severe mental retardation, dys- a skin biopsy revealed non-mosaic tetraploidy (92,XXYY) which was morphic face and malocclusion of teeth, strabismus, seizures and joint confirmed with interphase FISH. In contrast, FISH investigation of pe- laxity. MR show hypoplasia of corpus callosum, periventricular hetero- ripheral blood leukocytes and buccal cells did not show signs of tetra- topia and white matter alteration. Patient has a monosomy 6qtel and ploidy. As expected, a haplotype study of DNA from both parents and a trisomy 15qtel inherited from her mother. A healthy brother also has the boy’s fibroblasts indicated that the tetraploidy resulted from mitotic the same mother’s balanced translocation. slippage or failed cytokinesis during early embryonic development. Case 2. A 5-year-old boy with severe mental retardation, dysmorphic face and velopalatine insufficiency, hypospadias and seizures. Patient P02.183 The simultaneous presence of α and β thalassaemia has a monosomy 17qtel and trisomy 19qtel inherited from his mother. alleles: a pitfall for thalassaemia screening Case 3. A 5-year-old girl was referred to us because the cytogenetic A. Balassopoulou, E. Boutou, E. Delaki, K. Sinopoulou, M. Papadakis, E. blood analysis showed an extra material on the short arms of chro- Voskaridou; mosome 8; Karyotype: 46,XX, add(8)(p22). Proband presents severe Thalassaemia Center, Laiko Hospital, Athens, Greece. mental retardation and dysmorphic features. FISH study shows mono- Haemoglobinopathies are a group of monogenic disorders character- somy 8ptel and trisomy 4ptel inherited from her mother. ized by reduction of one or more globin chain synthesis or a structur- To our knowledge there are no other cases described in the literature ally abnormal globin chain synthesis. Accurate determination of carrier with the same subtelomeric chromosome rearrangements. We discuss haematological phenotype is quite useful in order to determine the genetic counselling aspects and patients evolution. underlying carrier genotype. Although haemoglobin disorders are the best studied (mainly for α- and β-thalassemias), autosomal genetic P02.181 Terminal osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects disorders and haematological phenotypes are not always well correlat- (TODPD): follow-up of the first reported family, characterization ed with specific gene mutations. The co-existence of different types of of the radiological phenotype, and refinement of the linkage mutations in thalassemia genes alter typical heamatological patterns region. and can lead to genotype / prenatal misdiagnosis, especially in cases N. Brunetti-Pierri1,2,3, R. Lachman4, P. Piccolo1, A. Cardinale1, K. Lee4, S. M. of ‘silent’ carriers. Leal2, I. Van Den Veyver2, C. A. Bacino2; In this poster we present distinct combinations of co-inheritance of al- 1Telethon Insitute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2Department of pha, beta and delta thalassemias (alpha and beta, alpha and delta, Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, beta and delta) and how these combinations alter the haematological United States, 3Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy, data. Furthermore we suggest more extended genotype analysis ap- 4Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, David Geffen School proach especially for couples where prenatal diagnosis is needed. In of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States. countries like Greece, where α - and β - thalassemia traits are quite Terminal osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects (TODPD) is an X- high, additional care must be given in β-thalasemia carriers who could linked dominant syndrome with distal limb anomalies and pigmentary possibly carry a ‘well hidden’ α-thalassemia severe mutation. Even in skin defects. We have previously described this syndrome in several cases where amelioration of erythrocyte indices (MCV, MCH) is ob- females from a large, four-generation pedigree. The presentation in served, MCH is not always modified. In couples where one partner the affected patients included multiple anomalies, hypertelorism, iris seems to be an α-thalassemia carrier and the other a β- thalassemia colobomas, punched-out pigmentary abnormalities over the face and carrier, in the latter, HbA2 is not practically altered when an a-thal- scalp, brachydactyly, and digital fibromatosis. The phenotype was assaemia trait co-exists. In such cases, simultaneous analysis of both highly variable thus suggesting that X-inactivation plays an important genes mutations should be carried out in order to achieve safer prena- role in the expression of the disease. Following our initial description tal diagnosis and more effective/accurate genetic counselling. of this condition there have been reports of more cases supporting the initial phenotypic description of this disease. We report the follow-up of P02.184 Townes-Brocks syndrome: report of a first case of this family at about 10 years from the first evaluation. A detailed clinical townes-Brocks syndrome with congenital adrenal hyperplasia follow-up and a review of the skeletal surveys suggests that although B. Bozorgmehr, A. Kariminejad, F. Afroozan, M. Kariminejad, N. Faramarzi the most striking features involves the hands and feet, the skeletal Garous; involvement is more generalized and affects many other areas. Kariminejad-Najmabadi Genetics Center, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Our previous linkage analysis has demonstrated mapping to Xq27.3- Townes-Brocks syndrome (TBS) characterized by imperforated anus Xq28. Using a 6,056 SNP array, we have further refined the critical (82%), dysplastic ears (88%) (over folded superior helices and pre- region within the Xq28 region. We have also excluded two candidate auricular tags) frequently associated with sensorineural and/or con- genes (FLNA and FAM58A) mapping in the critical region. The identifi- ductive hearing impairment (65%), and thumb malformations (89%) cation of the gene responsible for this rare condition will shed light on (triphalangeal thumbs, duplication of the thumb, preaxial polydactyly the molecular pathways leading to the various congenital anomalies and rarely hypoplasia of the thumb. of TODPD and will allow a more accurate genetic counseling to the Renal impairment (27%), including end-stage renal disease (ESRD) Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology  (42%), may occur with or without structural abnormalities (mild mal- no evidence of mosaicism. The clinical features are growth retarda- rotation, ectopia, horseshoe kidney, renal hypoplasia, polycystic kid- tion, prominent occiput, open anterior and posterior fontanelles, tele- neys, vesicoutereral reflux). Congenital heart disease occurs in 25%, canthus, short and asymmetric palpebral fissures, wide nasal bridge, genitourinary malformations (36%). Mental retardation occurs in ap- large nose, deep filter, high and narrow palate, microgenia, deformed proximately 10% of cases. It is autosomal dominant disease with vari- low set ears, abnormal length all fingers, abnormal dermatoglyphics, ability in the severity of expression. long narrow feet, chest deformation, skin grooves in lumbar region, We are reporting a 8 year girl with dysplastic ears, deafness, dysplas- ventricular septum defect and open arterial duct. The placenta was tic thumbs, small kidneys, history of repaired imperforated anus, and small and noncystic. The proband died of cardiac arrest. rectovaginal fistula. She is also diagnosed with congenital adrenal hy- perplasia with congenital hyperplasia. We believe our patient is the P02.188 Partial trisomy of chromosome 18q21 in a woman led to first case of Townes-Brocks syndrome. a full trisomy of chromosome 18 in a fatal embryo S. N. Kokkinou, A. Lindou; P02.185 Imperforate anus, ear and renal anomalies: is the Cytogenetic Unit, Sismanoglion General Hospital, Halandri, Greece. townes-Brocks syndrome possible? Introduction: Trisomy18 syndrome,is one of the most common autoso- C. Daescu1,2, I. Maris1,2, I. Simedrea1,2, A. Craciun1,2, C. Duncescu2, M. Puiu1,2; mal anomalies.Different candidate critical regions have been proposed 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, for Edwards syndrome extended from proximal 18q12 to distal 18q21. 2“Louis Turcanu“ Emergency Hospital for Children, Timisoara, Romania. Aim of the study: We report a woman with partial trisomy 18q21 who Introduction: Townes-Brocks syndrome (TBS) is characterized by the had 3 early abortions in embryos with full trisomy of #18. triad of imperforate anus (82%), dysplastic ears (88%) and thumb mal- Patients: In March 2008 a couple was transferred to Cytogenetic unit formations (89%). Renal impairment (27%) may occur with or without because of a history of 3 early abortions with the embryos having tri- structural abnormalities. Material and method: The authors describe somy 18.The husband had a normal phenotype,while the woman 30yr the case of a new-born male referred to our hospital for the proper old, had short neck,a finding that was also had her mother who refused surgical treatment of a life-threatening anomaly: imperforate anus. Re- a chromosomal analysis. sults: The physical revealed right facial nerve paralysis, microtia, and Methods: Peripheral blood lymphocytes were cultured using standard preauricular pit, while the cerebral MRI concluded that the external au- techniques.Thirty GTG banded metaphases were analyzed(ISCN2005). ditory canal and the middle ear were absent, but with preserved inner FISH was done with the 18SE centromeric probe(KREATECH) and ear structures. We also performed several other imaging studies: the LSI MALT1(18q21),which identifies #18 aneuploidy(VYSIS). abdominal ultrasound suggested crossed fused renal ectopia and the Cohybridization was done with Telvysion13q(so)/Telvysion 21q(sg). abdominal MRI confirmed these findings; vesico-uretheral reflux and Two hundred interface nuclei were counted for any single probe in renal scaring on the ectopic kidney were found on voiding cystography both partners. and scintigraphy scan, respectively; the cardiac ultrasound revealed a RESULTS: The husband had normal results (karyotype/FISH). ventricular septal defect. Corroborating the obtained data with and the The wife had 2 abnormal karyotypic cells and with FISH 10% of her international experience, we included our case in the TBS phenotype. cells were trisomic for 18q21region. Initially a left colostomy was performed immediately after birth, fol- Conclusion: Pure partial duplication of #18 is a very rare syndrome. lowed at 8 months of age by a posterior sagittal anorectoplasty (Pena In our case it is important that a mother with a partial trisomy of 18q21 procedure) and the nephrectomy of the ectopic kidney. The latter was critical region aborted 3 embryos with full trisomy #18. performed in an Austrian hospital. The patient had multiple urinary tract Reports suggest that the critical regions 18q11 and 18q21 are impli- infections, which stopped after the second intervention. Conclusions: cated in the etiology of the +18 syndrome and the risk of such interac- Genetic testing should be performed (muttation in the SALL1 gene) to tion errors increase with advance parental age and can happen during avoid confusion due to the absence of thumb malformations. the division of reproductive cells in the carrier parent. P02.186 A report of a familial translocation with different clinical P02.189 TSC2-PKD1 gene deletion related to Tuberous Sclerosis manifestaion and Polycystic Kidney Disease symptoms F. Mortezapour, M. Rahnama, F. Taleb Manochehri, F. Nasiri kenari, F. C. Vidales1, I. Zubillaga1, R. Simon2, A. Jauch3, P. Kozlowski4, E. Dominguez5; Razazian, F. Mahjoubi; 1Molecular Genetic Unit, Policlinica Gipuzkoa, San Sebastian, Spain, 2Servicio IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. de Neurología, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 3Institute of Human We are reporting a baby boy with abnormal phenotype who is a carrier Genetics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Institute of an apparently balanced translocation between chromosome 16 and of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 20. He is the second child of an unrelated couple. The first child shortly 5Laboratory of Molecular Diagnostics and Biotechnology, Center for Biomedical after birth was dead due to respiratory infection and being premature. Research (CIBIR), Logroño, Spain. This proband was delivered at 32 weeks of gestation. His birth weight Tuberous Sclerosis (TS) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by was 1/75 kg. He had low set ears, hydrocephaly, undetected testis, mutations in TSC1/TSC2 genes. Both are tumour suppressor genes cleft plate, and abnormal hands and feet. He was also dead because and encode the hamartin (TSC1) and tuberin (TSC2) proteins. of respiratory infection. The karyotype of the baby found to be 46, XY,tr Variable penetrance and a wide clinical spectrum are hallmarks of TS. (16;20)(q11.2;p13)mat. Since there are 2 cases of still birth in this fam- Genotype-phenotype correlation studies have shown that TSC2 muta- ily with familial translocation we think it is worth to report that. tions are associated with a more severe phenotype than those found in Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set up in RPMI 1640 sup- TSC1. In some cases this affirmation is biased by the presence of al- plemented with 20% FBS.highresolution chromosome banding was terations that compromise both TSC2 and PKD1. PKD1 is responsible Performed in all subject. for the Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) and is located adjacent to TSC2 in tail to tail orientation. P02.187 A case of triploidy (69,XXX) with long survival time We present here two unrelated patients with no family history of TS and J. Y. Kotalevskaya1, N. V. Oparina1,2, A. A. Medvedeva3, A. Y. Asanov4, N. S. negative for small-mutation screening in TSC1/TSC2. Clinical criteria Demikova5, V. G. Antonenko1; of patient 1 (3 years) are: Hypomelanotic macules, cardiac rhabdo- 1Vladimirsky Moscow Regional Research Clinical Institute, Moscow, Russian myoma, renal cysts, cortical tubers and retinal hamartoma. Clinical cri- Federation, 2Scientific Center of Medical Genetics, Russian Federation, teria of patient 2 (22 years) are: Angiofibromas, cardiac rhabdomyoma, 3Korolev Maternity Hospital, Korolev, Russian Federation, 4Moscow Medical renal cysts and cortical tubers.Using MLPA assays, we found a hetero- Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5Research Institute of Pediatrics and zygous deletion encompassing both TSC2 and PKD1 genes in both Child Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. patients. Patient 1: The deletion encompasses TSC2 E30-E41 and en- The liveborn infants with triploidy is a very rare event and death usu- tire PKD1; Patient 2: The deletion encompasses the entire TSC2 and ally occurs within the first hours of life. Triploid cases with a survival PKD1. Both patients have major criteria of TS and renal cysts which is of more than two months are infrequent. We report on a liveborn trip- concordant with TSC2/PKD1 contiguous gene syndrome. We propose loid female, born after 36-37 weeks of gestation and who survived 67 that MLPA analysis of the TSC2-PKD1 region should be considered as days. Chromosomal analysis demonstrated a 69,XXX karyotype with preliminary screening in patients with PKD and TS criteria.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 100 P02.190 Unusual presentation of tuberous sclerosis complex in Medicine, Antalya, Turkey. neonatal period The urofacial syndrome (OCHOA; OMIM 236730), is a rare autosomal E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Kocova, N. Angelkova, S. Krstevska; recessive disease characterized by facial abnormalities, and uropathy. Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. The patients with urofacial syndrome have paradoxical inversion of Tuberous sclerosis is severe autosomal dominant hamartosis that af- facial musculature during smile as crying facies and at the same time fects various organs and systems, predominantly skin and CNS. Most they present enuresis with neurogenic bladder. This disorder was previ- of the symptoms appear later during infancy, such as seizures, skin ously mapped to 10q23-q24 region and no locus heterogeneity has yet and bone lesions, as well as mental retardation. Early diagnosis in been reported. In this study, we report genetic analysis results of a new neonatal period is difficult and can be established if variable dysmor- consanguineous family with six offspring, four of whom were affected. phic features are present. The index case was a 16-year-old girl with an end-stage renal failure We report on a male newborn with major facial and body anomalies. for the last three years. She was under continuous ambulatory periton It is the third child in a family without the history of chronic diseases. dialysis. In the medical history, there was recurrent urinary infections, The pregnancy and delivery was normal, with high birthweight. The incontinence and enuresis. An appearance of crying face during smil- baby had hemihypertrophy of the whole left side - the body and face, ing was noticed. Voiding cystouretrogram of the index case showed a especially the left arm which was immobile. The hands and feet were trabeculated, diverticuled and low capacity bladder and left high-grade big, rough with loose redundant skin. The fingers especially on the vesicoureteral reflux. In addition, there was bilateral grade 4-5 hydro- left hand were large and inflexible. There is a vascular patchy skar- nephrosis in her renal ultrasound. She had five siblings. Three of them like lesion on the left hemithorax. Ultrasonography of the heart con- had similiar medical history and clinical findings. Their mental status firmed rhabdomiomas.KTM of the brain was performed at the age of and other examination findings were normal. Homozygosity analysis 2.5 months when seizures started, showing existence of tumors inside using 250K Affymetrix SNP array (NspI digestion) revealed a single the third ventricle and one in frontal lobe. long homozygote segment of 10Mb in size spanned between 94-104 The phenotype of TS in early infancy is variable -from no sign to full megabases on chromosome 10q23-q24. The results of this study fur- blown clinical presentation with hemihypertrophy and skin lesions. ther support the hypothesis that the same gene on 10q was respon- The combination of signs of tuberous sclerosis with big rough hands sible for all UFS patients from multiple ethnic groups. is rather unusual, and can be confused with Proteus syndrome at early age. There are reports of enlargement of a single finger, however this P02.193 22q11 deletion screening in patients with palatal patient have both hands and almost all fingers enlarged. Molecular abnormalities and suspicion of Velocardiofacial syndrome: diagnosis is needed to establish the diagnosis. preliminary results. T. P. Vieira, I. C. Sgardioli, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes; P02.191 Germinal Paternal Downstream of SHOX Department of Medical Genetics, University of Campinas, Campinas - SP, Deletion Associated with Post-zygotic mosaic maternal X- Brazil. chromosome Loss Leading to Nullizygote Langer mesomelic Velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS) is the most common syndrome as- Dychondrogenesis: implications for Disease mechanisms and sociated with cleft palate and occurs in approximately 1 in 4000 live Genetic counseling births. It is caused by a sub-microscopic deletion at 22q11.2, and the O. Reish1,2, C. Huber3, G. Altarescu4, D. Chapman-Shimshoni1, E. Levy-Lahad4, main characteristics include congenital cardiac defects, characteristic P. Renbaum4, M. Mashevich1, A. Munnich3, V. Cormier-Daire3; facial dysmorphic features, hypocalcemia, learning disabilities, de- 1Assaf Harofeh, Zerifin, Israel, 2The Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv velopmental delays and palatal abnormalities. The palatal abnormali- University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3INSERM U781 and Département de Génétique, ties occur in approximately 70% of the cases and include cleft palate, Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, submucous cleft palate and velopharyngeal insufficiency. Delayed di- 4Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. agnosis of VCFS is a significant health problem and valid criteria for Mutations or deletions in the SHOX gene lead to Langer mesomelic testing are needed. The aim of this study is to screen 22q11 deletion dysplasia (LMD) when present in homozygous form. A new class of in patients with palatal abnormalities and clinical suspicion of VCFS. deletions was defined recently 30-250 kb downstream of SHOX and After specific evaluation by a clinical geneticist, 52 patients were se- shown to display enhancer activity to the SHOX promoter. In a female lected. We used the SALSA P250 MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-dependent with LMD stigmata, monosomy for X-chromosome was estimated at Probe Amplification) kit and followed the manufacturer’s instructions. 31% of her lymphocytes. Further molecular studies included the segre- The MLPA results have been confirmed by FISH. We detected 22q11 gation of 17 highly polymorphic microsatellite markers and STRs flank- deletion in 18 patients and a duplication 8p in one patient without ing and including the SHOX locus, spanning 328 kb of PAR1 region. A 22q11 deletion. Until now, we detected genomic imbalances in 19 of deletion up to 10 kb residing 197 kb downstream of SHOX gene was 52 patients (37%). Previous studies that screened 22q11 deletion in detected, which was germinally transmitted from her clinically unaf- patients with palatal abnormalities, without clinical genetics evaluation fected father. This was associated with post-zygotic reduction to nul- and specific criteria for patients’ selection, found a very low detection lizygosity of disease-causing region due to mosaic loss of the normal rate (0-5%) and concluded that a routine screening for individuals with maternal X-chromosome, as shown by fluorescent fragment analysis. an isolated palatal anomaly may not be required. Here we demon- Since most cases of LMD with deleted downstream of SHOX gene strated that the screening for 22q11 deletion in patients with palatal are associated with double heterozygosity for SHOX mutation, further abnormalities, after specific evaluation by a clinical geneticist, could studies are required to elucidate the role of the former region in dis- be more feasible, improving the detection rate. Financial support: ease etiology. Mutations should be sought in clinically non-affected Fapesp, cNPq, capes. family related members due to variable expressivity in hemizygous carriers, and cytogenetic evaluation should be considered to detect P02.194 Locus heterogeneity in hyperkeratosis-deafness possible X-chromosome rearrangements underlying the haploinsuffi- syndrome ciency for the PAR1, when deletion is detected by molecular analysis. A. R. Janecke1, R. Strohal2, P. M. Kroisel3; Similarly, when LMD stigmata occur in a Turner‘s syndrome patient, 1Department of Pediatrics II, and division of Clinical Genetics, Innsbruck, the possibility of mutations in SHOX and the downstream of SHOX Austria, 2Division of Dermatology, LKH Feldkirch, Feldkirch, Austria, 3Institute of gene should be explored. Human Genetics, Graz, Austria. Hereditary palmoplantar keratodermas (PPK) are a clinically and ge- P02.192 Further evidence of genetic homogeneity in Urofacial netically heterogeneous group of diseases, which share impaired epi- (Ochoa) syndrome dermal differentiation. A particular syndromic form of PPK, PPK with M. Ercan1, E. Uz2, S. Akman3, S. Yücel4, N. A Akarsu2; deafness, was first reported in a father and his daughter by Vohwinkel 1Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Genetics, Akdeniz University in 1929 (Vohwinkel syndrome). A small number of cases have been School of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 2Gene Mapping Laboratory, Department described subsequently and most molecularly studied patients were of Medical Genetics, Hacettepe University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey, found to carry distinct, heterozygous missense mutation in the GJB2 3Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Akdeniz University School of Medicine, gene encoding connexin 26. We diagnosed severe PPK associated Antalya, Turkey, 4Department of Pediatric Urology, Akdeniz University School of with congenital deafness in a male and a female patient, who were 4th Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 101 degree cousins from one family. GJB2 mutation analysis and haplo- Normal Abnormal Major findings Observations type analysis excluded disease-causing mutations in this gene. A SNP Loss of Blood pressure array-based genome scan identified a 4-Mb region on 15q26 segregat- HBP 18 nocturnal dip 24 ABPm 12 Most undiagnosed ing with the disease under the hypothesis of autosomal recessive in- BP>75% 11 Elevated systolic (41) heritance. We are currently recruiting further patients and families with BP 25 PPK associated with deafness without GJB2 gene mutations in order SVAS 19 Coarctation of the to identify a gene for this condition using linkage analysis and second Echocardiogram PPS 6 13 31 aorta is seen in 4 generation sequencing of a minimal candidate region. (44) MVP or I 10 cases Surgery 4 P02.195 A girl with growth retardation , mental deficiency and Aortic narrowing, unusual face Doppler accelerated flows Excellent screening R. Tincheva; ultrasound 13 14 in carotid, renal, tool University Pediatric Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria. (27) abdominal branches We present a 5 year old girl from first uneventful pregnancy and de- Midaortic diffuse livery. She was born in 34 gw with birth weight 2000g and birth lenght total 14 narrowing 40cm. The parents are young, without consanguinity. The child is men- Defines the extent Angio ct thoracic 7 Stenoses of the taly and physicaly retarded since early infancy. At the age of 5 her 1 of the narrowings (15) abdominal celiac and superior lenght is 96 cm ( SDS -2.9 ). The face is dysmorphic- dolichocephaly, Diffuse involvement 13 mesenteric short nose, high arched palate, long filtrum, hypertelorism, , short and No renal stenoses downslanting palpebral fissures,epicantus, low placed ears, mild hy- pertrichosis over the limbs and dorsum. Investigations including GH P02.197 Phenotypic variability in children with Williams level, thyroid hormones, EMG, MRI and chromosomal analysis are syndrome normal. M. Budisteanu1,2, S. Chirieac2, A. Arghir2, A. Tutulan-Cunita2, C. Burloiu1, C. Our patient has facial features similar with the children, described by Iliescu1, I. Minciu1, D. Craiu1, S. Magureanu1, A. Lungeanu2; Wiedemann(1989) and Steiner(2000). 1Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry „Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia“, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania. P02.196 thorough evaluation of the cardiovascular system in a Objective: We present our research regarding the variability of the large cohort of patients with Williams syndrome clinical features of children with Williams syndrome (WS). M. Del Campo1, I. Barber2, L. Lara Moctezuma3, P. Betrián4, C. Aso Puértolas2, Material and methods: 10 patients with clinical suspicion of WS admit- G. Enríquez Cívicos2, J. Nieto Rey3, J. Cantos1, L. A. Pérez Jurado5; ted to our Department in the last 3 years were included in this study. 1Genetics, Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Pediatric Radiology, All children were evaluated by clinical (dysmorphological, neurologi- Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Pediatric Nephrology, Hospital Vall cal, psychological evaluations) and paraclinical (blood tests, echocar- d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4Pediatric Cardiology, Hospital Vall d´Hebron, diography, neuroimaging studies) examinations. Cytogenetic studies Barcelona, Spain, 5Genetics, Department of Experimental Science, Universitat - karyotype and FISH for 7q11.23 - were performed, confirming the Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. diagnosis. Williams syndrome (WS) is a complex developmental disorder charac- Results: Our patients (6 boys and 4 girls, age ranging from 6 months terized by congenital cardiovascular disease, dysmorphic facies, men- to 15 years) showed a clinical phenotype suggestive for WS: distinc- tal retardation and infantile hypercalcemia. WS is due to microdeletion tive facial dysmorphic features, motor developmental delay with an of chromosome 7q11.23 involving elastin gene and 25 others. Cardiac average walk age of 24 months, failure to thrive, hyperacusis. Nine involvement with supravalvar aortic stenosis (SVAS) and supravalvar children had moderate mental retardation, and one child had severe (SVPS) or peripheral pulmonic stenosis (PPS) and even mitral valve mental retardation associated with congenital cerebral malformation prolapse or incompetence (MVP or I) are well known complications and infantile spams. Almost all children (8 out of 10) had speech delay, that require intervention, often in childhood. However, and even in with first spoken words at a mean age of 36 months. Four patients pre- the absence of these lesions, high blood pressure (HBP) is seen in sented cardiovascular problems, and one child had pyloric stenosis. 50% of patients, and often appears at a young age, and goes often Visuospacial disorientation was present in all tested children. Hyper- underdiagnosed in our experience. The cause of the hypertension is calcaemia was noted in 4 children, all under the age of 3. largely unknown, “essential” in most cases, and renal artery stenoses Conclusions: There was a phenotypic variability among our patients, are rare. The central vasculature, including the supraaortic, thoracic especially regarding walk and speech age. Atypically, the majority of and abdominal branches of the aorta have not been extensively ex- our patients had speech delay. Only 4 children had cardiovascular plored, and how the progressive thickening of the vessel walls and problems. A particular case was that of the child who associated cere- consequent stenoses of the lumens relate to the development of hy- bral malformation and infantile spasms. pertension is uncertain. Acknowledgements: CNCSIS project 1203, PN 09.33.02.03 We have evaluated with 24 h ambulatory blood pressure monitoring a cohort of WS patients, and are currently examining the anatomy and P02.198 High frequency of autistic traits in Williams-Beuren function of the heart and vessels with several techniques. The follow- patients. ing table illustrates the great frequency of HBP, the variety and consis- C. A. Kim1, F. B. Assumpção Junior2, R. S. Honjo1, R. L. Dutra1, V. A. S. tency of the cardiovascular findings, and the need for monitoring and Amaral1, H. K. Oh3, D. R. Bertola1, L. M. J. Albano1, M. M. Nunes1; intervention in these patients. 1Unidade de Genética, ICr/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Departamento de Psicologia,USP, São Paulo, Brazil, 3College of Alternative Medicine, Jeonju, Korea, Republic of. Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is characterized by elfin facies, congenital heart disease (supravalvar aortic stenosis), mental retarda- tion and peculiar hyper sociable behavior. It is caused by microdeletion of 1.5 to 1.8Mb in 7q.11.23 region. We studied 31 WBS patients (20 M and 12 F) and their age ranged from 9 to 26 years (median 14y). The diagnosis of WBS was confirmed by FISH, MLPA or micro satellite markers analysis in all patients. The objectives were to evaluate cognitive ability, the execution IQ, verbal and total, the frequency of visual-spatial deficits and autistic traits. The tests used were: WISC-III, WAIS-III, Rey Complex Figure and scale of autistic traits (ATA). All patients had cognitive impairment in all tests, the total IQ ranged from 51 to 86 (median 63): 22 with mild mental retardation, 4 moder-Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 102 ate, 4 borderline and 1 on average lower. All patients had marked vi- nosed initially as having Nephrotic Syndrome. Frasier Syndrome was sual-spatial deficit. The frequency of autistic traits were found in 13/31 considered after finding the mutation and karyotyping as 46,XY. These patients (41.94%) with predominance in males (10M: 3F). No correla- data highlight the importance of molecular analysis as a complement tion was found between the size of the deletion and the presence or for clinical diagnosis and genetic counseling in Nephrotic Syndrome absence of autism. associated with sexual disorders. Our study reinforces the importance of the systematic assessment of the cognitive function in WBS patients and alert for the presence of a P02.201 A 130kb deletion in FmR2 may be the cause of high frequency of autistic traits, opposite of overfriendliness personal- developmental delay of one-year-old boy. ity typically found in WBS patients. These latter data are preliminary L. Samuelsson1, P. Almgren2, T. Zagoras1, E. Karrstedt1, J. Rundberg1, M. and further studies are necessary to confirm this specific finding in Stefanova1; WBS. (FAPESP) 1Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Krokslett Medical Service, Molndal, Sweden. P02.199 Recurrent achalasia in a child with Williams-Beuren An unstable GCC triplet repeat responsible for folate sensitive fragile syndrome site FRAXE in the 5‘ untranslated region of FMR2 gene is known to N. Pereza1, I. Barbarić2, N. Čače3, S. Ostojić1, M. Kapović1, V. Ahel3; cause X-linked mental retardation (XMR). To the best of our knowl- 1Department of biology and medical genetics, School of medicine, University edge no point mutations or deletions confined to the FMR2 gene has of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, 2Department of Gastroenterology and nephrology, been associated with mental retardation so far as it could be expected Clinics for children‘s diseases, Clinical hospital centre Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, in analogy to the FMR1 gene mutations. 3Department of Cardiopulmology, Clinics for children‘s diseases, Clinical Here we report clinical and molecular data of a one-year-old boy with a hospital centre Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia. mild mental retardation and a de novo 130kb deletion of FMR2 gene. Williams syndrome is a multysistem genetic disorder caused by the Additionally, he presented with minor dysmorphic features and anoma- 1.6Mb hemizygous deletion involving the elastin gene in the region lies: up slant palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, epicanthic folds, small q11.23 of chromosome 7. The phenotype of Williams syndrome is ex- nose with a broad prominent base, long philtrum, high palate, crumpled tremelly variable but the most common findings include cardiovascu- ears helix, short neck, narrow shoulders, and one sided supernumer- lar disease, distinctive facies, mental retardation, a specific congitive ary nipple. Cytogenetic analysis showed maternally inherited balanced profile, endocrine abnormalities, growth retardation and connective Robertsonian translocation, t(13;14). Methylation studies did not find tissue abnormalities. Although gastrointestinal difficulties are one of UPD 14. SNP array (Affymetrix 250k NspI, ) showed a 130 kb deletion the most constant and prominent finding of the syndrome, including which involves exons 2 and 3 of FMR2 gene and spans approximately gastro-esophageal reflux (GER), poor suckling, vomiting, constipation, between base pair X:147454718-147586323 (hg 18). The aberration prolonged colic, rectal prolapse, inguinal, umbilical and hiatal hernia, and the de novo status were confirmed by MLPA analysis. The end of there have been no reports of achalasia in association with Williams the deletion was predicted to cause a frame shift mutation, resulting syndrome in the literature. We present the case of a boy with Williams in a premature stop-kodon and truncated protein. This suggested a syndrome, achalasia and disease-causing nature of the described FMR2 gene deletion. Future recurrent postoperative stenosis of the cardia. After Heller myotomy, molecular screening studies of FMR2 gene on males with XRM may the boy developed severe restenosis of the cardia with abundant ad- be appropriate and could confirm an alternative mechanism of FMR2 hesions which repeated after every treatment, five times in periods associated mental retardation. shorter than one month. Eventually, he developed GER, errosive gas- tritis and hiatal hernia which led to severe malnutrition and failure to P02.202 Growth deficit and Xq chromosome deletion. Case thrive. Although the genetic defect causing Williams syndrome might report not be the direct cause of achalasia we suggest that the frequent de- B. M. Neamtu1,2, S. I. Iurian1,2, M. L. Neamtu1,2, B. I. Mehedintu1,2, M. Militaru3,4; velopment of severe restenosis of cardia due to tight adhesions could 1Lucian Blaga University, Sibiu, Romania, 2Pediatric Clinic, Sibiu, Romania, be the consequence of elastin gene haploinsufficiency and altered 3Iuliu Hatieganu University, Cluj Napoca, Romania, 4Genetic Department, Cluj structure and function of elastic fibers in esophageal connective tissue. Napoca, Romania. This case highlights the importance of early diagnosis of esophageal Aims. To present the diagnosis particularities in a child diagnosed motor disorders in childhood which should be included in the differ- with terminal deletion of Xq chromosome. The patient comes from an ential diagnosis when a child with Williams syndrome presents with endemic area for hypothyroidism. Methods. The authors present a 3 dysphagia and/or regurgitation. years old girl admitted for further investigations in context of growth impairment. The clinical exam has revealed: impaired nutritional sta- P02.200 molecular analysis of Wt1 gene in patients with Frasier tus (weight - 3 SD), short stature (-3 SD) with normal proportioned and Denys-Drash syndromes in Brazil body, short neck, face dimorphism (elfin face, long philtrum), low in- F. C. Soardi, M. S. Guaragna, J. G. R. de Andrade, V. M. S. Belangero, S. Z. P. serted ears, legs edema, modified palmar creases, low posterior hair- Rigazzo, G. Guerra-Jr., A. T. Maciel-Guerra, M. P. de Mello; line, hypotonia, mental retardation, hyperactive behavior, motor skills UNICAMP, Campinas, SP, Brazil. delay and limited vocabulary. The girl was evaluated regarding feet Mutations in WT1 gene have been identified in different syndromes, lymphedema and growth impairment etiologies. We have performed such as Denys-Drash (DDS) and Frasier (FS). Both DDS and FS are laboratory / imagistic investigations and genetic tests. Results. The characterized by gonadal and renal abnormalities and predisposition laboratory investigations have shown normal glucose and lipids me- to neoplasia associated with WT1 point mutations. In DDS, mutations tabolism. From endocrinological point of view: normal levels for thyroid act in a dominant negative way and often occur in the zinc finger region and adrenal gland function tests; the growth hormone and insulin- abolishing DNA-binding capacity and leading to sex ambiguity, diffuse growth factor-1 serum levels were also normal. The buccal smear for mesangial sclerosis with chronic renal disease and high incidence of Barr bodies test was below normal range. The karyotype investiga- Wilms tumor (WT). The FS presents with dysgenic gonads, male-to- tion has revealed Xq chromosome deletion (Xq26;qter). The parents’ female sex reversal in 46,XY subjects, pubertal delay in both sexes, karyotypes were normal so we consider ,,de novo” anomaly for patient. nephrotic syndrome and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis leading Conclusions. We should consider a karyotype performing for any girl to chronic renal disease and high incidence of gonadoblastoma, but with unexplained short stature correlated with mental disabilities. We without WT. We report the molecular investigation of WT1 gene in one should monitor the case regarding the osteoporosis evolution and the patient with DDS and two patients with FS. Direct sequencing revealed possibility of premature ovarian failure onset. It’s difficult to appreci- the most frequent mutation in DDS, the R394W in exon 9. The two ate the link between growth failure and mentioned genetic anomaly FS patients presented with the heterozygous mutations IVS9+4C>T (SHOX genes responsible for growth retardation were identified on Xp and IVS9+5G>A, respectively. These mutations are known to affect chromosome). the correct splicing of intron 9, causing different ratios from the normal 2KTS(+):1KTS(-) ratio. Present results are in agreement with those that consider exon 8-9 as a hot spot for mutations in WT1 gene. In ad- dition, the mutation IVS9+5G>A was identified in a female patient diag-Cytogenetics 10 P02.203 ZIC mutation analysis in five familial cases of in an autosomal dominant manner and several loci have been identi- heterotaxy: identification of a new mutation fied. Among them, SHFM3 has been located on 10q24 and the natu- E. Biamino1, E. Garelli1, N. Chiesa1, L. Sorasio1, E. F. Belligni1, A. Marinosci1, rally occurring Dactylaplasia mouse is the animal model for SHFM3 in M. Seri2, M. Silengo1, G. B. Ferrero1; humans. Recently, 0.5 Mb tandem genomic duplications at chromo- 1University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. some 10q24 involving at least the DACTYLIN gene have been found ZIC3 gene maps on Xq26 and encodes a zinc finger transcription in SHFM3 patients. No point mutations in any of the genes residing factor involved in early stages of left-right body axis formation. Muta- within the duplicated region have been reported so far, and it is still not tions in this gene have been already proven to cause X-linked visceral clear how this rearrangement leads to the SHFM3 phenotype. Indeed, heterotaxy (HTX), namely an abnormal arrangement of thoracic and complex alterations of gene regulation mechanisms that would impair abdominal organs often associated with complex cardiac malforma- limb morphogenesis are likely. tions. We performed ZIC3 mutation analysis by direct sequencing in We report on one case of split hand-split foot malformation identified five familial cases of HTX. Interestingly, we identified a new mutation during pregnancy, 5 cases of typical SHFM, 3 monodactylies and 1 (c.1306delC) in exon 1, predicted to result in protein truncation. Spe- femoral duplication for which array-CGH was performed on a research cifically, the mutation was found in a male patient presenting with an project basis on limb malformations. 10q24.31q24.32 duplication (321- apparently isolated complex cardiac malformation consisting in right 637 kb) was identified in all cases, comprising at least the DACTYLIN atrial isomerism, single ventricle, pulmonary atresia and bilateral su- gene. All cases were isolated and non-syndromic. perior vena cava. The sister and the mother of the proband, both ex- To our knowledge, this is the first prenatal report of 10q24 duplication periencing repetitive spontaneous abortions, resulted heterozygous in SHFM, as well as the first cases of monodactylies or femoral dupli- for the mutation. Particularly, the autoptic examination of a 21 weeks cation associated with this cytogenetic anomaly. male fetus conceived by the sister, revealed a right atrial isomerism, atrio-ventricular canal, double outlet right ventricle, severe hypopla- P03.002 First description of a patient with a 15q13.3 sia and transposition of pulmonary artery, asplenia and dextrogastria. homozygous microdeletion and epileptic encephalopathy, Our study further confirms the high variability of clinical phenotype in retinopathy and choreoathetosis patients with ZIC3 mutations, varying from isolated complex cardiac A. Masurel-Paulet1, J. Cuisset2, J. Andrieux2, L. Vallee2, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, defects to classic heterotaxy. D. Sanlaville3, P. Callier1, L. Faivre1; 1Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 2CHRU, Lille, France, 3Hospices Civils de J02.1 Prevalence of the isolated hereditary pathology of eyes in Lyon, Lyon, France. Kirov area of the Russian Federation The increasing use of array-CGH allowed identification of novel micro- V. V. Kadyshev, O. V. Khlebnikova, R. A. Zinchenko; deletional syndromes. Patients with 15 q13.3 microdeletions present Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. with relatively consistent breakpoints at BP4 and BP5, including the According to the world statistics about 5 % of all newborns are born CHRNA7 gene. The phenotypic spectrum is large, ranging from men- with those or other genetically caused defects from which on hereditary tal retardation with dysmorphic features, epilepsy, neuropsychiatric diseases of eyes 30 % are necessary approximately. For the purpose disturbances, to absence of anomalies. We describe the first case of of studying of features of prevalence isolated hereditary ophthalmo- homozygous 15q13.3 microdeletion in a 6-year-old boy. Both parents pathology total inspection of the population of six districts of the Kirov carried heterozygous microdeletion and have mild mental retardation. region (Nemsky, Sunsky, Uninsky, Shabalinsky, Bogorodsky, Svechin- Severe hypotonia were evidenced since birth and abnormal eye move- sky). Size of the investigated population was 54607 persons. The eth- ments at 3 months of life led to the diagnosis of rod-cone dystrophy. nic structure of examined sample on 95 % was presented by Russian. Pharmacoresistant epilepsy appeared at 3 years of age. At 6 years of 94 patients with the isolated hereditary pathology of eyes were totally age, he had mild dysmorphic features with normal OFC, poor head revealed. Research was lead according to elaborated in laboratory of control, blindness, partial deafness, choreoathetosis responsive to genetic epidemiology of Research Centre for Medical Genetics of the Xenazine®, absent language and atonic seizures. Cerebral MRI only Russian Academy of Medical Science the report, allowing to reveal showed an arachnoid cyst. Metabolic screening and nerve conduc- and clinically to diagnose all spectrum hereditary ophthalmopatholo- tion studies were normal. Although electroencephalography was not gies. Prevalence of the isolated hereditary pathology of eyes (auto- in favour of ceroid lipofuscinosis, a skin biopsy was performed and somal dominant, autosomal recessive and X-links) in the surveyed showed curvilinear-like cell inclusion bodies. Molecular and enzymatic districts of the Kirov region has made 1:581 the person (from 1:966 the assays ruled out CLN I and II. The 15q13.3 homozygous microdele- person in Uninsky district to 1:273 the person in Svechinsky district). At tion was confirmed by quantitative PCR. The association of convulsive inspection it has been diagnosed 26 diseases, including a isolated mi- encephalopathy, retinopathy and choreoathetosis is unusual and sug- crophthalmia with coloboma, the ocular coloboma, a corneal endothe- gests array-CGH analysis in such cases. The severity of the reported lial dystrophy, a microspherophakia, a congenital cataract, the bilateral clinical features argues in favour of the pathogenicity of the heterozy- optic nerve hypoplasia, a retinitis pigmentosa, Best vitelliform macular gous microdeletion. dystrophy, Wagner vitreoretinal degeneration , the choroideremia, a hereditary primary glaucoma. The etiology (DNA-analysis) and clinical P03.003 Further delineation of the 17p13.3 microdeletion distal polymorphism separate forms of a hereditary pathology of eyes were to PAFAH1B1: 4 additional patients studied. A. Delahaye1, M. Schiff2,3, J. Andrieux4, D. Sanlaville5,6, S. Passemard2,3,7, A. Labalme5, L. Perrin7, S. Bouquillon4, M. Elmaleh-Berges3,8, A. Aboura7, S. Drunat7, S. Manouvrier-Hanu9, B. Benzacken1,3,7, P. Edery5,6, A. Verloes3,7, C. P03 cytogenetics Vincent-Delorme9; 1Histology-Embryology & Cytogenetics Department, AP-HP - Jean Verdier P03.001 10q24 duplication: 10 new cases identified on array- Hospital, Paris 13 University, UFR SMBH, Bondy, France, 2Department of cGH allow prenatal diagnosis and broadening the clinical Pediatric Neurology , APHP – Robert Debre University Hospital, Paris, France, spectrum 3Inserm, U676, Paris, France, 4Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Centre M. Holder-Espinasse1, J. Andrieux1, M. Gerard-Blanluet2, M. mathieu- Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, Lille, France, 5Service de Génétique, Dramard3, V. Cormier-daire4, A. Verloes2, A. Toutain5, G. plessis6, P. Jonveaux7, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital de l’Hotel Dieu, Lyon, France, 6EA 4171, A. Valat1, A. Mezel1, P. Bourgeot1, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1; Université Claude Bernard, Lyon, France, 7Department of Genetics, APHP 1Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2hôpital robert debré, Paris, France, 3hôpital – Robert Debre University Hospital, Paris, France, 8Pediatric Imaging nord, Amiens, France, 4Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 5CHU, Tours, France, Department, AP-HP – Robert Debre University Hospital, Paris, France, 6CHU, Caen, France, 7CHU, nancy, France. 9Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Centre Hospitalier Ectrodactyly or split hand-split foot malformation (SHFM) is a rare Universitaire de Lille, Lille, France. condition that occurs in 1 in 8500-25000 newborns and accounts for Background: The Miller Dieker syndrome (MDS, MIM 247200) is char- around 15 % of all limb reduction defects. SHFM is clinically hetero- acterized by lissencephaly, mental retardation and facial dysmorphism. geneous and can be either isolated, associated with other malforma- The phenotype is attributed to haploinsufficiency of two genes present tions or part of syndromic entities. This condition is usually inherited in 17p13.3 region: PAFAH1B1 and YWHAE. Isolated PAFAH1B1 defect Cytogenetics 10 causes lissencephaly. Small 17p13.3 deletions distal to PAFAH1B1 but to fetal distress between nonconsanguineous 39-year-old mother and including YWHAE result in facial dysmorphisms, growth retardation, 37-year-old father. Intrauterine growth retardation was suspected at cognitive impairment, and variable structural abnormalities of the brain 27 weeks of gestation. Birth length was 36 cm (-3.7SD), weight 1324 g without lissencephaly. (-3.8SD), and head circumference (OFC) 29 cm (-1.5SD). At age of 3 Objective: We describe clinical, neuroradiological and molecular data 1/3 years, his length is 65 cm (-8.5 SD), weight 5890 g (-4.5 SD), and on four patients with a 17p13.3 deletion distal to PAFAH1B1 involving OFC 41.6 cm (-5.5 SD), indicating obvious pre- and postnatal growth YWHAE. retardation. Multiple anomalies were recognized. Serum TSH, fT3, Results: All patients presented with mild or moderate developmental and fT4 were normal. IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 were low and GH stimu- disorder and pre and/or post-natal growth retardation. Patients A and C lation test by clonidine and L-DOPA indicated GH deficiency. Serum had macrocephaly and leucoencephalopathy with Chiari type 1 malfor- antithrombin III (AT III) was also at a low level. GTG-binding chromo- mation for patient A and with paraventricular cysts for patient C. Patient some analysis of the patient’s blood lymphocytes demonstrated 46,XY, B had patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary arterial hypertension. del(1)(q23q25),t(4;11)(q31.3;q21). Parental karyotype was all normal. Patient C had unilateral club foot. Patient D had enlarged Virchow Affymetrix GeneChip Human SNP array 6.0 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, Robin spaces, microcornea and chorioretinal and lens coloboma. Ar- CA) clearly demonstrated 1q24.3-q31.2 deletion. Deletion junction was ray-CGH revealed de novo terminal 17p13.3 deletions for patient A determined at nucleotide level. The translocation, t(4;11)(q31.3;q21) and B, and showed interstitial 17p13.3 deletions of 1.4 Mb for patient was also carefully analyzed. Genotype-phenotype correlations will be C and of 0.5 Mb for patient D. discussed. Conclusion: Our patients confirm that 17p deletion distal to PAFAH1B1 have a distinctive phenotype: mild mental retardation, moderate to P03.006 A new case of 21q interstitial deletion detected by array severe growth retardation, white matter anomalies and developmen- cGH. tal defects including Chiari type 1 malformation and coloboma. Our A. Valetto1, V. Bertini1, A. Bonuccelli2, M. Taddeucci2, B. Toschi3, P. Simi1; patients contribute to the delineation and clinical characterization of 1Cytogenetic and Molecular Genetic Unit, Pisa, Italy, 2Pediatric Neurology Unit, 17p13.3 deletion distal to PAFAH1B1 and highlight the role of the re- Pisa, Italy, 3Medical Genetic Unit, Pisa, Italy. gion containing YWHAE in brain and eye development and in somatic We describe a 9-year-old boy with proportionate short stature, micro- growth. cephaly and profound developmental delay. Since 1 year of age he presented with seizures and hearing loss. He has peculiar morpho- P03.004 Genotype-phenotype delineation of terminal deletions logic facial features: long palpebral fissures, prominent and convex 18q demonstrating high phenotypic variability. nasal bridge with underdeveloped alae nasi; short philtrum with thin L. D. Kulikowski1,2, M. Yoshimoto3, C. M. Monma1, F. T. S. Bellucco1, S. I. N. upper lip and long ears. He has intermittent exotropia, no speech and Belangero1, D. M. Christofolini1, A. N. X. Pacanaro1, T. P. Vieira4, V. L. Gil-da- frequent falls during walking. Silva-Lopes5, C. A. Kim6, J. Squire3, M. A. C. Smith1, M. I. Melaragno1; We performed array CGH (Comparative Genomic Hybridization) which 1Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de São showed an interstitial deletion of chromosome 21q, encompassing Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Pathology, Medical School, LIM 03, bands 21q22.13 and 21q22.2. Universidade de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Department of Pathology and This deletion was confirmed by FISH analysis. Molecular Medicine, Queen‘s University, Kingston, ON, Canada, 4Department The deletion extent is about 5 Mb, and in this region several genes of Medical Genetics, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil, are harboured. 5Department of Medical Genetics, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, São The role of the potential genes in relation to the patient’s phenotype Paulo, Brazil, 6Genetics Unit, Instituto da Criança, University of São Paulo, São is discussed. Paulo, Brazil. Constitutive heterozygous 18q deletion is one of the most common P03.007 Variable phenotype in familiar unbalanced subtelomeric segmental aneusomies compatible with life and usually leads to vari- translocation 46,XX.mlpa 17psubtel (P070)x3, 22qsubtel (P070)x1 able phenotypes. We reevaluated ten patients with 18q deletion and G. Kronberger, G. Sander, O. Rittinger; clinical features of different degrees of severity, using molecular cyto- Universitätsklinik für Kinder- und Jugendheilkunde, Salzburg, Austria. genetic techniques in order to better define the genotype-phenotype Background. Screening for rearrangements of the subtelomeric region correlations. FISH with bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) re- remains to be a valuable tool for research in idiopathic mental retarda- vealed three different breakpoints: at 18q21.31 (3 cases), 18q21.33 (5 tion. About 50% of unbalanced translocations are parentally inherited. cases) and 18q22.2 (2 cases), showing genomic losses of 11.3, 17.6 Some subtelomeric abnormalities are not believed to be associated and 21.7 Mb, respectively. In one of the patients, the location of the with a discernible phenotype, including dup(17p) and del(21q). We re- breakpoint was refined by array-CGH, showing absence of associated port on a familiar double imbalance of these particular subtelomeric genomic abnormalities. Genotype-phenotype correlation demonstrat- regions. ed high phenotypic variability and no evidence that the severity of the Case report. B.M. is the child of a couple with the history of special phenotype was associated only with the size of the deletion. Genomic educational needs in the mother and her younger sister, and dyslexia analysis showed that the deleted region of 21.7 Mb encompasses sev- in the child’s father. Her neonatal period was uneventful. Later on mo- eral diploid and non-diploid genes that may be associated with differ- tor and particularly speech development were markedly delayed. At ent degrees of clinical manifestations. However, the role that each of 30 months the girl showed normal seize, brachycephaly with normal these genes plays in producing the specific phenotype features is still OFC and midface dysmorphism with square nasal tip. She was able to unknown. Molecular identification of these deleted regions and candi- speak single words. Neuroimaging was normal. date genes may contribute to establish a predictive phenotype map, Lab investigation. The patient and her parents underwent standard as well as a better understanding of the genomic complexity of 18q karyotyping and subtelomer screening using MLPA and FISH. An deletions. (Financial support: FAPESP, Brazil). unbalanced subtelomeric rearrangement involving 17p and 21q was found in the patient and her mother. P03.005 De novo deletion of 1q24.3-q31.2 in a patient with Discussion. Identification of subtelomeric imbalances is an important severe growth retardation contribution in diagnosing patients with mental retardation and thereby N. Matsumoto1, A. Nishimura1, Y. Hiraki1,2; enabling proper genetic counselling. In unbalanced translocations, the 1Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan, 2Hiroshima Municipal Center for derivative chromosome most often shows both a duplication and a de- Child Health and Development, Hiroshima, Japan. letion. While several conditions eg monosomy 1p36 lead to a straight- Interstitial 1q deletions have been classified into three groups: proxi- forward clinical diagnosis other chromosomal imbalances remain are mal deletion (1q21-22q25), intermediate (1q24-25q32), and distal found in which causality of the aneusomy remains questionable. Iso- (1q42-43qter). To our knowledge, only seven deletions have been lated subtelomeric 21q deletion was reported only exceptionally, but characterized by molecular methods. We report a patient with 1q24.3- subtelomer 17p duplication never before. Investigation of other family q31.2 deletion, which was thoroughly analyzed by high density SNP members might certify the genotype-phenotype association. array as well as junctional cloning. The proband is a 3 1/3 year-old boy. He was born at 35 weeks of gestation by cesarean section due Cytogenetics 10 P03.008** Tetralogy of Fallot due to 22q11.2 deletion not Clinical case: Male, born at term to a 38-year-old gravida 4, healthy including TBX1 and nonconsanguineous mother. No family history. Normal pregnancy K. E. M. Diderich1, J. M. A. Verhagen1, A. C. Verkleij-Hagoort2, P. J. Poddighe1, and delivery. Apgar 8/9. Birth weight 3750 g (90th centile), length 51 cm L. Dubbel-Hulsman1, M. W. Wessels1; (75th-90th centile), head circumference 34.5 cm (75th centile). Physical 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, examination at birth: hypertelorism, flat nasal bridge, upslanting palpe- Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Gynaecology, Erasmus Medical bral fissures, low-set ears with prominent auricles, cleft palate, small Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands. penis and testicles inside hypoplastic scrotum. Other findings: patent Conotruncal heart defects in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome are thought to ductus arteriosus and atrial septal defect, hypotonia, lax joints, pes ca- be due to TBX1 haploinsufficiency. vus. Outcome: developmental delay specially speech, febrile seizures, We present a patient with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), bilateral embryo- asthma, pneumonia, shy and friendly personality, microcephaly (head toxon posterior and learning problems, but no other features of 22q11.2 circumference <3rd centile at 6 ½-year-old), no short stature (length deletion syndrome. MLPA analysis showed a small 22q11.2 distal de- at 90th-97th centile at 6 ½-year-old), weight at 50th centile. Karyotype: letion between Mb position 19.266-20.130, including the SNAP29, 49,XXXXY. Brain magnetic resonance imaging at 2 ½-year-old: multi- CRKL, and LZTR1 genes, but not TBX1. Haploinsufficiency of Crkl ple extensive bilateral foci of hyperintensity signal in the periventricular in mice can cause defects of the cardiac outflow tract, whereas com- and subcortical white matter, mainly in the left parietal and frontal lobes pound heterozygosity for null mutations of the Crkl and Tbx1 genes (T2 and Flair), enlargement of the ventricular system, asymmetrical results in a much greater frequency of cardiovascular defects than that brain volume loss. generated by heterozygosity of Crkl or Tbx1 alone1. Discussion: We think that our patient confirms data of the few cases This suggests that conotruncal heart defects in 22q11.2 deletion syn- reported in the literature with brain magnetic resonance imaging, and drome might be due to epistatic effects of genes in the proximal dele- we must consider changes in cerebral white matter a specific finding tion region (TBX1) with genes in the distal deletion region (CRKL?). in 49,XXXXY patients. Furthermore, intragenic mutations in CRKL might cause conotruncal heart defects. P03.011 7q36.1 monosomy as a result of the intrachromosomal 1 D. Guris et al., Dev. Cell. 10:81-92, 2006 rearrangement S. Midyan1, A. Hovhannisyan1, L. Nazaryan2, C. Halgren2, N. Tommerup2; P03.009 A unique case of three presumably unrelated 1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, chromosome abnormalities (47,XXY, 1p36 deletion and mosaic 2Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Institute of tetrasomy 12p) in a child with severe malformations showing Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, necessity of several molecular cytogenetic techniques per Denmark. diagnosis The patient is a 1,3year-old boy with developmental delay and distinc- O. S. Kurinnaia1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, V. Y. Voinova1, Y. B. Yurov1,2, I. Y. tive facial features. He is the only child of healthy non-consanguineous Iourov1,2; parents, born at term by normal delivery after an uneventful pregnancy 1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, at term by normal delivery with a 2400g birth weight and length of Russian Federation, 2National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, 45cm. The child suffered from intrauterine infection, poor feeding, al- Moscow, Russian Federation. lergy, dermatosis and constipation. Clinical examination revealed mi- Multiple constitutional chromosome abnormalities are extremely rare crocephaly, flat occiput, right eye diminishing and ptosis, strabismus, in newborns and generally manifest either as co-occurrence of gono- hypospady, hollow breast, dental (incisor) anomaly, muscular hypoto- somal and autosomal aneuploidy or aneuploidy and a structural re- nia, intestinal motility disorders and possible cardiac defect (suspected arrangement. Here, we report on a unique case of a child with se- due to muffled heart sounds and systolic murmur). The patient showed vere malformations with three presumably unrelated chromosomal profound psychomotor developmental delay with IQ 47. imbalances. After standard karyotyping by GTG banding, non-mosaic Standard karyotype of the proband revealed a de novo intrachromo- 47,XXY karyotype (Klinefelter syndrome) was established. Since phe- somal insertion in chromosome 7. Peripheral blood DNA from the pro- notypic manifestations were far from those of Klinefelter syndrome, we band and both parents were analysed using the Affymetrix Genome- performed high-resolution comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). Wide SNP Array 6.0 platform. Copy Number and Loss of Heterozy- Metaphase CGH has identified a microdeletion of 1p36.22p36.23 and gosity data were generated using the Affymetrix Genotyping Consol confirmed the presence of additional chromosome X. The confirmation 4.0 software and showed a 9,8Mb deletion in 7q36 (chr7:149026058- of 1p36 microdeletion was further made by 1Mb-array-CGH. In addi- 158812470) in the proband’s genome. This deleted region includes tion to deletion spanning 1p36.22p36.23 region and additional chro- a number of genes (e.g. Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), KCNH2 and NOS3 mosome X, array CGH detected partial aneuploidy involving the whole genes) which can be involved in causing the patient’s phenotype. Par- short arm of chromosome 12 in 24% of cells. After FISH with DNA ticularly, minimal manifestation of the SHH gene are microcephaly, pto- probes for chromosome 12, we were able to demonstrate that it was a sis, sacral agenesis, tethered cord. Our patient shares some of these mosaic tetrasomy 12p present in 12% of cells. The boy presented with characteristics. The SNP microarray shows chromosomal imbalances increased height (a feature of Klinefelter syndrome), severe mental at a high resolution; this makes it possible to pinpoint the genes af- retardation, developmental delay and hypotonia as well as dysmorphic fected by the rearrangement and thereby link these genes to the clini- features characteristic for both 1p36 deletion syndrome and Pallister- cal manifestations in the patient. Killian syndrome (mosaic isochromosome 12p). Looking through the available literature, we have not found cases with up to three simul- P03.012 Association of genetic variants of ABcA1 gene with taneous and unrelated constitutional chromosome imbalances. It is ciii and total cholestrol level in tehranians with or without noteworthy that each technique applied revealed each “new” abnor- combined HDL/LDL-cholesterol Phenotype mality. Therefore, to provide correct diagnosis, one molecular cyto- M. Zarkesh, B. Faam, M. Daneshpour, M. Hedayati, A. Mesbah, S. Halalkhor, genetic method is not enough, even though some of them (i.e. array F. Azizi; CGH) provide for high-resolution genome screen. Obesity Research Center, Research Institute for endocrine sciences Shaheed Beheshti University of Me, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P03.010 49,XXXXY and abnormalities in brain white matter Introduction: Studies showed that plasma LDL- and HDL-cholesterol I. Arroyo Carrera1,2, A. López-Lafuente1, C. E. Cimadevilla Sánchez1, Y. taken jointly provide a suitable phenotype because they comprise a Castaño Muñoz1, M. L. Martínez Fernández2,3; complex trait, reliably measurable, and of considerable epidemiological 1Department of Pediatrics, San Pedro de Alcántara Hospital, Cáceres, Spain, and clinical interest. In the present study, we investigated the effects of 2Centre for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, the ABCA1 polymorphism on lipid related variables in Tehranian indi- 3Spanish Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations (ECEMC), Institute viduals with or without Combined HDL/LDL-Cholesterol Phenotype. of Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. Method: Independent samples of normolipemic subjects from Tehran Introduction: 49,XXXXY is a rare sex chromosomal aneuploidy with a lipid and glucose study populations (78 male and 121 female) were se- distinct phenotype and mental retardation. We present a patient with lected for a case-control-study (high LDL/low HDL versus low LDL/high this karyotype and abnormalities in brain white matter. HDL) with Apo B genotypes as independent factors. Total cholesterol, Cytogenetics 10 triglyceride, HDL-C, LDL-C, Apo AI, Apo B, Apo AIV, Apo CIII and CRP vealed five cases of fragile-X syndrome and eight cases with a mi- concentration were measured. A segment of the mentioned gene with crodeletion syndrome. Subtelomeric MLPA detected one case with PCR was amplified and the polymorphism with RFLP (XagI) revealed. del(10q)+dup(15q) and one case with del(21q)mat. aCGH helped Result: In two groups of Combined HDL/LDL-Cholesterol Phenotype further identifying pathogenic genomic imbalances in three cases the presence of R phenotype increase the Apo CIII concentration (R= (dup(Xp), dup(15q) and del(15q)). Additionally, aCGH identify cryp- 159 ± 73 mg/ml vs. K = 123±44 mg/ml, P<0.042) and CRP concentra- tic rearrangements in two cases with a chromosome abnormality: a tion (R: 707 (1.2, 2.2) vs. K: 1070(1.9, 2.1), P<0.048) in low HDL-C dup(Yq) in a male with severe ID and an X chromosome complex rear- and high LDL-C group. Also the R phenotype increase total cholesterol rangement combined to other abnormalities in a women with moder- concentration (R: 174±37 mg/ml vs. K: 156±26 mg/ml P<0.042) in high ate DI. Among these patients we found impulse control disorder and HDL-C and low LDL-C group schizophrenia as the relevant psychiatric illness. No malformations Conclusion: Two groups of combined HDL/LDL-cholesterol phenotype and medical problems but craniofacial dysmorphism were diagnosed. can be a good predictive for analysis the interaction between theAB- Our preliminary results show a very high prevalence of genomic imbal- CA1 polymorphism with lipid and related variables such as apoCIII, ances amongst adults with intellectual disability, psychiatric problems CRP and cholesterol level in normolipemic subjects. and dysmorphia. This work was supported by a grant of FIS (PI080778). P03.013 Validation analysis of a 60K customized high resolution cGH-array reveal new genomic imbalances associated with well- P03.015 increased aneuploidy and abortive DNA replication defined disorders associate with neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease E. Vallespin, M. Palomares, P. Lapunzina, M. Mori, A. Delicado, S. Garcia- Y. B. Yurov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, I. Y. Iourov1,2; Miñaur, E. Mansilla, F. Santiago, F. Santos, L. Fernandez, M. de Torres, J. 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Nevado; Federation, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, INGEMM-IDIPAZ-CIBERER Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. Moscow, Russian Federation. Background: Submicroscopic genomic imbalances underlie well-de- It has been repeatedly debated whether abortive DNA replication lead- fined microdeletion and microduplication syndromes and contributes ing to gross genomic imbalances (i.e. aneuploidy or tetraploidy) is as- to general developmental disorders. Array Comparative Genomic Hy- sociated abnormal aging in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). This suggests bridization (a-CGH) is a powerful molecular cytogenetic tool to detect that a relationship, if exists, between genetic or genomic instability, genomic imbalances and study disease mechanism and pathogen- abnormal aging and neuronal death in the AD brain requires additional esis. We report the design and validation of a focused high-resolution investigations. Recently, chromosome missegregation producing mo- oligonucleotide-array CGH assay for clinical laboratory diagnosis of saic aneuploidy of whole chromosomes 21 has been discovered to genomic rearrangements, referred to as KaryoArrayTM. play a role in the AD brain pathology. To get further insights into this Methods: We selected 60-mer oligonucleotide features from Agilent’s phenomena in the AD brain, we have analyzed aneuploidy and abor- eArray_v4.0 probe library in a custom high resolution format of 8x60K. tive DNA replication in neuronal cells of postmortem AD brain samples The average density of pathogenic regions is 7 Kb. KaryoArrayTM cov- using molecular neurocytogenetic approaches (interphase MFISH, ers more than 350 clinically relevant regions. quantitative FISH, interphase MCB FISH, and FISH-based DNA repli- Results: To evaluate the array, we blindly tested 102 samples. Ge- cation assays). Aneuploidy was observed in 2-15% of neural cells and nomic imbalances had previously been detected in 52 of the 102 sam- replicating DNA signals (singlet/duplet) were present in 0.4-3.7% of ples by karyotyping, FISH or MLPA. The remaining 50 samples were neural cells of hippocampus and prefrontal cortex of the AD brain. The sex-matched samples from healthy individuals as negative controls for frequency of abnormal neural cells (aneuploid and abnormally replicat- validation. Focused array CGH detected all known abnormal regions in ed) affecting different chromosomes was higher in the hippocampus 52 validation samples with more than 99% concordance and yielding and prefrontal cortex (brain areas which are affected by the neuro- most precise breakpoint boundaries. Interestingly, KaryoarrayTM was degeneration) as to the cerebellum (brain area which is less affected able to detect new rearrangements in 5/52 cases (9.62%) associated by the neurodegeneration). According to our data, genetically instable with known genetic disorders. and aneuploid neurons may demonstrate abortive cell cycle re-entry Discussion: This focused aCGH assay is a flexible, and robust method and DNA replication stress the diseased brain. These data indicate to diagnose genetic disorders associated with genomic imbalances. that somatic genome instability may be considered as the main genetic KaryoarrayTM offers advantages over currently available platforms in mechanism of neuronal death and contributes to the pathogenesis of the clinical diagnostic laboratory, overcoming many of the limitations AD. Supported by Philip Morris USA, Inc. of conventional gold standard routine techniques for the analysis of genomic rearrangements. In addition, it was able to identify cryptic P03.016 A paternity testing showing two related females with XY submicroscopic imbalances not previously detected with the standard at the amelogenin locus routine techniques in 9.62% of the patients. N. Fathallah, M. Gribaa, D. H’mida, I. Ben Charfeddine, O. Mamaï, A. Amara, S. Trabelsi, I. Fkih M’hamed, A. Saad; P03.014 Detection of pathogenic copy number variation in Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, de Génétique Moléculaire et de Biologie de la an adult population with intellectual disability and psychiatric Reproduction Humaines, Sousse, Tunisia. disorders. Amelogenin genes called AMEX and AMEY are located in chromo- N. Baena1, M. Guitart1, E. Gabau1, A. Veraguas1, M. Viñas1, L. Armengol2, S. somes X (Xp22.1-Xp22.3) and Y (Yp11.2) respectively. They show a Esteba3, N. Ribas3, R. Novell3; big homologous regions allowing simultaneous amplification with a 1Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, SABADELL, Spain, 2Quantitative Genomic same couple of primers. However, they have some differences in size Medicine Laboratories, BARCELONA, Spain, 3Parc Hospitalari Martí i Julià, and sequence permitting their use as a sex-typing marker, especially GIRONA, Spain. with paternity tests to define female and male samples. Adults with unexplained intellectual disability (ID) have not been sys- We identified during a routine parentage testing two females; mother tematically addressed for genetic study. We report our experience test- and daughter carrying the male and female variants of the amelogenin ing 94 adult patients affected by mild intellectual disability associated gene. This is in favor of mendelian inheritance of Y chromosome in with psychiatric disorders and minor dysmorphic features, recruited as the context of female persons. Haplotype analysis of X chromosome outpatients from Psychiatric services and referred to a clinical geneti- showed the presence of two alleles in each locus. The mechanism of cist for their evaluation. Patients had never undergone previous ge- this outcome stills unclear. One possible explication could be a gene netic evaluation. Genetic analysis included karyotype (800 G-bands), conversion event occurred in the male germ line from whom the mother specific molecular analysis to confirm the suspicion of a syndrome, is descended. It may be also possible that an umbalanced recombina- and subtelomeric MLPA (P036 and P070 kits from MRC Holland) and tion event has occurred. So that, the obtained proband’s X carries both high-resolution aCGH (Agilent 400K). X and Y chromosome copy of the amelogenin locus. More molecular A genetic imbalance was detected in 25 cases (27%). A chromosome and cytogenetics investigations should clarify this situation. abnormality was observed in 6 cases (two deletions, two balanced reciprocal translocation and two derivatives). Specific analysis re-Cytogenetics 107 P03.017 Universal reference samples for diagnostic copy tal retardation. In surveys of subtelomeric screening, deletion of 22q13 number variation analysis is the second most common subtelomeric deletion, after deletion 1p36. D. E. Barton1,2, J. de Ligt3, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa3, C. Brady1,2, J. A. Veltman3; The prevalence of 22q13 deletion hasn’t still determinated. 1National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, 2EuroGentest Network, The 22q13 Phelan-McDermid deletion syndrome is characterized by School of Medicine and Medical Sciences, University College Dublin, Dublin, mild-to-moderate range of mental retardation, global developmental Ireland, 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen delay, absent or severely delayed speech, decreased perception of Medical Centre, 6500HB Nijmegen, Netherlands. pain and autistic-like affect. Approximately 75% of deletions are simple Genomic microarrays are widely used in clinical laboratories to identify (terminal or interstitial), about 25% are complex (as a result an unbal- copy number variants (CNVs) throughout the human genome. CNVs anced translocation). are identified by comparing hybridization signals; sample over refer- We describe 3 patients including into subtelomeric screening using ence. The results are therefore affected by the choice and quality of MLPA technique. In all cases the subtelomeric screening detected the the reference material (RM) used. As yet, no approved CNV RM is deletion 22q13. In patients 1 and 2, both with normal karyotype, simple available for clinical use. Furthermore, there is a need for RMs in which terminal deletion was found at 22q13. In patient 3 with no cytogenetic the CNV profile has been established by several methods, to assist in finding, deletion 22q13 and additional duplication of terminal part of the evaluation of existing CNV technologies and the development of 17p were revealed. The size of every pathogenic microdeletion was new ones. We surveyed clinical array CGH labs and found that they determined by means of a high-resolution oligonucleotide-based ar- use RMs which do not meet the criteria required for clinical diagnos- ray-CGH. Our study has not shown significant relationship between tics. We investigated the suitability of existing FDA-approved genomic the clinical features and the deletion size. DNA RMs for pharmacogenetic tests, supplied by ParagonDx, for this This study was supported by VZ MSM0021622415. purpose. Three male and three female DNAs, plus pools of male and female DNAs were analysed using four microarray platforms (Affyme- P03.020 Array-cGH characterization of a constitutional complex trix, Agilent, Perkin Elmer and Roche Nimblegen). The performance rearrangement with two 4q and one 1q interstitial deletions in a of these samples was compared to pooled DNAs available from Pro- child with multiples congenital anomalies. mega, commonly used in aCGH. The use of ParagonDx DNAs as RMs M. Mori1,2, E. Vallespin1,2, S. Garcia-Miñaur1,2, R. Rodríguez3, J. Nevado1,2, J. yielded improved results compared to the Promega DNAs, based on a Perez4, F. Garcia1,2, E. Mansilla1,2, M. de Torres1,2, P. Lapunzina1,2; range of quality measures, for example Nexus QC (measure of noise); 1INGEMM-HULP, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Fetal Medicine ParagonDx DNAs had an average QC of 0.022 vs. Promega 0.057. We Unit-HULP, Madrid, Spain, 4Neonatology Unit-HULP, Madrid, Spain. conclude that the widespread use of ParagonDx DNAs may improve Constitutional complex rearrangements (CCRs) are considered to be the consistency of results in clinical applications of aCGH testing. Fur- very rare, but the use of molecular techniques like array-CGH is dis- thermore this reference set provides well-characterised samples for closing an increasing amount of CCRs, because they allow a more the evaluation of new CNV detection platforms and technologies. accurate characterization of the chromosomal rearrangements. We report the molecular characterization of a female newborn with P03.018 New tools in the cost-efficient detection of pathogenic intrauterine growth retardation and multiple congenital anomalies, chromosomal aberrations in patients with mR/mcA by array- including unusual craniofacial features (wide anterior fontanelle 6x3 cGH. cm., bitemporal narrowing, hypertelorism with narrow palpebral fis- K. Kok, G. B. Van der Vries, M. Burger, C. M. A. Ravenswaaij-Arts, T. sures, dysplastic ears, cleft lip and palate, and micrognathia), congeni- Dijkhuizen, Y. Swart, H. Zorgdrager, R. J. Sinke, B. Sikkema-Raddatz; tal heart disease (VSD and ASD), laryngeal stenosis, and a sacral S2 UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands. hemivertebra. She developed respiratory distress that progressively Array-based comparative genomic hybridization has become an indis- deteriorated over the first few days of life, eventually leading to her de- pensable tool in the hunt for submicroscopic chromosomal aberrations mise on day three. The post-mortem examination revealed agenesis of in patients with MCA/MR. The interpretation of array results is compli- the gall bladder in addition to the previous findings. cated by the discovery of neutral copy number variants (CNVs), that Pre- and postnatal karyotype were both normal. A standard 44K oligo constitute some 5 % of the genome. Thus, there is a need for proce- array-CCH (Agilent Technologies) showed three deletions: dures that (cost-) efficiently distinguish pathogenic from neutral CNVs. 1- a 1q23.1q23.3 4Mb deletion An important step in this process is distinguishing common (inherited) 2- a 4q21.22q21.3 3.2Mb deletion CNVs, which are more likely to be neutral, from de novo CNVs, which 3- a 4q22.3q23 5.8Mb deletion are more likely to be pathogenic. We have implemented an oligo-array Both deletions on chromosome 4 were separated by a 9.4Mb normal platform (Agilent, Santa Clara, USA) for the screening of patients with region. MR/MCA. For an efficient interpretation of the data, we initially per- Parents´ karyotypes and arrays-CGH were strictly normal without any formed trio analyses in which the parents of the patient are hybridized evidence of the previously mentioned findings in their baby. with opposite dyes on one array. To facilitate the individual analysis The molecular mechanisms predisposing to genomic instability and of each parent, separate 2logR files for the parents are subsequently leading to CCRs remain unknown. These mechanisms could involve generated using a home made software package that creates export multiple double strand breaks (DSB) followed by non-homologous end files that can be uploaded into several commercial software platforms. joining (NHEJ). Detailed studies at the molecular level of these CCRs This approach constitutes a fast way to determine the de novo nature will contribute to the identification of structural DNA elements which of the aberrations that are seen in the patient. An adaptation of this might predispose to such complex rearrangements. software has also enabled us to analyse six patients on one 4-plex 180K array slide, making our diagnostic tests even more cost-efficient. P03.021 A duplication of the chromosomal region 7p14.1 A database of local CNVs, created with the data of 800 healthy par- involving the GLi3 gene is associated with mental retardation ents, has proven to be of high value in the analysis of patients for F. Forzano1, M. Malacarne2, F. Faravelli1, C. Marciano1, E. Di Maria1,3, L. Perro- whom parents were not available. ni2, M. Pierluigi2, S. Cavani2; 1Medical Genetics Unit, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Laboratory of Geneti- P03.019 Array-cGH characterization of three patients with cs, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3University of Genova, Dept of Neuroscien- deletion 22q13 ce, Ophtalmology and Genetics, Genova, Italy. E. Zrnová1,2, V. Vranová1,2, I. Slámová1,2, A. Oltová1, R. Gaillyová1, P. Kuglík1,2; We report a 60 years old male affected by severe mental retardation 1The University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University, Faculty of who is carrier of a 1 Mb duplication within the region 7p14.1 (from Science, Brno, Czech Republic. 41.246.668 to 42.408.368) detected through array-CGH (Human Ge- Subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangements are believed to be a com- nome CGH Microarray Kit 4 x 44K, Agilent). The duplicated regione mon cause of mental retardation. Their prevalence is about 5-7%. Be- involves the genes INHBA and GLI3. As far as we know, duplications cause of their small size (under 5Mb) these subtelomeric aberrations of GLI3 have never been previously reported. The haploinsufficiency are undetectable by conventional G-banding method. New molecular of GLI3 is related to well known conditions, like Grieg cephalopolysyn- technologies such as MLPA, FISH and array-CGH have been adapted dactyly syndrome, Pallister-Hall syndrome and Acrocallosal syndrome, for subtelomeric or genomic screening in patients with idiopathic men- and this clearly suggest the gene is sensitive to dosage. It would be Cytogenetics 10 therefore reasonable to speculate that duplications as well as dele- genetic counseling, one can alleviate the misery of many parent and tions of this gene can be involved in human disease. also can reduce the birth of defected offsprings in the family subse- The patient never developed speech and always had a significant gait quently. This study emphasizes the potential of analysing chromosom- impairment. No malformation, sensory impairment, seizure or medical al rearrangements as a means to rapidly define candidate disease loci problem have been reported. He developed Myeloid Chronic Leuke- for further investigation. mia 2 years ago. He has a positive family history for mental retardation. One of his first P03.024 carrier-fetus of balanced translocation t(5;20)(q34;p12) cousins is affected by mild mental retardation: interestingly he carries S. Teofilova1, T. Ostojic1, O. Miljanovic1,2; a 14 Mb duplication of the region 2p16.2p22.1 (from 40.885.368 to 1Center for Medical Genetics and Immunology- Clinical Center of Montenegro, 54.807.891). The parents of the patients are dead, the siblings have Podgorica, Montenegro, 2Institute for Children`s Diseases - Clinical Center of normal chromosomes and the FISH analysis didn’t show any subtle Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro. imbalance within those regions. Translocations are considered the most frequent chromosomal chang- es in the human species. In genetics, a chromosome translocation is P03.022 the role of array-cGH in syndromic microdeletion a chromosome abnormality caused by rearrangment of parts between identification: case report of a 22q11.2 deletion chromosomes. Such balanced translocation are usually harmless A. C. Tutulan-Cunita1, A. Arghir1, M. Budisteanu2,1, S. Chirieac1, A. Lungeanu1; to carriers and may be found through prenatal diagnosis. However, 1“Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2Clinical carriers of balanced reciprocal translocations have increased risk of Hospital of Psyhiatry, Bucharest, Romania. creating gametes with unbalanced chromosome translocations lead- Herein, we present the case of a 16 years old girl with dysmorphic fea- ing to repeated miscarriages or delivery of chromosomaly abnormal tures and severe mental retardation referred for cytogenetic investiga- offspring. Genetic counseling and genetic testing is often offered to tion as a consequence of difficulties in establishing a diagnosis. families that may carry a translocation. The patient was the first child of healthy, nonconsanguinous parents, Individuals who are carriers at balanced translocation usually appear born after an uneventful pregnancy - though with polyhydramnios-, by completely normal and healthy but with reproductive problems. We normal delivery, with a small for date birth weight (2000 g), nourishing found a carrier of balanced translocation t(5;20)(q34;p12) . We per- difficulties in the first year of life, failure to thrive, and retarded neu- formed a cytogenetic analysis chromosomes of a fetus, after amnio- ropsychomotor development. The clinical evaluation showed: short centesis of 36 years old woman with history of 7 spontaneous abortions stature, dysmorphic features (small malformed ears, microphtalmia, ( each in the first trimester of pregnancy ). Karyotype analysis revealed prominent nasal bridge, prominent mandible, microstomia, thick lips, translocation between chromosomes 5 and 20. After cytogenetic study long fingers, bilateral camptodactilia of the 5th finger, bilateral covering of both parents, mother was found to be a carrier of the same 5;20 of the 2nd toe by the 3rd toe), dorsal kyphosis, severe mental retarda- translocation. The segments interchainged between chromosomes 5 tion, speech delay, hyperkinesia. The cerebral CT scan was normal. and 20 were of almost the same size, and the arrangament of G-band Classical cytogenetic and molecular investigations were carried out was not significantly different. using peripheral blood lymphocytes. The GTG-banded karyotype was Couples in wich one partner is a carrier of a balanced translocation normal, unevocative of any genetic syndrome. However, array-CGH have in increased risk of infertility, repeated miscarriages and delivery (44K, Agilent) indicated a 2.3 Mb deletion on 22q11.21, subsequently of chromosomaly abnormal offspring. confirmed by FISH with T-Box1 probe (Kreatech). The above described region is characteristically deleted in the velocar- P03.025 Balanced and unbalanced forms of transmission of a diofacial syndrome (VCFS) that covers a wide spectrum of more than complex chromosomal rearrangement involving chromosomes 200 physical manifestations, including palate and cardiac anomalies. 3, 8 and 10 in two generations Our patient’s phenotype, with prominent nasal bridge, prominent man- Z. Zmitkova1, M. Simandlova1, A. Baxova2, M. Vlckova1, J. Drabova1, D. dible, camptodactilia, dorsal kyphosis, sever mental retardation was Novotna1, Z. Vlckova1, Z. Zemanova3, E. Kocarek1, Z. Sedlacek1; not particularly suggestive for VCFS, therefore no specific investiga- 1Department of Biology and Medical genetics,Charles University, 2nd tions were performed at diagnosis. Ultimately, the array-CGH was de- Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, cisive in unravelling the underlying genetic abnormalities. 2Department of Biology and Medical genetics,Charles University, 1st Faculty Acknowledgements: CNCSIS project 1203, PN 09.33.02.03. Technical of Medicine and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, assistance: M.Cristea, I.Borcan, L.Dita 3Center of Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University P03.023 cytogenetic abnormalities found among the autism Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. patients in south india We report a familial apparently balanced complex chromosomal re- M. Arun, V. Balachandar, S. Mohana Devi, A. Karthick kumar, P. Manikantan, arrangement (BCCR) involving chromosomes 3, 8 and 10. The pro- S. Suresh kumar, K. Sasikala; band is the fourth child from the eighth pregnancy of an unaffected Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. mother whose karyotype was determined as 46,XX,t(8;10)(q13;q24),i Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by clinical, ns(3;8)(q26.2;q22q23). Standard chromosome analysis of amniocytes etiologic and genetic heterogeneity. It is often associated with other revealed apparently the same balanced karyotype in the proband. conditions, such as disorders of the CNS (tuberous sclerosis), devel- However, at the age of three years the boy was referred for genetic opmental delay, attention deficit, epilepsy, and anxiety and mood dis- analysis because of psychomotor delay, speech problems, autistic fea- orders. The prime aim of the present study was to identify the chromo- tures, teeth irregularity and dysplastic ears. Array CGH and SNP array somal alterations found among autism patients in Coimbatore region. analysis were performed but yielded no clues, including no evidence In order to investigate the possible cytogenetic damage to the autism for uniparental disomy. Proband‘s elder brother was born prematurely patients, a G-banding method was carried out on the lymphocytes of and died perinatally due to multiple severe malformations including 26 experimental samples and equal number of controls. In the present bilateral cleft lip and palate, protruding premaxilla, right microtia with study, Experimentals and controls were selected based on the detailed the absence of ear canal, deformation of legs, hypospadia and hypo- questionnaire. volunteers provided blood samples (5 ml) to establish genitalism. Chromosome analysis showed an unbalanced transloca- cell cultures at 72 h. For karyotyping, 40 complete metaphase cells tion t(8;10)(q13;q24) which led to partial monosomy of 8q. Proband‘s from each subject were evaluated. The detection of an increasing unaffected stepbrother has normal karyotype. Proband‘s unaffected number of recognizable syndromes such as fragile X syndrome and stepsister has karyotype 46,XX,t(8;10)(q13;q24). In her case a recom- Down syndrome were observed. Also major and minor Chromosomal bination replaced the deletion in the translocated part of chromosome aberrations such as deletions, inversion, gaps and breaks were found 8 with a segment of the normal chromosome 8. This, in combination among the autism patients. The present study exhibits higher degree with chromosome 3 lacking the insertion, led to a balanced karyotype of chromosomal aberrations in experimentals compared to controls with a simple reciprocal translocation. All findings were validated using (P<0.001). FISH with chromosome paints. BCCRs are very rare in population. In conclusion, to point out that, the systematic study of autism is very Our case illustrates multiple complex scenarios how the chromosomes rewarding with an accurate diagnosis in the proband and with proper affected by the rearrangements can be distributed to gametes and de-Cytogenetics 10 scendants of BBCR carriers. development of a new mouse anti-titin monoclonal antibody, using the Supported by INCORE (EC FP6 043318), CHERISH (EC FP7 223692) synthetic peptide corresponding to an amino acid sequence in the A- and MZOFNM2005. band of the titin molecule as immunogen. In the human skeletal mus- cle this MAb reveals a clear striated staining pattern, reacting with the P03.026 Deletion 3q26-28 in a patient with blepharophimosis- A-band of the sarcomere. Electrophoretic, immunoblotting, and amino ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPEs) acid sequence analyses with ESI-MS/MS proved the target antigen of M. A. Faiq1, M. Kumar1, M. Tanwar1, P. Gupta2, N. Pushkar2, R. Dada1; the MAb to be titin. The antibody reacts with titin also in non-muscle 1Lab for Molecular Reproduction & Genetics, All India Institute of Medical cells, giving a punctate pattern in cytoplasm and the nucleus. Howev- Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic er, the most striking finding was a clear reaction also with centrioles in Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. all cell types investigated so far. We suggest that this MAb detects titin BPES is a rare genetic disorder with autosomal dominant pattern of in- or a titin-like protein in centrioles. The investigation of the association heritance. The frequency of BPES has been estimated to be 1:50,000. of the MAb target antigen in centrioles with other centriolar proteins Patients with BPES have a combination of congenital anomalies as is in progress. This work was partly supported by target financing SF small palpebral fissures, epicanthus inversus, low nasal bridge and 0188096s08 of the Estonian. Ministry of Science and Education and congenital ptosis. BPES has been categorized into two types: type I Estonian Science Foundation (Grant No.6581). with infertility in females and type II involves eye malformation in both males and females. From the review of reported cases, it has been P03.029 combine analysis of chromosomal abnormalities in concluded that a locus for eyelid development is situated at the inter- plutonium production workers: aneugenic and clastogenic face of long arm of chromosome 3. Since blepharophimosis, ptosis and aspects of the influence microphthalmia are consistent features in Patients with BPES an inter- V. A. Timoshevskiy, S. A. Vasilyev, I. N. Lebedev, N. N. Sukhanova, Y. S. stitial deletion of band 3q2, the location of BPES gene at this position Yakovleva, N. B. Torkhova; seems highly likely. Various reports linked the deletion in 3q21, 3q22, Institute of medical genetics, Russian academy of medical sciences, Tomsk, 3q23, 3q24, 3q25 and translocations t(3:7)(q26-qter:q+), t(X:3)(p22: Russian Federation. q21), t(3:8)(q23:p22.1) to the BPES. Thus cytogenetically different de- Combine analysis of clastogenic/aneugenic effects of plutonium pro- letions and translocations of chromosome 3 have been described in duction factors has been performed using conventional and interphase patients with BPES. We report a sporadic case of BPES. We have molecular cytogenetic methods. Frequencies of aberrations of routine done the Cytogenetic analysis of the patient. Standard GTG banding stained and G-banded chromosomes, micronuclei and non-disjunction/ showed a novel deletion of band 3q26-28. This is the first report of lagging level in cytokinesis-blocked binucleated lymphocytes were es- deletion in this region. We also found deletion in the 3qter region which timated in lymphocytes of nuclear-chemical plant workers (66 males) has been already linked to the BPES. This finding may represent a and controls (25 males). The main contributing factors to increase of severe manifestation of the disease. BPES is a heterogeneous entity, aberrations in plutonium workers were chromosome type aberrations and evaluation and counseling of affected individuals should be under- (CTA), especially deletions (G-banding) and pair fragments (routine taken with caution. stain). Double-color FISH with centromero-specific DNA probes for chromosomes 2, 7, 8, 12, X and Y was used for the analysis of the P03.027 complex rearrangement involving 3 breakpoints in a chromosomal non-disjunction and lagging. The significant increase of t(3;22;11) translocation the non-disjunction frequency has been found for all investigated chro- S. Kaltenbach, A. Aboura, J. Rousseau, A. Tabet, C. Dupont, B. Benzacken, A. mosomes in the exposed group, except X-chromosome. The micronu- Verloes, S. Drunat; clei (MN) frequency was also significantly higher in binucleated cells Département de génétique. Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. of nuclear industry workers (p= 0.009). Correlations between markers Complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCRs) are defined as struc- of metaphase and interphase-FISH analyses have additionally been tural chromosomal rearrangements with at least three breakpoints and estimated. The results obtained by using different approaches have exchange of genetic material between two or more chromosomes. shown significant relationship. It figures that pair fragment frequency We report a de novo complex chromosomal rearrangement involving correlated with micronuclei level (Spearman rank (Sr) = 0.40). More- chromosomes 3, 11, and 22 in a 9 year-old boy with mental retarda- over, CTA were connected with MN (Sr = 0.50) and non-disjunction (Sr tion and dysmorphic traits (bushy eyebrows, frontal hirsutism, tented = 0.45), deletions correlated with MN (Sr=0.46), non-disjunction (Sr = upper lip, downturned corner of the mouth). Using CGH microarray 0.36), and lagging (Sr = 0.34). In general, the significant correlations (Agilent®) and FISH controls, we evidenced a 21 Mb duplication of have been found for basic characteristics of cytome abnormalities and 3q, a 2.8Mb deletion in 11q, and 121 kb deletion in 22q. Chromosomal different types of chromosomal aberrations. This observation points formula was out that aneugenic and clastogenic events are related phenomena of 46,XY,der(22)t(3;22)(q26;q13),der(11)t(11;22)(q25;q13). plutonium mutagenic influence. This study was supported by Federal arr 3q26.3q29(177663316-199329792)x3,(11q25)(131617566-13443 Agency of Education (P1707, P1748). 2465)x1,(22q13.3)(43683481-43804487)x1 dn (reference : hg18). The cryptic deletion on 22q breakpoint is underway by quantitative P03.030 cytogenetic analysis in 550 couples with history of PCR. The parental karyotypes were normal. CCRs are extremely rare spontaneous abortions but often associated with mental retardation, congenital abnormalities R. Talwar, S. K. S. Vats, M. K. Verma, A. Singh, C. Singh; and recurrent abortions. Dup(3q) syndrome is characterized by typical Super Religare Laboratories (SRL), Gurgaon, India. facial features, mental and growth retardation, often with congenital Chromosomal imbalance has been identified as a major cause for heart defects and a clinical overlap with Cornelia de Lange syndrome spontaneous pregnancy loss, infertility and childhood disability thereby, (CDLS). Del(11q) is known to be responsible of Jacobsen syndrome. contributing significantly to the genetic burden on society. The diagno- sis of chromosomal anomalies in couples with history of spontaneous P03.028 Titin or a titin-like protein as a human centriolar protein ? abortions can be made by conventional cytogenetics which involves A. Mikelsaar1,2, A. Sünter1, P. Toomik1,3, R. Mikelsaar1, E. Juronen1; karyotyping of GTG banded chromosome preparations obtained from 1University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2LabAs Ltd., Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian whole blood. In the present study, conventional cytogenetic analysis University of Life Sciences, Estonia. was used to analyze peripheral blood samples from 550 couples with Recently, the striated-muscle protein titin has been observed in non- history of spontaneous abortions, mainly in the first trimester. Cyto- muscle cells, and has been proposed to have a nuclear function as a genetic analysis revealed chromosomal abnormalities in 110 cases. chromosomal component. In this study, we further analyze this phe- Balanced reciprocal translocations were observed in 47 cases while nomenon. Different human cell-lines were used to characterize the Robertsonian translocations were observed in 6 cases. Novel cytoge- immunolocation of titin with different commercial titin-specific mono- netic anomalies like t(7;17), t(9;20) and t(17;20) were also observed clonal antibodies: 9D10 (DSHB), 9B9 (Chemicon), 2Q1063 (USBio- that have not yet been reported in literature, to the best of our knowl- logicals), and T11(Abcam). These antibodies showed a varied location edge.. Some cases revealed heteromorphic variants in chromosome 1 and expression characteristics of titin in the nucleus and cytoplasm (n=46) and 9 (n=50). Six cases revealed addition of genetic material in but reacted not with condensed chromosomes. Here we report on the the short arm of chromosome 22. The detection of these chromosomal Cytogenetics 110 anomalies, few of which are novel, in couples reiterates that cytoge- mosomal radiosensitivity and genetic predisposition to breast cancer. netic analysis is a ‘gold standard’ for screening couples with history of spontaneous abortions where structural anomalies are observed more P03.033 Phenotypic Genotypic correlation of Egyptian Patients frequently than aneuploidies. with chromosome 5 Aberrations S. Hammad, H. Bassyouni, M. Shehab, L. Hosny; P03.031 Molecular studies on a supposed “satellited 8q” National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. chromosome. Introduction: An increasing number of human diseases are recognized L. Rodríguez1, L. Golmayo2, M. Bonaglia3, A. Delicado4, J. Nevado4, E. to result from structural variations - segments where DNA is deleted, Abarca5; duplicated or rearranged in which the clinical phenotype is a conse- 1Laboratorio AbaCid-Genética. Grupo Hospital de Madrid., Madrid, Spain, quence of abnormal dosage of gene(s) located within the rearranged 2Servicio de Endocrinología-Pediátrica del Grupo Hospital de Madrid, Madrid, genomic fragments. Different chromosome 5 aberrations do occur in- Spain, 3Laboratorio di Citogenetica, Scientific Institute E. Medea, Bosisio Parini cluding deletions, duplications, translocations, inversions and others. (LC), Italy, 4INGEMM-Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular-IDIPAZ-HULP, Aim: This study aimed to analyze the phenotypic features of different Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 5Laboratorio AbaCid-Genética., chromosome 5 aberrations and to correlate tem with the type of aber- Madrid, Spain. ration. One of the most common polymorphisms in a cytogenetic laboratory, Subject and Methods: We were able to acertain 12 cases with chromo- is the presence of a satellite (NOR: nucleolus organizer regions) on some 5 aberrations. Cases included 6 children with mental subnormal- a non-acrocentric chromosome. These extra NOR regions are easily ity and 6 couples seeking premarital genetic counseling and intraueter- confirmed by NOR-bands in the cytogenetic laboratory. They generally ine fetal deaths. All the patients are subject to history taking, pedigree result from a translocation between a NOR region of an acrocentric analysis, clinical examination and anthrompometric measurements of chromosome and a non-acrocentric chromosome. These transloca- the children. Chromosomal study of the couples, children and their tions are usually terminal and have been described in the literature parents was carried out using G-banding technique. FISH was per- on multiple chromosomes, the most frequent of which involving the Y formed using whole chromosome painting probes for confirmation. chromosome (Yqs). Results: Our results showed different chromosomal 5 aberrations in In most cases these polymorphisms are inherited without clinical re- the form of: del(5) (p14 - term), 5 p+, inv(5)(P13;q13), balanced trans- percussion, so when they are found in a karyotype usually any addi- locations: t(3;5), t(5;7), t(5;11) and t(5;22). tional studies are not carry out. In fact, sometime not even NOR-bands Conclusion: Cases with larger deletions of chromosome 5 had greater techniques are performed and the final diagnosis is done with only degree of microcephaly. There may be a locus of Goldenhar syndrome G-bands. on chromosome 5 extending from 5p14 to 5p15.2. The impact that However, with the presentation of this case we want to show how these correlation have on understanding of copy number variations in important are such studies in order to properly define the “supposed the human genome will help clinicians not only for diagnosing genetic satellited chromosome” and to exclude any other chromosome abnor- disorders in individuals with dysmorphism and developmental delay malities. but also for prenatal diagnosis and genetic counseling. Here we present a case of a 15-month-old girl who came to our labora- tory with a karyotype in which a satellite in a chromosome 8 long arm P03.034 chomosomes involment in to chromosomal structure (8qs) was described. The reason for the cytogenetic studies was a rearrangemens frequency in Lithuania postnatal growth retardation, with all measures deeply below the 3rd V. Šliužas1,2, Ž. Čiuladaitė1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; percentile. In addition, the patient had mild dysmorphic features and 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius, slight motor delay. Lithuania, 2Center for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital FISH analysis with 8q subtelomeric probes (Cytocell) together with Santariskiu klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. MLPA and Array-CGH analyses, showed a very complex 8q chromo- Various congenital malformations, mental retardation as well as fertility some abnormality. problems could be determined by chromosomal structure rearrange- ments (CSR). Frequency of chromosomes participating in CSR does P03.032 chromosomal radiation sensitivity in lymphocytes of not correlate with chromosome length. breast cancer patients. Assessment of the frequencies of the chromosomes involved in to N. M. Ryabchenko1, V. M. Mikhailenko1, M. F. Anikusko2, G. P. Oliynichenko2; CSR in Lithuania patients referring for genetic counseling was carried 1Institute of Experimental Pathology, Oncology and Radiobiology of NAS of out. Karyotypes of 2729 persons from Lithuanian population were ana- Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Kyiv Municipal Oncological Hospital, Kyiv, Ukraine. lysed using conventional G-banded chromosome karyotyping, some Cytogenetic markers of intrinsic radiation sensitivity are seemed to CSR were verified with FISH and CGH methods. 106 chromosomal predict genomic instability that correlates with the risk of cancerogen- structure rearrangements (3.88% of all analysed cases) were de- esis in healthy population and response to radiotherapy among cancer tected. CSR were detected in chromosome X most frequently (8.5%), patients. Chromosomal G2-test makes it possible to estimate inter-in- chromosomes 14 and 18 were most common autosomes with CSR, dividual difference in levels of DNA breaks and efficiency of DNA dam- excluding Robertsonian translocations since only acrocentric chromo- age repair. Purpose of the presented study was comparative estima- somes are involved into this type of CSR. No CSRs have been identi- tion of chromosomal radiosensitivity of lymphocytes in healthy donors fied in chromosomes 19 and Y in the analysed group. and breast cancer patients According to the origin of rearrangements formation detected rear- Lymphocytes cultures were set up for 47 primary breast cancer pa- rangements were classified into 9 groups. Reciprocal translocation tients and 44 healthy women. To examine chromosomal radiosensi- was the most common type (29.25% of all detected cases) among tivity cultures were irradiated with 0,5 Gy of X-rays on 48 hour (cor- balanced CSR while deletion dominated among unbalanced CSR responds G2/M1). Metaphase preparations were made according to (16.04%). Altered chromosome regions were located in chromosome standard procedures. 100 well spread metaphases were analyzed for regions with lower than genome average gene density, but that was chromatid type aberrations. not the only factor contributing to survival of foetuses with unbalanced It was shown that G2 phase is characterized by high chromosomal CSR till birth. Pericentric inversion chromosome 9 has not been in- radiosensitivity and inter-individual variations in the levels of radiation volved into the research as it is construed as heteromorphic chromo- induced chromosomal breaks in both groups of examined donors. Co- some variant. Only one more chromosome heteromorphic variant has efficient of variation in group of patients was 32% and 26% in controls. been identified in the research - pericentric inversion chromosome 2 The mean overall G2 score for breast cancer patients was higher than inv(2)(p11.2q12), although several different heteromorphisms are de- that for the controls (86,6±10,4 and 67,8±14,0 respectively). Using the scribed in literature. 90th percentile as the cut-off point, the proportion of breast cancer patients with high G2 sensitivity was 38 % compared to 12 % for the controls. There was no correlation between G2 sensitivity and sponta- neous level of chromosome aberrations and age of donors. The results obtained support the concept of association between elevated chro-Cytogenetics 111 P03.035 A combination of molecular and conventional balanced” chromosome rearrangements. Furthermore, it reveals the karyotyping to unravel a complex karyotype complexity of chromosome rearrangements that is of great interest for K. Hansson1, A. Gijsbers1, C. Ruivenkamp1, A. Derksen-Lubsen2, I. Snoeck- the clinical diagnosis of these patients. Streef2, E. Aanhane1, W. vd Ende1, M. Hoogenboom1, E. den Ouden1, A. van Haeringen1,2; P03.037 Duplications 20p and 3q as a consequence of familial 1Clinical genetics LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2HAGA Teaching Hospital JKZ, complex chromosomal rearrangement the Hague, Netherlands. J. Drabova, A. Puchmajerova, D. Novotna, Z. Vlckova, Z. Zmitkova, Z. The use of high-resolution genome-wide array techniques as the first Sedlacek; method of choice in the clinical diagnostic setting has been shown Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of to considerably increase the diagnostic yield in patients with mental Medicine and Universit, Prague, Czech Republic. retardation with or without multiple congenital abnormalities. However, Balanced complex chromosome rearrangements (CCRs) are extreme- this technique is not able to elucidate more complex chromosomal re- ly rare. Their carriers have a high risk of primary infertility, spontane- arrangements. We present a patient who was referred to the mental ous abortions or children with unbalanced karyotypes. We report an retardation clinic because of psychomotor retardation and non-specific unusual case of a familial CCR involving three chromosomes. behavioral problems. The 7-year old girl showed mild ptosis, retrogna- An 8-year-old girl was referred for chromosome analysis because of thia and strabismus and was therefore defined as only slightly dysmor- heart defect, dysmorphic facial features, mild mental retardation and phic. High-resolution genome-wide array analysis with a 250K SNP- autistic features including a delay of speech development. Karyotyping array demonstrated four de novo interstitial deletions in three different revealed derivative chromosomes 20 and 22. For further clarification of chromosomes. Conventional karyotyping and FISH analyses revealed the rearrangement, FISH was performed using 20p and 20q subtelo- a complex chromosome rearrangement including both a reciprocal meric probes. It showed that material from 20p was translocated onto translocation and an insertion/deletion. This case demonstrates the 22p. Array CGH was essential for the identification of the suspected necessity of using a combination of different techniques to unravel the third partner in this CCR: It showed a 3q duplication of about 16.5 Mb, nature of complex structural rearrangements. and the CCR thus involved chromosomes 3, 20 and 22. Karyotyping and FISH analysis of other relatives indicated that four P03.036 cryptic genomic imbalances in two patients with de members of this family are carriers of a balanced form of this CCR. novo complex chromosome Rearrangements and abnormal These individuals are asymptomatic. Four of their descendants have phenotype. two types of unbalanced CCRs. The proband and her maternal aunt M. Palomares Bralo1,2, E. Mansilla1,2, M. L. de Torres1,2, P. Lapunzina1,2, have partial duplications of chromosome 3. Both have similar dysmor- E. Vallespin1,2, J. Nevado1,2, V. E. Fernández1, S. Martín1, B. Martínez1, A. phic facial features and mental retardation, but the aunt is lacking the Delicado1,2; heart defect and autism. Two other individuals have partial duplica- 1INGEMM-IdiPAZ. Hospital Universitario La Paz., Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, tions of chromosome 20. These children are currently very young. Spain. Their mental functioning seems to be normal, but the motor develop- Introduction: ment is delayed and macrosomia is present in both cases. Complex chromosome rearrangements (CCRs) are structural chromo- This work was supported by grants INCORE (EC FP6 043318), CHER- some anomalies involving more than 2 chromosomes or more than 2 ISH (EC FP7 223692) and MZOFNM2005. breakpoints. Phenotypic abnormalities are found in about 50% of pa- tients with de novo CCRs, suggesting that cryptic genetic imbalances, P03.038 Some cytochemical peculiarities of constitutive not detectable with conventional cytogenetics techniques, may be a heterochromatin in cytotrophoblast chromosomes from human common finding. chorionic villi. Here we report genomic imbalances detected in two patients with I. Trofimova1,2, M. Lyapunova1, E. Zolnerovich1, T. Kuznetzova2, V. Baranov1,2; abnormal phenotype and CCRs using a high-resolution array for ge- 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, nome-wide DNA. 2Ott’s Institute of obstetrics & gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Patient’s one conventional karyotype showed an apparently balanced Federation. translocation, t(4;8;7)(q13;q13;q11.2) dn. He presented with facial dys- Constitutive heterochromatin regions (CHRs) in chromosomes from morphism, psychomotor retardation and congenital malformations. chorion villi cytotrophoblast are characterized by decondensation, Patient two carried an apparently balanced translocation, early replication, hypomethylation and DNAse 1 hypersensitivity. After t(3;5;16)(q25;q13.1;q13) dn. He also presented with facial dysmor- standard AO staining of untreated direct chromosomal preparations phism, psychomotor retardation, congenital malformations and sei- CHRs manifests unusually bright red fluorescence in 1qh, 9qh, 16qh, zures. Yqh, 15cenh, 22cenh as typical for single-stranded DNA and RNA. Methods: The nature of this fluorescence was studied on direct chromosomal Array CGH experiments were carried out using Agilent Human Ge- preparations pretreated with different enzymes (RNase A, RNase H, nome CGH Microarray (105K), with an average resolution of ~100Kb. DNase I, DNA ligase T4) followed by AO staining. CVS from legal and Results: missed abortions at 5-10 week of pregnancy were used. Separate and Array-CGH revealed cryptic genomic imbalances in both patients. combined pre-treatment of slides with RNase A and DNase I resulted Summarized results of all the aberrations are shown in table 1. in decrease of red fluorescence of CHRs in most metaphase plates. Start (pb) It was especially evident in 1qh. All chromosome arms were uniformly Patient Karyotype Chromosome Imba NCBI Built End (pb) Size OMIM yellow-green or banded similar to RFA pattern in some metaphases. lance 36 (Mb) genes DNA ligase T4 or RNase H treatment resulted in total absence of fluo- rescence („black holes“) in CHRs, especially in 1qh, and uniform green GDAP1, t(4;8;7) 8q21.11- fluorescence along chromosome arms. Staining patterns of chromo- 1 loss 75079417 84816508 9.74 PXMP3, (q13;q13;q11.2) dn 8q21.13 somes after treatment with corresponding buffer solutions only were ZFHX4 identical to these one of untreated control slides. 8q21.2-8q21.3 loss 86739116 88087692 1.35 CNGB3 These results could be attributed to conformational packaging of CHRs 12q24.13 loss 112105455 112219269 0.11 and thus might be treated as an evidence of obvious transcriptional t(3;5;16) 2 5q15 loss 95457318 97818374 2.36 PCSK1 activity of pericentromeric satDNA of 1qh in cytotrophoblast cells from (q25;q13.1;q13) dn chorionic villi during early embryogenesis. 5q23.2 loss 123137045 124391381 1.25 5q33.3-5q34 loss 158629823 160676698 2.04 IL12B GABRA1, 5q34 loss 161228316 161537826 0.30 GABRG2 Conclusion: This study provides further evidence that cryptic genomic imbalances are common in patients with abnormal phenotype and “apparently Cytogenetics 112 P03.039 cytochemical characteristics of constitutive analysis revealed 17p13.3 monosomy associated to a 21 (pter,q21) heterochromatin regions from cytotrophoblast from human monosomy as a result of unbalanced segregation of a reciprocal ma- chorionic villi ternal translocation (45, XY,der17 t(17; 21)mat,-der 21). FISH studies M. S. Lyapunova1, I. L. Trofimova1, E. V. Zolnerovich1, T. V. Kuznetzova2; on the proposita lymphocytes confirmed the terminal deletion 17p and 1St.Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s the deletion of the 21(pter,q21) region. CGH-array analysis estimated Institute of obstetrics & gynecology RAMS, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. the size of the 17p telomere loss to 681 kb and the deletion of the Although the biological significance of heterochromatin remained ob- chromosome 21q to 16,15Mb. The study showed that the breakpoint in scure for many years, it is now apparent that heterochromatin plays chromosome 21 is proximal to the gene APP, the proximal boundary of a number of roles in the organization and function of the genome. the “monosomy 21” critical region and the breakpoint in chromosome Numerous characteristics (especially proliferation and migration cells, 17p is telomeric to LIS1 gene. Azoospepmia could be explained by invasive growth hormone-dependent, degree of methylation of DNA) the unbalanced translocation since that this chromosome anomaly is cells of cytotrophoblast reveals a striking similarity to tumor cells there- known to block meiosis during spermatogenesis. On the other hand, it fore feasible functional active of constitutive heterochromatin regions is often reported, in 17p terminal deletion cases with retention of gene (CHRs) of chromosomes 1, 9, 16 in cytotrophoblast cells of cytotro- LIS1, a severe mental delay in association with hypotonia and cerebral phoblast human chorionic villi is suggested. malformations suggesting the involvement of other genes other than The aim of investigation was comparative analysis of CHRs of chro- LISI in brain development and neuronal migration. mosomes 1, 9, 16 stained by acridine orange of direct chromosomal preparations from cytotrophoblast human chorionic villi (from legal and P03.042 interstitial deletion 11q13.1-q13.3 in a boy missed abortions at 5-10 week of pregnancy) and peripheral blood with developmental delay, prenatal short stature, facial lymphocytes from adult person. dysmorphisms and malformations of the hands and feet As fluorescent dye AO is discriminated single-stranded nucleic acids D. Niedrist, M. Riegel, A. Schinzel; from double stranded forms as orange-red and yellow-green fluores- Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, cence, respectively. Switzerland. CHRs of chromosomes 1, 9, 16 after pre-treatment with RNase A re- We report on a 3 year-old boy with mental retardation, prenatal short vealed red fluorescence of undifferentiated cells cytotrophoblast, but stature, microcephaly, split hand and facial dysmorphisms in associa- these regions stained green in terminally differentiated culture lym- tion with an interstitial 11q13 microdeletion. On the patient’s left hand, phocytes. Absence of fluorescence in CHRs, especially 1gh, was ob- the second finger was missing, there was total osseous syndactyly served after pre-treatment with RNase H. of the phalanges III/IV and flexion contraction in the metacarpo-pha- These results confirm unusual conformation packaging of CHRs of 1, langeal joint of the thumb. On the right hand, the distal phalanx of 9, 16 chromosomes in cytotrophoblast compared lymphocytes and the second finger was hypoplastic with missing nail, there were com- might be treated as an evidence of obvious transcriptional activity DNA plete cutaneous syndactyly III/IV and a finger-like thumb. There was of CHRs of 1qh in cytotrophoblast cells from chorionic villi during early syndactyly I/II and III/IV on the right foot. On the left foot there was embryogenesis. shortening of the third toe, and lateral deviation of the distal phalanx of the second toe but no syndactyly. The babygram showed 11 ribs P03.040 cytogenetic investigations in individuals residing near and a rather plump sacrum. Brain ultrasound revealed a single plexus the Jagatjit industries at Hamira, Punjab, india choroideus cyst. K. Kaur, G. Kaur, G. Gandhi; HR-CGH showed an interstitial deletion of 11q13. Array-based CGH Department of Human Genetics; Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, India. (44K array, Agilent Technologies) confirmed the deletion and revealed Distillery effluents can affect the air, water and soil quality and hence, a proximal breakpoint between positions 66.58 Mb and 66.64 Mb and the ecosystem. Exposure from polluted surrounding near the Jagatjit a distal breakpoint between 71.43 Mb and 71.46 Mb, thus a deletion Distillery may also be harmful to the residents of the area in terms of size of 4.73 Mb [46,XY,del(11)(q13.1q13.3)]. their genetic health and pose threat to their genetic make-up. In the This is the first report about a patient with this particular aberration. present study, individuals residing near distillery unit were investigated There are interesting candidate genes within the deleted region: such for any chromosomal damage in their peripheral blood lymphocytes. as TBX10 (malformation of the ears, mental retardation, missing rib The Cytokinesis block micronucleus assay was performed on 55 indi- and plump sacrum), FGF19 (malformation of the ears, mental retarda- viduals: 20 males and 20 females residing near the distillery from birth/ tion, sparse subcutaneous adipous tissue) FGF3 (malformation of the working in the distillery for 20-40y and 15 healthy controls matched ears, microdontia) FGF4 (malformation of the limbs), SHANK2 (men- for age (20-40 years), sex and socio-economic status. From each in- tal retardation) and others associated with eye-disease and deafness dividual, 2000 binucleated (BN) cells were scored for the presence of (CABP4, TCIRG1, LRP5). micronuclei. Preliminary scoring has revealed percent frequency of mi- cronucleated cells, nuclear buds and bridges to be higher in males in P03.043 interstitial chromosome 6q23 deletion characterized comparison to the values in females residing near/working in distillery by cGH in a patient with two de novo apparently balanced indicating that these individuals have more chromosomal damage as translocations, t(6;10) and t(7;11), and a paternal t(2;13) compared to controls. N. Oliva Teles1, B. Marques2, J. Aguiar1, M. R. Pinto1, H. Correia2, A. Fortuna1; 1Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, INSA I.P., Porto, Portugal, P03.041 characterization by FisH and cGH-array of a partial 2INSA I.P., Lisboa, Portugal. monosomy 17 (p13.3, pter) and 21(q11.2q21.3) encompassing We report on a female with a rare complex chromosomal abnormal- the 21q “critical region” in a patient presenting azoospermia and ity involving three translocations, which were characterized by GTG minor cerebral malformations. banding: two de novo apparently balanced t(6;10) and t(7;11) trans- H. Hannechi1, S. Mougou-Zerelli1, I. benabdallah1, s. Dimassi1, H. Issam2, A. locations, and a paternal t(2;13). To define the three translocations Labalme3, D. Sanlaville3, A. Saad1, H. Elghezal1; breakpoints and possible imbalances, comparative genomic hybridiza- 1Cytogenetics and Reproductive Biology Department, Farhat Hached University tion (CGH) techniques were now used, which allowed us to detect an Teaching Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Radiology department Farhat Hached interstitial 6q23.1-6q23.3 deletion. University Teaching Hospital,, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Hospices Civils de Lyon, The genetic investigation of this patient started when she was 14. Her Service de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, Lyon, France. clinical features are: mild to moderate mental retardation (the neu- So far, only a small number of monosomy 21(q11.2-q21.3) cases ropsychological profile showed global IQ of 58), dysmorphic facial have been reported. They displayed a very heterogeneous phenotype features with microcephaly, strabism and microftalmia, sensorineuro- where most clinical features have been attributed to the deletion of deafness, recurrent sinopulmonary infections, immunodeficiency and the critical region 21q : APP- SOD1 resulting in the “arthrogriposis like hemolitic anaemia. The diagnosis of Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome syndrome” . Here we report the case of a 26 years old patient referred (NBS) was suspected and both cytogenetics (chromosome breaks) for azoospermia. Clinical findings showed a moderate mental delay and molecular (nibrin gene) studies were performed 11 years ago, and facial dysmorphism. Cerebral MRI revealed an agenesis of the but these results were negative. Despite these results, we cannot ex- corpus callosum splenum and a cortico-sub-cortical atrophy. R banded clude this clinical diagnosis. The patient is currently 27-year-old and Cytogenetics 11 has been doing follow-up studies regarding her imuno-hematological due to a paternal translocation t(5;9), diagnosed in Lithuania. problems.The authors enhance the importance of using molecular cy- Case report. The parents of the proband had two healthy children from togenetic techniques for detecting subtle chromosome imbalances in their first marriages. This boy was delivered at 32 weeks of gestation patients with atypical phenotypic characteristics, especially with com- by a caesarean section due complicated pregnancy, breech presenta- plex de novo rearrangements and compare the present case findings tion. At birth his weight was 1980g, length 44cm and head circumfer- with previously published similar data. ence 27cm. Clinical examination revealed trigonocephaly, upslanding palpebral fissures, epicanthus, hypertelorism, flat nasal ridge, ante- P03.044 Clinical findings of 32 individuals with deletions of 18p verted nostrils, long philtrum, cleft palate, micrognathia, low set ears, C. D. Sebold, A. Hill, B. Soileau, M. Hasi, P. Heard, E. Carter, D. Hale, J. Cody; widely spaced nipples, corrected hernia umbilicalis, micropenis, partly Chromosome 18 Clinical Research Center, San Antonio, TX, United States. descended testis, underdeveloped scrotum. A large hemangioma on One of the primary goals of the Chromosome 18 Clinical Research the abdomen and occiput regions was observed. Cardiac evaluation Center is to identify genotype-phenotype correlations. An important revealed a ventricular septal defect. Gastrostoma was performed due part of this process is an extensive and accurate phenotypic descrip- to swallow difficulties. The chromosome analysis of peripheral blood tion. As a part of this process, we are conducting a thorough review of lymphocytes revealed 46,XY, del(9) (p22.3) karyotype. Cytogenetic the phenotype of individuals with 18p-. Here, we report the first part of analysis was performed from cultivated peripheral blood lympho- this project: the phenotypic characterization of study patients with a cytes, the resolution level was over 550 bands. Karyotype analysis centromeric breakpoint. In addition to reviewing the medical records of of both parents revealed normal mother karyotype and a balanced 32 study participants, we have interviewed the parents of 28 of these t(5;9)(p15.3;p22.3) translocation in the father, which has been con- individuals. Neonatal complications (jaundice, feeding problems, or re- firmed using subtelomeric FISH analysis. spiratory distress) were present in 20 individuals. Hypertonia or hypo- Conclusion. The present case illustrates that balanced translocation tonia were reported in 28 participants. Holoprosencephaly or findings carrier parents have high probability of having baby with 9p- syn- frequently associated with holoprosencephaly (such as single central drome. incisor or caudal regression) were identified in nine patients. Four had seizure disorders. Hearing and vision problems were common, oc- P03.047 supernumerary minute chromosome 17 in a boy curring in seven and 24 patients respectively. Eighteen patients had with severe developmental delay: molecular breakpoint in the chronic otitis media. Of the thirteen that had undergone echocardio- unstable proximal 17p region. grams, eight had a heart anomaly. Gastrointestinal anomalies were E. Manolakos1, L. Thomaidis2, M. Lagou1, R. Neroutsou1, K. Kefalas1, E. fairly common. Ten had chronic constipation; five had reflux. Herni- Louizou1, M. Rapti1, M. Kontodiou3, N. Triga1, P. Tsoplou1, T. Liehr4, M. B. as were present in six patients, and volvulus in one patient. Six had Petersen3, A. Metaxotou1; scoliosis; five had pectus excavatum. Foot anomalies were present 1Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics, Bioiatriki S.A, Athens, Greece, in six individuals. Endocrine problems were also fairly common. Two 2Developmental Assessment Unit, 2nd Department of Pediatrics, University of had panhypopituitarism, while seven had isolated growth hormone Athens, “P. & A. Kyriakou” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Department of deficiency. Four patients had hypothyroidism. As we continue to col- Genetics, Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece, 4Jena University Hospital, lect phenotypic data on patients with non-centromeric breakpoints, we Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. hope to narrow critical regions for features of 18p deletions. Introduction: Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMCs) are structurally abnormal chromosomes that cannot be identified or char- P03.045 A new case of deletion 18p syndrome acterized unambiguously by conventional cytogenetics alone. Particu- S. Ahmadpour, C. Azimi, M. Khaleghian, B. Ferizadeh; larly, chromosome imbalances involving the short arm of chromosome Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, 17 result in various distinct clinical conditions. Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Clinical Report: We describe a 5 years 6 months old boy with micro- Deletion of the short arm of chromosome 18 is a well established chro- cephaly, mild dysmorphic features and severe global developmental mosomal aberration. In patients, there is a broad variability of pheno- delay. typic features. Facial dysmorphism, short stature, skeletal anomalies, Methods: Chromosome analysis was performed using conventional and more or less severe psychomotor retardation are commonly seen. GTG-banding techniques. To identify the origin of the de novo sSMC, We report a patient with a del 18p, who was referred to our depart- FISH analysis was performed using centromere-specific multicolor ment. Our propositus is 12 years old and the last child born to healthy, FISH. Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) Oligonucleotide Micro- non-consanguineous parents. At birth, his father and his mother were array Analysis was also carried out. 43 and 42 years old, respectively. He has two sisters and one brother, Results: A very small supernumerary marker chromosome was identi- all are healthy. He was delivered full-term with a normal delivery, and fied in 85% of blood lymphocytes and FISH studies showed that the a birth weight of 3150 g. He had developmental delay, in all aspects marker was derived from chromosome 17. Several unique sequence specially walking. He lost all his child teeth by the age of 3, due to poor probes mapping to the SMS (17p11.2) and CMT1A (17p12) critical re- quality and extended caries. gions were applied to assign the distal breakpoint on the der(17) chro- His phenotypic manifestations are flattened nasal bridge, unilateral mosome, which was mapped at 17p12 adjacent to a low-copy repeat strabismus,large mouth, broad philtrum, low-set and rotated ears, very (LCR) sequence, while the proximal breakpoint mapped within the large and detached pinnae, and brittle nails. centromere. The karyotype was 47,XY,+mar[51]/46,XY[9].ish der(17). His mental status is in agreement with moderate mental retardation, Conclusions: This represent the first case of a marker chromosome and according to Weschler intelligence scale for children, his IQ was 17 to be characterized at the molecular level. It is important that more 77. He performed in non-verbal functions better than verbal ones. He cases of sSMC are described using high resolution molecular tech- showed delayed in learning at school, abnormal behaviour, agitation niques in order to elucidate a detailed genotype-phenotype correlation. and aggressivity. He has seizures and his thyroid hormones showed Furthermore, a precise determination of the chromosomal breakpoints high level of TSH. will enable the description of the mechanisms of origin of recurrent Cytogenetic studies from peripheral blood lymphocytes was carried chromosomal rearrangements like the genomic disorders of the un- out using G-banding technique on the propositus and his parents. stable proximal 17p region. The karyotype of the propositus revealed a de novo of 46,XY,del(18)(p11.3) and his parents showed normal karyotypes. P03.048 DiGeorge critical region 2 deletion in a patient with delayed psychomotor development and bilateral sensorineural P03.046 Report of a patient with a 46, XY, 9p- constitution due to hearing loss a paternal t(5;9) translocation R. Genesio1, D. Melis2, P. Boemio2, A. Mormile1, V. Ronga1, V. Gaudieri2, A. L. Cimbalistienė, V. Šliužas, V. Kučinskas; Conti1, M. Cozzolino2, G. Cappuccio2, F. Vitiello2, L. Nitsch1, G. Andria2; Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania. 1Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology and Pathology „Federico II“ Background. Deletion 9p syndrome is a rare congenital syndrome. It is University, Naples, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics „ Federico II“ University, characterized by mental retardation, trigonocephaly and other dysmor- phic features. We report of a patient with a 46, XY, del(9p) constitution Cytogenetics 11 Naples, Italy. using distribution of a DNA sample, open to 30 participants, was run in Partial monosomy 10p is a rare chromosomal aberration (approximate- collaboration with the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network ly 50 cases in the literature); it is considered a contiguos gene syn- (EMQN). drome. Two distinct critical regions have been described, one named The poster outlines details of the cases provided, including images HDR1, responsible for hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and exemplary reports. The marking criteria are explained, whereby and renal anomalies (HDR-syndrome) and one named DiGeorge criti- the specialist groups of assessors assigned a score for each submis- cal region 2 (DGCR2), associated with congenital heart defects and sion based on the criteria of analytical accuracy, interpretation of the thymus hypoplasia/aplasia or T cell defect, respectively. significance of the result, and content of the report. Results from all the We report the case of a 4-year-old boy presenting with facial dysmor- EQAs are summarised and examples of “Critical Error” are included, phisms, delayed psychomotor development and bilateral sensorineural defined as an error that would result in inappropriate clinical interven- hearing loss with an interstitial deletion of chromosome 10 short arm tion. Such errors were found in 27 of the 438 (6%) overall case submis- (10p13-10p14), the smallest deletion found in the literature so far. sions for the established (non-pilot) schemes. Our patient, carrying a deletion of the entire DGCR2 region and a par- tial deletion of the HDR1 region, showed, unexpectedly, only few minor P03.051 Fanconi anemia: telomere and telomerase genes clinical features of DiGeorge 2 syndrome (psychomotor retardation, evaluation using FisH technique. palpebral ptosis, epicanthic folds, anteverted nares, cryptorchidism, M. I. Shehab, A. M. Mohamed, M. M. Eid, H. K. Fayek, G. El Kamah, S. A. hand/foot abnormalities ) and did not show typical signs, such as car- Temtamy; diac defect, cleft palate and reduced T cell population. Furthermore he National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. had sensorineural deafness which is one of the characteristic features Introduction: Fanconi anemia (FA) an autosomal recessive and X-linked of the HDR syndrome. Our data support the hypothesis that DGS2 disease which belongs to the group of chromosome instability with high syndrome is associated to locus heterogeneity. We hypothesized that risk of malignancies. Because telomeres are involved in chromosomal the genes responsible for deafness in HDR syndrome or regulatory stability and cell proliferation , telomeric shortening and deletion will ac- elements of these genes map in the region between the two critical celerate cell apoptosis and the development of anemia. regions, namely HDR1 and DGCR2 (Lichtner et al., J Med Genet Aim: The study aimed to assess the telomeric deletion and the telom- 2000). erase genes (TERC and TERT ) copy number in patients with FA and aplastic anemia, compared to controls. P03.049 Duplication 8q12: a recognisable phenotype with Duane Subjects and methods: The study included 10 patients with aplastic anomaly. anemia (7 FA and 3 non FA) and 5 healthy individuals (control group). P. Blanchet1, J. Puechberty1,2, A. Schneider1,2, M. Girard2, M. Tournaire2, G. DEB, All Human Telomeres, TERC, and TERT Gene FISH probes, Lefort1,2, P. Sarda1, D. Geneviève1,3; were applied for peripheral blood lymphocytes culture. 1Département de Génétique Médicale et chromosomique, Centre de Référence Results: There was statistically significant difference (p<0.05; unpaired Maladies Rares Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs Sud- Student’s t-test) in the telomeric deletion of FA patients in relation to Languedoc Roussillon, CHRU Montpellier, Université Montpellier 1, Faculté controls (P< 0.0003), and a significant telomeric deletion in aplastic de Médecine de Montpellier-Nîmes, Montpellier, France, 2Plateforme puce à anemia patients (non FA) in relation to controls (P<0.016), but no sig- ADN, Service de Génétique Médicale et chromosomique, CHRU Montpellier, nificant difference in the deletion between FA and non FA(P< 0.16). Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France, 3Unité Inserm U844, Institut des The extra- telomeric signals (intrachromosomal and extrachromosom- neurosciences de Montpellier, Montpellier, France. al) were increased in FA and non FA patients. No amplification was Duane anomaly is a frequent ophthalmologic feature observed in sev- detected for telomerase genes in all patients. eral genetic disorders such as Okihiro syndrome (acro-renal-ocular Conclusion: Marked increase in the deletion of telomeric ends was syndrome) or Wildervanck syndrome. Here we report on a patient with detected in all patients. Although in the literature telomerase enzyme a small duplication of the long arm of the chromosome 8 (8q12, found reactivation was reported, no amplification of telomerase genes were with SNP-array) presenting with duane anomaly, moderate mental re- detected in our patients. Therefore we suggest that the increase in tardation and facial features namely horizontal eyebrows with proximal the telomerase enzyme level can be due to other factors than gene flaring of eyebrows, long palpebral fissures, and full cheek and lips. amplification. We found two other patients in the literature with a 8q12 duplication and a similar phenotype. The minimum critical size of the 8q12 dupli- P03.052 chromosomal alterations and sister chromatid cation was approximately 1.2 Mb and encompassed 4 genes namely exchange due to fluoride effects in and around the Dharmapuri the CA8, RAB2, RLBP1L1, and CHD7 genes. districts of tamil Nadu The observation of a duplication of the these genes questioned us A. Karthick kumar, V. Balachandar, S. Mohana Devi, M. Arun, B. on the potential effects of gene dosage in the phenotype observed in Balamuralikrishnan, P. Manikantan, S. Mustaq Ahammed, K. Sasikala; patients with 8q12 duplication. To our knowledge, no information is Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. available in the literature regarding pathological effects secondary to Fluorides are organic and inorganic compounds containing the ele- overexpression of the CA8, RAB2, RLBP1L1, or CHD7 genes. How- ment fluorine. Fluorides are generally colorless and they are more or ever, CA8 loss of function mutations have been recently demonstrated less soluble in water and can take the form of a solid, liquid or gas. to be responsible for ataxia and mild mental retardation, the RAB2 Fluorides are important industrial chemicals with a number of uses but gene is involved in neuronal adhesion, and neurite growth in vitro and the largest uses are for aluminum productions, drinking water fluori- hemizygous loss of function of the CHD7 gene lead to CHARGE syn- dation, and the manufacture of fluoridated dental preparations. Water drome suggesting a role of these genes in the phenotype observed in with underground sources is more likely to have higher levels of fluo- 8q12 duplicated patients. We believed that patients with 8q12 duplica- ride. Hence the present investigation has been carried out in the Dhar- tion share a common recognizable phenotype and we propose that mapuri districts to analyse the fluoride effects due to water. The objec- 8q12 duplication should be considered in patients presenting with a tive of the present study is to investigate the cytogenetic effects due to syndromic form of Duane anomaly. fluorides among the population in Dharmapuri district, South India. In the present study totally 50 samples 25 experimentals and 25 controls P03.050 Results from CEQA 2009, the European Cytogenetic were selected. All the experimentals were subjected to chromosomal External Quality Assessment Scheme alterations (CA), Sister Chromatid Exchange (SCE) and Micronucleus R. T. Howell, B. Quellhorst-Pawley, R. J. Hastings; (MN). Higher degree of CA like deletions, translocations, dicentrics, CEQA, Oxford, United Kingdom. chromatid gaps, breaks and satellite formation were observed. SCE CEQA undertakes annual external assessment of laboratory perfor- and fewer MN formation were also observed in experimentals when mance by provision of cytogenetic images and case details for analy- compared to their respective controls. In conclusion, the people re- sis through its online website. For 2009, two cases each of postnatal siding in the Dharmapuri district were found to have a higher level blood, prenatal amniotic fluid, haemato-oncology, and pre-implantation of genetic damage and the fluoride effect is hall marked by specific blastomeres were given, with 71, 72, 46, and 30 laboratories respec- behaviors of gene environment relationship which probably defines the tively submitting returns. Also, a new pilot EQA scheme for array-CGH cellular pathabiology of these fluorides diseases.Cytogenetics 11 P03.053 Analysis of factors associated with the cGG expansion Clinic, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital of the FmR1 gene in a Basque sample: Use of single Nucleotide Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. Polymorphisms (sNPs) Glycerol kinase deficiency (GKD) is a rare X-linked recessive disorder M. Barasoain1, I. Huerta1, M. Télez1, P. Flores2, J. Ramírez1, M. Hernández1, E. occurring in two forms, isolated and complex. Isolated GKD is caused Ortiz-Lastra3, A. González3, B. Criado4, I. Arrieta1; by point mutations in the glycerol kinase gene (GK). Complex GKD 1Department of Genetic, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology. Faculty is a contiguous gene syndrome involving the GK locus together with of science and Technology. University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, other Xp21 sequences including e.g. the adrenal hypoplasia congenita 2Department of Nursery. School of Nursing. University of the Basque Country, (NR0B1 gene) and/or the Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) loci. Bilbao, Spain, 3Department of Internal Medicine.Faculty of Medicine. University We present an infant hospitalized at the age of 6 weeks with ionic im- of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 4Department of Genetics. Cooperativa de balance, renal failure, and elevated creatin kinase and liver markers. Ensino Superior Politecnico e Universitario (CESPU), Porto, Portugal. The child suffered from hyponatremia, dehydratation, proteinuria, high The expansion of a CGG trinucleotide repeat in the 5’untranslated re- level of glycerol in urine and weak spontaneous mobility. Today, at the gion in the first exon of the FMR1 gene is the main cause of the fragile age of 2 years, he also shows mild psychomotor retardation. X syndrome. This gene maps to Xq27.3 and coincides with the fragile MLPA analysis of the DMD gene revealed a deletion of all exons. PCR site FRAXA. There are some important factors that influence the in- analysis confirmed a deletion of GK, NR0B1 and IL1RAPL1 genes. stability of the repeat. These factors include the length of the repeat, Karyotype analysis showed 46,XY,del(X)(p21.2p21.3), which was also the AGG interspersion pattern and the DXS548-FRAXAC1 microsatel- confirmed using FISH. These analyses confirmed suspected diagnosis lite markers associated haplotypes. It has been suggested that the of complex GKD. Array CGH analysis showed an 8.7 Mb deletion con- use of more stable polymorphisms, like Single Nucleotide Polymor- taining approximately 20 protein-coding genes. The distal breakpoint phisms (SNPs) could provide new advances in the study of the CGG was located between DCAF8L1 and IL1RAPL1, and the proximal one repeat instability. In previous investigations based on the structure of was located in the PRRG1 gene. the CGG repeat and linked microsatellite markers we showed differ- About 100 patients with complex GKD and phenotypes reflecting the ences among the Basque populations analyzed. In the present report, variable size of their deletions have been reported. Characterisation of in order to complete the investigation about the CGG repeat instability, the deletions is therefore an important prognostic factor. Our patient we have studied seven SNPs in the vicinity of the FRAXA repeat (DX- carried a rather large deletion including also the IL1RAPL1 gene as- S548P, WEX28, WEX1, ATL1, FMRb, WEX17 and WEX10) in Markina sociated with X-linked mental retardation and autism. and Arratia, two isolated Basque Valleys of the Biscay province. Our This work was supported by grants INCORE (EC FP6 043318), CHER- preliminary results suggest that there is a preferential association be- ISH (EC FP7 223692) and MZOFNM2005. tween DXS548-FRAXAC1 haplotypes and the SNPs ATL1*G, FMRb*A and WEX28*G in both valleys. On the other hand, our data indicate P03.056 comparative analysis of acetylated histone H3 that several of the analyzed SNPs predispose to the instability of the and methylated DNA distribution along human lymphocyte CGG repeat. chromosomes J. Lezhnina1, O. Efimova2, A. Pendina2, T. Kuznetsova2, V. Baranov2; P03.054 cytogenetic techniques in management of 1Saint-Peterburg State Universuty, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott‘s haematological malignancies: Degenerating or gold standard? Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. B. B. Ganguly; At the first step of our research we have studied how chromatin regions, Genetics Center, Navi Mumbai, India. enriched in acetylated H3 (AcH3K9), are distributed along human Conventional cytogenetic techniques played an important role in diag- metaphase chromosomes. Metaphase chromosomes were obtained nosis and monitoring of CML by characterizing Philadelphia chromo- from PHA-stimulated human lymphocytes, fixed with 2% glacial ace- some, which has heralded the development of gleevac. Subsequent tic acid in ethanol. 60 metaphases (~400 bands per haploid genome) development of FISH technique has enabled faster and sensitive de- from 5 individuals were studied. Analysis with monoclonal antibodies tection of onco-/anti-oncogenes. Nevertheless introduction of PCR and against AcH3K9 (Abcam,USA) revealed clearly distinguishable regions microarray techniques has revolutionised the management of haema- with high, medium, weak or absent fluorescence on metaphase chro- tologic malignancies and development of molecular and individualized mosomes. Combined DAPI and immunofluorescent staining allowed medicines. PCR based studies require stringent lab-environment and co-localtion the regions enriched/depleted in AcH3K9 with Q-negative/ validation of quantification of transcript ratio failing which a false posi- positive bands (R/G-bands). AcH3K9-richest regions corresponded to tive result may create confusion among clinicians and patients. Large 32 R-bands. Medium to weak AcH3K9-signals were detected in 86 R- scale clinical trials are being conducted for standardizing real time bands. All G-bands demonstrated weak fluorescence. In heterochro- PCR techniques for monitoring MRD condition. matic blocks of chromosomes 1,9,16 and Y immunofluorescent signal FISH technique, though generate false positive signals and is specific, was absent indicating no acetylation of H3K9 in these regions. is reliable and getting refined with advancement of probe-design and At the second step we have compared H3K9 acetylation with DNA combinatorial application with simultaneous detection of surface anti- methylation status, described in our previous study (Pendina et al., gens (FICTION). Clonal evolution or multilineage condition can only be 2005). Non-acetylated heterochromatic regions were hypermethyl- detected by conventional G-banding technique and molecular screen- ated. Among R-bands with medium to weak acetylation 6 bands dem- ing. The whole genome screening, though possible by SKY or CGH onstrated weak, 48 - medium and 32 - high DNA methylation level. 32 techniques, requires validation and refinement in disease manage- AcH3K9-richest R-bands showed variable DNA methylation level: from ment. Limitation of resolution of conventional cytogenetic technique high in 17 bands and medium in 12 bands to low in 3 bands - 1p13, many times reproduces a normal karyotype and that indicates the 2q31, 2q33. Low level of DNA methylation in highly acetylated bands need for employment of PCR technique especially for JAK2, NPM1, favors their specific function in lymphocytes. etc. Therefore, it is clear that every technology has some merits and Thus, the co-location of acetylated and methylated chromatin regions demerits where G-banding technique is still being considered as pri- suggests that active and inactivated chromatin is band-specifically dis- mary step for diagnosis and relapse-evaluation. In known cases, FISH tributed along chromosome arms. could be a better choice. Thus, with the present day technologies Supported by Carl Zeiss and Administration of Saint-Petersburg. available, conventional cytogenetic technique cannot be replaced and be considered as the gold standard in clinical management. P03.057 Identification of recurrent cytegenetic aberrations in hepatoma patients in southern india P03.055 Complex glycerol kinase deficiency in a patient with S. Mohana Devi1, V. Balachandar1, K. Sasikala1, R. Sangeetha1, P. psychomotor retardation: molecular analysis and comparison to Manikantan1, A. Karthick kumar1, S. Suresh kumar1, L. Venkatakrishnan2, S. published data. Dharwatkar3; M. Hančárová1, M. Vlčková1, P. Hedvičáková1, D. Novotná1, Z. Vlčková1, Š. 1Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India, 2PSG Medical College and Hospital, Vejvalková1, F. Fencl2, Z. Sedláček1; Coimbatore, India, 3KLE Medical University, Bangalore, India. 1Department Of Biology And Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty Hepatoma (Primary liver cancer) is the cancer of the hepatocytes. It of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Pediatric usually grows in the liver as a ball-like tumor, invading the normal tis-Cytogenetics 11 sue surrounding it. The aim of the present study was to identify the The aim of this study was to evaluate if X chromosome monosomy re- Chromosomal aberrations in hepatoma patients to assess whether pe- stricted to the left ventricle was associated to isolated HLHS. Formalin- ripheral blood had non-random cytogenetic aberrations as observed in fixed, paraffin-embedded cardiac tissue of 19 patients, 10 males and 9 tumor samples. The study was conducted on the peripheral blood of females, affected by HLHS without extracardiac congenital anomalies 67 hepatoma patients (aged 30 to 85 years male) undergoing hepatic and with a euploid karyotype, were investigated. For each sample 50 resection of liver tumour with curative intent. In the present study all consecutive nuclei isolated from both ventricles were analysed in a the experimentals and controls were analysed chromosomal altera- blind fashion by interphase FISH with X/Y/18 centromeric probes. The tions using conventional G-banging. same analysis was performed on a group of 15 chromosomally normal In the present investigation cancer patients had significantly increased pediatric patients affected by either restrictive or dilated cardiomyopa- aberrant metaphases compared to controls. Hepatoma samples re- thy, as negative controls. Mosaic monosomy X was detected in the vealed frequent aberrations in 1q, 8q, 17q, 20q, 4q , 8p, 13q, and 16q. cardiac tissue nuclei of both groups, with similar frequencies (6-16% Our finding of a high incidence of 1q gain and frequent deletion in the and 12-16%, respectively). In conclusion, this study has excluded that short arm of chromosome 8 strongly suggested this aberration was as- X chromosome monosomy confined to the left heart is a major case of sociated with the development of this disease. Chromatid breaks were HLHS, arguing that different pathogenic mechanisms are responsible seen on chromosomes 1p, 2p, 2q and 4q while chromatid gaps were for syndromic and isolated HLHS. on chromosomes 1p, 2p, 3p, and 3q. The results of this study might help in providing important clues and P03.060 Prenatal detection and follow-up of a mosaic i(18p) to add better knowledge in the location of relevant genes on specific case. A complex case for genetic counseling. altered regions of chromosomes. Comprehensive elucidation of the K. Kuuse1, P. Ilisson1, P. Tammur1, T. Ilus1, M. Jürgenson1, T. Reimand1,2, M. specific genes and molecular pathways involved in progression from Sitska1; pre neoplastic lesion to frank neoplastic in the protracted process of 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, hepatocarcinogenesis will facilitate development of new strategies for Estonia, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, prevention and therapy. Estonia. Prenatally detected mosaic aneuploidy leads to problems in genetic P03.058 New chromosome aberrations in male hypogonadism counseling. The risk for an abnormal clinical outcome varies accord- R. Mikelsaar1, J. Lissitsina1, K. Ausmees2, M. Punab2, P. Korrovits2; ing to the chromosomes and tissues involved and to the persentage 1Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, of cells with unbalanced karyotype. We present a prenatal finding of Estonia, 2Centre of Andrology, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. mosaic tetrasomy 18p detected at amniocentesis, not confirmed after Hypogonadism is a lack of testosterone in male patients and can be birth in cord blood and skin, but present in placental tissue, buccal of central (hypothalamic or pituitary) or testicular origin. The molecular smear and cells from urine of the baby. basis of hypogonadism has been identified for only 25%-30% of pa- Case report: Amniocentesis was done to 42-year-old woman due to tients, with mutations mostly in the KAL1, FGFR1 and GnRHR genes. positive serum-screening for Down syndrome, normal ultrasound. Two Although the systematic chromosome study of patients is a powerful cultures were set up, chromosomes analysed by G-banding and FISH. approach in the search for new loci associated with diseases, there is Unbalanced mosaic karyotype with tetrasomy 18p in 17% of cells was little data, other than isolated case reports, documenting the karyotype found: 46,XY[47]/47,XY,+i(18)(p10)[18].ish i(18)(p10)(pter+,D18Z1+,p of a more larger sample of hypogonadotropic patients. ter+). In this context we have studied cytogenetically 51 patients with pri- Parents opted to continue pregnancy. Apparently normal male baby mary hypogonadism (n=28) and secondary hypogonadism (n=23) was delivered prematurely (31wp, preeclampsy). classified by the gonadotropins level. Chromosome analyses were Postnatal chromosomal analysis of cord blood (22 mitoses, 70 nuclei performed from peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures using GTG, C- analysed) and skin fibroblasts (17 mitoses, 100 nuclei) showed normal banding and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) methods. Of 51 male karyotype. Unbalanced mosaic karyotype +i(18p) was confirmed patients studied, 34 were normal. However, 17 males (33.3%) had ma- in ~20% of cells in placental tissue (35 metaphases, 55 nuclei) thus jor chromosome abnormalities with sex chromosome abnormalities in suggesting to the diagnosis of confined placental mosaicism. 14 (27.5%) cases and autosome abnormalities in 3 (5.9%) patients. Subsequent FISH analysis of buccal smear (100 nuclei) and urine All three males were with secondary hypogonadism. They had chro- sediment cells (50 nuclei) confirmed the presence of +i(18p) in mosaic mosome abnormalities, previously not described in the patients with form in the tissues of baby as well (17% and 24% respectively). In this secondary hypogonadism, such as supernumerary inv dup(22)(q11.1); case the final diagnosis of true mosaicism (involvement of entodermal 45,XY,t(13;14)(q10;q10), and 46,XY,t(5;13), all confirmed by FISH and ectodermal tissues) was made thus giving the prognosis of facing method. developmental problems in near future. The revealed new cases, particularly translocations with new break- Clinical data of our patient at birth and at 7 months of age will be pre- events provide valuable information for positional cloning of new sec- sented. ondary hypogonadism genes, which might be involved in the patho- genesis of male secondary hypogonadism. Supported partly by target P03.061 A liability to malignancy, immunodeficiency, facial financing SF 0180096s08 of the Estonian Ministry of Science and abnormalities and chromosomal instability without mutation Education. in DNMTB gene in two siblings: new chromatin disorder delineation? P03.059 X chromosome monosomy restricted to the left A. Polityko1, N. Kosyakova2, H. Tönnies3, K. Sperling3, O. Khurs1, N. ventricle is not a major cause of isolated hypoplastic left heart Rumyantseva1, I. Naumchik1, H. Neitzel3, A. Weise2, T. Liehr2; syndrome (HLHs) 1National Medical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus, 2Jena University L. Bernardini1, M. Giuffrida1, P. Francalanci2, A. Capalbo1, A. Novelli1, F. Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany, Callea2, B. Dallapiccola2; 3Institute of Human Genetics, Charité, Humboldt-University, Berlin, Germany. 1IRCCS “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza” Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Bambino Gesù Several human diseases which are characterized by alterations or Children’s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy. modification of chromatin structure caused by changes of methylation Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) has an incidence of 0.016- pattern are considered as so-called ‘chromatin disorders’. ICF syn- 0.036% live births. HLHS encompasses a spectrum of heart anomalies drome (OMIM #242860) belongs to the aforementioned disorders and characterized by obstructive lesions of the left side of the heart accom- is a very rare recessive disease caused by mutations of the gene DN- panied by varying degrees of underdevelopment of the aorta, aortic MT3B that encodes the ‘de novo DNA-methyltransferase 3B’. We re- valve, left ventricle, mitral valve, as well as mitral atresia or stenosis. port on a family with ICF-like symptoms but without DNMT3B mutation The aetiology of HLHS is heterogeneous and can be observed as an and with a rather atypical pattern of heterochromatin abnormalities. isolated defect or in association with different chromosome abnormali- Methods. Chromosomal stability of both sisters and their parents using ties. In particular, HLHS has been reported in about 20% of patients GTG-banded or standard solid-stained chromosomes of 48, 72 and 96 with 45,X karyotype, suggesting that monosomy X is a cause of this h blood lymphocyte cultures and karyotypes investigation performed developmental heart defect. on the base of conventional cytogenetics. Molecular cytogenetics Cytogenetics 117 approaches were performed for further investigation of specificity of P03.064** Parental insertional balanced translocations are an cytogenetic instability in this family. Two-color interphase FISH using important cause of apparently de novo cNVs in patients with centromeric probes for X/Y-chromosomes (Abbott/Vysis) and multi- developmental anomalies. plex-fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) analysis was applied B. A. Nowakowska1, N. de Leeuw2, R. Thoelen1, R. Pfundt2, H. Mieloo2, B. de to clarify the composition of complex aberrations, irresolvable by con- Vries2, J. P. Fryns1, J. R. Vermeesch1; ventional methods. The analysis of chromosomes most frequently in- 1Center for Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven, UZ Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, volved in aberrations was performed. 100 metaphases were analyzed 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical per individual. Epstein Barr virus based immortalization of the family Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. blood was done. Array CGH screening is becoming a first tier diagnostic test for the Results. Karyotypes of both sibs and their parents were normal. Evi- identification of copy number changes in patients with mental retar- dent specificity of chromosome instability was presented by high fre- dation and/or congenital anomalies. The identification of a causative quency of juxtacentromeric heterochromatin rearrangements, chromo- CNV is not only important to make a proper diagnosis but also to en- somal fragments and despiralization or pulverization. However, muta- able the accurate estimation of the recurrence risk to family members. tions in DNMT3B could not be detected. The recurrence risk for de novo CNVs is considered very low, espe- Conclusion. Clinical, molecular genetic and cytogenetic findings will cially for de novo interstitial submicroscopic CNVs. At the macroscopic be presented. The discovery of a new so-called ‘chromatin disorder’ level insertional translocations occur only in approximately 1:80000 is suggested. live births. However, despite of a substantial number of sporadic re- ports, the frequency of submicroscopic insertional translocations re- P03.062 the results of cytogenetic analyses in 407 infertile mains unknown. women in Prešov region, slovakia To determine the frequency by which insertional translocations occur, I. Boroňová, I. Bernasovský, J. Bernasovská, E. Petrejčíková, A. Bôžiková, S. we investigated the potential presence of an insertional translocation Mačeková, D. Gabriková, M. Soták, A. Sovičová; in a consecutive series of 326 de novo CNVs, including both dele- Excellence Centre of Animal and Human Ecology, Faculty of Humanities and tions and duplications. For deletion, FISH with a probe within the CNV Natural Sciences, University of Prešov, Prešov, Slovakia. was performed on metaphase from both parents to determine whether The aim of this study was to assess the frequency of chromosome one of the parents is carrier of an insertional translocation. For dupli- anomalies in infertile women from Prešov region (Slovakia) in 1998- cations, FISH was on metaphases of the index patient to determine 2009. We analyzed the karyotypes of 407 individuals with clinical diag- whether the duplication was in tandem or on another chromosome. In nosis of infertility included primary sterility, secondary sterility and re- the latter case, both parents were tested for the presence of an IT. In peated abortions using cytogenetic banding techniques. We detected three (0.9%) parents a balanced, cryptic interchromosomal insertional fifteen aberrant karyotypes that corresponds to chromosome aberra- translocation was detected. tions frequency of 3.7%. Chromosomal polymorphism was detected This study shows that submicroscopic insertional translocations are in 17.7% of individuals. The most frequent heterochromatin variant much more frequent than microscopicly visible ITs. This knowledge detected in 4.7% of women of study survey was 15s+. Increased should be taken into account during counselling family members and length of heterochromatin and satellites in autosomal chromosomes might trigger follow up diagnostic tests in the parents. were present in 9.2% of women. The results of our study confirmed the higher occurrence of chromosome anomalies in infertile women that P03.065 two girls with mental retardation and behavioural absolutely reasons indication of cytogenetic examination. abnormalities: is the deletion of the AtXN1 gene on 6p22.3 a major factor in causing the phenotype? P03.063 chromosomal instability in peripheral blood T. Barøy1,2, D. Misceo1,2, M. Fannemel2, A. Stormyr2, O. K. Rødningen2, lymphocytes and risk of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in J. R. Helle2, Ø. Braaten2, C. F. Rustad2, B. E. Kristiansen2, H. S. Sorte2, P. south indian population Strømme3,4, E. Frengen1,2; V. Balachandar, S. Mohana Devi, K. Sasikala, P. Manikantan, M. Arun, B. 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway, Balamuralikrishnan, S. Mustaq Ahammed, S. Dharwatkar; 2Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Norway, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. 3Department of Pediatrics, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Norway, 4Faculty Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) is a chronic idiopathic inflamma- Division Ullevål University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Norway. tion of gastrointestinal tract. The two main forms of IBD are Crohn’s 6p22 interstitial deletions are relatively rare, with only eight patients Disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). In the present study about 43 described so far. The clinical phenotype in these patients includes patients were investigated and they were analysed for different chro- developmental delay/mental retardation, defects of brain, heart and mosomal alterations using standard protocol. Hence blood samples kidney, craniofacial malformations and dysmorphic features. The com- were collected from various hospitals of Coimbatore district after ob- mon deleted region, 2.2 Mb, harbouring 12 genes, has been defined taining the consent of patients. Then the patients were divided into as critical for this syndrome. ATXN1, located within this interval, has four groups along with suitable age matched normal healthy controls been suggested as a candidate gene for the mental retardation based for each group. In the present study, all the patients and controls were on its expression in CNS and the cognitive impairments manifested in subjected to chromosomal analysis using the standard protocol. 14 of knock out mice. We report on two patients carrying partly overlapping the 43 (32.5%) patients and 2 controls of the 43 (4.65%) were found to de novo deletions within 6p22.3, which are smaller than the ones pre- have different chromosomal aberrations. Group I patients were found viously reported. Patient 1 displays mild mental retardation and behav- to have the maximum number of chromosomal aberrations with 8 pa- ioural problems; her 115 kb deletion (chr6:16215803-16332297, hg19) tients (18.6%) of the 43 patients displaying aberrations like deletion, encompasses only GMPR and ATXN1. Patient 2 has severe mental translocations, mosaic and satellite. In group II, four patients (9.3%) retardation, autistic features and hyperactivity. Her deletion spans 2.3 were found to have different chromosomal aberrations like transloca- Mb (chr6:14545576-16846846, hg19) and includes JARID2, DTNBP1 tion and deletion. In group III, two patients (4.6%) were found to have and MYLIP, in addition to GMPR and ATXN1. Because the GMP re- aberration of deletion type. None of the group IV patients displayed ductases encoded by GMPR and GMPR2 have redundant functions, chromosomal aberrations of any type. Two of the controls in group haploinsufficiency of GMPR is not likely causing the cognitive impair- I showed minor aberrations (4.65%).This study in its own small way ments in our patients. We therefore suggest that ATXN1 hemizygosity might contribute valuable nuggets that could aid in solving the complex is sufficient to cause the mental retardation in patient 1. Furthermore, clues underlying this multifactorial disease and which are on the rise additional genes such as MYLIP, which is expressed in brain and has in Indian population. been shown to have a role in regulating neurite outgrowth, is expected to contribute to the significantly more severe phenotype of patient 2.Cytogenetics 11 P03.066** inverted duplication associated with an uncommon prise chromosomal regions or genes known for causing CHD, were 1p36 interstitial deletion: description and mecanism considered causal. The remainder were regarded as unclassified vari- A. Coussement, J. Milosevic, F. Baverel, D. Le Tessier, G. Quenum, A. ants (UCV) with variable degree of causality based on gene-content Ménard, J. Dupont; and inheritance (Breckpot et al., 2010). Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, APHP - Groupe hospitalier Cochin – Saint 101 rare variants were detected in 37 out of 44 patients. A de novo Vincent de Paul ; Université, Paris, France. 22q11.21 duplication in one patient with AVSD was considered causal. Inverted duplications with terminal deletion are rare chromosomal We detected on average 2 UCVs per patient. Mean size of the detect- rearrangement. They have been described for a greater number of ed UCVs was 83kb (median 31kb), comprising a mean of 52 markers chromosomal ends since the development of molecular techniques. per UCV (median 19). We report the first case of an inverted duplication associated with an Unlike previous studies (>10%, Greenway et al., 2009), we demon- interstitiel deletion of chromosome 1 in a 23 years old woman with strate that chromosomal imbalances are an infrequent cause of spo- mental retardation, dysmophic features and epilepsy. The cytogenetic radic, non-syndromic CHD. The 22q11.21 duplication was considered analysis shows a normal female karyotype. The analysis with BAC ar- causal, since several independent studies showed an association with ray-CGH shows a chromosomal rearrangement consisting of a dele- various developmental disorders including isolated CHD. Additionally, tion and a duplication of the short arm of chromosome 1.The analysis we detected a large number of UCVs in this patient cohort. Further with oligonucleotide array-CGH led us to the delineation of a 5 Mb du- studies are ongoing to assess the relevance of these unique variants plication and 3.2 Mb deletion. A two color in situ hybridization allowed in the pathogenesis of CHD. us to demonstrate for the first time an inverted duplication with an in- terstitial deletion. An Affymetrix SNP array discovered an uniparental P03.069 Phenotype-genotype correlation in a tatar ethnic child disomy distal to the rearrangement. Two mechanisms were suggested with Kabuki-like features to explain these chromosomal rearrangements: V. Plaiasu1, D. Ochiana1, G. Motei1, A. Costin2, E. Neagu3, B. Iancu3; - non allelic homologous recombination, the main mechanism in the 1IOMC Prof.dr.Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania, 2District Hospital Ilfov ”Sf. inverted duplication with terminal deletion of the 8p. This abnormality is Imparati Constantin si Elena”, Bucharest, Romania, 3National Institute of Legal characterised by a single copy region in between the deletion and the Medicine „Mina Minovici”, Bucharest, Romania. duplication and by an inverted LCR or a micro paracentric inversion 8p We report a 1-year-and 4 months-old girl, Tatar ethnic child, originat- in one of the parent. ing from South-Eastern region of Romania, with a phenotype reminis- - U-type exchange, characterised by the absence of a disomic region. cent of Kabuki syndrome, mild developmental delay, long palpebral Neither of these mechanisms can explain the formation of the inverted fissures, short stature. In 14 of 50 GTG-banded metaphases obtained duplication with a interstitial deletion witch leads us to expose a third from peripheral blood lymphocytes, a marker chromosome smaller possibility: a replication abnormality like FoSTeS (Fork stalling and than a G group chromosome was found. Fluorescence in situ hybrid- template switching). izations (FISH) showed the marker to be of X-chromosome origin. Also molecular analysis of the patient’s genetic material confirmed P03.067 A case with turner-like phenotype carrying iso(Y)/ the absence of the SRY gene. Proband‘s karyotype was described as monosomy X mosaicism mos45,X[36]/46,X,mar(X)[14]. Karotypes of the parents were normal. O. Cetin1, V. Okur1, M. Erdogan1,2, T. Kalkan1, F. Duzcan1; Other molecular studies will be performed. We present our case com- 1pamukkale university school of medicine dept. of medical genetics, denizli, paratively with another published Kabuki-like cases with sex chromo- Turkey, 2Ministry of Health Etlik Zubeyde Hanim Obstetric&Gynecology Training some abnormalities. and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. Sexual disorders are associated with various numerical and structural P03.070 simultaneous copy number and loss of heterozygosity aberrations of sex chromosomes. As for Y chromosome, isochromo- detection using Agilent’s cGH+sNP platform somes are the most commonly reported abnormalities. Here we report P. Costa, B. Curry, B. Peter, P. Anderson, N. Sampas, S. Giles, A. Ashutosh, J. a 14-year-old girl with short stature, Turner-like phenotype and amen- Ghosh, D. Roberts, A. De Witte; orrhea. Her medical history was not remarkable. She was the second Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States. child of healthy non-consanguineous parents and had two healthy In the past few years, genome-wide studies have broadened the need sisters. Her physchomotor development was normal while height and for simultaneous detection of genomic variations and allelic imbalanc- weight were below 3rd centile. Physical examination showed no axil- es. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) measurements can com- lary hairs and her breast development was TANNER Stage 1. Plasma plement DNA copy number (CN) measurements to enable detection of levels of estradiol, FSH and LH indicated hypergonadotrophic hypogo- allelic gains and copy-neutral changes such as loss of heterozygosity nadism. Her bone age was 2 years below the chronological age. Ab- (LOH) and uniparental disomy (UPD). dominal MRI for uterus and ovaries showed that uterus was hypoplastic The current SurePrint G3 Human CGH platform was extended to in- but no ovaries were visualized. Karyotyping with standard GTG band- clude a set of SNP probes on the same microarray, allowing simul- ing revealed mos46,X,iso(Y)(qter--> p11.1::p11.1-->qter)[20]/45,X[11]. taneous DNA Copy Number (CN) and Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH) C banding and subsequent FISH analysis with X and Y centromeric detection. Using the standard enzymatic labeling protocol, we evalu- probes supported karyotyping. SRY analysis and laparoscopic explo- ated the CN and LOH state in a set of cytogenetic samples with previ- ration for redundant testicular tissue are planned. ously characterized disorders. The genomic DNA was restriction di- gested with AluI and RsaI, allowing detection of SNPs located in the P03.068** Chromosomal imbalances are an infrequent cause of enzyme recognition sites. Following hybridization of the labeled gDNA non-syndromic sporadic congenital heart defects to CGH+SNP microarrays, the data were analyzed using Agilent’s Ge- J. Breckpot1, S. Jackmaert1, T. Voet1, J. R. Vermeesch1, M. Gewillig2, K. nomic Workbench software. Devriendt1; Several LOH regions, as small as 5.8 Mb, were detected in different 1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, samples. A trisomy of chromosome 21 and a duplicated region on 2Department of Pediatric Cardiology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, chromosome X were identified in two samples. The assay correctly Belgium. assigned known partial and complete UPDs. In one case, extended Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization leads to an increased de- segments of homozygosity were found throughout the genome as a tection of causal chromosomal imbalances in individuals with syn- consequence of parental consanguinity. In two additional cases, UPD dromic congenital heart defects (CHD) (Thienpont et al., 2007). This was associated with individuals known to have Angelman and Prader- study explores the incidence of causal imbalances involved in non- Willi syndromes, respectively. Our CGH+SNP platform confidently and syndromic sporadic CHD. High resolution SNP array was performed in accurately identified and mapped allelic gains, LOH and UPD aberra- 44 sporadic patients with an isolated and complex CHD (univentricular tions, previously reported as associated with the samples studied. heart or atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD)). SNP array experiments were conducted, as described (Korn et al., 2008). Genotypes were compared to a home-made reference model. Variants <10kb or with a >90% CNP overlap were not further investigated. CNVs which com-Cytogenetics 11 P03.071 molecular and clinical characterization of 6q16 Republic of Iran. deletions encompassing MCHR2, SIM1 and GRIK2 genes in Two paternal cousins were referred for genetic counseling due to 3 patients with mental retardation +/- high weight and small abnormal clinical features and mental retardation. The first was a 3 extremities year old female from a consanguineous marriage and the other was C. DUBOURG1,2, S. JAILLARD3,2, C. HENRY3, O. RAOUL4, J. LUCAS3, J. a 4 year old male and result of a non-consanguineous marriage. Both MOSSER2,5, V. DAVID1,2, H. JOURNEL6, S. ODENT7,2; mothers had a history of miscarriages. Cytogenetic studies revealed 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, RENNES, France, 2UMR 6061 an abnormal karyotype, described as der(1)t(1;9)(q42;q32). In the first CNRS, IGDR, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France, patient, the abnormal chromosome was inherited from her father and 3Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU, RENNES, France, 4Laboratoire de the other from his mother. Both these parents had the same balanced Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, PARIS, France, 5Plateforme reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 1 and 9, described as Transcriptome Biogenouest IBiSa, Rennes, France, 6Service de Génétique t(1;9)(q42;q32). Médicale, CHBA, Vannes, France, 7Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU, The two patients had similar clinical features including mental retarda- CLAD-Ouest, RENNES, France. tion, microcephaly , speech and developmental delay, aracnodactly, Deletions of the chromosomal segment 6q16 have been reported in asymmetric face, asymmetric skull, short filtrum and high arched pal- association with a Prader-Willi like phenotype. Array comparative ge- ate and female patient had a history of seizure up to1.5 years. How- nomic hybridization enables to accurately define the region of interest ever, the clinical features in the male patient were more severe than and five cases have recently been reported by Bonaglia et al (2008), the female patient. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case. allowing them to narrow the minimal critical region to a 4,1-Mb seg- ment. P03.074 Here we describe three more cases of overlapping 6q16 deletions. By Structural rearrangements of chromosome 8p23.1-p23.3 related comparing these deletions with the previously reported 4,1-Mb region, to mental retardation we define a new minimal deleted fragment of 2,2 Mb (100,489,030 V. Dirsė1, Ž. Čiuladaitė1,2, A. Utkus1,2, K. Männik3, A. Kurg3, V. Kučinskas1,2; ->102,689,000)(hg18-build36) involving four genes: MCHR2 encodes 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius a receptor for melanin-concentrating hormone which is involved in the University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University control of feeding behaviour and energy metabolism; SIM1 (candidate Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell gene for obesity), a transcription factor that plays an important role in Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. the development of the paraventricular neurones; ACSS3, an helicase; Mental retardation (MR) which occurs in about 1-3 % of population is and GRIK2, a glutamate receptor which could be involved in autistic- etiologically very heterogeneous and unexplained in more than a half like behaviour. of all cases. Rearrangements in 8p are frequent and associated with The three patients reported here present a moderate developmental MR. A unique feature of the chromosome 8 is a vast region of 15 Mb delay with language retardation. on distal 8p that appears to have a strikingly high mutation rate. Three Two of them have also a high weight and even obesity in accordance major factors have been associated with high mutation rates: proximity with haploinsufficiency of the SIM1 gene, as well as a rounded face to telomeres, high recombination rate and high A+T content. and small extremities. On the contrary, the third patient has an average We identified one duplication and five deletions in 8p23.1-p23.3 region weight and normal extremities, but he presents a complex chromosom- using Infinium-2 whole-genome genotyping HumanCytoSNP-12 Bead- al rearrangement with two deletions of the long arm of chromosome 6, Chips (Illumina) and arrayCGH (Agilent 105K) in 38 patients with MR. in 6q16.1 and 6q16.2q16.3. Moreover, the deleted chromosome 6 is Rearrangements size varies from 500 Kb to 6.7 Mb. 6.7 Mb 8p23.1- involved in a balanced translocation (6 ;13)(q16.1q21). 23.3 duplication was identified in 11 years old boy with MR, develop- The phenotypic difference could be explained by expression altera- mental delay, macrocephaly, speech disorders. Region of 8p23.1-23.3 tion of another gene, alteration which would offset haploinsufficiency contains genes which may be related to neurological abnormalities: of SIM1. CLN8, DLGAP2, MCPH1. Gene CLN8 encodes a transmembrane protein which is postulated to function in lipid synthesis, transport, or P03.072 mental retardation in a patient with 14q32.33 and sensing. Mutations in CLN8 gene have altered levels of sphingolipids 19p13.3 microdeletions characterized using array-based cGH and phospholipids in the brain and are associated with progressive E. Preikšaitienė1, L. Cimbalistienė1,2, P. Magini3, V. Kučinskas1,2; epilepsy with MR which is a subtype of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses. 1Dept. Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, DLGAP2 gene encodes a membrane-associated guanylate kinase 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania, that is localized at postsynaptically density in neuronal cells and may 3Unit of Medical Genetics, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. play a role in the molecular organization of synapses and in neuronal A 17-year-old boy was referred to the Centre for Medical Genetics be- cell signaling. Additional copies of MCPH1 gene have been associated cause of abnormal gait and distinctive phenotype. It consists of mod- with macrocephaly. erate mental retardation and dysmorphic features including narrow palate, sparse eyebrows, scoliosis and broad feet. The conventional P03.075 sNPs-array analysis in 100 patients with mental cytogenetic analysis revealed a normal 46,XY karyotype. Array-based retardation comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH) analysis demonstrated V. Pecile1, P. D‘Adamo1, L. Esposito2, P. Gasparini1,3, M. S. Rocca1; the presence of a 0,4 Mb deletion in 14q32.33 and 0,4 Mb deletion in 1IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2CBM SCRL, Area Science Park, Trieste, 19p13.3. The deleted regions encompass 26 genes, among which at Italy, 3Department of Reproduction and Development Science, Trieste, Italy. least 3 candidate genes for genotype-phenotype correlation could be The underlying genetic defect remains difficult to diagnose in the major- delineated. The products of TMEM121, GPR54 and KISS1R genes ity of patients suffering from mental retardation Recent developments are expressed in the developing brain and could possibly be related in genomic microarray technology now allow for the genomewide de- to mental retardation. Additional patients with well-characterized de- tection of submicroscopic chromosomal alterations. The SNPs array letions within these regions will be needed to determine the role of currently represents the technique with the highest resolution power, individual genes for the clinical manifestations. since they allow to identify chromosomal abnormality as for example The research leading to these results is funded by the European Com- variations in the number of copies (CNV) as duplications or deletions munity‘s Seventh Framework Programme [FP7/2007-2013] under and uniparental disomy (UPD). We have collected 100 samples from grant agreement n° 223692, CHERISH project. patients with normal karyotypes and some samples from their unaf- fected family members. The patients presented moderate or severe P03.073 Report of two dysmorphic and mentally retarded MR, associated with at least one of the following clinical features: cousins with identical inherited derivative chromosome 1 with one major malformation and/or dysmorphism and/or multiple minor different degrees of clinical severity anomalies. We have applied Infinium-2 genotyping assay with Hu- E. Bagherizadeh1, Y. Shafeghati1, F. Hadipour1, H. Hekmat1, T. Naieb Bagher1, man370CNV-Duo or Quad BeadChips (Illumina Inc.) to detect CNVs F. Behjati1,2; and copy-neutral LOHs. 1Sarem Women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2University of The data was analyzed with GenomeStudio 2009. We developed an Social Welfare Science and Rehabilitation, Genetics Research Center, Islamic ad hoc database to maintain all relevant information .Cytogenetics 120 The Illumina SNP platform detected CNVs most of which have already P03.079 Use of the Affymetrix cytogenetics Whole-Genome been reported in the Database of Genomic Variants or recurrently 2.7M Array in routine molecular karyotyping: first experiences present in our samples. We shall discuss unique CNVs and their as- and results sociated phenotype. S. Spengler1, M. Begemann1, B. Denecke2, T. Eggermann1; Patients with CNVs, who weren’t identified in the database or recur- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, rent in our cases, have been submitted to further investigation (FISH Germany, 2IZKF „BIOMAT“, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, or SNPs array on their parents). The results show that SNPs array can Germany. be used to reliably detect and characterize subtelomeric and interstitial Microarray analysis has become an increasingly powerful tool for the CNVs which are the cause of the pathological phenotype. detection of submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances. Previously, we used the Affymetrix 500K and the Genome-Wide 6.0 SNP arrays for P03.076 Novel cryptic genomic aberration associated with research purposes and now established the Cytogenetics Whole-Ge- mental retardation nome 2,7M Array for routine molecular karyotyping. This array con- K. Männik1, S. Parkel1, O. Žilina1, M. Nõukas1, P. Palta1, T. Esko1, H. tains 2,3 million copy number and 400.000 SNP markers allowing the Puusepp1,2, M. Remm1, K. Õunap2,3, A. Kurg1; detection of copy number alterations, the loss of heterozygosity and 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of uniparental disomy in a single run. Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Genetics, United So far, we analysed 24 patients with this array: in 5 patients chro- Laboratories, Tartu, Estonia. mosomal aberrations previously detected with the 6.0 array, aCGH or Expanding usage of whole-genome genotyping arrays in molecular cy- conventional karyotyping were confirmed. Another 19 patients showed togenetics has given a new quality to molecular karyotyping of patients no chromosomal aberrations. with developmental abnormalities e.g. mental retardation (MR). In ad- The cytogenetics array offers several advantages in comparison to dition to high resolution of SNP-CGH arrays, the possibility to combine other array techniques: in contrast to aCGH a control DNA for each copy-number variation (CNV) data with genotyping information pro- sample is not necessary. Instead, a reference of 450 pre-analysed vides an advantage to use array data for more widespread analysis. It HapMap samples can be used for computation. Compared to the 6.0 allows to detect uniparental disomy and copy-number neutral loss of array the workflow is much faster with less hands-on- and total time. heterozygosity tracks on genome-wide level as well as to character- The Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) software provided by Affyme- ize allelic composition and inheritance pattern of found aberrations or trix is easy to use, results are clearly arranged and aberrations are to use the same information in whole-genome association studies for directly linked to databases e.g. UCSC genome browser and Ensem- relating smaller rare CNVs with phenotypic features in patients. ble. Nevertheless there are some disadvantages, too. The software Here we report a cohort of Estonian patients with idiopathic mental sometimes shows computation biases: results may be false positive retardation screened for genomic structural aberrations - CNVs, incon- due to the use of different annotation files especially regarding the sistencies of mendelian inheritance as indicative for potential unipa- sex chromosomes and due to poor marker-coverage in some regions. rental disomy (UDP) and rare extended runs of homozygosity (ROH) Nevertheless, the cytogenetics array is a powerful, fast and reliable - by Infinium whole-genome genotyping assay with HumanCNV370 ar- tool and suitable for routine molecular karyotyping. rays (Illumina Inc.). We found structural aberrations with potential clini- cal significance in 23% of investigated families, including seven cases P03.080 A boy with mental retardation, obesity, dysmorphism with recurrent microdeletion or -duplication syndromes and eight fami- and hypertrichosis caused by a microdeletion of 19p13.12. lies with imbalances overlapping with previous similar reports. Four N. F. Van der Aa1,2, G. Vandeweyer2, F. Kooy2; novel aberrations with probable clinical significance were identified in 1Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium, 2University of Antwerp, chromosome regions 2p25.1-p24.3, 3p12.1-p11.2, 7p21.1-p21.1 and Edegem, Belgium. Xq28. Additional four CNVs less than 200kb in size and two extended We present a moderately mentally retarded boy with obesity, short ROHs with potential, yet uncertain role in the pathogenesis of MR were stature, hypertrichosis and facial dysmorphism. detected. Using the Illumina Bead Array platform a de novo deletion of chromo- some 19p13.12 was identified in DNA from our patient. Aberrations of P03.077 Xp22.3 interstitial deletion: a clinically recognisable the gene-rich chromosome 19 have rarely been reported. The dele- genetic condition identified by array comparative genomic tion in our patient is approximately 1.2Mb in size, with breakpoints at hybridisation 14.2Mb and 15.4Mb, and encompasses 30 genes (10 OMIM-listed). H. Ben khelifa, I. Ben Abdallah, S. Dimassi, S. Mougou, A. Saad, H. Elghezal; It includes NOTCH3 (MIM600276), causative of the vascular neuro- laboratory of cytogenetics,molecular genetics and reproductive biology - Farhat degenerative disorder CADASIL. In CADASIL, pathogenic mutations Hached hospital, sousse, Tunisia. alter the number of cysteine residues in the extracellular domain of X linked ichthyosis is a genetic disorder affecting the skin and is caused NOTCH3, which accumulates in small arteries of affected individuals. by a deficit in the steroid sulfatase enzyme (STS). This syndrome is It has recently been suggested that CADASIL mutations act through often associated with a recurrent microdeletion at Xp22.31. gain of function mechanisms. As mutations in NOTCH3 play a role in Most of the STS deleted patients have X linked ichthyosis as the only neurodegeneration, it is tempting to speculate that haploinsufficciency clinical feature and it is believed that patients with more complex dis- of this gene might contribute to the cognitive impairment in our patient. order, including mental retardation are the result of contiguous gene Another gene potentially related to the phenotype in the deleted region deletion . is the CASP14 gene (MIM 605848), playing a central role in apoptosis. This lead to the hypothesis that mental retardation gene should be It is highly expressed in the inner root sheath of the hair follicle and present within this microdeletion. It was previously proposed the VCX- haploinsufficiency of this gene may well contribute to the hypertricho- A,a member of the VCX (variably charged X-chromosome mRNA) sis in our patient. gene family, as the candidate gene for X-linked non-specific mental retardation in patients with X linked ichthyosis. P03.081 Patient with minor dysmorphism and microdeletion/ Using array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH array) on a 44K microduplication confirmed by aCGH due to the presence of a resolution, we identified an interstitial deletion of Xp22.3 of 1, 32 Mb double translocation (oligonucleotide position: from A-14-P139110 to A-14-P125042), in- V. Belengeanu1, S. Farcas1, C. Popa1, M. Stoian1, N. Andreescu1, D. Amzar2, cluding the STS,VCX (A, B, 3A and 3B) and HDHD1A genes. E. Ormerod3, B. E. Kristiansen3; The phenotype observed in our male patient had X linked ichthyosis, 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, moderate mental retardation, facial dysmorphic features and epilepsy. Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Endocrinology, University of Medicine Many previous results, suggest that VCX-A gene is sufficient to main- and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Ulleval tain normal mental development. Thus, our findings support a causal University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. role for ArrayCGH is the technique that, day by day adds new syndromes of VCX-A dysfunction in X linked ichthyosis patients who manifest mental microduplication or microdeletion in situations of mental retardation retardation. and/or congenital anomalies. We report a new syndrome with a dou- ble chromosomal aberration: microdeletion and microduplication in a Cytogenetics 121 case investigated for mental retardation, growth retardation and minor Overall, duplication and five various deletions were obtained (12%). All dysmorphic features (microcephaly, downwards slanting palpebral fis- positives were detected by the P245 MLPA kit. In one case the deletion sures, retrognathia, 2nd and 5th finger clinodactyly of both hands and covered subtelomeric region and was also traced using the MLPA kit umbilical hernia). A double chromosomal translocation, one involving P036. No additional positives were after the P297 MLPA kit analysis. chromosomes 1 and 13, and the other involving chromosomes 5 and We found the MLPA method as a fast, cheap, and effective method to 11 was revealed by the conventional cytogenetic analysis performed analyse patients with mental retardation within the laboratory routine. from peripheral blood lymphocytes with GTG banding. For establishing This work was supported by Grant No. IGAMZCR NS/10327-3/2009. the origin of the translocation, chromosomal analysis was performed for both parents, but their karyotypes was normal and we concluded P03.084 Array CGH; an excellent tool in the search for low-level that is a de novo translocation. Due to the presence of phenotypic mosaics. manifestations and the presence of mental retardation we suspected a B. Sikkema-Raddatz, L. Leegte, K. Kok, C. van Ravenswaaij-Arts, R. Sinke, T. possible genomic imbalance. ArrayCGH using 105A Oligo Microarray Dijkhuizen; kit was performed for our patient and revealed a 2,3Mb deletion on Department of Genetics; University Medical Centre, Groningen, Netherlands. 13q31.3 and 1Mb duplication on 2q14.3. Application of genome wide Somatic chromosomal mosaicism is a well established cause for array for detection of chromosomal aberration is mandatory in clini- mental retardation and multiple congenital abnormalities (MR/MCA). cal practice because it allows the correct characterisation of genomic However, low level mosaicism for clinically relevant chromosomal ab- imbalance. Other literature reports stated that when performing aCGH normalities can be missed if masked by a high percentage of normal for patients with translocations, genomic imbalance of other chromo- cells or due to selective growth of normal cells in culture. To overcome somes than the ones involved in translocation might be revealed. This this problem, either the number of karyotyped cells is extended and/or applies to our case, as a microduplication was found on chromosome interphase FISH in uncultured tissues is performed. With the introduc- 2 that is not involved in translocation. tion of array CGH techniques analysis of uncultured cells is easily fea- sible and up to 10% mosaicism is detectable (Cross et al, 2007). P03.082 Association of aberrant promoter methylation of In our cohort of 1730 MR/MCA patients analyzed by array CGH (either checkpoint genes in miscarriages with chromosomal mosaicism 105K or 180K custom designed Agilent oligo arrays) and by karyotyp- that fail to grow in vitro ing (10 metaphases), array CGH analysis detected 12 mosaics. Only A. A. Kashevarova, E. N. Tolmacheva, E. A. Sazhenova, I. N. Lebedev; 5 of these were detected by karyotyping. Mosaics included four triso- Institute of Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, mies (chromosome 13, 14, 18, 20), two monosomies (chromosome Russian Federation. X, 21), four extra markerchromosomes (chromosome 8, 12, 14, 18) Chromosomal abnormalities play a significant role in embryo develop- and two submicroscopic structural abnormalities (duplication 1q32.1, ment failure. About 50-70% of them are found in mosaic state with deletion 1p36.32p36.31). For each case confirmation by FISH analysis diploid cells. The molecular bases of chromosomal mosaicism remain was performed on PHA stimulated blood cells and on a second tissue unknown. In cancer studies hypermethyaltion of cell cycle control if available. The percentage of mosaicism ranged from 1 to 80%. In genes was shown, what potentially can cause chromosome missegre- our study, karyotyping failed to detect seven out of twelve (58%) chro- gation. We aimed to analyze karyotype of 18 embryos with cell culture mosomal mosaic cases and these included low level as well as high failure and 44 aneuploid miscarriages after conventional cytogenetic level mosaicism. We conclude that array-CGH is an excellent tool for analysis using FISH with centromere-specific DNA probes and to study detection of any type of mosaicism and therefore the preferred choice epigenetic status of M (CHFR and MAD2) and G1/S (RB1 and p14) of technique. checkpoint genes with methyl-specific PCR. Two extraembryonic tis- Cross et al. 2007. Prenat diagn 27,1197-1204 sues (mesoderm and cytotrophoblast) were studied when available. Mosaicism was more frequently observed among miscarriages with P03.085 Use of buccal smears to investigate tissue specific cell culture failure (p<0.01). Cytotrophoblast-specific compartmental- mosaicism ization of aneuploid clones prevailed in this group, what testify to the T. F. Morris, S. A. Lynch, L. Ekstrom, M. Mullarkey, D. R. Betts; higher rates of mitotic mutations in cytotrophoblast and trisomy rescue National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland. in mesoderm. In successfully cultured embryos abnormal cells pre- The suspicion of possible chromosomal mosaicism, the presence of vailed in mesoderm. The frequency of p14 and RB1 hypermethylation two or more chromosomally different cell lines within an individual, can was significantly higher in miscarriages with cell culture failure - 83% lead to diagnostic as well as genetic counselling dilemmas. It is well vs. 7% in successfully cultured (p<0.01) and it was mainly observed documented that levels of mosaicism can vary greatly within different in mesoderm or in both tissues. There was no CHFR and MAD2 hy- tissue types from the same patient and hence it is clinically advanta- permethylation in both groups. Our findings suggest that there is an geous to study tissues of differing embryonic origin. Obtaining smears association between hypermethylaion of G1/S checkpoint genes and from buccal swabs is a rapid and relatively non invasive technique for mitotic errors. Also prevalence of epimutations in cell culture failures obtaining skin fibroblasts, which is in contrast to the invasive and time may indicate their ability to reduce developmental potential of embry- consuming procedures such as taking skin biopsies. Buccal smears os. This study was supported by grant of Federal Program #P806. facilitate the rapid identification of identified or suspected chromosom- al abnormalities using interphase FISH, although their disadvantage is P03.083 MLPA analysis in children with mental retardation that G-band analysis is not possible. We report the FISH analysis on K. Hirschfeldova, V. Kebrdlova, R. Mihalova, J. Stekrova, K. Vesela, P. buccal smears from 15 patients to investigate possible chromosomal Lnenicka, M. Florianova, R. Solc, A. Baxova; mosaicism following G-band analysis on at least one other tissue type, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st FM and GTH, Charles University most commonly peripheral blood. The presence of mosaicism was in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. demonstrated in four of the 15 patients. Our findings included con- Chromosomal aberrations are the most common known cause of men- firming a diagnosis of suspected diploid/triploid mosiacism, with the tal retardation. However, the typical rearrangement is below a resolu- detection of a triploid cell line present in approximately 40% of fibro- tion limit of standard cytogenetic banding. MLPA is a modern molecular blast cells. Another patient was found to have a mosaic cell line within genetics method of choice that can detect such small deletion/duplica- the skin tissue containing a structurally rearranged chromosome 18. tion in a number of selected regions at a time. Notably, in both these instances the peripheral blood karyotype was Our sample was made of 41 unrelated probands in charge of the De- normal. These results demonstrate that buccal smears provide a valu- partment of Medical Genetics (GTH and 1stFM, Charles University in able and easy to obtain source of material to investigate for possible Prague). Selection criterions were the presence of mental retardation tissue specific mosaicism. corresponding to cryptic rearrangements but without a positive cytoge- netic finding on a standard cytogenetic karyotyping. We have analysed all probands using MLPA kits P245 for detection of 21 most common deletion/duplication syndromes, P036 for the subtelomeres analysis, and P297 designed to examine new chromosomal regions recently associated with mental retardation.Cytogenetics 122 P03.086 High-resolution 44K array and 1 Mb array detect similar P03.088 Common polymorphism near the IL-6 gene is rates of chromosomal imbalances in patients with müllerian associated with total and abdominal adiposity in caucasian defects (mD) men: 5-year follow-up study in swedish GOOD cohort É. L. Freitas1, C. Cheroki1, A. C. Krepischi-Santos2, P. A. Otto1, C. Rosenberg1; S. Adamovic1, N. Andersson1,2, S. Nilsson3, L. Strandberg1, C. Ohlsson4, M. 1Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, IB, University of São Paulo, Lorentzon4, J. Jansson1; São Paulo, Brazil, 2Fundação Antonio Prudente, Hospital A.C. Camargo, São 1GU/Neuroscience and Physiology/Endocrinology, Gothenburg, Sweden, Paulo, Brazil. 2Food Science, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, The defective development of the Müllerian ducts results in abnormali- 3Mathematical Statistics, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, ties of the female genital tract ranging from upper vaginal atresia to to- Sweden, 4GU/Depts. Of Geriatrics & Internal Medicine, Gothenburg, Sweden. tal absence of Fallopian tubes, uterus and upper vagina, while ovaries, Background: Regulation of fat mass is associated with immune func- breast development and patterns of body hair are normal. Patients tions. Studies of knockout mice show that endogenous interleukin (IL)- often exhibit additional clinical features such as renal, vertebral and 6 can suppress mature-onset obesity. Our hypothesis is that variants cardiac defects. In most cases its etiology remains poorly understood. of the IL-6 gene can affect obesity in humans. We recently published The vast majority of patients have a normal female karyotype and few results revealing association between the SNP rs10242594, mapping individuals have been found to carry chromosomal abnormalities. Re- slightly downstream of the IL-6 gene, in GOOD cohort, consisting of cently our group investigated by 1Mb BAC array CGH patients with MD 1049 men aged 18-20 years (p=.02). This finding was confirmed in and chromosomal imbalances in 33% of them affecting the 1q21.1, elderly men (nearly 8000 in total; Andersson N et al 2010, Int J Obes). 17q12, 22q11.21 and Xq21.31 chromosome regions. In order to verify Later on, this association was confirmed and strengthened in the whether smaller genomic alterations contributed to the MD etiology, GOOD GWAS, after exclusion of individuals with non-Caucasian de- we investigated 15 patients previously screened by BAC array and scent (p=.002, unpublished data). In this study we aimed to examine presenting normal results. For this study, we used a CGH microar- the influence of rs101242595 on obesity in a 5-year follow-up study of ray platform from Agilent Technologies containing 44.000 oligonucle- the GOOD subjects. otides, i.e., over 10 times higher resolution than the array previously Study Design: 724 participants of the GOOD-cohort, now 23-25 years used. Only copy number variations of DNA segments which are also of age, were available for follow-up measurements of body fat by DXA. observed in control populations (i.e, without a major pathogenic effect) Association of rs10242595 was analyzed by linear regression and ad- have been detected among our patients. A possible explanation for justed for age, length, tissue lean mass and current physical activity. these negative results is that the patients of the first study were more Results: rs10242595 is significantly associated with fat percent syndromic than the remaining patients and presents more additional (p=.016), total body fat mass (p=.012) and abdominal fat (p=.01) in clinical signs such as renal, craniofacial and member alterations and young Caucasian men investigated 5 years after the first measure- learning disabilities. Although the size of the sample is still limited, our ment. CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that rs10242595*A is results indicate that array-CGH has little diagnostic value for patients associated with decreased abdominal fat as well as total fat in young with isolated müllerian defects. men. We hypothesize that another, still unknown, polymorphism map- ping to the coding region of the IL-6 and in strong LD with rs10242595 P03.087 X-chromosome disorders: identification of underlying is one of the causing genetic factors of obesity. mechanisms P. C. Patsalis1, G. Koumbaris1, C. Hatzisevastou2, A. Kurg3, S. Kitsiou Tzeli4, N. P03.089 Pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 in medical Scordis5, Z. Kosmaidou6, J. Vermeesch7, I. Georgiou8, N. Carter9; genetics and clinical counselling 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Dept of Cytogenetics A. Sipek jr.1, A. Panczak1, R. Mihalova1, V. Sobotka2, P. Lonsky2, V. Gregor2,3; and Genomics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Ippokratio Thessaloniki General Hospital, 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles Thessaloniki, Greece, 3University of Tartu, IMCB, Department Of Biotechnology, University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Pronatal Sanatory, Prague, Czech Tartu, Estonia, 4Agia Sophia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 5Makarios Republic, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Thomayer University Hospital, Hospital, Department of Paediatrics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 6Alexandra Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. Department of Genetics, Athens, Greece, 7University of Leuven, Leuven, Pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 [inv(9)] is mostly considered Leuven, Belgium, 8University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 9Wellcome Trust to be clinically insignificant variant of the human karyotype. However, Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. several studies have shown possible connection of inv(9) with certain Non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR), nonhomologous end groups of clinical diagnoses: infertility, repeated abortions or schizo- joining (NHEJ), and recently Fork Stalling and Template Switching phrenia. (FoSTeS) have been implicated as the main mechanisms for the cre- In our retrospective epidemiological study, we have analysed the inci- ation of genomic disorders. In order to investigate the mechanisms dence of inv(9) and the spectrum of clinical indications for karyotyping responsible for the creation of X-chromosome disorders we analyzed in three medical genetics departments in Prague. In cytogenetic ar- 70 cases bearing cytogenetically visible X-chromosome abnormali- chives of these departments (at General Teaching Hospital, Thomayer ties using whole genome tiling path BAC arrays and custom designed University Hospital and Pronatal Sanatory) we identified 351 cases targeted ultra-high resolution oligo-arrays. Using whole genome tiling with inv(9) (1.60 %) among 21 944 cases in total (reference period: path BAC CGH, we were able to accurately map the breakpoints of 1981 - 2008). The sex ratio (female to male) in inv(9) patient group 35 cases bearing isochromosomes of the long arm of chromosome was 1.29. A special control group of 515 patients with normal karyo- X at a resolution of 150kb. Fifteen of these had breakpoints at the type was created from the cytogenetic archive in the General Teaching centromere and were considered monocentric. The remaining 20 were Hospital, using the systematic sampling method. isodicentric and had breakpoints in proximal Xp in ChrX:51500000- The most frequent clinical diagnoses among the patients with inv(9) 58500000. This region of chromosome X is rich in segmental dupli- were: infertility and/or habitual abortion - 124 cases (37.13 %), con- cations and contains some of the largest and most homologous in- genital anomalies - 41 (12.28 %) and psychomotoric and/or mental verted repeats in the human genome. Based on the BAC-array CGH retardation - 24 (7.19 %). Comparing these incidences with those in findings, we designed custom oligo-arrays which cover this region in the control group we determined the relative risk of infertility and/or ultra-high resolution (44K and 385K oligos in 7Mb region of interest) habitual abortion for inv(9) carriers as 1.21 (95% CI = 0.90 - 1.58); p = and feature enhanced coverage of segmental duplications. Screening 0.1726 (Fisher’s exact test). As this result was not statistically signifi- the isodicentric cases with these ultra-high resolution arrays enabled cant we haven’t proved any strong association of inv(9) with specific us to identify previously undiscovered breakpoint complexity in 45% clinical diagnosis and the clinical significance of inv(9) still remains of the isodicentrics and demonstrate that they are formed by NAHR, uncertain. The molecular-genetic examination of inv(9) itself should be facilitated by specific highly homologous inverted repeats. Twenty two our next step. percent of the isodicentrics were mapped within repetitive sequences and 33% have simple breakpoints that do not coincide with segmental duplications and are probably mediated by a nonhomologous recom- bination mechanism.Cytogenetics 12 P03.090 Atypical variant rearrangement bearing a BcR/ABL Kazakhstan. fusion gene on the chromosome 7 in a case of chronic myeloid The purpose of the study was appraised an effectiveness of prenatal leukemia with a translocation t(7;9;22)(q11; q34; q11) genetic screening by invasive diagnostics procedures. A. Bennour1, H. Sennana1, I. Ouahchi1, A. Laatiri2, A. Saad1; 1747 samples of fetus material (chorion’s thief or placenta’s cells and 1Cytogenetic Department, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Hematology, umbilical blood’s lymphocytes) were materials for invasive prenatal di- Monastir, Tunisia. agnostics and cytogenesis analysis by period from 2008 to 2009 years Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized by the presence of in Almaty. Biopsies of chorion’s thief were in 947 (54,2%) cases, plac- Philadelphia chromosome, usually resulted from a t(9;22)(q34;q11). entocentesis were in 589 (34%) cases and cordocentesis were in 145 Approximately, 5-10% of CML patients show variant translocations in- (8,2%) cases, interphase/nuclear in situ hybridizationis in 66(3,8%). volving other chromosomes in addition to chromosomes 9 and 22. In Samples were studied by G-kariotyping cytogenetic method. some variant translocations, additional material is transferred on the Normal karyotypes of fetus were diagnosed in 1602 cases (91,7). derivative chromosome 22 resulting in a masked Philadelphia chromo- Chromosomal pathologies were diagnosed in 79 cases by pregnant some. In this study, we report an apparently masked Philadelphia CML women of high-risk group (5%), that according with literature’s dates. patient showing a t(7;9;22)(q11; q34; q11) by conventional cytogenetic The more common indications for invasive prenatal diagnostics were and a b2a2 transcript by multiplexed polymerase chain reaction. A mo- pregnant women’s age with US-markers (NT, nasal bone) and serum lecular cytogenetic characterization was performed by fluorescence markers (PAPP-A, beta-CGH, alpha-fetoprotein). in situ hybridization (FISH) and disclosed the presence of the BCR/ Invasive prenatal diagnostics in 624 cases were made by isolate ABL fusion gene on the derivative chromosome 7. FISH analyses with indication (36%). The highest rate of chromosomal pathology diag- whole chromosome painting specific for chromosomes 7, 9 and 22 al- nostics by isolate indication was by ultrasonic 207(12%) and serum lowed us to precisely characterize the variant chromosomal rearrange- 502(29%) markers detections. The lowest rate was by only age indica- ment that was not perceived by conventional analysis and to discuss tion 385(22%). the mechanism formation of this chromosomal rearrangement. Thus, But combination of two and more indications was more important (170 resulted from a sequence of rearrangements (two steps): the first rear- cases, 10%): age factor + serum markers changes (92 cases) the rate rangement is a classical t(9;22)(q34;q11) which places the BCR/ABL of fetus chromosomal aberrations was 5,2%, age factor + ultrasonic fusion gene on the derivative chromosome 22 , this reciprocal trans- markers - 2,3% (40 cases). The maximal rate of fetus chromosomal location is followed by a second rearrangement between derivative changes was by combination of serum and ultrasonic markers (38 pa- chromosome 22 and chromosome 7, giving rise to a BCR/ABL fusion tients - 2,1%). gene on the derivative chromosome 7. The more common indications for invasive prenatal diagnostics were In summary, our data provide a precise molecular cytogenetic charac- pregnant women’s age with US-markers and serum markers. terization of a Philadelphia negative patient, bearing variant t(7;9;22), we also highlight the crucial role of the FISH analyses in disclosing P03.093** An Xp22.33 duplication flanking the pseudoautosomal masked Philadelphia chromosomes with is beyond the power resolu- region translocated on Yp11.2 tion of conventional cytogenetic. R. Stoeva1,2, A. Vogels2, R. Thoelen2, T. Voet2, J. P. Fryns2, J. Vermeesch2; 1Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical University, Plovdiv, P03.091 molecular and cytogenetic studies of the Prader-Willi Bulgaria, 2Center for Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, syndrome in Romania Belgium. M. Puiu1, C. Rusu2, D. Dan3, A. Dobrescu4, N. Cucu5; The human pseudoautosomal regions (PARs) represent short regions 1University of Medicine &Pharmacy „V. Babes“, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of homology on the terminal parts of X and Y chromosomes that be- of Medicine &Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 3Romanian Prader Willi Association, have like autosomes and pair and recombine during meiosis. Upon ar- Zalau, Romania, 4University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania, ray analysis of the DNA of a 13 year-old-boy with behaviour problems 5University, Bucuresti, Romania. (Smith-Magenis like) and Ebstein anomaly a 129 kb Xp22.33 duplica- This study is part of a the research introduced in Romania for PWS tion was detected. Surprisingly, the duplication is inherited from his patients. Multidisciplinary physical examination allows the corect es- healthy father. FISH with a BAC clone from that region showed a signal tablishing of the clinical score. The strategy we propose for the con- on the Y chromosome. We hypothesize the duplication might repre- firmation of the clinical PWS diagnosis includes initially a methylation sent an extension of PAR1. One possibility is that this is a de novo analysis (MSPCR). This test is used as a diagnostic instrument for extension of the PAR by an insertional translocation. Considering that PWS because methylation pattern is parental specific in this region the duplication on X is reported in the normal population, it may also be and detects patients with deletions, UPD and imprinting defects, that an evolutionary ancient PAR. Further analysis is ongoing to distinguish represent 99% of PWS cases. FISH technique, using specific probes between these possibilities. for the 15q11-q13 region, is considered as the most efficient cytoge- netic diagnostic method for PWS, identifying the deletion in approxi- P03.094 chromosome translocation 46,XX,t(2; 5)(q13; q12.3-13) mately 80% of patients. In our preliminary study, only 5 of the 11 pa- in a girl with psychomotor retardation tients (45,5%) had a positive FISH test. Because FISH doesn’t detect J. Toral-Lopez1, L. Gonzalez-Huerta2, V. Madrid-Cedillo2, S. Cuevas- UPD and mutations of the imprinting center, the rest of the patients Covarrubias3; need a DNA investigation using microsatellite markers inside and out- 1Genetica, ISSEMyM Ecatepec, Estado de Mexico, Mexico, 2Genetica, Hospital side PWS region. General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 3Genetica, Hospital General de In conclusion, the results obtained in the study group, even if its’ size Mexico, Facultad de Medicina., UNAM, Mexico, D.F., Mexico. doesn’t allow important statistic conclusions, differ from those report- We study a girl with severe psychomotor retardation product of nor- ed in the specialized literature, both in the proportion of PWS cases mal, young, healthy and non consanguineous parents. She was born confirmed by methylation analysis (70% compared to 99%), and that below the 3rd percentile. On physical examination she weighted and of cases confirmed by FISH analysis (45,5% compared to 70%). The heighted below the 3rd percentile, she presented plagiocephaly, left explanations could be related to a particular molecular profile of PWS occipital flattening, narrow forehead, low nasal bridge, flat facial pro- patients in Romania. Such studies do not exist for the moment in our file, synophrys, narrow palpebral fissures, short nose, long philtrum, country and the confirmation will be possible by investigating a bigger short neck, prominent anterior chest, aberrant right palmar crease and number of patients. clinodactyly of 5th finger of both hands. Karyotype with G bands was 46,XX,t(2;5)(q13;q13). To our knowledge this is the first case in the P03.092 the importance of invasive prenatal diagnostics results literature of translocation between chromosomes 2 and 5 (q13, q12.3- in genetic screening programme q13). The patient has severe psychomotor retardation and dysmorphic K. A. Koshkarova, G. S. Svyatova, A. G. Bayisbekova, Z. S. Makhmutova, D. changes probably attributed to one or more genes located on the site N. Salimbaeva; of rupture. More studies are needed to define more precisely the rup- The Scientific Centre of obstetric, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, ture sites in this case.Cytogenetics 12 P03.095 Molecular characterization of r(18) chromosomes in lication correlates with genomic instability, transcriptional activity, gene four patients density and chromatin structure. Synchronous replication of alleles was A. Spreiz1, O. Rittinger2, B. Wellek3, B. Utermann1, C. Fauth1, M. Erdel1,4, G. demonstrated for genes with a biallelic expression while asynchronous Utermann1, J. Zschocke1, D. Kotzot1; replication for those with monoallelic mode of expression due to im- 1Division for Clinical Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics, printing, X-inactivation or allelic exclusion. Little is known about repli- Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 3Department of cation timing(RT) of subtelomeric regions(SR), and its correlation with Human Genetics, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 4Hospital of the Sisters chromatin structure and function remains poorly understood. SRs of of Mercy, Linz, Austria. human chromosomes are highly unstable, rich in genes and frequently Ring chromosomes are usually associated with loss of chromosomal involved in aberrations and thus are of particular clinical interest. material at one or both arms of the chromosome and mitotic ring in- In this study the replication pattern of SR of chromosomes stability. Sometimes the rings are more complex with additional mate- 2,5,7,8,9,16,19 and 20 was investigated using FISH method in lympho- rial gain. Ring chromosome 18 is a rare finding with about 70 cases cytes of 8 healthy donors. At least 200 cells/probe/person were ana- reported so far. About 75% of these cases are female. lyzed. The replication status of a locus was classified as unreplicated(s) The clinical phenotype mainly depends on the size of the deletion. We and replicated(d). report here on four cases, three females and one male, with a ring The analysis revealed marked heterogeneity of investigated SR. The chromosome 18 first revealed by conventional karyotyping. Microsat- data suggested a continuum of replication throughout S phase, with ellite PCR analyses indicated maternal and paternal origin in each two SR9p (dd:20.9±0.96%) being the first, and SR2p (dd:3.7±0.51%) the of them. High resolution Human Omni1-Quad (Illumina®) arrays were last to replicate (p<0.01). The results showed asynchronous replica- used to determine the breakpoints and the exact sizes of the dele- tion at some SR. The frequency of sd ranged from 18.6% to 33.2% and tions, which were between 1.6 and 15 Mb on 18p and 3.8 and 24 Mb the mean for SR19q2q16q20q5p (sd:31.08±0.52%) was significantly on 18q, and between 16.6 and 38 Mb in total, respectively. One case higher (p<0.01) compared to SR2p7q5q (sd:19.9±0.58%). was found to be complex with an additional 1.5 Mb duplication on 18p This investigation revealed that different SR replicates at different (p11.23->p11.31). Confirmation experiments as well as investigations times during S phase and that certain homologous loci replicate asyn- to determine the parental origin separately for the deleted and dupli- chronously. Although the significance of RT is unclear yet, it might con- cated segments and the mechanism of formation in the latter case are tribute to the non-random involvement of specific SR in chromosomal in progress. rearrangements. Our cases confirm the previously observed high phenotypic variability for r(18), depending on the size of the aberrations. According to the P03.098 Detection of molecular cytogenetic damage of literature, the majority of cases shows the clinical picture of the 18q- individuals affected by retinoblastoma in south india syndrome, i.e. del(18)(q21->qter). This holds also true for the case K. Sasikala, V. Balachandar, S. Mohana Devi; with the duplication, corroborating previous observations according to Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. which duplications often remain without major clinical consequences. Retinoblastoma is the most common primary cancer of the eye among children and has both hereditary and sporadic form. The aim of the P03.096 Genetic investigations on 8 patients affected by present study was to analyze the chromosomal analysis as a marker a characteristic seizure disorder associated with ring 20 for diagnosing the disease.The details of retinoblastoma patients col- chromosome mosaicism lected from Eye Hospitals in Coimbatore city, revealed that both sexes D. Giardino1, A. Vignoli2, L. Ballarati1, M. P. Recalcati1, S. Russo3, N. are commonly affected by this disease. Blood samples were collected Camporeale1, M. Marchi3, P. Finelli1, L. Giordano4, M. P. Canevini2, L. Larizza1; from 58 retinoblastoma cases for the analysis of chromosomal aberra- 1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Lab Citogenetica Medica, Milan, Italy, 2Università tions using G-banding and the final results were ensured by multicolor degli Studi di Milano - U.O. Neurologia 2, A.O. San Paolo – DMCO, Milan, spectral karyotyping (SKY). Chromosomal analysis of the peripheral Italy, 3Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Lab Genetica Molecolare, Milan, Italy, 4Unità blood cells in retinoblastoma patients showed that the chromosomes Operativa di Neuropsichiatria dell’Infanzia e dell’Adolescenza, Spedali Civili, 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 13 and 17 carry aberrations. The more frequent ab- Brescia, Italy. errations were 13q-, 6p+ and 1q-. Deletion in the 13q is considered as Mosaic Chromosome 20 ring [r(20)] is a chromosomal disorder as- a pre-requisite for tumorigenesis whereas the 6p and 1q are involved sociated with a rare syndrome characterized by a typical seizure mainly in tumor progression. The less frequent aberrations were 3q-, phenotype, a particular electroclinical pattern, cognitive impairment, 5p-, 17p-, 8q-, t(17p; 6p) and t(13q; 10q). They may not have a role in behavioural problems and absence of a consistent pattern of dysmor- the tumorigenesis of retinoblastoma. Chromosomes under the group phology. The pathogenic mechanism underlying seizures disorders in A, C and D are more frequently aberrated. r(20) syndrome is still unknown. Hence the above described chromosomal aberrations can be used as We performed a detailed clinical, cytogenetic, FISH, array-CGH and a marker to diagnose retinoblastoma patients.Our results revealed that molecular stuy on 8 patients with ring 20 chromosome mosaicism, in- conventional cytogenetics remains an important tool in elucidating the cluding two members of the same family. complex and diverse genetic anomalies of Retinoblastoma. According Our results indicate that higher percentages of r(20) cells are related to these results, chromosomal analysis is of great use in patients with with precocious age at seizure onset and with resistance to antiepilep- Retinoblastoma at diagnosis to have a correct prognostic evaluation tic drug treatment. Behavioural problems also seems to be associated for clinical decision making. with higher percentages of r(20) cells. FISH and array-CGH experi- ments failed to detect any cryptic deletion on chromosome 20. No evi- P03.099** Identification of copy number variations in early dence of chromosome 20 uniparental disomy was found. Analysis of infantile onset Rett syndrom variants FISH signals given by variant in size alphoid tandem repeats probes S. Rajaei1, M. Kyllerman2, M. Albåge3, B. Hagberg2, A. Erlandson1; on the normal chromosome 20 and the r(20) in the mosaic carriers 1Inst. of Biomedicine, Dept. of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska suggests that the r(20) is the same chromosome not circularized in the Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Dept of Paediatrics, Queen Silvia Children’s “normal” cell line. Hospital, Sahlgrenska university/ East, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Dept of According to this hypothesis an epigenetic mechanism perturbing the Paediatrics, Astrid Lindgren Children’s Hospital, Karolinska University Hospital, expression of genes close to the telomeric regions, rather than hap- Stockholm, Sweden. loinsufficiency of genes located at the distal 20p and/or 20q regions, Background: Early infantile onset Rett syndrome (RTT) is character- may underlie the manifestation of r(20) syndrome. ised by Rett syndrome-like presentation with early onset (before the age of six months). P03.097 Asynchronous replication of human subtelomeric Methods: Copy-number variations (CNVs) have been reported in chil- regions dren with mental retardation. In this study, we analysed 12 early infan- I. Petkovic; tile onset RTT patients in order to find potential genetic abnormalities University Children‘s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. in this particular group, using a high-resolution GeneChip SNP array Replication of human genome is linked to different basic cellular pro- technique. cesses. Studies conducted so far have shown that timing of DNA rep- Results: We found four deletions on the X chromosome; size rang-Cytogenetics 12 ing from 1.1 Mb to 4.2 Mb (located on Xp11.22, Xp22, Xq22-q23 and this characteristic type of epilepsy, occurring exclusively in patients Xq27). These regions are known to contain a number of important with ring 20 syndrome. genes which are expressed in the brain and perform critical roles in neurite development, the initiation of process formation and axonal P03.102 Developmental delay and autistic features in a girl with guidance in the developing neurons. The findings in this study imply 45,X/46,X,r(X) that CNVs might be involved in this specific type of RTT (4/12 patients) B. Barreña1, M. L. Onaindia1, J. García1, M. Fiaño1, M. A. Tapia1, M. J. Angulo1, rather than MECP2, CDKL5 or FOXG1 genes, since no pathogenic M. A. Fernández-Cuesta2, C. Ruiz-Espinosa2, M. J. García-Barcina1; mutations were detected in any of these genes. 1Unidad de Genética del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA /Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Servicio de Pediatría del Hospital P03.100 Detection and Analysis of serotonin Receptor Gene (5- Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA /Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, HtR3A) Expression on Human Peripheral Blood Lymphocytes in Spain. Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) Patients We report here a case of a 2 years old female with developmental M. sadeghi koupaei1, g. ahangari1, s. samanguei2, S. nazari2; delay (sit unsupported at 11 months, walking indepently at 18 months, 1NIGEB, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shaheed Beheshti University of no 2 words phrases by 25 months) and autistic features (limited com- Medical Sciences, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. munication, obsessive behaviour and social difficulties…). No lymph- Background and aim: The 5-HT3A receptor is a pentameric ligand-gat- edema, neck webbing, congenital heart defcts, dysplastic nails, nor ed cation channel located in the central and peripheral nervous system facial dysmorphism were present. and on extraneuronal locations like lymphocytes, monocytes and fetal Cytogenetics analysis of 48-GTG band metaphases (400-550 band) tissue. The expression of the serotonin receptors was investigated in from peripheral blood lymphocytes prepared according to standard the brain but little work has been done to examine their expression in procedures revealed a 45,X karyotype in 24 cells and 46 chromo- other tissues. The aim of this study was to show whether the serotonin somes with absence of one X chromosome and the presence of a receptor gene expresses on peripheral blood lymphocytes in the pa- small ring chromosome in 24 cells. Fluorescence in situ hybridization tients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) disease. (FISH) studies were also performed. Metaphase arm-specific chromo- Material and methods: In the present study, using RT-PCR technique, some painting probes, XCAPX long (Texas Red) and XCAPX short we investigated 5-HT3A receptor gene expression in peripheral blood (FITC), revealed the presence of two red and two green signals, which lymphocyte cells (PBMC) of forty RApatients. is consistent with the fact that the ring is completely derived from X- Results: The results showed that the 5-HT3A receptor gene is detected chromosome material. With the XCyteX probe we confirmed that the on the lymphocytes of RA patients. r(X) had more than pericentromeric material (p11.1-q11.1). The pres- Discussion: There is not any evidence which points to role of serotonin ence of XIST (Xq13.2) was confirmed on both, ring and normal X chro- and their receptor in the pathophysiology of RA. Therefore, we detect- mosome. ed the expression of 5-HT3A receptor in patient individuals. Expres- Individuals with 45,X/46,X,r(X) cytogenetic constitution comprises sion profile in RA patients was compared to healthy individuals. It can about 6-7% of cases with a diagnosis of Turner syndrome. It has been contribute to access some new information related to pathogenesis of noted that there is an increased prevalence in mental retardation and RA disease. another atypical physical abnormalities in this group, in comparison with 45,X cases. The etiology of mental retardation and congenital P03.101 Ring 20 syndrome mosaicism: a new case with malformation remains uncertain. Even in the presence of XIST expres- amplification of two BAC clones at 20q11.21-q22 without sion, cases with abnormal phenotypes have been described. X inacti- deletion of the telomeric regions, detected by the Genome Array- vation may be incomplete despite XIST expression. cGH. A. Nucaro1, V. Cabras2, N. Santini3, M. Erriu4, S. Zorco5, A. Milia6, M. Loi7, R. P03.103 mEcHANisms OF RiNG cHROmOsOmE FORmAtiON Rossino8, C. Montaldo5; M. I. Melaragno1, V. F. A. Meloni1, C. A. Kim2, R. S. Honjo2, D. M. Christofolini1, 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Monserrato( Cagliari), Italy, R. Pellegrino1, B. Heck3, L. G. Alonso1, D. Brunoni1, N. B. Spinner4, L. D. 2Scuola di specializzazione Patologia clinica, dip. Biologia Sperimentale, Kulikowski2, R. S. Guilherme1; Università di Cagliari, Italy, Italy, 3OBL, Dipartimento di Scienze Chirurgiche, 1Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Universidade de São Università di Cagliari, Italy, Cagliari, Italy, 4OBL, Dipartimento di Scienze Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Hospital São Camilo Pompéia, São Paulo, Brazil, Chirurgiche, Università di Cagliari, Italy, Italy, 5OBL, Dipartimento Scienze 4Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. Chirurgiche, Università di Cagliari, Italy, Cagliari, Italy, 6Dipartimento Biologia We defined the breakpoints and mechanisms of ring chromo- Sperimentale, Università di Cagliari, Italy, Italy, 7Azienda Ospedaliera Brotzu, some formation in 12 patients using array-SNP Affymetrix® Nsp/Sty Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Cagliari, Italy, 8Dipartimento di Scienze Pediatriche e 6.0 and Illumina® platforms. The chromosomal terminal regions Medicina Clinica, Università di Cagliari, Italy, Cagliari, Italy. were investigated by MLPA and FISH techniques using subtelo- Ring 20 syndrome is a rare disease characterized by drug-resistant meric and pantelometic probes, respectively. The karyotypes of pa- epilepsy, moderate mental retardation and particular electroencepha- tients I-XII were determined, respectively: 46,XY,r(3)(p26.1q29), lographic disorder with non-convulsive status epilepticus. Herein, we 46,XX,r(4)(p16.3q35.2), 46,XY,r(10)(p15.3q26.2), 46,XX,r(10)( report on a new case of r(20) syndrome mosaicism in a 15 year old p15.3q26.13), 46,XY,r(13)(p13q31.1), 46,XY,r(14)(p13q32.33), female that presented minimal dysmorphism, generalized tonic and 46,XX,r(15)(p13q26.2), 46,XY,r(18)(p11.32q22.2), 46,XX,r(18)(p1 clonic absence and seizures, refractory to medical therapy, and be- 1.32q21.33), 46,XX,r(18)(p11.21q23), 46,XY,r(22)(p13q13.33) and havioural disorders. She was the first child of an unrelated couple, and 46,XX,r(22)(p12q13.2). These rings were found to have been formed she was born after an uneventful pregnancy and delivery. Among 50 by different mechanisms, such as: from breaks in both chromosome analyzed cells, 30 showed a 46, XX karyotype and 20 exhibited a 46, arms, followed by end-to-end reunion (patients IV, VII, VIII and XII); XX r(20)(p13q13.3)(40%). FISH using whole specific probe of chro- from a break in one chromosome arm followed by fusion with the mosome 20 confirmed the presence of the ring. Array-CGH (platform subtelomeric region of the other (patients I-II); from a break in one Bluegnome Cytochips, Technogenetics) showed no deletion at the site chromosome arm followed by fusion with the opposite telomeric region of the ring formation, but found the presence of an amplification of two (patients III and IX); from fusion of two subtelomeric regions (patient BAC clones, approximately 1.5 Mb, in 20q11.21-q22. We think that the VI); from telomere-telomere fusion (patient XI). Thus, the r(14) and one lack of detection of any deletion could be attributed to the mosaicism r(22) can be considered complete rings, since there was no loss of rel- and that clinical symptoms may be assigned either to haplo- insuf- evant genetic material. The r(13) showed a more complex mechanism ficiency of two epilepsy genes, CHRNA4 and KCNQ2, which map in of formation resulting in a deletion of 11.1 Mb concomitant with an inter- this region, or that other mechanisms may be involved. To the best of stitial duplication of 1.5 Mb. His karyotype was 46,XY,r(13)(p13q33.1). our knowledge, our patient was the first case presenting the typical arr13q33.1(101,543,509-103,001,462)x3,13q33.1q34(103,003,268- epilepsy disorder but no detectable deletion in the ring chromosome 114,142,980)x1 dn. We concluded that the phenotypes of ring patients 20 associated with amplification in 20q11.21-q22. Further studies are can be related with different factors, including gene haploinsufficiency, in progress to better genotype/phenotype correlation and to clarify gene duplications and ring instability. Epigenetic factors due to the cir- whether there is any association of this particular rearrangement with cular architecture of the ring chromosome must also be considered, Cytogenetics 12 since even patients with complete ring chromosomes can present as- case a female with a karyotype: 46, XX, r (13) [17]/ 45, XX,-13 [33], she sociated phenotypic alterations, as observed in our patients with com- revealed a language retardation and dysmorphic feature. Patient 2 is a plete r(14) and r(22). (Financial Support: FAPESP/Brazil). boy with a karyotype: 46, XY, r (13) [13]/ 45, XY,-13 [3] dead in 11 years old by leukemia. Finally the third case is a boy with congenital cardi- P03.104 Ring chromosomes 9 and 22 in children opathy and mental retardation his karyotype showed 46, XY, r (13). L. Letica, R. Lasan, I. Tonković Đurišević, K. Crkvenac Gornik, S. Huljev For further characterization of the ring chromosome 13, FISH was Frković, D. Begović; performed on metaphase chromosomes from the patient’s cells using Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University three DNA probes: WCP13, 13qter and LIS13 (13q14)/RB-1(Vysis®). Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia. Both cases showed loss of the 13q subtelomeric region by fluorescence Ring chromosome is a rare genetic disorder observed in the children in situ hybridization and chromosome whole painting probe showing a with variable clinical presentation and phenotype. Constitutional ring homogeneous painting of the whole normal and ring chromosomes 13 chromosome occurs in 1:50000 live birth. for the three patients. FISH analysis using LIS13 (13q14)/RB-1 probes We describe four patients, one with ring chromosome 9 and three chil- showed a deletion of RB1 gene only in the ring (13) of patient 2. dren with ring chromosome 22. Chromosomal analysis was performed For the first patient Agilent® oligonucleotide arrays 44K were performed using G banding according to standard procedure on peripheral lym- for more characterization of the ring 13 chromosome. It showed a dele- phocytes. tion of 4, 7 Mb in 13q34 region and a deletion of 2, 9 Mb in 13q11q11 Ring chromosome 9 is chromosomal aberration include growth and region. psychomotoric retardation, heart malformation, ambiguous genitalia, Molecular cytogenetic and whole-genome array-based technologies limb and skeletar defects. Cytogenetic analysis was found in all cells can give an accurate delineation of the imbalances which raises the ring chromosome 9. After FISH analysis karyotype was 46,XY,r(9).ish possibility of making genotype-phenotype correlations, in order to r(9)(wcp+,D9Z1+). Parental karyotypes were normal. identify minimal critical regions and candidate genes for a pattern of Ring chromosome 22 is a rare occurrence. Most cases of r(22) would clinical features including learning disability be expected to show loss of part or all of the short arm in addition to loss of some long arm material. Loss of short arm material is un- P03.107 Prenatal Diagnosis of de novo likely to have any phenotypic effect. Patients with ring chromosome 44,XX,der(13;14)(q10;q10)/46,XXX,der(13;14)(q10;q10) Karyotype 22 may have clinically significant deletions of 22q and application of E. E. Kurt1, O. Ozer1, E. Tarim2, Z. Yilmaz1, F. I. Sahin1; FISH techniques to ring chromosomes in order to confirm that dele- 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, tion has occurred, is a useful adjunct to conventional cytogenetic stud- Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of ies. However, partial monosomy resulting from deletion of part of the Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey. long arm is known to be associated with a syndrome involving global Robertsonian translocations represent the most common human developmental delay, mental retardation, severe delay in speech and structural chromosomal abnormality, occurring with an incidence of 1 language skills but only minor facial dysmorphology. / 1,000 in the general population. The occurrence of X chromosome All patients were informed by genetic counsellor and they are included monosomy and Robertsonian translocation in the same person is rare. in multidisciplinar programs. Turner Syndrome is a chromosome abnormality affecting about 1 in every 5000-10000 female births and up to 20% of miscarriages. Many, P03.105 Molecular and clinical definition of an unstable ring perhaps most, girls and women with Turner Syndrome are actually mo- chromosome 21 saic, meaning that they have cells with more than one karyotype. Often L. Kraoua1, O. Boespflug-Tanguy2, J. F. Gadisseux3, M. T. Iba-Zizen4, F. there is a mix of 46,XX and 45,X cells, and in this case the resulting Vialard5, A. C. Tabet1, C. Dupont1, B. Benzacken1, A. Verloes3, A. Aboura1; clinical abnormalities tend to be milder than in 45,X Turner Syndrome. 1Unité Fonctionnelle de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, We report a fetus diagnosed prenatally with both a Robertsonian Paris, France, 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, translocation and mosaic Turner’s syndrome. Amniotic fluid sample Paris, France, 3Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Robert Debré, was taken from our patient at the 20 weeks of pregnancy, due to an AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Service de Neuroradiologie, Centre Hospitalier increased second trimester screening risk. Chromosome analysis National d’Ophtalmologie des Quinze-Vingts, Paris, France, 5Laboratoire de was performed on trypsin G banded chromosome preparations ob- Cytogénétique, CHI de Poissy, Poissy, France. tained from amniotic fluid cultures. The karyotype was designed as Constitutional ring chromosomes are generally believed to be the result 44,X,der(13;14)(q10;q10)[23]/46,XXX,der(13;14)(q10;q10)[16] Periph- of de novo breakage of both end-segments of a chromosome during eral blood samples were taken from parents which revealed normal meiosis or early postzygotic mitosis, followed by ends joining, result- karyotypes. The family was informed during the genetic counseling ing in a continuous ring. This mechanism presumes the loss of some session and they decided on termination of the pregnancy. genetic material during ring formation. Almost one-half of reported ring autosomes derives from acrocentric chromosomes. However ring 21 P03.108 An Association studies for search a Susceptibility [r(21)] is a rare finding. Here we report a case of r(21) showed to be Genes in schizophrenia unstable by SNP array. The proband is a 6-year-old boy with mental P. Manikantan, V. Balachandar, K. Sasikala, S. Mohanadevi; retardation, epilepsy, facial dysmophism, myopia, and equinovarus Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. clubfeet. Brain MRI showed leucoencephalopathy. Karyotype and Objective: Schizophrenia is a severe mental disorder affecting 0.4-1% FISH analysis revealed a 46,XY,r(21)(p11q22).ish r(21)(p11q22)(wc of the population worldwide. It is characterized by impairments in the p21+,tel21q-,RP11-61A21+,RUNX1+,LSI21-) formula. Accurate mo- perception of reality and by significant social or occupational dysfunc- lecular characterization by SNP array (Illumina) and BACs-on-Beads tion. The disorder is one of the major contributors to the global burden technology (BoBs) confirmed a 21q22.2 deletion and showed a mosaic of diseases. Studies of twins, families, and adopted children point to proximal 21q deletion. We suggest that ring instability and death of strong genetic components for schizophrenia, but environmental fac- aneuploid cells may explain the microarray results. To confirm this hy- tors also play a role in the pathogenesis of disease. pothesis, FISH analysis on uncultured lymphocytes is programmed. Materials and Methods: Molecular genetic studies have identified sev- eral potential positional candidate genes. The strongest evidence for P03.106 Ring chromosome 13: characterization by molecular putative schizophrenia susceptibility loci relates to the genes encoding cytogenetic and DNA micro-array analyses. dysbindin (DTNBP1) and neuregulin (NRG1), but studies lack impres- I. Ben Abdallah1,2, H. Hannachi1,2, N. Soyah3, H. Elghezal1,2, S. Mougou1, D. sive consistency in the precise genetic regions and alleles implicated. Sanlaville4, A. Saad1,2; Results: The present study shows the role of three potential candi- 1Laoratory of Cytogenetic And Biology of Reproduction, Sousse, Tunisia, date genes by genotyping in the DNTBP1, NRG1 and AKT1 genes in 2Service Commun de Genetique, Faculte de Medecine, Sousse, Tunisia, schizophrenia patients. Some previously identified a region on chro- 3Service de Pediatrie, Höpital Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Labortoire de mosome 5q21-34 as a susceptibility locus for schizophrenia. Recently, Cytogenetique Constitutionelle, Hospics Civils Lyon, Lyon, France. two studies reported association between the g-aminobutyric acid type Ring Chromosome 13 is a rare chromosomal abnormality in mental A receptor cluster of genes in this region and one study showed sug- retardation. We report three cases of ring chromosome 13. In the first gestive evidence for association with another regional gene.Cytogenetics 127 Conclusion: This is the first candidate gene study to explicitly test for P03.111 combined direct dup(7)(q22q33) and inv(7)(q32.3q31.2) and provide evidence of a maternal-fetal genotype incompatibility in a developmentally delayed and dysmorphic boy mechanism in schizophrenia. In the present study found evidence that A. Frühmesser1, M. Erdel1,2, H. Duba1,3, C. Fauth1, J. Zschocke1, G. Utermann1, one GABA receptor subunit, GABRG2, is significantly associated with D. Kotzot1; schizophrenia. Furthermore, it also seems to affect to the functioning 1Division for Clinical Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Hospital of the Sisters of of the working memory. Mercy, Linz, Austria, 3General Women and Children Hospital, Linz, Austria. De novo inverted duplications are very rare chromosomal aberrations. P03.109 A simple and rapid method for heterochromatin regions Chromosome 7 duplications have been described in patients with selective staining on direct chromosomal preparations from Silver-Russell syndrome indicating possible relevance for this etio- tissues with spontaneous mitotic activity. logically heterogeneous syndrome. We report on a male patient who T. Kuznetzova1, I. Trofimova1,2, M. Lyapunova2, E. Zolnerovich2, V. Baranov1,2; shows muscular hypotonia, global developmental delay, and various 1Ott’s Institute of obstetrics & gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian dysmorphisms resembling Silver-Russell syndrome. Both parents (31- Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian year-old mother and 29-year-old father) and two older sibs are healthy. Federation. Family history as well as pregnancy and delivery were unremarkable. Allknown techniques for selective stainig of polymorpic pericentro- Length (52 cm), weight (4.030 g), and occipitofrontal head circumfer- meric heterocromatin regions and Yqh in human cromosomes include ence (37 cm) at birth were around the 90th percentile. At the age of 5 CBG, DA/DAPI, MG/DAPI, D278/170, MG/H33258. Acridine orange years height (101.5 cm) was at the 3rd percentile, weight (17.3 kg) was (AO) is routinely used in for RFA and RBA banding. Our study was at the 10th percentile, and occipitofrontal head circumference (51 cm) carried out on direct and semi-direct chromosome preparations from was at the 25th percentile. human chorionic villi and from different embryonic samples at the 5- Conventional karyotyping and FISH analysis with YACs revealed a 12 weeks of gestation (more 200 samples). After AO staining without 46,XY,dup(7)(q22q32)inv(7) (q32.3q31.2) karyotype. SNP microar- any pretreatments the constitutive heterochromatin regions (CHRs) ray analysis with the Illumina® Infinium HD HumanOmni1-Quad v1.0 in 1qh, 3cenh, 4cenh, 9qh, 16qh, 15cenh, 22cenh and Yqh showed BeadChip defined the proximal and the distal breakpoint of the entire red fluorescence, whereas all chromosome arms were uniformly yel- duplication between rs10275844 and rs6960639 and rs10954272 and low-green. This staining pattern was irrespective of AO concentration rs6467310, respectively, which includes the intrauterine growth retar- (0.01-0.1%), buffer solution (PBS, Sorensen‘s buffer, McIlvain‘s buf- dation- and Silver-Russell syndrome-related imprinted region on 7q32. fer), its pH (6.5-7.2) and age of slides (from 1 day to some months). The duplicated region has a size of about 31,7 Mb. Investigations for The red AO fluorescence of CHRs was detected also on metaphase the parental origin of the rearrangement as well as fine-mapping of the chromosomes of bone marrow cells from patients with lymphoblas- breakpoints of the inversion and the duplication are in progress. tic leukemia (10 samples were kindly provided by Dr. I.Martynkevich). The constellation in our patient is another example for the observation While they stained in green in cultured amniocytes (4 samples were that apparently simple chromosomal rearrangements may be more kindly provided by Dr.Y.Loginova). CHRs from PHA-stimulated lym- complex than initially thought, and that duplication of 7q32 may cause phocytes (more 50 samples of fetal and adult origin) revealed yellow- at least some clinical features of Silver-Russell syndrome. green staining in most metaphases with red 9qh in some metaphases. Mechanism of this selective staining remains unclear. However, as AO P03.112 skewed X chromosome inactivation is associated with is metachromatic stain which discriminates single-stranded from dou- OTC deficiency in 9-year-old girl with karyotype 46,X,del(X)(p11) ble stranded nuclei acids, our results advocate in favor of the principal P. Tammur1, M. Jürgenson1, M. Peters2, R. Teek1,3, O. Zilina4, R. Zordania5, K. cytochemical and conformational differences in CHRs in different cells Õunap1,3; which could be attributed to the variability of their DNA and hystone 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, epigenetic modifications. Estonia, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology , University of Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Estonia, 4Department P03.110 chromosome abnormalities in girls with isolated short of Biotechnology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Tartu, stature Estonia, 5Tallinn Children’s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia. E. Kouvidi, E. Sekerli, N. Selenti, A. Kolialexi, H. Fryssira, S. Kitsiou, C. Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, the inherited urea cycle Tsenghi, E. Kanavakis, A. Mavrou; disorder, is transmitted as a partially dominant X-linked trait (mapped Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, School of Medicine, to band Xp21.1). The symptoms in females vary both in onset and se- Athens, Greece. verity. Some of them are completely asymptomatic, while others have Objective: Short stature is defined as a condition in which the height of severe hyperammonemic crises, which can lead to brain damage or an individual is more than 2 SD below the corresponding mean height even to death. X-inactivation occurs very early in embryogenesis. It for a given age, sex and population group. Many different genetic eti- is usually a random process and both paternal and maternal alleles ologies of short stature are known. The present study aims to evaluate are randomly inactivated. In some cases, the X-inactivation is skewed. whether isolated short stature (SS) is an adequate indication for rou- When the inactivation is skewed to express more of the mutated allele, tine chromosome analysis. X-linked disorders may affect female carriers in different ways. Materials & Methods: This is a retrospective survey of 371 girls who We report a 9-year-old girl who had problems since the birth (respirato- were referred for cytogenetic investigation at the Department of Medi- ry insufficiency, hypoglycaemia), later developmental delay, muscular cal Genetics of Athens University between the years 1999 - 2009 for hypotonia, seizures, hepatomegalia and frequent infections. Metabolic SS only. Girls who in addition of SS had other phenotypic features investigations showed periodic hyperammonaemias. At 3-year of age were excluded. The mean age of referred subjects was 9.5 years. OTC deficiency was diagnosed based on allopurinol loading test re- Karyotyping was performed on cultured peripheral lymphocytes using sults (increased orotic acid excretion). Despite the treatment (protein GTG-banding. restriction, L-citrulline and anticonvulsants) she had recurrent seizures Results: Abnormal karyotype was detected in 34 (9.2%) of the referred which were controlled only with natrium-phenylbutyrate. At the same cases. Approximately 20% of the girls with abnormal cytogenetic find- time ammonia was normal. Standard G-banding cytogenetic and whole ings had a 45,X0 karyotype (n=7), while the remaining 80% were mo- genome array analysis showed abnormal karyotype 46,X,del(X)(p11). saic for Turner syndrome with 2-4 cells lines (n=27). Four girls (1.1%) The X-inactivation study showed that the X inactivation was skewed: carried chromosome variants (3 inv(9) and 1 inv(6)) and one individual in 14% of cells the aberrant X-chromosome was active. It is previously had a balanced translocation which did not involve the sex chromo- known that in cases where the breakpoint in Xp is proximal to Xp22.3, somes. there is a skewed X-inactivation, with the aberrant X being preferen- Conclusion: Cytogenetic investigation is essential in the management tially inactivated. In our case we saw unusual X-inactivation which is of girls with isolated SS to exclude Turner sundrome, in which effec- responsible for the atypical course of OTC deficiency. tive, but costly, growth hormone treatment has shown to improve final height.Cytogenetics 12 P03.113 A possible association between the sLcA9A gene and multi color FISH were performed. epilepsy - a case story Results: Pedegree analysis revealed fourteen MR cases and eight H. R. Nielsen1, J. Graakjaer1, Y. Petkov2, C. R. Fagerberg1; obligate carriers in four generations. Both probands have MR, dys- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle, Denmark, 2Department of Paediatrics, morphic features and cleft palate. Conventional cytogenetic analy- Esbjerg, Denmark. sis showed normal karyotype in the two probands and their parents. The SLC9A9-gene (NHE9) belongs to a family of Na+/H+exchanger Total subtelomer multicolor FISH in the 1st proband revealed ish membrane proteins, which regulates ion fluxes across membranes. der(1)t(1;16)(p36.3-,p13.3+), his father has balanced translocation ish The SLC9A9 gene has in several studies been associated with t(1;16)(p36.3-,p13.3+;p13.3-,p36.3+). The 2nd proband has the same language delay, ADHD and autism. Other genes from the Na+/ unbalanced subtelomere translocation and his father has the same H+exchanger family have been associated with epilepsy in mice. A balanced translocation. possible association to epilepsy in humans was shown by Morrow et Conclusion: The pedigree of this large family indicates that the Sub- al., 2008, who described a family of a mother and 2 sons with a non- telomere translocation does not affect fertility. This carries a high risk sense mutation in the SLC9A9 gene. Both sons had autism, and one of transmission of MR to several generations. In such family genetic was diagnosed with epilepsy, while the other had had some seizures. testing of all members is a must. Prevention of recurrence of MR can Their mother had speech delay, but neither autism nor epilepsy. be achieved through carrier detection and PGD. We describe a mother and son with a 0,79 MB duplication of chromo- some 3q23-q24 including the SCL9A9 gene, diagnosed by Array CGH. P03.116 Identification and interpretation of supernumerary The woman had epilepsy since the age of 11 years. She was treated marker chromosomes with Valproate 3000 mg daily during pregnancy. Her son was born with V. Cejnova, V. Harmas, M. Wilimska, M. Stara, M. Soukupova, J. Lastuvkova; a phenotype compatible with Foetal Valproate Syndrome, and in addi- Regional Health Corporation, Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad Labem, Department tion language delay and some behavioural problems. At the age of four of Medical Genetics, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic. years, he did not have signs of autism, ADHD, or seizures. Supernumerary marker chromosomes (SMCs) are extra, abnormal Conclusion: We describe a mother and son with duplication of the chromosomes whose origin cannot typically be determined by con- SLC9A9-gene. The mother was diagnosed with epilepsy at the age of ventional chromosome-banding techniques. SMCs are common, oc- 11 years. The son had Foetal Valproate Syndrome, and had no history curring in four of every 10,000 newborns, but are approximately 7 of seizures at the age of four years. This case supports an association times more prevalent in individuals with mental retardation. The most between the SCL9A9 gene and epilepsy in humans. However more common class of marker chromosomes are derived from acrocentric studies are needed in this area. chromosomes and have a satellited or bisatellited structure, with chro- mosome 15 accounting for the highest percentage of this group. P03.114 A new case of 4pter duplication and 4qter deletion We present two cases of SMCs. The first one is a prenatally diag- detected by sNPs-array. nosed partial mosaic trisomy of chromosome 22 with the karyotype S. Dipresa1, M. Rocca1, F. Faletra2, V. Pecile2, P. Gasparini2,3, A. Fabretto2; 46,XY[65]/47,XY,+mar[35]. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) 1University of Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy, 2Medical Genetics-Department of Child and spectral karyotyping (SKY) techniques identified a SMC as an inv and Maternal Hospital I.R.C.C.S. Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy, dup(22)(q11.1) consists of only bisatellited heterochromatic material. 3University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. In the literature there are described several cytogenetically similar cas- Only one case of duplication of the distal part of 4p and deletion of es, which did not show any clinical abnormalities. In the second case the same part of 4q as been so far described. This condition give rise we report a girl with craniofacial dysmorphism and multiple anomalies to recognizable craniofacial features: prominent glabella, characteris- consistent with the supernumerary der(22) syndrome. Derivative 22 tic bulbous nose, retrognathia, pointed chin, short neck with low hair- [der(22)] syndrome is rare disorder associated with multiple congenital line, enlarged and abnormal ears and cardiac defects. Our patient is anomalies including pre-auricular skin tags or pits, conotruncal heart 9-years-old boy mentally retardated, born from non consanguineous defects, and profound mental retardation. The nature of the SMC was and healthy parents. He was born at 34 weeks, with a birth weight of characterized using FISH and SKY techniques as der(22)t(11;22)(q23 2.140g (<3°). His clinical history was characterized by: interatrial de- ;q12). The karyotype of her mother showed a reciprocal translocation fect (involved spontaneously), frequent otitis and bronchitis and right over the distal bands 11q23 and 22q12. hernia (he underwent surgical treatment at 3 years old). He showed SMCs are a major clinical problem, especially when detected prena- facial dysmorphic features as: large forehead, downslanting palpebral tally during cytogenetic analysis. Molecular cytogenetic techniques fissures, telecanthus, prominent glabella, flat nasal root, pug nose with are necessary for their comprehensive characterization. In general, anteverted nares, long philtrum, thin upper lip, malformed ears, short the risk for an abnormal phenotype in prenatally ascertained de novo neck, brachydactyly. The karyotype was 46 XY normal. SNPs-Array cases with SMCs is given as ~13%. (370K from Illumina) showed a 4p15.3p16.3 terminal duplication (14.9 Mb) and a 4q34.2q35.2 terminal deletion (14 Mb). Our patient overlap P03.117 Identification of microdeletion 1q21 by FISH and array- clinical history, cardiac defects and dysmorphic features of the previ- cGH in proband with tAR syndrome ously described case. The deleted region is bigger in our case than A. Czekajova1, V. Vranova2, J. Blatny3, A. Tovarysova1, J. Sobotka1, P. Kuglik2; in the previous one. Anyway, our patient confirms that cardiac defect 1Cancer Center, Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Experimental Biology, are probably due to the deletion of ArgBP2 and PDLIM3 genes in 4q Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Children‘s region. We agree that the duplicated region may essentially facial dys- Medical Center, Brno, Czech Republic. morphisms, also present in cases affected by a 4p trisomy. In conclu- Thrombocytopenia-absent radii (TAR) is a rare genetic disorder. In pa- sion, we might suggest that both these cases with their clinical pictures tients with TAR syndrome microdeletion on chromosome 1 (1q21.1) define a new syndrome of contiguous genes alterations. was detected, but the presence of an additional modifier is required to elicit the phenotype. It was observed maternal as well as paternal P03.115 Familial mental retardation: role of subtelomeric transmission and occurrence de novo in 25 %. translocation We performed molecular-genetic methods to detect range of deletion A. M. Mohamed, A. K. Kamel, N. M. Meguid, I. Ragaa, W. Mahmoud; in proband with TAR syndrome. National Research cetre, Cairo, Egypt. In proband was ascertained bilateral radial aplasia, annulled ulna and Introduction: The identification of subtelomeric rearrangements as a scaffold of hands normally formalized. Ultrasound of brain was without cause of mental retardation (MR) has made a considerable contribu- pathology. Cardiology examination found foramen ovale apertum cov- tion to diagnose MR. ered by aneurismatic lash camber. Investigation of the bone marrow Aim: To correlate genotype/phenotype in 1p subtelomere deletion and proved deficit of megakaryopoesis and nonspecific dysplastic chang- 16p subtelomere duplication. Diagnosis of the balanced carriers for es. TAR syndrome was determined as a clinical diagnosis. prevention of recurrence of MR We determined presence of microdeletion by fluorescence in situ hy- Methods: This study carried out on two children who have mental re- bridization (FISH) analysis using RP11-315I20 (BlueGnome) probe tardation (MR) and dysmorphic features. They are members of a large and as a control probe we used centromere probe of chromosome family with recurrence of mental retardation. Cytogenetics and total 1 (Abbott Vysis). They were hybridized to metaphase spreads of the Cytogenetics 12 patient’s lymphocytes after PHA stimulated cultivation of peripheral rayCGH in prenatal samples and association of the laboratory findings blood by use of standard procedures. Oligonucleotide array-CGH (Hu- with clinical features. man Genome CGH Microarray Kit 44K, Agilent Technologies, USA) Methods: DNA was extracted from prenatal (CVS) samples with known was used for deletion sizing. karyotypes left over from conventional genetic analysis and fully ano- The FISH results revealed deletion of RP11-315I20 probe on one chro- nymised. The series was enriched for cases with chromosomal aberra- mosome 1 in locus 1q21.1 in proband. aCGH confirmed this deletion. tions (miscarriages). Array CGH was performed on NimbleGen CGX- The deletion had a maximum size 350 Kb and encompasses 21 oli- 12 arrays. This array contains 135,000 oligos covering more than 200 gonucleotides. Both parents of the proband were also investigated by targeted regions and more than 675 (functionally significant) genes FISH. The deletion of RP11-315I20 probe was proved in mother. FISH plus 41 unique sub-telomeric regions and 43 unique peri-centromeric and array-CGH are suitable methods for detection chromosome aber- regions. All of these regions have a coverage of one probe every 10 rations in rare clinical syndromes. kb. The whole-genome backbone coverage is one oligo every 35 kb Results: DNA of sufficient quality and quantity can be routinely ob- P03.118 A case of de novo partial trisomy of short arm of the tained from CVS samples for performing array CGH. Protocols for chromosome 4. labeling and hybridization were robust. The laboratory process from N. Oparina, E. A. Shestopalova; extracting DNA to finishing the array scanning took usually less than Vladimirsky Moscow Regional Research Clinical Institution, Moscow, Russian 3 days, and, thus, was significantly shorter than the time frame for Federation. long-term culturing. Though in depth analysis of the array CGH results We report newborn male with multiple congenital abnormal- along with comparison to clinical features is ongoing, initial findings ity: hypotrophy(m=1840g), asymmetry of the face, depressed nasal suggest that clinically relevant aberrations are readily detectable by bridge, bulbous nasal tip, macroglossia, low set and marformed ears, molecular karyotyping. short neck, abnormal dermatoglyphics findings, polycystic kidneys, Conclusions: ArrayCGH might supplement karyotyping of CVS sam- small penis and cryptorchism . An additional material of unknown ori- ples particularly in cases with structural chromosomal aberrations de- gin was detected on distal part of long arm (q) of the chromosome 10 tected by conventional chromosome analyses or aberrant first trimes- in blood lymphocytes culture analized with GTG- banding. Thus the ter screening. proband’s karyotype was 46,XY,add(10q). Parents’ karyotypes were normal. For detection of further detailed analysis FISH with different P03.121 Unusual signs in a phenotype of a patient with trisomy DNA-probs was applied: WCP 4/10, subtel 4 p/q (Vysis, Abbott, USA), 8 mosaicism mFISH (24XCyte Vit (MetaSystems, Germany), a result the proband S. Farcas, V. Belengeanu, C. Popa, M. Stoian, N. Andreescu; karyotype was 46,XY,der10t(4;10)(p14;q26).ish der(10)(wcp4p+)dn. In Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, finally proband had the trisomy 4p and monosomy 10(q26). Timisoara, Romania. Mosaic trisomy 8 is a relatively common chromosomal abnormality, P03.119 Particular phenotype in a newborn with partial trisomy with a distinct, recognizable phenotype in most cases. We report a 10p and partial monosomy 9q case, which in addition to certain characteristic features of mosaic tri- M. Stoian1, V. Belengeanu1, N. Andreescu1, S. Farcas1, D. Stoicanescu1, M. somy 8: a long, slender trunk, limitation of movement in multiple joints, Boia2, D. Icma2; and mild-to-moderate mental retardation, the deep plantar furrows, 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, presented several signs including craniofacial midline defects: notched Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Neonatology, University of Medicine and nasal tip, cleft maxillary alveolar ridge, bifid tip of tongue, grooved Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. uvula and left choanal atresia. Transfontanellar ultrasound revealed Trisomy 10p is a rare chromosomal syndrome. Most of the reported absence of corpus callosum and enlargement of the occipital horns trisomy 10p cases represent unbalanced products of familial recipro- of lateral ventricles. Cardiac ultrasonography showed an atrial septal cal translocations and are complicated by additional segmental imbal- defect. Due to the presence of midline defects, we suspicion the pos- ances. We present a female newborn with severe facial dysmorphy sibility of Toriello-Carey syndrome. and other anomalies, due to trisomy 10p and telomeric deletion of 9q. Chromosome analysis on peripheral blood lympocyte culture revealed The pregnancy was followed, and ultrasound examination revealed an trisomy 8 in 12 metaphases out of a total 50 examined metaphases. increased nuchal translucency, but the mother refused other examina- FISH analysis on cultured blood lymphocytes with CEP of chromo- tions. The newborn, delivered at term presented: growth retardation, some 8 showed 3 hybridization signals in 25 % of cells. cranio-facial dysmorphy (microcephaly, high forehead with hirsutism, Knowing that even it is a rarely possibility, the association of two syn- hypertelorism, short palpebral fissures, anteverted, hypoplasic nos- dromes may appear, an arrayCGH was performed to investigate the trils, thin lips, macroglossia, low-set, folded ears), supernumerary nip- possibility of cryptic unbalanced rearrangements. The commercially ples, flexed fingers, plantar creases, hypotonia, tetralogy of Fallot and available array (GenoSensor Array 300, Abbott) containing 287 ge- multicystic left kidney. Cytogenetic analysis from peripheral blood lym- nomic targets did not detect genomic imbalance. phocytes showed an extra material on the long arm of chromosome 9 We described this case of mosaic trisomy 8, which in addition to cer- (46,XX,add(9)(q34)). The mother’s karyotype revealed a translocation tain characteristic features of this syndrome, presented craniofacial (9;10). FISH analysis was performed for the mother, using 9q telomere midline defects, because these were not previously described in this and 9p telomere probes, and the telomere 9q signal of the derivative chromosomal disorder. We consider that the clinical findings in our chromosome was located on the short arm of abnormal 10 chromo- patient may contribute to the extension of the phenotypic spectrum of some. FISH using telomere 10p and 9q probes was performed for the trisomy 8 syndrome. proband and revealed partial trisomy 10p and partial monosomy 9q. The evolution of our patient was unfavorable, as she died two weeks P03.122 A report of a case with partial trisomy 9(p22pter) after birth. Comparing our case to trisomy 10p cases and telomere 9q F. Nasiri kenari, F. Talebmanochehri, F. Razazian, F. Mortezapour, M. deletion cases the proband associated unlike the reviewed reported Rahnama, F. Mahjoubi; cases, supernumerary nipples. For best evaluation, arrayCGH should IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. have been performed, but it is no longer possible as the newborn died We present a 7 year -old girl who referred to our laboratory for cyto- and no DNA sample was taken. genetic investigation. The girl had frontal bossing, left bridge protru- sion, and left upper lip down, open mouth. She was hyperactive and P03.120 molecular karyotyping of prenatal samples using developmentally and mentally delayed . She had speech delay. The oligonucleotide-based ArraycGH: A technical feasibility study cytogenetic test performed using standard method. The karytype of A. Caliebe; the proband showed an additional material at 4q. Institute of Human Genetics, Kiel, Germany. The mather karyotype confirmed that the additional segment on 4q was Objectives: Karyotyping of banded metaphase chromosomes is cur- of chromosome 9p origin, resulting in trisomy 9(p22pter)The karyo- rently the gold standard for the detection of chromosomal aberrations type of the proband was found as:46,XX,der(4)t(4;9)(~35.2q;22p). Her in prenatal samples. The present technical feasibility study aimed at father‘s karyotype was 46, XY. comparing results of conventional karyotyping and oligonucleotide ar- The parents advice to seek genetic counseling and informed of the Cytogenetics 10 possibility of having further child(ren) with partial trisomy or monosomy P03.125 Williams Beuren critical region duplication due to of the relevant chromosomes. a supernumerary marker in a patient with autism and severe behavioural disturbance P03.123 mild turner syndrome caused by Xpter-p21.1 J. Ghoumid, A. Aboura, L. Perrin, A. Verloes, C. Baumann; duplication and Xq22.3-qter deletion Hopital Robert Debre, Paris, France. T. Ilus1, R. Teek1,2, K. Varb1, K. Kuuse1, P. Ilisson1, O. Zilina3, K. Õunap1,2; We report on a 3 years old boy with a mosaic 7q11 trisomy. The preg- 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, nancy was uneventful, birth measurements were within normal range Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, and motor milestones were delayed (sitting achieved at 10 months 3Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, and gait at 17 months). The language was markedly impaired (first University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. word at 27 months). He presented with deep mental retardation and The classic phenotype of Turner syndrome includes short stature, suffered from particular behavioural troubles consisting in the alterna- ovarian failure and variable somatic stigmata. It is associated with X tion of periods of apathy and aggressiveness. Social interactions were monosomy. Mosaic and partial deletions or duplications of chromo- poor and so, autism was diagnosed. Facial dysmorphy was consistent some X result in different degrees of Turner syndrome. Few cases with those reported in Williams Beuren Syndrome Critical Region (WB- have more complex chromosomal complements. Here we report a SCR) duplicated patients. Macrocephaly was also observed (+4SD). woman with mild Turner syndrome caused by partial duplication of Xp MRI showed non-specific posterior white substance anomaly and and deletion of Xq. cardiac ultrasound was normal. Standard and molecular Karyotype A 19-year-old woman was first time investigated due to primary amen- (FISH and whole genome SNP genotyping array - Illumina), was mos orrhea, infantile external genitals and hypergonadotropic hypogo- 46,XY[50%]/47,XY,+mar[50%].ish 7q11.11q11.23(D7Z1+,ELN+).arr nadism. Her growth was normal 172 cm (+1SD), BMI 16,9. She had 7q11.11q11.23(62,000,000-74,000,000)x3dn. This 7q11.23 cytoband some dysmorphic features: a low hairline, clinodactyly, and joint laxity. (12Mb) encompasses the WBSCR but also AUTS2, possibly involved Chromosomal analyses revealed a female karyotype with derivative in autism, CALCN1 which is expressed in brain and WBSCR17. Uni- X-chromosome (Xq-). FISH-analysis with wcpX and XYpter and XYqter parental disomy of chromosome 7 was excluded. subtelomeric probes (Cytocell) showed, that chromosome consisted This is the first report of WBSCR mosaic duplication due to a supernu- entirely of X-chromosome material and both arms had short arm sig- merary marker. All patients reported so far carry the same 1.4-1.5Mb nals on subtelomeric regions. Her parents had normal karyotypes (rou- NAHR mediated duplication. tine analysis and subtelomeric FISH-analysis). Further, using whole- Our patient shared similarities with the patients already reported but genome Infinum-2 array and HumanCytoSNP array, we specified, that presented also with several differences due to the size of duplication the patient has a 31,4-Mb duplication in region Xp22.33-p21.2 and comprising genes expressed in brain and involved in autism. Thus, this 48,4-Mb deletion in region Xq22.3-q28. observation underlies the involvement of these genes in this particular Formation of der(X) chromosomes in females can be more complex phenotype. than previously thought. In our patient, partial Xp trisomy and partial Xq monosomy cause mild Turner syndrome. The normal height of our P03.126 sibs recurrence of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome resulting patient can be explained by a trisomy of the Xp-located SHOX gene. from a paternal cryptic translocation (4;15) characterized by However, she had amenorrhea and hypergonadotropic hypogonad- FisH and sNP array analysis. ism, which is common in Xq22-qter deletion patients. K. Nieto-Martínez1, L. Zepeda2, F. Fernández3, J. Berumen1, S. Kofman1, C. A. Venegas-Vega1; P03.124 mapping of the common deleted region of chromosome 1Facultad de Medicina UNAM-Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, Mexico, 7 in Uterine Leiomyoma through array cGH analysis 2Hospital General de Mexico-Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico, Mexico, A. C. Queirós1, I. Assil-Kishawi2, C. C. Morton3; 3Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, Mexico. 1Department of Obstrectics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a segmental aneusomy caused and Women‘s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, by partial deletion of 4p. WHS is originated by different mechanisms 2Agilent Technologies, Inc, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 3Department including de novo 4p terminal or interstitial deletions or an unbalanced of Obstrectics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology and Department of translocation (45%) either de novo or inherited from a familial balanced Pathology, Brigham and Women‘s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, translocation (~15%). Clinical modifications in the phenotype could be MA, United States. explained by variation in the size of the deletion. We report two siblings Uterine leiomyomata (UL) are the most common benign neoplasm with WHS due a cryptic translocation (4;15)(p16.1;p11.2)pat. Both pa- present in women of reproductive age, with approximately 40% of tu- tients had similar clinical findings; however the girl also showed urinary mors showing structural cytogenetic abnormalities. Cytogenetic analy- tract anomalies. High resolution banding were performed and for FISH sis has been fundamental in gene discovery efforts in these tumors. analysis LSl WHS region/CEP4 and mixture #4 (4p,4q,21q and LSI One of the most common recurrent abnormalities in UL involves de- AML1) and #10 (10p,10q,15q and LSI PML) of ToTelVysion (Vysis) letion or rearrangement of the long arm of chromosome 7; however, were used. SNP array was done using the GeneChip Human Map- the underlying genetic mechanism of this frequent aberration remains ping 500K platform (Affymetrix). Cytogenetic analysis in both children unknown. Identification of the pathogenetic sequence has been com- revealed a deletion of 4p, while both parents revealed an apparently plicated by difficulty in determining the smallest deleted region. With normal karyotype. FISH analyses using LSI WHS region probe de- this study, we sought to determine whether a common gene/region is mostrated in both sibs a submicroscopic deletion (4p16.3) while the involved in UL with translocation of chromosome 7 in band q22. father revealed a subtle balanced translocation involved a group D Using the human Agilent 1M array to assess genomic variation, we chromosome; to confirm that finding in the father a mixture #10 sub- analyzed four UL with translocations of the long arm of chromosome telomeric probe was used. A subtelomeric 4p region was observed in 7. These rearrangements include: t(7;9)(q22;q22), t(1;7)(q42;q22), the boy and absent in his sister. SNP array confirmed different 4p in- t(7;12)(q22-31;q14) and t(4;7)(p15;q22). Array-comparative genomic terstitial deletions, being a ~6.31 Mb in the boy and 6.41Mb in the girl. hybridization revealed accompanying large deletions in three of the Our results support the need of using FISH and high-density array for tumors with a common loss of ~16.3 Mb within bands 7q21.11 and optimal characterization of the genetic imbalances in patients and will 7q22.1. Comparison of findings of this study with previously published contribute to further correct phenotype/genotype correlations. data from our group resulted in a shortest region of overlap of ~3.3 Mb, restricting the possible candidate genes present in the region to ei- P03.127** X-inactivation silencing is not maintained on ght genes: ZNF498, ZKSCAN1, TRIM4, ZSCAN21, ZNF655, C7orf47, the autosomal segment of an inherited unbalanced X;19 COPS6 and PTCD1. These candidate genes will be further investiga- translocation in a male ted to evaluate their possible role in UL development. E. O. Onat1, S. Balci2, O. Engiz2, T. Liehr3, T. Ozcelik1; 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Hacettepe University Medical School, Ihsan Dogramaci Childrens` Hospital, Ankara, Cytogenetics 11 Turkey, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. were older, healthy, and were married and had healthy children. Our X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is a programmed transcription- proband had married six years ago, and claimed that before her mar- al silencing in mammalian female embryos. In naturally occurring riage, she had regular menstrual periods, but after marriage, her pe- X;autosome translocations, the inactivation signal spreads to the auto- riods became irregular by 2-3 months and stopped within a couple of some and leads to delayed replication. Here we report the allele spe- years. cific expression profiles of genes selected from the autosomal portion Her physical features including build, height, breast developement, of the translocation in a unique male with 46,XY,der(19),t(X;19)(q11.1- body hair and intelligence were normal. 11.2;p13.3) karyotype and bilateral periventricular nodular heterotro- Her pelvic sonography showed normal size and echo pattern of her pia, severe learning disability and epilepsy (Dev Med Child Neurol, uterus and ovaries. Evaluation of her hormones showed elevated for 49: 219-24, 2007). The mother as well as the maternal grandmother FSH and LH. of the patient is carrier of the same translocation, albeit in a balanced The G-banding technique was performed on her cultured peripheral state with no phenotypical consequences. XCI analysis showed that blood, and revealed: 46,X,t(X;20)(q21;q13). selection pressure favors an active translocated X in the mother and The presence of t(X;20) plus hypergonadotropic amenorrhea in our the opposite in the patient. High resolution SNP genotyping array proband confirms the role of X-autosome translocations in ovarian fail- positioned the translocation breakpoints between the telomere and ure. rs8105536 (212,033 bp) on chromosome 19, and between rs34355157 (62,794,454 bp) - rs3892372 (63,312,400 bp) on the X. This suggests a P03.130 Karyotype/phenotype correlation in Egyptian patients very small subtelomeric deletion (less than 0,21 Mb) of 19p13.3-19pter with Xeroderma pigmentosum. and a large duplication (almost 95,4 Mb) of Xq11.1-Xqter in the patient. H. T. El-Bassyouni1, G. El-Kamah1, A. El-Koutory1, M. El-Darouty2, S. Allelic expression analysis of 15 genes, including NDUFS7 at 19p13.3 Hammad1; and DNMT1 at 19p13.2, revealed that seven are heterozygous and are 1National Research Center, Guiza, Egypt, 2Department of Dermatology, Faculty expressed biallelically in the patient. These results demonstrate that of Medicine,Cairo University, Guiza, Egypt. the transcriptional silencing of the genes on the autosomal segment Xeroderma pigmentosum is a very rare hereditary disorder. We studied of the translocation is not maintained, and that a compromise between 14 Egyptian patients clinically diagnosed as xeroderma pigmentosum stability versus plasticity occurs early in development. (XP). The main aim was to determine the effect of karyotype variation on phenotype. Patients were clinically classified and the number of P03.128 Association of breakage on Xq region and sterility sister chromatid exchanges were calculated for each case. Karyotype F. Farzanfar, C. Azimi, Z. Safari; studies showed the following results: 12 & 13 % SCEs were detected Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam khomeini Hospital Complex, in 28.6% of patients, 8.8-11% in 57.1% of the patients whereas 7.9% Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and 5.9% in two patients respectively. Karyotype/phenotype correla- According to Lyon hypothesis, in somatic cells of mammalian females, tion showed that the severity of clinical phenotype is related to the one X chromosome is randomly inactivated at the onset of embryonic number of sister chromatid exchanges in the patients‘ chromosomes. development. The inactivated X is late replicating and can be cytoge- Our findings revealed a dosage effect of the number of chromosomal netically distinguished from the active one. The analysis of balanced affection on phenotype, thus confirming the reliability of karyotype as X;autosome translocations has revealed that in most cases the normal modifier of clinical phenotype, hence a marker for prognostic expec- X is constantly late replicating. tations and support both the additive and interactive hypotheses of A few published data showed that translocations between X chromo- karyotype/phenotype correlation. some and an autosome are very rare and are usually associated with primary amenorrhea and sterility. P03.131 An Xp deletion detected prenatally by karyotype and Our proposita, aged 17, was referred to our department because of defined by FISH and MLPA analysis primary amenorrhea. She was the fourth child of a non-consanguine- A. Bengoa Alonso, B. Hernández Charro, M. Artigas López, R. Narvaiza ous parents. She has two heathy brothers and three healthy sisters. Martinez, A. Pérez-Juana Del Casal, M. Ramos Arroyo; Her father was 47 and her mother 35 years old when she was born Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain. with the normal delivery. Her axillary and pubic hair was scant (Tanner Xp chromosome deletions in the female, predict the probability, but not 2), and her breast development was scaled Tanner 2. Ultrasonograghy the certainty, of an incomplete form of Turner syndrome and/or prema- showed a hypoplastic uterus and ovaries. ture ovarian failure. The phenotypic effects may be extremely variable, Investigation for chromosomal anomalies was routinely performed by from partial Turner Syndrome through minor menstrual abnormality, or cytogenetic analysis of our proposita and her parents. The karyotypes even normal menses and fertility. were carried out by G-banding technique studying 30 cells from the We used karyotype, FISH and MLPA analysis to investigate an Xp peripheral blood. Her karyotype was: 46,X,t(X;2)(q22;q23), and her deletion, fortuitously diagnosed in a prenatal karyotype performed for father and her mother showed normal karyotypes. advanced maternal age. It has been suggested that there is a critical region on the long arm of Initially, a terminal deletion was suspected from G-banded chromo- the X chromosome, ranging from Xq13 to Xq26, and breakage in this some analysis, but FISH with a probe for Xp telomere region showed region would result in gonadal dysgenesis and sterility. In our proposi- that the deletion was interstitial. MLPA with SALSA P018 and P106, ta, the breakpoint was inside the critical region and caused sterility. confirmed the deletion and delineated the breakpoints at Xp22.13 and Xp11.4. Some remarkable findings with this technique were that the P03.129 the relationship of X;20 translocation and amenorrhea deleted region did not include STS (steroid sulfatase deficiency) and A. Faraj Pour, C. Azimi; SHOX (short-stature gene), but it does include other important genes Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, like IL1RAPL1 (responsible for X-linked mental retardation). Parents´ Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. karyotypes were normal, and patient´s karyotype was redefined as It has been suggested that translocations involving X chromosome 46,X,del(X)(p11.3p22.2)dn, indicating a de novo occurred interstitial and an autosome are rather rare due to the association with infertility Xp deletion with breakage and reunion at Xp11.3 and Xp22.2, of about in men and subfertility in women, being estimated to occur in about 20Mb in size. The deletion, being ≥15Mb, would show completely one in 30,000 skewed inactivation, and thus, no clinical manifestations of X-linked live births. Some researchers showed that male carriers of an X-auto- disorders. some translocation, which is either inherited from their mother or is de Here we have described a case in which molecular cytogenetics (FISH novo, are sterile, regardless of the position of the breakpoint in the X and MLPA) can further delineate the size and position of the chro- chromosome. A few published data revealed that in women, X-auto- mosome abnormality detected by karyotype. Those techniques suple- some translocations are frequently associated with primary or second- ment classical cytogenetics, obtaining a more precise and accurate ary ovarian failure. information, which is critical for genotype-phenotype correlations and We report a 23-year old woman who was referreds to our department with important consequences for prenatal genetic counselling. for chromosomal study due to secondary amenorrhea. Her parents were nonconsanguineous. She had three brothers and one sister, all Cytogenetics 12 P03.132 46,XY karyotype with a duplication on the short arm of inhibiting DNA synthesis. These regions are found in all individuals chromosome X in a girl with mental retardation and dysmorphic and appear to be hotspots of chromosomal rearrangements in cancer. features. Approximately 90 cFS regions have been cytogenetically identified, S. Chirieac1, A. Tutulan-Cunita1, M. Budisteanu2,1, A. Arghir1, A. Lungeanu1; but only few of these have been determined at DNA sequence level 1“Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2Clinical and completely characterized. Major part of examined cFSs coincides Hospital of Psychiatry „Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia“, Bucharest, Romania. with extremely genomically large genes. The identification of the full We present cytogenetic and molecular results in a 7 years old girl, repertoire of Human Fragilome sequences is and an important task referred for genetic investigations due to clinical dysmorphic features of Cancer Genome research leading to the discovery of new cancer (up-slanting, short palpebral fissures, small eyelashes, broad nose, susceptibility genes. short philtrum, thick lips, micrognatia, hypoplasia of great labias and Using six-color FISH-mapping with BAC-probes on metaphase chro- congenital cataract), epileptic seizures, tetraparesis and severe men- mosomes of aphidicolin-treated lymphocytes we have specified the tal retardation. Abdominal computed tomography revealed a normal locations of two aphidicolin-inducible cFS, FRA14B and FRA14C, and uterus, the absence of ovaries and left suprarenalian calcification. narrowed them down from chromosome bands 14q23 and 14q24.1 to Classical and molecular cytogenetic investigations, performed on smaller regions of 600 kb and 800 kb, respectively. Both cFSs span peripheral blood lymphocytes, consisted in GTG-banded karyotype, genomically large genes, gephyrin (GPHN, 670kb) and neurexin-3 FISH and array-CGH (44K, Agilent). (NRXN3, 1,6Mb), encoding neuronal proteins. Notably, a male karyotype was found, with an atypical large Xp as To assess the possible role of FRA14B and FRA14C in cancer chro- confirmed also by FISH analysis with centromeric probes for X and Y mosome rearrangements we performed fine-tiling oligonucleotide chromosomes [SE X (DXZ1), SE Y class q arm - Kreatech, Poseidon] array CGH. We have detected multiple breakpoints within these two and a BAC probe for SRY gene (RP11-400O10). cFS occurring in neuroblastoma, melanoma, glioma, colon cancer and Moreover, array-CGH showed a 25.7 Mb duplication on the short arm breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors. Subsequent validation of of X chromosome, with proximal and distal breakpoints at Xp21.1 and CGH results by six-colour FISH with BAC probes revealed additional Xp22.31, respectively. balanced rearrangements at cFSs loci. In conclusion, we appreciate that the above-described cytogenetic re- Our data enlarge the list of fine-mapped cFSs of the Human Fragilome arrangements raise many questions concerning the origin and their and lead to the identification of two large cFS genes potentially associ- pathogenetic role, which remain to be elucidated. ated with cancer. Acknowledgements: The authors thank Mrs. Mioara Cristea, Ioana Borcan and Leontina Dita for technical assistance. Financial support: P03.135 molecular cytogenetic characterization of an interstitial Research National Projects: PN 09.33.02.03 and PNII 140/2008. 6q25.2q26 deletion in a 4-year-old girl with severe developmental delay, corpus callosum agenesis and hypertrichosis. P03.133 case report: complex mosaicism in 45,X/49,XYYYY L. Gwanmesia1, F. Béna1, S. Gimelli1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2, A. Bottani1; male 1Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, V. B. Chernykh, E. G. Okuneva, N. Y. Kuzina, N. V. Shilova, T. V. Zolotukhina, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine and Development University of O. P. Ryzhkova, A. V. Polyakov; Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Microdeletion of 6q25.2q25.3 was recently described in four patients Moscow, Russian Federation. with developmental delay, microcephaly, agenesis of the corpus cal- Objective: We report a patient with rare gonosomal abnormality. The losum, hearing loss, and dysmorphic features (Nagamani et al., EJHG, proband was newborn male born to a 27-years woman from a second 2009). pregnancy. The first pregnancy has stood on 4-5 week. The patient‘s We describe a 4-year-old female patient who was shown by array- father, who is 28 years old, is phenotypically normal 46,XY male. Peri- CGH (Agilent 244K) to have a heterozygous de novo 9.46 Mb deletion natal hypoxic-ischemic brain injury was diagnosed in the patient. The in 6q25.2q26. proband was referred to genetic examination because of dysembryo- The girl was born by caesarian section at 38 weeks of gestation after genesis stigmas. Following phenotypic features: backward sloping an uneventful pregnancy. Birth weight was 2870 g (p10-50), length 46 foreheads, high nasal bridge, microretrognatia, were prominent. The cm (p10-50) and head circumference 33 cm (p50). Examination at 3 patient had male genitalia descended in the scrotum testes and de- months revealed severe hypotonia, umbilical hernia, large ears, and formed penis. No pathology was revealed by abdominal ultrasonogra- macrostomia. Major xerosis of hands and feet complicated by bouts of hy and ophthalmologic examination. eczema as well as hypertrichosis (face, back, upper limbs) were also Materials and Methods: Chromosome analysis was performed on cul- noted. Ophthalmological and audiological examinations were normal. tured PHA-stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes with GTG- and C- Brain ultrasound and MRI at 4 months showed agenesis of the cor- staining in accordance with standard techniques. FISH analysis was pus callosum without other abnormality. At the age of 4 years, severe performed on interphase nuclei using standard protocols with CEP psychomotor delay (walking not yet achieved and absent speech) and X/CEPY DNA probes. Complete AZF deletions were tested accord- microcephaly were noted, as well as mild growth retardation (weight ing to Laboratory guidelines for molecular diagnosis of Y-chromosome and height slightly below 3rd percentile). microdeletions (EAA/EMQN, 1999), with some modifications. Partial The region of overlap in 6q25.2q25.3 between the previously-reported AZFc deletions were detected by multiplex PCR of following STS loci: patients and our case is 3.52 Mb long and harbours 12 protein-coding sY142, sY1197, sY1192, sY1291, sY1206, sY1054 and sY1125. genes. Among these, TIAM2, NOX3 and SYNJ2 are candidates for Results: Chromosome analysis shown 45,X[6]/49,XYYYY[19] karyo- normal development of the brain. Haploinsufficiency of any of these type in the patient. FISH analysis detected complex mosaicism with 5 genes could be causative of mental retardation, microcephaly, and/or cell clones: 45,X(21.2%)/46,XY(1.2%)/47,XYY(7%)/48,XYYY(14.1%)/ corpus callosum agenesis. In addition, a locus for hypertrichosis could 49,XYYYY(56.5%). No complete (classic) Y-chromosome microde- be situated in the deleted interval. letion was found. Partial AZFc deletion, b2/b3 was detected in both the patient and the patient’s father. Revealed in the patient complex P03.136 molecular cytogenetic characterization of interstitial gonosomal mosaicism is the result of postzygotic errors of sex chro- 5q14.3q15 deletions in two patients with severe developmental mosome segregation, possibly because of instability of the structural delay, hypotonia and seizures. rearranged Y chromosome. F. Béna1, M. Mascaretti2, S. Gimelli1, E. Veneselli2, S. E. Antonarakis1,3, A. Bottani1; P03.134 Fine mapping of FRA1B and FRA1C revealed new 1Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, large common fragile site (cFs) genes frequently rearranged in Switzerland, 2Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, G. Gaslini Institute and different human cancers University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 3Department of Genetic Medicine and D. Zheglo, L. Brueckner, A. Blumrich, M. Schwab, L. Savelyeva; Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Switzerland. DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany. Intersititial deletions of 5q are rare events. Only three independent Common fragile sites (cFS) are evolutionary conserved chromosomal studies reported on cases of 5q14.3q15 deletions in patients with se- regions that are most prone to breakage under conditions partially vere mental retardation, muscular hypotonia, and epilepsy (Cardoso et Cytogenetics 1 al., 2009; Engels et al., 2009; Le Meur et al., 2010). and she was rated Tanner 4 for her breast development. Her hormone We describe two unrelated patients with de novo overlapping micro- assays showed normal FSH, mildly elevated LH and estradiol, highly deletions in 5q14.3q15, spanning 5.73 Mb and 1.94 Mb, respectively. elevated testosterone and DHT. Patient 1 showed at the age of 4.5 years severe developmental delay, Her sonography showed absence of uterus and ovaries, and presence absence of speech, poor visual contact, stereotyped behaviour, ataxia, of aplastic testes in the abdomen. and epilepsy. Patient 2 was referred at the age of 10 months because Investigation of her family revealed that two of her aunts have also of psychomotor delay and severe hypotonia. At the age of 2.5 years, exactly the same clinical features. he still did not walk or speak. EEG showed epileptic alterations from Lymphocytes of the members of the family were cultured, and ana- the age of 9 months and seizures occurred thereafter during 5 febrile lyzed by use of the conventional G-banding technique. The karyotype episodes. of our proposita and two of her aunts revealed: 46,XY,inv(9)(p11q13). The boundaries of the deletions were different in the two patients, but Her mother showed: 46,XX,inv(9)(p11q13) and her father was nor- an overlapping region of 1.84 Mb in 5q14.3 was defined. This region mal. includes six genes: CETN3, MBLAC2, POLR3G, LYSMD3, GPR98, and MEF2C. Among those, three can be considered as particularly J03.3 Parity and consanguinity of Down syndrome in iran. A interesting in relation with the phenotypes of our patients: GPR98 al- study of 402 free trisomic cases. ready reported to cause febrile and afebrile seizures (Nakayama et E. Daei,1, M. Shariaty2; al., 2002), MEF2C recently shown to be responsible when haploinsuf- 1A.A.Taleb Hospital of Rafsanjan University, Rafsanjan, Islamic Republic of ficient for severe mental retardation, poor eye contact and seizures Iran, 2Tehran University Cancer Research Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of (Le Meur et al., 2010), and LYSMD3 which is highly expressed in the Iran. central nervous system. Background: Down syndrome is the most frequent chromosomal ab- normality in newborns with an incidence of around one per 700 live J03.1 Hypersexuality, mental retardation and infertility in a birth worldwide .Since the discovery of trisomy 21 in 1959 maternal 47,XYY patient and paternal age effect relation to the etiology and chromosomal pat- C. Azimi, A. Faraj Pour, M. Khaleghian; tern of affected persons has been studied .Since 1965 and with the Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, establishment of the first Cytogenetics Lab.in the Country, we* have Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. karyotyped over 700 Down patients. In this retrospective study par- The phenotype of 47,XYY males is normal, but the subjects are often ity and consanguinity of 402 free trisomic patients’s is analyzed and tall. The majority of them are usually fertile, but genital hypoplasia, reported. testicular ectopy and hypospadias have been also reported. They can Materials and methods: Peripheral blood of 736 patients aged one day have semen parameters ranging from severe oligozoospermia to nor- to 23 years were cultured and Karyotyped Two hours colcemide treat- mozoospermia. There is a definite correlation between this syndrome ed cultures after 70 hours incubation and ten minutes KCl treatment and committing offenses.It has been suggested that 47,XYY males were G-banded at 300-400 band level and analysed after air dry slide have an increased risk of behavioral problems, poor social integration, preparations..35 well spread mitoses were analyzed by one of us* and low tolerance to frustration, emotional instability, aggressivity, and poor seve mitoses were karyotyped .Results were reported to the in charge self-control. physicians according to ISCN nomenclature of 1995. A 26-year-old mentally retarded man referred to our department.His Results: Among 402 none mosaic free trisomic Down patients 53 per parents were non-consanguineous, and at birth,his father and his cent were products of the first pregnancies, 29 percent were the re- mother were 55 and 45, respectively.He was the last child and he has sults of the second pregnancies and the rests were outcomes of the two normal brothers, five normal sisters, One of his sister and one of 3rd to the 15th pregnancies. Only EIGHT per cent had consanguineous his niece were also mentally retarded. parents which is quite low as comparing to the average familial mar- His clinical features were included tall stature, mild gynecomastia, riages in Iran which is over 15 per cent. small testes, as well as temper tantrums, aggressive and defiant ac- Conclusion: we believe that in Iran the risk of having a Down syndrome tivity. He has unusual elevated sexual desire caused a big problems offspring in the first pregnancies is quite high and should be noticed such as sexual assaults on his mother and his sisters, masturbation by health officials. addiction and masturbating in front of others and on the public areas. Therefore, he is kept in the restricted mental hospital. J03.4 A report of a XYY male with hydrocephaly His IQ was 65. Endocrinological testing demonstrated increase in the F. Talebmanochehri, F. Razazian, F. Mortezapour, M. Rahnama, F. Nasiri FSH and LH, and decrease in the testosterone levels. His seminal kenari, F. Mahjoubi; analysis revealed azoospermia. Conventional cytogenetic analysis us- IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ing GTG-banding technique revealed the karyotype of 47,XYY in all Here we are presenting the clinical finding in a five days old baby boy his cells. who refereed to our Genetic Dept. due to undetectable testis and pos- sible hydrocephaly. He was born premature at 32 weeks of gestation J03.2 Androgen insensitivity syndrome and inversion of by cesarean. His parents were first cousin. He had a healthy sister. chromosome 9: in one family He had a feeding and respiratory problem. He passed away at age M. Khaleghian, C. Azimi; 10 day. Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, Chromosome study was performed using stimulated lymphocytes Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cells.Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set up in RPMI 1640 Androgen insensitivity syndrome is a set of disorders of sex develop- supplemented with 20% FBS.highresolution chromosome banding ment caused by mutations of a gene encoding the androgen receptor. was Performed in all subject. A person with complete AIS is a phenotypic female with a chromo- His karyotype revealed to be 47,XYY. From reviewing the article and somal genotpye of 46,XY. This syndrome is an X-linked recessive and case reports, we found that there least 4 other suspected cases of its gene is located at Xq11-12 hydrocephaly whom with further clinical investigation appeared to be Pericentric inversion of the chromosome 9 is such a common minor normal. We think that it is important to report our case to help the pos- chromosomal rearrangement which some cytogeneticists would con- sible correlation between phenotype and 47, XYY karyotype. sider them as normal variants. However, many reports in the literature raised conflicting views regarding the association with subfertility, re- J03.5 Report of a patient with isochromosome Xq and current abortion, and abnormal clinical conditions.. Robertsonian translocation 13;14 We are reporting a woman and two her aunts which have the androgen M. Moutabi Alavi, C. Azimi, M. Khaleghian, A. Fathpour; insensitivity syndrome and inversion 9. Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, A 22-year-old woman was referred to our department due to primary Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. amenorrhea and hirsutism. On physical examination, she measured Patients with isochromosome Xq phenotypically are resembled Turner 167 cm and weighed 61 kg.She was a female by appearance and syndrome with similar manifestations such as amenorrhea and infer- external genitalia. Her axillary and pubic hair was scant (Tanner 2), tility. Robersonian translocation between chromosomes 13 and 14 is Reproductive genetics 1 a common translocation among normal population with no obvious cytogenetic study, on the basis of G-banding, showed 46XX, t(11; 22) phenotypical effect. The combination of isochromosome Xq and the (q23.3; q11.2). The t(11; 22) is the common non-Robertsonian consti- Robertsonian translocation 13;14 is a very rare event. tutional translocation in humans. This translocation was reported by We are reporting a 30 years old single woman, who was referred to impaired anterior pituitary function and short stature, but this is the our department due to amenorrhea. Her clinical features were: short first case with similar translocation without gross pituitary dysfunction. stature, broad chest, narrow palate, low posterior hairline, infantile nip- A detailed clinical description of this patient, along with a precise cyto- ples, undeveloped breasts, infantile external genitalia, absent of axil- genetic designation of chromosomal breakpoint, allows further refine- lary hair, very scant pubic hair. Ultrasonography investigation revealed ment of genotype-phenotype correlation for this translocation. gonadal dysgenesis and hypoplastic uterus. Her IQ, cardiac and renal examinations were normal. J03.8 A Down child with a de novo translocation Cytogenetic analysis was performed by G-banding procedure, study- F. razazian, F. Taleb manoochehri, F. Nasiri kenari, M. Rahnama, F. ing 30 metaphases of proliferating lymphocytes from her pertipheral Mortezapour, F. Mahjoubi; blood. Her karyotype was found to be: 45,X,i(X)(q10),der(13;14)(q1 IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 0;q10). A 2 year sold girl was referred to our Genetic laboratory of being sus- We also studied her parents chromosomes to find out the origin of pected to be Down Syndrome. She was born at term by natural deliv- the translocation. It was revealed that her mother was normal, but her ery. Ultrasound performed during pregnancy but report the fetus to be father carries the same translocation. normal. Her weigh and head circumstances were within normal range. She had developmental delay. She did not gain weight from 6 months J03.6 Are there any association between 13q;14q Robertsonian age. translocation with Down‘s syndrome? Chromosome study was performed using stimulated lymphocytes M. Pilechian Langeroudi, M. Khaleghian, C. Azimi; cells.Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set up in RPMI 1640 Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, supplemented with 20% FBS.highresolution chromosome banding Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. was Performed in all subject. There are contradictory data on the association of translocation Chromosome study was performed on stimulated lymphocytes of the (13q;14q) and Down‘s syndrome. Some researchers reported the as- case and parents. She found to be a Down child plus a de novo car- sociation of translocations not involving chromosome 21 with Down‘s rier of an apparently translocation between chromosome 3 and 20. syndrome, and focused on the inherited 13/14 Robertsonian transloca- Her karyotype was reported as 47,XX,+21,t(3;20)(p23;p11.2). There tions and Down‘s syndrome. On the other hand, a study of four-gen- are few cases of a familial translocation plus a trisomy and a very few eration kindred of 86 sibships was carried out when an index case had cases of de novo translocation and trisomy. Therefore, we think it is the Down‘s syndrome, due to trisomy-21, and aslo carried the 13/14 important to report our case. translocation.Their aim was to examine the risk of t(13q;13q) carriers having trisomy-21 children. They could not find any association. J03.9 translocation and trisomy 21 in a baby boy. We report a 21-year old healthy man who came for genetic counseling M. Rahnama, F. Mortezapour, F. Talebmanoochehri, F. Nasiri Kenari, F. due to the Down‘s syndrome of his 23-year old sister. His father was Razazian, F. Mahjoubi; 64, his mother 62, and both look healthy. His sister showed typical IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. clinical features of Down‘s syndrome including: small stature, brachy- A 7 months old baby boy was referred to our laboratory because of cephaly, flat occiput, flat facial profile, small ears, epicanthal folds, having clinical manifestation of Down syndrome. He was born at term upslanting palpebral fissures, simian crease, hyperflexibility of joints, by natural delivery.The eyes were oriental and attention was normal and mental deficiency. with normal reflection to sounds rolling as like as other babies without Peripheral blood samples of the consultand, his sister and his parents any other MR signs . His parent were unrelated. They had also such a were cultured, harvested and banded according to standard methods. delivery in family history. Chromosome analysis of our consultand and his mother showed Chromosome study was performed using stimulated lymphocytes cells breakage and reunion at bands 13q10 and 14q10, and a derivative .Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set up in RPMI 1640 sup- chromosome (13;14). plemented with 20% FBS. high resolution chromosome banding was Consultand: 45,XY,der (13;14)(q10;q10) Performed in all subject. Mother: 45,XX,der (13;14)(q10;q10) The karyotype was ascertained as :47,XY,+21,tr(12;15)(p13.3;q26.1). Father showed normal karyotype. His parents had normal karyotypes Sister revealed trisomy-21 with 46 chromosomes due to the Robertso- nian translocation between the chromosomes 13 and 14, as follows: 46,XX,der (13;14)(q10;q10),+21 P04 Reproductive genetics The sister of our consultand was another rare case of Down‘s syn- drome with trisomy-21 in association with inherited Robertsonian P04.01 investigation of the 4977 bp mitochondrial DNA deletion translocation(13q;14q). in asthenozoospermic men S. S. Hayat; J03.7 short stature with t(11;22) and normal pituitary function Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical M. Shakiba1, N. Ghasemi2; Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. 1Yazd SS medical sciences university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, Objective: Sperm motility is one of the major determinants of male 2Research and Clinical Centre for Infertility, Yazd SS medical sciences fertility. There is increasing evidence that mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. mutations in sperm may lead to infertility. Due to the loss of several Short stature and genetic disease is an interesting aspect in pediat- vital OXPHOS genes, mtDNA deletions mainly affect high-energy ric medicine. Several chromosomal diseases were reported with short demanding post meiotic cells. Since spermatozoa movement also stature. Previously t(11; 22) was reported with short stature and hy- requires great amount of energy, defects in mitochondrial respiratory popituitarism. The present case was described is a case with short function is assumed to cause a decline in motility and, consequently, stature and translocation 11;22. She is a 14 years old normal appear- decrease of fertility. ing intelligent girl with no sign of puberty. In physical examination, her Design: Detection of mitochondrial DNA deletion in human sperma- weight was 24Kg and height 127 cm, with normal blood pressure. tozoa. There is no sign of cardiac or eyes abnormality. Laboratory findings Materials and Methods: We collected 240 semen samples from 240 were shown normal provocative growth hormone, estradiol in prepu- infertile men with asthenozoospermia (a<25% or a+ b<50% (WHO bertal range with normal thyroid hormone and cortical level. Other rou- 1999). The samples with sperm agglutination, high viscosity and in- tine tests were normal, but mild iron deficiency anemia (Hb10.7mg/dl) creased numbers of seminal leukocytes (leukospermia) were exclud- was seen. Father height was 155 and mother 163cm. Her birth weight ed. Blood samples obtained from 46 healthy individuals were used as was 3100gr and he mother complains growth problem of whom around control. first year of life. Two other children of family have normal growth. Her DNA was extracted from each semen sample. The mtDNA 4977 bp Reproductive genetics 1 deletion, so called `common deletion‘ was recognized by nested PCR- to predict, because it depends on different factors like duplications or amplified fragments in agarose gel electrophoresis. deletions or the degree of mosaicism (45,X cell line). Clinical presenta- Results: The 4977 bp deletion was identified in 96% of analyzed tions in these patients can range from a classical female Turner phe- samples. Sperm motility (a+b) extremely varies (3%-38%) in semen notype, through mixed gonadal dysgenesis, to phenotypically normal samples with mtDNA mutation. The deletion was detected also in 87% males. control group blood samples. 13 bp direct repeats located at flanking The essential genes for spermatogenesis are in Y chromosome and, region (8470-8482 and 13447-13459 respectively) may cause PCR because of that, karyotype is very important in males with idiopathic slippage and artificial fragment amplification. azoospermia (IA). Discussion: The results of our study correspond to the current data Case: A male with IA was referred to our laboratory for cytogenetic confirmed that nested PCR doesn‘t allow detecting mtDNA deletion analysis. 4977 accurately. Potential use of this mtDNA deletion as a diagnostic Cytogenetic result showed the presence of a mosaicism 45,X[50]/ test requires more reliable methods. 46,XY[8]; chromosome Y was normal by GTG banding techniques but Support: none very small. The result for the screening of STS markers showed a microdeletion in P04.02 molecular diagnosis of dominant and recessive AZFb and AZFc intervals. spinocerebellar ataxias We also evaluated the percentage of mosaicism in another tissue; R. Selvatici, B. Dolcini, A. Venturoli, C. Trabanelli, S. Carturan, M. Taddei buccal smear‘s cells were selected. A normal male result in 100% of Masieri, A. Ravani, A. Ferlini; the cells was obseved. Finally, SRY was studied by FISH in peripheral Sezione di Genetica Medica, Ferrara, Italy. blood chromosomes and showed two red signals, which meant the pa- Autosomal dominant ataxias (SCA1-2-3-6-7) and autosomal recessive tient had an isodicentric Y chromosome with common break point. Actu- Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) are the most frequent ataxias in Europe. ally the karyotype was 45,X[50]/46,X,idic(Y)(q11.1).ishYq(SRY++)[8]. Mutations in SCA1-2-3-6-7 are CAG expansions that are transcribed Conclusions: This case report underlines the necessity of a full-scale and translated into a long sequence of polyglutamine in the corre- genetic analysis in all patients with reproductive failures. This case sponding proteins, resulting in a toxic function for the cell. PCRs were also aimed to establish the influence of sex chromosome mosaicism performed with pairs of specific primers for each SCAs, in which the on the resulting phenotype respecting to differential tissue distribution, forward primer was usually fluorescinated. PCR products were ana- effects of the SRY and the breakpoints in the AZF region. Our results lyzed by gel electrophoresis and by capillary electrophoresis using ABI are in agreement to others reported. PRISM 3130xl gel Analyzer. Liz500 was used as internal molecular weight standard and GeneScan Software was used to elaborate the P04.05 data. cFtR gene mutations and non-obstructive azoospermia: An FRDA is a mitochondrial disease with a prevalence of 2x10-5 and a iranian study carrier frequency of 1/100. Almost 98% of the alleles has a pathologi- F. Mirzajani1, R. Mirfakhraie1, S. M. Kalantar2, N. Salsabili3, M. Montazeri1; cal expansion of GAA in the first intron of the gene causing reduction 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, of frataxin in homozygotes. Missense and truncating mutations are Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research & Clinical Centre for Infertility, Yazd, Islamic present in the remaining 2%. FRDA affected or carriers were identified Republic of Iran, 3Mirza Kouchak Khan Hospital, Tehran University of Medical by Hot-Start amplification using the XL-PCR kit (Applied Biosystems), Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. with the following primers: Genetic factors cause about 10% of male infertility. Cystic fibrosis GAA-F(5’GGG ATT GGT TGC CAG TGC TTA AAA GTT AG3’) conductance regulator (CFTR) gene mutations are among relatively GAA-R(5’GAT CTA AGG ACC ATC ATG GCC ACA CTT CGG3’). frequent causes of male infertility. The aim of the present study was PCR products were analyzed on agarose gel and by capillary electro- to evaluate the effect of CFTR gene mutations in non-obstructive azo- phoresis ABI PRISM 3130xl gel Analyzer. To confirm the diagnosis, ospermia. Rox1000 and Liz500 were used as molecular weight standards and The incidence of common CFTR mutations including delF508, G542X, GeneScan Software was used to elaborate the data. N1303K, W1282X and R117H was investigated in 106 Iranian patients 40 patients were analysed of which two resulted SCA2 affected, one with non-obstructive azoospermia using ARMS-PCR and PCR-RFLP was SCA1 affected, two were Friedreich affected and seven were methods. Also probable mutations in exons 4, 7, 10, 11, 20 and 21 Friedreich carriers. of the CFTR gene were studied using SSCP, TTGE and sequencing methods. 50 fertile men were also studied as control group. P04.03 Homozygous c.144delc of AURKc detected by Thirteen patients (21.26 %) showed 406-6T>C, A120T, I148T, ΔF508, bidirectional sequencing G542X, and IVS8-5T mutations. None of the mutations were observed N. B. Abdelmoula, R. Louati, T. Rebai; in the control group. No significant statistical correlation was observed Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia. between the incidence of M470V polymorphism and male infertility (P Molecular investigation by bidirectional sequencing of the exon 3 of = 0.755). AURKC gene using the couple of primers: TACCCTACCTCCCAAGCT- The present study indicates that there is a relation between CFTR GA and CTTCAGGGCCACAATGAAAT, is performed for two Libyan gene mutations and developing non-obstructive azoospermia. There- brothers who complain from infertility with large-headed polyploid fore, couples undergoing assisted reproductive technologies such as multi-flagellar spermatozoa. Clinical history showed absence of paren- intra cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) are advised to be screened for tal consanguinity and failure of many attempts of ICSI and IMSI. Ge- CFTR gene mutations. netic analysis showed the homozygous c.144delC for the two patients. This mutation leads to the production of large-headed polyploid multi- P04.06 DEtEctiON OF cFtR mUtAtiONs iN GAmEtE DONORs flagellar spermatozoa and causes meiosis I arrest in infertile men. iN sPAiN We underline that screening for c.144delC mutation of AURKC gene A. Urbano1, I. Ochando1, L. Gil2, C. Ochoa3, C. Calatayud4, I. Torres5, J. should be offered routinely to patients with macrocephalic sperm head Rueda6,1,1; syndrome in our countries (carrier frequency of 1/50), by setting up a 1U. Genética, Hospital Clínica Vistahermosa, Alicante, Spain, 2U. Reproducción, rapid molecular test. Consideration of AMP treatment remains still not Hospital Clínica Vistahermosa, Alicante, Spain, 3CEFIVA, Asturias, Spain, clear and will be discussed. 4CREA, Valencia, Spain, 5TAHE Reproducción, Murcia, Spain, 6Fac. Medicina, Univ Miguel Hernández, Alicante, Spain. P04.04 chromosome mosaicism in males with idiopathic Mutation of CFTR protein can originate CF and CAVD; it is a recessive azoospermia disorder and because of its high prevalence (1/25 in Caucasian popu- C. Garrido1, V. Català1, E. Cuatrecasas1, E. Masip1, L. Bassas2, E. Ars2, A. lation) it might be a good candidate for screening in gamete donors Serés-Santamaría1; for assisted reproductive techniques. Our objective was to study the 1Prenatal Genetics, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain. prevalence of CFTR gene’s mutations in Spanish gamete donors from Introduction: Dicentrics are among the most common structural abnor- five reproductive centers. malities of the human Y chromosome, and the phenotype is difficult Blood DNA samples from 588 healthy, both male and female donors, Reproductive genetics 1 ranging in age 18-32, were studied. The donors were from two repro- P04.09 Germline rearrangements in the tumour suppressor ductive centers in the North of Spain and three more from the East. genes WWOX and FHit are associated with Disorders of sex DNA analysis was performed using a commercial kit from Innogenet- Development ics that covers, roughly, 80% of the mutations of European Caucasian S. White1,2, E. Turbitt1, P. Bernard3, J. Hewitt1,2, Y. van der Zwan4, R. Hersmus4, population. Z. Juniarto5, M. Cools6, S. Faradz5, S. Drop4, L. Looijenga4, A. Sinclair1,2; The incidence of CFTR mutations in donors was 3.9% higher in the 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of North than in the East (4.32% vs. 3.21%). The premutation genotype Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Prince Henry’s Institute of Medical Research, 5T was present in 9.8% of the individuals (10.63 vs. 9.63, respectively). Melbourne, Australia, 4Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Diponegoro These differences were not statistically significant. The most frequent University, Semarang, Indonesia, 6University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. mutations were ΔF508 (42%), I148T (15.6%) and G542X (10.6%). Disorders of Sex Development (DSD), ranging in severity from genital Our data show some differences with previous reports in the Spanish abnormalities to complete sex reversal, occur in ~0.5% of live births population, such as a relatively high prevalence of the I148T muta- and represent a major paediatric concern. In many cases it is not pos- tion, and an unexpectedly high prevalence of the 5T genotype. The sible to make an accurate molecular diagnosis, with consequences for 5T/TG variant decreases the efficiency of intron 8 splicing and its ef- both treatment and genetic counseling. fects depend on other associated mutations, if any. Since a relatively We have used whole genome microarray copy number variation (CNV) high number (13.7%) of the individuals should not be accepted to be analysis in an attempt to identify causative mutations in a cohort of gamete donors, it is highly recommended to screen the candidates for DSD patients. In one 46,XY patient with ambiguous genitalia we de- CFTR gene mutations, including 5T analysis. tected a multi-exon deletion within the WWOX gene, which was also seen in the 46,XX mother. In another 46,XY patient with ambiguous P04.07 AGORA, a biobank of congenital malformations and genitalia we identified a single exon deletion within the FHIT gene. childhood cancers Both WWOX and FHIT are known tumour suppressor genes, and to I. A. L. M. van Rooij, K. Y. Renkema, E. M. H. F. Bongers, L. F. M. van der the best of our knowledge the deletions we have identified represent Zanden, C. H. W. Wijers, I. de Blaauw, W. F. J. Feitz, B. Franke, N. V. A. M. the first germline rearrangements affecting their coding regions. Both Knoers, N. Roeleveld; genes have been implicated as inhibitors of the Wnt/beta-catenin path- Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. way (a critical component of ovarian development), and a previously The aetiology of many congenital malformations and childhood can- described knock-out mouse of Wwox showed gonadal abnormalities cers has not been established, but is most likely interplay between in both sexes. genetic and environmental risk factors. Large series of patients are We are currently exploring the functional consequences of the identi- needed to identify genes involved, and biobanks are a key resource fied mutations on the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, as well as for this purpose. Therefore, we have set up a biobank of congeni- determining the frequency of WWOX and FHIT mutations in a larger tal malformations and childhood cancers at the Radboud University cohort of DSD patients. Nijmegen Medical Centre (RUNMC) named AGORA, Aetiologic re- search into Genetic and Occupational/environmental Risk factors for P04.10** Endometrial gene expression analysis in infertile Anomalies in children. In almost every paediatric department of the women in natural and artificial cycles RUNMC, a reference centre for 5 million people in the Eastern part of S. Altmäe1,2, J. A. Martinez-Conejero3, A. Salumets2, J. A. Horcajadas3, A. the Netherlands, patients and their parents are asked to donate blood Stavreus-Evers4; or saliva for DNA isolation and to fill out questionnaires addressing 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, the pregnancy period. Approximately 75-80% of the invited families 3iGenomix, Valencia, Spain, 4Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. participate and we already obtained 9150 DNA-samples (± 3350 case- We aimed to investigate endometrial gene expression profile in wom- parent-triads) and 2150 questionnaires. Currently, we are starting up en with unexplained infertility in comparison with fertile controls at the the recruitment a random sample of Dutch children as a control group time of embryo implantation in order to find potential predictive mark- through the nationwide population administration. The availability of ers of uterine receptivity and to identify the molecular mechanisms of large cohorts of well-phenotyped patients within this biobank has en- infertility. Further, we aimed to compare the gene expression pattern abled us to identify two new genes involved in the aetiology of hy- of receptive endometrium in natural cycles and in artificial cycles in pospadias and renal anomalies, emphasizing the significant value of these infertile women, in order to provide additional knowledge in the the AGORA biobank. Expansion of the biobank with Dutch, European complex process of artificial endometrial preparation, which could be and worldwide collaborators is set up for more rare disorders, such as helpful for improving the outcome of assisted reproductive techniques specific anorectal and renal malformations. A significant challenge in in infertility treatment. this pursuit of genetic and environmental basis of congenital disorders We used high-density oligonucleotide gene arrays, comprising 44 000 is the efficient and coordinated collection of genotype, phenotype and gene targets for endometrial gene expression profiling (n=5 in each environmental data. group). Hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis showed a P04.08 Cytogenetic study for couples with reproductive clear distinction in endometrial gene expression between study groups. problems Ingenuity Pathways Analysis showed dysregulation of gene pathways M. Mackic-Djurovic, I. Aganovic-Musinovic, S. Ibrulj; involved in leukocyte extravasation signalling, lipid metabolism, and Center for Genetics, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. detoxification in the endometria of infertile women. In the artificial cy- During last ten years, 278 married couples came to Center for genetics cle, significantly high levels of cytokine activity and hormone activity, of Medical faculty-University of Sarajevo, for chromosomal cytogenetic with cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction pathways were affected. analyze due to infertility or larger number of spontaneous abortions. To Our study provides new information on genes and pathways that may each married couple, kariotype has been made, using GTG technique have functional significance as regards to endometrial receptivity and from cultures of lymphocytes from peripheral blood. subsequent embryo implantation. Results: 25 (9%) of 278 had one partner carrying a chromosomal changes. Chromosomal changes at men were: 4 (1,43%) transloca- P04.11 search for epimutations of maternal expressed gene tions, 4 (1,43%) marker chromosomes, 1 (0,35%) numerical chromo- MEG (14q32) in early pregnancy losses somal changes in mosaic types. Analyzes at women, have reviled E. A. Sazhenova, I. N. Lebedev; larger number of chromosomal changes than at men. Changes found Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. were: 4 (1,43%) translocations, 3 (1,08%) inversions, 2 (0, 71%) mark- Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic phenomenon, which is involved er chromosomes and 7 (2, 51%) numerical chromosomal changes in in regulation of embryonic development and placental function. In mosaic types. general, paternally expressed imprinted genes enhance fetal growth whereas maternally expressed suppress it. Previously we have re- ported a tissue-specific loss of methylation in paternal expressed loci KCNQ1OT1 (11p15) and PLAGL1 (6q24-25) in 9.5% and 10.3% spon- taneous abortions, respectively. At the same time, normal epigenetic Reproductive genetics 17 status of the maternal expressed genes H19, CDKN1C and paternal ing continually extended. expressed gene SNRPN was found. The aim of the present research We demonstrate a case report of successful PGH for Huntington dis- was estimation of epigenetic status of other maternal expressed gene ease. MEG3 (14q32) in samples of first-trimester spontaneous abortions. Genetic testing for an inherited predisposition to specific disease The product of this gene is a regulatory RNA, which is involved in inhi- brings a deep dilemma for people with positive family history and de- bition of cell proliferation. Methylation-specific PCR of MEG3 promoter termined reproductive period. PGH provides an efficient and success- was performed using DNA from extraembryoniñ mesoderm and cho- ful alternative within prenatal diagnosis services and it counts among rion cytotrophoblast of 87 first-trimester missed abortions with abnor- the methods reducing individual risk. malities of cell proliferation. Thirty induced abortions were studied as a control group. Normal differential methylation of MEG3 parental alleles P04.14 the investigation of AZF, CFTR, AR genes in patients was observed in all studied embryos. Our data indicates that methyla- with impaired spermatogenesis tion status of MEG3 imprinted locus on the chromosome 14 has no ap- O. Fesai, L. Livshits; parent effect for disruption of early human embryogenesis. This study Institute of Molecular Biolody and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine. was partially supported by Federal Special-Purpose Program (¹ P303) Male infertility is found to have a role in approximately 50% of infertile and RFBR (¹ 08-04-01344). couples. Microdeletions of the long arm of the human Y-chromosome are associated with spermatogenic failure. Mutations in the CFTR P04.12 the genetics of gonadal mosaicism gene are also involved in male infertility. The androgen receptor medi- N. V. Kovaleva; ates androgen action determining male sexual phenotypes and pro- St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian motion of spermatogenesis. Federation. Y-chromosome microdeletions, mutations and IVS8-nT sequence of Gonadal mosaicism (GM) for chromosome abnormalities in otherwise CFTR gene and CAG-repeats number of exon 1 of the AR gene we asymptomatic carrier is not a rare condition. However there are many have screened in 125 patients with azoospermia (n=53) and oligozoo- problems related to GM which remain to be elucidated, including its spermia (n=72) and in control groups by PCR-based methods. For prevalence, mechanisms and timing of formation, causing factors, and each patient, PCR analyses were performed on DNA isolated from phenomenon of female predominance among GM carriers. leukocytes derived from peripheral blood. An approach to determine the population rate of GM for trisomies of Microdeletions were detected in 10 of total 125 (8.0%) infertile men. chromosomes without severe imprinting effect was developed recently Mutations in the CFTR gene were detected on 9 out of 125 analyzed [Genet Test 11:342]. A female predominance of individuals with GM infertile men. The most common mutation was F508del (7 of total 9 for free trisomy and for rearrangements involving pericentromeric mutations). IVS8-5T allele of CFTR gene associated with congenital breaks may be explained by female-specific chromosome loss and bilateral absence of the vas deferens was detected in 20 of total 125 female-specific centromere instability in early embryo development (16.0%) of patients. [AJMG 136A:413]. Strong female predominance found among carri- The frequency of alleles with CAG-repeats ≤17 was significant higher ers of GM for derivative chromosomes but not in carriers of balanced (P<0.05) in group of patients with azoospermia (9.4%) comparing with reciprocal translocations suggests male-specific selection against control group (2.7%). The frequency of alleles with CAG-repeats ≥26 unbalanced rearrangements [EJHG 13(S1):135]. Both direct (origin was significant differed (P<0.01) between group of patients with oligo- of trisomy 21 (T21)) and indirect (advanced grandmaternal age) evi- zoospermia (19.4%) and control group (2.7%). dence allow to assume that significant proportion T21 GM carriers had Molecular-genetic analysis of the AZF, CFTR and AR genes mutations been conceived as trisomics. Mosaicism transmission reported in 12 as well as genetic counseling are necessary very important of diagnos- of 80 families with T21 GM carrier(s) suggests a predisposition to tri- tics for patients with male infertility, especially if they are included in an somic rescue. Typical male preponderance in affected offspring with assisted reproductive technologies program. either maternally- or paternally transmitted T21 indicates that meiotic events are not responsible for the skewed sex ratio in Down syndrome. P04.15 Analysis of sperm chromosomal abnormalities and Among unaffected offspring of female T21 GM carriers, there was no sperm DNA fragmentation in infertile men bias from population sex ratio, while a strong female excess among S. brahem, M. Meriem, J. Sonia, E. Hatem, S. Ali; unaffected offspring of male carriers of T21 GM uncovers meiotic non- hospital Farhat hached sousse, sousse, Tunisia. homologous co-orientation of chromosomes 21 and X in spermatogen- Objective: The aim of this study was to evaluate levels of sperm nucle- esis [Mol Cytogenet, in press]. ar DNA fragmentation and of chromosomal abnormalities in a popula- tion of infertile men with severely teratozoospermia. P04.13 clinical application of preimplantation genetic Materials and methods: The level of DNA fragmentation was deter- haplotyping for monogenic disorders in czech Republic: mined by TUNEL assay in infertile men with severely teratozoospermia Huntington disease, a case report. (n = 70) and in adult healthy fertile men (control group, n = 30). Three M. Hejtmankova1, M. Putzova1, I. Eliasova1, L. Pecnova1, R. Kren1, D. color fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed with probes Stejskal1, J. Zidovska2; specific for chromosomes 8, X, and Y in the control group and terato- 1Centre of Medical Genetics and Reproduction Medicine GENNET Ltd., zoospermic men. Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Medical Genetics,1stMedical faculty, Results: Ours patients with severely teratozoospermia showed a sig- Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. nificantly higher abnormality with total rate of 6.31% for chromosome Preimplantation genetic haplotyping (PGH) for preimplantation genetic X,Y and 18 in their spermatozoa compared to control group ( 1.52 diagnosis (PGD) of monogenic disorders has been used at our centre % ; p < 0.0001). A significantly higher proportion of total sperm DNA since 2007. fragmentation was detected in patient with teratozoospermia (32.7% Genetic haplotyping technique allowed to use the testing of multiple ± 5.1 %) compared to the control group (8.19 % ± 2.1 %; p < 0.0001). loci using standard DNA - based PCR protocols on products of multiple There were significant correlation between sperm DNA fragmentation displacement amplification (MDA) from one blastomere biopsied from and abnormal sperm morphology (r = 0.75; p < 0.0001). Aneuploidy the cleavage-state embryo. Twenty seven gene - specific multiplex rate was correlated to abnormal morphology, macrocephalic heads have been developed. Now they are ready to be used for the couples and abnormal flagella (p < 0.001). Moreover a positive correlation was at risk of these monogenic disorders: cystic fibrosis, Huntington dis- found between the rate of sperm chromosomal aberration and the rate ease, Charcot-Marie-Tooth X-linked and type 1A, Duchenne/Becker of sperm DNA fragmentation (r = 0.45; p < 0.001). muscular dystrophy, Haemophilia A, SCIDX1, Dystrophia myotonica 1, Conclusion: The result indicates that spermatozoa from patients with spinal muscular atrophy 1, polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD), con- teratozoospermia contain greater DNA fragmentation and chromo- nexin disorders associated with deafness, RHD typing (D antigen), somal aneuploidy and may lead to male infertility. BRCA1, HSAN1, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, Neurofibromatosis type I, epidermolysis bullosa, propionic acidemia and Marfan, Lynch, Alagille, Currarino, Treacher Collins, IPEX, Crouzon and Fragile-X syndrome. The list of diagnosis where we can offer PGD/ PGH is be-Reproductive genetics 1 P04.16 Repeated genetic counselling in the family with mia, 4.3% in mild oligozoospermia and 3.7% in normozoospermia) in infertility, Cystic fibrosis and chromosomal aberration - case comparison to the fertile controls (1.5%). The frequency of IVS 8(5T) report allele was 4.1% in infertile men and 3.3% in controls. Two infertile men R. Gaillyová1,2, K. Kvačková1,3, M. Vozdová4, I. Valášková1,2, P. Kuglík1,5, M. with CFTR mutation (one with obstructive azoospermia and one with Vilémová1, J. Rubeš4,6; mild oligozoospermia) were also carriers of a IVS 8(5T) allele. 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Biological Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech P04.19 FsHB promoter polymorphism within Progesterone Republic, 3Dept. of Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk Response element is associated with serum FsH level in men University, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Dept. of Genetics and Reproduction, M. Grigorova1, M. Punab2, M. Laan1; Veterinary Research Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 5Dept. of Genetics 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, and Molecular Biology, Institute of Experimental Biology, Faculty of Science, 2Andrology Unit, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia. Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 6Repromeda, Brno, Czech Republic. Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) stimulates and regulates spermato- In pairs with reproductive failure we perform genetic counselling, cyto- genesis in males. FSH consists of alfa- ja beta-subunit, alfa-subunit genetic examination using karyotyping of lymphocytes from peripheral is common for all gonadotropins, whereas beta-subunit coded by the blood and DNA analysis of most frequent mutations in CFTR gene in FSHB gene (#MIM 136530; 11p13) is hormone-specific. Czech population. In men with severe oligospermia or azoospermia We identified a potential regulatory SNP (rs10835638; G/T), located we perform DNA analysis of AZF a, b, c regions on Yq. In men who within an evolutionarily conserved Progesterone Response element carry balanced chromosomal translocations we determinate sperm (Grigorova et al., 2008). Genotyping of the rs10835638 in a cohort aneuploidy and frequency of chromosomally unbalanced sperm using of young men (n=554; age 19.2 ± 1.7 years) revealed an association fluorescent in situ hybridisation. This examination helps to clarify the with serum FSH level in men (ANCOVA: p=0.001). Compared to the genetic prognosis and recommendations of appropriate methods of wild-type homozygotes (GG), the heterozygotes (GT) and the homozy- prenatal genetic diagnosis or preimplantation genetic diagnosis. gotes (TT) for the minor allele had on average 15.7% and 40% lower We describe repeated genetic counselling in the couple with reproduc- levels of FSH in their bloodstream, respectively. tive failure. We confirm the CFTR genotype: p.[F508del]+[ Q685PfsX4] In a consequent study we genotyped the rs10835638 in the cohort of in son from the pregnancy after IVF. infertile male patients (n=1,029, age 31.7 ± 0.2 years). A significant Within the preventive genetic testing of CFTR gene in this family we excess of TT homozygotes as well as GT heterozygotes was detected found chromosomal translocation in the mother‘s younger brother and among infertile men compared to the young male cohort (p<0.05). we recommneded examinations of sperm aneuploidy and cytogenetic Consistent with the previous data for a cohort of young men, we de- analysis in other relatives. tected an extremely strong association between the carrier status of Supported by grant NS 9842-4/2008. rs10835638 variants and serum FSH levels (ANCOVA: p<0.001). The median serum FSH values in the heterozygotes (GT) and the homozy- P04.17 A pericentric inversion of chromosome 5 in a infertile gotes (TT) for the minor allele were 20.6% and 48.5% lower compared man to wild-type homozygotes (GG). Moreover, among the patients diag- V. Radoi, D. Mierla; nosed with idiopathic infertility, TT-carriers had significantly smaller Life Memmorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. combined testes volume (ANCOVA p<0.05). Infertility affects an ~ 15 % of couples and male factor infertility is ~ Rs10835638 (FSHB -211 G/T) is the first identified polymorphism, 50% of cases. which determines male serum FSH level and affects male reproduc- A 34 years old men with oligozoospermia attending assisted reproduc- tive potential. tion program referred to our clinic for genetic testing and counseling. Cytogenetic analysis was performed according to standard methods P04.20 Gene expression of YBX2 and the interacting genes (GTG banding, with a minimum of 400 bands) on cultured cells ob- suggests a common pathogenic network involved in male tained from the patient peripheral blood and the result showed an ab- infertility normal karyotype 46,XY,inv (5)(pter-q13). F. Raicu, R. Cocoş, L. C. Boîţea; Chromosomal study is very important to predict probability of trans- University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. mission of affected gamete to offspring. Thus, in infertile males with Infertility affects about one in six couples and approximately half of abnormal karyotype, preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) aid in them have a male component. Despite the large amount of data col- increasing outcome of pregnancy. lected in the last years about the molecular genetic basis of male infer- tility still remains a large group of men with unexplained infertility. P04.18 Frequency of cystic fibrosis transmembrane Ybx2 gene has been identified as a central component in the regula- conductance regulator gene mutations in infertile men tion of spermatogenesis in mice but the potential role of its human P. Noveski1, T. Plaseski2, G. D. Efremov1, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1; orthologue YBX2 in human infertility is not well known. 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former To explore the possible association of the YBX2 gene with idiopathic Yugoslav Republic of, 2Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolic Disorders, Faculty male infertility in humans we developed quantitative real-time PCR of Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. assays for the YBX2 and its previously reported interacting genes: It is well established that 60-70% of patients with congenital bilateral PRM2, ODF1, TP1 and ACTL7B. aplasia of the vas deferens (CBVAD) have mutations in the cystic fibro- Testis biopsy, 50 mg specimen of testis tissue, was obtained from pa- sis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Increased tients with obstructive azoospermia (5 normospermic controls) and CFTR mutation frequency was also reported in males with non-ob- infertile male (10 with microdeletions in the long arm of the Y chromo- structive azoospermia and oligoasthenoteratozoospermia, emphasiz- some and 10 with idiopathic infertility) with the histopathology ranged ing the importance of screening for CF mutations not only in men with from Sertoli cell only (SCO) to severe oligozoospermia. CBVAD, but in all men with reduced sperm counts. The aim of this Real time RT-PCR assays (QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR kit) reveal study was to investigate the frequency of CFTR mutations in infertile large reductions in the mRNA levels of YBX2, PRM2, ODF1, TP1, AC- males from the Republic of Macedonia. A total of 169 infertile men (73 TL7B in all patients with spermatogenic defects except patients with with azoospermia, 46 with severe oligozoospermia, 23 with mild oligo- idiopathic oligozoospermia. Patients with idiopathic azoospermia had zoospermia and 27 with normozoospermia but unexplained couple in- similar pattern of gene expression as those carrying microdeletions fertility), as well as 136 fertile controls were included in the study. Five suggesting a possible similar mechanism leading to infertility. Further common CFTR mutations (DF508, G542X, N1303K, 621+1G->T and studies are necessary to explore the functional roles of this network of R117H) and IVS 8 polyT alleles were analyzed by a multiplex PCR and genes in germ cell development. single nucleotide extension reaction using a SNaPshot multiplex kit. Six DF508 and one G542X mutations were detected among infertile men, while two DF508 mutations were present among fertile controls. The frequency of CFTR heterozygosity was slightly higher in all groups of infertile males (5.5% in azoospermia, 2.2% in severe oligozoosper-Reproductive genetics 1 P04.21 Four SRY- Positive 46,XX male cases with and without Y abortions (SA) in the first trimester among smoking and non-smok- chromosome microdeletions ing pregnant women. Chorionic villi of 600 consecutive cases of 5-15 Z. Yilmaz1, O. Ozer1, M. R. Goren2, F. I. Sahin1; weeks gestation from women aged from 16 to 47 years (mean age: 30 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, years) were processed for molecular cytogenetic analysis. Chromo- Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Urology, some abnormalities were found in 303 out of 600 cases (50%). Chro- Ankara, Turkey. mosomal mosaicism due mitotic errors was detected in 157 from 600 XX males resemble individuals with Klinefelter’s syndrome (47,XXY) cases (26.2%). Among 463 non-smoking females chromosomal ab- in their general masculine appearance with azoospermia. They are in- normalities were detected in 237 cases (51.2%) including 122 mosaic fertile and have small atrophic testes. Ninety percent of these patients cases (26.3%). Among 137 smoking females (22.8%) chromosomal have Y chromosomal material including the SRY (testis-determining abnormalities were detected in 65 cases (47.4%) including 35 mosaic factor) gene. Y sequences are usually located on the distal tip of the cases (25.5%). This indicates that the incidence of regular and mo- short arm of the paternal X chromosome. We report four 46, XX cases saic chromosomal abnormalities was similar among SA exposed and referred to our department for azoospermia and primer infertility. unexposed to smoking. However, the level of stochastic (spontane- Cytogenetic, molecular cytogenetic and multiplex PCR for Y chro- ous/background) aneuploidy or chromosome instability index (propor- mosome microdeletion analysis were performed on peripheral blood tion of cells with aneuploidy involving other chromosomes than those samples. STR analysis for X chromosome was made in one case who of the main chromosome abnormality per chromosome) was signifi- had two derivative X chromosomes. cantly increased in SA exposed to smoking (1.4-2.1%) as compared to Chromosome analysis showed a 46, XX karyotype and translocation unexposed ones (0.3-1.2%). We conclude that smoking has negative of SRY from chromosome Y to chromosome X was identified by fluo- impact on fetal physiology through increasing mitotic chromosome in- rescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in all cases. One of the cases stability manifesting as spontaneous aneuploidy. Supported by Philip had two distinct derivative X chromosomes containing Y chromosome Morris USA Inc. fragments and Y chromosome microdeletion was not detected. Other cases had Y chromosome microdeletions of the studied STR regions. P04.24 mitochondrial tRNA threonine and proline mutations in We concluded that the cytogenetic analysis should be performed in in- repeated pregnancy loss fertile men with azoospermia and detection of SRY is important for the S. Seyedhassani1,2, M. Houshmand2, S. Kalantar1, A. Aflatoonian1, G. clinical diagnosis of XX males. Although, azoospermia in these cases Modabber2; is explained by the absence of long arm material including the candi- 1Research and Clinical Center for Infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, date gene family for spermatogenesis, presence of different sizes of 2National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic long arm of Y chromosome could explain clinical discrepancies. Republic of Iran. Introduction: Mitochondrial transfer RNAs (tRNA) genes are essential P04.22 Association of mannose-binding lectin genetic variations components of protein biosynthesis. These genes are hotspots for with genital tract infections and tubal factor infertility mutations. These mutations are associated with a wide spectrum of T. Laisk1, M. Peters1, M. Saare1, K. Haller-Kikkatalo1,2, H. Karro1, A. Salumets1,3; human disease. Many genetic factors are known in assessment of re- 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, peated pregnancy loss (RPL). Because of the role of mitochondria and 2Department of Immunology, Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, its maternal inheritance, analysis of tRNA Thr and tRNA Pro in women University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Competence Centre on Reproductive with RPL are good candidate for more genetic evaluation. Medicine and Biology, Tartu, Estonia. Material and Methods: The nucleotide variations of threonine and pro- Upper genital tract infections can inflict ineligible immune response line were investigated in 96 women with idiopathic repeated pregnancy and cause Fallopian tube damage and concomitant female infertility. loss. The related mitochondrial area was amplified using a polymerase However, the exact role of host genetic variation in the development chain reaction (PCR). The PCR products were demonstrated by 2% of tubal factor infertility is still not fully established. We selected five agarose gel electrophoresis, and all the positive samples were purified genetic variations in mannose-binding lectin gene (MBL2) involved and verified by an automated DNA sequencing method. in immune response modulation and assessed their association with Results: The sequence analysis revealed 4 mutations in tRNA Thr . tubal factor infertility by comparing genotype frequencies among 164 There were A15907G (2.08%), A15924G (3.12%), G15928A (10.42%) women with tubal factor infertility and 400 control individuals. In our as the most common mutations and G15930A (3.12%) as a novel mu- study MBL2 low-producing genotypes were related to increased inci- tation. The result of tRNApro sequencing showed the T15972C muta- dence of pathogens associated with genital infections (OR=6.40 95% tion in 1 woman (1.04%) as a novel mutation too. CI 1.99-20.34). In addition, hyper-producing MBL2 genotype HYA/HYA Discussion: These tRNAs mutations can alter their steady state level and low-producing MBL2 genotypes were associated with susceptibil- and affect the structure of tRNAs. It results in protein synthesis defects ity to tubal factor infertility (OR=2.12 95% CI 1.19-3.79 and OR=2.34 and, in turn, mitochondrial dysfunction. The mutations of these genes 95% CI 1.17-4.69, respectively), whereas high-producing MBL2 geno- may be of help in the assessment of RPL. Further study of an expand- type HYA/LYA had a protective effect (OR=0.28, 95% CI 0.11-0.75). ed series of these tRNA mutants will be recommended to describe Our data suggest MBL2 polymorphisms play a role in receptiveness to their etiologic role in idiopathic RPL. pathogens causing genital infections and contribute to susceptibility to tubal factor infertility. P04.25 H1 methylation in müllerian aplasia. M. Sandbacka1, S. Bruce1,2, I. Fransson2, M. Halttunen3, K. Aittomäki1, J. P04.23 maternal smoking during pregnancy induces mitotic Kere1,2, H. Laivuori4; chromosome instability in fetal tissues 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, and Folkhälsan S. G. Vorsanova1,2, I. Y. Iourov2,1, O. S. Kurinnaia1,2, A. D. Kolotii1,2, I. Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, A. Demidova1,2, E. A. Kirillova3, A. K. Beresheva1,2, V. S. Kravets1, V. V. Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden, 3Department of Obstetrics and Monakhov1,2, E. A. Saprina2,4, I. V. Soloviev2, Y. B. Yurov2,1; Gynecology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland, 4Department of 1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, Medical Genetics, and Women‘s Health Research Program, University of Russian Federation, 2National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Helsinki, Finland. Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Woman‘s Health Center, Moscow, Russian Müllerian aplasia (MA) is a congenital abnormality of the female genital Federation, 4Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, tract presenting as absence of functional uterus and upper two-thirds Russian Federation. of vagina. Apart from three MA patients with signs of androgen excess Smoking is known to be related to DNA damage, chromosome/ge- and a mutation in WNT4, the cause is unknown. nome rearrangements, and aneuploidy and is associated with cancer Hypomethylation of the H19 imprinted control region (ICR), on 11p15.5, and pregnancy complications. However, effects of maternal smoking has previously been suggested to be associated with genital and skel- during pregnancy on either somatic genome or mitotic chromosome etal malformations. In addition, two Finnish patients with Silver-Russell instability in human embryos have not been ever evaluated. Here, growth restriction syndrome (SRS) and MA show extreme hypometh- using interphase multiprobe FISH and DNA chromosome-enumera- ylation (<9%) of the H19 region. Thus we hypothesized that non-syn- tion probes we have analyzed the rate of aneuploidy in spontaneous dromic MA could also be associated with aberrant methylation of H19.Reproductive genetics 10 We have performed restriction site-specific methylation analyses by sis hinted for PCR amplification failure. In 1/14 embryos, results were quantitative Real-Time PCR of the H19 ICR region in blood-derived compatible with allele drop out (ADO). In 6/14 embryos the most prob- DNA samples from104 Finnish MA patients, 19 healthy relatives and able explanation was maternal cell contamination. 20 healthy female controls. No significant differences in mean methyl- Conclusion: FISH reanalysis confirmed the PCR results in the ma- ation values were observed between patients (48%, SD 8,7), relatives jority of embryos suspected as aneuploid. We therefore suggest not (46%, SD 4,7), and controls (50%, SD 10,8). transferring such embryos. Conflicting PCR results may be explained The results indicate that hypomethylation of H19 is not associated with by high rate mosaicism, resulting from post-meiotic errors. However, the MA phenotype in our patients. We cannot exclude, however, the incompatibility could also be attributed to contamination, amplification contribution of other epigenetic changes in the development of MA. failure or ADO which may be reduced by the use of additional polymor- Our ongoing genome-wide methylation studies in MA patients using phic markers. Illumina´s HumanMethylation27 Bead Array will spread further light on the general methylation status in patients with MA. P04.28 Preimplantation genetic diagnosis - 4 years‘ experience at the University medical centre Ljubljana P04.26 screening for NLRP7 mutations in tunisian women with K. Writzl1, N. Teran1, A. Veble1, J. Kmecl2, B. Peterlin1, G. PGD3; sporadic hydatidiform moles: report of two novel mutations 1UMC Ljubljana, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of Medical H. Landolsi1, M. T. Yacoubi1, C. Rittore2, L. Philibert2, M. Gribaa3, A. Saad3, S. Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2UMC Ljubljana, Department of Obstetrics Hmissa1, I. Touitou2; and Gynecology, Reproductive Unit, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3UMC Ljubljana, 1Laboratoire d’anatomie et de cytologie pathologiques, CHU F. Hached, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Sousse, Tunisia, 2CHU Montpellier, Unité médicale des maladies Background: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) offers early in- autoinflammatoires, Hôpital A de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 3Laboratoire vestigation of embryos in couples with a high risk for offspring affected de Cytogénétique, de Génétique Moléculaire et de Biologie de la Reproduction by a genetic disease. We report indications and results associated with Humaines, CHU F. Hached, Sousse, Tunisia. the PGD program conducted at Gynecology clinic Ljubljana from June Hydatidiform mole (HM) is an aberrant human pregnancy character- 2004 to December 2008. ized by hydropic degeneration of placental villi without embryo; it is Methods: Retrospective analysis. Sixty cycles were performed in 34 commonly non recurrent. Familial recurrent HM is an extremely rare couples enrolled in the PGD program. Embryos were biopsied on the autosomal recessive condition associated with homozygous mutations third day and the genetic analysis was performed using FISH and PCR in human NLRP7 gene on maternal locus. method. Embryo transfers were carried out on the fifth day. Our aim in the present study was to look if either this mutation exists in Results: The main indication was chromosomal abnormalities (67%), Tunisian women with sporadic HM. followed by recurrent miscarriages (16%), autosomal dominant and Material and methods: recessive diseases (9%), and X-linked diseases (6%). Sixty cycles Molecular analyses were conducted on genomic DNA extracted from were performed and 48 embryo transfer procedures. There were 17 the peripheral white blood cells of 38 Tunisian patients with sporadic biochemical and 15 clinical pregnancies resulting in clinical pregnancy HM. All samples were screened by direct DNA sequencing of all exons rate 25% per cycle and 31,25% per embryo transfer. A total of eleven of NLRP7 gene. A high resolution melting (HRM) analysis or sequenc- unaffected children were born. ing was performed on testing controls. Conclusions: PGD is technically a very challenging procedure. Supe- Results: rior knowledge and communication between geneticists and reproduc- Two novel missense mutations in a heterozygous state were found, tive medicine scientists is mandatory for successful PGD procedures. c.544 G>A (p.Val182Met) in one patient and c.1480G>A (p.Asp494Thr) PGD has gained a place among the choices offered at Gynecology in two patients. These two variants of mutations were lacking in 66 clinic Ljubljana to couples at risk of transmission of genetic disease. unrelated controls. Two other mutations, a heterozygous state as, c.1532A>G (p.Lys511Arg) and c.2156 C>T (p.Ala719Val), already re- P04.29 the paternal effect of chromosome translocation carrier ported, were also documented in 2 patients. in the embryos meiotic segregation. Conclusion : B. Lledo1, J. A. Ortiz1, R. Morales1, A. Rodriguez-Arnedo2, J. Ten2, J. Llácer2, In our knowledge, this is the first reported study of NLRP7 mutation R. Bernabeu2; in patients with sporadic HM. As homozygous MLRP7 mutations are 1IB BIOTECH, Alicante, Spain, 2Instituto Bernabeu, Alicante, Spain. thought to be associated with a failure status as the occurrence of Introduction: Understanding the meiotic segregation mechanism of recurrent HM, or conception loss; heterozygous type could be a risk translocation is important is a crucial step for an estimation of the risk factor for non recurrent mole. of either pregnancy loss or birth defects. The objective of this work is to estimate the meiotic segregation rates in preimplantation embryos P04.27 FisH reanalysis of embryos suspected as aneuploid by from PGD cycles of female and male reciprocal translocation carriers. PGD for monogenic disorders Material And Methods: Fourteen couples with reciprocal translocations T. Frumkin1, Y. Yaron2, V. Gold1, N. Mey-Raz1, A. Amit1, D. Ben-Yosef1, M. carried out 20 PGD-FISH cycles from January 2006 through July 2009. Malcov1; PGD was performed on 118 day 3 embryos using FISH with specific 1Racine IVF Unit, Department of Ob/Gyn, Lis Maternity Hospital, Sourasky probes for each translocation. The meiotic segregation modes were Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, Genetic estimated and the effect of the paternal origin of translocated carrier. Institute , Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel. Results: Overall, 2:2 segregation was observed in 78 embryos (66.1%), Introduction: In PGD for monogenic disorders, 5%-10% of the embryos 3:1 in 28 (23.7%), and 4:0 and chaotic patterns in 12 (10.2%). The are suspected of being chromosomally imbalanced. That may be the segregation most frequently was alternate. According to the gender result of true aneuploidy or represent artifacts of single cell PCR. of translocation carriers, the frequencies of adjacent-1 and adjacent-2 Aim: To estimate the rate of true aneuploidy by FISH reanalysis of were significantly lower in embryos from female than male PGD-cy- PGD embryos, suspected of having chromosomal abnormalities, as cles. For male translocations, alternate was the most frequent mode. assessed by single cell PCR. The 3:1 was the most frequent in female translocations carriers. Methods: PGD for monogenic disorders is performed by multiplex Conclusions: We describe the segregation modes in male and female nested PCR for the causative mutation(s) and haplotype analysis. We translocation carriers by FISH on preimplantation embryos. The pro- have reanalyzed 35 PGD embryos suspected of being aneuploid, by duction of unbalanced gametes was very different between the sexes. spreading the entire embryo on day 5 and FISH hybridizing with 2-5 These data may be explained by differences in the frequency and lo- probes. Aneuploidy and mosaicism rates were evaluated. calization of crossing-over. Analysis of the meiotic behaviour of chro- Results: FISH results confirmed chromosomal aberrations in 21/35 mosomes and the differences between the meiotic products of female embryos (60%). Of these, 2 were trisomic, 7 monosomic, and 12 pre- and male for a chromosomal rearrangement could provide clues as to sented a mosaic aneuploid pattern. The remaining 14 embryos (40%) the respective roles of the mechanism in meiosis. were chromosomally balanced. 5/14 were considered as true mono- somy in a single cell (i.e. mosaicism). 2/14 embryos, analyzed for an X-linked condition, were suspected of being 45, X, but FISH reanaly-Reproductive genetics 11 P04.30** the genetics of Premature Ovarian Failure (1,2 %) were found to have 22s+ heteromorphism. Familial investiga- T. Corre1, S. Carrabino1, C. Sala1, F. Viganò1, C. Masciullo1, M. Cocca1, M. tion made for one case showed a maternal transmission of the vari- Traglia1, G. Pistis1, P. D’Adamo2, S. Ulivi2, P. Gasparini2, D. Toniolo1; ant. Sperm fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was applied in 1San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, Department the second men, who had two children, secondary infertility related of Laboratory Medicine, Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS-Burlo to astheno-teratozoospermia and 3 early pregnancy losses after ICSI Garofolo, Trieste, Italy. treatment. FISH analysis revealed an increased rate of sperm aneu- Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is a complex disorder characterized ploidy which can explain negative impact on ICSI outcome. by menopause before the age of 40 years. Its occurrence is about 1 % At genetic counselling, the couple has been informed about the place in the Caucasian population. A genetic basis for the disease has been of preimplantation genetic screening to improve ICSI success. demonstrated by the prevalence of familial cases but to date only a We conclude that heterochromatin polymorphism in infertile males few of the genetic determinants for POF were identified. The aim of our and couples with recurrent pregnancy loss seems to be more than study is to combine several genetic approaches in order to discover an incidental finding, and must not be considered as a normal vari- different genetic risk factors for POF. ant. Polymorphic heterochromatin may have deleterious effects on the Using POF case/control cohorts and a candidate gene approach we genetic constitution of spermatozoa but more studies are needed to confirmed the role of the DIAPH2 X-linked gene, and excluded the make clear an eventual relation ship. INHA gene as a determinant of POF. We also showed that the DIAPH2 gene is one of the main determinants of cytoskeleton rearrangements P04.33 Functional evidence implicating FOXL2 in non associated with FSH stimulation of granulosa cells suggesting that al- syndromic premature ovarian failure and in the regulation of the teration in cytoskeleton may be responsible for POF. Deep-sequencing transcription factor OsR2 study of POF patients is ongoing to identify DIAPH2 variants impli- B. Lakhal1, H. Elghezal1, R. Veitia2, P. Laissue3, M. Fellous3, A. Saad1; cated in the disease. 1Farhat Hached university teaching hospital - Sousse – Tunisia., Sousse, From the study of the isolated populations in Italy, Val Borbera and Tunisia, 2Université Paris-Diderot/Paris 7 and Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS- Friuli-Venezia-Giulia in Northern Italy, and Carlantino in Southern It- UMR 7592, France, 3INSERM U567, Institut Cochin, Paris, France;, France. aly we identified 52 POF patients among 887 women in menopause. FOXL2 encodes a forkhead transcription factor whose mutations are Whole-genome genotyping and association analysis showed promis- responsible for the blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syn- ing preliminary results. Replicas in the Italian case/control cohorts are drome (BPES), involving craniofacial/palpebral abnormalities often as- currently ongoing in order to further validate these findings. sociated with premature ovarian failure (POF). We describe a FOXL2 variant (p.Gly187Asp) in a case of POF with- P04.31 Polymorphisms in the thrombophilia genes are out BPES. The subcellular localisation of FOXL2-G187D was normal associated with severe preeclampsia (EPH - gestosis). but its transactivation capacity tested on two reporter promoters, one I. Zainullin1,2, A. Zainullina1, E. Khusnutdinova1; of which should be relevant to the ovary, was significantly lower than 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian that of normal FOXL2. However, FOXL2-G187D was able to activate Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical strongly a reporter construct driven by the promoter of Osr2 (odd- University, Ufa, Russian Federation. skipped related 2 transcription factor), which we have suggested to be Recently, it has been proposed that abnormalities in coagulation and a crucial target of FOXL2 in the craniofacial region. This is compatible fibrinolysis contribute to the development of preeclampsia by increas- with the absence of BPES in our patient. ing the thrombotic tendency. This hypothesis was tested in women Our data provide evidence in favour of the implication of FOXL2 vari- who have had preeclampsia (EPH - gestosis) compared with matched ants in non-syndromic POF and confirm the regulatory interaction be- controls. Polymorphisms in the thrombophilia genes (PAI-1 4G/5G pro- tween FOXL2 and OSR2 whose perturbation might contribute to the moter polymorphism, MTHFR C677T polymorphism, FV G1691A poly- palpebral abnormalities observed in BPES patients. morphism, FII G20210A polymorphism, eNOS VNTR polymorphism in 4 intron, TPA Alu repeat I/D polymorphism in 8 intron) were deter- P04.34 Role of mitochondrial mutations in premature ovarian mined in women with severe preeclampsia (N=198) and women with failure uncomplicated pregnancy (N=206) in the populations from Bashkorto- A. Sharma1, M. Kumar1, K. Kumar1, A. Kriplani2, A. C. Ammini3, R. Dada1; stan (Russia). Allelic and genotypic frequencies of FII polymorphism 1Lab for Molecular Reproduction & Genetics, All India Institute of Medical (p>0,05) and TPA polymorphism (p>0,05) did not differ between both Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, groups of pregnant women. The PAI-1*4G allele (OR=1,35), eNOS*4a/ All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 3Department of *4b genotype (OR=1,82), FV*G/*A genotype (OR=2,93) and FV*A al- Endocrinology & Metabolism, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, lele (OR=3,22), MTHFR*T/*T genotype (OR=6,06) and MTHFR*T India. allele (OR=2,40) were associated with increased risk of severe pre- Premature Ovarian failure (POF) is defined as the cessation of ovarian eclampsia. Based on these results, we recommend the incorporation function under the age of 40 years and is characterized by amenorrhea, of these four analyses in individuals with severe preeclampsia. These hypoestrogenism and elevated serum gonadotrophin concentration patients may benefit from the application of low molecular weight hep- (FSH). It is a heterogeneous disorder with a multicausal pathogenesis arin as early as possible in the pregnancy in order to prevent uteropla- such as chromosomal, genetic, enzymatic, iatrogenic or infectious ab- cental microthromboses. errations. But in idiopathic POF, involvement of unknown mechanisms may affect the rate of oocyte apoptosis. Studies have shown that oxi- P04.32 Possible relation between 22s+ heteromorphism and dative stress (reactive oxygen species) affects the quality of gametes. recurrent pregnancy loss Mitochondrial mutations in different complexes of electron transport T. Rebai1, R. Louati1, M. Cherif2, D. Sallemi3, N. B. Abdelmoula1; chain have been reported to disrupt the electron flow which lead to 1Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Genetics private sector, Sfax, Tunisia, formation of more superoxide ions or increased level of ROS. This 3Gynecology private sector, Sfax, Tunisia. study was aimed to analyze the mitochondrial genome of idiopathic Polymorphic variations of heterochromatin (heteromorphisms) on chro- POF patients. 30 POF diagnosed patients were enrolled in this study. mosomes 13-15, 21-22 are described as heritable chromosomal varia- Blood samples were collected from the patients and controls. DNA was tions without a proven impact on phenotype. Relationship between extracted using phenol chloroform method. 24% variations were found chromosome heteromorphisms and infertility is yet undefined but there to be non-synonymous and 76% were synonymous. It was found that are many reports of a high frequency of these variations among infer- 48% variations were in complex I, 8% in complex III, 24% in complex tile men and couples with recurrent pregnancy losses. IV and 20% were in complex V of electron transport chain. We found The aim of this study was to report the 22s+ heterochromatic variants most of the non-synonymous mitochondrial variations in complex I among cytogenetic abnormalities recorded in couples with recurrent (48%) of the respiratory which is the largest of enzyme complex. The pregnancy loss and to discuss the possible mechanism of how 22s+ data suggest that the mitochondrial mutations (high ROS stress) may might affect spermatogenesis through a documented observation. be the cause of follicular atresia which may lead to premature ovarian Cytogenetic analysis was undertaken in 334 couples who were ex- failure. The role of OS in female fertility and sub-fertility is an area plored because 2 or more pregnancy losses. Only two male patients deserving of continued research.Reproductive genetics 12 P04.35 ATPase mutation and oxidative stress is associated Tab.1 List of ovary rCGG-RBPs identified by MALDI-TOF with premature ovarian failure (POF) Protein N° peptides S. Venkatesh1, M. Kumar1, A. Sharma1, A. Kriplani1, A. Ammini1, P. Talwar2, R. Splicing factor proline/glutamine rich gi4826998 5 Dada1; hnRNP A2/B1 gi4504447 11 1All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2ART, Research & hnRNP F gi4826760 7 Referal Hospital, New Delhi, India. hnRNP H gi1710632 14 Purpose: Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a heterogeneous, multi- hnRNP M gi14141152 14 factorial disorder. ATPase6 synthase helps to maintain the mt genome hnRNP G gi542850 2 integrity and mutations in ATPase 6 are associated with overproduc- hnRNP A1 gi133254 9 tion of ROS in variety of diseases. Methods: This pilot study included hnRNP H3/2H9 gi23503095 17 20 POF patients and 20 age matched healthy female controls. ROS levels in blood plasma were measured by chemiluminescence assay. Unknown belonging to α-crystallin-type 3 mtDNA ATPase6 gene was amplified and sequenced from the blood heat shock proteins gi2852648 lymphocyte DNA. HSP27 gi11036357 4 Results: 55% (11/20) patients showed nucleotide changes in ATPase6, Chaperonin HSP60 gi31542947 3 as compared to 10% (2/20) in controls and all of these mutations were Nuclear cap binding protein gi158513766 4 either G>A or C>T (mostly non-synonymous) except one case showing H1 histone family gi28839618 6 silent polymorphism A>G at nucleotide position 8679. Overall median Histone H2A.2 gi31979 7 RLU/min was found to be significantly (p=0.0037) higher in POF pa- tients 50480 (120, 132966) as compared to controls 340 (120, 5094). P04.37 Use of Y choromosome specific repeat sequencing for Nucleotide changes were found to be positively correlated with ROS sexing by single cell PcRand real time PcR levels in the POF patients. Moreover, 50 % of the POF patients had E. Arbabi Aval1, F. Mahjoubi1, M. Taheri2; high ROS levels, 20 % had medium and 30 % had normal values as 1National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic compared to controls. Republic of Iran, 2Zahedan University of medical sciences, Zahedan, Islamic Conclusions: OS associated with ATPase6 gene instability may be the Republic of Iran. underlying aetiology in idiopathic POF. Screening other mt genes with Embryo sexing is one of the important ways for sex selection of off- large number of samples may help in better understanding the role of spring. This is a potential method to considrerably improve animal OS in POF. Thus the results from this preliminary pilot study highlight breeding and the efficiency of dairy and meat production. A novel that mt gene (ATPase6) nucleotide alteration and supraphysiological repeated sequence specific to male cattle has been identified and ROS levels may play a causal role in accelerated atresia of germ cells named S4 . S4 is a 1/5 Kb repeating unit contains various internal and lead to premature ovarian failure. repeated sequence. S4 is localized on long arm of the Y chromosome in the region near to ZFY genes. Aim: The objective of this study was P04.36 Dissecting the role of FmR1 mRNA in the molecular FX- to established a simple, sensitive, reliable, reproducible and cost ef- POi pathogenesis fective PCR based technique for sexing.. Materials and Methods: Ge- N. Locatelli1, V. Padovano2, M. Cavaletto3, C. Caslini1, C. Santoro4, G. Pietrini2, nomic DNA was extracted from the whole blood samples of 4 male and E. Ginelli1, A. Marozzi1; female cattles. PCR and real time PCR were performed using specific 1Dept. of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences-University of Milan, Milan, primers for this region. Result: By this PCR based methods we could Italy, 2Dept. of Pharmacology-University of Milan and Institute of Neuroscience- differentiate between female and male genomic DNA. Real time PCR CNR, Milan, Italy, 3DiSAV- University of Piemonte Orientale, Alessandria, Italy, employed in order to have a quantitative method. Discussion:With this 4Dept. of Medical Sciences - University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy. technique we can distinct male from female using as much as 1pg CGG repeats expansion (55-200 units, permutation range) in the DNA . Using this method we could determined the sex of an embryo (4 5’UTR of FMR1 gene (Xq27.3) is associated with Fragile-X Tremor/ blastomers) . The Real Time PCR method optimized here was able to Ataxia Syndrome and Primary Ovarian Insufficiency (POI). FMR1 pre- be used for the quantitative detection of Y chromosomes in semen. mutation represents the most significant single gene variant associ- ated with POI, however no studies are available to evaluate its patho- P04.38 Genetic aspects of recurrent miscarriage genic effect in the ovary context. N. Almadani; As for FXTAS, an RNA-mediated toxic gain of function could be hy- genetic department, reproductive medicine research center, Royan institute, pothesized for FX-POI. By R-EMSA and RNA-pull down assays, ACECR., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 76ribo(r)CGG probe showed a higher binding affinity for several pro- Recurrent Pregnancy loss is the miscarriage of two or three Consecu- teins derived from human granulose ovary (named rCGG-Repeat tive Pregnancies in The first of early second trimester. Although approxi- Binding Proteins, rCGG-RBPs) compared to the 28rCGG one. rCGG- mately 10-15% of all recognized Pregnancies result in miscarriage, less RBPs were identified by means of MALDI-TOF analysis (Tab. 1). The than 5% of women will experience two consecutive miscarriage, and interaction of endogenous FMR1 mRNA for identified rCGG-RBPs was only 1% experience three or more. In recurrent Pregnancy loss, Cur- tested in vivo by RNA immunoprecipitation; FMR1 premutated mRNA rent Practice often Fails To make a diagnosis, as the fetal causes of solely co-immunoprecipitate with HSP27 and CRYAB heat shock pro- Pregnancy loss are usually ignored and only the maternal factors are teins, suggesting that in vivo premutated FMR1 mRNA differs from assessed. The maternal causes are well known and include: Uterine the wild type in making RNA-protein complexes. The role of HSP27 factors, Infections, Autoimmune syndromes, endocrine abnormality, all and CRYAB in the FX-POI pathogenesis was further investigated in immune factors and possibly hereditary thrombophilia.The fetal Causes an ovary cell model. of embryo loss include structural malformations that are incompatible An “heat shock like” response in human ovary granulosa cells express- with life, and Chromosomal aberrations. Unfortunately, no explanation ing expanded CGG mRNA was observed, strongly suggesting the toxic is found in 50% to 70% of Couples with recurrent pregnancy loss. About role of premutated mRNA itself in the ovaries. 5% of Couple with recurrent Pregnancy losses have A Chromosomal ab- This work is supported by Telethon grant GGP009126 normality and translocation is the most common inherited Chromosomal abnormality. Although a parent who carries a translocation is frequently normal, their embryo may receive too much or too little genetic mate- rial. Couples with translocation or other specific chromosome defects may benefit from pre-implantation genetic diagnosis. But in fact 60% or more of early miscarriages may be caused by a random chromosomal abnormality, usually a missing or duplicated chromosome. These mal- formations are usually associated with a normal karyotype. Single gene disorders associated with recurrent miscarriage are myotonic dystrophy. The factor V leiden mutation is the most common genetic predisposition to thrombosis but its carrier frequency in the white population is 3-4%.Reproductive genetics 1 P04.39 Genetic markers Related to Ovarial Response in P04.41 +1040 c/t polymorphism in coding region of thrombin- Bulgarian Women With Reproductive Problems activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor gene contributes to the risk of S. Bichev1, L. Dimitrova2, A. Savov1, D. Tacheva2, T. Todorov3, A. Todorova3, I. recurrent fetal loss Vladimirov2; I. B. Pruner1, V. Djordjevic1, P. Miljic2, M. Kovac3, N. Antonijevic4, L. Rakicevic1, 1Medical University Sofia, Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National D. Radojkovic1; Genetics Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Center for Reproductive Medicine and 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, In Vitro Fertilization, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Genetic Medico- diagnostic Laboratory 2Institute of Hematology, University Clinical Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria. 3Blood Transfusion Institute of Serbia, Haemostasis department, Belgrade, Background: recent studies showed a relation of the genetic polymor- Serbia, 4Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Clinical Centre of Serbia, phisms in ESR1 and ESR2 genes together with FSH receptor variants Belgrade, Serbia. with ovarian response during in vitro fertilization. However a popula- Recurrent fetal loss is common health problem affecting up to 5% of tion and ethnic specificity has been described. The previous studies women in reproductive age. It has been shown that plasma thrombin- showed a relation of genetics variants in the studied genes with poly- activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) concentrations increase dur- cystic ovarian syndrome in the Bulgarian population. ing pregnancy and return to baseline levels soon after delivery. The Aim: to investigate the ESR1 Pvu II and Xba II polymorphisms, ESR2 +1040C/T single nucleotide polymorphism in coding region of TAFI Rsa I polymorphism and Thr307Ala and Asn680Ser polymorphisms in gene is associated with TAFI blood levels. Bulgarian women with reproductive problems. Our objective was to determine whether there is an association be- Materials and methods: 72 women with reproductive problems and 58 tween +1040C/T polymorphism in TAFI gene and recurrent pregnancy healthy controls were investigated. loss. Results: The women with reproductive problems were categorized in Study was carried out in a group of 95 women (45 controls and 50 three groups: with poor, boundary and normal ovarian response. We women with recurrent fetal loss). The +1040C/T polymorphism was found unexpected low heterozygosity for ESR2 Rsa I polymorphism detected by polymerase chain reaction, followed by digestion with spe- both in the group of patients and controls. For ESR1 XbaI polymor- cific restriction enzyme. phism A/A (-/-) variant demonstrated association with poor ovarian re- Increased frequency of +1040T/T genotype was observed in a study sponse in the groups investigated (p= 0.040). Association has been group, but without statistically significant difference. Carriers of T/T found for the Thr307Ala polymorphism in the FSH receptor where the genotype have increased risk of fetal loss by 4-fold, compared to car- A/A (+/+) variant is significantly most common in the groups with better riers of C/C (95%CI 0.768-20.819; P=0.1) and 4.22-fold compared to ovarian response (p = 0.037). carriers of C/T genotype (95%CI 0.788-22.616; P=0.09). C allele is Conclusions: Larger studies are needed to establish the role of the associated with reduced risk of recurrent pregnancy loss compared to ERS1 and FSHR polymorphisms for the ovarian response during as- T allele, (OR 0.67; 95%CI 0.355-1.249; P=0.2). sisted reproduction before they can be used for establishing of an indi- In conclusion, we observed increased frequency of +1040T/T geno- vidual protocol during stimulation. type in a patient group, suggesting that this genotype could be poten- tial risk factor for reccurent fetal loss. Further investigation should be P04.40 sperm deoxyribonucleic acid fragmentation is increased carried out in order to establish definite role of this polymorphism in in failed fertilization and associated with a high risk of etiology of recurrent miscarriages. pregnancy loss after invitro fertilization and intracytoplasmic sperm injection. P04.42 substantive sex difference in fetal germinal trisomy 21 s. jallad, s. brahem, m. mehdi, h. ghezel, A. saad; mosaicism laboratory of cytogenetic molecular biology and human biology of reproduction, E. Iwarsson1, J. Jonasson2, T. Johannes3, M. A. Hultén4; soussa, Tunisia. 1Dept of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Introduction: Numerous recent studies involve DNA damages asso- Sweden, 2Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping ciated with poor fertilization rates, early embryo development defect, University, Linköping, Sweden, 3MetaSystems GmbH, Altlussheim, Germany, and poor quality of conceptus following assisted reproductive tech- 4Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom. nologies (ART). We have previously proposed that the underlying cause for the well- The aim of this study is to correlate any detected DNA damage with known parental sex difference in risk of having a child with Down fertilization rates and with spontaneous abortion rates after IVF and syndrome is different degrees of fetal gonadal trisomy 21 (T21) mo- ICSI. saicism. To test this hypothesis we have performed fluorescence in Material and methods: Semen samples (n = 25) were collected from situ hybridisation (FISH) using two chromosome 21-specific probes on men who had a repeated unsuccessful ART cycle or recurrent miscar- fetal ovaries and testes, obtained from termination of pregnancy for a riage. For each sample a Pure Sperm density gradient centrifugation non-medical/social reason. was performed and the percentage of recovered sperm with DNA frag- In the initial study we documented an average of 0.54% ovarian T21 mentation was determined with the use of terminal desoxynucleotidyl mosaicism (range 0.20-0.88%; SD 0.23) in fetal ovaries from eight transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate biotin nick-end label- cases (Hultén et al. Molecular Cytogenetics 2008, 1:21). We have now ing (TUNEL) assay. followed up this observation by recording copy number of chromosome Results: Our patients showed a significantly higher percentage of 21 in testes from four male fetuses. Analysing at least 2000 cells per sperm DNA fragmentation (21.04 ± 9.87) which can explain in the part case in a total population of nearly 12.000 we could not detect a single the failed of ART cycle. T21 cell nucleus (Hultén et al. Molecular Cytogenetics 2010, 3:4). This The sperm DNA fragmentation is increased in failed implantation group sex difference is highly statistically significant (p<0.001). 23.9% versus 20.75% in the group with failure of fecundation after IVF We conclude that the aberrant recombination patterns seen by fam- and ICSI. ily linkage most likely is related to meiotic pairing and recombination The DNA fragmentation index was significantly higher in the failed abnormalities in T21 oocytes. Thus, the risk in having a child with T21 implantation group after in vitro fertilization30% versus 17.83% after DS is likely to be dependent on degree of gonadal T21 mosaicism, intracytoplasmic sperm injection. with the maternal age effect due to an accumulation of any such T21 The patient who showed recurrent miscarriage approved a high level oocytes during development from fetal life until menopause (Hultén et of DNA fragmentation 19.45 %. al. Reproduction 2010, 139:1). Conclusion: Sperm DNA damage is associated with decreased IVF outcomes; it may contribute to failure of pronuclear formation and em- P04.43 A new accuracy method to undocumented embryo bryo development. It is also associated with a significant increased risk diagnosis of pregnancy loss after IVF and ICSI. A. Rodríguez-Arnedo1, J. Ten1, J. Guerrero-Villena1, B. Lledó2, J. Ortiz2, M. Carracedo1, J. Llácer1, R. Bernabeu1; 1Instituto Bernabeu, Alicante, Spain, 2Instituto Bernabeu Biotech, Alicante, Prenatal and perinatal genetics 1 Spain. P05 Prenatal and perinatal genetics Introduction: The FISH technology has been applied to evaluate the chromosomal pattern of unipronuclear and undocumented embryos. P05.01 Prenatally diagnosed two distinct cell lines of 18p However, this technique presents limitations; and we can not differ be- terminal deletion/monosomy X possibly due to chimerism tween paternal and maternal contributions. F. Duzcan1, O. Cetin1, E. Tepeli2, A. Ayaz1; The aim of this study was to ascertain the real ploidy of these embryos 1Pamukkale University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, with an accuracy method, using DNA technology in order to increase Denizli, Turkey, 2Pamukkale University, School of Medicine, Department of the success rate per IVF-cycle or to prognose a next treatment in case Medical Biology, Denizli, Turkey. of no pregnancy. Monosomy 18p is a rare disorder with an incidence of about 1:50000 Materials And Methods: Since March 2009, 23 undocumented em- live born infants. Here we report a patient with mosaic18p deletion bryos were collected in our in vitro fertilization Unit. DNA from parents accompanying to monosomy X. The case was the second live birth of were obtained and isolated from bucal swab. Embryos were placed a non-consanguineous couple. She was prenatally diagnosed by fetal in alcaline lysis buffer. After neutralization, cells lysates were used di- blood sampling and amniocentesis at the 26th gestational week due rectly for multiple displacement amplification (MDA). to ultrasonographic findings of cleft lip/palate and polyhydramnios and In order to identify the paternal-maternal origin of the DNA from the the karyotype was 46,XX,del(18)(p11.2)/45,X. The parents decided to undocumented embryos, the AmpFlSTR® Identifiler® PCR Amplifica- continue pregnancy and she was born at 36th gestational week. Her tion Kit was used. birth weight, length and head circumference was 2080 g (3-10p), 41 Results: The 23 undocumented embryos obtained had DNA amplifi- cm (<3p) and 32 cm (25-50p) respectively. Physical findings included cation and positive paternity test. Eighteen embryos (78.27%) were asymmetric cranium, micro/retrognathia, low set ears, bilateral cleft disomic embryos (2n) with paternal and maternal contributions, and 4 lip, short neck and diastasis recti. Postnatal confirmation of karyotype of them (17.39 %) were 2n embryos with only maternal contribution. from peripheral blood revealed 46,XX,del(18)(p11.2) in all 20 meta- Only one embryo (4.34%) was haploid (n) or uniparental disomic with phases and subsequent FISH analysis for X aneuploidy resulted in maternal origin. 4.4% monosomy X mosaicism in 1255 cells showing the dominant cell Conclusion: We are able to discriminate between disomic embryos line was 46,XX,del(18)(p11.2). Subtelomeric FISH analysis supported and partenogenic embryos with a common paternitiy test. Moreover, the 18 p deletion. Cranial MRI, abdominal ultrasonography, ophthal- we could apply a comercial genotyping kit after MDA amplification. mologic, oto-rhino-laryngologic and orthopedic examinations were Thanks to this, a great number of couples could benefit from these normal. Pelvic ultrasonography for internal genitalia was planned but findings. To our knowledge, this is the first report evaluating undocu- has not resulted yet. The mild clinical findings of our case except for mented embryos by means of a paternity test. cleft lip due to 18p deletion can be explained by the compensation of the 18p deletion by the presence of the cell line with 45,X karyotype P04.44 Y;21 translocation in infertile male patient with 45,X and two distinct cell lines in this individual may be due to chimerism karyotype resulted from an embryonic fusion of twin pregnancy. M. Eser1, L. Şatıroğlu-Tufan1, T. Kalkan1, G. Çetin1, Ö. Öztürk2, G. Bağcı3, C. Semerci1; P05.02 The verification of ADAM12 effectivity in first and second 1Pamukkale University School of Medicine Department of Medical trimester aneuploidy screening Genetics, Denizli, Turkey, 2Maslak Acıbadem Hospital Department of M. Macek1, D. Springer2, H. Klučková1, R. Vlk3, I. Špálová3, P. Calda4, A. Obstetric&Gynecology, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Pamukkale University School of Lashkevich1, D. Chudoba1, D. Novotná1, L. Dvořáková1, H. Kuželová1, Š. Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Denizli, Turkey. Vilímová1, M. Simandlová1, M. Turnovec1, M. Hladíková1, H. Cuckle5; 30-year-old male patient has referred to our clinic for unraveling the 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics of Second Medical School of underlying aetiology of the azoospermia. He had no unusual medical Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, history. At physical examination, obesity, short neck and gynecomasty 2Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory Medicine of First Medical were noted. All studied hormon levels were normal but estradiol was School of Charles University and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech 2-fold higher than upper limit. Having azoospermia in the spermiogram Republic, 3Department of Obstetric and Adult and Paediatric Gynaecology of scrotal USG was in normal range. Cytogenetical analysis and FISH Second Medical School of Charles University and University Hospital Motol, studies were performed subsequently and 45,X,add(21)(p10) and Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics of First 45,X,add(21)(p10).ish der(Y;21) (q12;p10) were found, respectively. Medical School of Charles University and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, On C-banding, dicentric staining of translocated chromosome was was Czech Republic, 5Obstetrics and Gynecology, Columbia University School of observed. Molecular genetics studies using multiplex PCR revealed Medicine, New York, NY, United States. the presence of Y chromosome sequences at SRY, AZFa, AZFb, AZFc The aim of the study was to verify ADAM12 aneuploidy screening ef- regions. fectivity in the Ist and IInd trimester. The ADAM12 levels in frozen maternal sera from controls and from J04.1 The social homogamy in Morocco fetal aneuploidies were measured by DELFIA ADAM12 Resarch Kit L. SBII, H. HAMI, D. BENALI, A. SOULAYMANI, A. MOKHTARI; (Perkin Elmer). For each day, in average 30 samples were used for university Ibn Tofail fac Scienes Kenitra Maroc, Kenitra, Morocco. control percentile (P) calculations. The 85 Ist and IInd trimester sera The study of the social homogamy, which is the tendency to marry from pregnancies with autosomal and heterochromosomal aneuploi- from the same social group, derives its importance from the fact that dies were tested to ascertain the decrease under P25. the choice of the spouse has consequences not only on the couple, but The P50 levels within week 9-19 rise from 254 to 1337 ng/ml with aver- also on the descendants. Indeed, the choice of the spouse influences age daily increase of 15 ng/ml. The screening effectivity between Ist the genetic structure of the family and guides the evolution of the he- and IInd trimester was not different. Screening positivity (<P25) within reditary patrimony of the population. week 9-19 was for T21 48 % (15/35), T18 57 % (4/7), T13 100 % (4/4), To assess the level of social homogamy in the region of Souss-Massa- triploidy 89 % (8/9), 47,XXX 88 % (7/8) and for 45,X 12,5 % (1/8). The Darâa in southern Morocco and to determine to what extent this rule of highest level of decrease from P25 was for T21 within range P10-25 marriage marks the population of this region, a prospective study was (22 %). In other trisomies the highest positivity was within P1-P5: T18 carried out through a survey of 194 families sampled randomly in the 29 %, T13 50 %, triploidy 78 % and 47,XXX 62,5 %. ADAM12 did not region between October 2005 and April 2007. detect 47,XXY, 47,XYY and mosaic form of 45,X. The results showed that the choice of a spouse having the same level Our results indicate inverse relationship between the degree of phe- of study is a frequent phenomenon. In fact, nearly one in three women notypic alteration in autosomal aneuploidies and decrease of ADAM12 has the same study level as her husband. Moreover, according to the under P25. It is remarkable, that the same is true for 47,XXX with mild survey results, more than one third of the female population marry men phenotypic affection. Our results suggests, that ADAM12 is important who resemble their fathers. Indeed, more than half the girls whose marker for severe autosomal aneuploidies, including triploidy and fathers are farmers marry farmers. Furthermore, individuals show a 47,XXX in Ist and IInd trimester. greater tendency to marry a spouse of the same social status. Supported by MZ0FNM2005 and NR9448-3/2007.Prenatal and perinatal genetics 1 P05.03 molecular study of alpha-globin non-deletional mutation P05.05 Aneuploidy Detection by QF-PCR of STR Markers on the in iran. Applied Biosystems 3500xL Genetic Analyzer Z. Shahab-Movahed1, A. Eskafi1, S. Mousavi1, M. Sharafi-Farzad1, M. Sharafi- V. Bansal1, C. J. Davidson1, A. Pradhan1, A. Felton1, N. Duxbury2, S. Higgins2; Farzad1, S. Kianfar1, F. Safi1, S. Ghahremani1, M. Vahidi1, M. Masoudifar1, F. 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Gen-Probe Life Sciences, Mollazadeh1, M. S. Fallah1,2, S. Zeinali1,3; Abingdon, United Kingdom. 1Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Kawsar Genomics & Biotech Analysis of short tandem repeat (STR) markers using quantitative fluo- Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic rescence PCR (QF-PCR) is a common strategy employed in clinical Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, research laboratories for the detection of chromosomal aneuploidy. 3Dep’t of Mol. Med., Biotech Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Laboratories that routinely perform these types of analyses demand Islamic Republic of Iran. high-throughput, efficient, and highly automated solutions. Here we Introduction: Alpha thalassemia is the most common hemoglobin dis- demonstrate performance equivalent between the Applied Biosystems order in Iran. Most of known alpha thalassemia mutations include dele- 3130 Genetic Analyzer and the new Applied Biosystems 3500 Ge- tion of one or both alpha globin genes. However a considerable num- netic Analyzer for the detection of aneuploidy using the Elucigene™ ber of cases remain unknown after investigation for common deletion. QST*Rplus) assay. A large panel of cell-line and clinical samples were In this case, investigating for point mutation in alpha-globin genes may assessed to demonstrate the accuracy, ease of use, and throughput help to detect the mutation and make a correct decision for performing capabilities of the 3500 system for aneuploidy analysis of chromo- prenatal diagnosis (PND) and differentiating unknown alpha thalas- somes 13, 18, 21, and sex chromosomes X and Y. The advanced ca- semia from normal HbA2 beta thalassemia. pabilities of the 3500 Series Genetic Analyzers, including new thermal Material and Methods: Couples referred to Kawsar Genomics Center control systems, enhanced optical detection, and new consumables for PND investigated for common deletional alpha-globin mutations designs, provide an easy-to-use platform for the detection and analy- (including -α3.7kb, -α4.2kb,--20.5 and --Med) using multiplex Gap- sis of multiplexed QF-PCR assays. The optional normalization reagent PCR. Those showed no deletion, further investigated for point muta- (GeneScan™ 600 LIZ® Size Standard v2.0) and compatible run mod- tion using direct sequencing using ABI-3130 genetic-analyzer. ule enable increased precision and accuracy in relative peak area or Result: From 281 suspected cases with low MCV, low MCH and nor- height determinations, which are particularly important for aneuploidy mal HbA2 and no common deletion which investigated using direct analysis. In addition, flexible GeneMapper® Software v4.1 was used to sequencing, 148 (52.67%) showed at least one point mutation either create reports and calculations to give user-configured tools for report- in α1-globin or α2-globin. More than 20 different mutation was detect- ing multiplexed QF-PCR assay results. For Research Use Only. Not ed. Most common mutation was Poly A2 (AATAAA>AATGAA) in 38 intended for any animal or human therapeutic or diagnostic use. cases (25.67%) followed by Poly A1(AATAAA>AATAAG) in 26 cases (17.57%) and CD142-CS (TAA>AAA) in 14 cases (9.46%). 121 cases P05.06 the values of echographic markers versus biochemical (81.76%) showed a mutation in α2-globin gene. markers for antenatal screening of chromosomal aneuploidies Conclusion: This study, showed using sequencing for further investiga- N. Andreescu1, S. Farcas1, C. Popa1, M. Stoian1, M. Muntean2, E. Bernad2, V. tion of α1-globin or α2-globin genes can help us to increase accuracy Belengeanu1; of prenatal diagnosis for alpha thalassemia. Because of much higher 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, frequency of mutation in α2-globin, it seems it is much cost effective to Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of sequence α2-globin at first. Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. At present, antenatal screening of the chromosomal aneuploidies in- P05.04 the study of Alpha-thalassemia prevalence in referral cludes evaluation of the echographic markers, biochemical markers patients to Pasteur institute of iran during september 2003 to and cytogenetic analysis using chorionic villus samples, amniotic fluid september 2009 and blood from umbilical cord. Even if it is not a rule, frequently the A. Amirian, M. Jafarinejad, A. Kordafshari, F. Bayat, M. Mosayebzadeh, M. prenatal cytogenetic analysis is request based on an abnormal ultra- Taghavi, S. Fathiazar, A. Valaei, Z. Azadi, M. Mohammadi, M. Karimipour, F. sound, biochemical markers or advanced maternal age. We present Maryemi, S. Zeinali; the cytogenetic analysis results of 210 cases of amniocentesis. These Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cases were evaluated as pregnancy at risk for chromosomal aneuploi- Background and Objective: Alpha thalassemia is the most common dies based on echography, biochemical markers or advanced mater- inherited disorder of hemoglobin synthesis in the world. Unlike beta- nal age and referred for cytogenetic analysis to our Genetics Labora- thalassemia, in which nondeletional mutations predominate over 95% tory. 63 cases were investigated for echographic signs suggestive for of recognized alpha-thalassemia involves deletion one or both alpha- chromosomal aneuploidies: increased nuchal translucency, shortened globin genes. The aim of this study is the determine the prevalence of femur length, echogenic bowel, choroid plexus cysts and echogenic alpha-thalassemia frequency in provinces of Iran during September intracardiac foci. In this lot we found one case of trisomy 18 and one 2003 to September 2009. case of monosomy X. Out of 82 cases with abnormal biochemical Materials and Methods: The assay was tested on a total 446 blood and screening, one case was diagnosed with trisomy 21. Out of 57 patients prenatal DNA samples. The samples were referred to genetic labo- with abnormal combined ultrasound and biochemical screening, one ratory of Pasteur Institute of Iran from health centers. After obtaining case was diagnosed as having trisomy 21 and one case with trisomy informed consent, blood sample was taken at initial visit and genomic 13. The advanced maternal age was the reason for cytogenetic evalu- DNA was extracted according to salting out method. Multiplex Gap- ation in 8 cases and one case of trisomy 21 was found. The ultrasoud PCR method and direct DNA sequencing were performed to detect al- investigation was more reliable than bioghemical screening for the de- pha-globin gene deletions and nondeletional mutations, respectively. tection of chromosomal aneuplodies. The risk was increased when two Results: Out of 446 samples153 were carrier for deletions , 40 had markers were abnormal (utrasound and biochemical) and we would nondeletional mutations and 253 were unknown. Among prevalence recommend karyotyping under these circumstances, the cytogenetic deletions the -α3.7 (77.1%%) is the most common alpha-thalassemia in analysis remains the gold standard for the prenatal diagnosis. Iran. The less common deletion was -α20.5(6.5%) , other deletions were, --MED (8.5%) and -α4.2 (7.9%). Nondeletional mutations were detected by P05.07 clinical application of whole genome array-cGH direct DNA sequencing includes: PolyA(47.5%) , -5nt(20%) , Cd59(Hb during prenatal diagnosis: study of 25 selected pregnancies Adana)(12.5%) , Hb C.S, Cd19, Hb Q(15%), Cd21(Hb Fontainebleau) with apparently balanced structural aberrations or ultrasound , 11bp deletion(5%). findings Discussion: )MCV and MCH were <65-70 and <18-22, respectively. P. Evangelidou1, C. Sismani1, M. Ioannides1, C. Christodoulou1, G. Koumbaris1, The study showed that in severe deletions (e.g. -α20.5 , --MED V. Velisariou2, P. C. Patsalis1; However , in mild deletional and nondeletional mutations (rest 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Dept of Cytogenetics and mutations),MCV and MCH were Genomics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Mitera Maternity, Gynecolocical, and Children’s >70-73 and >21-24, respectively. Hospital, Athens, Greece. The aim of this project was the application and evaluation of micro- array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) in selected Prenatal and perinatal genetics 1 cases during prenatal diagnosis. the real-time PCR method using GAPDH gene sequence. Array-CGH was applied in 25 fetal samples with normal karyotypes Results: We found significant elevations of cfDNA in plasma during and abnormal ultrasound findings, or with apparently balanced struc- hemodialysis sessions with the highest values at the end of HD and tural aberrations with or without ultrasound findings. 1Mb BAC array- with the rapid decline to normal levels within 30 minutes after HD in CGH (Cytochip, BlueGnome Ltd.) was applied and abnormal results most patients. In comparison with healthy controls, the cfDNA levels were confirmed with either Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH), in patients were significantly higher in the interdialytic interval. In ex- Multiplex Ligation-dependant Probe Amplification (MLPA) or Real- pression profiles, we found individual differences among our patients Time PCR. and we discuss these differences with regard to the kinetics of cfDNA Three out of 25 samples (12%) referred for prenatal array-CGH carry during HD session. copy number alterations. The rate of clinically significant alterations is Supported by the grant of the Ministry of Education of the Czech Re- 2/25 (8%) and the rate of findings with uncertain clinical significance is public MSM 0021620807 1/25 (4%). Two benign CNVs were also found in 1/25 cases (4%). The outcome of this study indicates the ability of array CGH to identify P05.10 Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis for beta-thalassemia chromosomal abnormalities which cannot be detected during routine using pyrophosphorolysis-activated polymerization (PAP cytogenetic analysis, therefore increasing the overall detection rate of M. Phylipsen1, E. E. Treffers1, D. T. S. L. Jansen1, S. Yamsri2, P. C. Giordano1, prenatal diagnosis. C. L. Harteveld1; 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Khon Kaen University, P05.08 Axenfeld-Rieger and Dandy-Walker malformations in two Khon Kaen, Thailand. fetuses with 6p subtelomeric deletion Currently, prenatal diagnosis for hemoglobinopathies relies mainly on S. Khung-Savatovsky1, A. Aboura2, R. Guilherme3, A. Tabet4, S. Serrero4, A. invasive testing, using chorionic villi sampling (CVS) or amniocentesis Verloes5, A. Delezoide3, F. Guimiot3; (AC). The risk of miscarriage following CVS or AC is 1-2%. The dis- 1Department of Developmental Biology, Robert Debre hospital, AP-HP, Paris, covery of fetal cells and free fetal DNA (ffDNA) circulating in maternal France, 2Department of genetics, Robert Debre hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, plasma has led to the possibility of reliable non-invasive prenatal di- 3Department of Developmental Biology, Robert Debre hospital, AP-HP and agnosis (NIPD). Recently, a highly specific PCR technique was intro- University Paris 7 Diderot, Paris, France, 4Department of Genetics, Robert duced, pyrophosphorolysis-activated polymerization (PAP), which has Debre hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 5Department of Genetics, Robert Debre been shown successful in fetal sex determination using ffDNA. hospital, AP-HP and University Paris 7 Diderot, Paris, France. Our aim is to develop a PAP-assay for NIPD of beta-thalassemia. In- We report two unrelated fetuses with Axenfeld-Rieger malformation, stead of designing PAP primers for each of the ~180 putative beta- and a 6p subtelomeric deletion. The first fetus had an unbalanced thalassemia causing mutations and optimizing the conditions for each translocation inherited from its father : 46XY, der (6) t(6;8)(p23;p23) of them, we have chosen to select informative SNPs (i.e. with a fre- resulting in a partial monosomy 6p23-pter and a partial trisomy 8p23- quency of >10% determined in a pilot study in 6 subsets of different pter. The second fetus had a de novo distal deletion of the short arm populations) in linkage to the normal or mutant allele derived from fa- of chromosome 6 : 46XX, del (6p24.3-p25.3). Both had an Axenfeld- ther and absent in mother. Rieger malformation (abnormal cleavage of the anterior chamber of We have designed PAP-primers for 15 informative SNPs within the the eye and hypoplasia of the iris) and Dandy-Walker malformation beta-globin gene cluster. After optimizing reaction conditions using (enlarged cisterna magna and hypoplasia or agenesis of cerebellar genomic DNA, mixtures of wildtype and homozygous SNP samples vermis). Other anomalies included, for the first fetus, hypertelorism, were prepared to test the sensitivity of the assay. Until now, 16 PAP ventricular septal defect, genital hypoplasia, diaphragmatic hernia reactions for 10 SNPs are optimized and able to detect <3% target and cochlear hypoplasia and for the second fetus, hypoplasia of the DNA in a background of >97% wildtype DNA. We have developed a left heart and cleft lip and palate. Breakpoints were mapped by BAC- primer for both wildtype and SNP variant for 6 SNPs. The next step is array CGH (Perkin). In both cases, the forkhead transcription factor to retrospectively test plasma samples of pregnant women referred gene FOXC1 was deleted. The Axenfeld-Rieger malformation is a well to our department for prenatal diagnosis using CVS or AC. The first known developmental anomaly of the eye, which occurs in as an iso- results will be presented. lated malformation or in a multiple congenital anomalies (MCA) con- text and related to mutations or deletions of a chromosomic region in P05.11 BTK (Bruton tyrosine Kinase) mutations in X-linked 4q25 (PITX2 gene) or in 6p25 (FOXC1 gene). FOXC1 has recently agammaglobulinaemia (XLA) been shown to play a role in cerebellar development and the Dandy- S. Fernandes1, E. Faria2, L. Marques3, A. Bonito Vitor4, M. Martins5, A. B. Walker malformation (Aldinger et al., 2009). Sousa6, A. Barros1; To our knowledge, this is the first fetal report of Axenfeld-Rieger mal- 1Genetics - Faculty of Medicine of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Primary formation including a cochlear anomaly. Immunodeficiency Ambulatory, Paediatric Hospital of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Commission of Infection Control, Maria Pia Hospital, Porto, Portugal, P05.09 comparison of plasma cell-free DNA levels with gene 4Paediatric Department, S. João Hospital, Porto, Portugal, 5Genetics - Trás-os- expression profiles of peripheral blood cell during hemodialysis Montes e Alto Douro Hospital, Vila Real, Portugal, 6Genetics - Lisbon Hospital, A. Horinek1, M. Korabecna2, K. Rocinova1, A. Panczak1, V. Tesar1, D. Cerny1, Lisbon, Portugal. M. Mokrejsova3,1; Introduction: X-linked agammaglobulinaemia (XLA; MIM 300300) is 1Charles University, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty an immunodeficiency characterized by failure to produce mature B of Medicine in Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 3Charles University, 3rd Faculty lymphocyte and is associated with a failure of Ig heavy chain rear- of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. rangement. Affected males suffer from recurrent bacterial infections Objective: The levels of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) have been considered starting in early childhood. The immunoglobin levels are reduced and as potential marker of biocompatibility of membranes used for hemodi- B lymphocytes number is less than 1% of the normal level. The XLA is alysis. Some studies demonstrated the elevations of cfDNA concentra- caused by BTK gene mutations. BTK gene is mapped on Xq21.3-q22 tions during the hemodialysis. Therefore we focused on comparison of and codes for a cytoplasmatic tyrosine kinase. plasma cfDNA levels and expression of selected genes in peripheral Material and methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from 23 patients blood cells during the procedure. We selected genes with known func- with XLA clinical diagnosis and 30 relatives. The 19 exons of BTK gene tions in the process of inflammation and apoptosis. were amplified by PCR (Vorechovsky et al., 1995). The amplicons Methods: The concentrations of plasma cell-free DNA of 30 patients were sequenced and analysed in an ABI Prism 310. undergoing hemodialysis (HD) have been measured and compared Results: 17 different mutations were detected, 6 missense (C154F, with the cfDNA levels of 30 healthy volunteers (before HD, after the R288W, R288Q, V535F, D579V and R641H), 4 nonsense (K53X, first, second and third hour of HD and 30 min after HD). The mRNA R255X, Y361X and E441X) and 7 new mutations: 2 missense (K18R expression of selected genes (pathways regulated by BAX, BCL-2 and and T354I), 1 nonsense (E7X), 2 frameshift (H285X286, Y345X402), by TNF receptor, caspase and interleukine families) were measured 1 splicing mutation (IVS7+1G>T) and 1 large undefined deletion (immediately before and after HD) using real-time PCR technology. (g.IVS15_IVS18del). So far, carrier status was detected in 18 out of 30 Plasma cfDNA was isolated and DNA quantification was carried out by relatives. 2 PND were performed and the familiar mutation was absent Prenatal and perinatal genetics 17 in both male foetuses. pregnant women. Conclusions: The X-linked agammaglobulinaemia was confirmed by Results: Heterozygozity in the SNPs varied from 14 % to 55 % the identification of one BTK mutation in all cases studied. All families with probability of the proper genotypes (Mother‘s SNP differs from studied presented private mutations. Carriers could be identified and fetal)detection from 12 % to 28 %. Sensitivity of minority genotype it is now possible to offer PGD and PND to these families. An early detection depends on the fluorescent background of non-specifically diagnosis of XLA will allow a correct clinical surveillance and an im- bound probe. The most sensitive TaqMan SNP systems were able to munoglobulin replacement therapy. capture 1% artificial genotype mixture. Our analysis confirmed direct dependence of fetal DNA amount with the week of gestation. P05.12 Non-invasive prenatal diagnostic mLPA test detects fetal Y-chromosome using cell-free fetal DNA extracted from maternal P05.14 TNFα genotypes and risk for cerebral palsy in preterm blood plasma early pregnancy and term infants S. G. M. Frints1,2, N. Kisters1, J. G. Nijhuis1,3, J. P. Offermans1,3, M. V. E. H. Kapitanovic Vidak1, S. Kapitanovic2; Macville1,2, J. Engelen1,2, G. de Wert1,4, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders1,2, J. P. M. 1Special Hospital for Children with Neurodevelopmental and Motor Difficulties, Geraedts5,2; Zagreb, Croatia, 2Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. 1Research Institute for Oncology and Developmental Biology, GROW, Faculty Background. Cerebral palsy is a nonprogressive motor disorder of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, caused by white matter damage in the developing brain. Activation of Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Prenatal Diagnosis & Therapy, the cytokine network by a variety of insults (infection and/or hypoxia- Maastricht University Medical Center+, azM, Maastricht, Netherlands, ischemia) and elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines can cause 3Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Maastricht University Medical white matter brain damage as well as the development of CP. Recent Center, azM, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Department of Health, Ethics and data suggest a significant role of TNFα in the pathophysiology of peri- Society, Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, natal brain injury. The aim of our study was to investigate the influence Maastricht, Netherlands, 5Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Faculty of TNFα promoter SNPs on susceptibility to CP in preterm and term of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, neonates. Netherlands. Methods. We analyzed 94 CP patients and control group of 118 un- Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or amniocentesis (AC) is used to related children with comparable gestational age and sex distribution. detect chromosomal abnormalities including trisomy 21. The major Real-time PCR SNP analysis of TNFα SNPs was performed using pre- disadvantage herewith is the procedure-related risk of abortion. Cur- developed TaqMan SNP genotyping assay reagents. rently, no cheap, non-invasive prenatal diagnostic test exists to detect Results. Statistically significant association between TNFα -1031 T/ chromosomal abnormalities. We aim at developing a targeted prena- C high expression genotypes (TC and CC) and risk of CP was ob- tal diagnostic screening test applicable in pregnancy using cell-free served (OR 2.1811 (1.2075-3.9396), p=0.0097). Statistically significant fetal DNA present in maternal blood plasma. In this study we used a association was also found between TNFα -1031C high expression “Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification” (MLPA) P95 kit in allele and risk of CP (OR 1.9909 (1.1831-3.3501), p=0.0095). Statis- order to detect chromosome 13, 18, 21, X and Y abnormalities. There- tically significant association between TNFα -1031 T/C high expres- fore, peripheral blood plasma samples were collected from A. Women sion genotypes (TC and CC) and risk of CP was observed in term undergoing pregnancy termination because of trisomy 13, 18 or 21 children (OR 4.7475 (1.5576-14.4696), p=0.0062) but not in preterm detected with CVS (n=4) or AC (n=10), B. Women undergoing prenatal infants. Statistically significant association was also found between screening at 12-14 weeks of gestation with low risk (n=4), C. Women TNFα -1031C high expression allele and risk of CP in term children undergoing AC because of age ≥ 36 years (n=3), and D. Non-pregnant (OR 3.0952 (1.2124-7.9020), p=0.0181).CONCLUSION. Our results control women who had 0,1,2 or 3 offspring (n=9). So far, all samples suggest a role of TNFα -1031 T/C gene polymorphism as modifying were tested with the MLPA P095 kit after specific amplification to de- factor for development of CP in term, but not in preterm infants. tect fetal Y-chromosomal sequences. The MLPA test results obtained were compared with the CVS, AC or pregnancy outcome and controls. P05.15 Difficulties of interpretation of a complex chromosomal All but one false negative sample did correlate with the non-invasive rearrangement in the prenatal period. MLPA test results, detecting the fetal Y-chromosome. Two out of three J. Puechberty1,2, A. Schneider1,2, C. Coubes1, M. Pérez1, M. Tournaire2, M. Y-MLPA-probe sets within the P095 kit were reliable. We conclude that Girard2, C. Pébrel-Richard3, A. Chaze1, N. Bigi1, P. Vago3, D. Geneviève1,4, P. further validation and quantification is needed to detect fetal Y chromo- Sarda1, G. Lefort1; some and/or fetal trisomy 21 in non-invasively obtained cell free fetal 1Département de Génétique Médicale et Chromosomique, Centre de Référence DNA. Maladies Rares Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs Sud-Languedoc Roussillon, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHRU, Université P05.13 cell free fetal nucleic acid sNP quantitative analysis for Montpellier 1, Faculté de Médecine, Montpellier, France, 2Plate-forme puces potential noninvasive prenatal diagnosis purposes. à ADN, Département de Génétique Médicale et Chromosomique, CHRU J. Bohmova1, R. Vodicka1, I. Dhaifalah1, R. Vrtel1, R. Kratochvilova1, M. Montpellier, Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France, 3Laboratoire de Prochazka1, M. Kvapilova1, E. Krejcirikova1, L. Dusek2, J. Santavy1; Cytogénétique, CHRU, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 4Unité Inserm U844, Institut 1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Montpellier, France. Republic, 2Institute of Biostatistics and Analyses, Brno, Czech Republic. Complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCR) are considered as rare Introduction: Genotyping based on the SNP analysis could be usefull events, but the frequency of their discovery increases with the con- tool for detection and quantification of cell free fetal (cff) DNA/RNA in tribution of molecular cytogenetic techniques. Here we report on the maternal plasma. For this purpose, is needed to choose genes ac- identification of apparently inherited balanced complex chromosomal cording to their specific expression in placenta and chromosomal lo- rearrangement during prenatal period. It was the 4th pregnancy from calization. Selected SNPs in particular genes should display high level healthy unrelated parents after 3 early miscarriages. First trimester of variability. Also, there is necessary to select more SNPs in several was uneventful but second trimester was marked by the discovery of genes to ensure the cffDNA/RNA detection. facial features during ultrasounds (right cleft of the lip and palate, flat Aims: Our aims include: optimization and calibration of SNPs in cffDNA fronto-nasal angle, hypertelorism). Fetal karyotype performed on am- obtained from blood plasma of pregnant women, SNP genotyping in niotic fluid culture (AF) evoked an apparently balanced CCR involving parents and fetuses followed by cffDNA SNP quantification of plasma the extremities of the long arms of chromosomes 2, 8 and 18. Pater- cffDNA in pregnant women in the first and second trimester. Project is nal karyotype was normal but the mother had CCR resembling those supported by IGA MZCR NS9624. found in the fetus. M-FISH on AF culture showed an unbalanced CCR Method: We designed 12 SNPs in silico in following genes: DSCR4, (distal 8q trisomy, distal 18q monosomy). However, maternal blood M- PLAC4, KRTAP26, PLAC1, PAPPA, PSG11. Particular genotypes FISH showed a more complex apparently balanced CCR with 4 break- were previously determined by sequencing of SNP regions in 30 ran- points leading to an insertion of 8q material on 2q, a translocation of dom samples of maternal DNA. Than, TaqMan RealTime PCR system 2q material on 8q and a translocation of 8q material on 18q. Based in chosen SNP regions were optimized and calibrated. SNP quantifica- on the maternal blood karyotype, we hypothesized a meiotic recombi- tion was made on cohort of 80 DNA samples isolated from plasma in nation event between the derivative chromosome 2 and the chromo-Prenatal and perinatal genetics 1 some 8 in the fetus. Microarray confirmed the CCR with chromosomal rphan) in 2 cases (11.76%). breakpoints (8q23.3 and 18q21.33) and estimation of the sizes of the These findings illustrate the complex decision-making process when 18q deletion and 8q duplication. This CCR found during a pregnancy coordinating the antenatal identification with the appropriate postnatal was prima facie an apparently balanced exchange between 3 chromo- evaluation and treatment for each pediatric patient. somes, but was the product of an unbalanced meiotic recombination from a maternal CCR. P05.18 Monitoring of Congenital Malformations and Efficacy of Prenatal Diagnostics in tomsk Region P05.16 Reverse-hybridization teststrips for the detection L. Minaycheva1, L. Nazarenko1,2, A. Kurovskii3, S. Fadyushina1, G. Filatova4; of common cYP21A2 mutations in dried blood spots from 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State newborns with elevated 17-OH progesterone University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Tomsk State University, Tomsk, S. Nemeth1, G. Kriegshäuser1, S. Baumgartner-Parzer2, F. Waldhauser3, S. Russian Federation, 4MLCPMU Municipal Hospital #3, Tomsk, Russian Riedl3, C. Oberkanins1; Federation. 1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Internal The results of monitoring of congenital malformations in Tomsk dur- Medicine III, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Medical University ing nine-year period since 1998-2007 and value of efficacy of prena- of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 3Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of tal diagnostics of some forms of congenital malformations has been Vienna, Vienna, Austria. analyzed. Frequency of prenatally detected and interrupted congenital Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) comprises a group of inborn er- malformations during period studied varied from 0,6 to 6,3 per thou- rors in the synthesis of adrenal corticoid hormones. More than 90% of sand, the malformations of central nervous system made basic con- cases arise from mutations in the CYP21A2 gene encoding steroid 21- tribution to this index. There was significant decrease in frequency of hydroxylase. CAH occurs in severe „classical“ forms (salt-wasting or some malformations during the period studied, with negative correla- simple-virilizing) or mild „nonclassical“ forms. The average incidence tion between year of observation and malformation frequency (trans- of classical CAH is about 1 in 15,000 births worldwide, and newborn position of the great vessels, r = -0,86; diaphragmatic hernia, r = -0,78; screening programs based on 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) lev- omphalocele, r = -0,61; birth defects of central nervous system, r = els have been introduced in various countries. Since neonatal 17-OHP -0,61; and Down syndrome, r = - 0,53). Dependence of reduction in screening has a considerable false positive recall rate, causing a sub- frequency of spina bifida and Down syndrome among newborns was stantial economical burden and emotional stress for parents, concur- determined from frequency of induced abortions of fetuses with these rent genetic testing for CYP21A2 defects to corroborate or exclude congenital malformations. Frequency of these forms of birth defects CAH diagnosis would be desireable. among newborns significantly decreased together with increasing of We have developed a reverse-hybridization assay for rapid and si- frequency of the same forms among induced abortions(r = -0,64). So, multaneous analysis of common CYP21A2 mutations from dried this dependence may testify for effective measures of prenatal diag- blood spots. The entire CYP21A2 gene is amplified in two overlap- nostics in decreasing of level of congenital malformations among new- ping fragments using PCR primers that will not co-amplify the highly borns. Apparently, improvement of preventive system of congenital homologous pseudogene. Biotinylated amplicons are hybridized under malformations may significantly decrease the frequency of birth de- exactly defined stringency to a teststrip presenting a parallel array of fects among newborns. allele-specific oligonucleotide probes for the following 11 mutations: P30L, IVS-2 A/C>G, 8 bp del (exon 3), I172N, I236N/V237E/M239K P05.19 Oxidative stress and sperm DNA Fragmentation- („cluster“), V281L, F306 insT, Q318X, R356W, P453S and R483P. Paternal role in recurrent spontaneous abortions. Specifically bound PCR products are detected using enzymatic colour M. B. Shamsi, S. Venkatesh, D. Deka, R. Dada; reaction. AIIMS, New Delhi, India. The new CAH StripAssay is currently being validated on DNA samples Introduction: Paternal genome integrity is important in initiation and of known CYP21A2 genotypes. Automated instrumentation and use sustenance of viable pregnancy in both natural and assisted concep- of a scanner-based software tool (StripAssay Evaluator) for recording tions. Nicks/breaks and/or nucleotide modification caused by unregu- and interpreting results may further contribute to making the StripAs- lated free radical concentration due to inefficient antioxidant machin- say a useful tool in CAH newborn screening programs. (oberkanins@ ery leads to sperm DNA damage. So antioxidant capacity assay and viennalab.co.at) sperm DNA integrity assessment are imperative in analysis of preg- nancy loss. P05.17 Role of genetic and iatrogenic factors in congenital Material and Methods: Male partners of 77 couples [Group A (n=41) hydronephrosis: clinical and therapeutic challenges in a spontaneous conceptions; Group B (n=36) assisted conceptions] ex- romanian clinical setting periencing recurrent pregnancy loss and 41 fertile controls were in- V. Dumitrascu1, A. Matusz2, C. Gug3, I. Cioata4; cluded in study. Total antioxidant capacity (TAC) of seminal plasma 1“Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Pharmacology was assessed by commercially available kits. Sperm DNA integrity Department, Timisoara, Romania, 2General Private Office, Timisoara, Romania, was quantified by single cell gel electrophoresis (comet assay). Mann- 3Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Medical Whittney test was applied for statistical significance. Genetics, Timisoara, Romania, 4“Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Results: Seminal TAC was reduced in patients (p=0.0017, p= 0.003 Pharmacy, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Timisoara, Romania. in group A and B respectively) as compared to controls.Higher level Congenital hydronephrosis is a serious disease occurring among new- of DNA damage (number of comet with increased tail length) were borns, represented by the dilatation of the renal calyces associated observed in both group of infertile men as compared to fertile controls with atrophic changes in the renal parenchyma resulting from obstruc- (p=0.005 and p=0.007 in group A and B respectively). tion of urinary flow, caused besides the intrinsic genetic factors by in Discussion: Seminal oxidative stress is a major cause of sperm DNA utero exposure to certain drugs. damage. DNA damage leads to recurrent spontaneous abortions, Our objective was to achieve a complete postnatal evaluation of pa- childhood cancers, genetic and epigenetic defects in offspring. Thus tients identified prenatally with congenital hydronephrosis in a Roma- oxidative stress assessment and DNA integrity analysis should be un- nian clinical setting. dertaken in all couples experiencing recurrent spontaneous abortions. In a two year longitudinal study, from January 2007 to December 2009, we prospectively enrolled and followed up 26 women whose fetuses P05.20 Prenatal diagnosis of Donohue syndrome were detected with hydronephrosis. Prenatal diagnosis of hydrone- (Leprechaunism) phrosis was achieved by echography; affected children were followed- M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, G. Pérez de Nanclares3, C. Velez1, M. Fenollar- up and evaluated after six month. Cortés1,4, M. Martinez-García1, I. Garín3, M. Martín-Frías5, R. Barrio5, C. Results: 9 women (34.61%) of the cases reported hydronephrosis in Ramos1; two (77.77%) and even three (22.22%) consecutive generations. In 17 1IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, cases of birth outcomes (65.38%), expectant mothers were exposed 3Molecular Genetics Department of the Txagorritxu Hospital, Vitoria, Spain, to different drugs in the first trimester of pregnancy: analgesic drugs 4Genetics Department of the Clínico San Carlos Hospital., Madrid, Spain, - 15 cases (88.24%) and respectively ntitussive agents (dextrometho-Prenatal and perinatal genetics 1 5Diabetes Unit of the Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, Madrid, Spain. P05.23 A familial t(15;22)(q13;q11.1), implications for prenatal Donohue syndrome (OMIM: 246200) is a severe congenital insulin-re- genetic testing sistance syndrome described in 1954 that leads to death, often in early A. Hegarty, J. Turner, G. Clarke, T. F. Morris, B. O’hIci, K. Meaney, A. Green, infancy. It is caused by mutations in the insulin receptor gene INSR D. R. Betts; (19p13.3-p13.2) and it is inherited as an autosomal recessive condi- National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland. tion. Prevalence is estimated to be 1 in 1 000 000 live births. Pregnancy in a familial balanced translocation carrier can pose a We present a prenatal diagnosis of Leprechaunism performed in Spain challenge to a genetics testing laboratory, particularly when the re- in a non-consanguineous couple with a previous affected son. This arrangement is G-band subtle and involves chromosome 15. We re- patient was born after a 41 week pregnancy and showed intrauterine port a t(15;22)(q13;q11.1) familial translocation that while easily dis- growth retardation detected from the sixth month. He died at 18 months tinguishable at the 600 band resolution could appear to be subtle at due to a respiratory failure. The mutations identified were p. R1026X lower resolution. The mother, a phenotypically normal carrier of the inherited from the mother and IVS19+5 g>a (p.D1176GfsX8) from the translocation, reported a family history of a Prader-Willi-like syndrome. father. Both predict null alleles and were not previously described. To help confirm the breakpoints of the translocation, FISH analyses Molecular diagnosis of the new gestation was made at 11+6 weeks using a range of commercially available probes was undertaken, these gestation in a sample of chorionic villus by automated sequencing of demonstrated that 15q breakpoint was distal to SNRPN, while the 22q exon 17 and intron 19. breakpoint was in the alpha-satellite region of 22q11. This therefore, The result was a female foetus with no mutation inherited, being the resulted in the derivative chromosome 15 containing both SNRPN and first prenatal diagnosis made in our population. the 22q11.2 region associated with Di George syndrome. At gestational week 11 a CVS biopsy was taken and sent to us for cytogenetic, MLPA P05.21 Prenatal diagnosis of an autosomal translocation with and UPD studies. Due to the prior FISH testing, cytogenetic analysis regular trisomy 21 could confidently define the foetal karyotype as 46,XY,+der(15)t(15;22 Y. Tunca1, M. S. Deveci2, H. Kaya1, A. Koc1, I. Alanbay3, M. Dede3; )(q13;q11.1),-22, thus resulting in partial trisomy of 15pter-15q13 and 1Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Dept of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, insignificant monosomy of 22pter-22q11.1. Both the MLPA and UPD 2Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Dept of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey, studies were consistent with this finding. These results illustrate the 3Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Dept of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, importance of prior planning for prenatal testing of an individual with Ankara, Turkey. a family history of a balanced chromosomal rearrangement and the The coincidence of trisomy 21 (regular Down syndrome) and a struc- identification of the appropriate tests and markers. tural rearrangement is very rare. Even, it is not reported as a prenatal diagnosis. In this report we present an autosomal translocation carrier P05.24 Non-invasive Bovine Fetus sex Determination Using fetus with trisomy 21: 47,XX,+21,t(3;8)(p21;q24). The coexistence of multiplex PcR Analysis of Fetal DNA in matrnal Plasma reciprocal translocation and trisomy may be seen in reciprocal trans- A. Davoudi1, A. Aleyasin2, a. salehi3, M. Mirtorabi4; location carrier families, de novo cases are extremely rare. The pre- 1University of tehran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetic Dept., sented case is diagnosed by amniocentesis which is done due to ab- National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, I.R. of normal fetal ultrasonographic findings and increased trisomy 21 risk at IRAN, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3University of Tehran, tehran, Islamic maternal serum screening. The postmortem pathologic examination Republic of Iran, 4Iran Animal Breeding Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of the fetus revealed novel findings associated with the breakpoints Background: In order to establish a reliable non-invasive method for 3p21 and 8q24. bovine fetal sex determination in routine setting the possibility of iden- tifying the fetal X and Y-chromosomes specific sequences has been P05.22 the effects of Paracetamol and Ketonal administration, evaluated in maternal plasma using conventional multiplex PCR analy- during embryogenesis, over the conception product sis. The aim of this study was to provide a rapid and reliable method for D. Iacob1, M. Boia1, R. E. Iacob2, A. Manea1, R. M. Pakai3, M. Puiu1; sexing bovine fetuses. Methods: Peripheral blood samples were taken 1”Victor Babeş” University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, from 38 pregnant heifer with gestational weeks of 12 to 38. DNA tem- 2SCJU - Pediatric Surgery, Arad, Romania, 3“Louis Ţurcanu” Children‘s plate was extracted by phenol-chloroform method from 350 μl mater- Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. nal plasma. Two primer pairs for bovine amelogenin gene (bAML) and Aims: To highlight the possible occurrence of congenital malformations BC1.2 were used to amplify fragments from X and Y chromosomes. following the administration of chemical substances during embryo- A multiplex PCR reaction has been optimized for amplification of 467 genesis, by conducting an experiment on animal model. bp and 341 bp producted from X and Y bAML gene respectively and a Material and method: The experiment took place during 15.05.2006 190 bp fragment from BC1.2 related to Y chromosome. Results: The and 30.06.2006 in the Laparoscopic and Microsurgery Center, UMF 467 bp fragment was detected in all 38 samples and 341 and 190 bp Timisoara, on a group of 20 pregnant female white mice. After weigh- fragments were detected only in 24 plasma samples that delivered a ing, in hypogastric region was given a dose depending on weight. male calf. The sensitivity and specificity of test was 100% with no false The procedure was repeated for each animal 3 days consecutively. negative and false positive results. Conclusions: The results showed At the end of pregnancy the born fetuses were examined. After birth, that phenol-chloroform method is a simple and sensational for isolation the intranatal exposed group was euthanized and macroscopic and fetal DNA in maternal plasma. The multiplex PCR is a available non- microscopic examination was made on liver and kidney, compared to invasive methods which is cost efficient and replicable and is easily for a control group. bovine fetal sexing. Results and discussion: Regarding the fertility of intranatal exposed animals, they had babies in a species characteristic number, which P05.25 Fetal RHD genotyping from maternal plasma: Lyonnaise were apparently normal. In terms of macroscopic examination of the study on 196 patients liver and kidneys, the presence of anomalies was not highlighted. Mi- E. Guinchard, E. Mayrand, D. Rigal; croscopic examination indicated a later suffering liver and kidney in an- EFS Rhône-Alpes site de Lyon-GHE, 69677 BRON Cedex, France. imals exposed to the intrauterine action of paracetamol and ketonal. RHD genotyping from maternal plasma allows to optimize the care Conclusions: Administration of paracetamol and ketonal during preg- of pregnant women anti-D allo-immunized and to target prevention nancy in mice did not influence the evolution of pregnancy. The re- through Ig anti-D currently recommended by the Collège National des sulted mice have had a normal morphological development compared Gynéco-obstétriciens Français during the second trimester of preg- with control group. Microscopic examination of liver and kidney indi- nancy. cated the presence of pathological changes. Exons 4, 5 and 10 of RHD gene are analyzed by real-time PCR using the TaqMan technology (Minon et al 2005). DNA is extracted manually with the QIAamp kit (Qiagen ®) and then amplified on the real-time PCR instrument Lightcycler 480 (Roche ®). After validation of witnesses (including SRY and CCR5 genes), we analyze the correlation of cycle Threshold obtained for the 3 exons and compare them to the phenotype achieved at birth.Prenatal and perinatal genetics 10 The RHD gene is present in fetuses where at least 1 of the 2 Ct ob- P05.28 A new case of microdeletion of the FOX gene cluster on tained for each exon is positive. Any discrepancy between the exons 16q24.1 in a preterm male infant: confirmation of the severity of implies, after verification of results, analysis of gene RHD on maternal pulmonary distress buffy coat. Finally, each negative result found for the first time will be F. Zufferey1, D. Martinet1, M. C. Osterheld2, F. Niel-Butschi1, E. Giannoni3, J. S. confirmed on another sample a few weeks later. A female fetus without Beckmann1,4, C. Shaw-Smith5, P. Stankiewicz6, C. Langston7, F. Fellmann1; RHD gene is characterized by the absence of amplification of the 3 1Service of Medical Genetics, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2University exons and the SRY gene control. Institute of Pathology, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Dept of Pediatrics, For 195 tests, the results show a perfect correlation with the phenotype CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Dept of Medical Genetics, Unil, Lausanne, of RH1 newborn regardless of gender. Switzerland, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Hinxton, Cambridge, United On1 sample, we have demonstrated the presence of an RHD pseu- Kingdom, 6Dept of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, dogene. Houston, TX, United States, 7Dept of Pathology, Texas Children’s Hospital, The use of a gene control, hyper-methylated in the fetus, currently un- Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. der study in our lab, would get rid of the SRY gene control, depending Genomic and genic deletions of the FOX gene cluster on 16p24.1 have on the sex of the fetus. been recently described in the context of alveolar capillary dysplasia, a rare lethal developmental anomaly of the lung, and other malfor- P05.26 Quantitative analysis of foetal DNA in maternal mations resembling VACTERL association. We report the case of a circulation in anaemic pregnant women preterm male infant, born at 26th weeks of gestation and deceased 16 M. Zamanpoor, T. Karuppiah, M. Yazid, R. Rosli; hours after birth. During pregnancy, a cardiac malformation and bilat- Universiti Putra Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. eral hydronephrosis were observed at 19th AW. Karyotype analysis was Advances in molecular genetics have allowed the investigation of the normal and a 22q11 microdeletion was excluded by FISH analysis. A foetal genome through analysis of circulating foetal DNA in maternal Cesarean section was performed at 26th AW due to fetal distress. Fol- plasma. Cell-free foetal DNA (fDNA) in maternal plasma or serum is lowing delivery he presented a refractory hypoxemia. An autopsy was widely investigated as a source of foetal genetic materials. Increased performed. Growth parameters were appropriate for gestational age. amount of circulating fDNA in maternal plasma has been found in The heart showed partial AV canal malformation. Both kidneys showed some adverse pregnancies. It was suggested that elevation of fDNA in dilatation of the pelvocaliceal system with bilateral ureteral stenosis. maternal plasma could be used for early identification of adverse preg- There was an annular pancreas. Microscopic examination of the lungs nancies. To date, no study has been done to investigate the fDNA in showed the characteristic features of alveolar capillary dysplasia with anaemia, considered as the more common pregnancy related compli- misalignment of pulmonary veins. Some features were less prominent cation. The aim of this study was to quantify circulating fDNA levels in due to the gestational age. Array-CGH analysis (Agilent oligoNT 44K) normal healthy pregnant individuals and pregnant women with anae- was performed on DNA extracted from uncultured fibroblasts, show- mia. In this study, fifty seven samples consisting of anaemia (n=19) ing an interstitial microdeletion encompassing the FOX gene cluster in and normal pregnant women (n=38) carrying singleton male foetuses, 16q24.1. The size of the deletion is 1.57 to 1.76 Mb. Complementary were collected. The fDNA concentrations were measured by quanti- analysis using FISH and high-resolution array-CGH are currently on- tative real-time PCR amplification using TaqMan dual labelled probe going to confirm a possible somatic mosaicism. We confirm the early system. The SRY gene was used as a unique foetal marker. The mean onset and the severity of pulmonary distress associated with 16q24.1 fDNA concentration for normal pregnancy samples and anaemic preg- microdeletions. This case also illustrates the interest of array-CGH nancy samples were 41.14 GE/ml and 30.96 GE/ml respectively. No analysis in prenatal diagnosis in case of fetal malformations. significant differences were observed in the mean fDNA concentration between normal and anaemic pregnancy samples (P=0.535). In con- P05.29 A pilot study of Fragile X carrier screening in china clusion, anaemia does not significantly affect levels of fDNA in mater- X. Ji, Y. Zhou, W. Sun, X. Han, Z. J. Yang, J. Tao; nal plasma. Hence, if fDNA is used as an additional marker in prenatal Xinhua Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, screening test in the future, the findings of this study suggests that Shanghai, China. fDNA quantity will not be much informative for anaemic pregnancies. CGG repeat expansion in the 5’ noncoding region of the FMR1 gene on the X chromosome is associated with an array of disorders. Large P05.27 Founder mutations in the tunisian Population: expansion of over 200 repeats (full mutation) gives rise to the most implications for diagnosis in North Africa and middle East common form of inherited mental retardation known as Fragile X Syn- L. Romdhane, R. Kefi-Ben Atig, S. Abdelhak; drome (FXS), whereas smaller expansion of 55-200 repeats (premu- Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis Belvédère, Tunisia. tation) is recently shown to be involved in autism, premature ovarian Tunisia is a North African country of 10 million inhabitants at the cross failure, and fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS). road between Europe and Africa. Throughout its history, it has been More importantly, the expanded CGG repeats are unstable and can the seat of the invasion and immigration of different ethnic groups. As undergo further expansion on female transmission. Thus, screening its neighbouring and Middle Eastern countries, its population shows for the unstable FMR1 alleles in asymptomatic women before or at a high prevalence of consanguinity and endogamy, thus leading to early pregnancy is an efficient strategy for the prevention of the related emergence of genetic disorders at higher rates. Many factors could diseases. To evaluate the feasibility of a Fragile X carrier screening pro- contribute to the recurrence of monogenic morbid trait expression. gram in china, we anonymously examined 935 Chinese women from Among these, founder mutations that arise in one ancestral individual our obstetric clinic for the FMR1 CGG repeats status. DNA analysis and diffuse through the population in isolated communities. By a re- was carried out by an enhanced PCR, coupled with capillary electro- view of the literature, data from PubMed and other sources including phoresis separation. Inconclusive results were subsequently verified conference proceedings, two classes of founder mutations have been by Southern analysis. The results showed that 72.5% of the samples identified in the Tunisian population. The first includes founder muta- were heterozygous for the FMR1 alleles, 29 and 30 CGG repeats were tions that are reported so far only among Tunisian patients, they are the most common alleles. In total, we identified 1 premutation (55-200 mainly the result of the high rate of consanguinity and endogamy. The CGG repeats) and 9 intermediate expansions (45-54 CGG repeats), second founder mutations are shared with other populations originat- no full mutation was found. The incidence of premutation (1:935) and ing mainly from other North African or Middle Eastern countries and intermediate expansion (1:104) in this cohort is comparable to that re- in certain cases from both shores of Mediterranean. These mutations ported in Caucasian population. Our finding indicates that implement- have captured historical events in the region and are particularly use- ing a Fragile X carrier screening program may be practical in chinese ful for the development of easy and cost effective tools for molecular population. diagnosis. P05.30 Non-invazive Prenatal Diagnosis on Plasma DNA from RHD Negative Pregnant Women with Free DNA Fetal Kit RhD® T. Gunel1, I. Kalelioglu2, H. Ermis3, K. Aydınlı4; 1Istanbul University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul-Prenatal and perinatal genetics 11 TURKIYE., Istanbul, Turkey, 32Istanbul University, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul- the consequences of screening for patients of all phenotypes. This TURKIYE., Istanbul, Turkey, 43Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of study aims to measure the opinion of citizens on this issue, including Medicine, Istanbul-TURKIYE, Istanbul, Turkey. valuation of benefits and harms as well as moral reasoning. Hemolytic disease of the newborn is the clinical condition in which A novel, quantitative questionnaire was developed, including back- couples Rh blood group antigens are incompatible with each other and ground information and scenarios of various screening outcomes. After mother is negative for the antigen whereas father is positive. Fetal pre-testing it has been submitted to a 1500-member consumer panel cells circulate in maternal peripheral blood. The possibility of analyzing as well as to (parents of) patients with Pompe disease. Descriptive sta- fetal cells recovered from maternal plasma could provide high sensi- tistics and regression analysis of the survey results will be presented. tivity prenatal diagnosis. In this study using a quantitative real-time PCR assay, the presence of RhD gene sequences was evaluated in P05.33 Health and functional status of patients symptomatically the serum of patients at the onset of pregnancy. For each fetal RhD diagnosed with Pompe disease .A case for earlier diagnosis genotyping analysis DNA is extracted from maternal plasma. The pres- through newborn screening? ence of fetal RhD gene in the plasma DNA is detected by real-time T. Rigter1,2, S. Weinreich1,2, C. van El1,2, M. Cornel1, A. Reuser3, A. van der PCR amplification of two different segments of thr RhD gene (exon 7 Ploeg2,4, M. Hagemans2; and 10). Each amplicon is revealed with specific taqman probes. Our 1Clinical Genetics/EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, VU current findings accuracy of fetal RhD genotyping on maternal plasma University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Center for Lysosomal using a Free DNA Fetal Kit RhD® and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of P05.31 Gene expression microarray analysis of amniotic fluid Paediatrics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. cells with trisomy 21 Background: Since enzyme replacement therapy for Pompe patients M. Volk, A. Maver, B. Peterlin; is most effective when started early and diagnostic methods on dried Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. blood spots are improving, attention for newborn screening for Pompe Trisomy 21 is the most common cause of mental retardation, although disease is increasing. the clinical picture is highly variable. The underlying mechanisms for Aim: Our study aims to depict the health and functional status of the variability in phenotype remain to be determined. Pompe patients at the time of symptomatic diagnosis in order to illus- Our hypothesis was that extra copy of chromosome 21 disrupts the trate the gains that might be achieved by early diagnosis via newborn normal profile of gene expression that alters the normal development screening. The outcome of this study may assist policy-makers in their of fetuses with trisomy 21. consideration of newborn screening for Pompe disease. We used Agilent 4x44K whole human genome microarrays to iden- Methods: Previously collected clinical data and results of the IPA/Eras- tify the measure of differences in gene expression variance between mus MC Pompe Survey, an international patient oriented question- total RNA from 10 samples with trisomy 21 and 9 samples of euploid naire study, were used. Cross-sectional data of 82 Pompe patients amniocytes matched with the reference RNA pooled from all above (age 0-62) were re-analysed to give a “snapshot” of their health status mentioned samples. at time of symptomatic diagnosis. Following the ICF classification, we Analysis of data from microarray experiments has revealed significant selected the following domains: body function and structure, activity, differences in expression levels of 136 probes with p-values adjusted participation and contextual factors, taking into account that some for multiple testing by Benjamini-Hochberg method estimated under damage might be irreversible. 0.01. This differentially expressed set of probes defined 72 genes up- Results: Around time of diagnosis of patients with classic-infantile regulated and 54 genes downregulated in samples with trisomy 21. Pompe disease, heart function, hearing, and muscle development and We compared our findings to the results previously reported by two strength are severely impaired in most if not all cases. Use of oxygen studies available at the NCBI GEO repository with accession num- and/or nasogastric tube-feeding was reported in almost 50% of these bers: GSE6283 and GSE10758. Cross-study comparison identified 8 cases. consistenly significantly altered genes in the intersection of our results In juvenile and adult patients, primarily muscle strength and respiratory with the GSE6283 study. This set of candidate genes may represent function are impaired at the time of diagnosis. The majority of juvenile a potential set of biomarkers for DS and will be further tested on inde- and adult patients have some form of handicap. About 15% use a walk- pendent samples of fetal trisomy 21, to evaluate the prediction value ing device and/or respiratory support by the time diagnosis is made. of the biomarker set. A more detailed description will be presented. P05.32 should newborn screening be introduced for Pompe P05.34 maternal of Glutatione-s-transferase Genes disease? Preliminary report on valuation of benefits and risks by Polymorphisms with Placental Insuficiency and Fetal Growth the general public in the Netherlands Retardation S. S. Weinreich1,2, M. Hagemans2, T. Rigter1,2, C. van El1,2, M. Cornel1, A. van O. A. Budjukhina1, E. I. Baranovskaya1, N. G. Danilenko2, O. D. Levdansky2; der Ploeg2,3, A. Reuser4; 1Gomel medical university, Gomel, Belarus, 2Institute of Genetics and Cytology, 1Clinical Genetics/EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, VU Minsk, Belarus. University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Center for Lysosomal Placental insufficiency (PLI) is a key problem of obstetrics. The pur- and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department pose of research is to study polymorphic alleles of glutathione-S-trans- of Paediatrics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical ferase genes (GSTT1, GSTM1, GSTP1) at PLI. GST-genes code xe- Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. nobiotic-conjugating Background: Enzyme replacement therapy is now available for Pompe enzymes of phase II detoxycation system. disease. Across the broad phenotypic spectrum of this disease, the Material and methods: 142 pregnant women were surveyed. PCR/ better the initial condition of the patient, the greater the effect of ther- RFLP was used for analysis of deletion genes GSTT1, GSTM1 fre- apy. The rapidly progressive, infantile form of Pompe disease is cur- quencies and polymorphism of GSTP1 at PLI and control group. Gen- rently diagnosed at a median age of 5 months. To shorten diagnostic otype GSTP1 D includes genotypes A/B, A/C, B/B, B/C, C/C. delay, newborn screening is under consideration. Results: The frequency of deletions genotypes of GSTT1 or GSTM1 is Primary screening of blood spots is sensitive for Pompe disease, but significantly increased in the group with placental insufficiency (53%) additional clinical and laboratory tests are needed to confirm the di- in comparison with control group (15%). In the group with fetal hy- agnosis and to distinguish severely affected infantile patients, who poxia the GSTP1 A/C genotype was revealed statistically more often require immediate treatment, from infants who may go on to develop (P=0,01), and at intrauterine growth retardation - GSTP1 D genotype more slowly progressive symptoms, later in childhood or adulthood. (p=0,015). The risk of PLI development with the GSTM1 +/GSTT1+ The need for additional tests means that parents would not be able to GSTP A/A genotype is 11 times lower (OR 0,09, 95 % CI 0,04-0,019). opt out of learning a diagnosis of ‘probable later onset disease’. The risk of development of fetal growth retardation with GSTM1 +/ Aim and method: Early prediction of later-onset disease is not a goal GSTT1 + GSTP D genotype is 5 times higher (OR 5,37, 95 % CI 1,05- of newborn screening, but if it were an inevitable by-product, as in the 27,5). case of Pompe disease, policy-makers and governments must weigh Genotype GSTP1 A/A has a high level glutathione-S-transpherase ac-Prenatal and perinatal genetics 12 tivity of placenta (p=0,029). Genotype GSTP1, which carries alleles lism which in turn may contribute to the development of neural tube B and/or C, glutathione-S-transpherase activity of placenta was de- defects and unexplained, recurrent embryo losses in early pregnancy. creased (ZT=2,37, p=0,018). Glutathione-S-transpherase activity of In this study we have analyzed the MTHFR C677T and A1298C geno- placenta doesn’t depend on genotypes GSTM1 and GSTT1. Carrying type distributions and their associations with compromised fetal viabil- functionally weak alleles GSTP1 D in combination with active smoking ity with regard to the presence of aneuploidy. during pregnancy provokes development of fetus growth retardation Methods. In addition to cytogenetic analysis, DNA was extracted from (βi=82,7, χ2=8,7, p=0,013), in consequence of decrease of glutathi- spontaneously aborted embryonic tissues and adult controls. Analysis one-dependant antioxidant detoxication in placenta. included detection of C677T and A1298C mutations with allele specific PCR method and molecular karyotyping with multiplex ligation-depen- P05.35 Espression of hsa miRNA 35 in normotensive, dent probe amplification (MLPA). preeclamptic and HELLP syndrome patients Results. Comparison of combined MTHFR C677T/A1298C genotype L. Lazar, B. Nagy, B. Stenczer, J. Rigó; distributions between spontaneously aborted embryos, normal and ab- Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. normal karyotype groups and controls is presented in table. Objective: The aim of our study was to examine whether the expres- Conclusions. The present finding indicates decreased viability among sion of micro RNA 325 (miRNA 325) differs in preeclamptic, HELLP fetuses carrying MTHFR mutations and a possible selection disad- syndrome and patients with uncomplicated pregnancy. Study Design: vantage among fetuses with increased numbers of mutant MTHFR Micro RNA was isolated from placenta tissue samples obtained from alleles. Spontaneously aborted embryos have a unique distribution of 16 preeclamptic, 10 HELLP syndrome and 18 normotensive pregnant MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms and their appearance is women. Micro RNA 325 was measured by real-time quantitative PCR. not related to chromosomal integrity in the abortus. Our final conclu- Results: Expression of miRNA325 are significantly elevated in uncom- sion is that combined common polymorphisms of MTHFR play a role plicated pregnancies (median: 11.395 vs. 32.460 and 0.001 vs. 0.086 in fetal demise. However, the present finding of high prevalence of pg/µl; P < .001), and decreased in HELLP syndrome. The expression mutated MTHFR genotypes in spontaneously aborted embryos further of miRNA325 was significantly lower in case of preeclampsia com- emphasizes the clinical and biological significance of this gene in foe- pared with HELLP syndrome, and normotensive patients. Expression tal development. was significantly higher in case of HELLP syndrome compared with MTHFR C677T/A1298C genotype distributions normotensive patients. Conclusion: The expression of miRNA325 is GENOTYPE NORMAL ABNORMAL downregulated in case of preeclampsia. ABORTIONS CONTROLS MTHFR KARYOTYPE KARYOTYPE (n=333) (%) (n=100) (%) C677T/A1298C (n=222) (%) (n=111) (%) P05.36 Hydrocephaly/anencephaly-polydactyly in four siblings: CC/AA 48 (14.4) 31 (14.0) 17 (15.3) 19 (19.0) a new locus HYLs2 on chromosome 15 CC/AC 30 (9.0) 20 (9.0) 10 (9.0) 13 (13.0) A. Putoux1, M. Gonzales2, S. Thomas1, D. Buzas3, C. Bole-Feysot4, S. Patrier2, CC/CC 26 (7.8) 18 (8.1) 8 (7.2) 10 (10.0) M. Saint-Frison5, C. Gomes1, L. Rigonnot3, F. Razavi1, N. Joye2, J. Siffroi2, M. CT/AA 51 (15.3) 37 (16.7) 14 (12.6) 23 (23.0) Vekemans1, T. Attié-Bitach1; CT/AC 53 (15.9) 33 (14.9) 20 (18.0) 16 (16.0) 1Département de Génétique et INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 2Service de Génétique et d’Embryologie CT/CC 23 (6.9) 14 (6.3) 9 (8.1) 3 (3.0) Médicales, Hôpital Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 3Service de Gynécologie- TT/AA 41 (12.3) 29 (13.1) 12 (10.8) 15 (15.0) Obstétrique, CH Sud Francilien, Evry, France, 4Plateforme Génomique, TT/AC 38 (11.4) 26 (11.7) 12 (10.8) 1 (1.0) Fondation IMAGINE, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Service TT/CC 23 (6.9) 14 (6.3) 9 (8.1) 1 (1.0) d’Anatomie Pathologique, CH Victor Dupouy, Argenteuil, France. chi square (all samples vs. controls) 46.64, P< 0.001 (df= 8) Hydrolethalus syndrome (HYLS, MIM236680) is a lethal polymalfor- chi square (normal karyotype vs. aneuploidy) 10.83, p =0.21 (df= 8) mative autosomal recessive disorder. It is characterized by the asso- ciation of postaxial polydactyly of the hands and preaxial polydactyly P05.38 Approach to the study of abortions with isolated limb of the feet, micrognathia and central nervous system anomalies which malformation or as part of multiple congenital anomalies. are often represented by hydrocephaly with absent midline structures M. Martinez-Garcia1,2, R. Cardero1,2, M. Rodriguez de Alba1,2, I. Lorda- and keyhole-shaped defect in the occipital bone. The majority of fetus- Sanchez11,2, C. Ayuso1,2, C. Ramos1,2, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2; es have been described from Finland with a prevalence estimated at 1Institute of Health Research of the Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS-FJD)., 1/20000 birth in this population. A recurrent D211G mutation in HYLS1 Madrid, Spain, 2Biomedical Research Center of the Network on Rare Diseases is responsible of the Finnish HYLS cases, with a founder effect. To (CIBERER) ISCII, Madrid, Spain. date, no other HYLS1 mutation has been found in non-Finnish HYLS BACKGROUND: Congenital limb malformation is clinically heteroge- cases. neous and may manifest itself as an isolated feature or in associa- Recently, the HYLS1 ortholog in C. elegans and Xenopus was shown tion with a particular syndrome. Providing accurate clinical diagnosis to be necessary for the apical anchoring of centrioles at the plasma of abortions is an arduous task due to the insufficient information membrane, phenomenon which is required for ciliary formation. There- obtained from ultrasound studies or the absence of anatomical and fore, HYLS has joined the group of ciliopathies despite the absence of pathological exams. renal abnormality. PATIENTS AND METHODS: 15 out of a total 500 abortions referred to Here we report 4 fetuses born from a consanguineous Algerian couple our service because of limb malformation either with or without other with a polymalformative syndrome associating hydrocephaly / an- multiple congenital anomalies, were selected. Karyotype, QF-PCR, encephaly and polydactyly suggestive of HYLS without mutation in MLPA (subtelomeric regions and genes involved in limb malforma- the HYLS1 gene. Homozygozity mapping using SNP chips Affyme- tions) testing was performed. 7 out of 15 selected DNA samples were trix 250K identified a new locus in this family which we define as the analysed with the commercially available Agilent 400k microarray. HYLS2. Further studies are under way to identify the second gene RESULTS: Numerical chromosomal aberrations were detected in 8 responsible for HYLS. A particular attention is given to genes involved cases either by Karyotype, QF-PCR or MLPA analysis. Agilent 400k in cilia biogenesis. microarray analysis showed significant genomic alterations in 5 of the 7 remaining cases, involving microdeletions and microduplications of P05.37 Analysis of MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms regions containing genes related to limb malformation. One sample in embryonic tissues from spontanous abortions was degraded and in the other one non-pathological alterations were S. Stangler Herodez1, B. Zagradisnik1, A. Zagorac1, K. Zerjavic1, N. Kokalj found. Vokac2,1; DISCUSSION: Our results support the discarding of numerical chro- 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Clinical Centre Maribor, SI-2000 mosomal anomalies as the first step in the study of abortions with limb Maribor, Slovenia, 2Medical Faculty, University of Maribor, SI-2000 Maribor, malformations. Microarrays assays are required for the cases in which Slovenia. chromosomal aberration is not the cause of the phenotype. In con- Introduction. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene clusion, both the selection process and the proposed strategy were C677T and A1298C polymorphisms influence homocysteine metabo- suitable since genomic alterations were found in nearly all the sam-Prenatal and perinatal genetics 1 ples. Nevertheless, exhaustive clinical information and further familiar 21 and 67 cases of other chromosomal abnormalities. Our false posi- molecular studies are essential to establish a more accurate genetic tive rate is 3,5% and detection rate for trisomy 21 is 98%. diagnosis. Shifting the strategy of prenatal screening required only minimum investment in terms of money, and some reorganization of existing P05.39 Determining the fetal gender and Rhesus D status by resources including manpower. The new screening method is very noninvasive prenatal method - a new approach in Romanian well accepted by women and compares very favorably with existing prenatal diagnosis field screening methods which have much lower detection rates and much A. M. Stan1, C. Dragomir1, E. Severin2, L. Savu1; higher false positive rate. 1Genetic Lab S.R.L., Bucharest, Romania, 2Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. P05.41 Birth of a healthy baby boy after microsatellite PcR- The prenatal diagnosis procedures currently employed in Romania are based preimplantation genetic diagnosis of a reciprocal based exclusively on invasive sampling procedures of fetal cells. The chromosomal translocation discovery of circulating free fetal DNA in maternal plasma has provided S. S. Chong1,2, S. F. Loh3, E. B. Prasath3, A. S. C. Tan1,2, M. L. H. Chan3, W. C. an alternative to invasive procedures. Our aim was to investigate the Tan2, G. H. Yeo1; possibility of using this approach to determine fetal gender and Rhe- 1National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University sus D status. Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 3KK Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital, We performed a short study: ten healthy pregnant women were in- Singapore, Singapore. cluded. All ten were RhD negative with RhD positive partners. Seven Carriers of balanced chromosome translocations usually do not show of them were carrying male fetuses. As controls, blood samples from any adverse phenotypic effects other than experiencing difficulty es- RhD negative and positive healthy non-pregnant women and healthy tablishing and maintaining a pregnancy, due to the high incidence of males were analyzed. A peripheral blood sample was collected from unbalanced karyotypes in their gametes. Preimplantation Genetic Di- each subject; the plasma was separated by a two-steps centrifugation agnosis (PGD) can improve pregnancy and live birth rates by identify- method. The total free cell DNA was extracted using the QIAamp® ing only karyotypically balanced embryos for transfer. Currently, PGD DSP Virus kit according to the SAFE optimized protocol (Legler et al.). of unbalanced translocations relies mainly on interphase fluorescence We determined the fetal gender and RhD status using both conven- in situ hybridization (FISH) of blastomeres. Limitations of this tech- tional and Real-Time PCR by detecting the fetus-specific Y (SRY and nique include overlapping signals, dual signals due to replicated DNA, DYS14 genes) and the RHD gene (exon 7) sequences respectively. stochastic probe hybridization failures, and lost blastomeres, result- We monitored the β-globin as a housekeeping gene to determine the ing in either misdiagnosis or uninterpretable data. We describe an al- DNA extraction efficiency. ternative microsatellite PCR-based strategy for PGD of unbalanced Conclusions: this non-invasive approach of fetal gender determination chromosomal translocations. PGD was performed on a karyotypically can be used as a screening procedure in cases at risk for inheriting normal woman and her husband, who carries a balanced transloca- an X-linked recessive disorder; the RHD gene detection can eliminate tion between chromosomes 12 and 22 [t(12;22)(p11.2;q11.2)]. Twenty the unnecessary administration of anti-D immunoglobulin to pregnant oocytes were recovered after ovarian stimulation, 13 fertilized after in- women with RhD negative fetuses. We are able to detect fetal DNA in tracytoplasmic sperm injection, and 8 developed sufficiently for blasto- maternal plasma, with the possibility of extending this study to single mere biopsy. Blastomeres isolated from Day 3 embryos were subjected gene disorder detection. to a single-round multiplex-PCR amplification of microsatellite markers mapping to chromosome bands 12p13.2, 12q21.33, and 22q13.2. P05.40 implementation of One-stop-clinic for Risk Assessment Three embryos were chromosomally balanced, four were unbalanced, of chromosomal abnormalities in the first trimester in the Czech and one showed discordant results in the two isolated blastomeres, Republic (OscAR) suggestive of somatic mosaicism. Two chromosomally balanced em- I. Dhaifalah1,2, V. Curtisova1,2; bryos were transferred on day 4 and a singleton pregnancy, with 46 XY 1Department of Human Genetics and Fetal Medicine, Fakultní nemocnice normal karyotype as confirmed by amniocentesis, ensued resulting in Olomouc, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Center of Fetal Medicine, Regional Hospital, the birth of a healthy baby boy. This PCR-based strategy represents a Zlin, Czech Republic. viable alternative to FISH-based PGD testing of chromosomal translo- Prenatal diagnosis encompasses all measures of disease prevention cations that may be preferred under certain situations. from mass screening programs and use of new technologies to or- ganizational and support systems used in the delivery of heath care. P05.42 Neonatal screening for phenylketonuria in Kazakhstan The unwillingness to depart form old and tested methods can prevent D. N. Salimbaeva, G. S. Svyatova, M. Orasgalieva, G. M. Berezina, Z. S. an introduction of new methods, even though they are proven to be Makhmutova; superior to the old ones. The Scientific Center of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology, Almaty, Czech doctors are free to select technologies for diagnosing and treat- Kazakhstan. ing patients. The selection is usually based on recommendations pub- Since 2006 year the national program of neonatal screening for phenyl- lished by medical societies. The most practiced strategy for prenatal ketonuria (PKU) and congenital hypothyroidism was introduced in Ka- screening is a triple test (TT). Women with a positive TT and those zakhstan. In 2006-2009 years 446 348 newborns were studied for PKU. over 35 years of age undergo amniocentesis with a possible late ter- The middle scope of neonatal screening in Kazakhstan was 77%. mination of pregnancy. The program of neonatal screening revealed 19 newborns with PKU, We present our experience in shifting prenatal screening of aneuploi- that in further was conduct molecular-genetic researches in PAH dies from 2nd to the 1st trimester in a large university hospital and a gene. large regional hospital in the Czech Republic. Our decision to change The evaluation of genetic polymorphism, specters and rates of muta- the method of screening was based on the published data and a one tions in PAH gene in Kazakhstan showed that our population has a dif- year pilot study which we run at the department. A minimum invest- ferent from other world population by mutations specter of PAH gene. ment was made to purchase the software (Astraia) and a blood ana- More of PKU patients were compound- heterozygous that had more lyzer (Kryptor). We started to book pregnant women for ultrasound accepted R408W mutation or R261Q, IVS10nt546, IVS12nt1 muta- examination in the first trimester and substituted triple test with first tions or other unknown and undefined earlier mutations. The V245V trimester biochemical screening. Anomaly scan including screening of polymorphism was revealed in 7 exon of PAH gene (frequency of mu- the heart was organized for 20-22 weeks of pregnancy. For women tation is 0,20), that didn’t conduct to change of PAH protein. In health who screened positive we immediately progressed to CVS and used control group R408W and R261Q mutations PAH gene didn’t reveal, PCR for the diagnosis of aneuplodies, with results available in less that was evidence of low rate of heterozygous carriers these mutations than 36 hours. Confirmed pathological cases were terminated accord- in Kazakhstan population. Accounting ethnic structure of population ing to the wishes of the women. frequency of PKU was 0,69 for 100 000 population by kazakh and We started the clinic in January 2004 in the University Hospital (Olo- 1,56 for 100 000 population by russian.Consequently, reveal ethnic mouc) and in October 2007 in the Regional Hospital (Zlin). So far we feature of alleles of PAH gene distribution in Kazakhstan allowed to screened about 18.000 pregnancies and detected 51 cases of trisomy accounting population features conduct molecular-genetic diagnostic Prenatal and perinatal genetics 1 for PKU, and introduce neonatal screening allow to opportunely reveal related to foetal or placental growth. PHLDA2 a maternally expressed and diagnose diseases before clinic manifestation. gene, and PEG10 a paternally expressed gene, are known to play roles in foetal growth and placental development. P05.43 Do parents in ireland understand the Newborn screening Quantitative Real Time PCR using TaqMan Gene Expression Assays test? was performed to evaluate the gene expressions patterns of PHLDA2 B. Ryan, K. Scully, M. Durand, S. Kimura, Y. Al Shatti, A. Murphy, J. Meehan, and PEG10 genes in 35 foetal/placental samples from SA. Two house- E. Roche, H. Hoey; keeping genes GAPDH and ACTB were used as controls. The results Department of Paediatrics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. were analysed by REST 2009 software showed that PHLDA2 gene Introduction: The National Newborn Screening Programme was intro- was upregulated in the first trimester and both genes were upregulated duced in Ireland in 1966. It currently screens for phenylketonuria, ma- in the second trimester. ple syrup urine disease, galactosemia, homocystinuria and congenital Data from literature has implicated PHLDA2 as a gene potentially more hypothyroidism. Almost all of the nearly 70,000 babies born annually active at early gestational ages. According to the “parental conflict” in Ireland participate in the newborn screening programme, yet the theory, maternal expressed genes restrict growth, whereas paternally impression is that parents in general have a limited understanding of expressed genes enhance growth. It would be expected that in intra- the purpose of the test. uterine growth restriction cases, PEG10 would be downregulated. The Aim: Our aim was to determine if Irish parents understand the newborn majority of our cases were idiopathic SA, so upregulation or downregu- screening test. lation of a gene according to the “parental conflict” is not predictable. Methods: A questionnaire assessing knowledge on the screening test As far as we know this is the first study presenting data from human was administered to 200 parents of children attending a paediatric imprinted gene expression in SA cases. hospital during October 2009. A qualitative grading system was estab- lished and applied to assess parental knowledge: P05.45 Polymorphisms of renin-angiotensin system and the Grading of Parental Knowledge risk of placental insufficiency among women of the Republic of Grade Knowledge tatarstan 0 Did not know if child was screened L. Sungatullina, O. Kravtsova; Kazan State University, Kazan, Russian Federation. 1 No/inaccurate knowledge One of the main reasons of pregnancy and birth complications, which 2 Knowledge of metabolic/screening aspects of test can lead to perinatal morbidity and mortality, is pathology of fetoplacen- 3 Knowledge of principles of screening & name a specific disease tal complex. The most wide-spread pathology is placental insufficiency 4 Knowledge of principles of screening & name 3 diseases (PI), accompanied by hypoxia and intrauterine growth restriction and 5 Global understanding of screening & name all diseases complicates almost all pregnancy diseases. The main mechanism un- Results Summary derlying PI involves endothelial dysfunction that leads to disbalance of n=200 the metabolism among fetal and maternal organisms. 151 mothers, 49 fathers, 1 grandmother We investigated the association between polymorphisms of renin-an- 175 Irish, 25 non-Irish giotensin system and the risk of PI among women of the Republic of Age Ranges Tatarstan. We compared 90 women with PI to 80 women with a normal pregnancy and evaluated them for the following genetic variants: A- <12 12-24 2-3 4-6 7-11 12-18 Age 20C, M235T and T174M polymorphisms of the angiotensinogen gene months months years years years years and G2350A polymorphism of the angiotensin-converting enzyme Number 24 24 30 44 44 34 gene. Genomic DNA was extracted from samples of whole blood in accor- Overall Grading of Parental Knowledge dance with standard phenol-chloroform method. These polymorphisms were genotyped using RFLP-PCR analysis. Grade % Number of Parents We also quantified concentrations of cell-free DNA from maternal 0 3 6 plasma, newborn baby’s plasma and amniotic liquid. Cell-free DNA 1 75 151 was obtained from plasma using the Lytech DNA Kit and measured 2 14 29 on spectrophotometer NanoDrop 1000. It is shown that amniotic liquid 3 6 11 and maternal plasma can be used as an accessible biological marker 4 1 2 to research cell-free DNA with the aim of PI diagnostic. 5 <1 1 P05.46 Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for Genetic Conclusion: Despite the fact that almost every Irish parent allows their and metabolic Disorders-the saudi Experience child to have the newborn screening test done there seems to be little A. I. Al-Aqeel; knowledge about its significance. Does this reflect inadequate informa- Riyadh Military Hospital/ King Faisal Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. tion prior to the test, the circumstances at the time of testing or trust in Saudi Arabian culture is highly consanguineous, with the first cousin the health care system? marriages accounting for 60-70% of all marriages. Given the difficul- ties in management of genetic disorders, reproductive option for fami- P05.44 study of imprinted genes expression PHLDA2 and lies affected with genetic diseases in Saudi Arabia is often limited to PEG10 in spontaneous abortions PGD which is permissible under the law and religion whereas prenatal S. Dória1, M. Sousa2,3, S. Fernandes1, C. Ramalho4,5, O. Brandão6, A. Matias4,5, diagnosis with the intent of termination of pregnancy is neither widely A. Barros1, F. Carvalho1; practiced nor socially accepted, although it is accepted under certain 1Dept. of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Portugal, 2Lab conditions. .Cell Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar, University of Porto, KFSH&RC has been offering PGD for monogenic and chromosomal Portugal, 3Genetics Department, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, disorders, since 2001. A total of 45 pregnancies initiated. Of which, 25 Portugal, 4Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hospital São João, Porto, healthy babies were born, 13 pregnancies are ongoing and 7 pregnan- Portugal, 5Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Portugal, 6Departmentof cies were either biochemical or ended up with abortion. Pathology, Hospital São João, Porto, Portugal. In all these families PGD was undertaken using fluorescent PCR (F- Genomic imprinting is defined as an epigenetic modification that inac- PCR) and/or nested PCR with sequencing on a single cell, or Multiple tivates one allele of a gene in a parent-of-origin-dependent manner. Displacement Modification (MDA) to amplify the whole genome from Current research on foetal control growth has focused on genes that a single cell. A singleton pregnancy ensure after transfer of one het- display imprinted expression. Miscarriage in the general reproductive erozygous and one/or normal embryo and prenatal diagnosis by CVS population is very frequent and other genetic causes beyond chromo- confirmed a normal pregnancy. This is the first report of successful somal abnormalities could be involved in spontaneous abortions (SA), PGD in different genetic disorders in Saudi Arabia, and the Muslim such as variations of expression in imprinted genes particularly those world.Prenatal and perinatal genetics 1 P05.47 Prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities in P05.49 Cytogenetic findings in 700 consecutive amniocentesis Republic of moldova C. GUG1,2, G. Budau1, B. Muresan3, M. Munteanu1, V. Simedrea3, N. Hrubaru1, M. L. Sprincean, V. Nour, V. Secrieru, E. A. Halabudenco, N. I. Barbova, M. S. D. Chiriac1, T. Cioata1, C. Olaru4, D. Grigoras1, G. Furau5, L. Antal6, Z. Schmidt7; Stratila; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, National Centre of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, 2Genetics Medical Center „Dr. Cristina Gug“, Timisoara, Romania, 3Obstetrics- Moldova, Republic of. Gynecology „Bega“ Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 4Obstetrics-Gynecology High frequency of chromosomal abnormalities at pregnant women „Dumitru Popescu“ Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 5Department of Obstetrics- of risk group with severe obstetrical anamnesis, recurrent abortions, Gynecology “Vasile Goldis” West University, Arad, Romania, 6Department of miscarriages, stopped pregnancies in evolutions, determine early ap- Obstetrics-Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oradea, Romania, plying of non-invasive and invasive techniques of prenatal diagnosis. 7Obstetrics-Gynecology Private Practice, Deva, Romania. Screening tests for diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities executed The aim of the study was to evaluate the frequency and structure of in necessary time during pregnancy could prevent born of children with prenatal detected chromosome abnormality. In this paper we report severe and major malformations and mental deficiencies. Prenatal di- results of 700 fetal karyotypes performed by cultured amniocytes. The agnosis procedures as ultra-sonography (fetal nuchal translucency cytogenetic analysis with GTG banding of amniotic fluid cells revealed (NT)), biochemical screening (evaluation of maternal plasma level of 17 aneuploidies (2,42%) and 23 structural abnormalities (2.9%). Each alfa fetoproteine (AFP), beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in cases has received genetic counseling. We found trisomy 21 (11 cas- maternal serum) and cytogenetic analyses, are necessary for complex es) that includes omogen trisomy 21 (8 cases), mosaic trisomy 21 (3 investigation during medico-genetic counseling. cases) one of them with 2 celular clones 47,XX+21/46,XX, another Research included a group of 1648 cytogenetically, biochemically and with 3 celular clones 47,XY+21/48,XYY+21/46,XY and the other of ecographically examined pregnant women in the period 2007-2009. In chimera 47,XX+21/46,XY. Other autosomal trisomies that were found 1314 cases was applied amniocentesis. Karyotyping applied in high- are the following: omogen trisomy 18 (1 case), mosaic trisomy 18 (1 risk pregnancies at 16-18 weeks represents the most informative diag- case), omogen trisomy 13 (1 case) and mosaic trisomy 22 (1 case). nostic method for detecting Down syndrome and other chromosomal Poliploidia was found in the form of the triploidy 69,XXX (2 cases). We abnormalities. In 72% of examined cases were detected maternal age found 2 Robertsonian translocations: 1 case maternal trob(13;22) and and markers for chromosomal anomalies, decreased levels of alpha 1 case de novo trob(21;21). We found also balanced translocations: fetoprotein. Abnormalities were detected in 9 -12 % of examined cas- maternal t(7;10)(p22;p12.1) 2 cases in the same family and mater- es. nal t(17;20)(q12;q11) 1 case. Pericentric inversions were showed in Conclusion: Non-invazive prenatal diagnosis using biochemical analy- 10 cases: maternal inv(10) 1 case, maternal inv(9) 3 cases, paternal ses (AFP) and ultra-sonographic markers (fetal nuchal translucency inv(9) 5 cases and de novo inv(9) 1 case. Other structural abnormali- (NT) at 10 to 13(+6) weeks of gestation) during first trimester of preg- ties includes: duplication dup(10)(q22.2-ter) due to maternal balanced nancy has a high sensitivity associated with a detection rate of 95% for translocations (4;10)(q22.2;q22.2-ter) 1 case, ring chromosome r(6) 1 a false positive rate of 5%. case, marker chromosome 2 cases. We found also 4 cases of dele- tions: del(7)(q21-ter) 1 case, del(1)(p31.2-ter) 1 case, del(1)(q32.1-ter) P05.48 A de novo prenatal diagnosis of Leri-Weill 1 cases, del(X)(q26-ter) 1 case. The karyotype using classical banding dyschondrosteosis in a 45,XY,t(Y;21) foetus: an example of a is an informative method able to detect chromosomal abnormalities. cytogenetic-molecular integrated laboratory. M. Fenollar-Cortés1, M. Rodríguez-de-Alba2,3, L. Soriano-Guillén4, I. Lorda- P05.50 Prenatal screening in the 1st and 2nd trimesters of Sańchez2,3, B. Gil-Fournier5, J. Díez-Racasens6, C. Ayuso2,3, M. Trujillo- pregnancy. Tiebas2,3; D. T. Tursunova, N. A. Karetnikova, V. A. Bakharev; 1Hospital Clínicos San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 2Genetics Department of the Research Center for obstetrics, gynecology and perinatology, Moscow, Russian Institute of Health Research of the Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS-FJD), Madrid, Federation. Spain, 3Biomedical Research Center of the Network on Rare Diseases Objectives: A comparative analysis of the results of combined screen- (CIBERER) ISCII, Madrid, Spain, 4Department of Pediatrics. Fundación ing in the 1st and 2nd trimesters of pregnancy. Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 5Genetics Department. Hospital de Getafe., Materials and Methods: There were 304 women examined at 9-13 and Madrid, Spain, 6Department of Gynecology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz., Madrid, 16-22 weeks of gestation by way of booth invasive and noninvasive Spain. methods. The protocol of examination included ultrasound scanning, We present a case of prenatal diagnosis of a 45,XY,t(Y;21)(p11;p11). detection of -HCGB and PAPP-A serum markers in the 1st trimester, ish der (Y;21)(p11;p11)(CEPY+,SRY+,D21Z1+) by karyotype in a am- and of HCG, AFP, and estriol in the 2nd trimester, computer processing niotic fluid sample of a 32-year-old G1P0 woman at 21 weeks of ges- with Life Cycle in the 1st trimester and PRISCA in the 2nd one; invasive tation because of an hyperecogenic focus in the mitral valve. Parent‘s prenatal procedures. karyotypes were normal. Molecular studies of SALSA MLPA P018 al- Results: Dynamic assessment of 42 risk group patients (13.8%) in the lowed to characterize the deletion limits that encompassed the SHOX 1st trimester revealed four cases (9.5%) with fetal pathology: Down s gene and the 3‘ SHOX region adjacent in the foetus sample showing a syndrome (2), Edward s (1) and Patau s (1) syndromes. There were no deletion from 9333-L10292 to 5648-L06218 probe (from Xptel at less chromosomal pathology of the fetuses of 64(21.3%) risk group women 1200kb). MLPA analyses in both parents were normal. A further study found in the 2nd trimester. All kariotype changes were registered in the with microsatellite analysis (DXYS10092, DXYS10093, DXYS10096; 1st trimester. DXYS233, DXYS6814) in the family confirmed and delimited the dele- Conclusion: A high rate of false-positive findings testified of the fact tion until 800-850pb in the foetus sample. According to these results, that none of any noninvasive means of diagnosis of fetal chromosomal parents received a genetic counselling referred to a posible Leri-Weill pathology had an absolute specificity. dyschondrosteosis (LWD) in the fetus. LWD is characterised by a dis- Screening programmes should be applied preferably in the 1st trimes- proportionate short stature with predominantly mesomelic limb short- ter. It is not expedient to perform dynamic follow-up in low risk group. ening and Madelung deformity of the arm. Females tend to be more Noninvasive screening in the 2nd trimester must be carried out only in affected than males.After genetic counselling, the couple elected to case of its absence in the1st trimester. In high risk group invasive meth- continue with the pregnancy. A ultrasonography evaluation at 26 weeks ods must be considered in the 1st trimesters of pregnancy. At present revealed an abnormal position of both wrists. A boy was born sponta- only invasive methods of diagnosis are important to make a decision neous at 39 gestation‘s week with 53 cm, 3700g and no apparently of the tactics of pregnancy management. skeletal abnormalities. A clinical follow up is under way. We will have new clinical signs in a new reevaluation by a medical endocrinologist in a few days when he will be 6 months old.Prenatal and perinatal genetics 1 P05.51 sequential contingent screening and ultrasound - merase Chain Reaction (QF-PCR), a rapid assay for the detection of effective screening? major aneuploydies of 13, 18, 21, X and Y chromosomes. E. Saue1, R. Zordania2; These cases were selected according to the following indications for 1East-Tallinn Central Hospital, TALLINN, Estonia, 2Tallinn Children`s Hospital, the invasive procedure: biochemical screening tests performed on ma- TALLINN, Estonia. ternal serum (bitest or tritest) and increased nuchal translucency. Background: Prenatal screenings tests of pregnancy is targeted to Fifty-six women had positive biochemical screening: 36 bitest (dos- select women having high risk of aneuploidy. Sequential contingent age of hCG and PAPP-A) and 20 tritest (computer-based analysis of screening is based on I trimester screening results. According to com- AFP, hCG, fE3 and maternal age). Our analysis revealed 2 trisomies bined risk three categories can be calculated and different follow up 21 among patients with positive bitest (PPV 5.7%) and 3 trisomies 21 tactics can be used. among patients with positive tritest (PPV 15%). These data highlight Methods: Maternal serum markers were measured I (fb-hCG, PAPP-A) the low informative value of biochemical screenings for the detection and II trimester (AFP, hCG, uE3), in keeping with at 11-13 and 15-17 of chromosomal abnormalities. weeks of pregnancy. Gestation age, length of the fetus (CRL 45-84 The analysis of samples with indication of increased translucency mm), nuchal translucency (NT) - was determined during the first tri- (measurement of the thickness of translucent area below the skin in mester by ultrasound investigation. Serum markers were tested using the back of the fetal neck) detected 18 pathological samples with a the Immulite 2000 automated chemiluminescent immunoassay meth- PPV of 20.7%, showing less false positives compared to the biochemi- od and Prisca risk calculation software for statistical risk calculations. cal screening. High, intermediate and low risk groups of pregnant women were se- All the results of QF-PCR were concordant with karyotype analysis lected according to I trimester combined test. Our results indicate that the biochemical screening has a high number Results: Retrospectively data of 1000 women (February to July 2009) of false positives inducing a large number of women toward a useless were analyzed using I and II trimester screening results. 915 were invasive procedure.Before performing a biochemical screening every younger women (<37 years) and 85 were older women (>37 years). pregnant woman should be adequately informed about the high rate About 55% of tested women in the young age group had normal I of false positives of the tests that need to be confirmed by an invasive trimester screening results (low risk), high and intermediate risk had procedure with a probable negative outcome. all women in the elder age group. During this period fetuses with an- euploidy were detected in 6 of 1000 pregnancies: 4 aneuploidy in the P05.54 Prenatal detection of selected aneuploidies - comparison young age group and 2 in the old age group. of a CE marked IVD commercial test kit and a home-made QF- Conclusion: The combination of sequential contingent screening with PcR assay ultrasound of markers is flexible, cost effectiveness and implementabil- S. Andonova, R. Raynova, S. Bichev, I. Kremensky; ity of early serum screening. National Genetics Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria. Since 2000 more than 5000 samples were analyzed in National Ge- P05.52 Perspectives in prenatal genetic testing netic Laboratory with QF-PCR technique. Our home-made assay in- D. Vlad1, V. Dumitrascu2, C. Gug3, C. Gurban4, B. Barac2, C. Vlad5; cludes 11 polymorphic STR markers (4 located on chromosome 21, 4 1Smart Lab Diagnostics, Timisoara, Romania, 2Victor Babes University of - on chromosome 18 and 3 - on chromosome 13) which are routinely Medicine and Pharmacy, Pharmacology Department, Timisoara, Romania, used in our practice. As an alternative, recently we have successfully 3Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Medical tested the commercial kit for the analysis of aneuploidy by Aneufast Genetics, Timisoara, Romania, 4Victor Babes University of Medicine and TM (Genomed Ltd). In this preliminary study we have evaluated and Pharmacy, Biochemistry Department, Timisoara, Romania, 5Private Dentistry compared the level of informativeness of the commercial CE marked Unit, Timisoara, Romania. in vitro diagnostic test kit and our home-made assay. To determine Prenatal testing has proved extremely valuable for the prevention of the heterozygosity of the STRs in both assays we have included the generic disorders. However, it has a number of disadvantages, such results from two groups of 250 prenatal samples analysed by two com- as invasive procedures and delayed results. binations of markers. We found that Aneufast was technically easier to The FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridisation) method and the ampli- use and the informativeness is high. However, the results showed that fication of short tandem repeat sequences through the polymerase the home-made combination of markers is more suitable for prenatal chain reaction (PCR) of a DNA fragment have both reduced the time of detection of selected aneuploidies in Bulgaria. issuing the results from 2-3 weeks to 1-2 days. Comparison of heterozigosity and A more recent possibility allows the results to be issued in several informativeness of both assays hours. Real-time multiplex PCR amplification and the quantitative am- Heterozygosity levels: plification of the DNA fragment discriminate with high sensitivity the 3:2 Aneufast TM kit Home-made set or 2:1 ratio between the copies of homologous chromosomes in the Markers on: lowest highest lowest highest case of numerical chromosome anomalies. However, the method used Chromosome 21 68.9 % 84.3 % 71.2 % 86.8 % to collect fetal tissue samples is an invasive one. Chromosome 18 67.7 % 86.0 % 63.8 % 91.2 % The development of techniques to isolate fetal DNA from the circulat- ing maternal blood may eliminate the invasive procedures. Placental Chromosome 13 78.2 % 84.6 % 76.6 % 84.5 % free (extracellular) DNA can be isolated from maternal plasma and Informative results for more than PCR-amplified. In the 11-17 weeks of pregnancy, about 1-5% of the 2 markers per chromosome: free DNA in the maternal circulation comes from the fetus, while the Combination of markers on: Aneufast TM kit Home-made set rest comes from the mother. This method has 95-100% specificity, but Chromosome 21 77.9 % 79.9 % can detect only fetal DNA sequences of paternal origin, because the Chromosome 18 74.8 % 77.1 % maternal sequences interfere with the maternal DNA. The fetal DNA Chromosome 13 81.2 % 81.8 % sequences in maternal circulation are shorter than the total circulating DNA. P05.55 indications for invasive prenatal procedures and Prenatal screening and diagnosis methods improve the health of the aneuploidies detected by QF-PCR analysis population. R. Raynova, S. Andonova, S. Bichev, Y. Petrova, S. Milusheva, I. Kremensky; National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, P05.53 informative value of biochemical screening tests for the Sofia, Bulgaria. detection of major numerical chromosomal abnormalities by First- and second- trimester serum screening (SS) together with ul- means of QF-PCR. trasound 2D/3D are widespread non-invasive methods for antenatal C. Curcio, C. Lodrini, A. Biasi, C. Melles, D. A. Coviello; screening for common autosomal aneuploidies. Pregnant women with Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale calculated high SS risk or/and abnormal ultrasound findings are coun- Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. seled to proceed to amniocentesis. The amniotic fluids routinely are We report here the screening results of 1135 fetal samples (785 amni- analyzed by cytogenetic or/and DNA analysis. A total of 17 229 blood otic fluids and 350 chorionic villi) using Quantitative Fluorescent Poly- serums from pregnant women were investigated in 2009 for first- and Prenatal and perinatal genetics 17 second- trimester SS. An increased risk for chromosomal aneuploi- 3 cases after ultrasound abnormalities and termination of pregnancy at dies was calculated for 1 224 (7%) of them. During the same period 26, 33+4 and 35 GW. A large gallbladder was detected in 2 cases and 1 289 women with different indications (including increased risk from an unusual severe prenatal microcephaly was seen in one case. Fetal SS, abnormal ultrasound markers and/or advanced maternal age) autopsy showed that all foetuses had large thumbs and 4 had facial were referred to our department for prenatal detection of chromosomal dysmorphism. A whole gene deletion was found in one case. Molecular aneuploidies by DNA analysis. Samples were investigated by QF-PCR analysis in the 4 remaining cases showed an amino acid deletion in assay on automatic sequencer. We have found pathological results exon 30, 2 splicing variants around exon 22, and one frameshift muta- for 46 samples (3.5%): 22 were found to be with trisomy 21, 11 with tion in exon 25. In the latter case, we also identified a duplication of trisomy18, 2 with trisomy 13, 3 with XXX, 4 with XXY, 2 with XO and 2 at least 50 kilobases extending into the 3’flanking region of the gene. with triploidy. Positive SS was indication for amniocentesis in 23 (50%) Parent’s DNA sequencing was in favour of de novo variants. of the pathological cases, abnormal ultrasound findings - in 14 (30%), In conclusion, CREBBP alterations in foetal RSTS are similar to those advanced maternal age - in 7 (15%) and positive family history - in 2. found in typical RSTS diagnosed in childhood. This report will contrib- Our 10-years experience shows that DNA analysis for chromosomal ute to a better knowledge of particular features in foetal RSTS and to aneuploidies is appropriate when the indications for invasive prena- improvement of this clinical diagnosis in antenatal cases. It shows the tal diagnosis are positive maternal serum screening or/and abnormal interest of genotyping, allowing reassuring genetic counselling. ultrasound markers. When advanced maternal age or positive family history for chromosomal disorders is present DNA analysis should be P05.58 Evaluation of 31 selective abortions after counseling combined with cytogenetic analysis N. Ghasemi1, M. Nasimsobhan2, E. Papary3, S. Miratashi4; 1Research and Clinical centre for Infertility, Yazd SS medical sciences P05.56 the use of a novel Real-time PcR assay for rapid university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Forensic Medicine Organization, prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 syndrome Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Yazd SS medical sciences university, Yazd, M. Behrooz Aghdam1,2, A. R. Kamyab2, M. Hashemi1, E. Shamsian1, F. Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Shahed University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Shakrokhi2, R. Mahdian2; In Iran, induced abortion is a criminal offence except to save the life 1Science and Research branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic of the mother or keep the family away from OSR and Haraj. OSR and Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Medicine Department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Haraj is a condition was explained by the law as “any big problem Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and suffer for Family”. The parliament now gave the list of diseases Trisomy 21 is one of the common chromosomal abnormality with fre- which pregnant women could have an abortion by order of forensic quency of 1/700-1/1000 live birth. Complete trisomy 21 is seen in 95% medicine. of case. Current diagnosis methods are based on karyotype and FISH Two to three percent of infants were born with congenital abnormal- technique. But these methods have some limitation, such as availability ity, which mostly now caused by genetic problem. However, investiga- of live fetal cells and the need of high technical expertise. Final results tion preformed after sonographic detection of central nervous system are achieved in 2-3 weeks. In this study, we have successfully used a or skeletal anomalies had highest diagnostic yield. From 31 selective novel real time PCR assay (TaqMan probe based) for rapid diagnosis abortions in Yazd forensic medicine organization from 2006 till now, of trisomy 21. DNA was extracted from 20 normal samples and 25 11 cases had fetal severe abnormally and the rest because of mother trisomy 21 samples using salting out method. A target gene (DSCAM) safety. Seven of these 11 cases were diagnosed by sonography and 4 on chromosome 21 critical region and a reference gene (PMP22) on others by genetic test in amniocentesis. These results show prenatal chromosome 17 were selected for gene dosage analysis. The primers screening is very important even only by sonography and it as one and probes were designed according to ABI guideline using Primer Ex- of the non-invasive prenatal diagnostic techniques should be used in press® software. For each sample, the difference between the thresh- every pregnancy. old cycle of DSCAM and PMP22 genes (ΔCt) were determined. Then, calibrated ΔCt value (ΔΔCt, sample ΔCt - normal control ΔCt) was P05.59 Neonatal silver-Russell syndrome With the Unique calculated. The ratio (2 - ΔΔCt) of target gene to reference gene for nor- combination of maternal UPD 7 and mosaic trisomy 7 mal individuals (1±0.01) and for 21 trisomy cases (1.67±0.16) clearly F. Abdelhedi1, A. Lebbar1, L. Cuisset2, V. Tsatsaris3, G. Viot3, A. Menard1, J. discriminated the two groups. The result of the real time PCR analysis Sauto1, L. Druart4, J. M. Dupont1; was confirmed by the result of karyotyping. Therefore real time PCR is 1UF de Cytogénétique; APHP, Hôpital Cochin; Université Paris Descartes, a reliable and accurate technique for rapid diagnosis of trisomy 21. Paris, France, 2Service de Biochimie Génétique; APHP, Hôpital Cochin; Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 3Maternité Port Royal; APHP, Hôpital P05.57 Foetal presentation of five Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome Cochin; Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 4Laboratoire Biomnis, Paris, cases with cREBBP alterations France. P. Fergelot1, S. Whalen2, G. Lancelot1, T. Attié-Bitach3, S. Blesson4, S. Charfi5, Trisomy 7 mosaicism has been diagnosed at least eleven times during B. Demeer6, B. Doray7, C. Fallet-Bianco8, R. Favre9, M. Gonzales10, N. Joyé10, the prenatal period by amniocentesis. Among these cases, three were J. Martinovic3, A. Philippe4, M. Portnoï10, F. Razavi3, L. Taine1, B. Arveiler1, D. associated with minor phenotypic abnormalities that can be observed Lacombe1; in Silver-Russel syndrome (SRS). Only one of these cases had mater- 1Service de Génétique Médicale GH Pellegrin CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, nal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7 (UPD7). France, 2Département de Génétique GH Pitié-Salpétrière APHP, Paris, France, We present the second case of prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 7 mosaic 3Service d’Histologie, Embryologie, Cytogénétique GH Necker- Enfants fetus associated with UPD7 (10% of SRS). A 43-year-old woman un- Malades APHP, Paris, France, 4Foetopathologie Service de Génétique CHU derwent amniocentesis at 19 weeks’ gestation because of advanced de Tours, Tours, France, 5Service d’Anatomie Pathologique Hôpital Nord maternal age. Fourteen percent of the colonies (8 colonies out of 17) CHU Amiens Picardie, Amiens, France, 6Génétique Clinique Hôpital Nord analyzed displayed trisomy 7 (47,XY,+7); whereas 86% of the colo- CHU Amiens Picardie, Amiens, France, 7Fédération de Génétique Hôpital nies demonstrated a normal karyotype. Maternal UPD7 was not tested de Hautepierre Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, during prenatal period. Sonographic examination noted intra-uterine 8Laboratoire de neuropathologie Centre Hospitalier Saint-Anne, Paris, France, growth retardation at 23 weeks’ gestation. The parents were counseled 9Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique CMCO-SIHCUS, Schiltigheim, France, and they were informed about the risk of SRS and they nevertheless 10Service de Génétique et d’Embryologie Médicales Hôpital Armand Trousseau decided to continue with the pregnancy. The medical examination at APHP, Paris, France. birth noted dysmorphic facial features of SRS without body asymmetry, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS; OMIM 180849) is an autosomal hypotonia and hypospadias. DNA analysis with polymorphic markers dominant developmental disorder characterised by facial dysmorphism, showed a maternal heterodisomy of chromosome 7. Chorionic villus broad thumbs and halluces associated with mental retardation. RSTS tissue culture showed trisomy 7 in forty percent of analysed cells. The is caused by mutations in the closely related CREBBP (60-65%) and karyotype obtained from lymphocytes was normal (46,XY). Analysis of EP300 genes (3%). About 10% of CREBBP alterations are deletions. urinary cells showed a mosaic trisomy 7 (16% of cells). These findings RSTS is often diagnosed at birth or during early childhood. suggest that mosaic trisomy 7 may have been overlooked in some We report on 5 cases of well-documented foetal RSTS. Two cases were cases of UPD7. In this regard the urinary cells represent one tissue examined after death in utero at 18 and 35 gestation weeks (GW) and that can be easily studied, looking for this mosaic trisomy.Prenatal and perinatal genetics 1 P05.60 molecular genetic and cytogenetic analysis of whole ther amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS). Although highly genome amplified rare single cells in a setting mimicking reliable to identify aneuploidies, as well as large chromosomal rear- microchimerism rangements, a significant limitation of this technique is the resolution T. Kroneis, J. B. Geigl, M. Auer, E. M. Hoffmann, T. Schwarzbraun, P. Ulz, G. that is > 5-10 Mb. Currently, prenatal diagnosis is reliant on cell culture Dohr, P. Sedlmayr; and the reporting of results represents a time of great anxiety for par- Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. ents during a pregnancy. Strategies for single cell analysis in cell based non-invasive prenatal In our laboratory we have collected, previous informed consensus, 100 diagnosis have to meet two purposes: first, the unambiguous identifi- samples of amniotic fluid for the following indications of examination: cation of the respective cell and second, the analysis of the target of advanced maternal age, positive screening test, ICSI, eco-evidenci- interest. Current strategies rely on various combinations of immunocy- ated markers / malformations. tochemistry, immunofluorescence, and fluorescence in situ hybridiza- We have used 20 ml of amniotic fluid, taken at 17 week of gestation, tion (FISH) or PCR for assignment of the status of candidate fetal cell. of which 15 ml were used for karyotype analysis and 5 ml were used Despite recent methodical refinements these techniques are restricted for SNP-array analysis. The SNP-array analysis has been performed to either fetal trisomic or male cells or few DNA loci specific for the with HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChip of Illumina. The data have been fetal genome. analysed with KaryoStudio software. To overcome the limitations resulting from analysing the DNA of a single In our cohort of 100 samples, the Illumina SNP platform detected these cell we implemented isothermal whole genome amplification (iWGA) imbalances: one duplication >1Mb, three duplication 1Mb,eleven dele- on the single cell level for subsequently enabling both molecular and tions <500 Kb. cytogenetic analysis from one and the same cell. An aliquot of cells of We compare the data obtained using SNP-array analysis with karyo- the colon carcinoma line HT-29 spiked into periperal blood mononu- type analysis. clear cells was immunostained for cytokeratin, nuclear counterstaining was done using TO-PRO-3 for establishing a group of double-positive P05.63 carrier screening for spinal muscular atrophy in taiwan candidate fetal cells. Single candidate cells were microdissected and on 107,611 pregnancies during 2005-2009 forwarded to low-volume on-chip iWGA. Aliquots of the iWGA products C. C. Hung1,2, Y. N. Su1,2, S. Y. Lin3,4, C. N. Lee4; were forwarded to DNA fingerprint analysis for confirmation of the ge- 1Graduate Institute of Clinical Genomics, National Taiwan University College of nomic identity, sequencing, and metaphase comparative genome hy- Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan bridization (mCGH). DNA profiles, sequencing, and mCGH data prove University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, our iWGA method to be compatible with analytical methods of a wide National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department range of resolution. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. P05.61 Genome wide 250k sNP array analysis for diagnosing Background Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the most common neu- pregnancies with ultrasound anomalies romuscular autosomal recessive disorder. The American College of B. H. W. Faas, R. Pfundt, I. van der Burgt, A. J. A. Kooper, J. Hehir-Kwa, A. P. Medical Genetics has recently recommended routine carrier screening T. Smits, N. de Leeuw; for SMA because of the high carrier frequency (1 in 25-50) as well as Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. the severity of the genetic disease. Large studies are needed to deter- To explore the application of the Affymetrix 250k SNP array platform mine the feasibility, benefits, and costs of such a program. in prenatal diagnosis, we performed array analyses on DNA from 69 Methods A prospective large population-based cohort study of preg- patients with prenatally identified anomalies. DNA was isolated from nancies was investigated in 25 counties of Taiwan during a 4.5-year (un)cultured amniocytes or chorionic villi, fibroblasts or blood cells. period, January 2005 through June 2009. Two different validated plat- Analyses were performed after TOP (N=35), IUFD (N=15), during forms were used for parallel SMN1/SMN2 gene quantification: dena- pregnancy (N=1), or postnatally (N=18). Prenatal karyotypes were re- turing high-performance liquid chromatography and multiplex ligation- ported normal (N=54), balanced (N=1) or unbalanced (N=3) and in 11 dependent probe amplification. cases culturing was not possible. Parental samples were available to Results We found 2,262 individuals with one copy of the SMN1 geno- study inheritance patterns. type, recognized to be SMA carriers, among the 107,611 pregnancies Array analysis revealed de novo (mosaic) CNVs (N=14) or UPDs screened. The carrier rate in our population was approximately 1 in (N=2) in sixteen cases, interpreted as highly likely clinically relevant. In 48 (2.10%). Of these individuals, 47 couples were at high risk for hav- three of these, the abnormality had already been reported after routine ing offspring with SMA after testing of partners or spouses 2,038 who cytogenetic analysis, in nine normal or balanced prenatal karyotypes were also determined to be SMA carriers. Prenatal diagnoses were de- had been reported and in four culturing of cells had not been possible. termined for 43 pregnancies (91.49%), of which 12 (27.91%) fetuses Aberrations inherited from a healthy parent and most likely not clini- were diagnosed with SMA; the prevalence of SMA in our population cally relevant were noticed in five cases and CNVs with unclear clinical was 1 in 8,968. relevance in two cases. Conclusions The main benefit of this program of SMA carrier screen- In summary, in 9/55 (16%) cases with normal or balanced prenatal ing was to reduce the burden of birth of an affected child. Additionally, karyotypes and in 4/11 (36%) cases with unknown karyotypes, ge- we determined carrier frequency and genetic risk to clinical research nome wide SNP array analysis enabled the detection of clinically rel- and providing carrier couples genetic services, knowledge as well as evant aberrations that otherwise would have remained undetected, generic counseling for health care. whereas in two cases, the clinical relevance of an aberration remained unclear. Moreover, in 3/3 cases already identified aberrations could be P05.64 Prenatal DNA testing of monogenic diseases with a late characterized in further detail. We conclude that genome wide SNP onset in Yakutia array analysis is a powerful tool that might replace routine karyotyping O. G. Sidorova1, S. K. Kononova1, V. L. Izhevskaya2, E. K. Khusnutdinova3; in diagnosing babies with ultrasound anomalies. 1Yakut Research Center of Complex Medical Problems, Siberian Branch of RAMN, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics P05.62 molecular karyotyping using sNP-array analysis in 100 of RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Biochemistry and cases of prenatal diagnosis Genetics,Ufa Research centre of RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation. M. S. Rocca1, L. Esposito2, P. Gasparini1,3, V. Pecile1; Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) and myotonic dystrophy (MD), 1IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2CBM SCRL, Area Science Park, Trieste, neurodegenerative and neuromuscular monogenic diseases with late Italy, 3Department of Reproduction and Development Science, Trieste, Italy. onset, are widespread in the Yakut population (frequency 38.6:100 Karyotype analysis of cultured cells has been regarded as the gold 000 and 21.3:100 000 respectively). Genetic counseling of 62 preg- standard for prenatal diagnosis for over 30 years. Since the first ap- nant women at risk for SCA1 or MD (43 with SCA1 and 19 with MD) plication of this technique to prenatal testing in the early 1970’s, this was carried out in 2002-2009 years. During this period 25 procedures procedure has proved to be highly reliable for identifying aneuploidies of prenatal DNA testing for SCA1 were carried out, in 13 cases results and structural rearrangements in foetal cells obtained invasively by ei- of DNA tests were negative and in 12 - were positive. 10 women with Prenatal and perinatal genetics 1 positive prenatal DNA test for SCA1 expressed a desire to terminate a expression of TTD genes in human placenta, above the mean of their pregnancy, and 2 women refused to terminate a pregnancy with SCA1 expression in all organs. Temporal analysis suggested that while XPD, mutation fetus. 10 procedures of prenatal testing for the MD have been XPB and TTDN1 were consistently expressed from 14 to 40 weeks carried out; in 7 cases the results of DNA tests were negative. Two gestation, expression of TTDA was strongly negatively correlated (r=- women from three with positive result of DNA testing refused to termi- 0.7,P<0.0001) with gestational age. Our results indicate an important nate a pregnancy and children with congenital form of MD were born role for XPD, XPB, TTDA and TTDN1 gene products during normal in both cases. human placental and fetal development. P05.65 structural chromosomal aberrations in early P05.67 A rare association of holoprosencephaly with triploidy in spontaneous abortions second trimester pregnancy-case report I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, K. Crkvenac Gornik, D. Muzinic, R. Lasan, L. Letica, F. M. Nedelea, V. Varlas, L. Turculet, L. Popescu, M. Iliescu, M. Bari, A. Stana, D. Begovic; G. Peltecu; Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University Clinical Hospital Filantropia, Bucharest, Romania. Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. Triploidy is one of the most frequent chromosomal aberrations found in About 15% to 20% of pregnancies end in spontaneous abortion, most- first trimester spontaneous abortions. Although majority of triploid con- ly in the first trimester. It is accepted that approximately 50% of early ceptions are lost in first trimester, few will still survive into the second fetal loss results from chromosome abnormalities. trimester and even rare in third trimester and leads to intrauterine or Cytogenetic examination was performed by the direct preparation neonatal death. Increased maternal age is not a risk factor. More likely method using chorionic villi. Among the 321 karyotyped abortions be- diandric fetuses survive to the second trimester. tween 4 and 13 weeks of gestation, 53,6% chromosomally abnormal We present a case of prenatal diagnosis of triploidy into the second tri- specimens were found and majority of chromosomal anomalies (90%) mester (20 weeks of gestation) trough CVS. It is an adolescent mother, were numerical. 17 years old and the referral reason for prenatal test was ultrasound Structural aberrations of the chromosomes were responsible for anomalies, characterized by severe IUGR, holoprosencephaly, cardiac 3,43% of early miscarriages and parental karyotyping is required. In septal defects and kidneys chists. Also enlarged placenta was present 6 of 11 habitual abortions with structural changes a familial balanced allowing only CVS procedure. The karyotype found was 69,XXX. rearrangement was established, that result in an increased recurrence It is a rare case when pregnancy survive into the second trimester and risk in future pregnancies. The structural chromosomal abnormalities also holoprosencephaly is associate with triploidy. that we encountered were divided into reciprocal chromosomal trans- The recurrence risk for future pregnancy is low, about 1%. The oppor- locations (4), Robertsonian translocations (4), deletions (2) and iso- tunity of a future prenatal test is not specifically indicated. It is recom- chromosome (1). The subsequent pregnancy outcomes for the three mended mother monitoring of hCG because of small risk of malign women having a reciprocal translocation was normal karyotype after transformation. amniocentesis. The mean maternal age was 29,8 years and there was no positive correlation of advanced maternal age with structural chro- P05.68 Application of quantitative Real-time PCR technique with mosomal aberrations. sYBR Green i dye on amniocyte samples for prenatal diagnosis Structural chromosomal imbalances were also independent on ges- of trisomy 21 tational age, depending of specific chromosomes invoved, genes and F. Shahrokhi, A. R. Kamyab, E. Shamsian, M. Behrooz Aghdam, R. Mahdian; size of the contained segment. Molecular Medicine Department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Cytogenetic analysis of the first trimester spontaneous abortion is use- Republic of Iran. ful to identify the reason for the miscarriage and prenatal diagnosis Introduction: Trisomy 21 syndrome (Down syndrome) is the main should be offered to carriers of a balanced chromosomal rearrange- causes of mental retardation and one of the most common chromo- ment because it may predispose to offspring with an unbalanced somal abnormalities (1 in 700-1000 births), Therefore diagnosis and karyotype. prevention of live-born affected fetus is a health care priority. Objective: Diagnostic Value of Real time PCR technique for prenatal P05.66** Adverse effects of trichothiodystrophy DNA repair and diagnosis of trisomy 21 was evaluated. transcription gene abnormalities on human fetal and placental Method and Material: Amniocentesis was performed on 59 pregnant development women who had the high risk criteria of having fetus with trisomy 21. R. Moslehi1, C. Signore2, A. Dzutsev2, J. Troendle2, A. Morgun2, A. Kumar1, J. 15-20 milliliter of amniotic fluid was used for cytogenetic analysis and Mills2; DNA extraction. Quality and quantity of DNA was measured by the 1State University of New York at Albany, Albany, NY, United States, 2National optical absorbance. DYRK1A and DSCAM genes (target genes) and Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. PMP22 (reference gene) were selected and specific primers for these Effects of abnormalities in DNA repair and transcription genes in hu- genes were designed. After determining of standard curve and PCR man prenatal life have never been studied. Based on novel clinical efficiencies for each gene, the target/reference genes ratio was calcu- observations, we conducted a genetic epidemiologic study to inves- lated using comparative cycle threshold method CΔΔ) t). tigate gestational outcomes associated with abnormalities in TTD Results: The results of target/reference genes ratio in trisomy 21 and nucleotide excision repair (NER) and transcription genes, namely, normal fetus was 1.61 ± 0.09 and 1.03 ± 0.05, respectively that showed XPD, XPB, TTD-A and TTDN1. We compared pregnancies resulting statistically significant difference between two groups. in TTD-affected offspring (N=24) with respect to abnormalities during Conclusion: Currently, the methods which are based on cytogenetic their antenatal and neonatal periods to population reference values. analysis are used to detect trisomy 21. These methods are generally We also analyzed the expression patterns of the four TTD genes in time-consuming and also need cultured live cells. In contrast, Real- normal human tissues. Significantly higher incidence of several se- Time PCR is a high throughput molecular technique with none of the vere gestational complications was noted in TTD-affected pregnan- above mentioned limitations. Therefore, Real-Time PCR technique cies. Compared to reference values, TTD-affected pregnancies were can be used as a rapid and reliable method for prenatal diagnosis of significantly more likely to be complicated by hemolysis, elevated liver trisomy 21. enzymes, and low platelets (HELLP) syndrome (RR=35.7,95%CI:7.6- 92.5,P=0.0002), elevated mid-trimester maternal serum human chori- P05.69 Rapid Prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 syndrome using onic gonadotropin (hCG) levels (RR=14.3,95%CI:7.0-16.6,P<0.0001), quantitative Real-time PcR on chorionic Villus samples small for gestational age (SGA)<3rd percentile (RR=13.9,95%CI:7.4- E. SHAMSIAN1,2, A. R. Kamyab2, F. Shahrokhi2, M. Behrooz Aghdam1, R. 21.1,P<0.0001), preterm delivery (<32 weeks) (RR=12.0,95%CI:4.9- Mahdian2; 21.6,P<0.0001), pre-eclampsia (RR=4.0,95%CI:1.6-7.4,P=0.006), and 1Science and Research branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran, decreased fetal movement (RR=3.3,95%CI:1.6-5.2,P=0.0018). Abnor- TEHRAN, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Medicine Department, Pasteur mal placental development may explain the constellation of observed Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. abnormalities. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the expression pat- Trisomy 21 syndrome (Down syndrome) is an intricate neurodegener- terns of the four TTD genes in normal human tissue. We found high ative disease caused by a chromosomal aberration with the frequency Cancer genetics 10 of about 1 in 800 births. Thus, prenatal diagnosis and termination of expression was observed in 10% of normal tissues adjacent to tumor, pregnancies with affected fetus is a health care priority. To this end, we compared to none in the noncancerous control group. have developed a novel quantitative Real-Time PCR method for pre- Conclusion: These results suggest that disruption of the RB and p53 natal diagnosis of Down syndrome. Chorionic Villus Samples (CVS) pathways may play a critical role in the development of ESCC among was obtained from 25 pregnant women who had the high risk of hav- high-risk population of northeastern Iran. Moreover,detection of abnor- ing fetus with Down syndrome in preliminary screening. Blood sam- mally accumulated p53 in the morphologically normal tissue adjacent ples from 6 Down syndrome patients were used as positive controls. to tumor may be a predictor of future recurrence of tumor in these Genomic DNA was extracted using a commercial kit and quality and patients. quantity of the DNA was measured by spectrophotometry. DYRK1A22, DSCAM (on chromosome 21) and PMP22 (on chromosome 17) genes P06.002 mutation analysis of the AATF gene in breast cancer were selected as targets and reference gene, respectively. Specific families primers were designed and PCR efficiencies were determined for each M. Haanpää1,2, M. Reiman1,2, H. Erkko1,2, K. Pylkäs1,2, R. Winqvist1,2; gene. Gene dosage study was performed using quantitative Real-Time 1Oulu University/ Biocenter, Oulu, Finland, 2Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, PCR and target /reference genes ratio was calculated according to the Finland. 2-ΔΔct formula. The results of gene dosage analysis showed the target/ Background: About 5-10% of breast cancer is due to inherited disease reference genes ratio of 1.56±0.09 and 1.02±0.11 in trisomy 21 and predisposition. Currently known genes account for less than half of the normal samples, respectively. The assay was able to demonstrate the hereditary cases. AATF (apoptosis antagonizing transcription factor presence of three copies of target genes in affected samples. DSCAM alias CHE1) plays an important role in the DNA damage response and / PMP22 and DYRK1A22 / PMP22 ratio were significantly higher in cell-cycle checkpoint control. Many previously identified susceptibility trisomy 21 cases (1.5 times). Therefore quantitative Real-Time PCR factors act in similar functional pathways as AATF, suggesting possible technique can be used as a sensitive, accurate and reliable technique involvement of AATF in heritable breast cancer susceptibility. for rapid and prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21syndrome. Methods: We have screened affected index cases from 124 Finnish breast cancer families for germline defects in AATF by using confor- P05.70 Confined placental mosaicism of 22 trisomy with normal mation sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE). All alterations seen were prenatal echosonography and normal eutrophic babyborn : characterized by direct sequencing with the Li-Cor IR2 4200-S DNA trisomy rescue demonstrated by presence of fetal uniparental analysis system. isodisomy. Results: Altogether seven different sequence changes were observed. E. Ginglinger, e. montoya, c. cordier, E. jeandidier; To our knowledge, this is the first study reporting the mutation screen- Emile Muller Hospital, Mulhouse, France. ing of the AATF gene in familial breast cancer. A chorionic villous sampling (CVS) performed at 11 weeks of gestation Conclusions: The identification of novel susceptibility factors offers ex- show at direct examination a trisomy 22 but after culture only a mosa- citing challenges, because more than 70% of the genetic predisposi- icism (mos46,XX[15]/47,XX+22[5]) was detected. The US was strictly tion to breast cancer remains unexplained. The result of our current normal, without the classical IUGR leading to new investigations. study indicates that germline alterations in the AATF gene do not sig- Cytogenetic analysis from amniotic fluid and fetal blood sample show nificantly contribute to the risk of getting breast cancer. normal 46,XX karyotype. Molecular analysis show a maternal isodisomy (meiosis II) involving P06.003 translocation detection in iranian patients with Acute trisomy rescue, usual incrimined but rarely demonstrated. lymphoblastic leukemia At birth the baby was a clinically normal healthy little girl. As in earlier L. Yektamaram, H. Loghmani Khouzani, P. Rostami, E. Shirvani, H. Imanian, reports, Chromosom 22 seems not to show any apparent imprinting S. Valizadegan, H. Najmabadi; effect. Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic When there is clinical and biological discordance during pregnancy, of Iran. Genetic counselling must be cautious and precise. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fast-growing cancer of white blood cells. Lymphocytes are a type of WBC that the body uses to fight infections. In ALL, the bone marrow makes abnormal amounts of un- P06 cancer genetics formed cells called blasts that normally develop in lymphocytes. How- ever, the blasts are abnormal. They do not develop and cannot fight P06.001 correlation of p53, p16, p21 and mDm2 protein infections. ALL is the most common cause of leukemia in children with expression in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma an annual incidence of 3.5 cases per 100,000 children below 15 years N. Taghavi1, F. Biramijamal1, M. Sotoudeh2, M. Abbaszadegan3, H. Khademi4, of age. 60% of ALL is diagnosed in children below 15 years of age, and O. Moaven3, R. Malekzadeh2; about 7% are diagnosed in young adults of 15-20 years of age. 1National institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic In this study we analyzed leukemic patients by nested multiplex re- Republic of Iran, 2Digestive Disease Research Center (DDRC), Tehran verse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) for rapid diagnosis and screening, University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 33. Division of for 4 chromosomal translocation; t(1;19) (q23;p13) , t(12;21) (p13;q22), Human Genetics, Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, t(4;11) (q21;q23) and for t(9;22) (q34;q11). Mashhad University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Mashhad, Islamic Republic Blood samples from the patients admitted to our genetic center were of Iran, 41. Digestive Disease Research Center (DDRC), Tehran University of subjected to RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis. To achieve maximal Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. sensitivity nested PCR protocol was used and a housekeeping gene Backgrounds: Tumor suppressor genes p53, p21Waf1/Cip1 and was considered as an internal positive control. p16INK4a and the proto-oncogene MDM2 are considered to be essen- We investigated 123 patients and the following results were obtained: tial cell cycle regulatory proteins whose loss of function is associated 8 (6.5%) were positive for t(12;21) (p13;q22) , 6 (4.8 %) had t(4;11) with esophageal esquamous cell carcinogenesis [ESCC]. This study (q21;q23) , 11 (8.94%) were positive for t(9;22) (q34;q11), which among was conducted to investigate the immunohistochemical expression of them 3 (27.27%) had the ‘b2a2’, 5(45.45%) ‘b3a2’ and 3(27.27%) these proteins in 80 ESCC patients in the northeastern Iran in which ‘e1a2’ breakpoint. Non of the patients had t(1;19) (q23;p13). ESCC has the highest incidence of cancer, well above the world aver- Our results were in concordance with other researches performed in age. different countries. Methods: Expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins in both the RB and p53 pathways was investigated Immunohistochemically, on tu- P06.004 the correlation pattern of acquired copy number mor tissues of 80 ESCC patients and 60 available paraffin-embed- changes in 164 EtV6/RUNX1-positive childhood acute ded blocks of adjacent normal specimens of cases, along with normal lymphoblastic leukemias esophageal tissues of 80 healthy subjects. H. Lilljebjörn1, C. Soneson2, A. Andersson1, J. Heldrup3, M. Behrendtz4, Result: Abnormal accumulation of the p53 protein along with p21 over- N. Kawamata5, P. H. Koeffler5, F. Mitelman1, B. Johansson1, M. Fontes2, T. expression and p16 negative expression, but not MDM2, was signifi- Fioretos1; cantly higher in the tumor tissue. (P < 0.001) Moreover, P53 positive 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University, Cancer genetics 11 Lund, Sweden, 2Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, tic relevance of NPM1 and FLT3 mutations in patients with AML and Sweden, 3Department of Pediatrics, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University, MDS in Russia. We have studied blood samples from 44 patients with Lund, Sweden, 4Department of Pediatrics, Linköping University Hospital, secondary and de novo MDS and 43 patients with AML. It was shown Linköping, Sweden, 5Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of California, Los that most of the patients with de novo MDS carried NPM1 mutations in Angeles, CA, United States. contrast to the patients with secondary MDS, and both groups had low The ETV6/RUNX1 fusion gene, present in 25% of B-lineage childhood frequency of FLT3 mutations. However FLT3 mutations were found to acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), is thought to represent an initiat- be predominant in patients with AML. It was shown that total frequency ing event, which requires additional genetic changes for leukemia de- of FLT3-ITD, FLT3-TKD and NPM1 4 bp insert mutations was 37,2% velopment. To identify additional genetic alterations, 24 ETV6/RUNX1- of all studied AML cases where FLT3-ITD mutation was the major positive ALLs were analyzed using 500K single nucleotide polymor- (13,9%). Taken together our results allow us to conclude that muta- phism arrays. The results were combined with previously published tion in NPM1 gene in MDS patients with normal karyotype leads to data sets, allowing us to ascertain genomic copy number aberrations favorable prognosis for disease outcome; FLT3-ITD mutation in AML (CNAs) in 164 cases. In total, 45 recurrent CNAs were identified with NPM1- patients with normal karyotype leads to poor prognosis. an average number of 3.5 recurrent changes per case (range 0-13). Twenty-six percent of cases displayed a set of recurrent CNAs identi- P06.007 Identification of regulatory genetic variation in cal to that of other cases in the data set. The majority (74%), however, childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) displayed a unique pattern of recurrent CNAs, indicating a large het- A. Kiialainen1, J. Nordlund1, O. Karlberg1, L. Milani1, A. Lundmark1, U. erogeneity within this ALL subtype. As previously demonstrated, alter- Liljedahl1, G. Lönnerholm1,2, A. Syvänen1; ations targeting genes involved in B-cell development were common 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2For the Nordic Society of Pediatric (present in 28% of cases). However, the combined analysis also iden- Hematology and Oncology (NOPHO), Sweden. tified alterations affecting nuclear hormone response (24%) to be a Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common form of child- characteristic feature of ETV6/RUNX1-positive ALL. Studying the cor- hood cancer. Although treatments for ALL currently exist, some pa- relation pattern of the CNAs allowed us to highlight significant positive tients do not benefit from them, while others suffer from unnecessary and negative correlations between specific aberrations. Furthermore, side effects. In order to gain insight into regulatory genetic variation oncogenetic tree models identified ETV6, CDKN2A/B, PAX5, del(6q), that affects drug response in ALL, we have previously measured the and +16 as possible early events in the leukemogenic process. allele-specific expression (ASE) levels of over 8000 genes in RNA- samples from 197 ALL patients whose in vitro drug responses against P06.005 NPM1, FLT and c-KIT genes mutations in childhood ten anti-cancer drugs are known (Milani et al. Genome Research AmL in Russia 2009). Guided by the allele-specific differences in gene expression, Y. E. Yatsenko1, O. V. Kalennik1, E. Y. Osipova2, T. V. Nasedkina1; we chose a subset of 56 genes displaying ASE for re-sequencing. We 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, are sequencing the whole genes, including exons, introns, and some 2Federal Research Center for Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, and of the 5’ and 3’ non-coding sequence making up a target region of Immunology, Moscow, Russian Federation. 3.1 megabases in total, in order to find the regulatory variants. We Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a genetically heterogeneous clonal have used Nimblegen sequence capture arrays and Agilent’s Sure- disorder characterized by the accumulation of acquired somatic ge- Select method for preparing sequencing libraries from DNA samples netic alterations in hematopoietic progenitor cells. Approximately 50% from ALL patients. Using the Illumina Genome Analyzer, we have se- of patients with AML exhibit a normal karyotype. Somatically acquired quenced libraries prepared from 63 ALL samples. We have used BWA mutations affecting transcription and signal transduction were identi- for sequence alignment and the Samtools package for further analysis fied in cytogenetically normal AML in the nucleophosmin 1 (NPM1), of the sequencing data and called up to 3500 SNPs per sample. We the fms-related tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3), and the tyrosine kinase c-KIT are now selecting the regulatory variants discovered by sequencing genes, which makes the mutations important prognostic markers. for genotyping in a larger set of patient samples. We will correlate the In present study we investigated the frequency of mutations in child- genotypes with the allele-specific expression levels as well as with the hood AML in Russian population. Genomic DNA was extracted from drug response patterns of the patient cells. 130 samples from patients with AML. FLT3 gene mutations of the in- ternal tandem repetition ITD and activation loop FLT3/D835Mt, NPM1 P06.008 Androgen receptor CAG polymorphism and breast gene mutations of exon 12 and c-KIT gene mutations of exons 8 and cancer risk in macedonian women 17 were examined by PCR and direct sequencing. In parallel, the sam- S. Madzunkova1, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, G. Kondov2, Z. Spirovski2, G. D. ples were analyzed for the presence of translocations using diagnostic Efremov1; biochip. 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former We have found NPM1 mutations in 7 of 130 patients (type A tctg - 3, Yugoslav Republic of, 2Clinic for Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Faculty of type B catg - 2, type D cctg - 1 and type Qm tcgg - 1). The FLT3/ITD Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. mutation appeared in 9 of 130 patients, the length varied from 11 to Androgens have been hypothesized to influence risk of breast cancer 110bp, whereas other FLT3 and c-KIT mutations were not found. The through several mechanisms, including their conversion to estradiol or rates of mutations are significantly lower in childhood AML as com- their binding to the estrogen receptor and/or androgen receptor (AR) pared with adult AML (published for Japanese and Italian populations): in the breast. Androgenic stimulation may oppose breast cell prolifera- NPM1 gene mutations - 5.4% (7/130) against 25-52%, FLT3/ITD - tion, that it is mediated by AR. The first exon of AR gene contains a 6.9% (9/130) against 18.9%. The work was supported by the Russian translated polymorphic CAG (poly-glutamine) repeat (from 8 to 35 in Foundation for Basic Research (project no. 08-04-01480). normal population), and its’ length is inversely correlated to the trans- activation power of the receptor. Longer CAG repeats have been as- P06.006 Frequency of mutations in NPm1 and FtL3 genes sociated with increased risk of breast cancer. The aim of this study and there impact on prognosis in patients with acute myeloid was to examine whether AR-CAG repeat lengths are related to breast leukemia (AmL) and myelodysplastic syndromes (mDs) in cancer susceptibility in Macedonian patients with breast cancer. We Russia. studied 71 patients with breast cancer and 76 controls. The CAG re- V. Y. Aksenova, M. V. Moskalenko, I. S. Martynkevich, S. V. Gricayev, M. P. peat number was determined by fluorescent polymerase chain reac- Ivanova, S. A. Tiranova, K. M. Abdulkadirov; tion (PCR) amplification of exon 1 of the AR gene and capillary elec- Russian Research Institute of Hematology and Transfusiology, Saint- trophoresis on ABI3130 Genetic Analyzer. Comparisons were made Petersburg, Russian Federation. for mean allele length, and separately for the shorter and the longer Mutations of the nucleophosmin (NPM1) and Fms-like tyrosine kinase alleles. Dichotomous categories for CAG repeats were generated at 3 (FTL3) genes have recently been described as the most frequent all possible cut-points. The AR CAG repeat ranged from 10 to 34 in all mutations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syn- tested women. The mean number of the repeats was not statistically dromes (MDS). Frequencies of these mutations and their impact on different between patients (22.32+1.96) and controls (21.81+1.97). We clinical course have been determined around world, but not in Rus- found a significantly higher percentage of longer alleles ≥25 repeats in sian population. Our aim was to investigate frequencies and prognos- breast cancer patients than in controls (p=0.0002, O.R. (1.87-8.32). Cancer genetics 12 This finding suggests that women with longer allele ≥ 25 CAG repeats P06.011 study of cloned gene-related protein Vp2 of infectious may be at increased risk of breast cancer. Bursal Disease Virus- induced apoptosis in human B cell lymphoma in vitro P06.009 Antimutagenicity and Anticancer effects of Citrus M. Hashemi1, A. Gharshi2, K. Parivar3, M. Shamsara2; Limon 1Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic M. Entezri1, M. Hashemi1, A. Majd2, M. Sedigheh2; of Iran, 2Departmemt of Virology,National Institue for genetic engineering 1Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic Azad Iran, 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran North Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic University,Science and research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of Iran. Background:Apoptosis or programmed cell death (PCD) is an impor- Background:Currenthy cancer is considered as one of the main factors tant mechanism in both development and homeostasis in adult tissue of mortality globally. Many chemicals in our environment can cause ge- for the removal of superfluous cells that its inducing is a effective cure netic mutations and are potentially responsible for millions of cancer- of cancer.The aim of the present study were to evaluated the effect of related deaths. The scientist are nowadays looking for food materials cloned gene-related protein Vp2 of Infectious Bursal Disease Virus in which can potenthially prevent the cancer occurrence. The purpose of human lymphoma B cells. this research is to examine antimutagenicity and anticancer effect of Material and methods:In present study after cloning the Vp2 gene in Citrus Limon fruit juices. Pichia pastoris system,the Vp2 protein was expressed. Cellular vital Material and methods:In present study Human Astrocytoma cancer capacity was determined by MTT. Then effect of Vp2 protein in human cells were cultured in DMEM (Gibco),supplemented with 10% fetal calf lymphoma B cells was examined by Hoechst staining and Flowcytom- serum,peniciline-streptomycin,L-glutamine and incubated at 37 ºC for etry techniques , respectively. 2 days.In addition cancer cell line were treated by Citrus Limon fruit Results:During MTT, human lymphoma B cell lines revealed to juice and Cellular vital capacity was determined by MTT. The Citrus have a meaningful apoptosis at 1μg and 5μg protein concentrations Limon fruit juice was subsequenthy evaluated in terms of antimuta- when compared with controls(p<0.01).Apoptotic bodies appeared by genicity and anticancer properties by a standard reverse mutation as- Hoechst staining apoptosis was induced suitably after 48 hours by say (Ames Test). Flowcytometry assay. Results:During MTT, human Astrocytoma cell line revealed to have a Conclusion: The present study is the first study that have revealed the meaningful cell death when compared with controls(p<0.01). In Ames gene-related protein Vp2 induced apoptosis in human lymphoma B Test the fruit juices prevented the reverted mutations and the hin- cells in vitro. drance percent of half-ripe Citrus Limon was 71.7% and ripe Citrus Limon was 34.4% in Antimutagenicity test and this value in anticancer P06.012 Genetic diagnostics of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor test was 83.3% and 50% in half-ripe Citrus Limon and ripe Citrus Li- in children in slovakia. mon respectively L. Rotikova1, B. Piackova1, M. Cermak1, Z. Szaboova1, B. Rychly2, D. Conclusion: This is the first study that have revealed antimutagenicity Ilencikova1; and anticancer effect of Citrus Limon fruit juice and the effects were 1National Institute of Oncology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Cytophatos, Bratislava, higher in half-ripe Citrus Limon in comparison to the riprned one. Slovakia. Introduction: P06.010 splicing mutations of the APc gene in the czech FAP Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is an aggressive type of em- families bryonal tumor - WHO Grade IV. Most frequently it occurs in children L. Schwarzová, M. Florianová, J. Štekrová, K. Hirschfeldová, V. Kebrdlová, J. under age 2. Due to its morphological variability, AT/RT is often falsely Kotlas, K. Veselá, M. Kohoutová; misdiagnosed for a primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) or me- Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine and General dulloblastoma. For the majority of AT/RT cases is characteristic either Teaching Hospital, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. deletion, or chromosome 22 monosomy - loss of the hSNF5/INI1 gene, Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant syn- which is localized on 22q11.2. drome with almost 100% risk of colorectal cancer. The typical FAP is Methodology and results: characterized by hundreds to thousands of colorectal adenomatous We examined paraffin embedded tumor tissue samples by a method polyps and by extracolonic manifestations. An attenuated form of FAP of fluorescent in situ hybridization in three child patients diagnosed (AFAP) is characterized by less than 100 adenomas and later onset in 2008-2009. In order to assess diagnosis we used the IGL probe of the disease. (22q11), by way of which we indirectly confirmed gene INI1 deletion. We analyzed the APC gene for germline mutations in 386 FAP/AFAP Gene INI1 deletion was directly validated by the proposed BAC probe patients. Mutation screening was performed using DGGE. DNA frag- RP 11-80O7 (22q11.23). ments showing an aberrant electrophoretic banding pattern were se- A 2-year-old patient was diagnosed with AT/RT CNS at the age of 1, quenced. All APC-mutation-negative probands were screened for large and one year later, a renal rhabdoid tumor was diagnosed in the very deletions of the APC gene using multiplex ligation dependent probe same patient. We assumed the presence of gene hSNF5/INI1 consti- amplification (MLPA). Analysis of mRNA variants followed in probands tutional inactivation (rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome). with possible splicing mutation. This analysis was performed by PCR Only scarcely a literature reference is found on metachronal renal amplification of target site flanking exons and sequencing the normal rhabdoid tumor formation following an AT/RT of the brain. and aberrant products. Examining the patient’s peripheral blood by the sequential meth- We identified 88 germline mutations among 144 unrelated probands od of molecular genetics revealed mutation of c.395_396insCC including large deletions. 11 germline APC mutations detected last two p.Val132ValfsX12 in exon 4 of the hSNF5/INI1 gene, which so far has years have not been reported yet, which gives evidence of great vari- not been described in NCBI, nor HGMD database. Further peripheral ability of mutations. blood examination in patient’s parents and sibling revealed no germline At all, 15 of the mutations would possibly cause splicing errors. Analy- mutation in exon 4 of the hSNF5/INI1 gene that was being monitored. sis of mRNA of nine of these patients showed exon skipping in 6 cas- es, change of the amount of alternatively spliced product in one case, P06.013 Optimisation and standardisation of sample and no effect in two cases. Several previously unknown alternative preparation with the Bead-beating technology in genomics splicings of APC gene were also revealed in normal controls. research This reserch was supported by the VZ MSM0021620808 of the Czech R. Verollet; Republic. Bertin Technologies, Montigny le Bretonneux, France. In the context of sample preparation and cell lysis, Bertin Technologies (France) has developed a technology dedicated to the homogeniza- tion and grinding of soft to hard materials. The goal is to improve the first critical step in any molecular biology process and follow the latest requirements of analysis equipments which have radically improved in terms of throughput, reproducibility, detection limits and linearity.Cancer genetics 1 Following specific mechanical engineering studies of bead beating mollusks. Our laboratory investigates hemocyanins and their deriva- technology, a high speed figure-8 multidirectional motion gives shak- tives from the species: Helix lucorum (HlH) and Rapana venosa (RvH ing energy to the beads that grind/homogenize samples in sealed vi- ) and their clinical use. The aim of our study is to examin their effect on als (2mL or 7mL). This patented solution Precellys24 plays a large genetic level against bladder cancer. part in the analyse chain of rapid method to extract full length DNA, Three different hemocyanin isopolypeptides, named β-HlH, αD-HlH stable RNA, native state proteins or drug compounds out any sam- and αN-HlH, were isolated from the hemolymph of the Helix luco- ples. Thanks to Cryolys option, temperature inside Precellys24 tubes rum and were identified by their N-terminal sequences and molecular is maintained at an optimal level during homogenization. masses. The molecular masses were determined by PAGE and size Bertin and its partners have been investigating mechanical lysis with exclusion chromatography. The mass of the β-HlH was found to be the Precellys bead beater vs. manual, chemical or sonicator methods. 1068 kDa and the masses of αD-HlH and αN-Hc - 1079 kDa. Several applications on DNA and RNA extraction from human or ani- The anti-tumour effects were investigated on 647-V, T-24 and CAL-29 mal tissues illustrate the contribution of this equipment to the improve- bladder tumor Gene expression profiling and Microarray CGH analy- ment of genomics research. ses of the tumor cells before and after haemocyanins treatment, and Bead beating technology was successfully evaluated in these applica- studies on the gene sequences of the haemocyanins isoformes will be tions and satisfied users in term of efficiency without degradation of the disscused. material, reproducibility, time and labour saving that are mains items to consider. P06.016 stUDY OF GENE EXPREssiON iN sUPERFiciAL tRANsitiONAL cELL cARciNOmAs P06.014 Molecular evidence supporting field effect in recurrent J. Mares1, M. Szakacsova2, V. Soukup2, C. Guelly3, J. Duskova4, A. Horinek5, and primary multiple superficial bladder cancers M. Babjuk6; A. Babayan1,2, Y. Andreeva3, D. Zaletaev1,4, M. Nemtsova1,4; 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Clinic of Urology, 1st Medical Faculty, 2Institute of Tumor Biology, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Center for Medical Research, Hamburg, Germany, 3Moscow Herzen Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria, 4Institute of Pathological Anatomy, Russian Federation, 4Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Institute of Federation. Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, High recurrence rate is a common phenomenon in superficial bladder Czech Republic, 6Clinic of Urology, 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles University, cancer (SBC). Recurrences, as well as primary multifocality, might be Prague, Czech Republic. explained with monoclonal theory, suggesting that all coexisting/fol- Treatment of bladder superficial tumours is dependent on the risk of lowing tumors arise from a single malignant transformed cell, which recurrence and it is therefore clinically important to identify bladder proliferates and spreads throughout the urothelium or might be spread cancers with a high risk of intravesical recurrence after transurethral during the intravesical manipulations. Another theory explains multifo- bladder tumour resection. To improve the accuracy of tumour progres- cality/recurrences as subsequent events secondary to a field-cancer- sion prediction various molecular markers have been evaluated by ization effect, so tumors are expected to be genetically non-identical. gene expression microarrays but to date no relevant molecular mark- The question weather recurrent/coexisting tumors arise from the same ers have been used in clinical practice. tumor clone or develop independently has a great clinical relevance to For the improvement of recurrence prognosis we have applied gene surgery and treatment approaches. Molecular analysis of alterations expression microarray analysis to two groups of bladder tumours (su- patterns in each of coexisting/recurrent tumors may give us an an- perficial bladder tumours with no or late recurrence during the period swer. of two years versus early recurrence ones). We examined 86 tumor samples from 19 patients with recurrent SBC Data from microarrays containing 29,019 targets (Applied Biosystems) (RSBC) (primary tumor and 1-4 relapses) and 8 patients with primary were subjected to a panel of statistical analyses to identify bladder multiple SBC (MSBC) (2-5 tumors/patient). Genomic DNA samples cancer recurrence-associated gene signatures. Initial screening using were prepared from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections. Our the GeneSpring and Bioconductor software tools revealed a putative panel included LOH analysis at 9p21 and 17p13 (microsatellite assay), set of about 50 genes differing in gene expression in both groups. After promoter hypermethylation of RASSF1A, P16, DAPK (methyl-sensi- validation significant differences were observed by ARHGEF4, NINJ1, tive PCR). PRICKLE1, PSAT1, TM4SF1 and TNFSF15 genes. Besides, we inte- Fifteen of 19 (79%) patients with RSBC showed different molecular grated the microarray dataset with additional background knowledge, alterations pattern between primary and recurrent tumors as well as in order to algorithmically mine for differential-expression patterns in 7 of 8 (88%) patients with MSBC. Moreover, relapses from the same terms of the Gene Ontology functions and processes as well as known patient also had different alteration patterns. Four of 19 (21%) patients regulatory pathway memberships. with RSBC and one of 8 (12%) patients with MSBC demonstrated con- Our results indicate that it may be possible to identify patients with a cordant alteration pattern between primary and subsequent/coexisting high risk of disease recurrence at an early stage using a molecular tumors. profile present already in the superficial tumours. Our results show that the relapses and coexisting multiple tumors in Research was supported by MSM 0021620808 many cases of SBC arise from independently transformed urothelial cells. P06.017 Rt-PcR Analysis of putative BRcA1/2 splice Variants R. D. Brandao1,2, K. van Roozendaal1, D. Tserpelis1, E. Gómez García1, M. J. P06.015 testing the antitumor effect of hemocyanins on Blok1; genomics and proteomics level 1Maastricht University Hospital, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2GROW - School O. S. Boyanova1, P. Dolashka-Angelova2, L. Yosifova3, S. Zaharieva3, L. for Oncology and Developmental Biology, University Maastricht, Maastricht, Velkova2, I. Dimitrov2, D. Toncheva1; Netherlands. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University- Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, Introduction: A subset of the unclassified variants (UVs) found in the 2Institute of Organic Chemistry with Centre of Phitochemistry, BAS, Sofia, BRCA genes may affect splicing. Twelve putative BRCA1/2 splice vari- Bulgaria, 3Institute of Experimental Pathology and Parasitology - Bulgarian ants prior selected upon in silico analysis were studied experimentally Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria. using RT-PCR. Urinary bladder cancer is the 7-th most common cancer worldwide Methods: The variants selected were: in BRCA1 c.693G>A and in and is a socially significant healthcare problem. Risk factors such as BRCA2 c.68-7T>A, c.425G>T, c.794-11T>C, c.6935A>T, c.6842-3T>C, DNA mutation and environmental factors: tobacco smoking, infection c.6943A>G, c.7976+3del2, c.8350C>T, c.8953+13A>G, c.8662C>T by Schistosoma haematobium, diet and the aging of the world popula- and c.8754+3G>C. We performed short-term lymphocyte cultures, in tion may be responsible for its pathogenesis. One of the approaches the absence or presence of puromycin, a nonsense mediated mRNA- for bladder cancer therapy is the use of Keyhole limpet hemocyanins decay inhibitor. PCRs using primers flanking the region of interest (KLH).The hemocyanins are copper-containing respiratory proteins were performed to look for aberrant cDNA. This was followed by allele- and serve as oxygen-carriers in the blood of some arthropods and specific PCRs in order to analyze the contribution of each allele to the Cancer genetics 1 relative expression of the wild-type and aberrant transcripts found. exclude the association of the gene in breast cancer but it needs more Results: The variants BRCA2 c.425G>T, c.7976+3del2, and investigation. Also it is necessary to test the other exones of the gene c.8754+3G>C result in aberrant splicing, i.e. exon 4, exon 17 skipping and retention of 46bp of intron 22, respectively. The BRCA1 variant P06.020 the comprehensive molecular-genetic analysis of c.693G>A results in exon 11 skipping, which is a normal isoform in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome: BRcA1 and breast- and ovarian tissue but not in lymphocytes. BRCA2 variants BRcA2 genes c.68-7T>A and c.6935A>T induce higher expression of the BRCA2Δ3 M. Konecny1, M. Milly1, K. Zavodna1,2, E. Weismanova1, Z. Bartosova1,2, I. and BRCA2Δ12 isoforms, which are also expressed in controls, Mlkva3, D. Ilencikova4, J. Kausitz1; whereas the level of expression of the full-length transcript is the same 1St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Cancer Research Institute as from the WT allele. For the other variants no splice aberrations were of Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Centre of Clinical detected. Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4National Cancer Institute, Conclusion: The BRCA2 variants c.425G>T, c.7976+3del2, and Bratislava, Slovakia. c.8754+3G>C could be classified as pathogenic. The clinical relevance Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes account for of variants that induce higher expression of normal isoforms is difficult the majority of hereditary breast ovarian cancer (HBOC) cases. The to evaluate as their function is currently unknown. analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 376 Slovak HBOC families revealed in 70 families a presence of relevant mutations, what repre- P06.018 Two deleterious BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a sents 18.6%. We observed that the best clinical criterion for BRCA1 spanish family. analysis is familiar occurrence of disease and diagnosis of breast can- M. Infante, M. Durán, D. Sanz, L. Pérez-Cabornero, A. Acedo, E. Lastra, L. cer at the age around 40 years together with the presence of ovarian Hernández, N. Martínez, C. Miner, E. Velasco; cancer diagnosed at the age around 50 years in the family. In BRCA2 IBGM, Valladolid, Spain. analysis it is an exclusive presence of breast cancer without any ovar- Double heterozygote (DH) families for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations ian cancer diagnosed at the age over 45 years in the family. We have are a rare event mostly found in populations with founder mutations. identified three novel, probably Slovak specific pathogenic mutations To date nearly 29 families have been described worldwide; most of c.80+3del4 and c.1166delG in BRCA1 gene and c.6589delA in BRCA2 them harbouring at least one of the three Ashkenazi mutations, whilst gene and also the presence of a very rare large genomic rearrange- only three families are not associated with known founder mutations. ment affecting complete BRCA1 allele, deletion of exons 1 to 24 re- Here we describe the first DH Spanish family without founder muta- spectively. tions. The index case was a woman with breast cancer (onset age Increasing the effectiveness of the analysis may be enriched by en- 48 years) that carried the nonsense BRCA1-c.153C>T (p.Q12X) and largement of analysed sequence of BRCA genes and by more strin- the novel BRCA2-1815delTinsCA mutation. Other tumours observed gent selection of HBOC families directed for BRCA1/2 analysis. in this family were ovarian, colorectal and three gastric cancer cases. Intriguingly, the daughter with ovarian cancer at 34 years only inherited P06.021 Acceptability of breast cancer medical prevention by the BRCA1 mutation. Other unaffected relatives were a 30 years-old letrozole in post- menopausal women with a BRcA1/2 mutation son that carried both mutations and a 46 aged nephew that inherited in the LiBER trial only the BRCA2 mutation. Breast cancer lifetime risks of 12.8% and P. Ppujol1, S. Mijonnet2, K. Baudry1, P. berthet3, C. Nogues4, A. Martin2; 6%, respectively, were previously established with BRCAPRO, thus, 1oncogenetique CHU, INSERM- CRCM Val d’Aurelle, Montpellier, France, the former patient was included in the surveillance program. This is 2FNCLCC, Paris, France, 3GGC FNCLCC, Caen, France, 4GGC FNCLCC, the only double heterozygote found in 860 families scanned for BRCA Paris, France. mutations until now (0.12 %), a frequency similar to those reported in Women carrying a germline BRCA1/2 mutation have a life-time risk of other European countries. developing breast cancer of 56 to 80%. Prophylactic bilateral mastec- Whereas BRCA1-c.153C>T mutation has 13 records in BIC mutation tomy provides a valid option to reduce breast cancer incidence, but database, BRCA2-1815delTinsCA is a new mutation present in two greatly affects the quality of life. There is therefore an urgent need to more unrelated families of our series. Haplotype analysis of twelve evaluate medical preventive alternative. polymorphic markers linked to BRCA2 suggested a common origin for The major breast cancer prevention trials using tamoxifen showed this mutation. an approximately 50% incidence reduction in high risk women. Adju- vant trials comparing aromatase inhibitors (AI) to tamoxifen revealed P06.019 BRcA1 and BRCA2 mutation in iranian breast cancer a higher preventive efficacy of AI for contralateral cancer with fewer patients thromboembolic side effects. H. Soltanzadeh; The French federation of cancer centres („FNCLCC“) has developed Young researcherchers club. Bonab of Azad University. National Institute for a randomized phase III study to determine the efficacy of letrozole Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology ., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. to prevent breast cancer in postmenopausal BRCA1/2 carriers. The Introduction: BRCA1 mutations are responsible for a significant propor- „LIBER“ study is a double-blinded, letrozole versus placebo study in- tion of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) families. BRCA1 volving 32 centres. The study opened for recruitment in march 2008. is responsible for more than 50 % of HBOC families with at least four Here we present data reflecting the acceptability of this preventive trial. cancer cases .Penetrance may be modified by other risk or protec- Twenty-one centres replied toan inquiry. 690 women were eligible. Out tive genes or environmental factors.. Mutations in BRCA1 may play of 485 women informed by letter, 217 (44%) came to consultation and an important role in evaluation of sick risk, earlier diagnosis and gene 62 (13 %) entered the study. The main concerns of women while con- therapy of breast cancer in Iranian populations sidering to enter the trial were: the potential side effects, the probability We conducted a study investigating BRCA1/2 among 60 Iranian breast to receive the placebo and the lack of support from other practitioners. cancer patients with a personal or family history suggestive of heredi- For post-menopausal women bearing a BRCA1/2 genetic predispo- tary predisposition to breast cancer .Total genomic DNA was extracted sition, prevention of breast cancer risk by letrozole could provide a from 60 idiopathic breast cancer Patients and 40 cases of healthy peo- precious alternative to bilateral mastectomy. The acceptability of this ple. Primers were designed to amplify the 20 hot exones .The entire phase III randomized double-blinded letrozole versus placebo trial by BRCA1 coding sequence was amplified by PCR with primers espe- patients who received oral information is 28%. cially designed for comprehensive mutation screening by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. analysis and alterations P06.022 the large BRcA1 new deletion revelation among were confirmed by DNA sequencing Russian families with breast/ovarian cancer. The distribution of the breast cancer mutation in the control samples N. V. Apanovich1, N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, P. V. matched the distribution reported for control samples by others . The Apanovich1, R. F. Garkavtseva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; analysis of our sample shows no difference between the analysis of 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical exon 11gene from 60 DNA samples of breast cancer patients showed Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Blokhin Cancer Centre, Moscow, no mutation.Our results suggest that (1) BRCA1/2 mutations are seen in low -risk Iranian women with breast cancer. However this does not Cancer genetics 1 Russian Federation. BRCA1 mutation (30%), while an unclassified variant was identified Inherited predisposition to breast/ovarian cancer is mainly due to in 2 patients (2.4%). Identifying a mutation in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 BRCA1/2 gene mutations. The methods for point mutation determi- genes among breast and/or ovarian cancer families is important, as nation cannot detect large deletions or insertions that include one or it enables carriers to take preventive measures. Currently, bilateral more exons. Meanwhile, a frequency of such gene rearrangements salpingo-oophorectomy is the most effective way to reduce the risk may have significant portion from a frequency of point mutation and of ovarian cancer in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. Further studies are may be different among populations. Large rearrangements are more warranted to determine the prevalence of mutations in the BRCA1, as frequent in BRCA1 gene. In present work large rearrangement finding well as in the BRCA2 gene, in both high-risk and unselected ovarian was conducted among families with inherited breast/ovarian cancer cancer cases in the Greek population. by analysis of SNP haplotypes, following gene alteration studing by RT-PCR and sequencing in the deletion vicinity. Among 58 hetero- P06.025 Haplotype analysis of two recurrent genomic zygous on BRCA1 haplotype B samples one deletion was revealed rearrangements in BRcA1 gene suggests that they are founder (1,7%). The deletion is unique and was not found earlier in the other mutations for the Greek population populations. The deletion encompasses exons 14-17 and has a size M. Pertesi, I. Konstantopoulou, D. Yannoukakos; 11327 bp. The 5‘ breakage point is disposed in AluSp that is in com- Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, N.C.S.R. „Demokritos“, Athens, Greece. position of four Alu tandem. In this tandem disposed also the breakage The deletion of 4.4kB and 3.2kB identified in exons 24 and 20, re- point of BRCA1 exons 14-20 known deletion. The 3‘ breakage point is spectively, are two of the four most common mutations in the BRCA1 disposed in AluSg near of which (100 b.p.) is Alu containing the break- gene in Greek breast cancer patients. The exon 24 deletion includes age point of BRCA1 exons 17 known deletion. It is possible that these both exon 24 as well as the 3’ UTR, while the exon 20 deletion starts regions are hot-spot of recombination. within exon 20 and extends into intron 20. They have been reported 9 and 6 times, respectively, in unrelated families of Greek origin. In P06.023 Identification of a unique de novo BRCA1 mutation in a order to characterize these recurrent mutations as founder mutations, patient diagnosed with breast and ovarian cancer in her fifties it is necessary to identify the disease-associated haplotype and prove K. Claes1, K. De Leeneer1, I. Coene1, J. Simkens1, B. Stragier2, A. De Paepe1, that it is shared by all the mutation carriers, suggesting that it occurred B. Poppe1; only once in a common ancestor. 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, Genomic DNA was isolated from 19 breast cancer patients and 66 2Medical Oncology, H Hartziekenhuis, Roeselare, Belgium. healthy individuals. Ten Short Tandem Repeat (STR’s) markers lo- Germline BRCA1&2 mutations confer high risks for breast and ovar- cated within and flanking the BRCA1 gene locus, spanning a 5.9 Mb ian cancer and are most prevalent in patients with a family history for interval, were used for the haplotype analysis. the disease. De novo BRCA mutations are rare and more frequently The results indicate that all carriers of the exon 24 deletion share a reported in BRCA2 (6 cases) than in BRCA1 (1 case), all in patients common core haplotype ‘4-7-6-6-1-3’ between markers D17S951 and with tumors occurring before the age of 40. The case presented below D17S1299, for a stretch of 2.9Mb. The common haplotype shared by illustrates that de novo mutations do not only occur in patients with carriers of the exon 20 deletion is ‘6-7-4-2-6-7-1-3’ between markers early onset disease. D17S579 and D17S1299, for a stretch of 3.9Mb. Haplotype conserva- We analysed the complete coding region of BRCA1&2 in 169 sporadic tion ended between markers D17S1299 and D17S800 and between breast and/or ovarian cancer patients with early onset or bilateral or D17S951 and D17S1861. multifocal tumors. In 16 (9.5%) a germline BRCA1/2 mutation was Both genomic rearrangements in BRCA1 gene are Greek founder identified; in three patients these were potentially de novo, unfortu- mutations, as all carriers share the same, for each group of mutation nately, parental DNA was not available for 2 of them. Here, we report carriers, disease-associated haplotype, suggesting the presence of a a patient (diagnosed with breast cancer at 52 yrs and ovarian cancer distinct common ancestor for both of the mutations. at 53 yrs) and heterozygous for a novel BRCA1 mutation c.3494_ 3495delTT (p.Phe1165fs). This mutation was absent in her parents P06.026 Haplotype characterization of BRcA1 gene in North- (paternity confirmed) and 8 sibs as verified by Sanger sequencing, Eastern Romania but was transmitted to 2 of her sons. To investigate possible mosa- L. Negura1, N. Uhrhammer2, A. Negura3, V. Artenie3, E. Carasevici1, Y. J. icism, the relevant amplicons were deep sequenced with 454 am- Bignon2; plicon sequencing. The mutation in the patient was detected in 43% 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Gr. T. Popa, IASI, Romania, 2Centre of the reads at 157 times coverage, but was absent in the maternal „Jean Perrin“, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 3University „Alexandru Ioan Cuza“, and paternal sample both covered 1840 and 2780 times respectively, IASI, Romania. consistent with the de novo occurrence (although germline mosaicism Introduction: BRCA1 is major cancer predisposition gene, respon- cannot be ruled out). Studies to determine if the mutation originated sible for a large percentage of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer on the maternal or paternal allele are ongoing. (HBOC) families. BRCA1 alleles are ascribed almost completely to 10 canonical haplotypes defined by 14 prevalent SNPs. Two of these P06.024 Prevalence of BRcA1 mutation in Greek high-risk haplotypes (H1 and H2) predominate and account for up to 78 % of ovarian cancer patients alleles in Europeans and North-Americans. The frequency and type of A. V. Stavropoulou1, M. Pertesi1, M. Tsitlaidou1, F. Fostira1, D. Yannoukakos1, BRCA1 haplotypes varies widely, depending on the geographic and/ G. Fountzilas2, I. Konstantopoulou1; or the ethnic distributions. 1Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, N.C.S.R. „Demokritos“, Aghia Paraskevi, Patients and methods: We investigated 26 patients from 17 unrelated Greece, 2Department of Medical Oncology, Papageorgiou Hospital, University HBOC families in north-eastern Romania. All patients agreed by writ- of Thessaloniki School of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece. ten informed consent. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood. The Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes contribute to the entire coding sequence was analysed using dideoxy sequencing. majority of hereditary ovarian cancers and comprise 10-18% of total BRCA1 haplotypes were assigned using 11 common single nucleo- cases. The lifetime risk for ovarian cancer in BRCA1/2 mutation car- tide polymorphisms previously described. riers ranges from 15% to 40%. A variable incidence of mutations has Results: We identified five BRCA1 variations, including novel, recur- been reported for these genes in different populations. In some popula- rent mutations or unclassified variants. We identified seven different tions, a wide spectrum of different mutations in both genes is present, haplotypes in our population: five previously described, and two other whereas in other groups certain mutations are seen at higher rates. In haplotypes containing an additional SNP, IVS7-34C>T (H1-n and H6- the Greek population, specific mutations in BRCA1 account for 71% of n). Haplotype frequencies appeared to be similar to those reported in all mutations detected in both BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. This study other European populations. Five haplotypes were not observed in aimed to determine the prevalence of BRCA1 mutations in a Greek our population. cohort of ovarian cancer patients, selected for a strong family history, Some mutations could be easily assigned to haplotypes. c.2241dupC early age of onset or metachronous breast cancer. 81 patients with was assigned to H1, both carriers of the mutation being homozygous for ovarian cancer were screened for all the BRCA1 mutations previously this haplotype. Cys61Gly was observed in association with IVS7-34C>T, identified in the Greek population. Of these, 24 carried a deleterious and could be assigned to either the H1-n or the H6-n haplotype.Cancer genetics 1 Conclusions: This study lays the groundwork to investigate BRCA1 logical, whereas the current focus is molecular profiling of breast can- haplotypes in eastern populations in more detail, with the aim of com- cers. paring groups within Eastern Europe or with western populations. In the interim, histology has been displaced as a consideration in ge- netic risk assessment. We believe that lobular histology may be as P06.027 Novel BRcA2 gene frameshift mutation detected in a important a negative predictor of BRCA status as pre-menopausal di- woman with multiple primary cancers agnosis is a positive predictor. Although infrequently considered, there E. Kurvinen1,2, T. Kahre3,4, K. Kirotar5, R. Žordania1, N. Tõnisson3,5; is some data from the literature to support this idea. Our experience 1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Estonia, 2National Institute for Health Development, is as follows: Tallinn, Estonia, 3Dept. of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Estonia, 4Dept.of We have counseled and tested 150 breast cancer patients at signifi- Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Estonia, 5Institute of Molecular cant risk of carrying a BRCA mutation, for whom histology was avail- and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Estonia. able/adequate and BRCA results were unequivocal. Lobular breast Women with BRCA2 gene germline mutations have approximately cancer was under-represented (8/150, 5.3%). Of these150 patients: 80% lifetime risk of breast cancer and 10-20% risk of ovarian cancer. • 20 (13.3%) had a BRCA1-2 mutation; three had bilateral disease. All In males, BRCA2 mutations are associated with 14% prostate cancer 23 tumors were of ductal histology; none were lobular. and 10% male breast cancer risks. In addition the risks of lymphomas, • 130 patients (86.7%) were negative for BRCA 1-2 mutations. All of gastric, pancreatic, thyroid and gallbladder malignancies are increased the lobular breast cancer patients were in this group. in individuals with BRCA2 mutations. Histological analysis is an integral part of every cancer patient’s evalu- In this report we present the germline NM_000059.3:c.8405_8406insC ation. Why not take it into consideration in genetic risk assessment? (p.L2803fs) mutation in exon 19 of the BRCA 2 gene, which manifests itself as a premature stop codon. The mutation has not been previ- P06.030 Hypermethylation in promoter region of E-cadherin ously reported at Breast Cancer Information Core (BIC) database. gene is associated with tumor metastasis in breast cancer This mutation was first found in a woman who had been diagnosed carsinoma with breast cancer at the age of 62 and two years later with stomach S. Alizadeh Shargh1, M. Mohaddes Ardebili2, M. Sakizli3, J. Gharesouran2; and kidney malignant tumours. The patient has a complicated family 1Medical Science institute, Medical Laboratory Department, Islamic Azad history: Her twin sister had died at the age of 32 of breast and ovarian University, Chalous, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, cancer and her elder sister had died of breast cancer at 50. Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, tabriz, Islamic Cascade screening of her close relatives is in process in the time of Republic of Iran, 3Medical Genetics & biology Department, Health Institute, 9 abstract submission. eylul University, Izmir, Turkey. Reduced or lost E-cadherin expression is associated with methylation P06.028 BRCA2 N372H polymorphism and breast cancer risk of CpG sites and has a direct relation with breast cancer metastasis I. Maleva1, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, G. Kondov2, Z. Spirovski2, G. D. Efremov1; status. The authors analyzed the methylation status by bisulfate se- 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former quencing and determining its pattern in 10 CpG site (50 cancerous Yugoslav Republic of, 2Clinic for Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Faculty of and 50 adjacent normal breast tissues). Data analyses was performed Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. using spearman rank regression statistical methods with SPSS.13 Truncating mutations in BRCA2 gene cause a substantial increase with (p<0.05) criteria for assessing significant variations between tu- in risk of breast cancer, but such mutations are found only in small mor (50% partial, 44% full methylation) versus normal tissue (76% number of breast cancer patients. Low penetrance alleles, such as non-methylated)(p=0.00). The methylation pattern was also shown polymorphic variants in strongly predisposing genes, such as BRCA2, to be significantly different in normal and tumor tissues (892, 940 & are candidates for inherited susceptibility to breast cancer. The N372H 879, 887 respectively). An adverse correlation was observed between polymorphism is common variant in BRCA2 gene that was suggested tumor metastasis and the pattern of methylation in 863, 865, 879, to affect BRCA2 structure and function and to moderately increase 887, 892,901, 920 CpG islands while the 873, 918 and 940 islands the risk of breast cancer. The aim of this study was to evaluate the showed a direct relation (the highest significancy was observed in 940, possible association of this polymorphism and breast cancer risk P=0.074). No significant linkage was detected between 940 island and in Macedonian patients. The study included 76 patients with breast chemotherapy. According to the results obtained from present study, it cancer and 75 controls from the general population. The N372H poly- can be concluded that methylation of CpG sites can be seen in normal morphism was screened by single strand conformation polymorphism tissues which means that methylation is not necessarily depends on (SSCP) method. In selected samples, the results were confirmed by blocking of gene expression. Significant difference was detected be- direct DNA sequencing. The BRCA2 N372H allele frequency in pa- tween methylation pattern in normal and tumor tissues in 892 and 940 tients with breast cancer was estimated at 25.7% and was similar to islands that reveal the specificity of tumor methylation pattern. that observed among controls (28.7%). There was no difference in the BRCA2 N372H genotype frequencies between patients with breast P06.031 Evaluation of methylation in the 5‘UtR Promoter cancer (52.6% NN, 43.4% NH and 4.0% HH) and controls (48.0% NN, Region of DBC2 Gene in 50 Breast cancer individuals and 46.7% NH and 5.3% HH). No difference was detected also when pa- comparing with the Normal controls in iranian Patients tients were stratified according to the age of diagnosis and family his- M. Hajikhan Mirzaei1, A. Bidmeshgipour1, H. Karbasian2, Y. Shafeghati3, M. tory. In one male patient with breast cancer the N372H polymorphism Noruzinia4,3; was found in cis to the BRCA2 D2723G mutation. In conclusion, our 1Biology Department, Faculty of Science, Razi University, Kermanshah, Islamic study has failed to support the association between N372H polymor- Republic of Iran, 2Department of Surgery, Day General Hospital, Tehran, phism and breast cancer risk. Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medical Genetics Department, Sarem Women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Hematology, Faculty P06.029 Breast cancer genetics: Lobular histology is a negative of Medical Science, Tarbiat Modarres University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of predictor of BRcA mutations Iran. C. D. DeLozier1,2, E. Ubias1; Breast cancer is one of the most common malignancies affecting wom- 1Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, CA, United States, 2Saint Agnes en worldwide. Around 10 percent of every woman would be affected Medical Center, Fresno, CA, United States. through her life. It is caused by a number of genetic and epigenetic Lobular breast cancer represents 10-20% of all breast malignancies. factors. Constitutional mutations in cadherin, a cell-adhesion molecule, result Aberrant hypermethylation of promoter regions in specific genes is a in a high risk of lobular breast and diffuse gastric cancers. key event in the formation and progression in some cancers. Recently However, BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 are the genes most frequently impli- DBC2 was found to participate in diverse cellular functions, such as cated in hereditary predisposition to breast cancer. Soon after clinical protein transport, cytoskeleton regulation, apoptosis and cell cycle testing for BRCA mutations became available, a flurry of publications control. DBC2 has been identified as a candidate tumor-suppressor appeared comparing the histological characteristics of breast cancers gene for breast cancer. Different studies showed that DBC2 is being in patients with BRCA-1 vs. BRCA-2, vs. patients negative for BRCA inactivated through epigenetic mechanisms such as methylation in its mutations (BRCA-X). The next wave of publications was epidemio- promoter region, may facilitate proliferation of tumor cells. Inversely Cancer genetics 17 reactivation of it usually suppresses the growth and expansion of the and HRT use was observed. The increased risk of breast cancer as- tumors. sociated with long-term HRT use was greater among women with at There are different techniques to detect the methylation pattern. Mety- least one variant allele of MnSOD Val-9Ala polymorphism. lation specific PCR is an accurate technique. This technique relies on Conclusions: Our results suggests that specific polymorphisms in alteration that sodium bisulfate induces in DNA sequences and cause genes involved in estrogen metabolism may modify the effect of long- difference between methylated and unmethylated cytosine, by deami- term HRT use on breast cancer risk. nation of unmethylated cytosine. Methylation pattern can be detected by using the specific primers set in two separate PCR reactions. P06.034 Polymorphism in mitochondrial DNA D loop region In this study, we evaluated methylation status of DBC2 in 50 breast of iranian breast cancer patients: is it one of the reasons for cancer samples from 50 Iranian affected women and 5 normal tis- younger iranian patients? sues. M. Akouchekian; The results showed that 23% of patients have methylated bands and Department of Genetic and Molecular Cell Biology, Iran University of Medical 70% are hemimethylated. We also found that 80% of normal tissues Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. are hemimethylated and one normal sample has methylated band. Breast cancer is the most important malignancy for women in the world. In Iran breast cancers incidence is growing and the Iranian pa- P06.032 Estrogen receptor α gene mutations in Exon 4 and tients are 10 years younger than their western counterparts. Defects in intron 1 polymorphisms in a cohort of Breast cancer patients mitochondrial function are suggested to contribute to the development from india and progression of cancer. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is particularly V. Bhavani1, G. Raju2, Y. R. Ahuja3, G. Hasan4; susceptible to damage by environmental carcinogenesis. 1Department of Genetics, Vasavi Hospital and Research Centre, Lakdi-ka- The displacement loop or D-loop is non-coding region in mtDNA and pool., Hyderabad, India, 2Department of Surgical Oncology, Nizam’s Institute contains essential transcription and replication elements; hence muta- of Medical Sciences, Panjagutta, Hyderabad, India, 3Department of Genetics, tion in this region may serve as a potential sensor for cellular DNA Bhagwan Mahavir Medical Research Centre, Masab Tank, Hyderabad, India, damage and cancer development. 4Department of Genetics & Molecular Medicine, Kamineni Hospitals, L.B.Nagar, Aim of this study is to scan the mutation frequencies in hypervariable Hyderabad, India. regions of mitochondrial D-Loop in breast cancer patients. The results Purpose: Estrogen receptor (ER) mutations and polymorphisms are of our investigation are summarized in the following table. When each possible risk factors implicated in the initiation and development of polymorphism is tested individually using the fisher exact test the fre- Breast Cancer (BC). Hence, sporadic BC patients from a cosmopoli- quency of one single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) was found to tan city of South India were assessed for ERα gene mutation in exon be significantly different between the breast cancer patients and con- 4 and both PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms in intron 1. Methods: Ge- trols (p≤0.05). nomic DNA was isolated from 310 sporadic BC patients and 210 sex In this work the fact that the Iranian women who expose to breast can- matched healthy controls to evaluate an earlier reported A908G ERα cer are approximately 10 years younger than their western counter- exon 4 mutation by PCR - SSCP and Pvu II and XbaI polymorphisms parts is investigated. We think that existence of some SNPs in mtDNA in intron 1 by PCR - RFLP. Results: The expected ER exon 4 mutation in contribution with other genetics and environmental factors may be was not identified in any of the samples, however, three BC patients one of the reasons that cause the mentioned phenomena. showed a novel C975G mutation in the same exon. Results from the Fisher’’s Exact Control cases Breast cancer analysis of ER polymorphisms indicate that, PvuII PP genotype is sig- Test p value (n=150) cases (n=25) SNPs nificantly associated with BC [OR 1.999, 95%CI -1.099-3.636], while % Positive % Positive XbaI polymorphism has no association in the cohort studied. Conclu- 0.99 4 6 48 12 G16145A sion: The functional significance of the novel exon 4 ER α gene C975G 0.99 7.3 11 60 15 C16261T nucleotide change identified in 1.2% of the BC patients needs to be 0.008 43 64 72 18 T16529C assessed. Unlike XbaI genotypes the ER alpha PvuII PP genotype confers a twofold higher risk of BC and may be used as a biomarker P06.035 molecular characterization of mesenchymal stem cells for Asian Indians and the involvement in tumor Growth and metastases. C. Glait-Santar, D. Benayahu; P06.033 Estrogen metabolism, hormone replacement therapy Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel. use and risk of postmenopausal breast cancer Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are present in a variety of tissues J. Černe1, V. Stegel2, Ž. Frković-Grazio3, M. Pohar-Perme4, S. Novaković2, K. like bone marrow stroma. MSCs can differentiate to various lineages Geršak1; includes the osteogenic lineage. Breast metastatic process displays 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, organ specificity, one of the main targets is the bone. The molecular Slovenia, 2Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Institute of Oncology cross-talk between tumor components may enable synergy in its pro- Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Department of Pathology, Institute of Oncology motion. Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4Institute for Biostatistics and Medical We focused on a novel cell adhesion molecule named SVEP1. SVEP1 Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. plays a role in cell adhesion and in breast cancer cells homing to bone Introduction: Association between long-term hormone replacement niches. We characterize SVEP1 transcriptional regulation in MSCs therapy (HRT) use and increased risk of breast cancer is still under (MBA15) versus breast cancer cells (DA3). debate. Functionally relevant polymorphisms in genes involved in es- TSS-SVEP1 promoter is transcriptionally regulated by DNA methyla- trogen metabolism may alter exposure to exogenous sex hormones tion. By using Methylated Specific PCR method, this region is highly and affect risk of postmenopausal breast cancer. We evaluated as- methylated in DA3, but less methylated in MBA15 cells. SVEP1 is tran- sociations of common polymorphisms in genes involved in estrogen scriptionally upregulated by TNF alpha and Estradiol treatments both in metabolism, duration of HRT use, and their interactions with breast transient transfections, using SVEP1 promoter luciferase reporter plas- cancer risk in a case-control study of postmenopausal women. mid and at the mRNA level. ChIP assay performed with MBA15 cells Patients and methods: We studied 530 incident breast cancer cas- revealed increased ER alpha and NFkB binding to SVEP1 promoter es and 270 controls matched by age and ethnicity. Genotyping was following TNF alpha or Estrogen treatments. In contrast, increased conducted for COMT Val108/158Met, GSTP1 Ile105Val and MnSOD binding of ER alpha and NFkB was found in DA3 cells stimulated with Val-9Ala polymorphisms by TaqMan® allelic discrimination method. TNF alpha, but not following Estrogen stimulation. TNF alpha and Es- Duration of HRT use was ascertained from a validated questionnaire. trogen also regulate SVEP1 promoter through affecting its methylation Adjusted odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated status. We present differential expression of SVEP1 alternative spliced using logistic regression analysis. forms in MSCs versus Breast carcinoma cells which in turn can add Results: None of the polymorphisms studied was, by itself, statistically another level of regulation. significantly associated with breast cancer risk. HRT use was signifi- SVEP1 and its spliced forms can be used as molecular diagnostic cantly associated with decreased breast cancer risk. Statistically sig- marker to isolate tumor initiating as well as metastatic cells and be nificant interaction between MnSOD Val-9Ala (pinteraction = 0.049) potential therapeutic target.Cancer genetics 1 P06.036 the correlation between E-cadherin protein P06.038 The inverse ratio of BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene and estrogen receptor alpha c promoter methylation, in expression in ovarian cancer tissue and in tumour environment. pathogenesis of iranian patients with breast cancer V. P. Shubin1, A. N. Loginova1, A. N. Gritsay2, A. U. Kashurnikov2, A. V. H. Loghmani Khouzani1,2, M. Noruzinia1,2, B. Samareh Abolhasani1; Karpukhin1; 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Sarem Research 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Center (SARC), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer Research Centre, Russian Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer among women. Most of Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. breast tumors originate from mammary epithelial cells and are estro- We investigated BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene expression in samples of gen dependent. Estrogen exerts its effects through at least two nuclear ovarian cancer tissues, in tissues of tumour environment and distant receptors, ERα and ERβ, which have an important role in proliferation from tumour regions. The BRCA1/2 gene expression was determined and differentiation of normal epithelial cells in breast tissue. comparative to expression of GAPDH gene by RT-PCR using Applied It has been shown that, receptor positive cells in breast cancer can be- Biosystems TaqMan kits. The BRCA1 gene expression in tumour com- come estrogen negative. However the exact mechanism of estrogen parative to distant region was decreased in more than half of samples. receptor negativeness in breast cancer needs to be clarified. Promoter Approximately the same result was obtained for BRCA2 although si- methylation at the ‘CpG islands’ in ERα has been investigated as an multaneous decreasing of both gene expression was characteristic appealing mechanism of gene silencing. only for 30% of patients. In tumour environment tissue BRCA1 gene On the other hand, E-cadherin is a cell-cell adhesion protein, with a expression was decreased in comparison with tumour tissue for 60% prominent role in epithelial differentiation. Data suggest that E-cad- of cases. For the same cases BRCA2 expression ratio in tumour and herin is also a tumor suppressor in breast cancer. environment tissues was inverse comparative to BRCA1 expression In this research, we investigated the role of ERα C promoter methyla- ratio. In the cases when BRCA1 expression level was less in tumour tion in Iranian patients with breast cancer, by Methylation Specific PCR than in environment tissue BRCA2 expression was inverse also. Thus in 40 blood and tissue samples in comparison with the percentage of for the first time it is revealed BRCA1 and BRCA2 participation in tu- E-Cadherin obtained by histopathological data from patients’ medical mour and environment tissue interplay. This is important in the light of records. Primers were selected to be specific for a known CpG island data about microenvironment influence on the processes of malignant in C promoter of ERα, either for methylated or unmethylated status. tumor onset and development and may be necessary for therapy cre- Finally Statistical analysis were done between E-Cadherin percentage ation. and the methylation patterns of ERα C promoter and a significant cor- relation was found (p-value =0.04). This result was in concordance to P06.039 is mitochondrial genome cell’s Achilles’ heel of those reported in the literature, which show a role of ERα methylation carcinogenesis? and E-Cadherin protein percentage in pathogenesis of Iranian breast A. M. Czarnecka1,2, A. Klemba1,2, K. Plak2, T. Krawczyk3, A. Semczuk4, M. cancer patients. Zdrozny5, J. Lubinski6, J. A. Petros7,8, E. Bartnik2,9; 1Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Oncology, Military Institute of P06.037 Homozygous BUBR1 mutation and susceptibility to Medicine, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of multi-site gastrointestinal neoplasia Biology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Clinical Pathology Laboratory, T. Rio Frio1, J. Lavoie2, N. Hamel1, C. Capelli3, M. Tischkowitz4, V. A. Marcus2, Monument Institute of Polish Mothers Health Center, Lodz, Poland, 42nd W. D. Foulkes4,5; Clinic and Ward of Gynecology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland, 1Department of Medical Genetics and Research Institute of the McGill 5Department of Oncological Surgery and Breast Diseases, Monument Institute University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Department of Pathology, of Polish Mothers Health Center, Lodz, Poland, 6International Hereditary McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Department of Zoology, University Cancer Center, Department of Genetics and Pathology, Pomeranian Medical of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Department of Medical Genetics and University, Szczecin, Poland, 7Department of Urology, Emory University School Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital, McGill of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States, 8The Atlanta VA Medical Center, University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Program in Cancer Genetics, Departments Atlanta, GA, United States, 9Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, the Polish of Oncology and Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. A 67 year old male was diagnosed with an ampulla of Vater adeno- Objectives: Investigation of the role of mtDNA inherited polymorphisms carcinoma at age 34, followed by multiple adenomas and carcinomas in breast cancer and endometrial adenocarcinoma development. of the stomach and colon in a setting of an unrecognized form of mo- Methods: mtDNA D-loop sequence and haplogroup distribution analy- saic variegated aneuploidy (MVA). He was found to have a very high sis were performed in the cohorts of cancer patients, centenarians and degree of premature chromatid separation (PCS) and chromosomal woman with cancer free history. Two tailed non-directional Fisher-Irwin abnormalities. A homozygous mutation causing an intronic de novo test has been used to verify the mutation probability difference be- splice site was found in BUBR1, a cause of MVA. All heterozygous tween cohorts and general Polish population. relatives had intermediate levels of PCS. Functional analyses indi- Results: In endometrial cancer cohort haplogroup H is under-rep- cated that homozygosity for this mutation causes a dramatic reduc- resented if compared with healthy population (p = 0.001). Negative tion in the amount of functional BUBR1 protein. This down-regulation Predictive Value of T7025C RFLP test=0.581 and Relative Risk Re- caused mitotic abnormalities: PCS, aneuploidy, cell cycle dysfunction, duction=0.725. Inheritance of 7028T results in increased risk of endo- and multiple cellular abnormalities (micronucleated cells, centrosome metrial cancer development as high as 350% in comparison to 7025C. amplification). Immunohistochemistry revealed a decreased amount Other mtDNA polymorphisms in particular 16223C (p =0.005), 16126C of BUBR1 in both normal and tumoral tissues in colon and stomach (p = 0.025) and 207A (p = 0.027) are abundant in endometrial cancer from proband compared to controls. Loss of functional APC (Adeno- population. matous polyposis coli) is one of the major causes of colorectal cancer. Breast cancer patients in comparison to cancer free control group We demonstrated that the interaction between the APC protein and abundantly carry 10398G (p< 0.001). This polymorphism is cancer BUBR1, previously reported as crucial for APC activation, was weaker development factor with odds ratio=9.510 and RR=7.576. A10398G in cells from the proband. Stable expression of BUBR1 cDNA in cells of RFLP test has high sensitivity=0.769 and specificity=0.740. Moreover the proband rescues the PCS phenotype, the cell cycle abnormalities, in breast cancer population A1811G and A4529T are overrepresented and the interaction between APC and BUBR1. Screening of a control (p=0.001) if compared with centenarians. population revealed that the mutation is a rare variant. This makes Conclusions: 10398G polymorphism inheritance may predispose to BUBR1 a strong candidate for mutation screening in cases of multiple breast cancer development, while 1811A and 4529A may protect from gastrointestinal cancers and highlights the possibility of deregulation of it. Carriers of T7028C seem to be protected for endometrial adenocar- SAC genes as a cause of gastrointestinal cancers. cinoma development, but inheritance of 16223C 16126C and 207A is a risk factor. mtDNA polymorphisms establish a specific genetic back- ground for cancer development and may enable selection of popula- tions at high cancer risk and support the process of prevention and early diagnosis.Cancer genetics 1 P06.040 Nature of untargeted mutations in the polymerase- P06.042 mutation screening of CDKN2A gene in malignat tautomer model of ultraviolet mutagenesis melanom a families from the slovakia. H. A. Grebneva; M. Milly1, M. Konecny1, K. Zavodna1, E. Weismanova1, D. Ilencikova2, I. Mlkva3, Donetsk Physical and Technical Institute NAS of Ukraine, Donetsk, Ukraine. J. Kausitz1; Delayed and untargeted mutations are two features of genomic insta- 1St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2National Oncological bility, the main cause of cancer. It is common hypothesis that they Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Faculty Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia. induce mutations at non damaged sites. The polymerase-tautomer Germline mutations in the CDKN2A gene have been linked to inherited model for ultraviolet mutagenesis is based on formation of rare tauto- predisposition to malignant melanoma. Variable frequencies of CDK- meric bases in cis-syn cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers and DNA bases N2A germline mutations were reported in different polulations. High [1], and that fact that during error-prone or SOS synthesis the induced percentage of the mutations were observed only once and are family DNA polymerase inserts canonical bases opposite the dimers in a specific. There is also an increased risk of pancreatic cancer in a sub- complementary way in contrast to uncomplementary one in the con- set of families with mutaions. ventional models [2]. Potential mutagens correspond to 5 basic types We have screened 32 high-risk melanoma families from Slovakia us- of rare tautomeric conformations of thymine and adenine [1] and 7 of ing a direct sequencing technique. There was examined the entire cod- cytosine and guanine. Potential untargeted mutation is rare tautomer ing region of the p16 and p14 gene, including exons 1α, 1β, 2 and 3, of guanine - cytosine pair, when protons in first and second hydrogen flanking exon/intron junctions, and portion of the 5´untranslated (UTR) bonds were simultaneously sent to the partners on hydrogen bonds. region of the gene. They will be stable and can cause transition or homologous transver- Analysis of CDKN2A gene showed presence of 2 novel missense mu- sion. In the case of closely located dimers in the both strands, the ad- tations, one mutation c.100G>C (Ala34Pro) was identified at exon 1α enines or guanines that are in rare tautomeric states can be a source in a two different melanoma families. The second mutation c. 150G>C of untargeted mutations. The third source is bases in rare tautomeric (Gln50His) was detected in one familie at the some exon. Both sub- state localized in small vicinity of dimers. They may result in transi- stitutions was not previously described, and have undetermined tion, transversion and frameshift mutations under error-prone or SOS pathogenic effect. There was also observed common polymorphism synthesis. Ala148Thr and frequent variants C/G in the 3´UTR at the postion 29 1. H. A. Grebneva. J. Mol. Struct. - 2003. Vol. 645. P. 133-143. after stop codon. 2. H. A. Grebneva. Environ. Mol. Mutagen. - 2006. Vol. 47. P. 733- In summary, within 32 Slovak melanoma families, we identified 3 fami- 745. lies (9,4%) with two types of novel CDKN2A mutations, which has not been reported yet. These new substitutions will need additional exami- P06.041 Germline mutations of the CBL gene define a nation of functional impact to gene CDKN2A. new genetic syndrome with predisposition to juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JmmL) P06.043 constitutional genomic imbalances in children with B. Pérez1,2, B. Isidor3, N. Philip4, J. Derain-Court4, B. Leheup5, F. Mechinaud6, A. cancer and congenital anomalies Salmon7, C. Galambrun8, N. Ben Romdhane9, B. Cassinat2, J. Lachenaud1,2, S. M. C. J. Jongmans, R. P. Kuiper, P. M. Hoogerbrugge, E. Kamping, L. Hilkens, Kaltenbach1, O. Fenneteau10, A. Baruchel11, H. Cavé1,2, A. Verloes1,12; M. J. L. Ligtenberg, A. Geurts-van Kessel, N. Hoogerbrugge; 1AP-HP, Hôpital Robert Debré, Département de Génétique, Université Paris7 Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Paris Diderot, Paris, France, 2INSERM U940, IUH, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, Congenital malformations are present at higher frequencies in children France, 3Service de Génétique, CHRU, Nantes, France, 4Service de Génétique, with cancer than in age-matched controls. Constitutional genomic Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 5Service de Génétique, CHRU, Nancy, imbalances may underlie these clinical manifestations. We set out to France, 6Service d’Oncologie Hématologie Pédiatrique, CHRU, Nantes, France, identify such anomalies using a high resolution genomic profiling ap- 7Service d’Onco-Hématologie Pédiatrique, CHRU, Nancy, France, 8Service proach. To this end, twenty-seven patients with a pediatric malignancy d’Hématologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 9Service and a congenital anomaly were analyzed on a SNP array platform (Af- d’Hématologie, Hôpital La Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia, 10AP-HP, Hôpital Robert fymetrix). In two of these patients submicroscopic imbalances were Debré, Service d’Hématologie Biologique, Paris, France, 11AP-HP, Hôpital found. The first patient was a girl with acute lymphoblastic leukemia Robert Debré, Service d’Hématologie Pédiatrique; Université Paris7-Denis (ALL) and polysyndactyly of the toes. She harbored a intragenic germ- Diderot, Paris, France, 12INSERM U676, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. line deletion of the THADA gene. This gene is considered to play a role Background: CBL missense mutations have recently been associated in apoptosis. Interestingly, THADA deletions have previously been en- with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML), an aggressive myelo- countered in sporadic paediatric ALLs. In the second patient, a girl with proliferative and myelodysplatic neoplasm of early childhood charac- embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and a congenital heart defect, we de- terized by excessive macrophage/monocyte proliferation. CBL, an E3 tected a microduplication of the chromosome 22q11.2 region. This mi- ubiquitin ligase and a multi adaptor protein, controls proliferative sig- cro-duplication appeared to be inherited from the mother who suffered naling networks by downregulating the growth factor receptor signaling from meningioma. This same region is typically deleted in patients cascades in various cell types. with velocardiofacial syndrome. In addition, a 22q11.2 microduplica- Methods and results: CBL mutations were screened in 65 patients with tion syndrome has recently been recognized. As yet, however, these JMML. A homozygous mutation of CBL was found in leukemic cells of syndromes have not been associated with tumor predisposition. Our 4/65 (6%) patients. In all cases, copy neutral loss of heterozygosity results indicate that high-resolution genomic profiling of patients with a of the 11q23-qter chromosomal region, encompassing the CBL locus, childhood malignancy and a congenital anomaly may hold promise as was demonstrated. Three of these 4 patients displayed additional fea- an approach to identify novel cancer predisposing genes. tures suggestive of an underlying developmental condition. A hetero- zygous germline CBL p.Y371H substitution was found in each of them P06.044 Deregulation of proapoptotic genes in skull base and was inherited from the father in one patient. The germline mutation chordoma represents the first hit, with somatic loss of heterozygosity being the L. Ferrari1, M. Stroppi1, A. Calastretti2, N. Boari3, P. Mortini3, P. Riva1; second hit positively selected in JMML cells. The 3 patients display 1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli a variable combination of dysmorphic features, hyperpigmented skin Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Farmacologia, Chemioterapia lesions and microcephaly that allow us to tentatively delineate a “CBL e Tossicologia Mediche, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, syndrome”. Learning difficulties and postnatal growth retardation may 3Dipartimento di Neurochirurgia, Università Vita-Salute S.Raffaele, Milan, Italy. be part of the phenotype. Chordoma is a rare tumour arising from remnants of notochord, char- Conclusion: We report germline mutations of CBL in 3 patients with acterized by local invasiveness and variable tendency to recurrence. JMML, confirming the existence of an unreported inheritable condition Given the implication of apoptosis in notochord regression, we stud- associated with a predisposition to JMML. ied in 21 tumours the expression by RT-PCR of 8 proapoptotic genes mapping in 1p36, region showing loss of heterozigosity in most chor- domas (83%). TNFRSF8 and TNFRSF9 were found to be differently expressed in 45% of tumours in comparison to the control nucleus pulposus, while DFFA, DFFB, CASP9, TNFRSF1B, TNFRSF14 and Cancer genetics 170 TP73 were occasionally observed differently expressed in comparison LMO2 gene of 1 patient. In multivariate analysis, it was observed that to the control. The expression profile of each tumour was compared only the duplications in IMPDH1 and FGFR1 genes were the most to that of the control and none of them but one, overlaps the control important factors that affected event-free survival (p=0.028). Duplica- expression profile. As the apoptotic pathway mediated by FAS-FASL is tions in 4 genes in CML patients, who used imatinib, were detected for involved in notochord regression, we studied their expression in 34 tu- the first time. The duplications in IMPDH1 and FGFR1 genes, located mours and in 3 chordoma cell lines. Since most chordomas expressed in chromosomes 7 and 8 and being in charge of signal transmission, FAS but not FASL, we treated a chordoma cell line, expressing FAS particularly had negative effects on event-free survival. In conclusion, but not the ligand, with the soluble FASL at different times and con- this study puts forward that chromosomes 7 and 8 should particularly centrations. By FACS analysis following apoptotic assay, we observed be investigated in more detail in addition to Ph+ chromosome in the apoptosis induction after soluble FASL administration. The expression determination of prognosis and selection of treatment alternatives. of TP53, involved in the intrinsic apoptotic pathway mediated by FAS- FASL, was also investigated by Real-Time PCR in 23 chordomas: P06.047 the isotherm of joint binding of different types of upregulation was detected in 53% of tumours. A correlation study be- ligands with DNA tween the expression profiles of proapoptotic genes and the patients’ A. Arakelyan; follow up will be carried out to search for prognostic markers, while the Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia. possible pharmacological effect of FASL will be investigated in primary Cis-DDP is frequently used as an anti - tumor drug. That is why it is chordoma cell cultures. very important to investigate the binding parameters of the cis-DDP with DNA. The special method has been developed for study of cis- P06.045 Detection of BcR-ABL breakpoints in iranian patients DDP bound to DNA irreversibly.The essence of the proposed method with chronic myelogenous Leukemia is to obtain the information about the irreversible binding of cis-DDP P. Rostami, H. Loghmani Khouzani, L. Yektamaram, E. Shirvani, H. Imanian, with DNA on the basis of isotherm of adsorption of the reversibly bind- S. Valizadegan, H. Najmabadi; ing lingand (EtBr) on DNA in presence of cis-DDP. The adsorption Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of ligands has been considered in case of small amount of both ir- of Iran. reversibly and reversibly binding matter. With taking into account the Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disor- existence of two regions with different binding features in DNA, the der characterized by increased proliferation of the granulocytic cell line adsorption isotherm and dispersion has been calculated. The isotherm without the loss of their capacity to differentiate. Translocation between of adsorption of EtBr on DNA has a linear form in Scatchard coor- the BCR locus on chromosome 22 and the ABL locus on chromosome dinates at low degrees of occupation. It was shown that irreversible 9 generates a chimeric gene, BCR-ABL. The protein product of this binding of cis-DDP on DNA results to transformation of the linear in chimeric gene exhibits an altered tyrosine kinase activity which is im- Scathcard coordinates isotherm of adsorption into non-linear isotherm. plicated in the progression of CML. It was shown also that comparison with experimental isotherm of re- In this study, peripheral blood samples from the patients admitted to versibly binding ligand permits to estimate such important parameters Kariminejad- Najmabadi gentic center were subjected to RNA isola- as binding constant, number of binding sites on DNA per ligand, and tion and cDNA synthesis. To achieve maximal sensitivity nested PCR the fraction of DNA molecules have been changed their features under protocol was used and a housekeeping gene was considered as an influence of irreversible binding of cis-DDP with DNA. internal positive control. We have studied 715 patients and the following results were ob- P06.048 Prognostic significance of interstitial del(14)(q) with tained: as from 715 CML patients, 266 of them were positive for t(9;22) deletion iGH(c) in patients with cLL. (q34;q11), and among them 151 (56.76%) had ‘b2a2’, 113 (42.48%) R. Ruzbacky, P. Novakova, M. Cermak, M. Matuskova, D. Ilencikova; ‘b3a2’ and 2 (0.75%) had the ‘e1a2’ breakpoints. National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. Most of our patients showed ‘b2a2’ fusion gene (56.7%), while the re- Introduction: Deletions of long arm of chromosome 14 are recurrently maining showed one of the transcripts of ‘b3a2’ or ‘e1a2’. The rate of observed in malignant B- cells and are often detected in patients with coexpression of the ‘b3a2’ and ‘b2a2’ was 5%. In contrast to other re- CLL. We wanted to answer following questions: ports, we did not see any coexpression of p210/p190. According to this What is CLL biology and genetics with deletion of IgH (C)? experiment ‘b2a2’ breakpoint is more common among Iranian popula- Which characteristics have patients with CLL and patients with this tion which is in contrary with other literature, indicating ‘b3a2’ break- change? point as the most common one. To be able to find the most common Does del IgH (C) have an influence for patient´s surviving? breakpoint in Iranian population we need to continue the experiment in Methods: We have identified patients with deletion of IgH (C) by the a larger scale and among different ethnics. method FISH with LSI IGH Dual color, Brak apart probe (Vysis) and consequently, we have examined these patients by the method ar- P06.046 Research and clinical importance of Duplications rayCGH for specification of size of this deleted region. Array CGH in Various chromosomal Regions in Addition to Philadelphia results were validated by FISH with BAC probes 14q24.1(ZFP36L1), chromosome in chronic myeloid Leukemia RP11-204K16sg (179,9 Kb) a 14q32.1, RP11-79J20so (168,2 Kb) T. Sever1, C. Kılıçarslan1, M. Pehlivan2, L. Kaynar3, M. Yılmaz2, B. Eser3, V. (Pentagen Ltd.). Okan2, F. Kurnaz3, M. Çetin3, S. Pehlivan1; Results and Conclusion: We have identified interstitial 1University of Gaziantep, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, del(14)(q24.14q32.33) in 5 patients by the method arrayCGH. We GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Medical Faculty, Department have found out the extent of IgH (C) deletions as well as the additional of Hematology, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 3University of Erciyes, Medical Faculty, chromosomal aberrations. Department of Hematology, KAYSERI, Turkey. Deletions of IgH (C) refer to assumption of interstitial deletions It was aimed to investigate the chromosomal aberrations in Chronic of 14q with breakpoint located proximally from Eμ (enhancer). Myeloid Leukemia (CML) and particularly the aberrations in the chro- Del(14)(q24.1q32.33) are occurring recurrently and in this region gene mosomal regions, which carried 67 genes pertaining to oncogene, ZFP36L1 is located, which possibly plays a role in disease pathogen- transcription factor, signal transmission, cytokine, immune system, esis. tumor suppressor and apoptosis, in addition to Philadelphia (Ph+) Correlation of incidence del(14)(q24.1q32.33) with surviving in 5 pa- chromosome by MLPA method and to compare them with clinical pa- tients refers to the fact, that isolated del(14)(q24.1q32.33) was asso- rameters. In this study, we were investigated with MLPA method in 48 ciated in patients with good surviving independently of age, clinical patients, who were diagnosed with chronic phase CML or were under phase, IgH (V) mutation status. treatment process and in 15 healthy controls. The obtained results That all points to: participation on disease development, but not as a were compared both among each other and with clinical parameters significant prognostic marker associated to a bad prognosis. and their effects on survival were evaluated. Seventy patients were male whereas 31 of them were female. The median age was 43 (20- 74). Duplication was detected in FGFR1 gene of 2 patients, IMPDH1 gene of 4 patients, PMS2 gene of 1 patient, NFKBI of 5 patients and Cancer genetics 171 P06.049 AHI1 Gene Expression Levels and BCR-ABL1 t315i patients without K-RAS mutation are good responders for the agents. mutations in chronic myeloid Leukemia Patients This is why mutations in others genes involved in EGFR signal path- T. Bulakbasi Balci1, F. I. Sahin1, S. Karakus2, H. Ozdogu2; way (e.g. BRAF and PIK3CA) are necessary to investigate in routine 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, molecular diagnostics. Another issue is lack of validated and standard- Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of ized methods for mutation detection in the highly heterogenic material Hematology, Ankara, Turkey. isolated from paraffin blocs, which may lead to false negative or false With the availability of molecular monitoring of BCR-ABL1 and the use positive results. of imatinib, therapy in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) now targets its The aim of our study was: 1) to analyze the mutational status in K- molecular pathology. While in time a group of patients would acquire RAS, BRAF and PIK3CA in group of 300 Polish patients with meta- resistance to imatinib, alternative tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been static colorectal cancer 2) to compare preanalytic and analytic phases developed in this aspect. In this study, 83 samples taken at different tools in order to propose recommendations for molecular testing. time points from 38 CML patients; were subjected to gene expression Molecular analysis is still proceed, thus final conclusions and summa- analysis of AHI1; a novel gene that is thought to have a role in both ries will be presented after completion of the study. BCR-ABL1 mediated leukemic transformation via the JAK/STAT path- Supported by N-403289136 way and response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. In the same samples, the presence of T315I mutation was investigated. Only one patient P06.052 involvement of distinct molecular mechanisms in (2.63%) harbored the T315I mutation. While no significant difference development of proximal and distal sporadic colorectal cancers in AHI1 expression was observed between newly diagnosed CML M. Hiljadnikova Bajro1, T. Josifovski2, N. Jankulovski2, A. J. Dimovski1; samples and non-CML controls; CML samples under imatinib therapy 1Faculty of Pharmacy, University „SS. Cyril and Methodius“, Skopje, had levels significantly higher than both newly diagnosed samples and Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2University Clinic for Abdominal controls. In the first 6 months of imatinib therapy, AHI1 expression was Surgery, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. found to increase, then decrease gradually in time. There was no sig- Published data suggest existence of two hystologically and genetically nificant difference between imatinib responders and non-responders, distinct subtypes of colorectal cancers in regards to the site of origin, while cases on dasatinib had significantly lower AHI1 levels. It is pro- with implications for the tumor prognosis and employment of thera- posed that the change in AHI1 expression during CML therapy might peutic regimens. Our study aims at comparing the clinicopathological be under the control of mechanisms independent from BCR-ABL1. and molecular profiles between colon cancers located proximally and AHI1 mediated signaling could be better understood by analyzing distantly to the splenic flexure among patients from the Republic of AHI1 gene expression levels in a greater number of patients and con- Macedonia. A total of 420 sporadic CRC were evaluated for the pres- currently investigating the JAK/STAT and Src family kinase pathways. ence and extent of microsatellite instability and loss of heterozygos- ity using fluorescent multiplex PCR and capillary gel electrophoresis. P06.050 First evidence for digenic inheritance in hereditary Patients with a history of CRC in the family were excluded from the colorectal cancer by mutations in the base excision repair genes study. The obtained results indicate that significant majority (70%) of M. Morak1,2, T. Massdorf1, H. Sykora1, E. Holinski-Feder1,2; CRC detected in the Republic of Macedonia are located distally to the 1University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Campus Innenstadt, splenic flexure, develop at an older age (61.05ys) predominantly in Munich, Germany, 2MGZ - Center of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany. female population (p=0.0159, OR=1.742 CI 95%=1.11-2.74) and show Biallelic mutations in the base excision repair gene MUTYH are re- loss of heterozygosity at 18q (p=0.0454, OR=1.72,CI 95%=1.0-2.93), sponsible for variable recessively inherited phenotypes of polyposis. as well as tendency towards allelic loss at 8p, 1p and 5q. Proximal Beside MUTYH, the proteins OGG1 and MTH1 (or NUDT1) are also tumors develop in younger (59.45 ys) men and show significantly involved the repair of 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxo-G). So far, pre- higher frequency of microsatellite instability (p=0.000037, OR=7.67, vious studies only found missense mutations in either MTH1 or OGG1 CI 95%=2.69-21.87) in comparison to the distal CRCs. Our data with additional heterozygous mutations in MUTYH. clearly support the hypothesis for involvement of different molecular To investigate the role of a defective 8-oxo-G repair we performed a mechanisms in development of proximal and distal sporadic colorec- germline mutation screening in the genes MUTYH, OGG1 and MTH1 tal cancers, ongoing prospective studies should elucidate the possible in 81 patients with a clinical phenotype ranging from attenuated or prognostic differences as well as the predictive value of the underlying atypical adenomatous polyposis coli including hyperplastic polyps to molecular mechanisms for establishment of effective therapeutic ap- HNPCC syndrome without microsatellite instability in their tumours proach. and no germline mutation detectable in mismatch repair genes MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 or APC. P06.053 the Use of multifactor Dimensionality Reduction to We describe here the first pathogenic germline mutation in OGG1, Detect Epistasis Among Potential causal Genes of colorectal a splice site mutation affecting exon 1 which was inherited from the cancer father, in combination with a maternal MUTYH missense mutation M. Toma1, M. Stavarachi1, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, T. Burcos2, E. Popa2, L. p.Ile209Val in a female patient with synchronous colon cancer at age Belusica3, N. Panduru4, C. Serafinceanu4, L. Gavrila1; of 36 years pointing towards digenic inheritance for colorectal cancer 1Institute of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Coltea predisposition. Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3“Prof. Dr. Dimitrie Gerota” Hospital, Bucharest, Monoallelic missense mutations in MTH1 (3), OGG1 (2), or MUTYH Romania, 4Institute of Diabetes, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases “N. (3) were identified in 11 patients, of those, four mutations were novel. Paulescu”, Bucharest, Romania. Our findings indicate that other genes of the 8-oxo-G repair beside Aims/hypothesis. Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a complex genetic dis- MUTYH might be involved in hyperplastic polyps, attenuated polyposis ease, which results from interactions between multiple genes and en- and colorectal cancer predisposition, either as single heterozygote or vironmental factors without any single factor having strong indepen- double heterozygote mutations. dent effects. This study was done to identify gene to gene interactions which could be associated with the risk of CRC. The multifactor-dimen- P06.051 Genetic biomarkers spectrum and molecular tools sionality reduction (MDR) method has been shown to be effective for utility in metastatic colorectal cancer diagnostics in patients of detecting and characterizing gene to gene interactions in case-control Polish origin. studies with relatively small samples. A. Tysarowski, L. Wyrwicz, J. Oledzki, J. Siedlecki; Methods. We genotyped 14 different polymorphisms in 9 candidate The Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center And Institute of genes for disease in 180 unrelated CRC patients and 60 control sub- Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. jects. We analyzed gene to gene interactions among 14 polymorphic K-RAS gene encodes G-protein involved in EGFR-induced cell sig- loci using the MDR method. naling. Mutations in K-RAS are found in about 40% of metastatic Results. We identify a tree-locus model between DCC (rs714), ACE colorectal cancers and are connected with lack of response for novel (rs4291) and IGF2 (rs680) that have a maximum CV consistency of therapeutic agents targeting the EGFR signal pathway. Estimation of 7 out of 10, and a four-locus model between ACE(rs4646994), VDR mutational status of K-RAS is necessary for the selection of patients, (rs2228570), MTHFR (rs1801133) and IGF2 (rs680) that have a maxi- who should be treated with targeted therapies, however only subset of mum CV consistency of 5 out of 10.Cancer genetics 172 Conclusions/interpretation. Using the MDR method, we showed a tree- plays a role in regulating normal cell growth and behavior. Mutation of locus interaction between the DCC, ACE and IGF2 among 9 candi- CTNNB1 gene has been reported in colon carcinomas, medulloblas- date genes of CRC. The determination of such genotype combinations toma and ovarian carcinoma. The aim of this study was performed to contributing to CRC could provide a new tool for identifying high-risk investigate the CTNNB1 gene mutation in EC pathologically diagnosed individuals. cases. Presence of these molecular markers may elucidate better un- Study supported by grant CNCSIS-TD 51/2008. derstanding of CTNNB1 gene behavior in our EC diagnosed patients. Genomic DNA was extracted from paraffin embedded sections of tumor P06.054 Association of polymorphisms in the hmLH1 gene with and normal tissue from 73 patients with EC (59 endometrioid and 14 sporadic colorectal cancer risk non-endometrioid). CTNNB 1 mutations in exon 3 were assessed with f. ghaderi, B. Noori Nayyer, f. fallahian, p. rostami; direct DNA sequencing using ABI 3130xl Genomic Analyzer. CTNNB1 Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases,Taleghani Hospital , mutations were identified in 20 ECs (33.9%), all of them endometrioid Shahid Beheshti Univer, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. carcinomas (20 of 59; 33.9%). The results of this study may add more Mismatch repair (MMR) genes are among of the most important genes insight into the molecular mechanisms of CTNNB1 gene in endome- associated with colorectal cancer. Numerous polymorphisms (mainly trial tumorigenesis process occurs in Saudi Arabia patients. SNPs) have been identified for DNA repair genes, although no study of association between single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) of P06.057 The Determination of FAS and TNF-α and IL-6 Gene hMLH1 gene and Iranian sporadic colorectal cancer (SCRC) is avail- Polymorphisms in Early stage mycosis Fungoides able. To address this issue,we examined 4 reported single-nucleotide G. Saydam1, H. Ak Celik2, H. H. Aydin2, I. Ertam3, I. Kilinc3, F. Sahin1, C. variants that have rarely been verified in a population-based study Sezgin4, A. Berdeli5, G. Ozturk3; to identify SNPs and the genotype-phenotype association in Iranian 1Ege University School of Medicine Department of Hematology, Izmir, Turkey, populations of 100 healthy individuals and 174 SCRC patients. We ex- 2Ege University School of Medicine Department of Medical Biochemistry, Izmir, tracted the genomic DNA from the blood of these individuals and used Turkey, 3Ege University School of Medicine Department of Dermatology, Izmir, Pyrosequencing technology to determine these SNPs. All 4 single-nu- Turkey, 4Ege University School of Medicine Department of Medical Oncology, cleotide variants of hMLH1 gene examined in this study were identified Izmir, Turkey, 5Ege University School of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, as SNPs . Whereas rs1799977and rs4986984 did not seem to affect Izmir, Turkey. SCRC risk, rs2308317( OR, 6.085; 95% CI,2.706 -13.681; P <0.001 Mycosis fungoides (MF) is the most common of primary cutaneus )and rs2020873(OR, 6.026; 95% CI,2.261 , 16.062; P <0.001) did lymphomas. Although, environmental and occupational exposure to show statistically significant differences between cases and controls solvents and chemicals has been implicated in the etiology of the dis- ease, the cause and risk factors of MF are still unclear. P06.055 multiple primary malignancies and subtle In this study, we have aimed to determine the FAS (-670 A > G, mucocutaneous lesions in patient with cowden syndrome (cs) rs1800682) and TNF-α (-308 G > A, rs 1800629), interleukin-6 (IL- P. Vasovcak1, M. Senkerikova2, J. Hatlova3, A. Krepelova1; 6) (-174 G > C, rs1800795) gene polymorphisms in early stages of 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Medical MF patients (n=25) and compared them with control subjects (n=95) School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department to clarify the potential role of these polymorphisms in MF. We found of Medical Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic, significant increases in IL-6 CC genotype (Odds ratio: 36.55, p < 0.01) 3Fingerland’s Department of Pathology, Charles University Medicine Faculty, and C allele frequency (Odds ratio: 3.35, p < 0.01) in MF group. Nev- Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic. ertheless, not any significant change determined for FAS and TNF-α Cowden syndrome (CS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder charac- polymorphisms. terized by multiple benign polyps called hamartomas and an increased risk of developing tumours, mainly breast, thyroid and endometrial P06.058 Analysis of DICER1 gene dosage in hematological carcinoma. Almost all (99%) CS patients present mucocutaneous le- malignancies sions by their thirties. Macrocephaly, Lhermitte-Duclos disease (LDD), K. Zerjavic1, B. Zagradisnik1, L. Lokar2, M. Glaser Krasevac3, N. Kokalj Vokac1; gastrointestinal polyps and goitre are another features commonly pre- 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Maribor, Maribor, sented in CS patients. Slovenia, 2Department of Transfusiology, University Medical Center Maribor, We examined a 58 year-old woman with subtle mucocutaneous lesions Maribor, Slovenia, 3Department of Hematology and Hematological Oncology, and multiple primary malignancies. She had been followed up for a pe- University Medical Center Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. riod of 23 years, when she developed gradually thyroid, ovarian, stom- Ribonuclease Dicer is the key enzyme required for the biogenesis of ach, colon and benign meningiomas. Mutation analysis of the PTEN microRNA and is essential for both mammalian development and cell gene revealed a novel germline mutation (c.438delT, p.Leu146X) in differentiation. Recent evidence indicates that Dicer may also play an the patient (submitted). important role in cancer. Although the expression patterns of DICER1 Although breast and thyroid cancer are predominant malignancies in in different types of tumors were studied so far, the influence of DIC- CS, it should be emphasized that benign and/or malignant tumours ER1 gene dosage on the progress of cancer remains largely unex- may also develop in GI tract from pre-existing polyp, in genitourinary plored. Therefore, in this study we investigate whether DICER1 gene tract or in brain. Most papers dealing with cancer in CS patients do not dosage is altered in patients with hematological malignancies. show the lifetime risk of malignancy in CS because of the relatively Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral venous blood and bone young age of the patients. We suppose that meningioma and GIT can- marrow. For gene dosage analysis, real-time PCR quantification of cers, although occurring rarely, should be a part of the definition of CS DICER1 and HFE1 as a reference gene was carried out, using SYBR and the physician who might encounter the disease should be aware Green I as a dsDNA saturating dye. Relative DICER1 gene dosage of this neurological and/or GI manifestation. was calculated using the two standard curve method. Grant support: MZOFNM2005 We included 114 patients with hematological malignancies (clinically confirmed MPNs, AMLs or CMLs) and 78 apparently healthy individu- P06.056 Beta-catenin gene mutation analysis in saudi als as a control group. We found no difference in DICER1 gene dosage diagnosed Endometrial cancinoma Patients relative to the reference gene in patients with hematological malignan- I. Alabdulkareem1,2, M. Al Balwi1,3,2, W. Al Harbi1, M. Balloee1, F. Alsafi4, A. cies. Additionally, HFE1 gene dosage was not altered in any tested Almulham4, A. Alkushi3,2; individual. 1KAIMRC, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health We conclude that DICER1 gene dosage is not altered in the majority Sciences, College of Medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Department of Pathology of patients with MPNs and AMLs/CMLs. Any potential change in the and Laboratory Medicine, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, expression of DICER1 in these types of malignancies is therefore not 4Obstetrical and Gynecology Department, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, caused by the alteration of gene dosage. The copy number polymor- Saudi Arabia. phisms of both DICER1 and HFE1 genes may be too rare in the gen- Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most frequently diagnosed gynecologi- eral population to be detected in the limited number of individuals. cal malignancy reported worldwide with an estimated incidence of 15- 20 cases per 100,000 women per year. Beta-catenin (CTNNB1) gene Cancer genetics 17 P06.059 Analysis of frequency NFKBiA gene polymorphism P06.061 Detection of EGFR mutations from cytologic specimens (rs696) in Polish patients with differentiated thyroid cancer of Non-small cell lung cancer in slovak Republic M. Kaczmarek-Ryś1, J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska1, S. Hryhorowicz2, D. Rakowski2, K. Hlinkova1, D. Ilencikova1, P. Babal2; O. Zakerska1, K. Ziemnicka3, J. Sowiński3, R. Słomski1,2; 1National Institute of Oncology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Pathological 1Institut of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, Anatomy, Bratislava, Slovakia. 2University of Life Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 3Department of Endocrinology Objective: Lung cancer is the leading cause of death in the Slovak Re- and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland. public. Lung cancer includes small cell lung cancer and non-small cell Thyroid carcinomas are the most often carcinomas of endocrine sys- lung cancer. NSCLC accounts for approximately 80% of lung cancer. tem with growing up frequency. The most often occurs papillary and Chemotherapy for NSCLC remains marginally effective with a 5-year follicular thyroid cancer, which belong to group of well prognoses tu- overall survival in 5-18%. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib was mors with slow progress and low benignity. Very serious problem are approved in Slovak Republic for the treatment of NSCLC. Gefitinib is a recurrences and regional or remote metastasis. Progression from well selective EGFR inhibitor that binds to the ATP binding pocket of the ki- differentiated thyroid cancer to malignant anaplastic carcinoma is pos- nase domain and blocks downstream signaling pathways. Mutations of sible also. the EGFR, in-frame 15bp deletional mutation (delE746_A750) in exon In this focus, very important seems to be searching for molecular 19 and L858R in exon 21 correlated with a clinical responsiveness to markers of disease course, good or poor prognosis and response on EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. medical treatment as well. It is expected that SNP polymorphisms re- Material and methods: We established methods for detecting delE746_ search in genes demonstrating association with neoplastic diseases A750 and L858R mutations from cytologic materials by a high resolu- will be helpful in understanding of molecular mechanisms of thyroid tion melting analysis and a mutant-enriched PCR. The results were gland tumors development and allow to better diagnosing. compared with direct sequencing. We analyzed 60 archivated cyto- We analyzed c.*126G>A polymorphism (rs696) in NFKBIA gene. logic specimens from patients with NSCLC. Groups of 273 patients with differentiated thyroid cancer and 186 in- Result: Mutations of EGFR were detected in 13 cases. In-frame dele- dividuals from population group were examined. Sequence variants tion in exon 19 were detected in 15% and L858R mutation in exon were determined by pyrosequencing. 21 in 9,4% cases. The results of the mutant-enriched PCR and high There were observed differences in allele and genotype frequencies. In resolution melting analysis were consistent. However one mutant case patients with thyroid cancer allele G was present with frequency 0,579 in exon 21 and two cases in exon 19 were not detected by direct se- and allele A with frequency 0,421, compared with 0,521 and 0,478 in quencing. The pathological findings of these specimens showed a 5% population group respectively. The differences were more significant fraction of tumours cells. when considerate men and women separately. Allele G in males with Conclusion: Our results indicated that mutant-enriched PCR and high DTC was observed with frequency 0,651 comparing with males popu- resolution melting analysis are the same sensitive methods for the de- lation control 0,533; allele A with frequency 0,349 in patient males and tection of EGFR mutations from cytologic specimens. 0,467 in males population. Regarding lower frequency of the disease in males, detected differ- P06.062 Genetic analysis on EGFR prior treatment with tyrosine ences may indicate on association of allele G with thyroid cancer risk. kinase inhibitors on patients with non-small lung cancer (NscLc) P06.060 the association between CDKN2A/p16 aberrant Å. Nilsson; DNA methylation with few risk factors such as obesity and Inst. of Laboratory Medicine, Dep of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion occupational airborne exposures in esophageal cancer patients Medicine, Gothenburg, Sweden. S. Mohammad Ganji1,2, E. Miotto3, E. Callegari4, F. Rastgar-Jazii1, K. Aim: To develop methods for EGFR mutation screening with high sen- Sayehmiri5, F. Fereidooni6, M. Yazdanbod7, M. Negrini2, M. Negrini2; sibility for selection of lung cancer patients who will benefit from treat- 1Department of Biochemistry, National Institute for Genetic Engineering and ment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dipartimento di Medicina Background: Lung cancer is the most common cancer related cause Sperimentale e Diagnostica e Centro Interdipartimentale per la Ricerca sul of death in the western world, including both men and women. The Cancro, Università di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 3DDipartimento di Medicina mortality is high, less then 15% are living 5 years after diagnosis. The Sperimentale e Diagnostica e Centro Interdipartimentale per la Ricerca main reason for the poor prognosis is that the majority of patients are sul Cancro, Università di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Medicina diagnosed with metastasis. Therefore, it is of great importance to have Sperimentale e Diagnostica e Centro Interdipartimentale per la Ricerca sul effective treatment to decrease the mortality among these patients. Cancro, Università di Ferrara,, Ferrara, Italy, 5Department of Epidemiology and During the last couple of years new ways of treatment, using tyrosine social medicine, Ilam University of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Islamic Republic kinase inhibitors (Gefitinib, Erlotinib), have successfully evolved. How- of Iran, 6Department of Pathology. Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospitals ever, best drug response is observed in patients with specific muta- Complex, Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7Surgery tions within the gene encoding the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Department, Shariati Hospital, Medical University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic (EGFR). This gene plays a major role in the regulation of tumour cell Republic of Iran. proliferation. Therefore, genetic analysis of the tumour DNA should be There are some risk factors for increasing of squamous cell carcinoma performed prior treatment of patients. of esophagus such as obesity and occupational dust exposure which Method: We will develop methods for specific mutation analysis of exon we tested whether these factors could also affect aberrant DNA meth- 19 and 21 in the EGFR gene. This includes fragment analysis on ABI ylation. For this reason, we studied for methylation at the CDKN2A/p16 3130 and quantitative Taqman based PCR. Genetic analysis of genes gene promoter by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction as- downstream in the EGFR signalling pathway, including KRAS, BRAF say (MSP) on DNAs extracted from 44 fresh tumor tissues and 19 and PIK3 will also be performed with these techniques to search for non-tumor adjacent normal tissues, obtained from 44 patients affected additional mutations/amplifications that might correspond to improved by squamous cell carcinoma of esophagus (SCCE) in Iran. Statisti- treatment. cal analysis were used to assess association of promoter methylation Significance: Genetic analysis of treated NSCLC patients will help us with bio-pathological, clinical and personal information data, including find biomarkers in order to better predict patients who will benefit from obesity and airborne exposures. The results showed that in 27.2% (12 anti-EGFR-treatment. out of 44) of tumor samples, Methylation at the CDKN2A/p16 gene promoter was detected but none of the non-tumor tissues exhibited P06.063 the analysis of mutations in the EGFR and K-ras genes the aberrant methylation.moreover, the results confirmed previously using LNA-clamp PcR and hybridization with biochips described significant association with low tumor stage (P=0.002); in M. A. Emelyanova1, F. A. Amossenko2, A. V. Chudinov1, T. V. Nasedkina1; addition, we found that obesity (P=0.001) and occupational exposure 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, (P=0.008) were both significantly associated with CDKN2A/p16 pro- 2Medical Genetic Center, Moscow, Russian Federation. moter methylation. This study provides evidence that obesity and oc- The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a receptor tyrosine ki- cupational exposure increase the risk of developing esophageal can- nase whose activation leads to aberrant signaling and cell proliferation cer through an enhancement of CDKN2A/p16 promoter methylation. in lung adenocarcinomas and colorectal cancers, is a main subject of Cancer genetics 17 new targeted therapies, such as anti- EGFR monoclonal antibodies is the exposure to endogenous and exogenous estrogen throughout (cetuximab and panitumumab) or tyrosine kinase inhibitors (gefitinib life. We hypothesized that UGT1A1 variants may be associated with and erlotinib). Somatic mutations in the EGFR gene and K-ras gene, bilirubin levels and risk of dyslipidemia in endometrial cancer. We stud- coding the downstream GTPase, are associated with the sensitivity to ied 312 ceses of endometrial cancer ,202 cases had dyslipidemia and these drugs. 110 cases had nomal value of the lipid, with no history of congenital A biochip has been developed for the analysis of mutations in codons or acquired liver dysfunction. The assays for genotyping the polymor- 12 and 13 of the K-ras oncogene, mutations in codons 858, 719, 790 phisms in the UGT1A1 gene were based on either Invader® assay or and deletion in exon 19 of the EGFR gene. An approach represents direct sequencing. We conducted a case-control study to investigate a combination of two-round multiplex PCR and hybridization with im- the associations between UGT1A1 polymorphisms and risk of dyslip- mobilized oligonucleotide probes complementary to wild-type and idemia in endometrial cancer. Polymorphism of UGT1A1*28 and *60 mutated sequences. For specific amplification of mutant fragments in carriers with higher serum bilirubin concentrations exhibit association a large excess of wild-type DNA the blocking (clamping) of wildtype with lower risk of dyslipidemia. There is a possibility that the UGT1A1 sequences with a synthetic nucleotide analogue, locked nucleic acid polymorphism involved in individual variation of conjugation and elimi- (LNA) was used. The amplified fragments were labeled via incorpora- nation of estrogens to diffrence of serum bilirubin levels. tion of fluorescently labeled triphosphate during the second round of PCR. To prove the feasibility of the method the clinical samples from P06.066 Detailed analysis of the independent tumor suppressor patients with pancreatic cancer, lung adenocarcinoma and colorectal loci telomeric to tp53 suggests skip and myo1c as novel tumor cancer were analyzed. suppressor gene candidates in this region We consider the biochip-based approach with LNA-clamp PCR as a C. Hedberg1, S. Nilsson2, D. Dios1, A. Linder1, A. Behboudi1,3; useful tool for the screening of mutations in the K-ras and EGFR genes 1University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2University of Chalmers, to identify patients who will have a response to anti-EGFR targeted Gothenburg, Sweden, 3University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden. therapies. Several lines of evidence indicate an independent, commonly deleted The work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Re- region distal to the TP53 locus with a potential tumor suppressor activ- search (projects no. 08-04-01480 and 08-04-01371). ity in a variety of human tumor types. In a recent study, we reported a comparable finding in a rat tumor model for endometrial carcinoma. P06.064 circulating free RNA in NscLc - a promise for clinical Using FISH data, we developed a deletion map and narrowed the application candidate region to 700 kb, harboring 19 genes. In the present work, R. Cherneva1, B. Rukova2, O. Georgiev1, D. Toncheva2; we adopted a candidate gene approach to characterize this candidate 1Internal Medicine Department, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Medical Genetics Department, region further using a set of well-characterized experimental endome- Sofia, Bulgaria. trial carcinomas (ECs). We performed real-time qPCR analysis of the Background: The evidence of circulating nucleic acids in cancer pa- 19 genes in a panel of EC tumor and control samples and identified tients is of paramount clinical importance because it provides chances Hic1, Skip and Myo1c as the best candidates. No mutation in cod- for early diagnosis and better outcomes. ing sequences of Hic1, Skip and Myo1c was detected, and thus low Aim:The aim of this study was to explore the clinical utility of EGFR expression levels suggested a haploinsufficient mode of function for and hTERT mRNA expression as markers for diagnosis of NSCLC. these potential tumor suppressor genes. Both Skip and Myo1c were Methods: RNA was isolated with TriZOL from 3ml plasma of 45 NSCLC significantly down regulated at mRNA and/or protein levels, which patients and 40 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) pa- could be rescued in gene expression restoration assays. This could tients. A preamplification reaction with gene specific primers preceded not be shown for Hic1. There is no earlier report on the potential tu- the qPCR. TaqMan gene expression Assays for EGFR (Hs 00193306_ mor suppressor activity of Skip and Myo1c. However, they both show m1) and hTERT (Hs 00972650_m1) were used. β-actin (Hs 9999903_ an overlapping role in PI 3-kinase/Akt signaling, which is vital for the m1) served as endogenous control. A TaqMan MGB probe (FAM) was growth and survival of cancer cells. Moreover, there are reports on used. tumor suppressor activity of other members of the gene families that Results: The gene expression level of each gene was calculated and Skip and Myo1c belong to. Functional significance of these two genes given as a relative quantity - RQ. EGFR expression was found in all in cancerogenesis remains to be investigated. lung cancer patients - mean RQ = 29.39. hTERT mRNA was detected in 88% of the patients - mean RQ=17.31. Only 50% of the high risk P06.067 Hereditary mosaic gene inactivation by promoter patients were positive for EGFR - mean RQ = 2.09. hTERT mRNA was methylation in colorectal cancer susceptibility detected in 17 (42.5%) patients of the high risk COPD group - mean M. J. L. Ligtenberg1, R. P. Kuiper2, R. Venkatachalam2, D. Bodmer2, I. D. RQ=1.02. A statistically significant difference in EGFR and hTERT Nagtegaal3, J. H. J. M. van Krieken3, A. Geurts van Kessel2, N. Hoogerbrugge2; mRNA expression could be observed between the two groups of pa- 1Departments of Human Genetics and Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen tients - p=0.0001 Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, Conclusion: EGFR and hTERT mRNA are potential markers for NSCLC Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, diagnosis, whose clinical significance should be replicated in a larger 3Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, cohort of patients.T he premplification reaction with gene specific prim- Nijmegen, Netherlands. ers enhances the sensitivity and detection of free circulating RNAs in We have described 3’ end deletions of the EPCAM gene as a novel plasma of cancer patients. cause of Lynch syndrome (also known as Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer) . EPCAM is located directly upstream of MSH2, a P06.065 Association between the UGt1A1 polymorphism, well known mismatch repair gene that is frequently mutated in Lynch dyslipidemia and endometrial cancer risk syndrome patients. Deletions of the 3’ exons of EPCAM lead to tran- A. Hirasawa, T. Akahane, S. Matsumura, T. Tsuruta, K. Bannno, K. Makita, N. scriptional read-through across the MSH2 promoter, thereby inducing Susumu, D. Aoki; allele specific methylation and inactivation of MSH2 in tissues express- Gyne/Obst, Tokyo, Japan. ing EPCAM. Thus a mosaic pattern of epigenetic inactivation of MSH2 A close association exists between endometrial cancer and dyslipid- is established, that can be inherited over generations. Together with emia, in our previous study. Uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransfer- several international partners, we have thus far identified 43 indepen- ases (UGTs) are a family of phase II-metabolizing enzymes involved in dent families with a 3’ end deletion of EPCAM, which leaves the pro- glucuronic acid conjugation of sex steroid hormones. UGT1A1 encodes moter region of MSH2 intact. In these families 18 different deletions the critically important bilirubin UGT and involved in the conjugation have been characterized, all including the two most 3’ exons contain- and elimination of estrogens. Bilirubin is an antioxidant that suppress- ing the transcription termination signal of EPCAM. All deletions appear es lipid oxidation and retards atherosclerosis formation. An inverse to have arisen by Alu-repeat mediated recombination events. Methyla- association between serum bilirubin and coronary heart disease has tion of the MSH2 promoter has been confirmed in mutation carriers been reported. Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic from 15 families for which tissue was available. These results show neoplasm in Western countries and has been increasing over the past that deletions of the 3’ end of EPCAM are a recurrent cause of Lynch several decades in Japan. One of the risk factor of endometrial caner syndrome. Recently, we obtained additional evidence for an epigenetic Cancer genetics 17 silencing scenario caused by transcriptional read-through of another tained by both screening methods were verified by sequencing analy- gene involved in colorectal cancer, suggesting that this phenomenon sis. may be more prevalent than previously thought. We identified 22 different germline APC mutations and 8 of these were novel. Of the identified mutations, 10 were 1 to 5 bp deletions, 2 were 1 P06.068 Loss of EPS8 expression in a subset of colorectal bp insertion and 10 were nonsense mutations, 19 leading to the forma- carcinoma and adenoma tion of premature stop codon. Three mutations were in the splice-site W. M. Abdel-Rahman1,2, S. Ruosaari2, S. Knuutila2, P. Peltomäki2; region of the APC gene. Mutation screening for large genomic altera- 1University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates, 2University of Helsinki, tions in the APC gene was performed by multiplex ligation-dependent Helsinki, Finland. probe amplification (MLPA). Large APC deletions were detected in 3 EPS8 has a conserved actin barbed-end capping function that is re- patients. quired for proper apical morphogenesis and maturation in the intestinal The total mutation detection rate was 80% in patients with classical cells. Recent data showed that EPS8 was overexpressed in advanced FAP and 9% in AFAP patients. The results of the mutation analysis stage colon cancers. Our expression microarray analysis of colon are important for the preparation of individual treatment strategies for cancer cell lines confirmed this overexpression but there were strik- FAP patients. ingly low levels of EPS8 in RKO. In our genome wide LOH analysis This study was supported by MH SR 2006/26-NOU-02. of colon tumors, we observed considerable LOH at the EPS8 gene locus. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that EPS8 is constitutively P06.071 Diagnosis of Fanconi Anaemia (FA) in dizygotic twins expressed at normal colonic mucosa with a dot-like supranuclear cy- N. Selenti1, A. Kolialexi1, V. Papadakis2, G. Avgerinou2, K. Roka2, S. toplasmic localization. The staining was stronger towards the luminal Polychronopoulou2, E. Kanavakis1, A. Mavrou1; surface suggesting that EPS8 plays a role in epithelial differentiation. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, School of Medicine, Compared to matching normal mucosa, 19 colon tumors (4 adenoma, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Pediatric Hematology – Oncology, Aghia 15 carcinoma) out of 51 (37%) showed strikingly tumor specific EPS8 Sophia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece. protein loss. Of the remaining tumors, 5/51 (2 adenoma, and 3 carcino- Background: FA is a rare autosomal instability syndrome character- ma, 10%) showed marked overexpression, while 27/51 tumors (53%) ized by progressive bone marrow failure, various congenital malfor- showed retained expression. Mutation analysis revealed a missense mations, predisposition to malignancy and cellular hypersensitivity to mutation (c.794C>T , p.R265C) in exon 8 in RKO. EPS8 promoter was cross linking agents. We report on a case of FA in dizygotic twins with also methylated in RKO but there was no significant methylation in oth- characteristic congenital abnormalities and the same deletions of the er cell lines or carcinoma specimens studied. The clear loss of EPS8 FANCA gene. expression in the presence of few genomic alterations in adenomas Patients & Methods : A twin boy and a girl, aged 6 years old, were and carcinomas suggests that down regulation of this gene might be a referred to the Department of Medical Genetics for genetic investiga- significant event in the early stages of colorectal carcinogenesis. tion after the clinical suspicion of FA. Peripheral blood samples were analysed with cytogenetic and molecular techniques. Matched for age P06.069 Polymorphism of estrogen receptor-α gene codon 10 and sex donors were used as controls. (t392c) in iranian women with breast cancer For clastogen-induced chromosome damage both MMC and DEB were S. M. Abbasi; added and a minimum of 150 metaphases per case were analysed. A Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. sample was considered as FA positive if the percentage of breaks and Breast cancer is one of the most frequent malignancies among Iranian radial formations was 7-10 times higher as compared to the control. women. Estrogen receptor-α gene (ESR1) polymorphism has been Molecular investigation was performed using the Multiplex Ligation-de- found to be associated with breast cancer and clinical features of the pendent Probe Amplification (MLPA) technique to detect deletions of disease in Caucasians and Asians. A case study was conducted to es- the FANCA gene which account for more than 65% of Fanconi Anae- tablish a database of ESR1 polymorphisms in Iranian population in or- mia cases. der to compare Western and Iranian (Middle East) distributions and to Results : Induced breaks and radial formations were detected in both evaluate ESR1 polymorphism as an indicator of clinical outcome. The patients. MLPA identified the same deletions involving exons 1-5 and ESR1 gene was scanned in Iranian patients newly diagnosed invasive 7-17 of the FANCA gene in both patients. Parental molecular testing breast tumors, (150 patients) and in healthy individuals (147 healthy revealed that the mother was heterozygous for deletions of exons 1-5 control individuals). PCR single-strand conformation polymorphism and the father for deletions of exons 7-17. methodology and direct sequencing were performed. Conclusion : Although the siblings were dizygotic twins, both were The silent single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) was performed, as compound heterozygous for the same deletions of the FANCA gene. reported previously in other studies, but at significantly different fre- quencies, with further increasing predictive accuracy in Iranian popu- P06.072 Detection of complex mutations in swedish FAP lation. familes Data suggest that ESR1polymorphisms are correlated with various as- A. M. H. Rohlin1, Y. Engwall1, J. Wernersson1, J. Björk2, M. Nordling1; pects of breast cancer in Iranian ESR1genotype, as determined during 1Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, pre-surgical evaluation, might represent a surrogate marker for pre- Sweden, 2Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. dicting breast cancer. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), is caused by mutations in the APC gene. In Swedish FAP families, 61 different mutations in 96 P06.070 Rapid detection of APc mutations in slovak FAP families analyzed have been found and 27 of those are novel (Kanter- families by high resolution melting analysis and protein Smoler et al 2008). In classical FAP almost all mutations have been truncation test found, whereas in attenuated FAP (AFAP) or atypical FAP 70-80% of L. Mihók, K. Hlinková, D. Ilenčíková; the mutations still remain unknown. The main mutation detection meth- National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. ods that have been used are , Sanger sequencing, dHPLC, SSCP and Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant pre- MLPA. disposition to colorectal cancer and is caused by germline mutations The aims of this study were therefore to investigate the mutation nega- in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC). Classical FAP is char- tive AFAP cases and the more complex APC gene inactivations result- acterised by the occurrence of hundreds to thousands of colorectal ing in a lower expression of the APC gene. In addition mutations affect- adenomatous polyps and by several extracolonic manifestations. An ing splicing and patients with mutations that demonstrate a variation in attenuated form of polyposis (AFAP) is associated with less than 100 the penetrance of the disease were also studied. adenomas and later onset of the disease. The methods that have been used include copy number- and expres- In this study we analyzed the APC gene for germline mutations in 68 sion analysis using the 6.0 SNP arrays and Exon arrays 1.0 from Af- probands from unrelated FAP families of Slovak origin. The mutation fymetrix. RT PCR was used for extensive RNA investigations of the analysis of the complete coding region and exon-intron boundaries of APC transcripts. the APC gene was performed using a combination of high resolution Larger deletions of the APC gene including the promoter region and in melting analysis and protein truncation test. All positive findings ob- some cases several other upstream genes have been detected. RNA Cancer genetics 17 studies have also revealed the existence of several splice variants P06.075 interleukin 1B gene (iL-1B) and interleukin 1 receptor both in mutation carriers and normal controls. In other cases common antagonist gene (iL-1RN) polymorphisms and the risk of gastric mutations with lower penetrance among family members have been cancer found. These mutations were located in sites that could interfere with F. Burada, C. Soare, M. Ioana, P. Mitrut, R. Angelescu, A. Riza, A. Dobrescu, RNA-binding proteins involved in splicing, however modifying genes E. Buteica, M. Cruce, F. Mixich; and other complex mutational mechanisms were not excluded. University of Medicine and Pharmacy from Craiova, Craiova, Romania. Gastric cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer death world- P06.073 MutSβ exceeds MutSα in dinucleotide loop repair wide and remains a significant global health problem, with widely vary- M. Kansikas1, J. Kantelinen1, M. K. Korhonen1, S. Ollila1, K. Heinimann2, R. ing geographical distribution. Association between gastric cancer risk Kariola1, M. Nyström1; and polymorphisms in the genes coding for cytokines was reported in 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Basel, Basel, case-control studies. The aim of this study was to investigate the poly- Switzerland. morphisms of IL1B Ex5+14C>T (rs 1143634) and IL1RN Ex5 -35T>C The target substrates of DNA mismatch recognising factors MutSα (rs 419598) in a Romanian population. A total of 55 gastric cancer (MSH2+MSH6) and MutSβ (MSH2+MSH3) have already been widely patients and 105 healthy controls were included. Genomic DNA was researched. However, the extent of their functional redundancy and extracted from patients and controls blood using Wizard Genomic DNA clinical substance remains unclear. Mismatch repair (MMR)-deficient Purification Kit (Promega). The polymorphisms were genotyped using tumours are strongly associated with microsatellite instability (MSI) Taq Man SNP Genotyping Assays (Applied Biosytems) and the differ- and the degree and type of MSI seem to be dependent on the MMR ent alleles were discriminated according to the fluorescence intensity gene affected, and is linked to its substrate specificities. Deficiency of Fam and Vic (RotorGene 6200 HRM-Corbett). To investigate the as- in MSH2 and MSH6 is associated with both mononucleotide and di- sociation of these polymorphisms with gastric cancer we used x² test. nucleotide repeat instability. Although no pathogenic MSH3 mutations Allelic distributions were examined for deviation from their correspond- have been reported, its deficiency is also suggested to cause low di- ing Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence nucleotide repeat instability. Germline mutations in MMR genes are intervals (CIs) were calculated to assess the relative risk conferred by associated with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). a particular allele and genotype. The results indicate that allele IL1RN To assess the substrate specificities and functionality of MutSα and Ex5 -35C could increase the genetic susceptibility of gastric cancer MutSβ we performed an in vitro MMR assay using three different sub- (OR 3.22; 95% CI 1.08-9.60). The polymorphism of IL1B Ex5+14C>T strate constructs, GT mismatch, 1 and 2 nucleotide insertion/deletion is not associated with gastric cancer risk (OR 0.83; 95% CI 0.24-2.85). loops (IDLs) in three different cell lines. Our results show that although To our knowledge this is the first study of these polymorphisms in an MutSα alone seems to be responsible for GT and IDL1 repair, MutSα Eastern European population and further larger studies of genetic vari- and MutSβ indeed have functional redundancy in IDL2 repair and in ation in IL1-B and IL-1RN are required. contrast with earlier studies, MutSβ seems to exceed MutSα. The find- ing is clinically relevant because the strong role of MutSβ in IDL2 repair P06.076 comparison of the repair kinetics of the UVA- and UVB- indicates MSH3 deficiency in tumours with low dinucleotide and no induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers in the genome of human mononucleotide repeat instability. keratinocytes and its relation to expression of DNA repair genes M. Karbaschi, M. S. Cooke, M. D. Evans; P06.074 Gain of chromosome 2p, recurrent chromosomal University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. aberration in B-cLL Solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) by inducing DNA photo-lesions, has M. Stoklasova1, J. Sobotka1, M. Brejcha1, Y. Brychtova2, V. Holubova1, A. become the prime cause of most skin cancers. These cancers could Tovarysova1, T. Sablaturova1, A. Czekajova1, D. Adamova3, V. Heinzova3, M. be prevented if we protect ourselves from UVR. Wrobel1, J. Zivna4, M. Urbankova5, J. Mayer2,6; UVB is directly absorbed by DNA and induces different forms of le- 1Cancer Center*, Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Internal Haematooncological sions like cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs). In contrast with UVB, Clinic, Faculty Hospital Brno*, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Silesian Hospital in UVA is indirectly absorbed by DNA. It has long been considered that Opava, Opava, Czech Republic, 4Hospital Hranice Inc., Hranice na Morave, the UVA component of solar UVR carries a minimal risk for skin car- Czech Republic, 5Hospital Sumperk Inc., Sumperk, Czech Republic, 6*CELL, cinogenesis, as it does not lead to the formation of CPD, not least The CzEch Leukemia Study Group – for Life, Czech Republic. because DNA does not absorb UVA. Most sunscreens filter out UVB Chromosomal aberrations are independent prognostic factors in B-cell absorption, but they cannot block most of UVA, so they do not help to chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL). prevent skin cancer. A better assessment of the routes by which UVA By improving the cultivation technique using CpG-oligonucleotides and UVB induce CPDs, may lead to prevention of skin cancer. and IL-2 stimulation other chromosomal aberrations were identified, This study focuses on the differential expression levels of genes cod- especially unbalanced translocations and complex karyotypes. These ing for components of the nuclotide excision repair pathway and and findings can modify prognosis of patients evaluated by fluorescence in also viability of the human keratinocytes (HaCaT cell line), before and situ hybridization (FISH). Recently there was found the other recurrent after irradiation with UVA and UVB. aberration- gain of chromosome 2p. Metaphase cytogenetic and molecular-cytogenetic analyses detected P06.077 gain of 2p in 17 of 225 patients. towards an understanding of genetic selection in breast cancer We performed metaphase cytogenetic analysis using cultivation tech- N. I. Park, P. K. Rogan, J. H. M. Knoll; nique with CpG-oligonucleotides and IL-2 stimulation. Interphase FISH University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. was used for detection deletions of 13q, 11q, 17p, trisomy 12 and The cancer genome contains frequent chromosomal abnormali- t(14q32). Gains of 2p were confirmed by multicolour FISH and range ties and gene mutations. Nevertheless, the cell must maintain the of gain was determined by multicolour banding. capability of self-renewal, unlimited growth potential, and the ability Gain of 2p was detected in 17 (7,6%) cases. In 13 cases, gain of 2p to form tumours de novo. We are examining selective forces in the was detected as unbalanced translocation with the other chromosome. breast cancer genome, to determine if the minimal essential genome In 3 cases direct 2p duplication was presented, one case had direct encodes proteins that are consistently targets of therapeutic drugs. 2p duplication together with unbalanced translocation and isochro- Analysis of the genomes of 243 previously reported breast tumours mosome 2p. FISH identified chromosomal aberrations in 16 cases; (Gen Res.2006.16:1465) revealed 766 unstable (amplified and/or de- 7 cases had 13q deletion as a sole aberration, 6 cases had 13q and leted) and 815 stable (or quiescent) contiguous genomic regions. The 11q deletions, one case had 11q deletion and +12, one case had 17p stable regions had 10,232 protein coding genes of which expression deletion. Correlations between gain of chromosome 2p and some clini- of 8,954 of these genes were measured in the Affymetrix HG U133 cal/biological parameters will be presented. Plus 2.0 array. Using datasets reporting differential gene expression The cultivation technique using CpG-oligonucleotides and IL-2 stimu- in primary breast cancer samples vs. matched normal controls (BMC lation is an efficient method that can improve quality of cytogenetic Can.2007.7:55), we identified that 70% (6247/8954) of the genes had analysis. Detection of the other aberrations i.e. gain of chromosome 2p both stable copy number and stable expression. The genes with stable can provide new prognostic information in B-CLL, which is presented. expression were characterized by bioinformatic analyses of gene on-Cancer genetics 177 tology and biological pathways. We determined that the breast cancer informed consent was obtained. genome preferentially preserves functions that include cellular meta- Results: Analysis of twenty-five cases revealed novel mutations on bolic processes, regulation of gene expression, DNA packaging (chro- BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes respectively matin and nucleosome assembly), cellular component assembly, RNA Conclusions: It is known that the frequency of breast cancer differs metabolic process and regulation of apoptosis (p≤0.01). Conservation with ethnic origin. Assessment of cancer risk and probable life time of this minimal gene set may explain the effectiveness of certain che- cancer risk development takes into account the mutations found in the motherapeutic agents (doxorubicin, cisplatin, carboplatin, tamoxifen, BRCA genes. Knowing mutations unique to ethnic origins is of interest estradiol, fluoroucil, etc) due to their actions on multiple gene products for improving successful risk calculation. in this set. P06.080 Splicing Functional Assays of DNA variants of the P06.078 Study of 20 glioblastoma patients treated in Kaunas BRcA1 and BRcA2 genes. University of medicine during 2003-2006y A. Acedo1, D. J. Sanz1, L. Pérez-Cabornero1, M. Infante1, M. Durán1, E. V. Asmoniene, D. Skiriute, V. Deltuva, A. Tamasauskas; Esteban-Cardeñosa2, C. Miner1, E. A. Velasco1; Laboratory of Neuroscience, Institute for Biomedical Research of Kaunas 1Instituto de Biología y Genéica Molecular (Uva-CSIC), Valladolid, Spain, University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania. 2Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain. The analysis of the deleterious effect of genetic variants in disease Glioblastoma multiforme (astrocitoma grade IV, WHO) is the most genes is usually focused on the predicted effect on protein function but common and most aggresive primary brain tumor in adults. Suppos- an increasing amount of evidence indicates that there can be deleteri- edly, glioblastoma arises from altered glia cells or/and brain stem ous effects through the disruption of the splicing process. cells. These tumors are characterized by intratumoral heterogeneity, We have investigated the presence of aberrant splicing of BRCA1/2 invasive growth nature and rapid recurrence. Despite aggresive multi- in hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC). About 15% of individuals modal therapy, prognosis for glioblastoma patients still remains poor, undergoing genetic testing carry a DNA variant of unknown physiologi- as most patients die within the first 12-15 months after diagnosis. This cal significance that hamper genetic counselling in HBOC. situation has not significantly changed in the last 20 years. We examined the functional consequences on splicing of 24 BRCA Here, we report 20 glioblastoma patient cases followed up in the De- variants detected in 688 breast/ovarian cancer families that were bioin- partment of Neurosurgery, Kaunas University of Medicine during 2003- formatically preselected with splicing specific tools: NNSPLICE (splice 2006y. Patient clinical data - age, sex, tumor localization, treatment, site analysis), ESEfinder and ESRsearch (detection of splicing en- relapse free survival (RFS) and overall survival (OS) were estimated hancers and silencers). They were assayed by RT-PCR of lymphocyte (see Table). The chromosome 9p21 and its CDKN2A locus, with the mRNA and/or hybrid minigene experiments in HeLa and nontumor p16(INK4A) and p14(ARF) genes are recognized as the most frequent breast epithelial cells. Another 33 putative splicing variants from the genomic regions involved in the pathogenesis of glioblastoma were BIC mutation database were generated by site-directed mutagenesis investigated. and analyzed by hybrid minigenes assays. Results: there were no significant points for relapse free survival Twenty-eight variants altered the splicing process by different mecha- and overall survival, we think because of small glioblastoma patients nisms, including disruptions of the canonical,splice sites, the polypy- group. rimidine tract and splicing enhancers/silencers, and creation of cryptic Relapse Survival splice sites. We found that any type of variant (missense, synonymous, Patient characteristics Significance,p Significance,p nonsense, insertions/deletions) can be associated with defective splic- ing. 9 F Sex 0.175 0.133 Furthermore, twenty mutations were predicted to truncate the BRCA 11 M proteins and/or to delete essential domains, suggesting that aber- Age, y 48.7 (SD 11.3) 0.125 0.201 rant splicing of BRCA1/2 may represent an important ethiopathogenic Resection 20/20 N/A N/A mechanism in HBOC. Radiation therapy 20/20 N/A N/A The identification of splicing disruptions by functional assays is a valu- Chemotherapy (Temodal) 15/20 0.875 0.282 able tool to discriminate between benign polymorphisms and patho- p14 deletion 4/17 (23,5%) 0.04 0.456 genic mutations. p16 deletion 3/17 (17,6%) 0.130 0.763 P06.081 Tumour suppressor function of both of the BRCA1 and BRcA2 genes has a low threshold for splice site mutation. P06.079 Risk Assessment and BRcA1/BRcA2 testing results of P. J. Ainsworth1, P. K. Rogan2; Hereditary Breast cancer Patients in turkey 1London Health Sciences Centre/UWO, London, ON, Canada, 2University of E. Laleli-Sahin1, C. Irgil2, E. Karatayli3, G. Alis Burgucu1, M. Calikapan2, C. Western Ontario (UWO), London, ON, Canada. Yilmaz2, M. Bozdayi3, A. Tukun4,1; The majority of inactivating mutations in the BRCA1/BRCA2 tumour 1Duzen Laboratory, Ankara, Ankara, Turkey, 2Bursa Breast Surgery Center, suppressor genes are either small frame-shifting in/dels or nonsense Bursa, Turkey, 3Ankara University Hepatology Institute, Ankara, Turkey, 4Ankara mutations obviously causing protein-truncating events associated with University Medical School Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. increased risk of breast and/or ovarian cancer, (BIC database1). The Introduction and objectives: Breast cancer, with an average frequency classification of non-truncating sequence variations of unknown sig- of 10-12% is a common health concern for all ethnic groups around the nificance (VUS) is more difficult. Most of these VUS are comprised world. Known risk factors vary from sex/age to environmental factors. of synonymous or non-synonymous coding SNP’s, intronic and/or 5’ The inheritance of cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 are and 3’ sequence variants potentially affecting normal gene expression risk factors for familial breast cancer development. About 85-90% of by variously interfering with normal promotor function, mRNA stability breast cancer cases are sporadic and only the remaining 5-10% ac- and/or normal mRNA splicing. Easton et al2 have attempted to better count for early onset familial cancer. Individuals that carry BRCA1 and/ characterize the clinical significance of these VUS by: assessment of or BRCA2 gene mutations, life time risk of developing breast cancer family cancer history, co-occurrence in trans with a known deleterious significantly increases. mutation, and/or co-segregation with disease in HBOC families. To fur- Here we report novel mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes identi- ther analyze this data an information theory-based splicing mutation fied in Turkish families with positive family history and risk estimation analysis was used to predict the amount of full-length mRNA produced for these cases. by these variants. A significant proportion of the 43/1433 VUS classi- Methods: This study presents findings form families that have been fied as clinically significant by Easton et al. (12/26 in BRCA1 and 8/17 referred to our institutions for breast cancer risk estimation and genetic in BRCA2) were predicted to disrupt normal splice function, though 3 testing. The initial step with all cases is genetic counseling to obtain of these variants were also non-synonymous coding SNP’s. 50% of family history, explain the benefits and risks of genetic testing, prob- these damaging splice variants (6/12 in BRCA1 and 4/8 in BRCA2) able impact of results on the family members, and the limitations of predict only partial loss of splice site recognition. This high prevalence genetic testing. Those cases that agree for the testing to proceed an of leaky splicing mutations in BRCA1/BRCA2 genes is consistent with Cancer genetics 17 the possibility that high levels of these genes products are essential P06.084 qPCR-HRM combining to unlabeled probes : a single for tumour suppression, and alternative splicing at these loci may be technique used for point mutation prescreening, large gene diverting full length mRNA to inactive isoforms. rearrangement detection and genotyping of frequent sNPs in 1.http://research.nhgri.nih.gov/bic/ BRcA1 and BRcA2 genes 2.Easton et.al 2007 AJHG:81:873_883 F. Coulet, A. Miniere, M. Eyries, F. Soubrier; Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique et Angiogénétique Moléculaire, Groupe P06.082 Assesing pathogenicity of unclassified variants in Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, AP-HP, PARIS, France. hereditary colorectal cancer susceptibility genes Quantitative PCR High Resolution melting (qPCR-HRM) allows in one A. J. Brea-Fernández1, C. Fernández-Rozadilla1, M. Ferro1, O. Lortes1, E. step the detection of point mutation and gene rearrangements. Due to Fernández1, J. M. Cameselle-Teijeiro2, A. Vega1, Á. Carracedo1, C. Ruiz-Ponte1; recurrent SNPs in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, a large amount of se- 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, CIBERER, Grupo de quencing work remains after qPCR-HRM, as melting curves for SNPs Medicina Xenómica-USC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Servicio de and deleterious mutations may be similar. To reduce sequencing, we Anatomía Patológica. Hospital Clínico Universitario, Santiago de Compostela, developed genotyping of five recurrent SNPs in BRCA1 and BRCA2 Spain. genes by unlabeled probes and melting curves analysis. Probes are Genetic testing of susceptibility genes in hereditary colorectal can- 30 to 35 bp 3’ phosphorylated oligonucleotides corresponding to the cer (CCR) is applied in clinical practice to predict risk of developing mutated allele of each SNPs and included in PCR mixes. Asymmetric CRC. Many of the mutations identified result in premature termina- PCRs (1:10 primers ratio) were performed with fluorescent saturing tion of translation and thus in loss of function of the encoded proteins. dye (Resolight dye®) on LightCycler® 480. Genotyping is accom- These variants are considered pathogenic mutations. However, a sub- plished by monitoring the post-PCR melting of probe-target duplexes. stantial proportion of the variants found are nucleotide substitutions, Sensitivity and specificity of the assays were evaluated with a blind either within the coding sequence (missense or silent variants) or in screening of 92 samples previously sequenced. All the heterozygous introns, which do not lead to such a premature termination of the trans- and homozygous were correctly genotyped by unlabeled probes and lation. The question of whether these variants, referred to as unclas- melt curve analysis. In seven cases, sequence alterations were dis- sified variants (UVs), affect the normal function of encoded proteins tinguished from SNPs. For example, previous gene scanning analysis and therefore contribute to the development of disease is essential in showed similar melting curves for the c.2415_2416del mutation and genetic testing. Characterizing the significance of such variants repre- the c.2311C>T SNP of the BRCA1 gene . The second example is the sents a major challenge for medical management of patients in whom distinction by unlabeled probes between the c.1-11C>T variant and the they are identified. c.1-26G>A in the BRCA2 gene. The aim of this study was to asses the pathogenicity of 38 exonic qPCR-HRM combined with unlabeled probes is a simple, sensitive and and 13 intronic UVs found in APC, MYH and MMR genes in families rapid method which allows detection of point mutation and of gene with hereditary colorectal cancer. A combination of approaches was rearrangements and genotyping of SNPs. This method could be ex- followed that included: segregation with the disease within families, tended to other recurrent SNPs in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. absence in control individuals, co-occurrence with known deleterious mutations, effect on mRNA for putative splice-site mutations, effect on P06.085 Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer: A protein function by bioinformatic analysis, and specifically for MMR Nationwide study of all families referred for Fumarate Hydratase variants, tumour microsatellite instability status and DNA mismatch germline mutation analysis. repair protein expression by inmunohistochemistry. D. L. Smit1, A. R. Mensenkamp2, S. Badeloe3, B. H. Martijn4, M. E. H. Simon5, K. Y. van Spaendonck6, C. M. Aalfs7, J. G. Post8, S. Shanley9, L. H. Hoefsloot2, P06.083 The case report of Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer J. A. van Moorselaar1, T. M. Starink1, J. Bayley4, J. Frank3, M. A. M. van with causal mutation in CDH1 gene Steensel3, F. H. Menko1; E. Prusova1, K. Kyselova2, P. Vanickova1, O. Urban3; 1VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Radboud University 1P&R LAB a.s., Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Radioterapie a.s., Novy Jicin, Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Maastricht University Medical Czech Republic, 3Hospital Vitkovice a.s., Ostrava, Czech Republic. Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is the autosomal dominant Netherlands, 5Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6University susceptibility for diffuse gastric cancer, a poorly differentiated adeno- Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 7Academic Medical carcinoma that infiltrates into the stomach wall causing thickening of Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, the wall (linitis plastica) without forming a distinct mass (ring carcino- Netherlands, 9Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. ma). CDH1, encoding the protein E-cadherin, is the only gene known Background Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HL- to be associated with HDGC. Mutations in CDH1 account for approxi- RCC) is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterised by multiple mately one-third of HDGC. The majority of the cancers in individuals cutaneous piloleiomyomas, uterine leiomyomas and papillary type 2 with CDH1 mutations occur before the age of 40 years. CDH1 muta- renal cancer. HLRCC is caused by germline mutations in the fuma- tions are also correlated with breast, colorectal, thyroid and ovarian rate hydratase (FH) gene. Clinical expression is highly variable. We cancer. evaluated the yield of FH germline mutation analysis in a cohort of The E-cadherin is cell-cell adhesion molecule whose reduced ex- suspected HLRCC kindreds, assessed clinical variability among fami- pression or loss of function is regarded as one of the main molecular lies with a demonstrated mutation, and propose diagnostic criteria and events involved in dysfunction of the cell-cell adhesion system, trigger- indications for FH mutation testing. ing cancer proliferation, invasion and metastasis. Methods Clinical data were collected from all families referred for FH In this work we demonstrate a case report of molecular analysis of mutation analysis in the Netherlands. An MLPA test was performed in CDH1 gene, exemplified demonstrating anticipation of HDGC. Pro- families with negative FH sequence analysis. band is 27-year-old woman whose sister died at the age of 30 to gas- Findings In 14 out of 33 families we identified 11 different pathogenic tric cancer, her mother died at the age of 47 to pancreatic cancer and FH germline mutations, including four novel mutations and one whole- her grandmother died at the age of 63 to gastric cancer. We found gene deletion. Clinical data were available from 34 FH mutation carri- the causal mutation IVS15-6C> G in the CDH1 gene of proband. The ers. Cutaneous leiomyomas were present in all FH mutation carriers uncle of proband (mother‘s brother 57-year-old) was negative for this above 40 years. 10 out of 20 female FH mutation carriers underwent causal mutation. Thanks to performed molecular analysis the proband surgical treatment for symptomatic uterine leiomyomas at 34 years on may undergo life-saving total gastrectomy. average. Two FH mutation carriers had kidney cancer; the histological subtypes were papillary type 2 and Wilms’ tumour, respectively. Interpretation All FH mutation positive families harboured patients with cutaneous leiomyomas, contrasting with none of the families negative for FH mutations. An MLPA test should be part of FH mutation testing. FH mutation carriers frequently had early-onset, severely symptomatic uterine leiomyomas, whereas renal cancer was infrequent. Multiple cu- taneous leiomyomas may be diagnostic for HLRCC.Cancer genetics 17 P06.086 Molecular diagnostics strategy to identify hereditary tions are often point mutations or small deletions but also large chro- non-polyposis colorectal cancer patients mosomal deletions occur. So far however, little data is available on the O. Kostina1,2, E. Rebane1,2, W. Anderson1, M. Kask1, A. Valkna1; nature of the somatic, ‚second hit‘ mutations in polyps of JPS patients. 1Competence Center for Cancer Research, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Tallinn University In this study, we have screened for somatic mutations in twenty-four ju- of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia. venile polyps from three individuals harbouring a pathogenic BMPR1A Introduction. Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), (583C>T; G195X; patients P1 & P2) or SMAD4 (1244-1247delACAG; also called Lynch syndrome, is an autosomal dominantly inherited patient P3) germline mutation. syndrome predisposing to the early development of cancers of colon, We identified consistent allelic loss of the BMPR1A wild-type allele at rectum, endometrial, small bowel and urinary tract and accounts for the location of the first hit mutation in 45% (5/11) of juvenile polyps ~5% of all colon cancer cases. Molecular investigations have shown from patients P1 (4/9) & P2 (1/2). Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at that most HNPCC families are associated with constitutional mutations informative STR markers indicated that the entire wild-type BMPR1A in a class of genes (called MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2 and probably gene was lost in three of the five polyps. Mutation analysis of epithelial others) involved in DNA mismatch repair. MLH1 and MSH2 genes ac- and stromal tissue isolated by laser microdissection from one polyp count for approximately 90% of HNPCC families identified germline showed that LOH solely occurred in the epithelium. This was verified mutations. Most of these mutations are point mutations and small in- by FISH probes covering the BMPR1A region which additionally speci- sertions or deletions. The large genomic deletions explain a significant fied the size of the chromosomal alteration. proportion and epimutations in MLH1 a smaller fraction of point muta- Immunohistochemical staining of the juvenile polyps from patient P3 tion-negative cases with MMR protein loss in tumor tissue. The aim of revealed the absence of SMAD4 expression in the epithelial (80%, the study is to improve the diagnostic strategy of Lynch syndrome and 12/15) and stromal (60%, 9/15) compartments. However, no second characterize the MMR gene mutations of Estonian HNPCC families. hit mutations were identified in these polyps, despite extensive screen- Methods. A systematic analysis of patients from Estonian HNPCC- ing for sequence variations, chromosomal rearrangements, and pro- suspected families is performed using complex analysis by immuno- moter methylation. histochemistry, microsatellite instability, and by detection of gene mu- tation and changes in methylation profiles. P06.089 Sensitive detection of KRAS and BRAF mutations using Results. A comprehensive analysis of samples from 75 HNPCC-sus- mutant-enriched PcR and reverse-hybridization teststrips pected patients is ongoing, we will present preliminary results. G. Kriegshäuser1, B. Holzer2, B. Rauscher1, E. Schuster2, R. Zeillinger1,2, C. Conclusion. Based on traditional molecular genetics and combined Oberkanins1; with epigenetics, multiple detection methods can accurately diagnose 1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Molecular Oncology Group, HNPCC. As the results of the study, the precise molecular diagnostic Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical University of Vienna, scheme for diagnosing of HNPCC will be worked out for clinical use Vienna, Austria. in Estonia. KRAS and BRAF are key players in growth factor receptor induced signalling pathways. Somatic mutations in the two genes are known to P06.087 Promoter region methylation status of MGMT and play a role in oncogenesis and are found in various types of tumors. THBS1 genes in breast carcinoma patients KRAS and BRAF mutations are also known to be predictive for the F. I. Sahin1, O. Ozer1, M. C. Yagmurdur2, Z. Yilmaz1, B. Demirhan3; response to cancer therapy with anti-EGFR antibodies. 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, We have developed a reverse-hybridization StripAssay targeting ten Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of General KRAS codon 12/13 mutations as well as BRAF V600E. The test is Surgery, Ankara, Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department based on PCR in the presence of wild-type suppressors (mutant-en- of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey. riched PCR), followed by hybridization to teststrips presenting a par- Carcinogenesis is a multistep process with genetic and epigenetic allel array of allele-specific oligonucleotide probes. The hybridization changes playing role from the very beginning to the metastatic level. and detection steps can be carried out automated using commercially Breast cancer is a major health problem among women all over the available instrumentation. StripAssay performance was evaluated on world. Changes in methylation patterns of a number of genes associat- genomic DNA obtained from cultured cell lines, formalin-fixed paraffin- ed with cell growth have been reported in breast cancer. In the current embedded tissue and stool. study, we studied methylation status of MGMT and THBS1 genes in Using dilutions of DNA from tumor cell lines into normal DNA, each breast carcinoma patients. Paraffin embedded tissue samples from 47 mutation was shown to be detectable at levels as low as 1%. DNA invasive breast carcinoma patients were included in the study. Promot- containing various proportions of mutant KRAS was analyzed by Stri- er regions of MGMT and THBS1 genes were amplified by methylation pAssay hybridization and compared to results from real-time PCR, specific polymerase chain reaction following bisulphite modification. dideoxy sequencing and pyrosequencing. Dideoxy sequencing and We detected methylation of MGMT gene in 4 patients (8.51%) where- pyrosequencing failed to detect levels of 12.5% or lower, while Stri- as THBS1 promoter methylation was observed in one patient (2.12%). pAssay hybridization and real-time PCR unambiguously identified as Statistical analyses were performed by Pearson’s chi square test to in- low as 1% of mutant KRAS. vestigate whether methylation was related with age, menopausal sta- The existing StripAssay is currently being extended to contain addi- tus, lactation, parity, histological tumor type, local recurrence, axillary tional mutations, such as KRAS codon 61 variants. The simultane- metastatic lymph nodes and remote metastasis of the patients. We did ous detectability of multiple mutations in a single experimental set up not detect a significant relationship between the methylation statuses with excellent sensitivity will make the StripAssay a useful tool for the of the promoters of the two genes with the above parameters. Methyla- KRAS/BRAF mutation assessment on tumor samples. tion status of different genes has been reported to be heterogeneous in breast carcinoma, although we did not detect a significant relation- P06.090 KRAS Variant Detection on the Applied Biosystems ship, we believe studies including increased number of samples and 3500xL Genetic Analyzer genes will provide more information. C. J. Davidson1, F. Wang1, K. Champion2, M. Gauthier1, N. Koch1, J. Boonyaratanakornkit3, A. Pradhan1, J. Walker1, J. R. Jones2, A. Felton1; P06.088 Somatic mutations in juvenile polyps from BMPR1A 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Greenwood Genetic and smAD4 mutation carriers Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 3AcroMetrix, Benicia, CA, United R. H. E. Blatter1, M. Plasilova1, A. M. Russell1, J. Zhang1, N. Bösch1, S. T. States. Gokaslan2, R. Ashfaq2, H. Müller1, K. Heinimann1; The KRAS gene encodes a protein in the RAS-MAPK pathway, one 1Research Group Human Genetics, Centre for Biomedicine DKBW, University of several signaling cascades downstream of EGFR activation. EGFR of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2Department of Pathology, UT Southwestern signaling pathways are important in the development and progression Medical School, Dallas, TX, United States. of several cancers, with KRAS gene mutations common in pancreatic, Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) is an autosomal dominant disorder lung, and colorectal cancers. Activating KRAS mutations have been that predisposes to gastrointestinal polyps and a cancer risk of 10- described most frequently in codons 12 and 13, these mutations result 50%. Germline mutations in the genes BMPR1A or SMAD4 have been in constitutively active form of KRAS causing EGFR pathway signal- identified in approximately half of JPS patients. These ‚first hit‘ muta- ing independent of EGFR activation; thus making therapeutic agents Cancer genetics 10 that block EGFR ineffective. Here we describe limit of detection ex- ploys a nested-PCR approach, thus being suitable for MDR monitoring periments for the detection of sequence variants in codons 12 and 13 with an almost identical sensitivity as HemaVision assay. of the KRAS gene. Methodologies investigated include capillary elec- Overall our assay exhibited good sensitivity and specificity and al- trophoresis (CE) DNA sequencing, Shifted Termination Assay (STA) lowed identification of fusion gene transcripts in 24% of acute leuke- detection, single-base extension, pyrosequencing, real-time PCR, and mia. Compared with commercially available kits like HemaVision it is high resolution melt (HRM). Two sample types were used to assess considerably cheaper and for our lot of patients identified the same the limit of detection: 1) mixtures at various percentages of gDNA fusion gene transcripts as HemaVision assay. extracted from KRAS mutant and wild-type cancer cell-lines; and 2) This work was supported by the grant PN 41-087 from the Romanian mixtures at various percentages of KRAS mutant and wild-type cells Ministry of Education and Research. The authors express their grati- that were formaldehyde fixed and paraffin embedded to create a cell tude to European LeukemiaNet for their permanent support. block from which gDNA was extracted. The analytic sensitivity of the above methodologies is described with a detection of KRAS variants P06.093 Li-Fraumeni in the Baltics - it‘s not so rare, it‘s not so in codons 12 and 13 possible at a level of 1%. Further, copy number usual, it‘s so timely. variation (CNV) assessment of KRAS mutant cell line gDNA was per- R. Janavičius, K. Andrėkutė, L. Griškevičius; formed since it is known that cancer cell lines have CNV of the KRAS Vilnius university hospital Santariskiu clinics, Hematology, oncology and gene. For Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or human transfusion medicine center, Vilnius, Lithuania. therapeutic or diagnostic use Germline TP53 gene mutations are associated with complex cancer predisposition syndrome, the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), predispos- P06.091 sNaPshot as a sensitive molecular tool for prognostic ing to wide spectrum of malignant tumors, especially sarcomas, early- determination of K-RAs mutation status in patients with onset breast cancer, brain and adrenocortical carcinomas. Recently, colorectal cancer in different clinical stages the estimated prevalence of germline TP53 mutations may vary from T. Slamka1, Z. Bartošová2, L. Mihók1, M. Mamráková1, A. Jendeková1, D. 1:5000 to 1:20000. Ilenčíková1; Of note, genetic epidemiology, genotype-phenotype correlation and 1Department of Cancer Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, clinical presentation of LFS are completely unknown in Northern-East- Slovakia, 2Cancer Research Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, ern Baltic sea region (Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia). Given the strong Slovakia. founder effect in BRCA1 gene in Lithuania, there is a possibility for The K-RAS has been the first molecular marker used to predict suc- founder effect in other tumor predisposition genes. In Hematology, on- cessful response to specific biological treatment with anti-EGFR cology and transfusion medicine center of Vilnius university hospital monoclonal antibody (MoAb) in the first line treatment of metastatic Santarsikiu clinics we prefer less stringent modified Chompret crite- colorectal cancer (mCRC). ria (2009) and prescreen TP53 2-11 exons by high resolution melting We established a rapid and inexpensive assay based on Multiplex (HRM) analysis followed by direct automatic sequencing. SNaPshot kit (Applied Biosystems) to facilitate the identification of K- During one year period 3 confirmed TP53 carriers families (4 patients) RAS mutations in codons 12 and 13 on a routine diagnostic basis. were identified. Here we discuss the peculiarities of the phenotypic At first, DNA samples isolated from the formalin-fixed paraffin-embed- expression in these patients and describe the novel germline TP53 ded tissues have been tested for a diagnostic indication of MoAb tar- mutation. Two of patients conformed to clasic LFS criteria, well de- geted therapy in patients with mCRC. The K-RAS mutations were de- scribed p.R282W mutation was revealed in one osteosarcoma patient tected in 182 out of 508 samples (35,7%). Another clinical question we and p.C199G mutation was found for the first time in germline status addressed, was the distribution of K-RAS mutations in CRC in different (submitted to IARC database) in one breast sarcoma patient. One pa- clinical stages. Prospective screening included 131 patient samples tient presented as apparently BRCA1-related breast/ovarian patient, from fresh resected tumors. Patients were classified according to age, which was found negative for BRCA1 mutations but positive for TP53 sex, clinical stage, site of tumor, EGFR expression, p53 and BRAF p.R273C mutation. Additional genetic modifiers (MDM2 SNP307G; mutation status. We compared these factors in respect to the K-RAS T53 R72P, PIN3) were assessed and data will be presented in the mutation status. context of clinical sense. Surprisingly, outcomes pointed out a higher mutation rate of K-RAS oncogene in clinical non-metastatic stage II(38,8%) in comparison to P06.094 Alterations of LAts2, sPP1, stK11, ViPR1 and s100A2 metastatic stage III(31,3%). Therefore, we intend, that monitoring dur- are lung cancer type specific ing the treatment could explain closer the relationship between K-RAS M. Stražišar, V. Mlakar, D. Glavač; status and tumor behavior, tendency to metastasis and treatment re- Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia. sponse. High mutation rate of K-RAS in clinical stageII seems to be Molecular heterogeneity within non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is important to focus this molecular marker as a crucial prognostic factor evident in the variable presence of mutations, but molecular differenc- in treatment of CRC. Hence, the K-RAS status could play a key task es that may be associated with specific types are either unidentified in decision to apply adjuvant therapy. Study was supported - MHSR- or controversial. In an attempt to find novel molecular differences be- 2006/26-NOU-02. tween squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and adenocarcinoma (ADC), we created a DNA microarray platform (MA) by which expression lev- P06.092 Multiplex RT-PCR assay for rapid and cost efficient els of 3060 genes involved in carcinogenesis and apoptosis are moni- screening of fusion gene transcripts in acute leukemia. tored. The expression levels of candidate genes that were chosen on D. Jardan, R. Talmaci, D. Coriu; the basis of MA results were also validated on RT-PCR, and those Fundeni Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. genes further investigated for mutations, copy-number changes and The aim of this study was to validate the application of an “in house” methylation. We examined 118 NSCLC tumours of known stages and designed multiplex RT-PCR for the detection of 8 most frequent fusion types, as well as adjacent non-tumour tissue. By means of MA, more gene transcripts in acute leukemia (E2A-PBX1, TEL-AML1, AML1- than 40 genes, most of them involved in transcription or transcription ETO, PML-RARα, MLL-AF4, CBFb-MYH11, BCR-ABL, SIL-TAL) for regulation, were detected as having differential expression in compari- use in routine molecular diagnostic practice. A total of 78 patient sam- son to adjacent healthy tissue. LATS2 and STK11 genes were down- ples at presentation were tested (48 AML and 30 ALL). For evalua- regulated regardless of the type of NSCLC, but further mutation detec- tion all samples were tested in parallel with HemaVision Full kit (DNA tion showed that alterations are significant only for SCC. In S100A2, Technology). SPP1 and VIPR1, we discovered significant differences between ADC A total of 19 cases with fusion genes transcripts were identified ( TEL- and SCC already on expression level. S100A2 and VIPR1 were signifi- AML - 1, BCR-ABL - 4, AML-ETO - 2, PML-RARα - 8, MLL-AF4 - 1, cantly down-regulated and SPP1 up-regulated in ADC in comparison CBFβ-MYH11 - 2, SIL-TAL - 1). This allowed risk stratification for 25% to SCC. We were able to identify the causes of down-regulation of of AML cases and 23% of ALL cases. In combination with detection VIPR1 and LATS2, the former being a copy-number alteration and the of MLL-AF9 fusion gene transcript, MLL-PTD, FLT3-ITD, FLT3-TKD latter methylation. Our findings confirm LATS2, STK11 and VIPR1 as testing and detection of mutations in NPM1 this method allowed evalu- tumour suppressors and identify novel changes and genes that clearly ation of prognostic for the most of our AML patients. This method em- show differences between NSCLC histotypes on a molecular level.Cancer genetics 11 P06.095 Women with Lynch syndrome: perception of cancer at risk of urinary bladder cancer. risks, follow-up and prophylactic surgery Methods: Carriers and first-degree relatives of 95 families with a germ- C. COLAS1, A. Saleyron2, F. Coulet1, F. Soubrier1, Y. Ansquer2; line mutation in the MSH2 (n=43), MLH1 (n=26), or MSH6 (n=26) gene 1Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique et d’Angiogénétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié were systematically questioned about occurrence of carcinoma. The Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France, 2Service de Gynécologie, Hôpital Saint- cumulative risk of cancer occurring before the age of 70 years (CR70) Antoine, AP-HP, Paris, France. was compared to CR70 of the general Dutch population. Microsatellite Lynch syndrome predisposes to colorectal cancer and also to gynae- instability (MSI) testing and/or immunhistochemistry (IHC) was per- cological cancers. Screening recommendations for colorectal cancer formed on bladder tumours. are well established whereas gynaecological screening is still in de- Results: Bladder cancer was diagnosed in 21 patients (90% men) from bate. We evaluated follow-up, perception of cancer risk and attitude re- 19 Lynch syndrome families (15 MSH2, 2 MLH1, and 4 MSH6). CR70 garding prophylactic gynaecological surgery for 24 women with Lynch for bladder cancer was 7.5% [95% CI 3.1-11.9%] for men and 1.0% Syndrome, [95% CI 0-2.4%] for women, resulting in relative risks for mutation car- All women had an adequate digestive follow up (21 of 24 had colo- riers and first-degree relatives of 4.2 [95% CI 2.2-7.2] for men and noscopies at least every 2 years) but their gynaecological follow up is 2.2 [95% CI 0.3-8.0] for women. Men carrying an MSH2 mutation and less systematic (only 14 of 24 patients had ultrasonography and less their first-degree relatives were at highest risks: CR70 for bladder and than 50% also had an endometrial biopsy). Forty seven percents of pa- upper urinary tract cancer being 12.3% [95% CI 4.3-20.3%] and 5.9% tients had an accurate perception of their colorectal risk of cancer but [95% CI 0.7-11.1%]. Bladder cancer tissue was MSI positive in 6/7 tu- only 33 % also had an accurate perception of their endometrial risk of mours and loss of IHC staining was found in 14/17 tumours, indicating cancer and 8 % for ovarian cancer risk. If gynaecological prophylactic Lynch syndrome aetiology. surgery was proposed, they would be 63 % to consider this option but Conclusion: Patients with Lynch syndrome carrying an MSH2 mutation only after menopause. Almost 90% of the patients (21/24) discussed are at increased risk of urinary tract cancer including bladder cancer. of colorectal cancer risk with their gastroenterologist but only 54% dis- In these cases surveillance should be considered. cussed about the gynaecological risk. On the same way, only 50% of these patients discussed about the gynaecological risk with their P06.098 Evaluation of pathogenicity of single-base germline gynaecologist and 10 women (41%) did not mention their genetic pre- changes involving the mismatch repair genes mLH1, msH2 and disposition to their general physician. msH6 in diagnostics of Lynch syndrome. Women with Lynch syndrome are less aware of their risks for extra- L. Pérez-Cabornero1, M. Infante Sanz1, E. Velasco Sampedro1, E. Lastra Aras2, colonic cancers and undergo endometrial cancer screening less often J. Cuevas González3, A. Acedo Bécares1, M. Alonso Ramos1, I. Fernández than colonoscopy. Given the increased risks for endometrial and ovar- Carvajal1, L. Hernández Sanz1, N. Martínez Martín1, C. Miner Pino1, M. Durán ian cancers, sustained efforts to inform women and physicians of can- Domínguez1; cer risks, screening recommendations and possibility of prophylactic 1IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital General Yagüe, Burgos, Spain, 3Hospital surgery are important. Comarcal Medina del Campo, Medina del Campo, Valladolid, Spain. Lynch syndrome is an inherited disease caused by germ-line mutation P06.096 characterization of germline mutations of MLH1 and in mismatch repair genes such as MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6. MSH2 in suspected south American Lynch syndrome families A proportion of families are characterized by nucleotide substitutions, M. V. Dominguez1, E. M. M. Santos2, F. O. Ferreira2, F. C. Silva2, B. C. Lisboa2, unclassified variants (UVs) have been found, in order to use the vari- D. M. Carraro2, B. M. Rossi2; ants for predictive testing in persons at risk, their pathogenicity has to 1Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Clermont Ferrand, France, 2AC Camargo be evaluated. Hospital, Sao Paulo, Brazil. We examined 7 UVs detected in MLH1, MSH2 or MSH6 genes in pa- Introduction - Lynch syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant syn- tients suspected of HNPCC for expression at RNA level, the effects drome predisposing to the early development of colorectal cancer on splicing were evaluated by RT-PCR analysis and systematic se- (CRC), endometrium, ovary, small intestine, stomach and urinary quencing: MLH1: c.306+5G>A and c.307-29C>A; MSH2: c.1661G>A, tract. LS is caused by germline mutations in the DNA mismatch repair c.2634G>A; MSH6: c.100G>C, c.3425C>T and c.4004A>C. genes, mostly MLH1 or MSH2, which are responsible for more than We demonstrate that 3 of the 7 UVs analyzed affect splicing. The vari- 85% of known germline mutations in patients with SL. ant c.306+5G>A, a G to A transversion affecting position +5 of the Objectives - Search for germline mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 genes splice donor site of MLH1/exon 3; the sequencing of this revealed a in 99 Brazilian suspected unrelated LS patients. deletion of five nucleotides which gave rise to the aberrant splicing. Material and Methods - 99 DNAs were obtained from peripheral blood The substitution MSH2 (c.1661G>A) affecting the last nucleotide of and subjected to PCR followed by direct sequencing in both directions exon 10, the change from guanine to cytosine makes the natural splic- of all exons and intron-exon junctions regions of MLH1 and MSH2 ing site 50 (value 0.60) disappear, using a new donor cryptic site in genes. position c.1580 (value 0.56), thus producing the deletion of 81 nucleo- Results - We found 32 MLH1 or MSH2 pathogenic mutations, being 2 tides in the mRNA. This point was confirmed by means of RT-PCR individuals with 2 mutations. Thirty pathogenic mutations were found, analysis, so that the normal fragment would have a size of 357bp and being 21/41 (51.27%) fulfilling the Amsterdam and 9/58 (15.5%) the the aberrant fragment 246bp. We confirmed complete skipping of exon Bethesda criteria. Thirteen pathogenic mutations were described for 15 for the mutation MSH2: c.2634G>A. the first time. Currently, these findings are available on LOVD data- The pathogenic splicing mutations identified in this study will contribute base. to the assessment of „unclassified variants“ in genetic counselling. Conclusions - The results were consistent with literature. Moreover, higher frequency of MLH1 or MSH2 mutations was observed in pa- P06.099 molecular characterization of cNs embryonal tumors tients with Amsterdam criteria, confirming their high specificity. The in early childhood: differences between medulloblastoma and number of new pathogenic mutations in MLH1 or MSH2 genes found atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (At/Rt). in this study point for the requirement to screen suspected LS families, M. Biscuola1, E. Rivas1, G. Ramirez2, A. Santos1, E. Quiroga2, J. Palacios1; mainly regarding the Brazilian families complex genetic background. 1Pathology Department of Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio, Seville, Spain, 2Pediatric Oncology of Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio, Seville, P06.097 the risk of urothelial bladder cancer in Lynch Spain. syndrome is increased, in particular among MSH2 mutation Atypical Teratoid Rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT) are highly malignant CNS carriers tumors with an ominous prognosis that justifies an aggressive treat- N. Hoogerbrugge, R. S. Post van der, L. A. Kiemeney, M. J. Ligtenberg, J. ment. Due to their heterogeneous histology, IHC profile and some Krieken van; morphologic overlap with Medulloblastoma (MB), make an accurate Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. diagnosis results to be a difficult challenge. Background: Colorectal, endometrial and upper urinary tract tumours In order to characterize the molecular profile, we constructed a specific are characteristic for Lynch syndrome. The aim of this study was to Tissue Micro Array (TMA) with a series of 30 formalin-fixed paraffin- establish whether carriers of mutations in MSH2, MLH1 or MSH6 are embedded childhood brain tumours (22 MB and 8 AT/RT), from year Cancer genetics 12 2003 to 2009, were acquired from the archives of the Pathology De- identify melanoma-specific expression patterns and splicing events; partment of H. Virgen del Rocio, Seville, Spain. Representative areas and 4) methylation analysis to uncover epigenetic changes in mela- of each tumour were chosen. noma cells that contribute to melanoma-specific expression patterns. We studied by Immunohistochemistry (IHC) Ki-67, sinaptofisin, eno- Here we present results from the karyotype, CGH and SNP analyses, lase, GFAP, EGFR, INI-1, β-catenin and cyclin D1 and by FISH we as well as preliminary results from transcriptome sequencing. We ex- studied EGFR, HER2, MYC, MYCN, 11p, 17p/17q, 6q status. amine the challenges and limitations of working with highly aneuploid AT/RT group showed: 1) Loss of expression for INI-1 protein in all cancer genomes, and propose appropriate analytical procedures. Our the cases: 2) Positive immunohistochemical nuclear expression of β- comprehensive copy number profiling is useful to stratify melanomas catenin and cyclin D1 in 62% and 90% of the samples respectively, into sub-categories based on genomic amplification status (see Table). while the group of MB was positive only in a 13% and 9% respectively; We demonstrate a link between genomic amplification and increased 3) 75% of AT/RT samples carried 6q deletion while only 18% of MB gene expression, and we have grouped genes according to their copy showed this alteration. In contrast 36% of MB showed gain of 6q. number profiles. We anticipate that characterisation of melanoma-spe- Amplification of HER2 and MYC/MYCN was observed only in MB cific aberrations at the genomic, transcriptomic and epigenetic levels group in the 22% and 36% of these samples. will improve clinical diagnosis by identifying new candidate genes play- These results suggest that molecular characterization could be a help- ing a role in melanoma malignancy. ful tool for a more accurate diagnosis of these two tumors. Number of genes and genome fraction affected by copy number aberrations (* regions ≥ 100Kb) P06.100 Exome re-sequencing of 7 melanoma cell lines to Number of Amplifications* identify “driver” mutations Melanoma subset Deletions* melanomas (copy number ≥ 5) S. I. Nikolaev1, K. Harshman2, C. Gehrig1, M. Guipponi1, B. J. Stevenson3, 612Mb 12Mb A. J. Sharp1, D. Rimoldi4, P. Descombes1, I. Xenarios5, V. C. Jongeneel3, A. Large deletion 2 3778 genes 77 genes Valsesia3, C. Iseli3, S. E. Antonarakis1; 26Mb 217Mb 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Lausanne, Moderate amplification 3 200 genes 1548 genes Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Ltd, and 25Mb 1978Mb Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Institute for Cancer Major amplification 2 148 genes 14312 genes Research, Ltd, Lausanne Branch, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland. P06.102 multiple Endocrine Neoplasia (mEN), type iiA - case Melanoma is the most dangerous form of skin cancer. Ultraviolet light report exposure is a well known environmental risk factor for this tumor. Al- A. Kirov1,2, T. Todorov1,2, L. Angelova3, A. Todorova1,2, V. Mitev1; though a few prevalent mutations have been identified, the full mu- 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, tational spectrum that includes the “driver” mutations of melanoma Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Madico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, is unknown. To better understand the molecular pathophysiology of 3Laboratory of Medical Genetics, “St. Marina” Hospital, Varna, Bulgaria. melanoma we have used high throughput sequencing of array-select- MEN2 is a rare familial cancer syndrome caused by mutations in the ed exons to determine the mutational spectrum in the protein-coding Rearranged During Transfection (RET) protooncogene and is inher- fraction of seven melanoma cell lines, 5 unrelated and 2 derived from ited as an autosomal dominant disorder. MEN2 is classified into three the same patient (before and after treatment). subtypes: MEN2A, MEN2B, and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma. We performed the exome selection using CCDS capture arrays (34 The overall frequency is 1:30,000-50,000. Almost all MEN2A patients Mb, 20000 genes) on genomic DNA extracted from cell lines derived (95%) develop medullary thyroid carcinoma. It is generally the first from metastatic tumors and from normal tissues of the same patient manifestation and appears between the ages of 5 to 25 years (mean (EBV-transformed or non-transformed PBLs). An improved capture 15 years). We report on a Caucasian male with complains of general protocol results in 60% of DNA library fragments originating from cod- weakness and weigh loss (10 kg for 2 month). The patient’s mother has ing exons. Exomes were re-sequenced using 2-3 lanes of 2x76 bp been diagnosed at 47 as bilateral pheochromocytomas and struma no- paired-end sequencing, providing 40-80 fold coverage per sample. dosa and died at age of 51. In the index patient abdominal ultrasound More than 98% of SNPs recovered on SNP arrays were confirmed examination with biopsy of adrenal glands and histological analysis by re-sequencing. Somatic mutations were determined by comparison revealed pheochromocytoma on right side; elevated plasma calcito- between the melanoma and normal cell lines for each individual. We nin concentration and US scan with biopsy of thyroid tissue detected observe that the most abundant class of mutations is C>T, a hallmark medular thyroid cancer. The index patient has two elder brothers - (it of exposure to ultra-violet light. In order to detect “driver” mutations, turned out that one of them) had been surgically treated for medular we compared somatic mutations between individuals and revealed a thyroid cancer in the past; bilateral pheocromocytomas were detected subset of genes affected by probably deleterious mutations. We are in the family screening process. Presymptomatic identification of at- also investigating rare germline variants that are shared by the mela- risk siblings led to the diagnosis of medular thyroid cancer and right noma patients which may include alleles that predispose individuals sided pheocromocytoma in the eldest brother. MEN2A diagnosis was to this disease. suspected and we performed sequencing of RET protooncogene. The genetic analysis of the family affected members revealed c.1902C>G, P06.101 Copy number profiling of metastatic melanoma cell p.Cys634Trp heterozygous mutation. Unfortunately, two kids in the lines families of 2 of the brothers have also inherited the mutation. All adult A. N. Valsesia1,2,3, B. J. Stevenson1,2, D. Rimoldi1, D. Martinet4, M. Gaillard4, family members were offered genetic counseling. B. Rapin4, P. Benaglio3, S. Bergmann3,2, S. I. Nickolaev5, S. E. Antonarakis5, C. Rivolta3, J. S. Beckmann3,4, C. V. Jongeneel1,2, C. Iseli1,2; P06.103 Aberrantly expressed microRNAs indicate the 1Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss pathways potentially associated with non-small cell lung cancer Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Medical development Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Service of Medical T. Annilo1, U. Võsa1, R. Kolde2, K. Välk1, R. Roosipuu3, T. Vooder3, A. Genetics, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Department of Genetic Medicine and Metspalu1,4; Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, Melanoma is a malignant tumour arising from melanocytes (pigment 2Institute of Computer Sciences, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Tartu producing cells) which can generate metastases throughout the body. University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Estonian Genome Center, University of Although one of the less frequent skin cancers, melanoma is respon- Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. sible for most of the associated deaths. We are analyzing seven meta- MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are regulatory molecules that have been impli- static melanoma cell lines, as well as matched control cells, with 1) cated in development of a number of different cancers. The mecha- karyotype, high-resolution CGH and SNP analyses to study large-scale nisms of altered expression and functional relevance of many dysregu- genomic variation; 2) ultra-high-throughput sequencing of exome-cap- lated miRNAs are still unknown. ture genomic DNA to discover mutations in protein-coding genes; 3) To investigate the role of miRNAs in lung cancer development, we ex- transcriptome profiling using 454/Roche pyrophosphate sequencing to amined the miRNA expression profiles in 40 I and II stage non-small Cancer genetics 1 cell lung cancers (NSCLC) and 40 paired normal lung samples. We Moléculaire , Centre de Biologie et Pathologie ,CHRU, Lille, France. used Illumina MicroRNA Expression Profiling Panels which are able The MLH1 and MSH2 genes belong to the mismatch repairs genes to detect 858 human miRNAs. Altered expression of several miRNAs family. Thus far more than 200 different variants have been character- was confirmed by individual TaqMan miRNA assays. ized in each of the MLH1 and MSH2 mismatch repair genes. These We identified miRNAs miR-9, miR-149 and miR-205 as most signifi- mutations are not present in any particular hotspot or zone of the gene cantly up-regulated and miR-648, miR-1264 and miR-512-5p as most and include either nucleotide substitutions (missense, nonsense or significantly down-regulated miRNAs in NSCLC samples (P < 10-6). splicing errors) or insertions/deletions (gross or small). Specifically the The molecular pathways potentially affected by dysregulation of these overwhelming majority of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancers miRNAs were identified using online tool Diana mirPath. Significant (HNPCC) are attributed to mutations in the genes MLH1 and MSH2 enrichment of predicted targets was observed in pathways involved in respectively, which allows them to be classified as tumour suppressor adhesion, signaling and tumorigenesis, indicating that altered miRNA genes. Ongoing research on MLH1 and MSH2 genes mutations has expression may have a causal role in lung cancer development. underlined the need for simple mutation detection research protocol. The high number of variations, the gene length and the absence of P06.104 the inhibition of cell proliferation by a microRNA a hot spot region make the automated capillary electrophoresis (CE) molecule, miR-145 in human prostate cancer. DNA sequencing the gold standard method for this research. It’s a S. Sevli, O. F. Bayrak, S. Gulluoglu, Z. Demir, M. Ozen; highly referenced and robust technique that delivers long read lengths Yeditepe University Medical School, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, and the ability to sequence anywhere from a few to several hundred Turkey. samples in a single day. Here we present a MLH1 and MSH2 research Prostate cancer is one of the most significant cancers of the men protocol. This protocol was developed via a collaborative research and there is a need to identify novel therapeutic approaches in this study on 15 colorectal cancer samples using the Applied Biosystems disease. MicroRNAs are new class of small RNAs as regulators of 3130 Genetic Analyzer and the newest capillary electrophoresis plat- gene expression. Alteration in microRNA expression may play a critical form, the Applied Biosystems 3500 Genetic Analyzer. role in tumorigenesis, androgen independency and recurrency after radical prostatectomy. Global microRNA expression studies revealed P06.107 Expression of multidrug resistance-associated protein the key regulatory microRNAs in prostate cancer. We have shown a 1 and lung resistance-related protein in breast cancer patients: widespread deregulation of microRNA expression in human prostate correlation with response to chemotherapy treatment cancer. miR-125b, miR-145 and let-7c are down regulated in prostate M. Taheri1,2, F. Mahjoubi2, R. Omranipour3; tumors as compared to normal prostatic tissues. miR145 is downregu- 1Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran, lated in prostate tumor samples and prostate cancer cell lines including 2National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic PC3, DU145, LNCaP and LAPC4 but has relatively higher expression Republic of Iran, 3Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic in normal prostatic epithelial cells. The ectopic expression of miR145 Republic of Iran. significantly inhibited the proliferation of prostate cancer cells in vitro. Drug resistance is still a great obstacle to the success treatment of The molecular mechanism behind this change are being investigated. breast cancer. Molecular investigations on drug resistance have led Possible targets could be SEMA3A and SOX9 as identified by gene to the discovery of genes coding for P-gp, multidrug resistance-as- expression profiling. More studies to elucidate the mechanism of this sociated protein 1, lung resistance-related protein and many others. inhibition are in progress. In summary, our data showed that miR-145 Despite the intensive studies regarding the role of these genes in in- has an anti-proliferative ability as tested in vitro in human prostate can- ducing drug resistance in cancer patients the data is still controversial cer cell lines, suggesting microRNAs as important molecules in pros- and debated. tate cancer tumorigenesis. Therefore, in this study we attempted to investigate the possible cor- This study is supported by a grant (18S051) from The Scientific and relation between multidrug resistance-associated protein 1, lung re- Technological Research Council of Turkey. sistance-related protein and clinical response in women with breast cancer. We determined mRNA levels of MRP1 and LRP in tumor and P06.105 the mLH1, msH2 and msH6 mutations among familial adjacent normal tissues of 54 breast cancer patients by Real Time colon cancer Russian patients RT-PCR. E. A. Goncharova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, A statistically significant increase in MRP1 and LRP expression level E. L. Korchagina2, R. F. Garkavtseva2, D. Shakhmatov3, Y. A. Shelygin3, E. K. was observed when tumor tissues were compared with normal breast Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; tissues. Furthermore, MRP1 and LRP expression levels were signifi- 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical cantly different in patients responding to chemotherapy compared to Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer Research Centre, Russian noresponding patients. No relation between the expression level of Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3State Scientific either of these genes and clinicopathology markers was found. Centre of Coloproctology, Moscow, Russian Federation. Our results suggest that MRP1 and LRP in human breast cancer cells For the first time MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 gene mutations were ana- may affect the clinical response to treatment and determination of lyzed among Russian patients. There were 67% of hereditary non-pol- MRP1 and LRP (either alone or in combination) may be valuable for yposis colon cancer syndrome cases with MLH1 and MSH2 mutations. the prediction of the chemotherapy outcome in breast cancer patients The mutations mainly were in MLH1 gene. Only one mutation - deletion which remains to be cleared. of 3T in MLH1 exon 16 (p.Lys618del3) was repeated (20% of MLH1 spectrum). It is interesting that all patients with this mutation had mul- P06.108 Expression of MDR1 and MRP1 in colorectal cancer tiple primary neoplasms. This is often than under the other mutations patients: correlation with response to chemotherapy treatment near the significance value (P=0.06). The rest mutations were unique. S. Samanian1, F. Mahjoubi1, R. Mirzaei2, R. Azizi3, B. Mahjoubi3; Among 80 colon cancer families not corresponding to Amsterdam‘s 1Department of Clinical Genetic, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and criterion only 3 cases (~4%) with MLH1/MSH2 mutations were found. Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2D Department of The MSH6 gene was analyzed among 17 colon cancer families that Surgery, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, included endometrial cancer cases. There were two MSH6 mutations Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Surgery, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Iran in the sample (12%). One of those - 1142insCCCA was not found in the University of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. data bases and available literature and, so, is new. Drug resistance is still a great obstacle to the success treatment of breast cancer. Molecular investigations on drug resistance have led to P06.106 Development of a workflow to detect variants on MLH1 the discovery of genes coding for P-gp, and multidrug resistance-as- and msH2 genes, using the newest capillary electrophoresis sociated protein 1 (MRP1).Despite the intensive studies regarding the platform the 3500 Genetic Analyzer role of these genes in inducing drug resistance in cancer patients the R. Petraroli1, L. Bagait2, C. Davidson3, T. Lovecchio4, M. Dieu4, D. Boidin4, M. data is still controversial and debated. Crépin4, M. Buisine4; Therefore, in this study we attempted to investigate the possible cor- 1Life Technologies, Roma, Italy, 2Life Technologies, Paris, France, 3Life relation between MRP1 and MDR1expression level and clinical re- Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 4Laboratoire d’Oncologie sponse in patients with colorectal cancer. Tumor and adjacent normal Cancer genetics 1 tissues from cancer patients were assessed for the expression level of tations, p.Y179C and p.G396D, when compared to other Caucasian MRP1 and MDR1 by Real Time RT-PCR. populations. Here we present some of our data in regards to the role of MDR1 and MRP1 in clinical response to chemotherapy. P06.111** chromosome 11q aberrations and the tumor suppressor cBL in myeloproliferative neoplasms P06.109 Evidence for a founder effect for the common T. Klampfl1, A. Harutyunyan1, T. Berg1, R. Jäger1, B. Gisslinger2, F. caucasian p.tyr179cys and p.Gly396Asp mUtYH mutations in Passamonti3, E. Rumi3, D. Pietra3, J. T. Prchal4, M. Cazzola3, H. Gisslinger2, R. the italian population Kralovics1,2; R. Tricarico1, E. Pin2, E. Lucci Cordisco3, A. Panza4, M. Pedroni5, A. Piepoli4, 1Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, M. Ponz de Leon5, A. Viel2, M. Genuardi1; Austria, 2Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and Blood 1Department of Clinical Pathophysiology, Medical Genetics Unit, University Coagulation, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 3Department of of Florence, Italy, 2Experimental Oncology 1, Oncology Reference Center, Hematology, University of Pavia, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, IRCCS, Aviano, Italy, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Catholic University, Rome, Pavia, Italy, 4Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology, Italy, 4Gastroenterology Unit and Research Laboratory, Casa Sollievo della University of Utah and VAH, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 5Department of Aberrations of the long arm of chromosome 11 (11q) have been fre- Internal Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy. quently described in hematological malignancies. Recently it was Background: MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP) is an autosomal re- shown that these aberrations often associate with mutations of the tu- cessive inherited disorder characterized by a high risk of polyposis and mor suppressor CBL at 11q23. Using high-resolution SNP array geno- colorectal carcinoma (CRC). Although MAP-causing mutations are dis- typing of patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) we identi- tributed across the MUTYH locus, a few population-specific mutations fied a variety of 11q aberrations that predominantly but not exclusively have been reported. The majority of changes found in the MUTYH gene targeted CBL. Two patients harboring 11q uniparental disomy (UPD) are missense variants; among these, p.Y179C and p.G396D (previ- spanning the CBL locus carried a mutation in the CBL gene. For the ously annotated as p.Y165C and p.G382D) represent approximately first time we show, that a chromosomal gain of 11q amplifies a mutant 75% of MUTYH mutations found in Caucasians. The high frequency of CBL allele. As two patients with 11q deletions at the CBL locus did not these two mutations in Caucasian populations could result from either carry mutated CBL on the remaining allele, loss of a single CBL allele recurrent de novo mutational events or from founder effects. (haploinsufficiency) may also be oncogenic in MPN. Patients with MPN Aim: To verify the presence of possible founder effects for MUTYH often develop secondary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and since CBL mutations p.Y179C and p.G396D in the Italian population. mutations have been previously described in AML we examined the Materials and Methods: Haplotype analysis, using a set of 16 markers association of CBL mutations with post-MPN AML. Sequence analysis (microsatellites and SNPs) spanning a region of ~6cM covering the of CBL in 309 MPN patients in chronic phase and post-MPN leukemia MUTYH locus, was performed in 42 unrelated p.Y179C and p.G396D revealed an association of CBL mutations with leukemic transforma- carrier families and in a set healthy control chromosomes, including tion (P=0.0048). Not all aberrations that we detected on chromosome nuclear pedigrees. Haplotypes were manually constructed to minimize 11q were overlapping with the CBL locus. Thus, other 11q tumor sup- the minimum number of recombinations. The distributions of allelic pressor genes may play a role in the evolution of a malignant cell clone frequencies in normal and mutated chromosomes were compared by in MPN. The role of chromosome 11 in MPN pathogenesis is likely Chi-squared and two tailed Fisher’s exact tests. more complex than previously recognized. Results: We observed statistically significant differences in allele fre- quencies between normal and both p.Y179C and p.G396D chromo- P06.112 A missense mutation of the NBs1 gene altering DNA somes. In addition, p.Y179C and p.G396D chromosomes were char- damage response in a patient with familial early-onset breast acterized by an association with distinct haplotypes. cancer Conclusions: Our data support the hypothesis that the common L. M. PRADELLA1, L. B. AMATO1, V. MINIERI2, V. TURINETTO2, C. p.Y179C and p.G396D mutations may have been transmitted by a GIACHINO2, R. ZUNTINI1, G. GASPARRE1, G. ROMEO1, D. TURCHETTI1; common founder in the Italian population. 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, Turin, Italy. P06.110 Phenotypic variation in mUtYH-associated Greek While screening candidate Breast Cancer (BC) genes in BRCA-nega- polyposis patients tive early-onset BC patients, we detected a constitutional heterozy- F. FOSTIRA1, M. Pertesi1, A. V. Stavropoulou1, C. Panopoulos2, A. Grivas3, D. gous missense mutation (V210F) of the NBS1 gene in a patient with Yannoukakos1; BC diagnosed at age 29 and a family history of early-onset BC. 1Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, NSCR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2St. NBS1 encodes a protein, nibrin, involved in the repair of DNA Double- Savas Regional Oncology Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Metaxa Cancer Hospital, Strand Breaks. Biallelic NBS1 mutations cause Nijmegen Breakage Athens, Greece. Syndrome, characterized by microcephaly, growth retardation, im- MUTYH-Associated Polyposis (MAP) syndrome is inherited as a re- munodeficiency, chromosome instability, radiation sensitivity, and a cessive trait and is characterized by low polyp burden and increased predisposition to lymphoid malignancies. However, there is growing lifetime colorectal cancer risk. In Caucasians, two MUTYH mutations: evidence of an increased cancer risk in heterozygous carriers of NBS1 p.Y179C and p.G396D constitute the majority of all MUTYH muta- mutations. tions identified. Ten families meeting the MAP phenotypic criteria were The V210F variant has been previously reported in a child affected by studied. Patients were presented with 10-100 colorectal adenomas, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and in a patient with melanoma, but and in most cases family history does not show vertical transmission not, to our knowledge, in healthy controls. of polyposis. The mean age of developing colorectal cancer was 47 To explore the effect of this variant on Double-Strand Breaks Repair, years. Analysis of the MUTYH gene revealed eight different germline we performed an immunofluorescence assay on EBV-transformed B mutations in seven polyposis families. Furthermore, the pathogenicity lymphocytes from the patient. The response to DNA damage following of a 13-base pair deletion, located on intron 6 of MUTYH gene, which exposure to γ-radiations was evaluated in terms of number, intensity, was identified in two unrelated Greek MAP patients, was elucidated. and persistence of histone γ-H2AX positive nuclear foci. The polyp number, as well as the onset of colorectal cancer varied A marked increase of the γ-H2AX signal, indicating an increase in the amongst families studied. This is the first report of germline MUTYH number and intensity of nuclear foci, was found in the cells of the pa- mutations in the Greek population, which can explain a fraction of pol- tient, in comparison with a healthy, wild-type control and with a het- yposis patients, which are APC negative. The pathogenicity of a rare erozygous carrier of the 657del5 mutation, the most common NBS1 pathogenic MUTYH mutation, possibly associated with a relatively se- mutation. vere MAP phenotype, has been elucidated. It is quite evident that each These preliminary results suggest that the V210F mutation may actu- MAP case should be handled according to its distinct genotype, follow- ally alter NBS1 function and raise the hypothesis of a role in the gen- ing a specific prophylaxis protocol to ensure cancer prevention. Fur- esis of cancer. Further studies are ongoing to test this hypothesis. thermore, preliminary data reveal genetic heterogeneity of the Greek population, as well as lower prevalence of the two most frequent mu-Cancer genetics 1 P06.113 Neuroblastoma genetics: A great challenge for the P06.115 the importance of trk gene family in neuroblastoma Paediatric Oncologist M. C. Popoiu1, D. A. Izvernariu1, A. Goanta2, A. Timofte2, E. Seclaman1, V. L. S. Trabelsi1, D. H’mida-Ben Brahim1, M. Ben Brahim2, M. Gribaa1, S. Sassi1, David2, A. V. Popoiu1, C. A. M. Petrescu1, E. S. Boia1; S. Mougou-Zerelli1, A. Zakhama3, A. Saad1; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 1Laboratoire de cytogénétique de génétique moléculaire et biologie de la 2Emergency Children Hospital “Louis Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania. reproduction humaines Farhat HACHED Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service de Neuroblastoma is the most frequent extracranial solid cancer in child- chirurgie pédiatrique Fattouma Bourguiba Hospital Monastir Tunisie, Monastir, hood and the most common cancer in infancy. Despite multimodal Tunisia, 3Service d’anatomie pathologique Fattouma BOURGUIBA Hospital, treatment: chemotherapy, surgery, radiotherapy, the prognosis of neu- Monastir, Tunisia. roblastoma is reserved. The Trk family genes play an important role in Few tumors have engendered as much fascination for clinical and neuroblastoma behaviors. Neuroblastomas expressing TrkA are bio- laboratory investigators as neuroblastoma. Neuroblastoma, the most logically favorable and evolve to spontaneous regression or differenti- common solid tumor in childhood, is derived from primitive cells of the ation; meanwhile TrkB-expressing tumors often have a poor outcome. sympathetic nervous system. Genetic abnormalities in tumor cells cor- Between 2000 and 2009 a total of 17 patients with Shimada grade III relate closely with the clinical outcome. These genetic abnormalities and IV neuroblastoma were admitted in our hospital. There were 7boys include gains as well as loss of genetic material (MYCN amplification and 10 girls, age between 3 months- 8 years. Most of the patients (11) chromosome 17q gain and deletions of 1p). MYCN amplification is the were in stage IV, 4 were in stage III and 2 were IVS. Overall mortality first genetic marker to be used as a guide for therapeutic decision and rate was 77%, 75% in the Shimada III group, 81% in the Shimada IV remains the most relevant prognosis factor. group and 50% in the IVS. These rates are significantly higher than The primary aim of our study is to combine the use of molecular ge- that previously mentioned in the literature and, more important, are netics strategies to screen chromosomal rearrangements in Tunisian similar for the Shimada III and IV. This is an indication that more is to children neuroblastoma. For this we have chosen 3 technics: chromo- be done for a better stratification of the patients. A better stratification genic in situ hybridization (CISH), multiplex ligation probe amplification means better results with fewer side effects. This is particularly impor- (MLPA) and microsatellite analysis, on fresh and paraffin-embedded tant because the majority of survivors of high-risk neuroblastoma have tissues. We analyzed 22 neuroblastoma tumors encompassing 2 case long-term side effects from the treatment. Survivors of intermediate of recidivism. Using both CISH and MLPA, we analyzed MYCN ampli- and high-risk treatment often experience hearing loss, growth reduc- fication rate. MLPA also allowed us to analyze MYCN nearby genes tion, thyroid function disorders, learning difficulties, and greater risk of (NAG, DDX1 and ALK) and 17q gain, whereas microsatellite mark- secondary cancers. The determination of Trk A and Trk B improve risk ers analysis enables us to identify 1p deletions. We investigated 21 grade stratification, therapy approach providing attractive targets and patients, the age of tumor discovery ranged from 4 days of life to 10 decrease side effect of chemotherapy. years. MYCN amplification rate ranged from 5 to 9 copies, at least one patient showed chromosome 1p deletion. Amplification of MYCN P06.116** multiplexed amplicon sequencing of the breast cancer nearby genes was frequently found associated to MYCN amplifica- genes BRCA1&2: challenges, opportunities and limitations. tion. Our results correlates with patient prognosis and allowed us to K. De Leeneer1, J. Hellemans1, J. De Schrijver2, W. Van Criekinge2, A. De set up the first Tunisian neuroblastoma therapeutic strategy based on Paepe1, P. Coucke1, K. Claes1; molecular findings. 1Center for Medical Genetics - Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Laboratory for Bioinformatics and Computational Genomics -Ghent University, P06.114 characterization of amplicon junction sequences in Ghent, Belgium. genomic regions surrounding the mYcN gene in neuroblastoma Since the launch of 454 Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), an in- tumors; implications for clinical follow-up of high-risk patients creasing number of applications has been published, however, its H. Kryh1, J. Abrahamsson2, E. Jegerås1, R. Sjöberg1, I. Devenney3, P. Kogner4, implementation in a diagnostic setting remains a challenge. T. Martinsson1; We first optimized an efficient workflow allowing pooling of as many 1Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, patients possible in a single run. After amplification with amplicon-spe- 2Institute of Clinical Sciences, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Institute of Clinical and cific primers, a second reaction is performed to fuse the A/B adaptors Experimental Medicine, University of Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 4Childhood and MID tags to each amplicon. Different set-ups for BRCA1/2 ampli- Cancer Research Unit, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. con sequencing were used to evaluate coverage, sensitivity and speci- Background: Amplification of the MYCN (2p24) gene region is a com- ficity. Equimolar pooling of 112 simplex PCR reactions, covering the mon feature among one group of unfavorable neuroblastoma tumors. complete coding and splice site regions of BRCA1/2, was compared The aims of this study were to characterize the amplified DNA seg- with equimolar pooling of these 112 amplicons in 16 strongly optimized ments (amplicons) in detail and to obtain tumor-specific PCR frag- multiplex reactions. Data analysis was performed with the VIP (Variant ments to be used for minimal residual disease (MRD) detection in Identification Pipeline) software package. these patients. More uniform coverage was obtained with the multiplexing approach. Method: High-density SNP-arrays were used to map the endpoints After optimization, a fold difference to mean coverage of 2 was reached of the MYCN amplicons in a subset of neuroblastoma tumors. As we for 90% of the amplicons. Sensitivity was evaluated with 132 distinct sought to clone novel junctions between amplicons, outward-facing sequence variants of which 90 were deletion/insertion mutations. In primers were designed, giving rise to a PCR product only in the case total 129/132 (~98%) of all variants could be easily detected. Variants of a rearrangement. DNA sequencing revealed information about the not detected were all deletions/insertions in homopolymeric repeats. junction region and the successful primersets were also tested for By defining filters initial specificity for 4013 amplicons was increased MRD detection in a semi-quantitative PCR assay, comparing DNA from 50% to 98.5%. from blood samples with a serial dilution of tumor/control DNA to esti- By using a multiplex barcoding approach NGS becomes competitive mate the amount of tumor DNA in the blood. with other prescreening techniques currently used in diagnostics. To Results: A tumor-specific junction fragment was detected in each of the our knowledge this is the largest validation of 454 amplicon pyrose- four cases hitherto analyzed, albeit different in each case. The junc- quencing published so far and our approach can be used as a guide- tions consisted of small microhomology regions of only a few bases book for the implementation of other diagnostic tests. and mapped to the reference genome as two separate hits on either side of MYCN, confirming a head-to-tail orientation of the amplicons. P06.117 PcR-based targeted sequence enrichment for next Our approach to MRD detection was found to be sensitive enough to generation sequencing platform detect the junction fragment in a 1/10^6 dilution of Tumor/Control DNA R. Padilla1, N. Hoag1, L. Z. Pham2, K. Li1, J. Ziegle1; and we were also able to estimate the tumor-DNA content in the pa- 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2RainDance Technologies, tient samples. Thus, this method is suitable for patient-specific moni- Inc., Lexington, MA, United States. toring of treatment response and early detection of relapse. Many human diseases are associated with genetic polymorphisms. Resequencing candidate regions can provide valuable information about the genetic basis for these diseases. Combining Next Genera- tion Sequencing with a new PCR-based enrichment method gener-Cancer genetics 1 ates a robust and cost-effective workflow for deeper interrogation of P06.120 Analysis of genetic susceptibility to non-Hodgkin targeted genomic regions of interest for specific applications. Here, lymphoma (NHL) in Bashkortostan Republic of Russia we report the use of Next Generation Sequencing with PCR-based I. Gilyazova1, M. Bermisheva1, O. Goncharova2, O. Lipatov2, E. enrichment to extract target regions from Yoruba DNA. We present Khusnutdinova1; an optimized and flexible workflow for library construction post PCR 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics,Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian enrichment to emulsion PCR and sequencing on a Next Generation Federation, 2Bashkir Medical State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Sequencing platform. We demonstrate that this pipeline provides a NHL is a heterogeneous malignancy of B and T-cells that involves their useful solution for targeted resequencing applications. uncontrolled clonal expansion in the periphery. The aim of study is to define the role of genetic polymorphisms and reveal potential suscep- P06.118 Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) in molecular tibility loci for NHL. The sample included 119 NHLpatients aged 55-64 diagnostics: evaluation of data analysis software tools and years from Bashkortostan. Patients were defined as all patients with application to BRcA1/2 testing a first, incident, morphologically verified diagnosis of NHL.Controls G. Michils, S. Hollants, J. Van Houdt, L. Vliegen, V. Brys, J. Vermeesch, H. were matched for age, gender, ethnic origin and area of residence. Cuppens, G. Matthijs; We examined polymorphisms in homocysteine metabolism related Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. enzymes (MTHFR C677T, MS 2756 AG), oxidative stress (MPO G- One of the challenges in genetic testing is the implementation of the 463A, SOD2 Val16Ala), detoxification (GSTM1*0, CYP1A1 A4889G, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies. There are techni- EPHX Tyr113His, CYP2E1 (intron6)), TNF-α ( G-308A). No statistically cal and managerial pitfalls as well as aspects of validation and ac- significant effects on risk, incidence, NHLstatus with SOD2, MPO, creditation of both the ‘wet’ work and the data analysis. We develop CYP2E1, MTHFR, CYP1A1, GSTM1 genotypes were observed. Dis- diagnostic applications on the Roche 454-GS FLX platform, starting tribution of genotype and allele frequencies in TNF-α gene showed with BRCA1/2. significant increase of TNF-308AA genotype and TNF-308A allele in First, fragments spanning the coding region of the BRCA1 gene were cases. TNF -308AA genotype was more frequent in aggressive form amplified using different DNA samples, to generate an (artificial) con- (7,1%) than in indolent (0%). Individuals with TNF -308A allele, associ- trol sample that contained 40 variations, including 16 frameshifts. The ated with higher constitutional and inducible expression of TNF-α, had data files were analyzed with three commercial software tools: CLC a significant increase in NHL risk (OR=2,11, CI=1,14-3,92). Analysis of Genomics Workbench (CLC bio), Sequence Pilot (SeqNext module, MS gene showed MS2756GG and MS2756GA genotypes to be asso- JSI medical systems) and GS Amplicon Variant Analyzer (AVA, Roche). ciated with decreased risk (OR=0,38, CI=0,14-0,99). Significant differ- Second, the coding regions of the BRCA1/2 genes were amplified for ences in distribution of EPHX gene genotypes showed high possibil- 454-GS FLX sequencing, using a recently developed multiplex assay ity of aggressive NHL form development in individuals with His allele (distributed by Multiplicon, Belgium). (OR=2,19, CI=1,23-3,93). Risk of NHL development was also higher All known tested variations could be detected by a combination of the in cohort aged less than 55 years old (OR=2,14, CI=1,01-4,56). These different software tools; except for SeqNext, the tools missed one or polymorphisms might play a role in NHL by influencing DNA synthesis a few variants. The variant frequencies (% mutant versus wild type or DNA methylation. reads) for heterozygous variations were 46 ± 2. We are increasing the number of samples to generate figures for the sensitivity and reproduc- P06.121 invasion and metastasis in non-small cell lung cancer: ibility of the method. expression analyses The multiplex assay is robust for the simultaneous amplification of ge- S. N. Metodieva1, D. N. Nikolova1, A. G. Josifova1, S. K. Karachanak1, S. P. nomic fragments for subsequent analysis on the Roche platform. How- Hadjidekova1, M. I. Kicheva2, D. B. Petrov3, D. I. Toncheva1; ever, the software tools still have to undergo further developments. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, On the basis of the results using patient samples, we are confident 2Progene, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Thoracic Surgery, University that the multiplex PCR approach will soon be ready for introduction in Hospital St Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. molecular diagnostics. Purpose: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is major cause of can- P06.119 Analysis of NF2 mRNA expression in sporadic colon cer-related death. The poor outcome of NSCLC is usually caused by cancer metastatic disease. Current diagnostics and treatment regimens are T. Cacev, S. Kapitanovic; ineffective partly due to the limited ability to distinguish differences in Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. inherent tumor invasiveness. The purpose of this study was to deter- NF2 protein product merlin is predominantly localized to the mem- mine the expression levels of 84 genes associated with invasion and brane-cytoskeleton interface and has a role in receiving extracellular metastasis in Bulgarian patients with NSCLC. signals and controlling cell-cell and cell-ECM communication, motility Methods: Total RNA was extracted from 54 NSCLC samples and 34 and differentiation. It has been shown recently that merlin inhibits Ras adjacent non-tumorous lung tissues. Six pools were prepared - one and Rac activation by uncoupling them from growth factor signals. control and 5 pools of tumor RNAs divided according to clinicopatho- Since these processes are essential for tumorigenesis and metastasis logical features including histological subtype and lymph node me- in general, we decided to examine the possible role of NF2 in sporadic tastases (LNM). Expression profiles of 84 genes were determined by colon cancer through analysis of its mRNA expression. The NF2 gene applying real-time PCR on pathway focused gene arrays (SABiosci- ( 22q12) is composed of 17 exons, with two alternatively spliced major ences, USA). isoforms, type I and II. Isoform type I lacks exon 16, whereas isoform Results: Common expression alterations in all 5 pools of NSCLC was type II contains exon 16 but lacks exon 17. These isoforms are variably upregulation of matrix metalloproteinases MMP11 and 13, their activa- expressed in some tissue types with possibly different functions. tor ETV4, as well as downregulation of TIMP3, cell growth and pro- Real-time PCR was used to determine the NF2 mRNA expression, liferation genes FGFR4 and TRPM1, cell adhesion gene MCAM and as well as expression of its mRNA isoforms type I and II in 60 pairs of transcription factors NR4A3 and RORB. The genes underexpressed colon cancer tumors and corresponding normal tissue. No statistically in LNM-positive samples are involved in cell adhesion (CDH6, ITGA7, significant difference in total expression of NF2 gene as well as its SYK) and cell growth (SSTR2) while LNM-negative pool showed spe- isoforms I and II was observed in tumor tissue as compared to cor- cific downregulation of matrix degradation related genes TIMP2 and responding normal tissue. Results of mRNA expression were corre- CTSL1. Unlike adenocarcinomas squamous cell carcinomas showed lated with the patients‘ clinicopathological features. Expression of NF2 prevalent deregulation of cell growth and proliferation genes, charac- mRNA, as well as its isoforms I and II, was higher in moderately and teristic overexpression of MMP9, underexpression of adhesion gene poorly differentiated tumors and tumors classified as Dukes‘ C. Based MGAT5 and metastasis suppressor KISS1. on our results we can conclude that NF2 gene is involved in sporadic Conclusion: This study revealed distinct transcriptional profiles related colon cancer development and progression. to invasiveness and metastasis in pooled NSCLCs in respect to clini- copathological features.Cancer genetics 17 P06.122 LNcR2 region and the incidence of polymorphic alleles to γ-secretase inhibitor treatment. Therefore, the identification of in czech patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer diagnosis NOTCH1 and FBXW7 mutations need to be taken into account when E. Hirmerová1, A. Panczak1, E. Křepela2, V. Kebrdlová1, A. Hořínek1, J. choosing target therapies in T-ALL patients. Štekrová1, M. Marel3, J. Homolka3, M. Kohoutová1; 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles P06.124 Nucleophosmin is overexpressed in thyroid tumors University and General Teaching Hospital, Praque, Czech Republic, A. Pianta1, C. Puppin1, D. Fabbro2, A. Franzoni1, C. Di Loreto3, M. Romanello1, 2Laboratories of Molecular and Cell Biology University Hospital Bulovka, M. Deganuto1, G. Tell1, E. Puxeddu4, S. Filetti5, D. Russo6, G. Damante1; Prague, Czech Republic, 31st Department of Tuberculosis and Respiratory 1Università di Udine, Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Udine, Diseases, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General Teaching Italy, 2Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria “S. Maria della Misericordia”, Udine, Hospital, Praque, Czech Republic. Italy, 3Dipartimento di Ricerche Mediche e Morfologiche, Università di Udine, Recent genome-wide association studies identified associations be- Udine, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Università di Perugia, Perugia, tween the risk of lung cancer and certain single-nucleotide polymor- Italy, 5Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche, Università di Roma “la Sapienza”, phisms (SNP) mapping to the region LNCR2 on chromosome 15q Roma, Italy, 6Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacobiologiche, Università di including genes encoding the nicotinic receptors subunits. We have Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy. introduced the analysis of four SNPs in the vicinity of these genes: Nucleophosmin (NPM) is a protein that contributes to several cell LOC123688 (rs931794, rs8034191), CHRNA3 (rs1051730) and CHR- functions. Depending on the context, it can act as oncogene or tumor NA5 (rs16969968) to identify the frequency of these polymorphic al- suppressor gene. Misexpression or delocalization of NPM, associated leles in Czech patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) com- with mutations in the structural gene, has been described in many hu- pared to two control group - individuals with non-neoplastic pulmonary man neoplasia. Expression and localization of NPM was investigated diseases, and anonymized blood samples from routine laboratory. The in human thyroid tumors and cell lines. By immunohistochemistry DNAs of NSCLC patients were isolated either from peripheral blood studies, NPM overexpression was detected in papillary, follicular, un- leukocytes or from normal lung tissue. differentiated thyroid cancer and also in follicular benign adenomas, We found no signifiant differences in the frequencies of SNP alleles indicating it as an early event during thyroid tumorigenesis. In normal between both subgroups of NSCLC patients regarding types of DNAs thyroid FRTL-5 cells, a positive correlation between NPM protein lev- (PBL or tissue) investigated or between both control groups respec- els and proliferation state was detected. By using quantitative RT-PCR tively. Generally, the individual alleles of SNPs in LNCR2 region form to measure NPM mRNA, we found that overexpression of NPM protein haplotypes, but a small proportion of “recombinants” could be de- is not always associated to increase of NPM transcript, suggesting tected; they are more frequent in the NSCLC patients than in control the existence of a post-mRNA regulatory mechanism. Finally, while individuals. We looked for the association between haplotype variants in non-cancerous thyroid cell lines NPM is localized in nucleolus, in in LNCR2 region and diagnosis of NSCLC. The highest difference in some thyroid tumor cell lines also a nuclear localization was detected, genotypic frequencies was seen between the groups of NSCLC pa- suggesting that in thyroid tumors a partial delocalization of NPM may tients and individuals with non-neoplastic pulmonary diseases, namely occur. However, no NPM1 gene mutations were detected in all except in rs8034191 and rs931794 (P = 5.9 x 10-6 and P = 1.1 x 10-6 respec- one thyroid tumor examined. tively). Similar results have been obtained for smoking habitus. Supported by the grant project MSMT CR MSM0021620808 P06.125 clinical and cytogenetic characteristics of acute leukemias with t(9;11)(p22;p15) P06.123 Prognostic significance of NOTCH1 and FBXW7 C. Lundin1, A. Horvat1, K. Paulsson1, K. Karlsson2, T. Olofsson2, B. Johansson1; mutations in pediatric t-ALL 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Hematology, Lund, Sweden. Y. Erbilgin1, M. Aydin Sayitoglu1, O. Hatirnaz1, O. Dogru2, A. Akcay3, G. The NUP98 gene in 11p15 is fused to a wide variety of translocation Tuysuz3, T. Celkan2, G. Aydogan4, Z. Salcıoglu3, C. Timur5, L. Yuksel Soycan6, partners in hematologic malignancies, with many of the correspond- U. Ure7, S. Anak8, L. Agaoglu8, O. Devecioglu8, I. Yildiz2, U. Ozbek1; ing chromosomal changes (most often translocations) being re- 1Institute of Experimental Medical Research, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Pediatric ported in only a few cases each. One of these rare translocations is Hematology Divisions of Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, t(9;11)(p22;p15), which has been found in four cases of acute myeloid Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Pediatrics, Bakirkoy Maternity and Childrens leukaemias (AML), in one case of acute biphenotypic leukaemia, and Hospitalh, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Department of Pediatrics, Bakirkoy Maternity and in one chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) in myeloid blast crisis (Mitel- Childrens Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Unit of Pediatric Hematology, Ministry man et al, 2009; present study). By reviewing the available clinical data of Health Goztepe Teaching Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Turkish BFM Study in these cases, including one from our own department, some notable Group, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Department of Internal Medicine, Haseki Education features are emerging, albeit based on a small number. The t(9;11) and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Pediatric Hematology Division of was the sole cytogenetic aberration in all cases, except for the CML, in Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. which the typical CML-related t(9;22)(q34;q11.2) was present as well. The NOTCH signalling pathway plays important role in the develop- All cases investigated molecularly harboured the NUP98-LEDGF fu- ment of multicellular organisms, as it regulates cell proliferation, sur- sion. Two cases were males and four were females, and all but one vival, and differentiation. NOTCH1 and/or FBXW7 mutations both lead were adults (the exception being a 5-year-old girl with AML M2/M3). to activation of the NOTCH1 pathway and are found in the majority of Excluding this pediatric patient, the median age at diagnosis was 52 T-ALL patients. years (20-64). The median peripheral blood values were hemoglobin In this study, mutation analysis of NOTCH1 and FBXW7 genes were 89 (72-104) g/l, platelets 42 (30-104) x 109/l, and the white blood cell performed in 87 pediatric T-ALLs who were treated on the ALL-BFM count 64 (1.4-293) x 109/l. Among the adult acute leukemia patients, protocols. Overall, 22,2% of our T-ALL patients had NOTCH1 muta- all relapsed within five years (3-54 months), suggesting an unfavour- tions and 10% FBXW7 mutations. We define novel mutations as able prognosis. well as previously reported ones inside the NOTCH1 and FBXW7. Whereas FBXW7 mutation frequency is similer to previouse studies, P06.126 study of opticin expression in human cancer cell lines prevalence of NOTCH1 mutation was relatively lower in our group. We Z. Tahmasebi Fard1, M. Jeddi-Tehrani2, A. Ahmad Bayat2, H. Rabbani2,3, K. also analyzed the relationship of the mutation data with the clinical Parivar4; and biological data of the patients. NOTCH1 and FBXW7, NOTCH1 1Department of Biology, Roudehen Islamic Azad University and Member alone were found correlated with lower initial leucocyte counts which of Young Researchers Club, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Monoclonal was independent from sex and T- cell immunophenotype. However, Antibody Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, ACECR, Tehran, NOTCH1 and FBXW7 mutations were not predictive of outcome in the Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Immune and Gene Therapy Lab, Cancer Center overall cohort of pediatric T-ALLs. Karolinska, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department The characterization of the NOTCH1 mutations and certain targets on of Developmental Biology, Islamic Azad University, Science and Research Unit, the NOTCH pathway are important for developing novel and specific Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. therapeutic strategies. Inhibitors of γ-secretase have recently been Introduction: Opticin is a member of a family of secreted proteoglycans tested in T-ALL cell lines and were shown to induce cell cycle arrest. that mainly expressed in human eyes. It is also expressed in human Importantly, FBXW7 mutations have been associated with resistance brain, ligament, liver and skin, but at lower levels than the eyes. The Cancer genetics 1 precise function of opticin are unknown but may be involved in fibril- Searching for mutations, we performed SSCP-PCR protocol. Se- logenesis of collagen molecules to form the vitreous gel and is poten- quenced with a DNA sequencer. tially involved in maintaining the spacing between the collagen fibrils of Our study shows any P38 mutation database phenotypically interre- the tissue. Here we present expression profile of opticin in a variety of lated with the clinical prognoses. human cancer cell lines. Methods: Two peptides from extracellular domain and signal peptide P06.129 comparative yield of endosonography and magnetic of opticin were synthesized and used for polyclonal antibodies produc- resonance imaging in surveillance of individuals at high risk for tion. Anti-opticin polyclonal antibodies were purified and evaluated by pancreatic cancer ELISA, and Western blot (WB). Opticin expression in mRNA and pro- F. Harinck1, J. Poley1, J. van Hooft2, D. J. Gouma2, C. van Eijck1, Y. Nio3, J. J. tein levels were studied by RT-PCR and Western blot on the following Hermans1, A. Cats4, A. Wagner1, C. Aalfs3, I. Kluijt4, P. Fockens3, M. J. Bruno1; cell lines: A-172 (brain cancer), T47D (mammary gland carcinoma), 1Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Academic Paca-2 (pancreas carcinoma), Ej-138 (bladder carcinoma), Calu6 Medical Center University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Academic (lung carcinoma), ACHN (kidney cancer), SKOV3 (ovarian cancer), Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Netherlands Cancer LS-180 (colon carcinoma), A-375 (skin cancer), PC3 (prostate adeno- Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. carcinoma), CLL-CII (chronic lymphocytic leukemia ). Introduction: Individuals at high risk for pancreatic cancer (PC) might Results: All cancer cell lines except A-172 expressed opticin at both benefit of a surveillance-program diagnosing this disease at an early mRNA and protein levels. and potentially curable stage. Endosonography (EUS) has proved to Conclusion: Our finding may represent opticin as a novel tumor marker be a potentially valuable tool for surveillance-purposes. Data for MRI in a wide variety of cancers. are limited. We present preliminary results of a comparative study be- tween baseline-EUS and baseline-MRI investigations in high-risk indi- P06.127 Gene polymorphisms that affect the circulating amount viduals (HRI) entering a yearly surveillance-program. and cytokine function of leptin are associated with risk for oral Methods: Individuals eligible for surveillance were 1st-degree members cancer of families with familial-PC (FPC) and mutation-carriers of PC-prone C. N. Yapijakis1, M. Kechagiadakis1, Z. Serefoglou1, D. Avgoustidis1, F. W. hereditary syndromes (e.g. p16-Leiden, BRCA1/2, p53, Peutz-Jeghers Neukam2, E. Vairaktaris1; syndrome (PJS)). HRI prospectively underwent EUS and MRI. 1University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, 2University of Erlangen Results: Sixty-four HRI (M/F 30/34, median age 50 years) underwent Medical School, Nurnberg, Germany. baseline surveillance-investigations (42.2% FPC, 28.1% p16-Leiden, Introduction: Functional DNA polymorphisms in genes of factors regu- 6.3% BRCA1-mutation, 17.2% BRCA2-mutation, 3.1% p53-muta- lating cell proliferation have been associated with increased predis- tion, 3.1% PJS). Asymptomatic masses (50mm, 10mm and 7mm) position for oral cancer by genetic association studies performed by were detected in three individuals (4.7%; 2 p16-Leiden, 1 FPC). All our group and others. This study examined the possible association masses were detected by EUS only (in one individual MRI was con- of oral cancer risk with DNA polymorphisms -2548G/A and Q223R in traindicated), of which two proved to be a malignancy and in one no the leptin (LEP) and leptin receptor (LEPR) genes, respectively. Both malignancy but focal areas of premalignant-lesions were found. Small polymorphisms affect the circulating amount and cytokine-type func- cystic lesions (median size 4.5mm) were detected in 15 individuals tion of leptin, which in the oral region seems to promote keratinocyte (23%), more often by MRI (MRI/ EUS 16/12). None showed signs of proliferation. malignancy. Methods: PCR-based RFLP analysis was performed in DNA samples Conclusion: Based on these preliminary baseline-results, EUS and MRI of 150 patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and 152 seem complementary techniques to detect (potential) (pre)malignant healthy controls of equivalent gender, age, and ethnicity (Greeks and lesions in HRI. All mass lesions were detected by EUS only, including Germans). two malignancies and one lesion with focal areas of premalignant-le- Results: In comparison to controls, the homozygous high gene expres- sions. Small cystic lesions were frequently found (23%) and more of- sion genotype A/A of the LEP -2548G/A polymorphism was significant- ten detected by MRI. Whether surveillance improves survival remains ly increased in the subgroups of patients with advanced cancer stages to be investigated. (P = 0.0001; OR 9.0, 95% CI 2.62-30.89), of patients with a positive family history of cancer (P = 0.0346; OR 3.55, 95% CI 1.15-11.01) and P06.130 Genetic analysis of BRAF mutation status in papillary nonsmokers (P = 0.0051; OR 9.69, 95% CI 1.03-91.24). The homozy- thyroid carcinoma gous low-leptin-binding genotype G/G of the LEPR Q223R polymor- K. Zavodna, Z. Bartosova, J. Podoba, S. Galbavy, M. Vallova, M. Milly, E. phism was strongly associated with an increased risk for OSCC for all Weismanova, M. Konecny, J. Kausitz; patients (P = 0.0028; OR 4.11, 95% CI 1.30-12.97) as well for most of St. Elisabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. the patient subgroups. Thyroid cancer represents a serious problem worldwide. Progress Conclusion: These findings reveal a significant contribution of circulat- in human genome project and modern molecular biology techniques ing leptin in the occurrence of OSCC. This is the first study indicating have improved our undestanding of the genetic changes that lead to the association of LEP and LEPR gene polymorphisms with increased carcinogensis and have provided opportunities for identifying disease risk for oral cancer. biomarkers. The recently discovered activating mutation in the gene for the B-type Raf kinase (BRAF) is the most common genetic altera- P06.128 P38 gene mutations and Breast cancer tion in thyroid cancer. The BRAF mutation (V600E) is the most fre- M. Hosseini1, M. Houshmand2; quent genetic alteration in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). The role 1Dept.Science,Islamshahr Branch,Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic of BRAF mutation as a poor prognostic factor has been reported in Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology many studies. The presence of the BRAF mutations in papillary thyroid (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cancer patients correlates with older age, extrathyroidal tumor inva- It has been known for a while that the P38 protein induces cell death. sion, distant metastases, higher tumor stage, and even higher rates of On the other hand it has been demonstrated that P38 can be essential recurrent disease. for death receptor-mediated apoptosis in cancer cells. The aim of our study was to establish the methods for rapid, sensitive In this study a kind of phenotype-genotype research for breast carci- and cheap detection of BRAF mutation status in tumour tissues DNA. noma and P38 gene mutations has been done. We applied DxS BRAF mutation test kit to detect somatic mutations in The correlation between breast cancer stage and its prognosis has BRAF gene in the set of 70 samples. Next step was to evaluate the been evaluated with the mutation types of the P38 and their statistical SNaPshot analysis and compare the sensitivity of these two methods. analyses were the matter of interest through a series of clinical and Our results demonstrate the utility of using the SNaPshot analysis for genetic variables. detection of somatic BRAF mutations in clinical samples. The sensitiv- Analyses were conducted for the 400 patients and 160 controls geno- ity of mentioned test is comparable to commercial DxS BRAF mutation typed for P38, including 182 patients, 76 Control of premenopausal test kit. women and 218 patients, 84 Control of postmenopausal women and ages were 35-55 years. The P38 gene consists of 12 exons.Cancer genetics 1 P06.132 Role of p73 and acetylation of H3 histone in the P06.134 PRDm16 is frequently rearranged with various partner regulation of periostin expression in thyroid cancer cell lines genes in myeloid malignancies with 1p36 alterations C. Puppin1, F. Frasca2, R. Vigneri2, P. Dello Russo3, S. Tomaciello1, G. F. P. Duhoux1, G. Ameye1, K. Bahloula1, I. Wlodarska2, M. Mozziconacci3, C. Damante1,3; Roche-Lestienne4, S. Raynaud5, C. Herens6, F. Speleman7, N. Dastugue8, S. 1Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, Taviaux9, N. Nadal10, P. Talmant11, E. Lippert12, K. Rack13, F. Mugneret14, F. Italy, 2Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Medicina Specialistica, Sezione di Nguyen-Khac15, N. Auger16, M. Lafage17, C. Terré18, M. Collonge-Rame19, I. Endocrinologia, Ospedale Garibaldi, Catania, Italy, 3Azienda Ospedaliero- Tigaud20, C. Cabrol21, J. Libouton1, H. A. Poirel1, G. F. C. H22, B. C. G. H. O23; Universitaria “S. Maria della Misericordia”, Udine, Italy. 1Cliniques univ saint-Luc / UCL, Brussels, Belgium, 2KU Leuven, Leuven, Periostin expression is a characteristic of the epithelial-mesenchymal Belgium, 3Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, 4Hôpital Jeanne de transition, which occurs during epithelial tumor progression. Previous Flandre, Lille, France, 5CHU, Nice, France, 6CHU, Liège, Belgium, 7UZ, Ghent, data indicate that periostin expression is related to aggressiveness in Belgium, 8Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 9Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, thyroid tumors. In order to identify mechanisms responsible for peri- Montpellier, France, 10CHU Hôpital Nord, Saint-Etienne, France, 11CHU, Nantes, ostin expression during thyroid tumorigenesis, four different human France, 12CHU, Bordeaux, France, 13IPG, Gosselies, Belgium, 14CHU, Dijon, thyroid tumor-derived cell lines were investigated by chromatin immu- France, 15Centre Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 16Institut Gustave noprecipitaion assay: BCPAP and TPC-1 (from papillary thyroid carci- Roussy, Villejuif, France, 17Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 18Hôpital noma), WRO (from follicular thyroid carcinoma), FRO (from undifferen- Mignot, Versailles, France, 19CHU, Besançon, France, 20Centre Hospitalier Lyon tiated thyroid carcinoma). Steady-state levels of acetylated histone H3 Sud, Lyon, France, 21Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, Genève, Switzerland, at lysines 9 and 14 are not related to periostin mRNA levels. Moreover, 22Groupe Francophone de Cytogénétique Hématologique, 23Belgian treatment of WRO and FRO cells with the histone deacetylase inhibi- Cytogenetics Group Hemato-Oncology. tor, Tricostatin A, increases acetylated H3 levels at periostin promoter Cytogenetic rearrangements of chromosomal band 1p36 are found in or coding sequence but reduces periostin mRNA levels. Therefore, no approximately 0.1% of myeloid malignancies. PRDM16, a gene located relationship was observed between H3 acetylation status at levels of on 1p36.32, is involved in the reciprocal translocations t(1;3)(p36;q21) either periostin promoter and periostin expression. and more rarely t(1;21)(p36;q22) in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) In addition to epigenetic mechanisms, by cell transfection, the effect and acute myeloid leukemias (AML). of several transcription factors was investigated. The thyroid-specific We studied 83 myeloid malignancies with 1p36 abnormalities by fluo- transcription factors Pax8 and Hex have no effects on periostin pro- rescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with a bacterial artificial chromo- moter. Instead, ΔNp73, but not TAp73α TAp73β, significantly increases somes (BAC) contig containing more than 80 BAC probes on 1p36. periostin promoter. Since ΔNp73 is expressed in thyroid cancer but In this series, PRDM16 was found to be rearranged with RPN1 in 30 cas- not in normal thyroid tissue, our data suggest a molecular mechanism es of t(1;3)(p36;q21), AML1/RUNX1 in 1 case of t(1;21)(p36;q22), TEL/ involved in development of thyroid carcinomas. ETV6 in 1 case of t(1;12)(p36;p13), IKZF1 in 1 case of t(1;7)(p36;p12), Moreover, our results suggest that periostin gene expression is con- CDH4 in 1 case of add(1)(p36), NSF in 1 case of t(1;17)(p36;q21), trolled in cancer thyroid cells by mechanisms that are independent a non-coding unknown sequence in 1 case of t(1;2)(p36;p12), and 2 from the levels of H3 histone acetylation. further loci in 2 cases of t(1;2)(p36;p21). PRDM16 was thus involved in over 45% of myeloid malignancies with P06.133 molecular genetic analysis of apparently sporadic 1p36 rearrangements. Like MDS/EVI-1, PRDM16 encodes for a zinc pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas in czech patients finger transcription factor and contains an N-terminal PR domain. 2 Z. Musil1, A. Krepelova2, T. Zelinka3, A. Vicha4, Z. Frysak5, A. Puchmajerova2, isoforms have been described. Most translocations would allow for the M. Simandlova2, J. Widimsky3, M. Kohoutova1; expression of both the long and the short isoform (lacking the PR do- 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine, main). This is in contrast with previously published studies which sug- Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, gested that, as for MDS/EVI-1, only the short isoform was supposed to Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and Motol University Hospital, have an oncogenic effect due to its translocation-induced upregulation Prague, Czech Republic, 33rd Medical Department - Clinical Department of in AML. Further studies are needed to understand the pathogenesis Endocrinology and Metabolism of the 1stFaculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech of AML and MDS mediated by PRDM16 isoforms and the role of the Republic, 4Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, 2 nd Medical partner genes. School, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 53rd Clinical Department of Faculty of Medicine, Olomouc, Czech P06.135 Polymorphic variants in CYP1B1 linked with increased Republic. risk for prostate cancer in Bulgarian patients Pheochromocytoma is sympathetic tumour of chromaffin cells in the D. L. Kachakova1, M. Boyadzhieva2, E. Popov3, A. Mitkova1, R. Dodova1, A. adrenal medulla that may produce and secrete catecholamines. This Vlahova4, T. Dikov4, S. Christova4, I. Kremensky5, C. Slavov3, V. Mitev1, R. rare endocrine disorder causing arterial hypertension among approxi- Kaneva1; mately 0,1 % of patients with hypertension, occurs in approximately 1Molecular Medicine Centre, MU- Sofia, Department of Medical Chemistry 90 % as a sporadic disease, or as a hereditary disorder either as a and Biochemistry, Medical University –Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular component of cancer syndromes: multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 Medicine Centre, MU- Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Urology, Medical ( germ-line mutations in the RET proto-oncogene located on 10q11.2), University –Sofia, Clinic of Urology, Alexandrovska University Hospital, Sofia, von Hippel-Lindau syndrome ( germ-line mutations in the VHL tumour Bulgaria, 4Department of Pathology, MU-Sofia, Central Pathology Laboratory, suppressor gene located on 3p26-p25) and, much lesser in neurofi- Alexandrovska University Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Molecular Medicine Centre, bromatosis type 1 (germ-line mutations in the NF1 gene) also known MU- Sofia, National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics, Sofia, as von Recklinghausen disease or nonsyndromic familial disease. Bulgaria. Germline mutations in genes SDHB (1p36.1-p35) and SDHD (11q23) Introduction: Prostate cancer (PC) is the most diagnosed non-skin can- that encode subunits of succinate dehydrogenase, which participate in cer and it is the second leading cause of cancer death in men. One of aerobic electron transport and the Crebs tricarboxylic acid cycle, have the genes associated with PC is CYP1B1 which encodes cytochrome been identified to cause susceptibility to familial pheochromocytoma. P450 1B1. This enzyme activates many carcinogens and catalyzes Head and neck paraganglioma is tumour of chromaffin cells, which hydroxylation of estrogens. It is over expressed in tumors and some arise from parasympathetic ganglia, most commonly at the bifurca- polymorphic variants may increase the activity of the enzyme and have tion of the carotid artery (carotid body tumour). The causes of the he- role in human prostate carcinogenesis. reditary paragangliomas are germline mutations in the SDHB, SDHC Materials and methods: We have investigated the association with PC (1q23) and SDHD genes, which encode three of the four subunits of of four polymorphisms in exons 2 and 3 in CYP1B1 in case control enzyme succinate dehydrogenase (SDH). Genomic imprinting might study of 181 PC patients and 200 controls. Direct sequencing was be a possible cause as mentioned in some recent studies. used for genotyping and SeqScape for scoring. Among 187 sporadic pheochromocytoma patients 5 germline muta- Results: Positive association with PC risk showed the polymorphic tions were found in the VHL gene. Further, 8 mutations in SDHB gene variants rs1056836 (L432V) and rs1056837 (D449D). The C/C geno- were detected.. In addition, in 3 examined patients with paraganglioma type of rs1056836 and rs1056837 have OR=1.44, 95% confidential we detected mutation of the start codon in SDHD gene. interval (CI)=0.95-2.18, p=0.053. The C allele of the same variants Cancer genetics 10 shows OR=1.345, 95% CI= 1.002-1.8, p=0.028. The polymorphisms element (ARE) in its proximal promoter region, plays pivotal role in the rs1056827 (A119S) and rs1800440 (N453S) did not show any signifi- cellular signaling pathways that control apoptosis of androgen-depen- cant association with PC. No association was found between stage dent prostate cancer cells. and grade of cancer with any of the polymorphisms. Discussion: CYP1B1 is hypothesised to play an important role in car- P06.138 Multifaceted preventive effects of single agent cinogenesis owing to its role in the metabolism of both environmental quercetin on a human prostate adenocarcinoma cell line (Pc- and endogenous procarcinogens. Several studies have demonstrated 3): implications to nutritional transcriptomics and multi-target the association between one or more genetic variants of CYP1B1 and therapy increased PC risk. M. R. Noori-Daloii1, M. Momeny1, N. Motamed2, N. Kazemialiakbar2, M. Conclusions: CYP1B1 polymorphisms D449D and L432V showed as- Yaseri1, M. Yousefi1, Z. Roshani1, S. Hashemi1; sociation with PC in the Bulgarian population but further study with 1Tehran Univ. of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2University larger sample size is needed. of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. The aim of the present study is to evaluate the effects of quercetin, a P06.136 study of ccassettes alterations in mitochondrial D- dietary flavonoid, on human prostate adenocarcinoma PC-3 cells. Lac- Loop in iranian prostate cancer patients tate dehydrogenase (LDH) release, microculture tetrazolium test (MTT Z. Ousati Ashtiani1, M. Heidari1, M. Ayati2, N. Rakhshani3; assay) and real-time PCR array were employed to assess the influ- 1Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Imam ences of quercetin on cell cytotoxicity, cell proliferation and expression Khomeini Hospital,Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic of various genes in PC-3 cell line. Quercetin inhibited cell growth and Republic of Iran, 3Shariati Hospital,Tehran University of Medical Science, proliferation and modulated the expression of genes involved in DNA Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. repair, matrix degradation and tumor invasion, angiogenesis, apopto- Prostate cancer which is the most commonly diagnosed nonskin ma- sis, cell cycle, metabolism and glycolysis. More importantly, quercetin lignancy among menhas heterogenous nature that multiple genes inhibited the expression of genes responsible for progression from the may involve in its occurance and progression. Mitochondrial genomic androgen deprivation-responsive stage to the hormone deprivation re- mutations are found in variety of human cancers. The non-coding fractory phase. In addition, no cytotoxicity of quercetin on PC-3 cells displacement-loop(D-loop) region of mtDNA in which contains es- was observed. Taken together, as shown by the issues of the current sential sequences for the initiation of replication and transcription,is study for the first time, the manifold inhibitory impacts of quercetin on a polymorphic region that accumulates point mutations. Mt D-Loop PC-3 cells may introduce quercetin as an efficacious „magic shotgun“ has two hypervariable regions(HSVI, HSVII) with homopolymeric C.To in order to be used in the future nutritional transcriptomic investigations investigate the mitochondrial micro satellite instability (mtMSI) within and multi-target therapy to overcome the therapeutic impediments in the mononucleotide C repeat at np 303-312 and 16184-16195 of mt crusade against prostate cancer. D-Loop hpervariable regions in Iranian prostate cancer patients and Benign prostatic hyperplasia(BPH) group, DNA from 30 pathologi- P06.139 GstP1 cpG island hypermethylation as an epigenetic cally-confirmed prostate cancer patients (paraffin-embedded tissues biomarker in the molecular detection of prostate cancer of tumour and adjacent normal tissues) and 30 age-matched with BPH R. Dumache, D. L. David, A. Kaycsa, D. Ionescu, M. Puiu, R. Minciu, M. Motoc; extracted and amplified D-Loop region by PCR.Sequencing results University of Medicine and Pharmacy ‚‘Victor Babes‘‘, Timisoara, Romania. showed different alterations in two C cassettes.Most of them were as Introduction: Prostate cancer represents a leading cause of cancer re- follows: del C, C→A and C→T at np 16184-1695, del and ins C in ho- lated mortality and mortality among men. mopolymeric stretch interrupted by a T at np 303-312. The identifica- GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation occurs during carcinogenesis and tion of micro satellite instability may complement other ealy detection is considered to be a major event of prostate carcinogenesis. DNA- approaches for prostate cancer and BPH. based biomarkers are a class of new and promising tools for the early cancer detection. P06.137 Paradoxical apoptotic induction of mcs-c2, a pyrrolo- The aim of our study was to detect the promoter hypermethylation of pyrimidine derivative, via up-regulation of p53-independent, AR- GSTP1 gene in blood and tissue samples from patients with PCa and dependent p21ciP1 expression in androgen-dependent prostate BPH. To detect this epigenetic DNA alteration we applied the methyla- cancer cells tion specific PCR (MSP) method. C. Lee, H. Oh, H. Suh; Materials and methods: For our study we used tissue and blood sam- College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. ples from 57 patients with the histological diagnosis of PCa, with a Androgen is essential for prostate development and homeostasis. An- Gleason score of 4 to 7, and 44 patients with the diagnosis of BPH. drogen, acting through androgen receptor (AR), regulates not only a se- Patients with prostate cancer were subdivided according to their Glea- ries of androgen target genes, such as PSA, but also genes for cell cy- son score, PSA, age and TNM staging. cle- and apoptosis-regulatory molecules within prostate epithelial cells, Results: GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation was detected in 55 from such as p21CIP1, which induces cell cycle arrest in response to DNA 57 prostate cancer samples (96,5%) but it was not detected in any damage and protects cancer cells against p53-mediated apoptosis. sample from patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia. In the course of screening for novel modulators on apoptotic induction, Conclusion: Promoter hypermethylation of GSTP1 gene distinguishes we generated MCS-C2, a pyrrolo-pyrimidine derivative. MCS-C2 in- between PCa and BPH and therefore, this epigenetic alteration can duced cell growth inhibition and apoptosis in a time- and dose-depen- be used as a biomarker for screening, early diagnosis and molecular dent manner in androgen-independent prostate cancer cells (DU145, staging of prostate cancer. PC3) and various non-prostate cancer cells. However, MCS-C2 para- doxically induced apoptosis at specific drug concentration (6 μM) in P06.140 investigation of PtcH1 promoter mutations and androgen-dependent prostate cancer cells (LNCaP, LNCaP-E9, -G4 polymorphisms and C4-2), while weakly inducing apoptosis at lower (3 μM) and higher V. Musani, M. Sabol, D. Car, P. Ozretic, S. Levanat; (9, 12 μM) drug concentration. Rudjer Boskovic Institute, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia. To investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in this paradoxi- PTCH1 is a tumor suppressor gene, located at 9q22.3, encoding a cal apoptotic induction of MCS-C2 in LNCaP and its subline cells, we 12-pass transmembrane glycoprotein, that acts as an antagonist in the performed real time-CES, Western blots, real time-PCR, confocal mi- Hedgehog signaling pathway. PTCH1 gene has 23 coding exons and croscopic analysis, knocking-down using siRNA. several alternative forms of exon 1. Interestingly, paradoxical apoptotic induction of 6 μM MCS-C2 is as- PTCH1 is often mutated in Gorlin syndrome and various tumors, basal sociated with dramatic up-regulation (46-fold) of p53-independent, AR- cell carcinomas in particular. Gorlin syndrome is a rare autosomal dependent p21CIP1. dominant disorder characterized with multiple basal cell carcinomas Androgen, in general, up-regulates expression of p21CIP1 gene in stim- (BCCs), meduloblastomas, meningiomas, ovarian fibromas, jaw cysts, ulating prostate cancer cell proliferation. However, in contrast, we con- different developmental abnormalities, such as craniofacial alterations, clude that up-regulation of 6 μM MCS-C2-mediated, p53-independent bifid ribs, and polydactyly and syndactyly. p21CIP1, which is activated by AR via a canonical androgen response Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) of the skin, the most common human can-Cancer genetics 11 cer, shows a continuously increasing incidence, occurring predomi- Blokhin Research Oncological Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Clinic nantly on sun-exposed skin of elderly fair-skinned people. Several of Urology of I.M. Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes have been implicated in the Federation, 5Medical Radiological Research Center RAMS, Moscow, Russian pathogenesis of BCCs, and most of them are members of the Hedge- Federation. hog signaling pathway. Renal cancer (RC) is one of ten most frequent carcinomas in adults In our previous research we discovered several new PTCH1 muta- and represents actual problem of modern oncology. Aim of this investi- tions and polymorphisms located in promoter region of exon 1b. Two gation is molecular genetic analysis of RC for development of potential new mutations: c.-892_-891CC>TT and c.-808C>T were discovered in markers of desease. We have studied 209 RC samples, 192 from wich BCCs and , new polymorphism c.-1184G>A was found in screening of were clear cell carcinomas. Mutations in the VHL gene were tested Gorlin syndrome samples, healthy controls, BCCs and ovarian tumors. using SSCP and sequencing, methylation was detected by methylsen- Additionally, two new alleles with 5 and 6 CGG repeats were discov- sitive endonuclease digesting and following PCR (hypermethylated ered in the CGG repeat polymorphism in the 5’UTR region. samples were confirmed using bisulphite sequencing). We have de- We are continuing this research with the functional impact of these mu- tected VHL somatic mutations in 35.4% of samples. VHL inactivating tations and polymorphisms on the promoter activity and consequently events were present in 53.7% of patients with stage I that testified on PTCH1 role in the pathway. in favour for early alteration of this gene in clear cell RC. Aberrant methylation of VHL was observed in 12.0%, RASSF1 - 56.0%, FHIT - P06.141 Next Generation Presequencing for BRCA1 and BRCA2 58.4%, and CDH1 - 46.4% of cases. Methylation of at least one tested Genes : comparison between qPcR-HRm and EmmA gene was detected in 84.1% of samples. RASSF1 hypermethylation C. Derouet, C. Lefol, R. Lidereau, I. Bièche, E. Rouleau; was associated with later RC stages (p = 0.015) and metastases (p INSTITUT CURIE - HOPITAL RENE HUGUENIN, ST CLOUD, France. = 0.036). Aberrant methylation of CDH1 was associated with tumor Most are involved with next generation sequencing research projects. progression, invasion, and metastases (P = 0.009, 0.039, and 0.002 However, two new routine methods (qPCR-HRM and EMMA) provide correspondingly). Results of this investigation denoted the opportunity valuable information to screen point mutations and large rearrange- for using mutation and methylation of VHL, aberrant methylation of ments at low cost and low computing investment. We compare them RASSF1 and CDH1 in RC molecular marker system. prospectively on 91 patients with a familial cancer predisposition. METHOD : qPCR-HRM was performed with 79 amplicons, in tripli- P06.143 Phytoalexin resveratrol induces apoptosis in hormone- cate, on a LightCycler480 (Roche Diagnostic). EMMA was performed resistant cancer cell lines. with 24 amplicon multiplexes (Fluigent), on an automatic sequencer S. I. Olga; ABI3130XL (Applied Biosystem). Softwares were GeneScanning Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery RAMS, Moscow, Russian (Roche Diagnostic) and home-made macro in qPCR-HRM and Em- Federation. malys (Fluigent) in EMMA. Phytoalexin resveratrol has some structural similarities to diethyl stil- RESULTS : Total number of analyzed amplicons was 7189 for qPCR- bestrol, a synthetic estrogen. Resveratrol has been reported to pos- HRM and 7371 for EMMA. Abnormal profiles were 730 in qPCR-HRM sess cancer preventive properties. and 1141 in EMMA. There were 16 deleterious mutations (17,5%) and In this study, we analyzed anti-tumor activity of resveratrol towards 15 unknown variants (UV), a duplication (exons 5-7) and a deletion breast and prostate cancer cell lines. (exon 24) in BRCA1 and none in BRCA2. All events were detected by Methods: We incubated two human cancer cell lines Du145, MBA-MD- the two approaches. 231 (ER-negative) with resveratrol in high concentration, in dosage DISCUSSION : Their advantages are discussed. For 8 samples, a run and time dependent manner; and analyzed the influence of drug on is 9 hours in qPCR-HRM and 12 hours in EMMA. qPCR-HRM sounds cell lines by flow cytometry. more rapid and appropriate for urgent screening. There were no main- Resveratrol treatment had reduced the proliferation of human cancer tenance, no technical skill in automatic sequencer, PCR products for cells, cells had been arrested in the G2/M phase, and the percentage direct sequencing and ability to rapidly shift to new primers or genes. of cells in the subG1/G0 fraction had increased. EMMA can genotype current polymorphisms. Then, a validated multi- We characterized the anti-proliferation activities of resveratrol. plex kit clearly lessen the number of sequences. Emmalys software is Treatment with resveratrol had resulted in a non-significant decreasing well-dedicated to diagnostic purposes and large series. the percentage of cells in the G1/G0 phase in androgenresponsive CONCLUSION : Both methods are similar high throughput pre-screen- human breast cancer cell line (50-100 Mmol/L for 24 hours), and dose- ing for point and complex mutations in BRCA1/BRCA2 genes. response (50-100 Mmol/L) induction of apoptosis in androgenrespon- sive human prostate cancer cells (incubation time 24 and 48 hours). P06.142 molecular genetic alterations in the VHL gene and However, at similar concentrations, resveratrol treatment did not affect methylation of several tumor suppressor genes in sporadic clear the viability and rate of apoptosis in normal human prostate epithelial cell renal cancer cells. D. S. Mikhaylenko1, M. V. Grigoryeva2, V. V. Zemlyakova1, V. V. Shkarupo1, L. These data suggest that resveratrol have to be further examined as N. Lubchenko3, R. V. Kurynin4, A. M. Popov5, D. V. Zaletayev1, I. G. Rusakov2; a potentially clinical chemotherapeutic agent for treating breast and 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, prostate cancer. 2Hertzen Research Oncological Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3N.N. Cancer genetics 12 P06.144 Modification effect of RET+3:T allele in medullary thyroid alization we used Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE). cancer In case of positive findings we sequenced the particular fragments. In K. Ziemnicka1, M. Podralska2, J. Sowinski1, A. Plawski1; case of negative results we continued by using Multiplex Ligation - de- 1Karol Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute pendent Probe Amplification (MLPA) and Methylation - specific MLPA. of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. In all the cases of bilateral retinoblastoma we trapped point nonsense Sporadic medullary thyroid cancer is a non-hereditary type of medullary mutations. In 5 out of 14 (35%) patients point mutations were detected cancer. Familial type is caused by mutation in the RET gene. The RET and 9 out of 14 (65%) were negative. In negative patients (4 out of 9 protooncogene is one of the receptor tyrosine kinases, cell-surface - 44,4%) we requested samples of tumor tissue, where we managed to molecules that transduce signals for cell growth and differentiation. detect particular mutations that caused the disease. Medullary thyroid cancer arises from specialized cells named para- Conclusion: Analyzed RB1 gene mutations were compared to cases follicular cells. The present study concerns RET+3:T polymorphism retrieved from RB1 gene Mutation Database (Lohmann 1999). We also localized in enhancer region. We investigated only sporadic cases of discovered new, yet unpublished mutation cases, in majority of them a medullary thyroid cancer. Patients are delivered from Department of deletion occurrence was involved, or nucleotide insertion. Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Diseases, University of Medi- cal Sciences in Poznan. In our studies, we compared the frequency of P06.147 Adnexectomy status is the critical feature for the occurrence of the RET+3:T allele in our group of 48 non-familial association between serum selenium level and the risk of MTC patients with the frequency of occurrence of the allele in the Pol- cancer in BRcA1 carriers ish population. The frequency of the occurrence of the heterozygote J. Lubinski1, T. Huzarski1, T. Byrski1, C. Cybulski1, M. Stawicka2, A. variant of the RET+3:T for the Polish population reached almost 12% Jakubowska1, J. Gronwald1, B. Gorski1, T. Debniak1, W. Wasowicz3, E. Kilar4, (18/152) of heterozygotes but in the group of patients with MTC, we M. Szwiec5, D. Surdyka6, E. Marczyk7, P. Serrano Fernandez1, P. Sun8, S. A. did not find even a single RET+3:T allele. The frequency difference is Narod8,9; statistically significant and in the Fisher‘s Exact Test, the two-sided P 1Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 2Prophylactic and value is 0.0080. This observation allows assuming that the occurrence Epidemiology Center, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Occupational Medicine, of the RET+3:T in the heterozygotic state may lead to the inhibition Lodz, Poland, 4Regional Oncology Hospital, Swidnica, Poland, 5Regional of the disease phenotype in the cases of the medullary thyroid carci- Oncology Hospital, Opole, Poland, 6Center of Oncology of Lublin Region, noma. Lublin, Poland, 7Regional Oncology Center, Krakow, Poland, 8Womens College Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada, 9Dalla Lana School of Public Health, P06.145 MDM2 and TP are modifier genes of retinoblastoma University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. V. Disciglio1, P. Berchialla2, D. Giachino3, M. Amenduni1, G. Livide1, M. In these analysis we asked whether serum selenium levels were differ- Mencarelli1, A. Marozza1, F. Mari1, F. Ariani1, A. Renieri1, M. De Marchi3; ent in women with a BRCA1 mutation who developed breast or ovar- 1Medical Genetics Unit, Molecular Biology Department, University of Siena, ian cancer, compared to matched mutation-positive controls who did Siena, Italy, 2Dept. of Public Health and Microbiology, University of Torino, not develop cancer. We conducted a nested case-control study of 60 Torino, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, University of Torino, Torino, Italy. women with breast cancer and 15 women with ovarian cancer (and 75 Current evidence support the role of DNA repair and apoptosis gene matched controls) who were diagnosed among a cohort of 518 women polymorphisms as cancer modifiers. Two common SNPs TP53 R72P in a selenium supplementation trial and for whom a blood sample had and MDM2 SNP309 with known functional effects have been studied been taken for serum selenium measurement. Cases and controls with contrasting findings in both sporadic cancer (gastric, lung, child- were matched for age at enrolment, past history of breast cancer, oo- hood ALL) and the inherited Lynch syndrome, and in Li-Fraumeni syn- phorectomy and whether they received selenium supplement or pla- drome a significant interaction between the germline TP53 mutation cebo during cancer chemoprevention trial. Selenium measurements and the MDM2 SNP has been shown. To investigate their role in he- for this analysis were performed one year after above trial. The mean reditary retinoblastoma we genotyped the two SNPs by Pyrosequenc- serum selenium level was 74.4 µg/l for the 75 cases, versus 72.8 µg/l ing® assays on blood DNA of 90 patients with known germinal RB1 for controls. mutation, 34 familiar. A descriptive analysis showed an earlier age at Selenium level was the independent risk factor for breast/ovarian can- diagnosis in patients with bilateral retinoblastoma than in those with cer risk among BRCA1 carriers stratified depending on oophorectomy. unilateral retinoblastoma (median age: 0.57 yrs vs 1.49 yrs, respec- For carriers after adnexectomy the optimal concentration of Selenium tively, p<0.001). Since age of onset is often nor exactly known, we con- in the blood was <70 µg/l (p = 0.033; OR = 0.27; CI = 0.08-0.8). sidered bilaterality as a more robust measure of the variable genetic For carriers without adnexectomy the optimal selenium concentration risk. A multivariate logistic regression model adjusted for age and gen- was 60-80 µg/l. This sub-group have had ~20 fold lower risk of cancers der showed the risk of bilateral disease to be: i) as for the type of RB1 as compared with carriers with selenium blood level <60 µg/l (OR = mutation higher for splicing and missense mutations than for deletions, 18.6; p = 0.024; CI = 0.04 - 0.80) and ~2 fold lower risk of cancer as duplications, nonsense and frameshift mutations but not significantly compared with carriers with selenium level > 80 µg/l (OR = 0.57; p = so (OR=1.33; 95% CI 0.22 - 8.22); ii) as for the MDM2 SNP309, sig- 0.43; CI = 0.2 - 1.6). nificantly higher for the GG genotype than TT (OR=11.78, 95% CI 2.18 - 63.65) but not significantly for TG; iii) as for the TP53 R72P SNP not P06.148 Molecular characterisation of SH2D1A and ODZ1 gene significantly for the PP genotype. Our results suggest for the first time deletions in three patients with variable phenotype of X-linked that MDM2 and TP53 may be modifiers of Retinoblastoma as well. lymphoproliferative syndrome M. Vlckova1, A. Janda2, E. Mejstrikova2, T. Freiberger3, B. Ravcukova3, P06.146 RB1 gene mutation in children with retinoblastoma Z. Zmitkova1, J. Drabova1, M. Koudova1,4, M. Hancarova1, P. Keslova2, D. B. Piackova1, D. Ilencikova1, D. Durovcikova2; Sumerauer2, O. Hrusak2, R. Zachova5, Z. Sedlacek1; 1National Institute of Oncology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Slovak health University, 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Bratislava, Slovakia. Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, Background: Retinoblastoma is the most common intraocular tumour 2Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Charles University 2nd in children. The molecular scanning of RB1 genes in searching of a Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, germline mutation lead to the publication of new mutations whose 3Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and knowlegde is important for genetic counselling and the characteriza- Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Present adress: GHC, Prague, Czech tion of phenotypic relationships. Republic, 5Department of Immunology, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Results: RB1 gene mutation was first examined in child patients diag- Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. nosed with retinoblastoma as germline mutation detected in peripheral The SH2D1A gene encodes an adaptor protein interacting with the blood or bone marrow. Out of the entire number of patients, 14 cases cytoplasmic tail of SLAM family members. Mutations of SH2D1A are out of 21 (66,6%) were diagnosed with unilateral retinoblastoma, and responsible for the X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome. 7 out of 21 (33,3%) had bilateral retinoblastoma. In order to identify We present 3 patients from 2 families with complete deletions of the germline mutations we used the standard PCR, and for a proper visu- SH2D1A gene. The first patient was an 18-year-old man with Burkitt Cancer genetics 1 lymphoma treated by intensive chemotherapy at the age of 16 followed P06.151 High-risk neuroblastoma without MYCN amplification by severe aplastic anaemia treated by stem cell transplantation from - characterization of the 11q-deletion tumors reveals a poor his brother. Molecular analysis showed a deletion of all SH2D1A exons. prognostic chromosome instability phenotype with later onset His maternal cousin, a 25-year-old man with mild learning difficulties, H. Carén1, H. Kryh1, M. Nethander2, R. Sjöberg1, C. Träger3, S. Nilsson4, J. mild autistic features and severe epidermolysis bullosa-like dermatitis Abrahamsson5, P. Kogner3, T. Martinsson1; that manifested at the age of 8 years, carried the same deletion. Due 1Dept Clinical Genetics, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of to this atypical phenotype, array CGH was performed to specify the Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Genomics Core Faciliy, The Sahlgrenska extent of the deletion. It was about 65 kb long and removed also the 3‘ Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Childhood terminal part of the ODZ1 gene. The molecular defect was identical in Cancer Research Unit, Department of Woman and Child Health, Karolinska both cousins. The third patient was a 20-year-old man who developed Institutet, Karolinska Hospital,, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of EBV-driven lymphoproliferation at the age of 3. He recovered after Mathematical Statistics, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, chemotherapy and now, at the age of 21, he is well, suffering only from Sweden, 5Dept, Pediatrics, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of hypogammaglobulinaemia. His brother died of lymphoproliferation in Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. infancy. The deletion in this patient spanned over 200 kb, affecting the Analysis of chromosomal aberrations is used to predict clinical prog- entire SH2D1A and a part of ODZ1. FISH analysis was used to identify nosis of children with neuroblastoma and to stratify risk-based therapy. female carriers in this family. Our study can help to decipher the phe- MYCN amplification (MNA) alone is incomplete as a poor prognostic notype contribution of genes deleted together with SH2D1A in carriers factor and 11q status has recently been included in risk classification. of large Xq25 deletions. We analyzed 170 neuroblastomas using high-density SNP microar- Supported by INCORE, IGA NS10480-3 and MZOFNM2005. rays and describe and compare the high-risk groups defined by MNA (n=37) and 11q-deletion (n=21). Median age at diagnosis was 21 P06.149 the differentl effect of the gene knockdown on months for the MNA group and 42 months for 11q-deleted, while medi- apoptosis of two human colon cancer cell lines. an survival from diagnosis was 16 months for MNA and 40 months for A. A. Korotaeva, A. S. Bavykin, E. G. Zenit-Zhuravlouva, E. A. Goncharova, A. 11q-deletion. Overall survival was similarly poor, 35% at eight years for V. Karpukhin; both groups. MNA and 11q-deletion were almost mutually exclusive; Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical only one tumor harbored both aberrations. The numbers of segmen- Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. tal aberrations differed significantly; the MNA group had a median of We investigated the effects of gene silencing mediated by small in- four aberrations, while 11q-deleted group had 12. The high frequency terfering RNA (siRNA) on two colorectal cancer cell lines: HT-29 and of chromosomal breaks in the 11q-deletion group is suggestive of a CaCo2. The HT-29 is characterized by APC gene mutation that is chromosomal instability phenotype gene located in 11q, and one such absent in CaCo2 cell line. In accordance with this we found an ex- gene, H2AFX, is located in 11q23.3 (within the 11q-deleted region in pression of c-Myc gene in HT-29 cells approximately five times more all tumors). Furthermore, in the groups with segmental aberrations in comparison with CaCo2 cells. The expression c-Myc mRNA was without MNA or 11q-deletion, children with tumors with 17q gain had determined also following siRNA transfer to cells. After c-Myc gene worse prognosis than those with segmental aberrations without 17q silencing we observed apoptosis among HT-29 cells (17%, 3 times gain, who had a favorable outcome in our material. This study has im- more than in control). There were no significant difference of apoptotic plications for understanding of neuroblastoma genetics, prognostic as- cell number in CaCo2 culture with and without c-Myc silencing. The sessment and choice of therapy for different risk groups and stresses c-Myc silencing after heat-shock treatment of cells (44ºC, 40 min) for the use of genome wide microarray analyses in clinical management apoptosis induction lead to increasing of apoptotic cell number in both to evaluate patient diagnosis, risk and treatment. cell lines. However, silencing by siRNA of HSPA5 gene, the member of heat-shock protein 70 family, result in more effect on apoptosis for P06.152 MMR system gene expression profile in sporadic both cell lines after heat-shock in comparison with c-Myc silencing. colorectal cancer The combined using of both mentioned gene silencing lead to 90% of M. Ioana, C. Angelescu, F. Burada, A. Riza, M. Cruce, F. Mixich, A. Saftoiu; apoptotic cells for HT-29 and 60% for CaCo2 that is significantly more Univ Med Pharm Craiova, Craiova, Romania. than after heat-shock alone. The data demonstrate different effect of Colorectal carcinoma is the second leading cause of death by can- the same gene silencing in dependence on cancer cell genomic char- cer in Europe as its incidence increases with life span. As colorectal acteristics and significance of genes studied for development cancer cancer (CRC) develops over a long period of time, screening is a vital treatment, especially for colon tumor with APC gene mutation. prevention and early detection component. Continuing research to de- tect new highly sensitive and specific noninvasive CRC biomarkers is P06.150 A combination of anti-iAP interfering RNAs and essential. The aim of this study was to compare 9 mismatching repair chemotherapy induce efficient colon tumor cell apoptosis under (MMR) genes activation levels in normal, polyp and malignant tissues drug small dozes in order to detect a MMR gene expression pattern in sporadic colorec- A. Bavykin; tal malignant pathology. Real-Time PCR with TaqMan (Applied Bio- Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, systems) probes specific to ANKRD17, EXO1, MLH1, MLH3, MSH2, Moscow, Russian Federation. MSH3, MSH4, MSH5, MSH6 gene transcripts were used. The general The gene silencing mediated by small interfering RNA (siRNA) was tendency observed is a decreased mRNA level of the MMR genes in used to increase a chemotherapy effect. The siRNA of 19-22 base pair tumor samples by comparison with normal tissue, with the exception of long and small hairpin RNA (shRNA) produced from expression vector EXO1 and MSH5. Of the analyzed genes, ANKRD17 mRNA appears were used for this study. A number of colon tumor cell lines: Caco2, to be the most sensitive target and may have a potential value as an HT-29 and HCT-116 were tested for the cisplatin and oxalyplatin sensi- additional marker for the existing multitarget assay panel for colorectal tivity. The HT-29 appeared to be more susceptible for oxalyplatin. The cancer detection. p53-negative HT-29 cells seem to escape from p53-depended apopto- sis and anticancer platin based drugs activate caspase cascade. We P06.153 telomere length evaluation in patients with B-chronic performed serially repeated RNA silencing of caspase linked ingibitors lymphocytic leukemia - correlation with other molecular, of apoptosis (IAP). Mixed cocktail of anti-FLIP, IAP-2 shRNAs and anti- cytogenetic and immunophenotypic features IAP-5 (Survivin), HspA5 siRNAs showed twice stronger effect than ox- J. Brezinova1, S. Vcelikova1, A. Berkova2, Z. Zemanova2, S. Izakova1, I. alyplatin alone: 38 and 18% respectively. Combinations of IAP-2/FLIP Sarova1, H. Cechova1, L. Grosova2, L. Lizcova2, E. Malinova2, M. Zemanova2, and IAP-5 with oxalyplatin resulted in 50 to 60% apoptosis compared E. Cmunt3, M. Trneny1,3, J. Karban3, J. Schwarz1, K. Michalova1,2; with 10% of the negative control. In summary, anti-FLIP and IAP-2 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, together with small doze oxalyplatin demonstrated the same apoptotic 2Center of Oncocytogenetics, General University Hospital, Charles University, death of cells as treated with (3x)-oxalyplatin alone. Our data indicate Prague, Czech Republic, 3First Medical Department, General University that anti-IAP siRNA seem to be a prominent tool to increase the ef- Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. fect of standart chemotherapy and significantly reduce it‘s overload for B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) is a heterogeneous disor- cancer patients. der characterized by a highly variable clinical course. Classical staging Cancer genetics 1 systems introduced by Rai and Binet help to predict survival in B-CLL, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. however they do not distinguish patients who will evolve more aggres- Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most sive disease from those who will remain indolent. Therefore, other in- common cancer worldwide, the most common site of oral-cancer dicators related to the genetics and biology of B-CLL are increasingly development is the anterior two thirds of tongue.TP53 has been fre- used for prognosis and treatment response prediction. Recently, some quently reported to be associated with HNSCC among smokers and evidences suggest that short telomeres are associated with poor out- drinkers. In recent years, number of patients at younger ages who are come and telomere length might be of predictive significance.During non-smokers and non-drinkers but suffer from oral cavity SCC (OSCC) the years 2007 - 2009, peripheral blood and bone marrow samples is increasing. For these patients, other etiologic factors such as infec- of 102 patients with B-CLL (53 male, 49 female, mean age 68 years) tion with Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) may be considered. The pur- were analyzed to ascertain whether telomere shortening was associat- pose of this study was to investigate the prevalence of HPV infection ed with genomic aberrations detected by I-FISH (Abbott Vysis), immu- and TP53 mutation in patients with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of noglobulin variable heavy chain (IgVH) mutational status, CD38 and the tongue and subsequently its significance on cervical lymph node ZAP-70 expression, and telomerase activity. No difference in telomere metastases and tumor differentiation. Sections of tissue blocks from length between patients with good and intermediate prognosis accord- ninety five tongue SCC patients, were enrolled. Immunohistochemical ing to cytogenetics was found, however, in patients with deletion of (IHC) technique was used to study tissue TP53 mutation. Polymerase ATM/p53 gene and IgH rearrangement short telomeres were proved chain reaction (PCR) was performed for detection of high risk HPV (p=0.053). Association between telomere length and IgVH mutational types, sixteen and eighteen. Frequency of HPV16 and HPV18 infec- status, ZAP-70, CD38 expression and telomerase activity was found tion were 10.6% and 16% respectively. TP53 mutation was found in as significantly shorter telomeres in patients with unmutated IgVH sta- 70.2% of patients. Young patients (aged below 45 years) comprised 20 tus (p=0.001), ZAP-70 positivity (p=0.001), CD38 positivity (p=0.01) % of all patients. There was not a significant association betweenTP53, and telomerase positivity (p=0.01) were detected. Telomere length HPV16 or HPV18 presence and higher stages of the tumor, tumor dif- in combination with other prognostic parameters completes the risk ferentiation or presence of nodal metastasis. Although association be- profile and might serve for better subclassification of B-CLL patients tween HNSCC and HPV infection is being recognized and reported, with different outcomes and further treatment. Supported by grants our data implicates that HPV infection or TP53 mutation may not play MZOVFN2005, MSM0021620808, MSMLC535. a significant role in oral tongue SCC pathogenesis, differentiation or metastasis. P06.154 TIMP2 Gene Polymorphisms in Breast carcinoma Patients P06.156 Novel tP53 germ-line mutations in a czech familes with O. Ozer1, N. Kozan1, M. C. Yagmurdur2, Z. Yilmaz1, B. Demirhan3, F. I. Sahin1; Li-Fraumeni syndrome 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, E. Machackova1, J. Smardova2, M. Mikova1, J. Hazova1, L. Foretova1; Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of General 1Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, BRNO, Czech Republic, 2University Surgery, Ankara, Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department Hospital, BRNO, Czech Republic. of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey. Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant syndrome char- Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are potent proteolytic enzymes that acterized by the occurrence of diverse mesenchymal and epithelial are known to play key roles in invasion and metastasis of malignant neoplasms at multiple sites. tumours. Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are endog- Here we demonstrate 2 novel germ-line mutations detected in Czech enous inhibitors of activated MMPs that contribute to normal functions LFS families. such as tissue repair after injury and development, as well as to patho- A novel large germ-line deletion of TP53 gene spanning exons 2-11 logic states such as cardiovascular disease and cancer. (confirmed by CGH-array) was identified by MLPA in typical LFS family There are four known TIMP genes (TIMP-1-4) which have both MMP- with early childhood brain tumor and severe family history of bilateral dependent and MMP independent effects in many cell types includ- breast cancer cases, liposarcoma and melanoma in 4 generations di- ing the breast. TIMP-2 is normally expressed in breast stromal tissue; agnosed in early adulthood. however, increased expression has been found in ductal carcinoma TP53 missense substitution p.Ile254Val located in DNA binding do- in situ and in invasive breast carcinomas.TIMP-2 has been found to main was detected in a family with 3 relatives with breast, bilateral stimulate cell growth and inhibit apoptosis in breast cancer cells, as breast and brain tumors (diagnosed at age of 42-56). This missense well as to inhibit endothelial cell growth and abrogate angiogenesis. substitution has not been yet described as a germ-line mutation but This study was conducted to investigate TIMP2 gene polymorphisms was reported as a very rare somatic mutation in IARC TP53 database. on breast cancer. By the assessment of transactivation capacities measured by Kato et In our study we investigated the TIMP2 G418A and C303T polymor- al. p.Ile254Val was designed as functional in IARC TP53 database. phisms in 42 breast cancer patients and 41 fibroadenoma samples that We evaluated a functional status of p.Ile254Val using FASAY, which were used as a control group. DNA was extracted from paraffin em- resulted in loss of function as fully inactivating mutation. bedded tissue sections according to standard protocols. Polymerase TP53 missense mutants located in the DNA binding domain could chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism was used for be classified as partial deficiency alleles or severe deficiency alleles the detection of TIMP2 G418A and C303T polymorphisms. based on their ability to transactivate target sequences. Several stud- According to our results TIMP2 gene polymorphisms don’t seem to be ies indicated that specific mutation in TP53 may affect the type of tu- associated with breast cancer susceptibility and clinical parameters. mor and the age of onset but the effect of the functional heterogeneity However to confirm our results, further studies need to be performed of the TP53 mutations on the severity of associated disease has not in a larger group of patients and additional polymorphisms of TIMP2 been assessed. gene. Supported by grant MZ0MOU2005 P06.155 Human papilloma virus and tP53 gene mutation in oral P06.157 the role of pregnancy on hemangioblastomas in von tongue scc and their correlation with tumor characteristics in Hippel-Lindau disease: a retrospective French study. iranian population; a multicenter study C. Abadie1,2, I. Coupier1,2, S. Bringuier-Branchereau3, G. Mercier3, F. Séguret3, J. Mehdizadeh Seraj1, L. Vazifeh Mostaan2, Z. Ousati Ashtiani3, S. Mehdizadeh N. Aghakhani4,2, P. David4,2, F. Parker4, D. Le Gars5,2, G. Robert6, P. Pencalet7, Seraj1, S. Hasheminasab3, Z. Madani Kermani1, B. Memar4, F. Mirashrafi1, N. J. Houtteville8, P. Mercier9,2, S. Deveaux2, S. Richard2,10; Yazdani1; 1Service de Génétique Médicale, Unité d’Oncogénétique, Montpellier, France, 1Otorhinolaryngology Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 2Réseau National et Centre de Référence Cancers Rares INCa ”Maladie de Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2ENT Department, Imam Reza Hospital, VHL et prédispositions héréditaires au cancer rénal de l’adulte” (PREDIR), Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Service d’Urologie, AP-HP, Hôpital de Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 3Département d’Informatique Médicale, CHU, Montpellier, France, 4Service Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Pathology Department, Imam Reza Hospital, de Neurochirurgie, Hôpital de Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 5Service de Neurochirurgie, Hôpital Nord, Amiens, France, 6Service de Neurochirurgie, Fondation Ophtalmologique Rothschild, Paris, France, 7Service de Cancer cytogenetics 1 Neurochirurgie, Hôpital Foch, Suresnes, France, 8Service de Neurochirurgie, approximately 80% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), these alterations CHU, Caen, France, 9Service de Neurochirurgie, CHU, Angers, France, are considered important in initiating events in the process of leukemo- 10Laboratoire de Génétique Oncologique EPHE, CNRS FRE 2939, Faculté de genesis and as indicators of clinical outcome. In the cytogenetic labo- Médecine Paris-Sud, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre et Institut de cancérologie Gustave ratory at the University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara we have Roussy, Villejuif, France. investigated 56 cases of acute leukemia, 26 cases of ALL and 30 cas- Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) [OMIM 193300] is a dominantly in- es of AML. In one case of ALL, the cytogenetic findings were trisomy herited disorder predisposing to highly vascularized tumors, mainly 4 associated with trisomy 17. Trisomy 4, a numerical abnormality, is hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system (CNS) and retina, commonly associated with high hyperdiploidy and is very rarely found but also renal cell carcinomas, pheochromocytomas, pancreatic neu- in cases of ALL with low hyperdiploidy. The functional consequences of roendocrine tumours and endolymphatic sac tumours. The disease re- hyperdiploidy are not clearly understood. It remains to elucidate if the sults from germline mutations in the VHL tumour-suppressor gene that extra copies of particular chromosomes found in hyperdiploid ALL lead plays a key role in response to hypoxia and angiogenesis. to increased expression or to more marked changes in expression of A potential growth of hemangioblastomas during pregnancy with con- particular genes. In one case of AML the only cytogenetic aberration sequent risk to the mother and fetus has been reported in a few case found was trisomy 4. Trisomy 4 is a rare cytogenetic abnormality in reports and an only study in a small population of VHL patients. Thus, patients with AML, with a frequency of less than 1%. The prognostic we performed a retrospective and comparative French study in 269 significance of this abnormality in patients with AML is not clear, but ap- women from 172 families from the national VHL clinical database. pears to be poor. More data are needed for understand the prognostic Patients were divided into two groups according to their gestational significance of such rare karyotypic abnormalities. status. The study focused on the occurrence of new hemangioblas- tomas and complications of previously known tumors. Available data P07.02 cytogenetic analyses of the chromosome 11 duplication/ of imaging follow-up of CNS and retina were collected in 176 women amplification in acute myeloid leukemia with at least one pregnancy (group 1) and 93 women with none (group I. Sarova1, J. Brezinova1, S. Izakova1, E. Malinova2, Z. Zemanova2, L. Lizcova2, 2). The results showed more complications of hemangioblastomas in J. Cermak1, J. Polivka3, J. Vydra3, M. Siskova4, K. Michalova2; group 1 (p=0.031) with increased symptoms and the need for surgical 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic, treatment in emergency in some cases. 2General University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles University, To our knowledge, this is the first study analysing the pregnancy’s ef- Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Faculty Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, Prague, fect in a very large series of VHL patients. This work underlies the Czech Republic, 4General University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine of necessity of a close follow-up during pregnancy and a systematic CNS Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. Magnetic Resonance Imaging without injection is recommended during Gene amplification is a frequent genetic abnormality in solid tumors, the fourth month of pregnancy in women with hemangioblastomas. whereas it has been rarely detected in hematological malignancies. Activation of proto-oncogenes is associated with aggressive growth of P06.158 Identification of germline mutation in a Turkish patient tumor cells and poor prognosis. In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), with Von Hippel-Lindau disease repeated target of gene amplification is chromosome 11, particularly R. K. Özgül1, D. Yücel2, H. Kıratlı3; band 11q23. 1Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health, Department of Pediatrics, During years 2006 to 2009, bone marrow cells of all newly diagnosed Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University,Faculty of Science,Department patients with AML were examined by conventional cytogenetics and of Molecular Biology, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University,Faculty of FISH with a Vysis MLL Break Apart Rearrangement probe (11q23.3). Medicine,Department of Ophthalmology, Ankara, Turkey. In some cases, target regions of chromosome 11 amplification were in- Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is an uncommon, dominantly inher- vestigated by Vysis LSI ATM (11q22.3), LSI CCND1 (11q13.2) probes ited multisystemic cancer syndrome. Various benign and malignant tu- (Abbott) and/or by methods mFISH/mBAND 11 (MetaSystems). mors appear in multiple organs including eye, kidney, pancreas, broad Chromosome 11 aberrations were proved in 32 of 148 patients: rear- ligament, epididymis, adrenal gland and central nervous system in the rangements in 28, duplication/amplifications in 13 and deletion in 3 pa- disease. Retinal capillary hemangioblastoma is hallmark tumor lesion tients. The amplification was presented as: amplification of the 5´MLL in the eye. VHL disease caused by germline mutations in the VHL (myeloid/lymphoid leukemia) gene (1x), trisomy 11 (3x), partial trisomy tumor-supressor gene located on chromosome 3p25-26. Germline 11q (5x), isochromosome 11q (1x) and multiple amplification (3x). mutations in the VHL gene span three exons. In conclusion, chromosome 11 duplication/amplification has been In this study, germline VHL mutation identified in a Turkish patient proved to be present in approximately 10% of AML cases. Amplicons affected with the disease. Mutation screening of three exons in VHL vary in size and can be located on both arms of chromosome 11. How- gene was performed to detect disease causing pathologic allele. Mu- ever, overrepresentations usually include a band 11q23 and MLL gene. tation analysis in exon 3 of VHL gene revealed that there is a disease The identification of true target genes of amplification is important for causing heterozygous R161X mutation in the patient. Different type of understanding the cancer pathogenesis and can be useful for cancer VHL mutations in literature were classified and VHL truncating muta- therapy selection. Therefore, a combination of conventional and mo- tions were found to be associated with hemangioblastomas and renal lecular cytogenetic methods is needed for their detection. cell carcinoma. Supported by grants MZOUHKT2005, MZOVFN2005, MSM Analysis of germline mutations in VHL gene and correlation between 0021620808, MSMT LC 535. mutations and ocular phenotype may light on understanding of patho- genetic mechanisms underlying VHL tumorigenesis in the eye. P07.03 Novel translocation t(6;17)(p12;p11.2) in de novo acute myeloid leukemia with complex karyotype - a case report A. A. Arghir1, S. Chirieac1, A. Tutulan-Cunita1, A. Colita2, A. Lungeanu1; P07 cancer cytogenetics 1“Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. P07.01 Rare cytogenetic findings in two cases of acute leukemia 50-70% of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) patients have cytogenetic C. Popa1, H. Ionita2, A. Belengeanu3, M. Stoian1, N. Andreescu1; abnormalities and 10-15% of adult AML show complex karyotypes. It 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, is well established that karyotype represent a key feature for diagnosis Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Hematology, University of Medicine and and prognosis. Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 3Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, We present a de novo AML case (72 year-old, female) with complex University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. chromosomal abnormalities identified at diagnosis, including a novel Identification of recurring chromosomal abnormalities has a major im- translocation t(6;17)(p12;p11.2). pact on risk evaluation and for treatment of the patients with acute leu- Bone marrow chromosomal studies were performed on GTG-banded kemia. Cytogenetic and molecular genetic analyses of childhood acute slides. FISH with painting probes (chromosome 9 - Kreatech, chromo- lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) are today used routinely for diagnostic some 6 - Cytocell), locus specific probes (TP53 - Vysis, subtelomeric and prognostic evaluation; chromosomal aberrations are revealed in 17pter Kreatech, dual fusion BCR/ABL probes - Vysis) and BAC FISH approximately 70% of patients. Genetic alterations can be detected in probes (RP11-525O11 - 17p11.2, RP11-129E3 - 17q24) were applied Cancer cytogenetics 1 for molecular characterization. P07.06 Predictive genetic diagnosis of breast cancer: detection Two malignant clones were detected, one bearing abnormalities of of large rearrangements in the genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 by chromosomes 6 and 17, and the other having additional abnormali- molecular combing ties - partial deletions of both short and long arm of chromosome 9. A. Vannier1, E. Rouleau2, K. Cheeseman1, A. Thomas1, A. Briaux2, A. Both homologous chromosomes 17 were involved, in different anoma- Bensimon1, R. Lidereau2, E. Conseiller1, M. Ceppi1; lies: a t(6;17)(p12;p11.2) generating der(17)t(6;17)(p12;p11.2)(wcp6+ 1Genomic Vision, Paris, France, 2Centre René Huguenin - Institut Curie, Saint- , ST17pter-,TP53-,RP11-525O11+,RP11-129E3+), and an interstitial Cloud, France. deletion, not encompassing TP53, del(17)(p11.2p1?3)(STpter+,TP5 The BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are involved with high penetrance in 3+,RP11-525O11-,RP11-129E3+). The anomalies involving chromo- breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility. Among patients with breast some 9 are still to be elucidated. Painting FISH sugests a deletion, as cancer and severe family histories of cancer who test negative for no chromosome 9 material is observed elsewhere. ABL region is not BRCA1 and BRCA2 point mutations, about 10 to 15 % can be expect- deleted: der(9)del(9)(p?)del(9)(q?q34)(wcp9+,ABL+). ed to carry large genomic alterations (deletion or duplication) in one of The pathogenesis of AML with complex karyotype is less well un- the two genes, mostly on BRCA1. Large rearrangements are missed derstood when compared with AML associated with specific genetic by direct sequencing. Thus, effective methods to identify these types of defects. Thus, unravelling new cytogenetic abnormalities in AML with mutation should be integrated in current diagnostic procedure to obtain complex karyotype might bring some important insights in understand- a more comprehensive genetic screening strategy. Molecular Comb- ing this heterogeneous disease. ing is a powerful FISH-based technique for the direct visualization of To our knowledge, this is the first reported case with a translocation single DNA molecules which allows exploration of the entire genome t(6;17)(p12;p11.2) as part of a complex karyotype in de novo AML. at high resolution in a single analysis. We have developed a novel predictive genetic test based on molecular combing, for which specific P07.04** chromosomal alterations evaluated by acGH BRCA1 and BRCA2 “genomic morse codes” and associated analysis in patients presenting pediatric cancer and congenital platform have been designed and validated on 10 breast cancer pa- dysmorphisms tients with severe family history. Large rearrangements corresponding L. P. Capelli1, A. C. V. Krepischi1, B. Heck1, B. de Camargo1, C. Rosenberg1,2; to deletions and duplications of one to several exons and with sizes 1Antonio Prudente Foundation, AC Camargo Cancer Hospital, São Paulo, ranging from 3 kb to 40 kb have been detected on both genes. Im- Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, portantly, the mutations identified by Molecular Combing confirm the Institute of Biosciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. results previously obtained by high-resolution zoom-in aCGH (11k) on Oncogenesis is a multistep process that, generally, requires several the same patients, with a resolution in the 1 - 2 kb range. years until manifestation of the disease. Accordingly, childhood neo- plasias must be rare. It seems reasonable to assume that the prema- P07.07 molecular cytogenetic analysis of novel recurrent ture appearance of neoplasias often involves genetic alterations con- abnormality of chromosome 7 in three pediatric patients with stitutively present in somatic lineages of the patients, shortening the myelodysplastic syndrome (mDs) period of time necessary to trigger the tumorigenesis. Furthermore, an L. Lizcova1, Z. Zemanova1, E. Malinova1, M. Jarosova2, E. Mejstrikova3, P. increased frequency of congenital defects has already been reported Smisek3, D. Pospisilova2, J. Stary3, K. Michalova1; among pediatric cancer patients. The presence of variation in copy 1General University Hospital and Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech number of DNA segments (copy number variations - CNVs) affecting Republic, 2University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, gene(s)-dosage could explain the concomitant occurrence of cancer Czech Republic, 3University Hospital Motol and Charles University in Prague, and associated phenotypes. Currently, array-based comparative ge- Prague, Czech Republic. nomic hybridization (aCGH) is a useful tool to detect submicroscopic Abnormalities of chromosome 7 are the most common cytogenetic deletions or duplications. In this work, we used a 180K aCGH platform findings in childhood MDS occurring in ~55% of children with primary (Agilent) to investigate the presence of such chromosomal alterations disease. Chromosome 7 aberrations are associated with poor outcome in patients presenting pediatric cancer associated with clinically mi- and most frequently occurs as a loss of whole chromosome or intersti- nor anomalies or congenital defects, an approach almost unexploited tial deletion of long arm with major breakpoints at 7q22 and 7q35-q36. to identify genes involved in cancer and/or associated phenotypes. Deletions of short arm are less frequent. Among 31 patients evaluated so far, including one XY female, seven We present an unusual structural abnormality leading to loss of whole of them (22.6%) presented submicroscopic chromosome alterations short and long arm of chromosome 7 which was found in bone mar- never or rarely reported in DGV (Database of Genomic Variants), be- row cells of three children with MDS. For precise characterization of ing four microduplications (at 4q13.3, 11p15.5, Xq27.2 and 18q21.33) the marker chromosome conventional cytogenetics and FISH analy- and three microdeletions (at 7q36.1, 5p13.1 and 3p14.2). Our initial ses using Vysis CEP 7/LSI 7q31, ToTelVysion probe mix (Abbott Mo- results point to chromosomal regions possibly involved with the emer- lecular) and XCyte 7 color kit (MetaSystems) were performed. A tiny gence of childhood cancer. Financial support: FAPESP. “dot-like” marker chromosome was shown to be composed solely of chromosome 7 centromeric region and was described as der(7)del(7)( P07.05 cytogenetic characteristics of basal cell carcinoma p11)del(7)(q11) in all three cases and was presented in 79%, 53% and S. Ibrulj1, A. Haveric2, S. Haveric2, A. Rahmanovic2, F. Alendar3; 15% of screened nuclei, respectively. 1Medical faculty, University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Together with one previously published case1 it represents a new re- 2Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and current karyotypic abnormality involving chromosome 7 in childhood Herzegovina, 3Clinical center, University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and MDS. Whether this novel chromosomal abnormality is a new cytoge- Herzegovina. netic entity or a specific prognostic subgroup must be evaluated on Basal cell carcinoma is the most common epithelial cancer in humans. larger series of patients. Cytogenetically, reported marker, due to its Known karyotypic abnormalities in this tumor are nonrandom, rarely size, can easily be overlooked by G-banding analysis. Therefore all including evidence of clonal evolution. The aim of this research was to cases with an apparent monosomy 7 observed by conventional cyto- investigate the frequencies of numerical and structural chromosome genetics must be interpreted with caution and should be confirmed by aberrations in primary cultures of basal cell carcinoma. Cytogenetic molecular cytogenetic methods. analysis was conducted over 10 successfully harvested samples. Ob- Supported by MSM21620813, MSMLC535, MZOVFN2005. served chromosome aberrations were scored according to the Interna- 1Zamecnikova A. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 2008;180:163-4. tional System for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature. Aneuploidy was the most frequent among observed numerical chromosome aberra- P07.08 Isochromosome i(9)(q10) in childhood T-cell acute tions. Aneuploid cells were found as it was expected because aneu- lymphoblastic leukemia ploidy is probably the only mutation capable to clarify all aspects of E. Malinova1, L. Lizcova1, Z. Zemanova1, A. Berkova1, P. Smisek2, J. Stary2, K. carcinogenesis. Michalova1; 1General University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles University, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 22nd Faculty of Medicine of Charles University in Cancer cytogenetics 17 Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. and trisomy 18. The t(14;18)(q32;q21) has been identified in 90% of Isochromosome i(9)(q10) is a rare recurrent chromosomal aberration follicular lymphomas and 20-30% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, described in bone marrow cells of ~1% children with acute lympho- but is rare in CLL. The CD10 marker is expressed in of follicular lym- blastic leukemia (ALL). This abnormality more often occurs in patients phoma and is not expressed in CLL. The expression of ZAP70 and with pre-B immunophenotype, although rare cases of T-ALL have also CD38 markers are both associated with a poor prognosis in CLL. The been reported. aim of this study was to describe the clinical and pathological features We examined 62 newly diagnosed children with T-ALL by combina- of 5 CLL patients with trisomy 12 associated with t(14;18)(q32;q21) or tion of cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic methods. In two of them, trisomy 18. Material and Methods. In this study, three patients showed i(9)(q10) was found, in one case as sole aberration and in the other by karyotype and/or FISH studies trisomy 12 + t(14;18)(q32;q21) and combined with trisomy 8 and t(10;14)(q24;q11). Findings were con- two patients trisomy 12 + trisomy 18. The CLL markers were studied firmed by mBAND and mFISH (XCyte 9, 24XCyte, MetaSystems). by flow cytometry in 4 cases. CD10 was studied in three cases [+12, Chemotherapy was administered to both patients (BFM Interim) and t(14;18)(q32;q21) two cases; +12,+18 one case]. Results. In all cases they are living in complete remission 10 and 6 months after diagno- the ZAP70 marker was negative and CD38 was positive. CD10 marker sis. was negative in all cases. Follow-up was available in two patients (12,+ The biological effect of i(9)(q10) is not well established. Formation t(14;18)(q32;q21); +12 + 18) and none of them progressed. Remarks. of isochromosome results in partial monosomy of the short arm and CD38 marker was positive and ZAP70 negative in all the CLL patients partial trisomy of the long arm of chromosome 9. These two patho- included in the study. The lack of expression of CD10 marker expres- genetic events - overexpression of several proto-oncogenes (includ- sion excludes the follicular lymphoma diagnosis. ing the ABL gene at 9q34) and deletion of various tumor-suppressor genes (including CDKN2A at 9p21.3 or PAX5 at 9p13), have been P07.11 complex karyotype in a case of cmmL suggested to play significant role in malignant proliferation of leukemic M. Souto, M. Cunha, O. Moutinho, R. Pinto Leite; cells. Specifically, loss of the known candidate gene CDKN2A leading Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal. to deregulation of cell cycle, is one of the most important deletions The chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is a haematological in childhood T-ALL. Nevertheless, the i(9)(q10) is a scarce genomic disease of difficult classification because of their clinical characteris- abnormality and therefore, its clinical implication is extremely hard to tics and their evolution. Initially, according to FAB classification, the evaluate. Thus, the significance of i(9)(q10) in pathogenesis of T-ALL CMML was considered a myelodysplastic syndrome. Recently, CMML needs to be further studied on larger cohorts of patients. is included in a new category: the disease myelodysplastic / myelopro- Supported by MSM0021620813, MSMLC535 and MZOVFN2005. liferative according to WHO classification. The cytogenetic analysis may be important in the characterization P07.09 of disease and prognosis. Approximately 20 to 40% of patients with Recurrent chromosomal unbalance translocation in two cases of CMML have chromosomal abnormalities, but none is specific to the chronic lymphocitic leukemia with tP53 deletion. disease. The most common aneuploidies involve the chromosomes 8 A. Carrió, C. López, D. Costa, C. Gómez, N. Villamor, D. Colomer, M. Rozman, and 7, structure abnormalities in chromosome 12 and complex karyo- F. Bosch, E. Montserrat, E. Campo; types are also described. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. The authors present the results of a cytogenetic study in a patient with Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is the most common leukaemia CMML, with 10 years of development, clinical and analytical stable, in the Western world. The analysis of chromosomal aberrations has despite leukocytes sustained over 20.000/μl. provided significant prognostic information. The use of metaphase cy- Bone marrow cell cultures were made and all the technical procedure togenetics, however, has turned out to be problematic, due to the low to obtain metaphases was performed according to the protocols in the mitotic index of most CLL cells even in the presence of B-cell mito- laboratory. gens. The analysis of aberrant chromosomal regions by fluorescence The karyotype was: 46, XY, der(1)t(1;5)(q44;q31),der(5)del(5)(q14q in situ hybridization (FISH), which can be applied to interphase cells, 31),t(15;22) confirmed by FISH technique. This is a complex karyo- resulted in the detection of clonal aberrations in more than 80% of CLL type, unbalanced, presenting two translocations in all metaphases patients. Deletion of the locus of the TP53 gene identifies the most analyzed. aggressive subset. The authors present a bibliographic revue. We present here two patients with TP53 deletion and a recurrent trans- location that involve chromosomes 8 and 17. P07.12 Conventional cytogenetic studies were carried out with G-banded ac- Instability at common fragile sites as a possible cause of cording to standard protocols. FISH analyses were performed in cell recurrent chromosomal rearrangements in colorectal cancer suspension from the conventional cytogenetics culture, with CLL kit L. Brueckner, M. Schwab, L. Savelyeva; LSIp53 / LSI ATM and LSI D13S319 / LSI 13q34 / CEP 12 (Vysis). Two German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. hundred nuclei were analysed for each probe. Colorectal cancer (CRC) ranks among the leading causes of cancer Both patients showed -8 and der(17)t(8;17)(q12;p13) and TP53 dele- death worldwide. The identification of genes that influence colorectal tion. cancer susceptibility and progression therefore remains an essen- From our knowledge it is the first time that it recurrent chromosomal tial goal of basic and clinical research. Specific patterns of structural abnormality is described. We can remark the relevance to combine chromosomal aberrations have been associated with this tumour type. conventional and molecular cytogenetics in CLL to detect new recur- However, despite these findings, the molecular events underlying can- rent clonal chromosomal aberrations that can help us to understanding cer susceptibility and chromosomal instability in these tumours are not the biological mechanisms related with the pathology and evolution of well understood. CLL patients. Early-stage colorectal cancer development is associated with DNA rep- lication stress inducing DNA double-strand breaks and consequently P07.10 chronic lymphocitic leukemia with trisomy 12 genomic instability. Such genomic DNA damage, represented mainly associated with t(14;18) or trisomy 18. by deletions and amplifications, occurs particularly at specific loci that D. Costa1, C. López1, C. Gómez1, N. Villamor1, D. Colomer1, M. Rozman1, P. are prone to DNA double-strand breakage. These loci are present in all Abrisqueta2, E. Montserrat2, E. Campo1, A. Carrió1; human individuals and are referred to as common fragile sites (cFSs). 1Hematopathology Unit. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, Rearrangements within cFSs were identified using customised CGH 2Hematology Department. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. arrays with spotted sequences of 21 known cFSs. Aberrations were Chronic lymphocitic leukemia (CLL) is a lymphoproliferative dis- detected within multiple cFSs in all samples investigated, suggesting order. This is the most common leukemia of the adult population in that cFSs may well be involved in colorectal tumourigenesis. Breaks Western countries. The chromosomal abnormalities associated with seem to most prominently occur within fragile sites FRA3B (76.5%) CLL are: trisomy 12, del(13)(q14), del(11)(q22-23), del(17)(p13) and and FRA16D (47%), usually within the regions spanning FHIT and del(6)(q21). Some studies have reported the presence of trisomy 12 WWOX, respectively. Additionally, aCGH data indicate several other associated with other chromosomal abnormalities as t(14;18)(q32;q21) active cFSs, such as FRA1A (41.2%), FRA2C (41.2%) and FRA2E Cancer cytogenetics 1 (35.3%). Many of the observed rearrangements seem to affect cFS P07.15 cytogenetic abnormalities del(17p) and del(11q) in genes, making them potential candidates for further study. Investigat- chronic lymphocytic leukemia ing cFS loci for genomic alterations in cancer cells, rather than the I. Ionita, M. Puiu, C. Ionita, R. Cioaca, D. Calamar, H. Ionita; entire genome, is likely to accelerate the search for CRC candidate University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. genes as biomarkers for clinical patient management including targets Background. In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the presence of for therapies. del(17p) is associated to chemotherapy resistance and poor progno- sis. Del (11q) also confer an unfavorable outcome. Aims. To asses P07.13 Karyotype and first complete remission rate in adult the incidence of del (17p)/del (11q) in CLL patients in different phases acute lymphoblastic leukemia of their disease and their impact on treatment requirement. Methods. M. G. Velizarova1, E. A. Hadjiev2, K. V. Alexandrova2, I. I. Dimova3, D. From September 2000 to december 2009, 87 CLL patients were in- Toncheva3; cluded in this study. There were three groups: 45 cases at diagnosis, 1Chair of clinical laboratory and clinical immunology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinic 24 at first progression and 18 at progression after one or more thera- of hematology, University hospital „Alexandrovska“, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Chair of pies. Cytogenetic abnormalities and CD38 expression were analyzed. medical genetics, Sofia, Bulgaria. Results. The incidence of del(17p) was 22%, del(11q) was 11% and The associations of cytogenetics with complete remission (CR) rates, CD38 expression in 9% of the cases. All patients CD38+ had del(17p) time to achieve first CR and therapy resistance were studied in 35 or del(11q). Cases with del(17p) or del(11q) had a treatment-free in- untreated adult ALL patients in a clinical trial comparing 3 patient’s terval that was on average half of that of cases without these abnor- prognostic groups: poor risk, standard risk and miscellaneous. Chro- malities (23 vs 40 months) as well as patients with CD38 pos vs neg mosomal analyses of bone marrow were performed by G-banding ( 18 vs 42 months). Conclusions. Del(17p) and del (11q) occur in CLL and aberrant chromosomes were examined using fluorescence in cases associated with CD38 expression and show a rapidly progres- situ hybridization (FISH) with locus specific and centromere probes sive course of the disease. (Vysis). The statistical variables tested for potential prognostic value were: molecular-cytogenetic abnormalities, age, WBC, immunologic P07.16 Using the FISH method for an identification of genetic subgroup, CR, frequency of resistant disease and early deaths in ALL alterations in cervical carcinoma and cervical intraepithelial patients. Clonal chromosomal abnormalities were detected in 18 of 35 neoplasia: gain of human telomerase gene (htERc) (51.4%) adult patients with ALL with the follow separation: poor risk I. Slamova1,2, L. Moukova3, D. Zezulkova1, N. Strossova1, V. Vranova1,2, P. group (t(9;22), t(11q23), t(8q24) and complex karyotype)- 31.4%, stan- Kuglik1,2; dard risk group (normal karyotype, t(1;19) and hyperdiplody)- 65.7% 1Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Institute of Experimental Biology, and miscellaneous risk group (del(12p), i(7q)and del(4p)) - 14.3%. CR Brno, Czech Republic, 2University Hospital, Departement of Medical Genetics, was achieved in 71.4% of patients and resistant disease (RD) or early Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk deaths were detected in 34.4% of cases. Although the presence of Memorial Cancer Institute, Departement of Gynaecological Oncology, Brno, poor pretreatment laboratory characteristics, the group with miscella- Czech Republic. neous abnormalities is suggestive of having better CR rate compared Cervical cancer is the second most common cancer in women in the with the poor risk and standard risk groups (83.3% vs. 68.7% and Czech Republic, approximately 400 women die of this disease every 76.5% respectively). Patients with t(9;22), t(8q24) and complex karyo- year. It is known that this carcinoma develops from precancerous cer- type had higher rate of RD ( 50-75%) then patients with other aberra- vical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) which is characterized by series of tions or normal karyotype. Our study emphasizes that karyotype is an genetic abnormalities. Gain of hTERC (3q26) was the most consistent independent prognostic factor in adult ALL after intensified treatment chromosomal abnormality found in cervical carcinoma. It was discov- regimens. In multivariate analysis, karyotype retained its prognostic ered that gain of hTERC gene is associated with progression from significance for CR rate, time to achieved remission and RD. precansers (CIN1, CIN2, CIN3) to cervical carcinoma. In our work, we studied copy number changes of the chromosomal P07.14 conventional cytogenetics in Acute and chronic region of hTERC gene using the FISH method in cytological smears Leukemias: A Laboratory Report obtained from 30 patients of the Departement of Gynaecological On- S. Komandur1,2, S. Dayakar1, A. Swaroopa1, A. Sheik3, S. Chakravarthy4, S. cology of Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute Brno. Gain of hTERC Prasad4, S. Vanajakshi3; gene was found in 16 from 30 (53 %) patiens with the diagnosis of cer- 1Apollo Health City, Hyderabad, India, 2Department of Cytogenetics, Vijaya vical cancer or with CIN1-CIN3. It was confirmed that gain of hTERC is Diagnostic Center, Hyderabad, India, 3Department of Haematology, Apollo significantly associated with cervical carcinoma. Health City, Hyderabad, India, 4Department of Oncology, Apollo Health City, In 2009 a new DNA probe for simultaneous identification of HPV infec- Hyderabad, India. tion and examination of copy number changes of hTERC and MYCC Cancer is, in general, more common in industrialized nations, but there genes using the FISH method was created by Abbott. The initial ex- has been a growth in cancer rates in developing countries, particularly periences with detection of hTERC and MYCC genes in HPV positive as these nations adopt new diet and lifestyle habits. The burden of cells in CIN3 are presented. leukemias is increasing by the day and the incidence of different types The results of genetic analyses should serve as a supporting tool for of leukemia varies with the age in different parts of India. the determination of samples containing high risk HPV infections and We received a total of 85 Bone Marrow Aspirates over a period of 10 chromosomal aberrations linked to the potential progression and tu- months between November 2008 and September 2009. Conventional mor proliferation. GTG chromosomal analysis was carried out according to the modified method of Morehead. 30 metaphases were analyzed and 10 karyo- P07.17 Assessment of HER-2 gene amplification in breast types made. cancer The 85 cases included 49 (57.6%) males and 36 (42.4%) females. A. Belengeanu, D. Stoicanescu, A. Muresan, M. Stoian, N. Andreescu, N. Of these, normal karyotype was revealed in 49/85 (57.6%) while an Meszaros; abnormal karyotype was seen in 36/85 (42.4%) cases. Karyotype with University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. t(9;22) was seen in 10/36 (27.8%), t(8;21) in 5/36 (13.9%) and t(15;17) A fraction of breast cancers, as part of their development, undergo in 6/36 (16.7%). Other abnormalities i.e., 13q-, inv (3), monosomy 7, gene amplification. Amplification and overexpression of HER-2 onco- 5q+, t(5;11), der7, dup (1p), trisomy 8, t(1;3), 2x (del) 22? and aneu- gene seems to remain stable over the course of disease. Gene over- ploidy were seen in 15/36 (41.7%) cases. Our results show that con- expression is an important marker of poor prognosis and a useful de- ventional cytogenetics could be used as first line diagnostic tool for terminant of susceptibility to trastuzumab. The present study aimed to different types of leukemia. Further it gives a complete picture of the evaluate HER-2 amplification/overexpression status in breast cancer chromosomal changes compared to FISH or Real time PCR which are patients by FISH technique and immunohistochemistry. The study was specific. Conventional cytogenetics can also be used to differentiate performed on 50 selected cases with primary mammary carcinoma. between acquired and constitutive changes and can also detect treat- We used immunohistochemistry for HER-2 oncoprotein and FISH as a ment induced random aberrations. It is also cost-effective in compari- follow up test for ambiguous results. From the 50 tumors, 34% present- son to FISH and Real Time. ed different degrees of positivity with immunohistochemistry; 66% did Cancer cytogenetics 1 not express the oncoprotein c-erbB2. Cases with 2+ immunostaining 17p13 and 6q21, with prognostic implications and sometimes thera- score were interpreted as uncertain and HER-2 status was determined peutics. by FISH to reveal genic amplification. 3 cases showed gene amplifica- The authors present a study consisting in the analysis by cytogenetic tion. HER-2/CEP17 ratio was determined using the rate between HER- and fluorescent in situ Hybridization (FISH) of 25 blood samples of 2/neu signals and CEP17 signals in 20 nuclei. We could appreciate patients with B-CLL, before any treatment. amplification in 4 cases, 2 with „low level“ amplification and 2 with „high For each sample were made two kinds of culture, with different mi- level“ amplification. Polyploidy was considered in cases with at least togens (pokeweed and TPA). All the technical procedure to obtain 3.0 signals from chromosome 17. We identified 1 case of polyploidy. metaphases was performed according to protocols optimized in the HER-2 amplification/ overexpression are used as prognostic markers, laboratory. but also as predictive markers for breast cancers. Thus, in positive cas- GTL bands were applied and FISH technique with the probes for the es, tumors are faster growing, more aggressive and less responsive to unique sequence of chromosomes 13 and 17, and α-satellite probe for chemotherapy and hormone therapy. Identification of HER-2 - positive chromosome 12 were performed. tumors is certainly crucial in order to identify patient candidates for The authors present the analytical and clinical data of 25 patients and anti- HER-2 therapies. results of cytogenetic and FISH. A bibliographic revue is presented. Supported by the Commission for Promotion of Research in Health P07.18 Chromosome aberations in hypertrophic gastritis Care: Research Project in Applied Health Care - Nº 6/2007 O. A. Matveyenko1, L. N. Urazova1, I. N. Lebedev2, A. D. Cheremnykh2; 1Research institute of oncology, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of P07.21** the role of microRNAs in chromosome instability Medical Genetics, SB RAMS, Tomsk, Russia, Tomsk, Russian Federation. driven by telomere shortening in human prostate cancer cells. Gastric cancer takes a special place among human tumor pathology. In Z. Demir, S. Sevli, O. F. Bayrak, A. Celebi, M. Ozen; most cases this type of neoplasia arises on the background of continu- Yeditepe University Medical School, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, ously existing changes of mucosa. Precancerous lesions are usually Turkey. presented by morphological damages of epithelium and replacement Chromosomal instability appearing early in tumor progression is a of normal mucosa by dysplastic tissue. However, oncogenic potential hallmark of almost all cancers. The majority of tumors exhibit abnor- of these changes as well as underlined genetic mechanisms remain mal karyotypes consisting chromosomal breaks, fusions and trans- unclear. One of the possible reasons of tumour transformation is ac- locations. Recent studies demonstrated that microRNAs are located cumulation of multiple chromosome aberrations. But their prevalence in chromosomally instable regions. Previously, we have compared among different types of preneoplastic lesions is not fully investigated. karyotypes of commonly used prostate cancer cell lines including The aim of present research was molecular cytogenetic analysis of hy- DU145, PC3, LNCaP and an immortalized prostate cell line PNT1a pertrophic gastritis tissues. DNA from 15 samples was investigated by as the presence of common regions of genomic instability. Thirty three CGH. The most common chromosome aberrations were gains of chro- microRNAs including miR-579, miR-580, miR-1274a, miR-581, miR- mosome regions 1q32-q42 (93.3%), 10q24 (73.3%), 15q22 (66.3%) 449a, miR-449b, miR-1974, miR-583, miR-1244, miR-584, miR-143, and losses at 9p13 (66.3%), 9q21 (60%) and 1q21 (60%). Our data miR-145, miR-378 were located on chromosome 5 carrying one of indicate that these aberrations can be early events in gastric cancero- the most consistent regions of instability. Prostate cancer cell lines genesis. It is possible, that cells with observed abnormalities can have and PNT1a cells have been transfected by one of these microRNAs, selective advantages and form foci of gastric neoplasia. This study miRI45. PNT1a cells have also been transfected by anti-miR-145. was supported by Federal Agency of Education (P-1706). Chromosomal preparations were analyzed for any break, aberrations or telomeric associations. Cells transfected by miR-145 showed in- P07.19 making of JAK2 RG kit with Real time PcR method for creased number of telomeric associations and clumping. These prepa- the First time in iran rations had less number of cells in mitosis as well. Our data suggest M. A. Saremi1,2, S. Negari2, M. Moshirazin2, M. Saremi3; that microRNAs might play a role, in chromosomal instability driven by 1Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, telomere shortening. 2Kawsar Tech Exploration Company, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Health This study is supported by a grant (18S051) from The Scientific and Reference Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Technological Research Council of Turkey. JAK2 (Janus Kinase 2) is a Tyrosin Kinase located in cytoplasm with essential role in signaling pathways for cytokines and growth factors. P07.22 Oligonucleotide array-based comparative genomic The acquired mutation G1849T leads to substitution of valine with hybridization analyses of gain 1q21 in multiple myeloma phenylalanine (V617F). This substitution results in constitutively ac- R. Zaoralova1,2, P. Nemec1,2, H. Greslikova1,2, J. Smetana1,2, L. Kovarova3,4, R. tive JAK2 which leads to uncontrolled cell proliferation in the absence Hajek4,3, P. Kuglik1,2; of growth factors. This mutation is found in the majority of BCR-ABL- 1Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics, Babak Research Institute, Faculty of negative myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs) and has become a main Medicine, MU, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Experimental Biology, diagnostic test for polycethemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department (ET) and primary myelofibrosis (PMF). of Internal Medicine and Hematooncology, The Faculty Hospital Brno, Brno, JAK2 RG kit is intended for use with Rotor Gene 6000 and for the Czech Republic, 4University Research Centre – Czech Myeloma Group, Babak detection of JAK2 (V617F) mutation in genomic DNA extracted from Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech human cells. This kit is intended for research use only. The analytical Republic. detection limit of the kit was assessed with serial dilution series of the Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematological cloned target in wild type genomic DNA and showed a limit of detection malignancy. It is characterized by malignant transformation and clonal equal to 0.01% (1:10,000). This sensitivity is achieved only if 5 to 10 proliferation of B-lymphocytes and their accumulation in bone mar- million WBC have been extracted and eluted in 200ul which is equal to row. MM is incurable, although usage of the new drugs significantly roughly 100,000 genomes per reaction. increased survival of patients in last years. MM is characterized by presence of specific genetic changes present in plasma cells. One of P07.20 Evaluation by standard cytogenetic and FisH of non our fields of interest is to analyze gain on long arm of chromosome treated patients with LLc-B 1, which is currently one of the most studied chromosomal changes P. Botelho, M. Souto, S. Rebelo, M. Inácio, M. Guerra, M. Cunha, O. Moutinho, in MM. R. Pinto Leite; Using oligonucleotide array-CGH we analyzed 41 MM samples with Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal. gain of 1q21 (CKS1B gene) detected previously by FISH. As input ma- The chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common form of terial for array-CGH we used DNA from CD138+ cells separated from leukemia in Western countries. The leukemia of B lymphocytes con- bone marrow using magnetic or fluorescence activated cell separa- stitutes about 95% of all cases of CLL. The cytogenetic analysis in the tion. study of B-CLL is important, allowing detecting chromosomal changes Taking together 76% (13 of 41) cases had gained not only 1q21 locus associated with this type of leukemia, namely, the trisomy of chromo- but whole 1q arm. Moreover, another 17% (7 of 41) had at least 100 MB some 12, deletions in loci located on chromosomes 13q14, 11q22-q23, gain anywhere at the 1q arm. It is obvious, that not only CKS1B gene, Cancer cytogenetics 200 but other genes are affected as well, for example IL-6R or BCL6. Many clarified. Cytogenetic results were correlated with other clinical and of them are possibly negative prognostic factors in MM. According to laboratory parameters and will be presented in the future. the FISH data (in about 95% cases we detect max. two extra copies of CKS1B), we did not find any high-level amplification of 1q21. In all P07.25 A case of angioimmunoblastic t-cell non-Hodgkin cases, 1q aberrations were associated with additional copy number lymphoma with a neocentric chromosome inv dup(1)(qter-- alterations, including monosomy of chromosome 13 or hyperdiploidy. >q21::q21-->q31-->neo-->q31-->qter) Supported by grants and projects MSM 0021622434 and 0021622415, E. Blom1, F. H. Heyning2, F. Havik1, E. L. den Ouden-Wienhöfer1, W. G. M. IGA NS10207-3/2009 and 10406-3, and LC 06027. Kroes1; 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Medical Center P07.23 t(1;8)(q32;q24): a novel cytogenetic abnormality in Haaglanden, The Hague, Netherlands. pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) Neocentromeres are rare epigenetic phenomena in which functional E. Tassano, E. Tavella, C. Micalizzi, C. Panarello, C. Morerio; centromeres are formed onto novel chromosomal locations without IRCCS Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy. any alpha-satellite DNA. To date, constitutional human neocentro- MYC, one of the first identified oncogenes, codes for a transcription meres have been reported in at least 90 cases. In cancer, however, factor commonly deregulated in tumorigenesis. Chromosomal trans- the knowledge is much more limited. Acquired neocentromeres have locations joining the immunoglobulin (IG) and MYC genes have been been described in a particular class of lipomatous tumors (atypical li- extensively reported in Burkitt and non-Burkitt lymphomas, but data pomas and well-differentiated liposarcomas, ALP-WDLPS), 3 cases concerning MYC rearrangements with non-IG partners are few. We of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), 1 case of non-Hodgkin lymphoma describe a new translocation involving MYC in pediatric ALL. An 11- (NHL) and 1 case of lung carcinoma. Here, we report a 66-year-old month-old girl came under our observation with abdominal mass and male with angioimmunoblastic T-cell NHL. Cytogenetic analysis of his skin nodules. Bone marrow (BM) aspirate showed 91% lymphoblast bone marrow showed multiple aberrations including the presence of a FAB L1 morphology. The immunophenotype was positive for CD19, supernumerary chromosome. Using the FISH-technique, the supernu- CD20, CyIgμ, DR, and negative for CD10 and TdT. Histology of skin merary chromosome showed to represent an inverted duplication of nodules revealed a neoplastic infiltrate of Burkitt-like lymphoma, posi- the segments between 1q21 and 1qter. A neocentromere is formed in tive for CD19, CD20, DR, λ light chains and negative for CD10, TdT. band 1q31. To our knowledge, this is the second reported case of NHL LD-PCR for t(8;14)(q24;q32) was negative. AIEOP LNH 97 protocol (both T-cell) with the presence of a neocentromere. The occurrence was started and complete remission (CR) was obtained. Six months of neocentromeres in tumor cells, however, may be underestimated after the end of chemotherapy the girl experienced BM and skin re- due to technical limitations during the routine diagnostic chromosomal lapse. The cell population was more immature with pre-B appearance analysis. The prognostic impact is therefore currently unknown. and low proliferation index. REC 98 HR protocol induced second CR. The girl is now alive and well 8 years after relapse. BM blast karyotype P07.26 investigation of aneusomy of chromosome 17 and its at relapse was 46,XX, t(1;8)(q32;q24). FISH analysis with MYC probe influence on prognosis (some clinical and immunohistochemical confirmed the rearrangement. Abnormalities of chromosome 1q are parameters) amongst some iranian women with sporadic breast common in all forms of B-cell malignancy, mostly as partial duplication cancer of the region: FISH analysis has shown that some of these duplica- F. Behjati1, M. Ataee Kachoui2,1, E. Keyhani1, H. Karbasian3, M. Kadivar4, M. tions can be complex. Molecular studies to identify a new non-IG MYC Karimlou5, F. Larti1, F. A. Moghadam1, S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1; partner that could explain the peculiar clinical history of our case are 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation ongoing. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic P07.24 New chromosomal translocations in patients with of Iran, 3Department of Surgery, Atie Hospitel, Tehran, Islamic Republic of primary myelodisplastic syndrome Iran, 4Departmnt of Pathology, Atie hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, M. Dencic-Fekete1, V. Djordjevic2, J. Jovanovic2, A. Bogdanovic2, D. Antic2, V. 5Department of Statistics, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Milosevic2, B. Mihaljevic2; Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Institute of hematology, Belgrade, 2Institute of hematology, Belgrade, Serbia. Breast cancer is amongst the leading causes of death in women Cytogenetic analysis is one of the essential methods for determining worldwide and the most common cancer amongst Iranian women. Un- chromosomal aberrations in myelodisplastic syndrome (MDS). Since fortunately, the current clinical and histological criteria can only help more than 70% of patients with MDS have clonal cytogenetic abnor- 60%of women with breast cancer in diagnosis and long term treat- malities, cytogenetic studies play a pivotal role in defining the concept ment. Therefore, genetic markers both at single gene level and chro- of primary MDS, establishing the diagnosis, evaluating prognosis for mosomes can play an important role in improving the diagnosis and survival and transformation to AML and approaching the molecular ba- prognosis of breast cancer patients. The aim of this retrospective study sis of the disease. was to investigate the role of chromosome 17 copy number assessed Among structural abnormalities, deletions are the most common by Interphase Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) using paraffin changes in primary MDS, while many of the patients exhibit aneu- embedded breast tumor blocks. The study was carried out on 50 Ira- ploidy, too. Translocations are rarely seen in MDS and involve certain nian women, with sporadic primary invasive ductal breast carcinoma. key genes whose disruptions change the control and the balance of The age range was 31-84 years with an average age of 48.58. The proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic precursors. prognostic value of aneusomy 17 in relation to the established clini- We report a group of 6 patients with primary MDS, in whose karyo- copathological parameters, the immunohistochemical markers of ER, types, novel chromosomal translocations were identified by conven- PR, P53, age and the duration and status of survival in the patients tional cytogenetic analysis. were investigated. The maximum rate of aneusomy 17 was 83% and Unstimulated bone marrow samples were used for cytogenetic analy- the minimum rate was 39% with a mean rate of 57%. The only positive sis according to the standard method. Chromosomes were HG-band- significant correlation was between monosomy 17 and negative status ed (HG-modified banded technique) after direct and 24-hour culture of ER in the patients (p<0.05). The relationship between the status of preparation. aneusomy 17 and all the studied clinicopathological parameters will The karyotypes were: be discussed. 1. 46,XY,der(X)t(X;1)(q28;q12)[11]/46,XY[9] 2. 46,XY,der(14)t(1;14)(p11;p11)[12]/46,XY[8] P07.27 chromosomal aberrations in blood cancers 3. 46,XX,del(20)(q11)[7]/47,XX,t(4;18)(p16;q11),del(20)(q11),+mar[13] I. Aganovic-Musinovic, M. Mackic-Djurovic, S. Ibrulj; 4. 46,XX,-3,t(5;9)(q13;q34),+13[20] Center fopr Genetics, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. 5. 46,XY,del(20)(q11)[5]/46,XY,t(7;20)(q21;q11)[2]/46,XY[13] Cytogenetic studies are important diagnostic and prognostic tool for 6. 46,XX,t(13;22)(q14;q13)[4]/ evaluation of therapeutic procedures among 275 hematological pa- 47,XX,del(5)(q13q31),t(13;22)(q14;q13),+21[9] tients, during the period of 2005-2008. in Center for Genetics of Medical Determination of the genes involved in the translocation’s breakpoints, faculty - University of Sarajevo. Most of malignant hematological dis- so as their impact on the clinical picture and prognosis, remain to be eases are detectable by chromosomal analyses. Many chromosomal Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 201 abnormalities are associated with particular subtypes of leukemia and flicting results in this regard have been published with respect to vari- have prognostic significance. Chromosomal preparations were made ant SNP rs4291 at position -262 upstream of ACE in its promoter re- by standard techniques and GTG bend. We have detected numerous gion. In the present research, we aimed to investigate the link between abnormalities among analyzed materials as: t(1:18), t (8:13), t (1:19), rs4291 and late onset Alzheimer’s disease through a case-control t(3:14), t (3:21), t(9:22), inv(16), del (5), inv (3), inv (11) (p11:q23), izo study among Iranians. One hundred patients affected with AD with age (17), der (11), der (9), tris (8), del (6q), del (13q), that have relevant at onset of more than 65 were selected as cases. The controls were significance for patients.Cytogenetic studies are important to hema- 100 age-matched non-demented individuals. All cases and controls tologists to predict good or poor response to treatment in patients with were screened for A/T variations at position -262 by an allele specific different types of leukemia. The table below shows the number and PCR protocol. No association between genotypes at this position and percentage of abnormal karyotypes among our patients. Alzheimer’s disease status was found. Number and % of Number and % of types of leukemia normal karyotype abnormal karyotype P08.03 The angiotensin converting enzyme I/D polymorphism and physical performance. ALL 34 (12,36)% 12 (4,36%) H. Jaklič1, M. Selingerová2; AML 36 (13,09%) 5 (1,81%) 1Institute of Medical Genetics,Dep.of Obsterrics and Gynaecology,University CML 86 (31,27%) 19 (6,90%) Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Institute of Sport MDS 32 (11,63%) 0 Sciences,Faculty of Physical Education and Sports of the Comenius University MPS 17 (6,18%) 3 (1,09%) Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia. Lymphomas 26 (9,45%) 5 (1,81%) Bacground: There is an assumption that ACE I/D polymorphism rep- TOTAL 231 (84%) 44 (16%) resents one of the possible genetic factors that might be associated with athletic excellence. Recent studies identified that an increased frequency of I allele amongst elite endurance athletes, long distance P08 Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, runners, rowers and mountaineers. linkage and association methods Material and methods: We examined this hypothesis by determining ACE I/D allele frequency by PCR analysis amongst 126 children after P08.01 MMP2 (-10 C/T) gene polymorphism and susceptibility motoric tests using lokomometer. ACE genotype and allele frequen- to abdominal aortic aneurysm or aortoiliac occlusive disease cies were compared with 252 healthy controls. J. Mikolajczyk-Stecyna1, A. Korcz1, K. Pawlaczyk2, G. Oszkinis2, R. Slomski1, Research came into following results: ACE genotype frequency in the M. Gabriel2; whole cohort did not differ from that in sedentary controls (p<0,56). 1Polish Academy of Sciences, Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, We have found positive genotype-dependant association between I/D 2Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. polymorphism and results of motoric tests in 126 children. There was Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a life-threatening condition af- an excess of the I/I genotype and I allele incidence in group (n=31) of fecting 4-9% of population with a risk increasing with age. Aortoiliac endurance types (regarding the speed and frequency: p≤0,05, p≤0,01, occlusive disease (AIOD) is characterized by aortoiliac obstruction respectively). and is caused by advanced atherosclerosis. Both AAA and AIOD are Conclusion: The frequency of the ACE I/I genotype and I allele was considered to have multifactorial etiology and are the most frequent significantly increased among endurance types of children, thus we reasons for vascular surgery procedures within abdominal cavity. De- could conclude that the ACE I/D polymorphism may represent a ge- structive remodeling of extracellular matrix related to activity of various netic factor that contributes to the development of elite athletes. The matrix metalloproteinases associates both of these pathologies. Matrix I allele does seem to be associated with enhanced endurance perfor- metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) plays a major role in the remodeling of mance, probably via a local muscular effect. Further research might extracellular matrix in arterial vessels and increased MMP2 expres- clarify the exact relationship between ACE I/D polymorphism and ACE sion in AAA walls was shown in several studies. Different MMP2 gene expression in skeletal muscle and the interaction of this with training, polymorphisms were tested in genetic association studies of vascular capillary density and substrate utilization. The understanding of the diseases. The purpose of the present study was to determine if there is mechanisms of cellular efficiency might have important applications association between the functional polymorphism in a promoter region beyond the world of extreme endurance sports. of MMP2 gene (-1306 C/T) and susceptibility to AAA or AIOD in Polish patients. P08.04 Association of ACTN genetic variants with physical Based on PCR-RFLP analysis MMP2 genotypes (C/C; C/T; T/T) were performance of Lithuanian athletes determined in three selected groups: 253 patients with AAA and 282 A. Pranculis, V. Gineviciene, V. Kucinskas; patients with AIOD who underwent surgery; 367 individuals from con- Departament of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius trol group. Genotypes were compared with demographic and clinical University, Vilnius, Lithuania. data of subjects and analyzed in relation to risk factors. The genotype Homozygosy for the nonsense mutation 577X (c.1729C>T) within distribution and allele frequency of MMP2 (-1306 C/T) gene polymor- ACTN3 results in deficiency of α-actinin-3 but does not result in an phism were significantly different between patients with AAA and con- abnormal muscular phenotype. Previous research has found an as- trol group. No significant differences were found between patients with sociation of the 577R allele with speed/power performance while the AIOD and control group.conclusion: MMP2 (-1306 C/T) gene poly- 577X allele may confer an advantage during endurance events. morphism may be an important factor in development of AAA. The aim of the study was to investigate genotype and allele distribu- tion of ACTN3 gene R577X polymorphism in elite Lithuanian athlete P08.02 Absence of association between genotypes at position groups (compiled according to the athlete qualification and their sport -262 0f ACE and Alzheimer’s disease orientation (N-149)) and controls (unrelated, untrained individuals (N- P. Yenki1, E. Jaberi1, M. Kazemi2, E. Elahi1; 250)). Genotyping was performed by RFLP. The aerobic capacity of 1Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, University College of Science, athletes was measured by using VOmax. The ACTN3 RX genotype 2 University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Students‘ Scientific frequencies in the athletes were: RX- 56.4%, RR-30.9%, XX-12.8% Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic (χ2=4.1, p=0.043), in the controls: RX-50.4%, RR-39.2%, XX-10.4% Republic of Iran. (χ2=2.46, p=0.117). Genotype frequencies differed significantly be- ACE is a candidate gene for susceptibility to the sporadic form of Al- tween the elite and non-elite athletes (p=0.04). XX genotype was more zheimer’s disease (AD). ACE consists of 25 exons at locus 17q23, frequent in non-elite (19.9%) than in elite (7%) athletes and in speed/ and encodes angiotensin converting enzyme. The major role of ACE power group (16.7%) compared to endurance (10.4%), mix (14.4%) relates to maintenance of circulatory homeostasis. However, it has and control groups (10.4%). Irrespective of the athletes genotype VO- been demonstrated that ACE can degrade amyloid beta peptide in vi- max value was highest in the speed/power group. RR and RX geno- 2 tro. This peptide is the constituent of amyloid plaques, the hallmark of typed athletes had higher VOmax values than XX genotyped athletes. 2 Alzheimer’s disease. Several variations in the ACE gene have been The results indicate that in Lithuanian athletes XX and RX genotypes reported to be associated with incidence and age at onset of AD. Con- could be associated with higher speed/power while RR genotype could Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 202 be associated with endurance. It can be therefore concluded that the P08.07** Identification of a novel candidate disease locus for absence of a functional ACTN3 gene in fast-twitch muscle fibers is anophthalmia/microphthalmia by homozygosity mapping in an most likely compensated by ACTN2 and other enzymes that take part irish traveller family in anaerobic muscle metabolism. J. P. Casey1, J. Conroy1, R. Regan1, N. Shah1, S. Lynch2, A. Green1,2, S. Ennis1,2; P08.05 Investigation of complement factor H Y402H 1University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 2National Centre for Medical polymorphism in turkish patients with age-related macular Genetics, Dublin, Ireland. degeneration Rare genetic variants associated with disease are, by their nature, dif- M. Yılmaz1, D. Yücel2, R. K. Özgül3; ficult to identify by traditional genetic analysis methods. Homozygosity 1Hacettepe University,Faculty of Science, Department of Genetics, Ankara, mapping in consanguineous families has been used successfully in Turkey, 2Hacettepe University,Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular the identification of genetic cause in a range of rare conditions. An- Biology, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health, ophthalmia (absence of an eye) and the related condition microph- Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey. thalmia (small eye) are relatively rare conditions estimated at 3 and Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a progressive degenera- 14 in 100,000 births respectively. The aetiology of anophthalmia/mi- tive disorder known to be the major cause of visual loss in the elderly, crophthalmia (AM) is not well understood but observed familial clus- especially in well developed countries. AMD has a multi-factorial eti- tering suggests a significant genetic component. Several genes have ology and is determined by both genetic and environmental factors. been implicated in AM but, to date, mutations in these genes account Family-based and population based studies showed the association for less than 25% of cases. We present homozygosity mapping in a between some gene variants and AMD. CFH Y402H variant seems to four generation consanguineous Irish family from an endogamous no- be one of the most significant genetic risk factor in AMD cases as pre- madic group presenting with various forms of AM. Previous analysis viously reported by several studies. There is still some conflict among excluded any causative mutation in known AM genes. Genotyping the results of different studies focused on the relation between CFH was undertaken using the high density Illumina 1million SNP platform. variant Y402H and AMD in various ethnic groups. Homozygosity mapping identified a 0.9Mb homozygous segment on This study inquires association between CFH Y402H polymorphism chromosome 15 shared by all 6 affected individuals but not shared by and AMD development in a cohort of Turkish AMD patients. A total of unaffected relatives. The candidate region contains twelve genes, two 95 AMD patients and 87 age-matched control individuals were geno- of which are strong functional candidates that are implicated in eye de- typed for this allelic variation. Y402H polymorphism was detected with velopment. The candidate region was isolated by NimbleGen’s novel PCR-RFLP method. sequence capture service and sequence analysis of the region is cur- Genotype frequencies were highly different between case and control rently underway. Results of studies into this novel AM candidate region groups compared to the heterozygotes carrying the risk allele C (AMD will be presented at the ESHG conference. Identification of a novel AM patients 71,6%, controls 54,03%). This findings suggest that hetero- gene would provide valuable insight into the molecular aetiology un- zygote individuals with CT genotype (O.R=2,13, CI% 1,11-4,15) have derlying the disease phenotype and may enhance our understanding increased risk for AMD compared to homozygotes with TT genotype of the disease network. in Turkish population. P08.08 APO E/C1/C4/C2 gene cluster polymorphisms and risk P08.06 Association of apolipoprotein E allele-ε4 with late-onset factor for ischaemic Heart Disease in spanish population. Alzheimer‘s disease in mexican mestizo population R. Carreras-Torres, M. Gayà-Vidal, G. Athanasiadis, E. Esteban, P. Moral; C. Venegas1,2, F. Fernández3, L. Gutiérrez4, E. Alonso5, S. Kofman6,2; Faculty of Biology - University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 1Hospital General de Mexico, Servicio de Genética,, Mexico. D.F, Mexico, Atherothrombotic diseases are multifactorial diseases caused by ge- 2Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico. netic and environmental factors. Among the genes that code for apo- DF, Mexico, 3Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico. D.F, Mexico, 4Servicio de lipoproteins, APO E is located close to APO C1, APO C4 and APO Geriatría, Instituto Nacional de la Nutrición y Ciencias Médicas., Mexico. D.F, C2 forming the APO E/C1/C4/C2 gene cluster. The APO E plays a Mexico, 5Instituto Nacional de Neurología, Mexico. D.F, Mexico, 6Hospital major role in lipoprotein metabolism and lipid transport. The three iso- General de Mexico, Servicio de Genética, Mexico. D.F, Mexico. forms (apoE2, apoE3, and apoE4) account for a significant proportion Alzheimer Disease (AD) is clinically characterized by global, progres- of lipid and apolipoprotein variability and have been associated with sive and irreversible loss of mental faculties. Neuropathalogically for atherothrombotic disease. As far as the APO C1, APO C4, and APO neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques; composed mainly by Amy- C2 genes are concerned, they seem to contribute modestly to plasma loid β-peptide (Aβ). The apolipoprotein E allele-ε4 is the major known triglyceride levels. In this work we test 10 SNPs that represent the mo- genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD), with a lecular variability of the APO E/C1/C4/C2 cluster for association with gene-dosage effect increasing the incidence and lowering the age of Ischaemic Heart Disease in 101 family trios from Spain with one af- onset according to heterozygote or homozygote ε4 status. The Apoε4 fected son (N=302 individuals). The results indicate significant disequi- allele enhances the polymerization and aggregation of Aβ and might librium in the transmission of the combined C and T alleles (freq=0.36) affect its clearance, increasing Aβ deposition. APOE allelic frequen- of SNPs rs405509 (APO E) and rs5167 (APO C4), suggesting that cies vary between different populations, for example, in a Caucasian interaction among the elements of the APO E/C1/C4/C2 cluster might (ε2: 8%, ε3: 78%, ε4: 14%), Asian (ε2: 5%, ε3: 86%, ε4: 9%), African- also contribute to the development of the disease. American (ε2: 5%, ε3: 76%, ε4: 19%) and Hispanic (ε2: 3%, ε3: 85%, ε4: 12%). P08.09 Linkage and association analysis for genetic modifiers Materials and Methods: We analyzed the frequency of alleles and in a large family with cardiac sodium channel disease. genotypes for APOE (ε2/ε3/ε4) and performed a case-control study to I. C. R. M. Kolder1, P. G. Postema2, M. P. Van den Berg3, M. M. A. Mannens4, J. evaluate the association between APOE 4 allele with LOAD in Mexi- P. Van Tintelen5, F. van den Heuvel6, S. Kääb7, A. A. M. Wilde2, C. R. Bezzina8, can Mestizo population. We studied 77 patients with LOAD and 77 sex M. W. T. Tanck1; and age-matched control subjects. Genotyping of APOE alleles was 1Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and Bioinformatics, Academic Medical performed by TaqMan technology. The association risk was estimated Center, University of Ams, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of using chi-square test and calculation of odd ratios with 95% CI was Cardiology,Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department adjusted by age and sex. of Cardiology, Thorax Center, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Results: We found different genotype frequencies between cases and Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, controls and observed association for APOE ε4 allele with OR=2.28 Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of Genetics, University Medical Center (2.17-4.03) Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 6Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Conclusions: These data suggest a genetic association between ε4 University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 7Department allele with LOAD in Mexican Mestizo population. Our results differ of Medicine I, Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, 8Failure Research from studies reported in the literature. Acknowledgements: CONACyT Center, Department of Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, (2004-C01-129)Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 20 Amsterdam, Netherlands. often sensorineural. Non-syndromal sensorineural deafness is a highly To identify loci modulating electrocardiographic (ECG) parameters, heterogeneous condition, which can be divided into DFNA (autosomal we carried out linkage and association analyses at loci harboring 18 dominant deafness,~15-20%), DFNB (autosomal recessive deafness, candidate genes involved in cardiac electrical activity in two large ~80%), DFN (X-linked deafness, ~1%), and mitochondrial deafness genealogically-linked kindreds with the sodium channel mutation (at least 1%). In this study, we selected 20 Iranian families with auto- SCN5A-1795insD (3p21-p25). The mutation leads to the prolongation somal dominant pattern of inheritance. All of the patients belonged to of several ECG parameters, including P-wave and QRS duration, PQ large families who had more than 5 affected members in three genera- and QTc interval, ST-elevation as well as slower heart rate. ECGs and tion. Using linkage analysis method with flanking and intragenic STR DNA were available for 217 individuals (101 carriers). Individuals were markers, we studied the following loci: DFNA2, DFNA6, DFNA20/26, genotyped for 1433 tagging SNPs. Linkage and association analyses DFNA9, DFNA8/12, and DFNA3. These genes have a high prevalence were performed using SOLAR and PBAT and Kinship, respectively. especially in neighboring countries of Iran. In fact, they are the most As expected, linkage peaks were found for all ECG parameters stud- prevalent among DFNA loci. In our previous studies, we could find ied on 3p21-p25 in the region of the mutation (LOD 4.6-19.5). PBAT large deaf families which were linked to DFNA3, DFNA36 and DFNA5 best association was p=0.04 for P wave on 3p21-p25. Kinship found all with novel mutations. Continuing this project, So far three of our fami- phenotypes to be highly associated with SNPs on 3p21-p25, with the lies have been linked to DFNA2 and DFNA6. Mutation in these genes highest association found for rs11708587 with QTc (p=1.2e-23). (KCNQ4, GJB3 and WFS1) has been shown in many populations. The Based on the present study, all of the analyses programs tested picked mutation screening for these two families is underway. up the major known effect of the mutation although PBAT was outper- formed by Kinship, picking up this major effect in all ECG parameters P08.12 Investigation on the prevalence of 8 autosomal recessive instead of just P-wave. After correcting for our main effect, different loci non syndromic loci in iranian population with hearing loss were found both by linkage and association. Both Kinship and SOLAR M. Babanejad1,2, Z. Fattahi1, N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, K. perform well in the present large kinship, but due to time consuming Jalalvand1, S. Saadatmand2, K. Kahrizi1, R. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1; IBD calculations, association using Kinship can be regarded as a fast- 1Genetics Research Center , University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation er alternative. The lesser performance by PBAT is most likely related Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University, to the large size of our kindred. Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories,Department of Otolaryngology Head P08.10 rs4307059 and rs4141463 study in an Italian cohort with and Neck Surgery,University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. Autism spectrum disorder. Hearing loss is the most frequent neurosensory disorder which is high- P. Prandini1, E. Trabetti1, A. Pasquali1, P. Muglia2, L. Da Ros2, M. G. ly heterogeneous, and can also occur due to environmental causes. Romanelli1, G. Malerba1, B. Dalla Bernardina3, L. Zoccante3, F. Boscaini3, G. Around 50% of the HL cases in developed countries have genetic Masi3, F. Nardocci3, R. Scifo3, A. Zuddas3, A. Pascotto3, A. Tiberti3, M. Molteni3, origin. However not much investigation has been done in developing P. Curatolo3, L. Margari3, M. Elia3, P. A. Battistella3, A. Parmeggiani3, P. F. countries to show the prevelance of different genes. Pignatti1; Mutations in GJB2 gene are the major cause of recessive non-syn- 1University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Fondazione Smith Kline, Roma, Italy, 3The dromic hearing loss in the Iranian population. Recent studies indicated Italian Collaborative Study of Autism, Italy. that the mutation in SLC26A4 gene located in DFNB4, as the most The genetic component of Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) is com- prevelant syndromic form of hearing loss, and mutation in TECTA plex including known chomosomal anomalies, rare genetic variants gene, as the second most-prevalent genes involved in non-syndromic and copy number variants. More recently, a set of common polymor- in Iran. phisms on 5p14.1 have been associated with ASD in two independent In our previous study we demonstrated several mutations for the genes studies (Wang et al, Nature 2009 and Ma et al, Annals Human Genet- located in the following loci DFNB2, DFNB3, DFNB7/11, DFNB9, ics 2009) and another SNP on the gene MACROD2 showed asso- DFNB16, DFNB24, DFNB53 and DFNB59 and we could not find any ciation at the genome-wide level (IMFAR, International Meeting For linkage to other previously reported genes. In this study we would like Autism Research 2009). to determine the prevalence of these eight loci in our population. Total Thanks to Fondazione SmithKline (FSK), a large multicentric study of 91 Iranian families were selected with the following criteria: 1) His- has been funded with the aim of collecting biological material (DNA, tory of two or more affected individuals in the family, 2) Families with RNA, plasma and lymphoblastoid cell lines) from extremely well-char- NSARHL, who were negative for the DFNB1, DFNB4 and DFNB21 acterized patients, parents and relatives and studying ASD pathology. loci. Homozygosity mapping with flanking and intragenic STR markers Till now we have collected 533 individuals for 162 familial units, and it used to investigate these 8 loci. So far total of 75 families have been in- is planned to recruit a total of 350 families within year 2010. vestigated of which 5 have been linked to DFNB3, 3 to DFB24 and one At the moment we have genotyped 486 individuals (144 families) for other to DFNB7, 11. The linkage study for remaining families and mu- the two SNPs (rs 4307059, located at 5p14.1 and rs4141463 located tation screening for MYO15A, RDX and TMC1 genes are underway. in the MACROD2 gene) with allelic discrimination TaqMan Assays. We performed TDT test (UNPHASED software) and we did not find any P08.13 Molecular genetic study of genes biotransformation of significant association for any of the two SNPs. xenobiotics Increasing the number of individuals will allow us to test more complex G. Galikeeva, E. Vasilyeva, E. Vorobyeva, V. Gorbunova; models of transmission (such as parent-of-origin effect, preferential Bashkir State Pedagogical Univercity, Ufa, Russian Federation. transmission to males or females, gene-gene interactions) and inves- In this work we examined the polymorphic variants of genes of en- tigate the correlation of affection status with the numerous available zymes of phase II biotransformation of xenobiotics belonging to the quantitative phenotypes. family of glutathione S-transferases: GSTM1, GSTP1 gene and the putative tumor suppressor gene p53. P08.11 Study of Autosomal Dominant non syndromic loci in The material was analyzed in DNA samples from 594 people. All the iranian population with Hearing loss studied sample was divided into 2 groups: residents of areas with Z. Fattahi1, M. Babanejad1,2, N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, K. adverse environmental conditions (189 people) and the comparison Jalalvand1, K. Kahrizi1, R. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1; group - 405 people. 1Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Analysis of the frequency distribution of genotypes and alleles of poly- Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University, morphic loci Ile105Val (A313G) and GSTP1 gene polymorphic variants Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular of p53 gene (Arg72Pro, dup 16 bp) did not reveal significant differ- Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head ences between the groups (p> 0.05). and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. Analysis of the frequency distribution of genotypes of GSTM1 gene Hearing loss is common at all ages and can be due to environmental deletion polymorphism showed a tendency to increase the genotype factors, genetic defects, or a combination of the two. The genetic basis „+“ (p = 0.0598, OR = 0.670) and significant increase in the combina- of hearing loss is highly complex. About 70% of all cases of the inherited tion of genotypes + / / Ile / Val (p = 0.004; OR = 2.205) in the group with forms of hearing loss estimated to be non-syndromic, which are most low ecological load.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 20 At typing in polymorphic variants of p53 gene (MspI-polymorphism) P08.16 Investigating ANKH and ENPP1 in slovakian families has been shown that the frequency of genotype ww (p = 0.017, OR = with chondrocalcinosis 0.634) and allele w (p = 0.037, OR = 0.707) higher in the comparison A. P. Couto1,2, Y. Zhang3, A. Timms3, A. Sims3, M. Santos1, L. Martins1, M. group, and genotype wm (p = 0.015, OR = 1.601) and allele m (p = Soares1, J. Bruges Armas1,4, J. Sequeiros2, M. A. Brown5; 0.037, OR = 1.416) in the group of persons living in conditions of high 1SEEBMO, Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal, 2Instituto de Biologia Molecular e environmental load. This may indicate that individuals living in areas Celular, Porto, Portugal, 3Institute of Musculoskeletal Sciences, Oxford, United with high environmental stress, more prone to the emergence of dis- Kingdom, 4IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 5Diamantina Institute, Queensland, Australia. eases such as cancer. Familial articular chondrocalcinosis was first reported in 1963. It is characterized by multiple calcifications of hyaline and fibrous cartilage P08.14 Genome-wide association of breast cancer: composite in the joints and intervertebral disks. Mutations in ANKH have been likelihood with imputed genotypes identified in several pedigrees as a monogenic cause for this disorder. I. Politopoulos, J. Gibson, W. Tapper, S. Ennis, D. Eccles, A. Collins; ANKH is a key protein in pyrophosphate metabolism since it is the University of Southampton, School of Medicine, Southampton, United Kingdom. responsible for pyrophosphate transport across the cell membrane. We describe a composite likelihood-based analysis of a genome-wide The objective of this work was to screen ANKH and ENPP1, two key breast cancer case-control sample from the Cancer Genetic Markers genes in pyrophosphate metabolism, in Slovakian kindreds with famil- of Susceptibility (CGEMS) project. We determine 14,380 genome re- ial chondrocalcinosis. gions of fixed size on a linkage disequilibrium (LD) map which delimit DNA samples from 25 individuals (10 affected, 15 unaffected) from 8 comparable levels of LD. Although the numbers of SNPs are highly families were obtained. The promoter, coding regions and intron-exon variable each region contains an average of ~35 SNPs and an average boundaries of ANKH and ENPP1 were sequenced. of ~69 after imputation of missing genotypes. Composite likelihood as- Twelve DNA sequence variants, six in each gene, were identified. All sociation mapping yields a single P-value for each region, established the variants had been previously identified. None segregated with the by permutation testing, along with a maximum likelihood disease loca- disease. Due to the high rate of homozygous parents (affected and un- tion S, standard error and information weight. For single SNP analysis affected) the genetic informativeness of these families was scarce for the nominal P-value for the most significant SNP (msSNP) requires association studies. Our results suggest that neither ANKH nor ENPP1 substantial correction given the number of SNPs in the region. There- mutations are the cause of chondrocalcinosis in these families, indicat- fore, imputing genotypes may not always be advantageous for msSNP ing that possibly other major genes are involved in the aethiopatho- testing, in contrast to composite likelihood. For the region containing genesis of this condition. A possible role of variant K121Q of ENPP1 FGFR2 (a known breast cancer gene) power is greatest under com- needs to be further investigated. posite likelihood with imputed genotypes (χ2 increases from 20.6 to 2 22.7), and the single SNP-based χ2 is 19.9 after correction. Imputa- P08.17 Evidence of association between GDF5 polymorphisms 2 tion of additional genotypes in this region reduces the size of the 95% and congenital dislocation of the hip in a caucasian population confidence interval for location of the disease gene by ~40%. Amongst K. Rouault1, V. Scotet1, S. Autret1, F. Gaucher2, F. Dubrana3, D. Tanguy4, C. the highest ranked regions, SNPs in the NTSR1 gene would be worthy Yaacoub El Rassi5, B. Fenoll6, C. Férec1; of examination in additional samples. Meta-analysis, that combines 1Inserm U613 „Génétique moléculaire et génétique épidémiologique“, Brest, weighted evidence from composite likelihood across corresponding re- France, 2Department of orthopedic surgery, Hotel Dieu, Pont l’Abbé, France, gions in different samples and refines putative disease locations, is fa- 3Department of orthopedic surgery, CHU Cavale Blanche, Brest, France, cilitated through a test for homogeneity. This test is more powerful than 4Department of physical medicine, Perharidy, Roscoff, France, 5Department of methods that combine unweighted chi-squares through probability. orthopedic surgery, CH Cornouaille, Quimper, France, 6Department of pediatric surgery, CHU Morvan, Brest, France. P08.15 Molecular genetic study of genes of cardiovascular Congenital dislocation of the hip (CDH) is a multifactorial disease system in athletes which involves genetic factors that are still unidentified. Recently, a G. Gumerova, E. Vorobjeva, V. Gorbunova; functional polymorphism (rs143383) of the 5’UTR region of GDF5 Bashkir State Pedagogical University from after M. Akmulla, Ufa, Russian (Growth/Differentiation Factor 5), previously reported to be associated Federation. with osteoarthritis, has been associated with CDH in a Chinese popu- Introduction: Molecular genetics of sport - a relatively young disci- lation. The aim of our study was to determine whether GDF5, known pline whose task is to search for polymorphisms in genes that lead to be involved in bone and joint morphogenesis, is also associated to individual differences in the development and manifestation of vari- with CDH in Caucasians. We genotyped three tagSNPs (rs224334, ous physical qualities of human. Were typing these genes governing rs143384, rs143383) in 239 cases and 239 controls from western Brit- the operation of the cardiovascular system: renin (ren MboI), which tany (France) where CDH is frequent, and tested the association using cleaves angiotensinogen and angiotensin form I; chymase (CMA1/B), both single-locus and haplotype-based approaches. The most signifi- involved in the conversion of angiotensin I in the enzyme active vaso- cant association was observed with rs143384. The T allele of this SNP constrictor angiotensin II; vascular receptor-widening factor - bradyki- was overrepresented in cases (65.9% vs. 55.9%, p=0.002). Under a nin (BDKRB). recessive model, carriers of the TT genotype had a 1.71-fold higher Materials And Methods: We studied samples DNA of 145 athletes with risk of developing CDH than carriers of the other genotypes (OR TT vs. high achievement (candidates for master of sports and the master of CT+CC=1.71, 95% CI: [1.18-2.48], p=0.005). At a nominal level, the as- sports) aged 17-30 years and specialising in different sports. Control sociation was also significant with rs143383 (OR TT vs. CT+CC=1.52, group consisted of 144 healthy people who are not involved in sports. 95% CI: [1.05-2.19], p=0.026). The haplotype carrying the susceptibil- The analysis genetic polymorphism is realized by polymerase chain ity alleles of these SNPs was also more frequent in cases (65.9% vs. reaction (PCR) and RFLP- analysis. 55.9%, OR=1.53, 95% CI: [1.18; 1.98], p=0.002). This study reports, Results: Analysis of the frequencies of genotypes and alleles of genes for the first time, the association between GDF5 polymorphisms and bradykinin receptor (BDKRB) and chymase (CMA1/B) revealed no sig- CDH in Caucasians, and points out another polymorphism of inter- nificant differences between the groups studied. Analysis of the gene est that requires further investigation. Reduction in GDF5 expression renin (ren MboI) in athletes compared with the control group showed might lead to developmental deficiency of ligaments and capsule in hip a significant increase in the frequency of genotype ren +/- (76.2% joint, and therefore contribute to CDH pathogenesis. against 54.6% in the control group; P = 0.01). Thus, the renin gene (ren MboI) may be associated with the level of P08.18 The spectrum of the most common CFTR gene physical performance, but also for identifying favorable allelic variants mutacions at Kaunas medical University Hospital of genes, providing a more effective implementation of physical work, I. Poceviciene, D. Serapinas, A. Vitkauskiene, I. Nasvytiene, R. Sakalauskas; necessary further study of genetic markers. Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania. This work was partially funded by the grant of Russian State Scientific Cystic fibrosis is one of the most common autosomic recesive dis- Fond 08-04-97050. ease with a prevalance of 1:1600-1:4000 in Europe. It presents mainly with pulmonary or/and gastrointestinaly symptomas and accounts for a small portion of male infertility. 95 patients were reffered for genetic Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 20 counseling with suspition of cystic fibrosis (CF) diagnosis between (such as smoking, nutritional or metabolic factors). We use an additive 2004-2009. The spectrum of most commom mutations was tested with threshold model and derive the necessary sample sizes as a function the help of INO-LIPA CFTR 19 mutation detection kit (Innogenetics, of the external risk factor’s strength and of the sampling scheme. If Belgium). both cases and controls are sampled from the risk population, a loss Results: The CFTR gene mutations were detected in 23.16% from of power must be expected. The loss of power (i.e., increase of neces- all analyzed cases. The most commom mutation, as expected, was sary sample size) is even larger if only the cases are sampled from the F508del with a incidence of 81.82% out of all detected mutations. 3 risk population, while the inverse scheme (non-risk cases and risk con- patients were diagnosed to have CFTRdel2,3 (21kb) mutation, that trols) provides a gain of power since non-risk cases are enriched for accounts for 13.64% out of all detected. R553X mutation showed disease-favouring alleles while risk controls are enriched for protective the incidence of 4.54% (1 patient). As far as F508del is concerned, 4 alleles. For small effect sizes we derive simple approximations in ana- patients were diagnosed to be homozygotes (F508del/F508del) and lytically closed form. The principle of our analysis has some analogy 10 heterozygotes ( including one patient with detected 2 mutations : to the so-called Carter effect, i.e. the phenomenon that the probability F508del and CFTRdel2,3). One patient was heterozygote for another in a child of a multifactorial disorder with sex dimorphism for liability two mutations: R553X and CFTRdel2,3. In conclusion the spectrum of depends on the sex of the affected parent. In summary, we propose CFTR gene mutations was similar to that reported for European popu- to optimize GWAS sampling from risk populations in order to minimize lation, with especially high incidence of F508del. the necessary sample sizes. P08.19 Role of DRD4 Polymorphism in Attention-Deficit P08.22 Segregation exclusion analysis (SEGEX) efficiently Hyperactive Disorders identifies genomic regions harboring germ line mutations in A. Kocak1, E. Senol1, E. O. Aktas1, O. H. Kok1, H. Ak Celik2, H. H. Aydin2; familial disorders 1Ege University School of Medicine Department of Forensic Medicine, A. Harutyunyan1, T. Burkard1, T. Klampfl1, T. Berg1, Z. Rudzki2, A. P. C. van der Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University School of Medicine Department of Medical Maas3, A. Zimprich4, R. Skoda5, J. Colinge1, R. Kralovics1,6; Biochemistry, Izmir, Turkey. 1Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is characterized by hy- Austria, 2Department of Pathomorphology, Collegium Medicum, Jagiellonian peractivity and difficulty in sustaining attention and impulsivity. Defiant University, Kraków, Poland, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Medical Centre and various anxiety disorders, depression, learning disorders, mood Haaglanden, The Hague, Netherlands, 4Department of Neurology, Medical disorders, alcohol and drug abuse may coexist with ADHD. Previously, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 5Experimental Hematology, Department several SNPs in different genes have been effect on characteristic of of Research, Basel University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland, 6Department of ADHD. In this study, DRD4 polymorphism investigated in the persons Internal Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (n=90) whom have responsible for two and more traffic accidents. Ge- Recent advances in high-throughput microarray genotyping have fa- notyping and allelic distribution compared with control group (n=100) cilitated research in many fields of genetics, including disease gene who has no traffic accident history as driver. Adult ADHD Self-Report identification in familial disorders. We developed a simple and robust Scale (ASRS) test was performed to determine attention and/or hyper- algorithm for non-parametric linkage analysis based on SNP array activity disorders. DRD4 intronic polymorphism (rs752306) determined data. The algorithm is based on identification and exclusion of all ge- in both of the groups. No significant difference in the allelic distribution nomic regions that are not shared between affected members of the has been found between the groups. family, while remaining non-excluded regions are called. Genotype data of more than 900,000 SNPs used in the analysis were obtained P08.20 A family-based association test to detect gene-gene from Affymetrix Genome-wide SNP 6.0 arrays. The method uses only interactions in the presence of linkage affected members of the family and does not take into account mode L. De Lobel1, L. Thijs2, T. Kouznetsova2, J. Staessen2, K. Van Steen3; of inheritance or level of penetrance. We have validated the algo- 1Ugent, Ghent, Belgium, 2KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Université de Liège, rithm by analyzing three families with known disease-causing muta- Liège, Belgium. tions: one family with hereditary parkinsonism caused by mutation in For many complex diseases, quantitative traits contain more informa- LRRK2 gene, two - with hereditary thrombocythemia caused by mu- tion than dichotomous traits. One of the approaches used to analyse tations in thrombopoietin (THPO) gene. In family with parkinsonism these traits in family-based association studies is the Quantitative and one of the families with thrombocythemia the algorithm showed Transmission Disequilibrium Test (QTDT). The QTDT is a regression- single genomic region in linkage, which contained LRRK2 and THPO based approach that models simultaneously linkage and association. genes, respectively. In the other family with thrombocythemia, there It splits up the association effect in a between- and a within-family were 3 regions identified due to smaller family size, THPO located in genetic component to adjust and test for population stratification and one of them. In general we observed negative exponential correla- includes a variance components method to model linkage. tion between the total size of called genomic regions and the number We extend this approach to detect gene-gene interactions between of meioses separating all family members analyzed. Overall, SEGEX two unlinked QTLs by adjusting the definition of the between- and performs well with high density SNP genotype data, precisely defining within-family component and the variance components included in the regions containing disease-causing mutations and is a useful tool for model. To capture the influence of population stratification, we derive disease gene mapping. the bias of the estimated interaction effect and discuss the influence on type I error rates. We simulate data to investigate the influence of P08.23 Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) ATTRV30M: a the epistatis model, LD patterns between the markers and the QTLs, good model for the study of genetic modifiers for age-at-onset family structures and allele frequencies on the power and type I er- (AO) ror rates of the approach. Results show that for some of the inves- A. Sousa1,2, A. M. Silva3, L. Maia3, T. Coelho3; tigated settings, power gains are obtained in comparison with other 1ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 2IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 3Centro Hospitalar do Porto techniques (e.g. FBAT-LC/FBAT-MM). We conclude that our approach (CHP), Porto, Portugal. shows promising results for studies where too few markers are avail- Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) ATTRV30M is an autosomal able to correct for population stratification using standard methods dominant systemic amyloidosis, due to a point mutation in the trans- (e.g. EIGENSTRAT). The proposed method is applied to real-life data thyretin (TTR) gene (chr18q12.1). It was first described by Andrade in on hypertension. Northern Portugal, in 1952, as a disease beginning mainly between 25 and 35y of age. It was later shown to present a much wider vari- P08.21 Choosing GWAS subjects from risk populations ability in AO, among different clusters (Portugal: 34.7, Sweden: 56.7, K. Oexle, T. Meitinger; Majorca: 45.7), but also within the same focus. In CHP (Porto), 2331 Institute of Human Genetics, TU München, München, Germany. patients belonging to 550 different families were diagnosed from 1939 Power, i.e., sample size is a crucial issue in genome-wide association to 2008. We have previously shown that, in our series, AO varied from studies (GWAS) on disorders generated by a multitude of weak genetic 20-80yrs (mean: 37.1 in women, 32.4 in men). We also reported that effect sizes. Here, we examine the influence of sampling cases and/or 209 probands (40%) had no affected parent at the time of diagnosis, controls from populations that are subject to an external risk factor and that these had a much later AO (46.5y) than the ones belonging Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 20 to families with one affected parent (32.3y). We now studied sex dif- P08.26 Biotransformation gene polymorphisms and the risk of ferences between probands with or without an affected parent: inter- glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis estingly, while female probands with an affected parent had a later O. A. Gra1,2, M. V. Moskalenko3, I. V. Goldenkova-Pavlova1, T. V. Nasedkina2; onset (35.8y) than males (30.3), this difference was not significant for 1Vavilov Institute of General Genetics Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, probands with no affected parent (46.9 and 46.2, respectively). The Russian Federation, 2Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian most intriguing feature was the fact that this protection very often fades Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Hematology & away and next generation manifests with classical AO. Moreover, this Transfusiology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. protection seems to be lost permanently, since in our 70 years’ regis- Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis (GCOP) is the most common try, we never found classical onset parents giving origin to late-onset cause of secondary osteoporosis in long-term use of corticosteroids, offspring. A cis-acting effect, within or close to the TTR locus, may be which leads to significant morbidity and mortality. Glucocorticosteroids responsible for some variation between generations. are widely prescribed drugs, especially in the treatment of allergies, thus, the study of risk factors for GCOP in patients with bronchial asth- P08.24 Assosiation study between IL1RA gene polymorphism ma receiving long-term systemic corticosteroid therapy is an important and Febrile convulsion in iranian children problem of prevention medicine. A. Foroughmand1, A. Nozari1, A. Ahadi2, A. Khoshdel3, S. Saleheian4, H. The aim of this work was to determine the genetic component in the Bagheri4, M. Hashem Zadeh Chaleshtori3, E. Farrokhi3; GCOP etiology by the analysis of 8 candidate gene polymorphisms 1shahid chamran university, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2shahre kord together with quantitative indicators of Bone Mineral Density (BMD) university, Shahre kord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3medical university of Shahre and Z-criterion in 137 Russian patients with asthma receiving long- kord, Shahre kord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Hajar hospital, Shahre kord, term systemic corticosteroid therapy. The analysis of biotransformation Islamic Republic of Iran. gene polymorphism was performed using the low-density “Pharma- Background and aim: Fever and seizure is the one of the most reason gen-biochip”. for children registration in hospitals. Some children as their genetic At comparison of BMD indexes of proximal femur for the Z-criterion structure have less resistance to fever, as recent studeis express posi- revealed a statistically significant association of gene polymorphism tive corelation between family history for febrile convulsion (type and MTHFR 677C>T (non-parametric ANOVA Kruskal-Wallis p = 0.0013). age of onset in childrent ) and disease. So, this study was performed In addition, for the insertion-deletion polymorphism of GSTM1 also was to survey about assosiation between Inter Leukine 1 Receptor Antago- found statistically significant differences by Mann-Whitney U-test (p = nism gene, IL1RA gene polymorphism and predisposition to disease. 0.016). Interestingly, that the GSTM1 and MTHFR genes are local- Method: In this case - control study 100 febrile convulsion (FC) pa- ized on 1p chromosome (1p13.3 and 1p36.3 respectively), so we can tients that refered to pediateric department and emergency ward of suggest that the chromosome region may be involved in the GCOP Hajar hospital and also 130 healthy children were selected. The age susceptibility in Russia. average of the patients group was 3/4±1/4 years and for the control The determination of the GSTM1 and MTHFR alleles seems to be group was 3/4 ± 1/2 years. 44 cases of the patients group had a posi- important to identify group of patients with high risk for osteoporosis tive history for FC. After sampling, DNA extraction and PCR reaction among individuals receiving long-term systemic corticosteroid therapy for IL1RA gene was performed. Finally by the comparision of segments for the timely prevention of disease. size results were analysed. The work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Re- Results: The genotypes frequency of the IL1RA gene allele1 and 2 in search (project no. 08-04-12225). the patients group was 56% and 10%, and for control group was 55/4 % and 6/9% respectively. P08.27 INTERSNP: Genome-wide Interaction Analysis Guided Conclusion: Considering to P = 0/93 for allele 1 and P= 0/401 for allele by A Priori information 2, there was no significance difference between two groups. Based C. Herold1, F. F. Brockschmidt2, M. Steffens1, M. Mattheisen1, M. P. Baur1,3, T. on the chi square test, there was no correlation between IL1RA gene Becker1; polymorphism and predisposition to F.C. disease. 1Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, P08.25** Multiple Marker Methods for Analysis of Genome Wide University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3German Center for Neurodegenerative Association studies Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, Bonn, Germany. A. Kindt1,2, J. Floyd2, S. Knott2, P. Navarro1, C. Haley1,2; Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have lead to the identifi- 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, cation of hundreds of genomic regions associated with complex dis- Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2University of eases. Nevertheless, a large fraction of their heritability remains un- Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. explained. Interaction between genetic variants is one of several puta- Genome Wide Association Studies have had success at identifying the tive explanations for the ``case of missing heritability‘‘ and, therefore, genetic causes of complex trait variation, but generally explain only a a compelling next analysis step. However, genome-wide interaction small fraction of the genetic variance indicating a number of undetect- analysis (GWIA) of all pairs of SNPs from a standard marker panel ed variants. We investigated the power of different regression models is computationally unfeasible without massive parallelization. Further- to identify associations across the range of minor allele frequencies more, GWIA of all SNP triples is utopian. In order to overcome these (MAF) for the causative variant. We explored the performance of lin- computational constraints, we present a GWIA approach that selects ear regression models on simulated traits using single or multiple (3, combinations of SNPs for interaction analysis based on a priori infor- 5 or 7) adjacent genotyped markers, haplotypes consisting of 3, 5 or mation. Sources of information are statistical evidence (single marker 7 adjacent markers and single imputed markers. We analysed data association at a moderate level), genetic relevance (genomic location) from a single real chromosome of 453 unrelated individuals genotyped and biologic relevance (SNP function class and pathway information). with the Illumina’s HumanHap300 Genotyping BeadChip comprising We introduce the software package INTERSNP that implements a lo- 317,503 SNPs. We simulated 1,000 traits by omitting 100 genotyped gistic regression framework as well as log-linear models for joint analy- SNPs in each of 10 MAF classes (<0.05 to >0.45). In each dataset one sis of multiple SNPs. Automatic handling of SNP annotation and path- of the SNPs was treated as causative and set to explain 0.3 of the trait ways from the KEGG database is provided. In addition, Monte-Carlo variance. The genotyped regressions analysed 16,024 markers, while simulations to judge genome-wide significance are implemented. We 163,157 imputed markers (MACH1.0; CEU HapMap2 as reference introduce various meaningful GWIA strategies that can be conducted population) were analysed. We compared the ability of the methods using INTERSNP. to identify the simulated causative variant on the basis of the signifi- Typical examples are, for instance, the analysis of all pairs of non- cance of the association. The three-marker method using genotyped synonymous SNPs, or, the analysis of all combinations of three SNPs data performed well at MAF >0.1, but below that the haplotype meth- that lie in a common pathway and that are among the top 50,000 sin- ods supersede. The significance of analyses using imputed SNPs was gle-marker results. We demonstrate the feasibility of these and other greater than analyses using genotyped SNPs for MAF <0.2. However, GWIA strategies by application to a GWAS data set and discuss prom- the advantage was slight and has to be weighed against the 10-fold ising results. increase in the number of tests performed using the imputed data.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 207 P08.28 Haplotypes analysis of VDR gene and spinal muscular P08.30 Genetic background of Severe course of IBD atrophy disease A. Lozynska-Nelke1, I. Kubinska2, E. Czkawanianc3, P. Krokowicz1, W. M. F. Stavarachi1, P. Apostol1, M. Toma1, D. Cimponeriu1, N. Butoianu2, C. Meissner1, W. Cichy1, M. Drews1, D. Lipinski1, A. Plawski4; Iliescu2, S. Magureanu2, L. Gavrila1; 1Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Department 1University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Al. Obregia“ Clinical of Pediatrics and Gastroenterology Institute of Polish Mother’s Memorial, Lodz, Psychiatric Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. Poland, 3Department of Pediatrics and Gastroenterology Institute of Polish Aim: To investigate the relationship between VDR gene haplotypes Mother’s Memorial, Poznan, Poland, 4Institute of Human Genetics Polish and SMA disease. Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Materials and methods: Blood samples were collected from SMA pa- Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is characterized by chronic relaps- tients (n=70), and control subjects without heredo-collateral or person- ing inflammation in gastrointestinal tract. IBD is dived into two subtypes al antecedents (n=54). The homozygous deletion of SMN1 gene was Crohn disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). If it is not possible to detected in all the patients, meanwhile at least one copy was identified differentiate these IBDs the patients are diagnosed as indeterminate in the control lot. The haplotypes of VDR gene polymorphisms (FokI, colitis (IC). In our 160 severe IBD patients with average age of diagno- BsmI, ApaI, TaqI) were inferred after PCR-RFLP genotyping, using sis 26 years, the youngest patient was diagnosed when was 3 years SHEsis platform. old and the oldest one was diagnose at the age of 69. In this group Results: A significant relationship was detected in case of fbaT haplo- we investigated frequency of alleles in NOD2/CARD15 gene and 15- type which seems to confer risk for SMA type I disease only (OR=2.801, PGHD gene. The 15-PGDH gene codes dehydrogenase which is a 95%CI: 1.139 -6.887, p=0.02). Taking into account that only two SMN2 prostaglandin-degrading enzyme and acts as an antagonist to enzyme copies were found in SMA type I patients, we can speculate either a called cyclooxygenase 2. We also studied frequency of haplotype in relationship between VDR haplotypes and SMN copies number. The q31 region on 5th chromosome. We estimated frequency of alleles results suggested also the importance of performing haplotypes rather SLC22A4 1672T and SLC22A5 T207C. In studied group we observed individual marker analysis, as the single locus study detected a signifi- increased frequency of INV4+39C>T 15-PGDH homozygotes in group cant relationship only for BsmI polymorphism. of patient under 18 years old with UC (12%) in comparison to adult For the patient’s lot, we didn’t identify a strong linkage disequilibrium patients where the INV4+39C>T 15-PGDH homozygotes were not relationship regarding BsmI, ApaI, TaqI polymorphisms, as it is usually been observed. The frequency of A at position 168 in PGDH gene reported. Random sampling or recombination events that could affect were higher in patient under 18 years old (49%) than in adult patients other genomic regions than 5q11.2-13.3, might be possible explica- (34%). In NOD2 gene we observed statistically significant differences tions for our results. Regarding the control lot, the most prevalent three of frequency of P268S, R702W and 2030insC in group of patient with locus haplotypes are baT (31.4%), BAt (28.1%) and bAT (18.2%), as it severe course of IBD in comparison to unselected IBD patients and was previously reported in Caucasian population. control group The study was supported by the Polish Ministry of Sci- Conclusions: The analysis of VDR gene haplotypes should be taken ence and Higher Education projects no. 2P05A06929 into consideration in the studies regarding possible modifier factors of SMA disease. P08.31 Software for multipoint parametric linkage analysis of Study supported by grant CNCSIS-IDEI 2152/2008. quantitative traits in large pedigrees T. I. Axenovich; P08.29 Comprehensive approach to investigate the genetic Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. basis of Hereditary Hearing Loss in iranian population Parametric linkage analysis is one of the most powerful tools for map- H. Najmabadi1, C. Nishimura2, N. Meyer2, T. Yang2, N. Bazazzadegan1, Y. ping of traits with known model of inheritance. Several well-known Riazalhosseini1, G. Asaadi Tehrani1, A. Daneshi3, M. Farhadi3, S. Yahyavi3, P. programs may be used for this analysis. However these programs do Imani1, A. Anousheh1, A. Nazeri1, K. Jalalvand1, K. Jalalvand1, M. Malekpour1, not work with the large extended pedigrees from genetically isolated N. Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, S. Azimi1, F. Larti1, Z. Fattahi1, M. Babanejad1, K. human populations and great part of them cannot analyze quantitative Kahrizi1, R. Smith2; traits. Large pedigrees with thousands members are available now for 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation genetic analysis. Utilizing such pedigrees in linkage analysis is com- Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology putationally challenging. Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, IA, We developed software for multipoint parametric linkage analysis of United States, 3Research Center of Ear, Nose, Throat, and Head-Neck Surgery, quantitative traits using information about SNP genotypes. Mixed mod- Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. el of major gene and polygene inheritance is implemented in this soft- Genetic testing for deafness in Iran is well established. The popula- ware. Implementation of several algorithms to avoid computational un- tion is extremely heterogeneous, which means that to determine the derflow and decrease running time permits application of our software genetic basis of hereditary hearing loss in the Iranian population, eth- to the analysis of very large pedigrees collected in human genetically nic-specific data are required. Over that last several years, We have isolated populations. The software assigned for the multipoint para- generated and published much of these data by screening over 2000 metric linkage analysis based on both known (estimated prior to link- families segregating autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness age) model parameters and the ones estimated during the analysis. (ARNHL). All patients were screened for mutations in GJB2 and GJB6 We tested our software by performing linkage analysis of adult height in the Deafness Neurosensory Type 1 (DFNB1) locus, and if no mu- in large pedigree from Dutch isolated population. Three significant tations were identified, haplotype were reconstructed by typing three and four suggestive loci were identified with the help of our programs, short tandem repeat polymorphisms flanking 24 known ARNHL loci. whereas VC based linkage analysis, which requires the pedigree frag- In a subset of families, genome-wide linkage analysis was completed. mentation, demonstrated only three suggestive peaks. The most prevalent mutation in this gene was 35delG, although we The software package MQScore_SNP is available at http://mga.bio- identified 34 different mutations, seven of which are common. We have net.nsc.ru/soft/index.html. also identified a novel GJB2 mutation in an endogenous population with autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss (ADNSHL) in a P08.32 Multipoint linkage disequilibrium mapping with village in North of Iran. In approximately 50% of these families, we incorporation of covariates in general pedigrees have been able to establish genetic causes for deafness. About 15% Y. Chiu, C. Lee; have mutations in GJB2 followed by mutations in SLC26A4 and TEC- National Health Research Institues, Zhunan, Taiwan. TA. We have also found mutations in PJVK, TMC1and USH1C, OTOF, Complex diseases are often involved a number of genetic and en- MYOVIIA, MYO15A, COLLA2, RDX and VLGR1. Finally, we have de- vironmental factors. Incorporating the factors relevant to a complex scribed a new syndrome, a contiguous gene deletion syndrome that disease as covariates into the disequilibrium mapping can therefore involves both Deafness and Infertility Syndrome (DIS) in males. These enhance the efficiency of a disease locus estimate as well as help dis- data from the Iranian population attest to its diversity and contribute to sect the etiology of a complex disease. Previously, we developed two the current body of knowledge regarding the deafness of genetics. approaches to incorporate covariates into linkage disequilibrium map- ping in the case-parent design. The approaches, including parametric and non-parametric modeling, are robust in that no assumption about Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 20 the underlying genetic model is required, other than the assumption Our results reinforce EDNRA as a susceptibility factor for MO, although that there is no more than one disease gene in the chromosomal re- we cannot exclude the involvement of this gene in MA susceptibility in gion. In addition to the estimate of a disease locus, the magnitudes of our population. Dissecting migraine genetic susceptibility will be cru- the associations between the genetic effect at the disease locus and cial to develop better therapeutic strategies, as the risk variants im- covariates can also be assessed. plied and their effects may vary in different populations. In practice, data are often available for larger pedigrees with multiple nuclear families or general pedigrees, it would be desirable to have P08.35 Associating mitochondrial DNA variation with complex the association mapping approaches that can use all potentially in- traits formative data. In the present study, we will extend these approaches J. L. Elson1, K. Majamaa2, N. Howell3, P. F. Chinnery4; to general pedigrees to make full use of the data available, so as to 1Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United improve the efficiency of estimate for a disease locus. By making full Kingdom, 2University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 3Matrilinex LLC, CA, United use of pedigree data, one can also estimate the relative risks among States, 4Institute for Ageing and Health and Institute of Human Genetics , different relatives, which is informative for uncovering the underlying Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom. genetic model of a disease. Saxena and colleagues produced a set of SNP´s for testing asso- ciation between common mitochondrial DNA [mtDNA] variation and P08.33 Study of polymorphic variants of genes LPL (Hind III, disease; these SNP’s have continued to be used publications. De- s447X) and cEtP (tagiB) in individuals with different levels of spite concerns however that the SNP’s are not sufficiently accurate total cholesterol in the blood or comprehensive. The SNP´s where derived from publicly available L. R. Kayumova, E. R. Yakshembitova, A. I. Khaidarova, E. V. Vorobieva, V. Y. human mtDNA sequences and intended to represent diversity in Eu- Gorbunova; ropean populations. However, 101 (~8%) non-European sequences Bashkir State Pedagogical University name of M.Akmulla, Ufa, Russian were included and ~16% were from the Finnish population, where rare Federation. mtDNA clades are overrepresented. Furthermore, ~11% of the mtDNA Lipoprotein lipase gene LPL (8p22) and the gene ester transfer pro- sequences were from patients with type 2 diabetes, Alzheimer and tein cholesterol CETP (16q21) is one of the major genes involved in Parkinson disease, although many studies have hunted for associa- the regulation of lipid metabolism. Studied polymorphic variants of the tion of these diseases with mtDNA SNP’s. HindIII, S447X LPL gene and TagIB gene CETP, as well as an analysis The SNP’s derived from the above data reliably detect some common of associations studied polymorphic variants of the level of total cho- haplogroup-defining polymorphisms and thus some haplogroups but lesterol (TC) of human blood plasma. not others. The SNP´s included many homoplasies, i.e. changes that Material for the study included DNA samples from 380 healthy indi- have occurred more than once on the phylogeny. The majority of es- viduals. Determining the level of cholesterol carried by standard en- tablished mtDNA haplotypes are defined by a combination of SNP´s. zymatic methods. Analysis of DNA polymorphic loci of LPL and CETP Some haplogroups are tagged by a single homoplasy using the Saxena performed by PCR-RFLP. SNP´s; by definition a single homoplasy cannot reliably “tag” a single Results: In the group of persons with high cholesterol showed sig- mtDNA haplotype. Of the SNP´s identified by Saxena et al. 53% were nificantly significant increase in the genotype LPL (Hind III) H+/H+ in homoplasies associated with two or more haplogroups. In short, math- blood (39.19% versus 25.61% in the group of individuals with indica- matically sound methodology was applied but the data was flawed and tors of cholesterol in normal, P=0,031), and also showed a trend to in- failing to apply knowledge about the evolution of mtDNA resulted in the creased CETP genotype B1/B1 (34% vs. 25%, respectively, P=0.070). production of SNP’s not well suited to the purpose. Careful selection Revealed a statistically significant increase of genotypes in the study of SNP´s using knowledge of evolution and biochemical effect will be of polymorphic variations in a group of persons with high levels of cho- needed to progress. lesterol (a variant of H+H+/SS/B1B1, P=0.04). Conclusions: We found that polymorphic markers Tag IB in the gene P08.36 Skew in the human caveolin 1 gene upstream purine ester transfer protein CETP cholesterol and Hind III in the lipoprotein complex homozygote haplotype compartment in multiple lipase gene LPL associated with the level of cholesterol in the blood, sclerosis and the genotype of CETP B1/B1 and LPL genotype H+/H+ are mark- M. Zarif Yeganeh1, M. Ghaffarpour2, D. Farhud3, M. Karimlou4, M. Ghabaee2, ers of high levels of cholesterol in human blood. A. Haghighi Nazari2, H. Najmabadi1, M. Ohadi1; This work was partially funded grant from the Ministry of Education of 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Russia „Thematic Plan 2008-2010“. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian Center of Neurological Research, Imam Khomeini Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, P08.34 A variant in EDNRA is associated with migraine without Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Clinic, Tehran, Islamic Republic aura in a group of Portuguese patients of Iran, 4Department of Biostatistics, University of Social Welfare and C. Lemos1, J. L. Neto2, J. Pereira-Monteiro3, D. Mendonça4, J. Barros3, J. Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Sequeiros2, I. Alonso1, A. Sousa2; Caveolin 1 (CAV1) is a component of the myelin sheath and the ex- 1IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2IBMC and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 3Serviço de pression of the gene encoding this protein is increased during myelina- Neurologia, HSA and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 4ICBAS and Instituto de Saúde tion in Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes. We sought to investigate Pública, Porto, Portugal. the homozygote haplotype compartment in a recently identified poly- Migraine is a common disabling primary headache, leading to a di- morphic purine complex at the upstream region of the human CAV1 minished quality of life in migraineurs and their relatives. Anomalies of gene in multiple sclerosis (MS). In a case/control study design, the vascular function, with dilatation of cerebral blood vessels and release region was characterized in 126 cases of MS diagnosed based on of vasoactive neuropeptides have been implied in its pathophysiology. the Revised McDonald diagnostic criteria, and 460 controls. We re- Endothelin type A receptor (EDNRA) mediates the biological effects of port a skew in the homozygote haplotype compartment in the cases endothelin-1 (ET-1), leading to vasoconstriction. Our aim was to as- versus controls both in a qualitative and quantitative respect. Excess sess the involvement EDNRA in susceptibility to migraine in a sample homozygosity for haplotypes was observed in the MS cases (cor- of Portuguese migraineurs, by a case-control study. rected p<0.012, OR=2.54, CI 1.14-5.64). Furthermore, we observed Three tagging SNPs (rs702757, rs5333 and rs5335) were analyzed eight homozygote haplotypes in the MS cases that were non-existent in 188 cases - 111 without (MO) and 77 with aura (MA) - and 287 in the controls (p<0.0003, OR=20.27, CI 2.50-163.8). For the first time, controls. A multivariable logistic regression included the three SNPs, our data highlight the CAV1 upstream purine complex as a novel sus- adjusted for gender. Allelic and haplotypic frequencies were compared ceptibility genomic locus in the pathophysiology of MS. Of utmost im- between cases and controls. portance, the region has been conserved across species, including We found a borderline increased risk for the rs702757 T-allele mouse, guinea pig, rhesus macaque, and human. The functional effect (OR=1.44, 95% CI:1.05-1.99) and for the TT genotype (OR=2.34, 95% of this region remains to be clarified in the future studies. CI: 1.12-4.90) for MO. A trend towards an increased risk for MA regard- ing the C-allele of rs5333 was also found. The T-C-G haplotype was found to be significantly overrepresented in the MO subgroup.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 20 P08.37 MMP  sequence variants and serum level correlations that mutations in 79 loci and 28 genes are associated with DFNB. Mu- in Myocardial Infarction tations in OTOF gene are a cause of neurosensory non-syndromic S. H. Rani1, M. K. Spurthi1, R. G. Kumar1, S. S. Kumar2, N. Pratibha1; recessive deafness, DFNB9. OTOF gene contains 48 exons which 1Dept of Genetics &Biotechnology,Osmania University, HYDERABAD, India, encodes a transmembrane protein, otoferlin. Several mutations in this 2Dept of Cardiology,Durga Bai Deshmukh Hospital and Research Centre, gene have been found in Lebanese, Pakistani, Turkish, Colombian HYDERABAD, India. and Spanish families. Recently we observed an Iranian ARNHL family Background: Myocardial Infarction (MI) is a common, multifactorial which showed linkage to otof gene. Mutation detection of this gene disorder and studies have revealed a 5 to 7 fold increased risk to MI revealed a missense mutation in exon 27, so we decided to screen our associated death in first degree relatives of the probands. To date a population for this gene. large number of genes are implicated in MI of which Matrix metallopro- Ninty one ARNHL families with two or more affected individuals origi- teinases (MMPs) represents a potential candidate gene system in the nated from different ethnic groups of Iran were selected for this study. cardiac remodeling and Heart Failure. All the families were subjected to homozygosity mapping using flank- Objective: The present study aims to ascertain the association be- ing STR markers of OTOF gene. After screening all the families, no tween potentially functional variants of the MMP-9 gene promoter and linkage was established. So in comparison with other countries such correlate the same to the serum levels of MMP-9 in the susceptibility as our neighboring country, Pakistan, OTOF mutations are very rare to myocardial infarction and to identify the asymptomatic first degree in Iran. relatives at risk to MI on family screening. Methods: The study comprises 150 individuals which include 50 cases P08.40 Common polymorphism in Per3 gene, dietary of angiograpically recorded MI, 50 first degree relatives of the patients composition and time structure of energy intake in the central- and 50 age and sex matched healthy controls. Genotyping of MMP 9 is European caucasian population based on PCR-RFLP using restriction enzyme sph1 and serum levels J. Stastny1, J. Bienertova-Vasku1, P. Bienert1, J. Lipkova1, Z. Piskackova2, Z. were estimated by ELISA using commercial antibody. Brazdova2, A. Vasku1; Results & Conclusions: The frequencies of the MMP 9 genotype were 1Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk significantly varied among the three groups of study and the levels University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Preventive Medicine, Faculty seem to be correlated with specific genotypes. Hence it is suggested of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. that MMP-9 plays an important role in the onset and prognosis of myo- Introduction: Recent studies have demonstrated a tight relationship cardial infarction and helps in the diagnosis of asymptomatic and pre between circadian rhythmicity and the development of obesity and its symptomatic individuals in screening. related traits. In this study, we investigated possible associations of the VNTR polymorphism in the Per3 gene with obesity-related anthropo- P08.38 A stochastic model for DNA instability in the inherited metric traits and behavioral patterns. neuromuscular disease myotonic dystrophy Methods: The total of 330 volunteers of various BMI and age distribu- C. F. Higham, C. Cobbold, D. T. Haydon, D. G. Monckton; tion originating from the Czech Caucasian population were enrolled University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. in this study in order to evaluate the relationship of VNTR Per3 with Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is caused by inheriting an expanded anthropometric parameters related to obesity and dietary composition unstable DNA CTG repeat. Generally, an increase between genera- and time patterns of food intake (based on 7-day native food records). tions causes a decreasing age of onset, whilst an increase in the num- The allele-specific PCR-based method was used to determine the ber of repeats throughout the lifetime of a patient contributes toward VNTR Per3 genotypes. the progressive nature of the symptoms. We are interested in model- Results: No differences were observed in genotype or allele frequen- ling mathematically the evolution of repeat length through the lifetime cies between the obese cases (BMI≥30) and the non-obese individ- of patients as this has potential for improving prognostic information as uals (BMI<30) (pg = 0.92; pa = 0.86). The VNTR Per3 was further well as providing a deeper understanding of the underlying biological associated with the energy value of lunch on average working day process. (p < 0.02). When analyzing the dietary composition, the VNTR Per3 Diagnosis of DM1 is usually confirmed by establishing CTG repeat polymorphism was associated with the total daily energy derived from length but the interpretation of this length is compromised by not know- carbohydrates (p < 0.01) and fat (p < 0.02) , whereas the 55 homozy- ing the inherited allele length and levels of DNA instability which vary gotes expressed the highest daily intake of carbohydrates and fat, re- among individuals due to environmental and genetic factors. spectively. No association with aberrant behavioral patterns - extreme Quantitative data, collected from small pool PCR analysis of allele snacking or extreme portion sizes was observed. length in blood cells from DM1 patients reveals the variation within and Discussion: This is the first study to investigate the relationship be- between. This rich source of data opens up the possibility of model- tween VNTR polymorphism in Per3 gene and behavioral patterns of ling with a stochastic process. By calibrating a new continuous-time, the food intake in humans; VNTR seems to influence rather the quali- discrete-state stochastic model to this data, we infer the unknown in- tative dietary structure than the time patterns of food intake. herited allele length for each patient and quantify the mutational force which has led to their observed distribution of alleles. P08.41 Association study between G-protein-coupled receptor We show that these quantitative traits improve prognostic information kinase 5 gene and Parkinson’s disease for age of onset and could be used as biomarkers to identify trans-act- P. Tarantino1,2, E. V. De Marco1, F. E. Rocca1, F. Annesi1, D. Civitelli1, G. ing genetic, epigenetic or environmental effects. We conjecture that Provenzano1,2, V. Scornaienchi1, V. Greco1, A. Gambardella1,3, A. Quattrone1,3, these trans-acting genetic modifiers also apply in the general popula- G. Annesi1; tion where they will affect ageing, cancer, inherited disease and human 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Csenza), Italy, 2Department of genetic variation. Neuroscience, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. P08.39 OTOF (DFNB9) mutations are very rare in autosomal The major component of Lewy Bodies, the pathological hallmark of recessive Non-syndromic Hearing Loss in iranian population Parkinson’s disease is α-synuclein, most prominently phosphorylated N. -. Bazazzadegan1, N. Meyer2, K. Kahrizi1, M. Babanejad1, K. Jalalvand1, N. at serine 129. It is not clear which is exactly the contribution of mem- Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, R. Smith2, H. Najmabadi1; bers of G-protein-coupled receptor kinase family (GRKs). However, it 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social and Rehabilitation Sciences, has been shown that the GRK5 phosphorylates Ser 129 in vitro and Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research enhances α-synuclein toxicity. Moreover, a genetic association study Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University performed in an Japanese population revealed haplotypic associa- of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. tion of the GRK5 gene with susceptibility to sporadic PD. We aimed Hearing impairment is the most common genetic sensory defect in hu- at investigating whether four polymorphisms within the GRK5 gene mans worldwide. It is estimated that profound hearing loss occurs in (rs871196, rs2420616, rs7069375, rs4752293) could represent a risk 4 out of every 10,000 children. About 70% of hereditary SNHL is non- factor for sporadic PD in Southern Italy. We genotyped 446 patients syndromic (DFN) and at least 80% of these cases have autosomal with PD and 450 controls for these markers and we did not find any recessive (DFNB) inheritance . To date, genetic studies have shown significant association with the disease at allelic, genotypic and hap-Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 210 lotypic level. Our results indicate that the GRK5 gene does not confer response. Nevertheless, cost-effectiveness should be further analyzed risk to sporadic PD in our sample from southern Italy. before its implementation in clinical practice. P08.42 Per3 VNTR polymorphism and chronic heart failure P08.44 Search of associations of IL12A, IL12B, IL12RB1 J. Lipkova1, J. Bienertova-Vasku1, J. Stastny1, P. Bienert1, M. Hlavna1, L. polymorphisms with tuberculosis, bronchial asthma and Spinarova2, A. Vasku1; ischemic heart disease 1Department of pathological physiology, Faculty of medicine, Masaryk N. P. Babushkina, M. V. Golubenko, A. N. Kucher; university, Brno, Czech Republic, 21st Clinic of Cardioangiology, St Ann´s Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Masaryk University affiliated Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. Polymorphisms in IL12A (rs568408), IL12B (rs32122 and rs321227), Introduction: The human homologue of Drosophila clock gene PERI- IL12RB1 (rs3746190 and rs11575926) were studied in the population OD3 (PER3) gene has been recently demonstrated to affect circadian sample (Russians, Tomsk) and in three samples of patients collected expression of various proteins in variety of tissues including heart. Al- in the same population: (1) ischemic heart disease combined with hy- terations in the circadian patterns of variety of circulatory functions are pertension, (2) tuberculosis, (3) bronchial asthma. For the study, DNA frequently observed in cardiovascular diseases. No studies of Per3 collections of the Institute of Medical Genetics were used. For all SNPs, gene on chronic heart failure (CHF) patients have been conducted no deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was detected. Compari- so far, therefore the aim of the study was to investigate the effect of son of patient groups with population sample revealed an association variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism in the coding of IL12A (rs568408, allele G and genotype GG) with bronchial asthma. region of the circadian clock Per3 gene on CHF. For allele G carriers, OR=1.65 (I=1.01-2.7; χ2=4.01 (p<0.05)). For gen- Methods: This case-control study comprised a total of 371 patients of otype GG, OR=2,00 (I=1.12-3,58; χ2=5,56 (p<0.05)). Comparison of Caucasian origin with chronic heart failure (functional classes NYHA different patients groups has shown differences in genotypes frequen- II-IV, ejection fraction (EF) < 40%) and 332 healthy controls of similar cies in the same locus between asthma group and ischemic heart dis- age and gender distribution. The study subjects were genotyped for ease (χ2=6,65, p<0.05), as well as between asthma and tuberculosis Per3 VNTR polymorphism using an allele-specific PCR-based meth- (χ2=8,006, p<0.05). There were no significant associations for individ- odology. ual SNPs in IL12RB1 gene, but the genotypes combinations were dif- Results: No significant differences in genotype or allele frequencies of ferent in cases and controls. In particular, we found that combination of Per3 VNTR were observed when comparing CHF cases and control genotype CC rs3746190 with AG rs11575926 in IL12RB1 is protective (pg = 0.30, pa = 0.52); moreover, no significant differences were ob- for all three diseases studied: for ischemic disease (OR=0,08 (l=0,00- served when comparing CHF cases according to their etiology (pg = 0,62; χ2 = 7,32 (p<0.05)), tuberculosis (OR=0,10 (I=0,01-0,54; χ2=9,37 0.87, pa = 0.91). In the multivariate regression modeling, no predictive (p<0.005)), and asthma (OR=0,23 (I=0,05-0,97; χ2=4,04 (p<0.05)). function of VNTR Per3 polymorphism on ejection fraction or NYHA So, we have shown involvement of SNPs in IL12A (rs568408) and class, hyperlipidaemia or type II diabetes risk was observed. IL12RB1 (rs3746190 combined with rs11575926) into pathological Discussion: Based on the results of the presented study, we do not phenotype in different diseases. consider the Per3 VNTR polymorphism a major risk factor for chronic heart failure or a factor modulating severity of the CHF in the investi- P08.45 The effect of peroxisome proliferator - activated gated Caucasian population. receptors polymorphisms on the physical performance of Lithuanian athletes P08.43 Evaluating the PHARMAchiptm array: Pharmacogenetic V. Ginevičienė1,2, L. Tubelis2, V. Kučinskas1; profile assessment in Spanish control population. 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Lithuanian R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, B. Almoguera1,2, B. Gomez-Dominguez1,2, C. Villaverde- Olympic Sports Center, Vilnius, Lithuania. Montero1,2, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, R. Lopez-Rodriguez3,4, M. Roman3,4, P. Variation in genes involved in lipid, glucose metabolism and energy Dorado5, A. Llerena5, F. Abad-Santos3,4, C. Ayuso1,2; homeostasis is expected to have a role in the physical performance. 1Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS-FJD), Although the polymorphisms of PPARA intron 7 G/C (rs4253778) and CAIBER Unit, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en PPARG Pro12Ala (rs1801282) have been suggested to influence Red (CIBER) de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Clinical variation in skeletal muscle function, data has been conflicting. We Pharmacology Department, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, CAIBER have investigated the genotype and allele distribution of PPARA and Unit, Madrid, Spain, 4Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red (CIBER): PPARG polymorphisms in Lithuanian athletes (N=193) and controls Enfermedades Hepaticas y Digestivas, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 5CICAB, Clinical (N=250). The athletes were stratified into three groups: endurance Research Centre, Extremadura University Hospital and Medical School, (N=77), power (N=51) and mixed (N=65). There were 43 ‘elite’, 52 Badajoz, Spain. ‘sub-elite’, 98 ‘non-elite’ athletes. Genotyping was performed by PCR- Objectives: 1) To determine the analytical and clinical validity of PHAR- RFLP. The results of the present study imply that the PPARA C allele MAchip array before its routine use in clinical practice; 2) To investi- is more common in the athlete group than in the general population of gate the frequencies of important allelic variants in 36 genes involved Lithuania (G/C 77.5/22.5% vs G/C 82.8/17.2%, P=0.046). Genotype in pharmacogenetics in Spanish control population. frequency did not differ between all athletes and controls, but differed Methods: 437 unrelated Spanish controls that were genotyped using significantly between the ‘elite‘ athlete group and the controls (GG/ the PHARMAchip. Analytical validity was determined for CYP2D6 and GC/CC: 51.2/37.2/11.6% vs 69.2/27.2/3.6%; P = 0.018). Moreover, SLC6A4 genes and results obtained by the array were compared to the frequency of CC genotype was higher in elite athletes (11.6%) PCR-based methods. Clinical validity was also determined for CY- than sub-elite (7.7%) and non-elite (2%) athletes. No significant dif- P2D6. Allelic frequencies were calculated and statistically analysed. ferences between the athletes and controls were found according to Results: Sensitivity (S) and specificity (SP) values of the array ranged the allele and genotype frequencies of the PPARG polymorphism. The from 98-100% for CYP2D6 alleles. For SLC6A4, S and SP were of present findings suggest that there is an association between PPARA 96.5 % and 97.9%, respectively. For the diagnosis of poor metabolizer G/C polymorphism and physical performance in Lithuanian athletes. status, S was 87.5% and SP 98.6%. For ultra-rapid metabolizer status, Conversely, the importance of PPARG polymorphism in athletic per- both values were 100%. All genes were in Hardy-Weinberg equilib- formance is not straightforward and can be masked by other genetic rium, with the exception of ADRB2. In terms of metabolizers status, the and non-genetic factors as no association was found with athletic suc- percentages of poor, intermediate, extensive and ultrarapid metaboliz- cess. ers were similar to those described in other Caucasian populations. Conclusions: To best of our knowledge, this population-based study P08.46 A Common Polymorphism in the Cannabinoid Receptor shows for the first time the allelic distribution of 90 pharmacogenetic 1 (cNR1) Gene is Associated with Pre-eclampsia in the central- variants among Spanish population. The availability of this genetic in- European caucasian Population formation, and the functional significance of these polymorphisms af- J. A. Bienertova Vasku1, P. Bienert1, Z. Dostalova2, J. Chovanec1, A. Vasku1; fecting drug metabolism, should facilitate their application to pharma- 1Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk cogenetic profiling. PHARMAchip is an accurate, rapid and updatable University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Oncogynecology, Masaryk tool for assessing an individual’s genetic background in relation to drug Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 211 Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. P08.48 The PTPN22 Gene Influences Genetic Predisposition to Introduction: Endocannabinoids have been recently suggested to Ulcerative colitis and crohn’s Disease. play a fundamental role in early placental development. The aim of L. M. DIAZ-GALLO1, M. Gómez-García2, C. Cardeña3, L. Rodrigo4, A. Nieto5, the study was to investigate associations of three SNPs in the endo- G. Alcain6, I. Cueto6, M. López-Nevot2, N. Festen EAM7, R. Roberts8, A. cannnabinoid type I receptor gene (CNR1) (rs1049353, rs12720071 Zhernakova9, B. Z. Alizadeh10, J. Martin1; and rs806368) and their haplotypes with pre-eclampsia, a severe 1Instituto de Biomedicina y Parasitología López Neyra, Armilla Granada, Spain, pregnancy-associated condition characterized by abnormal develop- 2Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain, 3Hospital Clínico ment and remodeling of spiral decidual arteries. San Cecilio, Granada, Spain, 4Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Methods: The case-control study comprised a total of 115 pre-eclamp- Oviedo, Spain, 5Hospital Puerta del Mar, Cadiz, Spain, 6Hospital Virgen de la tic women and 145 healthy pregnant controls, all originating from the Victoria, Málaga, Spain, 7University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Czech Caucasian population. Using PCR-based methods, we tested Netherlands, 8Department of Pathology University of Otago, Otago, New rs1049353, rs12720071 and rs806368 in CNR1 gene and haplotypes Zealand, 9Universitair Medish Centrum Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 10Unit of were constructed. Genetic Epidemiology & Bioinformatics University Medical Center Groningen, Results: Significant difference in genotype distributions of rs806368 (p Groningen, Netherlands. < 10^-5) was observed when comparing the cases and the controls; The PTPN22 gene, encoding the lymphoid_tyrosine_phosphatase- the cases presenting with significantly higher proportion of heterozy- LYP, is an important risk factor for human autoimmunity. Recently a gotes. In the regression modeling, the rs806368 served as a predic- novel polymorphism (R263Q;rs33996649) within the catalytic do- tor for pre-eclampsia development (beta = 0.15; p = 0.04). Haplotype main of LYP has been associated with reduced risk of SLE. And the analysis revealed presence of 4 common haplotypes; the AAC hap- R620W;rs2476601 LYP variant is a risk factor of several autoimmune lotype being less frequent in pre-eclamptic cases compared to the diseases. Based on this, we evaluated the role of both polymorphisms controls (p < 0.008), whereas the prediction role of AAC haplotype for in ulcerative colitis (UC) and Cohn’s disease (CD). pre-eclampsia onset (beta = -0.18; p = 0.03) was confirmed further by A total of 2176 CD patients, 1764 UC patients and 2950 healthy con- analysis of regression model. None of investigated polymorphisms or trols, from an initial case-control set of Spanish Caucasian ancestry haplotypes was associated with IUGR development. and two independent cohorts of European-ancestry (Dutch and New Discussion: This is the first study focusing on relationship between Zealand) were included in the study. Genotyping was performed us- SNPs in CNR1 gene and pre-eclampsia risk. Although limited by a ing TaqMan® allelic discrimination assay for the rs33996649 and relatively small sample size, the study clearly indicates that rs806368 rs2476601 polymorphisms in the PTPN22 gene. Meta-analysis was in the CNR1 gene may act as attractive susceptibility marker for pre- performed to test the overall effect of each polymorphism in UC and eclampsia in humans. CD (Including for the R620W: 5305UC, 7081CD, 9502 healthy controls and for R263Q: 2085UC, 2434CD, 3102 healthy controls). P08.47 Novel IL1RA gene mutation and haplotype block We found that the R263Q PTPN22 polymorphism is significantly as- structure of the OSMR mutation region in familial primary sociated with UC in the Spanish population (P=0.017,OR=0.64,95%C cutaneous amyloidosis I=0.43-0.94) and the meta-analysis confirmed this association (P=0.0 M. Lin1,2, D. Lee3,4, T. Liu5, Y. Lin6, Y. Liu5, K. Arita7, Y. Chang4,3, J. A. McGrath8, 07pooled,OR=0.69,95%CI=0.52-0.90). Although, the R263Q polymor- S. Tsai9,6; phism is not significant associated to CD (P=0.29pooled,OR=1.13,95 1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, %CI=0.89-1.43), we found through the meta-analysis, that the C allele 2Department of Medical Research & Education, Taipei Veterans General of the R620W PTPN22 variant is a risk factor to develop CD (P=0.000 Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Department of Dermatology, Taipei Veterans General 1pooled,OR=1.29,95%CI=1.13-1.46) but is not for UC (P=0.08pooled, Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, OR=1.09,95% CI=0.95-1.25) in the Caucasian population. National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Genome Research Center, Our data suggest that the A allele of the R263QPTPN22 polymorphism National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 6Department of Life Sciences reduced the risk of UC. While, the C allele of the R620WPTPN22 poly- and Institute of Genome Sciences, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, morphism is a risk factor to CD. Taiwan, 7Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan, 8St John‘s Institute of Dermatology, Division of Genetics P08.49 Development of real-time PCR assay and comparison and Molecular Medicine, The Guy‘s, King‘s College and St Thomas‘ School with RFLP genotyping of 49A/G ctLA-4 of Medicine, London, United Kingdom, 9Division of Molecular and Genomic A. Bicek1, A. Fratnik Steyer2, M. J. Mandelc Mazaj3, T. Pajic3; Medicine, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan. 1University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Department of Nuclear Medicine, Primary cutaneous amyloidosis (PCA) is an itchy skin disorder as- Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2University of Ljubljana, Veterinary Faculty, Institute for sociated with amyloid deposits in the superficial dermis. The disease microbiology and parasitology, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3University Medical Centre is commonly found in Southeast Asia and South America. Autosomal Ljubljana, Department of Haematology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. dominant PCA has been mapped previously to 5p13.1-q11.2 and 2 The cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) has a role in control- pathogenic missense mutations in the OSMR gene, which encodes ling immune response delivering a negative signal to T-cell activation. the interleukin-6 family cytokine receptor oncostatin M receptor beta A single nucleotide polymorphism at position 49 in the exon 1 of the (OSMRβ), were reported. We investigated 29 Taiwanese pedigrees CTLA-4 gene (49A/G) has been associated with several autoimmune with PCA and previously reported 10 had heterozygous missense mu- diseases. In order to analyze the 49A/G polymorphism a conventional tations in OSMR: p.D647V (1 family), p.P694L (6 families), and p.K697T polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by the restriction fragment (3 families). The mutation p.P694L was found to be associated with the length polymorphism method (RFLP) has been described. Although same haplotype in 5 of 6 families with PCA. Of the other 19 pedigrees RFLP has widely been accepted as suitable method, more automated that lacked OSMR pathology, 8 mapped to the same locus on chromo- and faster genotyping method might be needed for routine use and some 5, which also contains the genes for 3 other interleukin-6 family population studies. In our previously described study the genotyping cytokine receptors, including interleukin-31 receptor A (IL31RA), which of 49A/G polymorphism by RFLP using BseXI enzyme was carried can form a heterodimeric receptor with OSMRβ through interleukin-31 out. Here are reported data on the design of primers and MGB-probes signaling. In one family, we identified a point mutation in the IL31RA used in the real-time PCR assay to detect the 49A/G polymorphism. A gene, c.1562C>T, that results in a missense mutation, p.S521F, which comparison of the used RFLP and the new real-time PCR assay has is also sited within a fibronectin type III-like repeat domain as observed been done on 45 samples. Four results were found to be discordant in the OSMR mutations. PCA is a genetically heterogeneous disorder between the two methods. Three samples defined as heterozygotes but our study shows that it can be caused by mutations in 2 biologi- (AG) by the RFLP method were identified as mutant homozygotes cally associated cytokine receptor genes located on chromosome 5. (GG) using the real-time PCR assay. In one case RFLP-defined wild The identification of OSMR and IL31RA gene pathology provides an type homozygote (AA) was identified as heterozygote. Cause of these explanation of the high prevalence of PCA in Taiwan and new insight discordant results could be incomplete enzyme restriction in RFLP into disease pathophysiology. which is avoided in real-time PCR assay. In addition, using real-time PCR method a possible cross-contamination is minimized. Therefore, it could be concluded that the developed real-time PCR assay gives Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 212 more accurate results than RFLP and is more appropriate for 49A/G AA540 B-carriers540 p540 AA360 B-carriers360 p360 CTLA-4 genotyping. SNP_1 30.5% 15% 8.8*10-5 25.7% 15.5% 0.02 SNP_2 25% 18.1% 0.102 24.9% 12.9% 0.011 P08.50 Identification of a novel locus for autosomal dominant A-alelle540 B-alelle540 p540 A-alelle360 B-allele360 p360 Bootstrap Restless Legs syndrome in an irish Pedigree SNP_1 25.8% 14.7% 0.0002 23.1% 14.6% 0.0136 964/1000 E. B. Skehan, M. M. Abdulrahim, N. A. Parfrey, C. K. Hand; SNP_2 23.9% 17.3% 0.074 23% 11.5% 0.004 722/1000 University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. Introduction: Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS) is a common neurologi- P08.52 -1082A genetic variant of interleukin-10 gene promoter cal sleep-related disorder, which affects 5-10% of the general popula- linked to schizophrenia in a spanish schizophrenic population tion. The disorder is characterised by an irresistible urge to move the B. Almoguera1,2, R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, R. Lopez-Rodriguez3,4, M. Roman3,4, J. lower limbs associated with unpleasant sensations. Symptoms pres- Lopez-Castroman5, P. Dorado6, J. Fernandez-Piqueras7, E. Baca5, A. Llerena6, ent while at rest, generally in the evening, and are relieved, at least F. Abad-Santos3,4, C. Ayuso1,2; partially and temporarily, by movement. The condition is predominantly 1Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS-FJD), an autosomal dominant disorder. Molecular genetic approaches have CAIBER Unit, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en identified six distinct genomic regions. No specific gene within these Red (CIBER) de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Clinical loci has been reported thus far. Association mapping has highlighted a Pharmacology Department, CAIBER Unit, Hospital Universitario de la further five areas of interest. Princesa, Madrid, Spain, 4Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red (CIBER): Aim: The goal of this research was to map and identify the gene re- Enfermedades Hepaticas y Digestivas, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 5Psychiatrics sponsible for the syndrome in a newly identified autosomal dominant Department, IIS-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz. CIBERSAM, Madrid, Spain, 6CICAB, Irish RLS family (RLS3002). Clinical Research Centre, Extremadura University Hospital and Medical School, Method: Eighteen members of the RLS3002 family participated in the Badajoz, Spain, 7Genetics Department, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, study; eleven affected and seven unaffected members. All known RLS Madrid, Spain. loci and associated regions were examined for linkage. A genome wide Introduction: Schizophrenia aetiology is predominantly genetic with up linkage analysis scan was then conducted. to 80% heritability presumably caused by the interaction of a cluster of Result: Linkage was excluded from all published RLS loci. The ge- genes, each contributing with small increase in the global risk. Massive nome-wide scan identified a region of linkage with a maximum LOD information is emerging from association studies that give rise to mul- score of 3.59, at a theta value of 0. A genetic region which corresponds tiple candidate genes no consistently replicated. The aim of this study to 2.5 Mb was defined by haplotype analysis. A number of candidate is to analyze the relationship of variants in genes previously linked genes have been identified and are the subject of further study. to schizophrenia, namely SLC6A4, HTR2A, DRD3, COMT, GRIN2B, Conclusion: We have successfully identified a novel locus for auto- TNFα and IL-10. somal dominant Restless Legs Syndrome, which will enable us to at- Subjects and methods: 261 unrelated schizophrenic patients and 437 tempt to identify the causative gene in this family. controls were genotyped for the genetic variants selected, through PHARMAChip, a Pharmacogenetic tool with polymorphisms involved P08.51 Pharmacogenetics of stroke (Geno-tPA study): genetic in the therapeutic outcome. Pearson’s χ2 test, Bonferroni correction and background predicts hemorrhagic transformation after Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium were used to assess genetic association. thrombolytic therapy in ischemic stroke Results: IL-10 -1082A allele and A/A genotype were significantly in- A. del Río-Espínola1, I. Fernández-Cadenas1, D. Giralt1, M. Gutiérrez2, M. creased in schizophrenic patients compared to controls (χ2=7.75; Quintana3, M. Mendióroz1, S. Domingues-Montanari1, M. Ribó3, J. Serena4, V. p=0.005 and χ2=11.57; p=0.0007 respectively). IL-10 genotypes did Obach5, J. Martí6, M. Freijo7, J. Montaner1; not deviate from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. 1Neurovascular Resarch Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain, 2Biochemistry Discussion: Three single nucleotide polymorphisms have been de- Department. Vall d‘Hebrón Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 3Neurology Department. scribed in the promoter of the IL-10 gene, which define three hap- Vall d‘Hebrón Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Josep Trueta, Girona, lotypes in Caucasian populations. These haplotypes are known to Spain, 5Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 6Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant influence IL-10 production with high, intermediate and low producing Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 7Hospital de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain. haplotypes. High producing allele -1082G and haplotype have been Background: t-PA is the unique treatment for acute ischemic stroke linked to schizophrenia. We found the low producing allele -1082A as- management. Despite its global beneficial effect, 20-30% of t-PA treat- sociated to schizophrenia. Thus, haplotype distribution investigation is ed patients suffer hemorrhagic transformations (HT). needed to elucidate the role of interleukin 10 in schizophrenia. Insuf- Methods: Two cohorts of 540 and 360 stroke t-PA treated subjects ficient sample size or exclusion of causative role could be the explana- were analyzed. 162 SNP were genotyped in both cohorts using SN- tion for the lack of association found in the remaining genes Plex technology. Results robustness was assessed by bootstrap analysis. Baseline protein and mRNA levels of associated genes were P08.53 Association of G72/G30 polymorphisms with determined in 140 individuals. Finally, a predictive model was gener- schizophrenia in the populations from Bashkortostan (Russia). ated with clinical and genetic data. A. Zainullina, A. Kazantseva, T. Noskova, A. Gareeva, E. Khusnutdinova; Results: 9 SNP were independently associated with HT appearance Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian in the first 540-cohort. One of them, located in a gene related to blood Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. brain barrier permeability, resisted Bonferroni correction and was vali- Recently, the nested genes G72 and G30 on chromosome 13q32-q33 dated in the replication cohort using either dominant model or addi- have been implicated in the etiology of schizophrenia. We hypothesized tive model [Table 1]. Furthermore, it was consistently associated in that polymorphic changes in this gene region might be associated with bootstrap analysis. This variant correlated with plasmatic protein levels schizophrenia in populations from Bashkortostan (Russia). We investigat- (p=0.016) but not with baseline mRNA levels (p=0.669). Another SNP ed four SNPs (rs2391191, rs3918342, rs978714 and rs1341402) in 351 was associated in bootstrap analysis, which was in the threshold of patients (131 Russians, 112 Tatars and 108 Bashkirs) with schizophrenia significance [Table 1]. This SNP influenced protein activity (p=0.004) and 423 control subjects (115 Russians, 168 Tatars and 140 Bashkirs). and was associated with intrahospitalary death (p900= 0.00048). Case-control comparisons were based on association analysis, linkage The predictive model allowed us to predict HT up to 50% occurrence disequilibrium (LD) and haplotype frequency estimations. The T/T geno- with higher predictive capacity than clinical data alone. type (rs3918342) associated with an increased risk (OR = 1,87; CI 95% Conclusion: genetic background is underlying HT appearance after 1,08 - 3,24) of schizophrenia in Russians patients. Maximum likelihood thrombolytic therapy and might be a useful tool to predict hemorrhagic analysis of haplotype distribution demonstrated the presence of a link- complications in acute stroke management. age disequilibrium between the two loci rs2391191 and rs1341402 in subjects of the Bashkirs (D’= 52%), Russians (D’= 75%), Tatars (D’= 59%) descent. Further analysis showed overrepresentation of the CG haplotype (p=0.081) among Tatar patients compared to control.Conclu- sions: Our findings suggest that the genes G72/G30 may be associated with schizophrenia; however, the effect is influenced by ethnicity.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 21 P08.54 Evidence of the future synpolydactyly genetic P08.56 The efficiency of multiple splitting strategy for linkage heterogeneity in sPD1 locus analysis O. A. Schagina, E. L. Dadali, A. Polyakov; I. Zorkoltseva; Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscov, Russian Federation. Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. Synpolydactyly (SPD) is a rare limb deformity showing a distinctive The large pedigrees from isolated populations are very informative for combination of syndactyly and polydactyly. SPD is characterized by multipoint linkage analysis of complex traits. However, to analyze them webbing between 3/4 fingers and between 4/5 toes. Three loci have by using existing programs for linkage analysis, it is necessary to split been identified at chromosomes 2q31 (SPD1), 22q13.31 (SPD2) and the pedigree into non-overlapping fragments of the suitable size. This 14q11.2-q12 (SPD3). splitting can be done in various ways to produce multiple sub-pedi- The five generation Russian family was ascertained. A detailed pedi- grees sets with quite different characteristics. Each of these sets would gree was constructed and 15 subjects were physically examined. Eight be informative to detect linkage signals on different chromosomal re- subjects were found to be affected. Five members has syndactyly of gions. We proposed to use several splittings for genome-wide linkage the third and fourth fingers both hands, one member of one hand and maximizing LODscore on all the splittings for each marker. The main two members has syndactyly of the third and fourth hands fingers and problem which arises due to multiple testing is generating a correct polydactyly of the fifth toe in the feet. genome-wide significance threshold for linkage result. To assess the To test the candidate locuses for linkage with the phenotype segregat- empirical type I error and the efficiency of our strategy, we performed ing in the Russian family, microsatellite markers from region 2q31-q32 a simulation study of a quantitative trait. We split the complex pedigree (SPD1: D2S1776, D2S326, D2S2314, D2S324, D2S311, D2S164, including 1500 members by use programs Jenti (Falchi & Fuchsberg- D2S2250 and intragenic CA repeat of HOXD13 intron 1); from region er, 2008), PedCut (Liu et al., 2008) and PedStr (Kirichenko et al., 2009) 22q13 (SPD2: D22S1141, D22S928, D22S274) were selected. Two into three sub-pedigrees sets. The threshold corresponding to signifi- microsatellite markers flanking the SPD1 candidate interval (D2S2314, cance level depended from splitting and varied within 5%. The same D2S324) and intragenic CA repeat revealed significantly high LOD threshold for maxLODscores increased by 14 % of average threshold. scores (Zmax ≥2) indicating a strong evidence of linkage between However, power of the analysis was retained and the detection of QTL this locus and the phenotype segregating in the Russian family. How- position became more accurate. We believe the use of several split- ever at research of all coding, not coding and regulatory regions of tings instead of one, is quite effective strategy for search of genes of HOXD13 gene it was not revealed any nucleotides substitutions ex- complex traits. cept rs72923424. Polyalanine repeat expansion mutations were not found too. P08.57 Vitamin D receptor genetic polymorphism and bone The received results can testify about future genetic heterogeneity of mineral density in iranian postmenopausal women synpolydactyly in SPD1locus and possible involving of others locus M. Daneshpour, N. Ahmadi, S. Poormohammadvali-Behnami, F. 2q31-q32 HOX genes to SPD pathogenesis. Hosseinpanah; Obesity Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Tehran, P08.55 Association of type 1 diabetes to the MHC2TA gene and Islamic Republic of Iran. genotype frequencies among controls with age Objective: Osteoporosis is one of the most important medical prob- A. Gyllenberg1, S. Asad1, M. Janer2, B. Van Yserloo3, J. L. Hoehna3, E. A. lems facing the aging population especially postmenopausal women. It Rutledge3, L. Padyukov4, B. McNeney5, J. Graham5, F. Piehl1, C. Törn6, M. is a common disease with a strong genetic component. Polymorphism Orho-Melander7, E. Lindholm7, C. Graff8, K. Åkesson1, M. Landin-Olsson6, Å. of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene has been reported to play a ma- Lernmark9,6, T. Olsson1, I. Kockum1; jor role in variations for genetic regulation of bone mass. To clearance 1Neuroimmunology Unit, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska of its role BsmI polymorphism were studied in Iranian postmenopausal Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Institute for Systems Biology, University of women. Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Molecular and Genetics Core, Methods: 128 women from Tehran Lipid and Glucose Study (TLGS) Diabetes Endocrinology Research Center, University of Washington, Seattle, study (53 postmenopausal, 75 premenopausal) were selected who WA, United States, 4Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Karolinska underwent BMD testing, serum 25(OH) D, calcium, phosphorus and Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Department of Statistics and Actuarial Sciences, bone mass were measured, they had genotyping for the VDR alleles Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada, 6Department of Medicine, using polymerase chain reaction methods and restriction fragment University Hospital Lund, Lund, Sweden, 7Diabetes and Cardiovascular length polymorphism with Bsm1 based on the present (b) and the ab- Disease, Genetic Epidemiology,University Hospital Lund, Lund, Sweden, sent (B). 8Department of Neurobiologi (NVS) Karolinska University Hospital Novum, Results: In current study the respective frequencies of VDR genotype Stockholm, Sweden, 9Department of Medicine, University of Washington, were BB 18%, Bb 52% and 30% bb. After adjusting the influence of Seattle, WA, United States. age and menopausal status, the analysis of co-variance (ANCOVA) The MHC2TA gene, which is crucial in expression of MHCII molecules, revealed that the presence of the bb genotype increases the BMD in has been reported to associate to a wide range of diseases like Rheu- premenopausal individuals (Femoral neck, p 0.005; Trochanteric, p matoid Arthritis (RA), Multiple Sclerosis (MS) and Myocardial Infarction 0.047; Total femoral, p 0.051; Lumbar spine (L1-L4), p 0.007). (MI). These results have been replicated with varying results depend- Conclusion: It was found that there is significantly association between ing partly on which control group was used. Linkage to chromosome VDR gene polymorphism with bone mineral density in different meno- 16p13 where MHC2TA is situated has been reported to type 1 diabetes pausal situation. These finding suggest that the ethnic diversity in VDR (T1D). Here we test whether the gene is associated to T1D and MS genotype frequencies, the association between the genotypes and with correction for age and if there is a change in genotype frequency bone mass might be in part responsible for the ethnic differences in depending on age in the MHC2TA gene among the controls. bone mass. Several markers in the MHC2TA gene were genotyped using mainly Taqman allelic discrimination in two large materials of MS and T1D P08.58 Identity-by-descent probability estimation for multiple patients. Also >10000 controls from studies of RA, MS, T1D, MI and sNP markers Alzheimer’s disease (AD) was typed for 3 SNP markers. The controls G. R. Svischeva, I. V. Zorkoltseva, T. I. Axenovich, T. I. Axenovich; were divided into 5 years intervals with respect to age at disease on- Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of set/sampling. Chi-squared test was used to detect significant associa- Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. tion; Chi-squared Test for Trend in Proportions was used to detect the Availability of dense SNP maps has opened new possibilities for iden- overall trend in genotype over age, and logistic regression was used to tity-by-descent (IBD) calculations. Development of the new methods control for age-differences. for large pedigrees is actual because large number of individual ge- The results shows significant association to T1D (RS11074930 p=0.03, nome sequences will be available soon. Application of recursive meth- RS11074932 p=0.008, RS3087456 p=0.02) but not to MS for the 3 mark- ods of approximate IBD computation is the most acceptable for the ers when correcting for age, also there is a significant difference in the large complex pedigrees and large number of analysed markers. One genotype distribution for all 3 markers with respect to age among controls. of such approaches had been proposed by Wang et al. (1995) for ar- This could have several causes that need to be further investigated. bitrary pedigrees with complete marker information. But its application Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 21 to the multipoint genotype data is not expedient, because in this case Groups AgP OP CPS many related pairs may be non-informative. The problem was solved Alleles N=43 % N=40 % N=78 % by recursive multi-point approach proposed by Pong-Wong et al. CALCR (2001). This approach permits to obtain effective IBD probabilities by T 61 0.71 53 0.68 120 0.77 genotypes of informative flanking loci due to specifying transmission C 25 0.29 23 0.32 36 0.23 of alleles of non-informative locus from parents to offspring but only COLI1A1 N=43 % N=40 % N=77 % with individuals whose parents and grandparents were genotyped. To G 44 0.51 68 0.76 124 0.82 find effective IBD estimates with all individuals of large complex pedi- T 42 0.49 8 0.24 28 0.18 gree with ungenotyped generations, we develop a universal approach PTHR1 N=43 % N=40 % N=82 % combining these recursive methods, witch expands limits of their ap- 5 65 0.76 56 0.76 106 0.67 plication. The approach makes it possible to compute quickly and suf- ficiently exactly IBD estimates using any multipoint genotype data. 6 21 0.24 18 0.24 51 0.32 9 0 0 0 0 1 0.01 J08.1 A study of anthropometric trait in Korean Twin chort The results of researches have shown authentic distinction on CO- J. Lee1, Y. Kim2, M. Lee3, M. Go2, N. Kim4, J. Lee2, B. Han2, J. Sung5; LI1A1 in group AgP in comparison with CPS (p≤0,05) . 1Division of Structural and Functional Genomics, Center for Genome Science,National Institute of Health, Korea Centers for Disease Control and J08.3 Association between +12545GT CollAl genotypes Prevention, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Division of Structural and Functional with different stages of caries in children with chronic Genomics, Center for Genome Science,National Institute of Health, Korea gastroduodenitis. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, D. A. Kuzmina1, M. V. Moskalenko2, M. M. Kostik3, S. V. Azanchevskaya4, A. O. 3Division of BioBank for Health Sciences, Center for Genome Science, National Sidorkin5, B. T. Moroz1, V. P. Novikova3, V. I. Larionova3; institute of health, Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Seoul, 1Medical Academy of Postgraduate Study, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Korea, Republic of, 4Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Seoul, Federation, 2“Gene“, Ltd, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3State Korea, Republic of, 5Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4City‘s We surveyed the 1520 respondents drawn from the Korean Genome Hospital #4, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5City‘s Hospital #2, Saint- and Epidemiology Study (KoGES), which is an ongoing prospective Petersburg, Russian Federation. twin cohort study and also genotyped 1,861 samples from the Korean Collagen I type is one of structural proteins of connective tissue. The Genome and Project (KoGAP). This study is to assess the impact of changes of collagen structure associated with any connective tissue their influence including single nucleotide polymorphisms from Korean disorders, with symptoms of gastrointestinal involvement. Twin. Genomic DNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells was The aim of our study were children with caries and chronic gastro- used for this study. We recruited twin pairs first using a population- duodenitis. Methods: We included 70 children aged 12-17 years, with based twin cohort in Korea. These twins were of Korean ancestry, to different stages of caries and chronic gastroduodenitis with morpho- analyze their genome association within 1 ethnicity. There were 1298 logical approve. Morphological changes ranged from different degree individuals from 374 twin pairs who have clinical, epidemiological and of fibrosis of mucous stomach membrane: 27 with intensive, 26 with genotyping data, including 224 monozygotic and 169 dizygotic individ- moderate and 16 without fibrosis. Dental examination was revealed uals. We performed a Genome -wide association study, typing cases different stages of caries. Molecular testing of +12545GT polymor- and controls on a single platform using the Affymetrix Genome-Wide phism of CollA1 gene was carried out by RFLP. Human SNP array chip (Affymetrix 6.0 SNP chip). Genotype calls were Results: ss genotype of CollA1 gene was revealed in 5 patients with determined by Birdseed algorithm. decompensate caries (7,5%). Ss genotype was determined in 53,7% For clinical, epidemiological and genotype data related to anthropome- with decompensate and in 28,3% with compensate caries (p<0,05) and try in Korean twin cohort data, we tried to analyze heritable and signifi- in 11,9% of children without caries p<0,05). Frequency of SS genotype cances. Especially, we showed the differences of metabolic traits using decreased relatively to degree of caries (p<0,05). generalized estimating equations(GEEs) were performed on age- and Children with intensive stomach mucous membrane fibrosis have rare sex-adjusted data. SS genotype compare with children without fibrosis (33,3% compare 72%) and frequently Ss (42,6% compare 28%) and ss genotypes (24% J08.2 Genetic component in polyaetiology models of chronic compare 0%), chi-square=20,11, p=0,0004, C=0,58. We have no de- generelaized periodontitis with an aggressive current. tected significant differences in genotypes distribution of CollA1 geno- A. I. Zinoveva1, O. A. Shсhagina2, N. V. Komarova2, V. G. Atrushkevich1; types between patients with moderate fibrosis and without it. 1MGMSU, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2RCMG, Moscow, Russian Federation. Conclusion: children with Ss and ss genotypes more frequently have Prevalence of inflammatory diseases periodontis in age group of 35-44 decompensate caries (53,7% and 7,5%) and also have more signifi- years on the world makes 94.3 %. In disease development periodonts cant fibrosis changes in stomach mucous membrane (Ss - 42,6% and assume presence genetic components. The basic directions of search ss - 24%). Children with decompensate stages of caries need in wide candidate genes were made among markers of infringement of a bone endoscope and morphological examination. metabolism. On the basis of a clinical picture and the given laboratory analyses (raised level PTH and decrease CALC), for studying have J08.4 Association between a polymorphism in the G-protein β3 been chosen polimorphisms genes CALCR, COLIA1 and PTHR1, ear- subunit gene and unipolar depression lier defined as hereditary factors of decrease bone mineral density. T. Noskova, E. Khusnutdinova; Research objective was to definite genetic components of chronic ge- 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Centre RAS, Ufa, nerelaized periodontitis with an aggressive current (AgP). Research of Russian Federation. polymorphic variants COLIA1 (rs1800012) and CALCR (rs1801197), A dysfunction of the serotonergic system can lead to development was spent by a Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification of unipolar depression (UD). There are 14 different serotonin recep- (MLPA), for PTHR1 research has been chosen VNTR from promoter tors, 13 of which are G-protein-coupled receptors. The T-allele of the region, genotypes was carried out by a amplification fragments lengths C825T polymorphism of the GNB3 gene coding G-protein β3 subunit polymorphism (AFLP). The research was made on DNA samples of was found to be associated with the expression of a short splice vari- 151 person of both sexes which have divided into 3 groups. 1st group ant termed G3βs, a biologically active Gβ-protein that may be associ- included patients with AgP, middle age 38.9±5.7, 2nd group includ- ated with enhanced signal transduction. A total of 230 patients with UD ed patients with a system osteoporosis (OP) middle age 68.2±5.4, (95 Russians and 123 Tatars) were included in this study. The control 3rd group has made casual populations sample (CPS), middle age group included 357 individuals (83 Russians and 274 Tatars) without 45.7±5.3. a personal/family history of any psychiatric disorders. The C825T polymorphism of the GNB3 gene was analyzed using PCR technique. There were no statistical differences between UD patients and healthy controls in the genotypic and allelic distribution of the GNB3 polymor- phism investigated. But we found the tendency to increase *C-allele in Complex traits and polygenic disorders 21 patient group of Tatars ethnicity: χ2 = 3,403, P=0,065. P09.002 Epistasis between neurochemical gene polymorphisms The research was supported by the Russian Humanitarian Research and risk for ADHD Fund (the grant number 08-06-00579a). R. Segurado1, M. A. Bellgrove2, F. Manconi3, M. Gill1, Z. Hawi1; 1Neuropsychiatric Genetics Group, Department of Psychiatry, Trinity College, J08.5 Analysis of interaction between rs2476601 and rs10818488 Dublin, Ireland, 2The University of Queensland, Queensland Brain Institute and sNPs in causing risk for rheumatoid artheritis School of Psychology, Brisbane, Australia, 3Department of Neurosciences ‚B. B. S. Ahmadlou1, A. Salimzadeh2, M. Akhyani3, M. Keramatipour1; Brodie‘, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. 1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics, A number of genes with function related to synaptic neurochemistry Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, have been associated with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Rheumatology Section, Sina Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Alborz However, susceptibility to the development of common psychiatric dis- Hospital, Karaj, Islamic Republic of Iran. orders by single variants acting alone, can so far only explain a small Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common autoimmune disease with a proportion of the heritability of the phenotype. It has been postulated complex etiology affecting 1% of the world population. It appears that that the unexplained “dark heritability” may at least in part be due to RA requires the complex interaction of genetic and environmental fac- epistatic effects, which may account for the small observed marginal tors with the immune system, and ultimately in the synovial tissues. associations, and the difficulties with replication of positive findings. The role of genetic elements in determining both the risk of developing We undertook a comprehensive exploration of pair-wise interactions RA and the severity of the disease had already been acknowledged. between genetic variants in 24 candidate genes involved in monoami- Association studies in various populations have reported a number nergic catabolism, anabolism, release, re-uptake and signal transmis- of genetic variations affecting the individual susceptibility to RA. The sion, in a sample of 177 parent-affected child trios using a case-only strongest association has been reported from genes within the HLA design. Marker-pairs showing large effects and statistical significance region, particularly the HLA-DRB1 gene. were further explored with a case-pseudocontrol design using condi- The rs2476601 SNP of PTPN22 (protein tyrosine phosphatase non- tional logistic regression. We detected a number of interaction odds receptor 22) gene can be named as the second polymorphism that ratios greater than 4.0, including an interesting correlation between has been repeatedly reported to be associated with RA. The associa- markers in the ADRA1B and DBH genes in affected individuals, and tion of another SNP, rs10818488 located near TRAF1 gene, has been several further interesting, but smaller effects. These effects are no recently picked up by genome wide association studies. So far there larger than you would expect by chance under the assumption of inde- is no report investigating the possible association of rs2476601 and pendence of all pair-wise relations, however independence is unlikely. rs10818488 SNPs with RA in Iranian population. Therefore the aim Furthermore, the size of these effects is of interest and attempts to of this study is to determine the possible association of these SNPs replicate these results in other samples are anticipated. with RA in Iranian population using family-based (parents-child trios) as well as population-based case-control studies. P09.003 clinical validation of age of onset predictor for late- In addition to testing for association, analysis of interaction between onset Alzheimer’s Disease. the two SNPs will be performed on obtained data. O. Makeeva1, V. Markova1, J. Arbuckle2, S. Brewster2, A. D. Roses3; Currently the genotyping of samples are being carried out. The results 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics SB RAMS, Tomsk, Russian Federation, will be presented at the meeting. 2Zinfandel Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Durham, NC, United States, 3Duke University, Durham, NC, United States. A variable, polyT length mutation within intron 6 of the TOMM40 gene, P09 complex traits and polygenic adjacent to the APOE locus, is correlated with age of onset differences for Alzheimer’s disease (AD). [http://www.nature.com/tpj/journal/vaop/ disorders ncurrent/full/tpj200969a.html] APOE4 is a well established risk factor for AD and 98% of the time is linked to long forms of the polyT variant. P09.001 Genetic risk factors underlying Achilles tendinopathy: Linked to APOE3 strands, however, are two distinctly different sizes of the IL-1β, iL-1RN and iL-6 genes the polyT repeat, each with distinct evolutionary strand histories within A. V. September1, E. Nell1, K. O‘Connell1, M. Collins1,2; the LD area defined by TOMM40 and APOE and each conferring dif- 1UCT/MRC Research Unit for Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, ferent disease risk. These data have been replicated, but clinical vali- Department of Human Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South dation is necessary before use in prediction. A prospective diagnostic Africa, 2Medical Research Council of South Africa, Cape Town, South Africa. validation study designed to follow normal individuals between the age An increase in the incidence of overuse injuries such as Achilles tendi- of 62-87 years, combined with a therapeutic clinical trial of a potential nopathy (TEN) was noted. A number of extrinsic and intrinsic risk fac- „delay of onset“ medicine in the high risk group, has been accepted tors have been suggested to be associated with increased risk includ- by the FDA Voluntary Exploratory Data Submission review group. An ing genetic elements within the COL5A1, TNC, MMP3, GDF5 genes. international study involving sites in Russia, England, Switzerland, The aim was to investigate if functional polymorphisms within genes Australia and the US has initiated identification of normal volunteers encoding proteins involved in tendon signalling pathways such as IL- so that, once an Investigational New Drug application is in place and 1β (rs16944 and rs1143267), IL-1RN (rs2234663), IL-6 (rs1800795) a clinical trial with appropriate informed consents can be launched, were associated with AT in a South Africa (SA) and an Australian recruitment into the study will be accelerated. The evolution of the (AUS) case-control study. TOMM40 polyT mutations is currently being studied in ethnic-specific 171 TEN (89 SA and 82 AUS) and 356 asymptomatic control subjects populations. The design of the therapeutic trial, the results of the pre- (CON) (158 SA and 198 AUS) were genotyped using RFLP analy- recruitment studies [www.opalstudy.org], and the implications of differ- sis. Chi-squared or Fisher’s exact tests were applied (significance ent risk allele frequencies and evolutionary histories for multinational p<0.05). clinical trials will be presented. The rs16944:TT genotype (OR=3.4, 95% CI 1.2-9.6; p=0.018) and rs1143627: C allele (OR=1.7, 95% CI 1.0-2.7; p=0.048) in IL-1β were P09.004 Analysis of genes influencing on development of significantly over represented in the SA male CON group. No differ- alopecia areata of patients from European part of Russia ences were noted between the AUS male/female or SA female groups. E. D. Nefedova1, K. N. Suvorova1, A. V. Abrukova2, T. A. Vasileva3, N. V. No associations were observed for IL-RN in either population. Petrova3, R. A. Zinchenko3; The GG genotype (OR = 2.1, 95% CI 1.2-3.6; p=0.017) and G allele 1Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate education, course of the skin (OR = 1.5, 95% CI 1.0-2.2; p=0.044) of IL-6 rs1800795 was significant- and veneral disorders in childhood, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Medical ly over represented in AUS TEN, however no differences were noted genetic consultation, Cheboxary, Russian Federation, 3Research Center for in the SA groups. Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian In conclusion, the rs16944:TT and rs1143627:C in IL-1β are associated Federation. with reduced risk of TEN; IL-6 rs1800795:GG and G allele are associ- Alopecia areata (AA) is a chronic autoimmune dermatosis with genetic ated with increased risk of TEN. This provides preliminary evidence for predisposion, primarily affecting the hair and nails. Detection of genes the involvement of the inflammatory pathway in the development of AT. influencing on development of AA is important for understanding the Complex traits and polygenic disorders 21 pathogenesis of the disease. to weak credibility because of small summary OR after the addition We have examined the 105 patients living in the European territory of studies with effects similar to the lowest/highest published OR and of Russia with various forms and stages of AA, including 43 children sample sizes ranging from 80 to 2000 . For half, new studies could aged from 3 to 17 years and 62 adult patients aged 19 to 75 years. 70 introduce large I2 when their sample sizes were 400 to 1600. These (66,7%) patients were diagnosed with mild forms of alopecia areata, associations ended up with a small summary OR and one became and 35 (33,3%) patients had severe forms - alopecia totalis (AT) and non-significant. Two out of four associations graded with moderate and alopecia universalis (AU). weak evidence because of I2 >25%, could not become strong evidence Subject to clinical features and accompanying diseases we have di- because of one outlier in each analysis. Finally, associations with weak vided ours patients into groups. The first group included patients with credibility due to small OR only became non-significant when new autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (with endocrinopathy, studies with no effect had sample sizes ranging over 3400 to 6600. chronic skin and mucous candidosis, AA), verified by the mutation in The Venice criteria are very helpful criteria to grade the credibility of AIRE gene R257X in each case. The second group included patients genetic associations, but its practical usefulness may be limited due to with severe form of AA. Two patients were recognized with the muta- outliers and small effects. Further guidance is needed on how to deal tion in phospholipase gene LIPH (deletion of the 4th exone). A woman with these situations. having combination of total form of AA and ichtiosis vulgaris was rec- ognized with the mutation 2284del14 in FLG gene. P09.007 Overexpression of human amyloid precursor protein The third group included patients with various forms of AA. 28 patients causes neurodegeneration and impairment of cognitive were diagnosed with combination of AA and other autoimmune diseas- functions in transgenic Drosophila melanogaster es (autoimmune tyreoiditis, atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, rheumatoid D. Rodin1, G. Kislik1, M. Vitek2, S. Sarantseva1; arthritis, vitiligo). We have examined the polymorphism of the TNFA, 1Petersburg Institute of Nuclear Physics, Gatchina, Russian Federation, 2Duke IL1A, IL1B, IL1RN genes in this group of patients. Some distinctions University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States. were revealed. Alzheimer disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by accumulation of amyloid deposits, neurofibrillar tangles, neuron P09.005 Genetic analysis of FUS gene in an italian cohort of death. The main component of amyloid plaques is amyloid-β-protein sporadic ALs patients. (Aβ) - a cleavage product of amyloid precursor protein (APP). Accord- W. Sproviero1,2, C. Ungaro1, R. Mazzei1, A. Patitucci1, A. Magariello1, A. ing to the main hypothesis primary molecular defects of AD are associ- Gabriele1, L. Citrigno1,3, M. Muglia1, A. Gambardella1,4, F. L. Conforti1; ated with Aβ secretion, real mechanisms that lead to neurodegenera- 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2University “Magna tion remain unclear. Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Department of Anesthetiological, Psichiatric and In our study, transgenic Drosophila melanogaster was established as Neurosciences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 4University “Magna a model to analyze AD-like pathology caused by APP overexpression. Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy. Drosophila has α- and γ-secretases and does not have activity of β- FUS (fused in sarcoma) or TLS (translocation in liposarcoma), a DNA/ secretase . Therefore flies do not generate Aβ. We expected that an RNA-binding protein, is the cause of ALS6, a dominant autosomal in- elav-GAL4c155 -UAS-driven APP695 and APP695-Swedish overex- herited form of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). Its main role in pression in neural cells of Drosophila may induce specific effects of the neurodegeneration is highlighted by the presence of cytoplasmic APP independently from Aβ secretion. We showed a strong deficit of accumulation of its mutant protein form in ALS patients, absent in nor- presynaptic proteins in mushroom bodies in flies that expressed full mal individuals, in SOD1-mutated ALS patients and in sporadic ALS size human APPs. Transgenic lines of Drosophila that expressed APP patients positive for TDP-43 aggregates. or APP-Swedish exhibited a progressive neurodegeneration with nu- The FUS gene (chromosome 16p11.2) is encoded by 15 exons and merous vacuoles in the cortex and neuropil and impairment of cogni- most of the ALS-linked mutations discovered are clustered in the high- tive functions. We suggest that impairment of cellular functions of APP ly conserved extreme C-terminal region. and secretion of neurotoxic forms of Aβ may independently contribute To further define the frequency and spectrum of FUS mutations, we to the synaptic loss in AD. have screened a cohort of 320 Italian patients with sporadic ALS (sALS) We used novel peptide mimetics of Apolipoprotein-E, COG112 or coming from South Italy, by analyzing first exons 15 and 14 (mutational COG133 as therapeutic preparation. Selection of apoE-mimetics hotspots for sALS cases) and then exons 5 and 6. These exons have derived from the receptor-binding region of apoE was based on the been analyzed by DHPLC (Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chro- ability of these peptides to mimic the functional anti-inflammatory and matography) screening, except for exon 15 directly sequenced. neuroprotective effects of the intact apoE protein. The development of We have identified two missense mutations, already described, in 4 neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits was corrected by injections patients. The R521G substitution has been observed in 2 patients, as of COG112 or COG133. well as the P525L mutation has been found in other 2 cases. In our screening we found also polymorphic variants some of which are novel P09.008 Genetic association of CCR2 & CCR polymoephisms (3’-UTR variant, c.*41G>A; c.1393+34G>T and c.337-17del[AAAA]. with Alzheimer’s disease The results of this study combined with other data collections confirm M. Mohaddes Ardebili1,2, J. Gharesouran1,2, M. Rezazadeh1, T. Yeghaneh1, F. that mutations in FUS gene have an important role in pathogenesis of Biuckagazadeh1; ALS, accounting for at least 1% of the sporadic form of the disease 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of also in our cohort. Medical Sciences, tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2These authors contributed equally to this work, Islamic Republic of Iran. P09.006 Grading the credibility of genetic associations Chemokines participate in the regulation of immune and inflammatory in Alzheimer’s disease using the Venice criteria: practical responses by interacting with their specific receptors on related im- considerations following from the Alzgene database mune and inflammatory cells such as B-lymphocytes, T-lymphocytes L. Broer, M. Schuur, J. C. van Swieten, C. M. van Duijn, C. A. J. W. Janssens; and antigen-presenting cells. Chemokines and their receptors are Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. therefore considered to mediate inflammation and tissue damage in The epidemiological credibility of genetic associations in Alzheimer’s autoimmune disorders. The recent studies have revealed the geno- disease (AD) in the ‘top list’ of the Alzgene database is graded using types of chemokine receptors (CCR) and their related polymorphisms the so-called Venice criteria. We aimed to evaluate the robustness of in a number of autoimmune and infectious diseases. We used the these criteria. polymorphic DNA markers (CCR2-64I) and (CCR5Δ32) to study the Hypothetical results from simulated studies were added to the meta- association of CCR2 and CCR5 gene mutations with Late-onset Al- analyses of these associations that were graded with strong credibility zheimer’s disease (LOAD) and the relation between clinical features or with moderate or weak credibility due to inconsistency of replica- and genotypes in affected individuals. A total of 150 patient samples tion (high between-study heterogeneity (I2)) or low summary odds ratio and 150 healthy controls from west northern Iran (Eastern Azerbaijan) (OR < 1.15). Robustness was quantified as the sample size needed to were genotyped for the two polymorphisms by the PCR-RFLP method change the grading. and genotype frequencies were statistically determined. No significant For most associations graded with strong credibility, the grade changed linkage was determined between CCR5Δ32 and the disease of inter-Complex traits and polygenic disorders 217 est. However the gene CCR2 was appeared to be significantly linked 6Istituto di Neurologia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, to the disease, as it could be concluded from statistical analysis. 7Fondazione Don Gnocchi IRCCS, Roma, Italy. Sporadic Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (sALS) is a multifactorial neu- P09.009 the association of the regulatory region of the Ps-2 rodegenerative disorder, with unknown aetiology and pathogenesis. gene with Alzheimer‘s disease We performed a mutational analysis of genes encoding for neuronal V. Andreoli1, F. Trecroci1, A. La Russa1, P. Spadafora1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, F. nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits (nAChRs), considered as Condino1, G. Di Palma1, M. Caracciolo1, G. Nicoletti1,2, R. Cittadella1; candidate genes for their role in motorneurons survival and glutama- 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Pianolago tergic pathway. Calcium trafficking mediates nAChRs neuromodulat- di Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia,, ing effects, including regulation of cell survival and glutamate release. Catanzaro,, Italy. We sequenced all exons and flanking intronic regions of CHRNA3, There has been increasing evidence that variants in the promoters and CHRNA4 and CHRNB4 genes in 245 patients (all normal for SOD1) regulatory regions of presenilins (PS1 and PS2) genes may be rele- and in 450 healthy control subjects. We found 15 missense variants vant in the pathogenesis of familial AD (FAD) by altering transcriptional in patients (6.1%) and 6 variants in controls (1.3%). This difference is activity. Also, some of those have been reported as risk factors for statistically significant (p=0.001; OR 4.48, 95% CI 1.7 to 11.8). Mis- sporadic AD (SAD) development. Firstly, the PS2 promoter contains sense variants were located within the cytoplasmic loop of the recep- multiple putative binding sites for transcription factors and variants in tor, which has a crucial function in modulating channel ionic properties. this regulation sequence increases the expression of this gene in vitro Tested functionally by mutagenesis, cellular transfection and electro- experiments. The specific objective of our study was to examine these physiological studies, the observed variants were found to disrupt the genetic variants so as to further explore the pathogenesis of FAD and receptor properties. Receptors underwent impaired desensitisation SAD, in an independent series of Southern Italy samples. Clinical data and prolonged channel opening, causing a subsequent increase of in- and blood sample were collected from 289 AD patients, after inform tracellular Ca2+. We suppose that these mutations could be an impor- consent. The control group consisted of 324 subjects matched for tant predisposing factor in ALS. Supporting this hypothesis, tobacco ethnic background, gender and age. Genomic DNA was isolated from smoking is the only proven risk factor for ALS. blood and a polymorphism, located in the 5’ regulatory region of the Interestingly, three patients with ALS (and none of controls) had a rare PS2 (deletion of adenosine at the 24914 site), was assessed by PCR- missense variant in two distinct subunits of nAChR. These results sug- RFLP (Dde I). There was no statistically significant difference in allelic gest that epistasis is a major component of the genetic architecture of and genotypic frequency distribution between cases and controls. We complex diseases like ALS.This study highlights a possible pathogenic also tested whether the different genotypes were associated with clini- model in sporadic ALS, consisting in a cholinergic dysfunction, that cal features but no significant differences were detected. To conclude, could be pharmacologically targeted. our data suggest that this polymorphism, despite a biological plausibil- ity, do not constitutes a risk factor for AD in our population. However P09.012 Association study of the interleukin iL17A gene in additional intensive association studies with enlarged sample size in caucasian patients with Ankylosing spondylitis - Preliminary different populations are needed, for clarifying the substantial role for results PS2 gene promoter polymorphisms in AD. M. Soares1,2, A. R. Couto1,2, M. R. Santos1,2, J. P. Pinheiro1,2, A. Martinho3, H. Alves4, J. E. Fonseca5,6, F. Pimentel7, J. Branco7, R. Amorim8, J. Bruges P09.010 Effect FAD mutations on Ps1 mediated cell adhesion Armas1,2; and synapse formation 1SEEBMO - HSEAH, 9700-856 Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal, 2IBMC - Instituto A. L. Schwarzman1, S. Sarantseva1, M. Vitek2; de Biologia Molecular e Celular da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 1Petersburg Institute of Nuclear Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 3Centro de Histocompatibilidade do Centro, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Centro de Gatchina, Leningrad’s district, Russian Federation, 2Division of Neurology, Duke Histocompatibilidade do Norte, Porto, Portugal, 5Unidade de Investigação de University Medical Center,, Durham,, NC, United States. Reumatologia – IMM, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, Growing body of evidence suggests that synaptic loss/dysfunction Lisbon, Portugal, 6Serviço de Reumatologia – Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisbon, occurs in the very early stages of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). The Portugal, 7Serviço de Reumatologia – Hospital Egas Moniz, Lisbon, Portugal, mechanism(s) by which synaptic dysfunction occurs is not understood. 8Serviço de Medicina Interna – Hospital Caldas da Rainha, Caldas de Rainha, The early-onset familial AD (FAD) caused by mutations in the prese- Portugal. nilin 1 (PS1) gene also demonstrates that memory loss and synaptic Introduction: IL-17 mediates proinflammatory responses and induces dysfunction occur in the absence of amyloidogenesis or neurofibrillar inflammatory cytokine and chemokine production. High expression of degeneration and precede neuronal death. Recent data indicate that IL-17 has been detected in the synovial fluid of spondyloarthropathies PS1 plays an important role in cell-cell adhesion and synapse forma- (SpA)-affected patients. Furthermore, murine arthritis models deficient tion. Therefore, we analyzed effect of FAD mutations on PS1-medi- in IL17A have shown reduced inflammation. ated cell-cell interactions using confocal microscopy and a quantita- Objective: Our aim was to investigate IL-17A as a candidate gene for tive assays based on the measuring of number of cellular aggregates Ankylosing Spondylitis (AS), a member of the group of the seronega- and single cells in suspension. L cells stably transfected with induc- tive SpA, which characteristic pathological lesion is the inflammation ible GFP-PS1 constructs bearing FAD mutations E318G and G209V of the enthesis. AS has a strong genetic association with allele B*27 of showed decreased aggregating activity in comparison with wild-type the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I. GFP-PS1. L cells stably transfected with GFP-PS1 constructs, which Patients and Methods: Genomic DNA samples from 283 HLA-B27 pos- had a truncated N-terminus, C-terminus or deleted hydrophilic loop of itive individuals were obtained; from those, 139 were diagnosed with PS1 completely failed to form intercellular contacts and or demonstrat- AS and the other 144 individuals, although HLA-B27+, were healthy ed very low aggregating activity. In addition we showed that embry- and thereby used as controls. The IL17A promoter, coding regions and onic neurons transfected with GFP-PS1cDNA bearing FADmutations intron-exon boundaries were sequenced in the 3130xl Genetic Analy- displayed a low number of morphological synapses in comparing with ser AB. neurons expressing wild type GFP-PS1. Results: 5 DNA genetic variants on IL17A gene were identified: -197 G>A (5’UTR region), 27+18 G>A (intron 1), *162 G>A (exon3/3’UTR), P09.011 Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alterations as *1248 C>T (exon3/3’UTR) and *1252 C>T (exon3/3’UTR). None of a pathogenic model in sporadic Amyotrophic Lateral sclerosis these variants was disease specific. Allele frequencies in affected and S. Lattante1, I. Mancuso1,2, G. Marangi1, M. Murdolo1, D. Orteschi1, C. unaffected individuals were compared using the Fisher’s exact test. Limatola3,4, F. Grassi3, S. Di Angelantonio5, A. Conte6,2, P. Tonali6,7, G. Neri1, M. No statistical significant difference was observed. Conclusion: Our Sabatelli6,2, M. Zollino1; genomic DNA results suggest that IL-17A is not involved in the aetio- 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, pathogenesis of AS in this population. On the other hand, the number Italy, 2I.CO.M.M. Association for ALS research, Roma, Italy, 3Dipartimento di of individuals analysed in this study could be insufficient to evaluate Fisiologia e Farmacologia-Centro di Eccellenza BEMM, Sapienza Università di small genetic effects. Further studies should be performed with larger Roma, Roma, Italy, 4Neuromed IRCCS, Isernia, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Biologia sets of individuals. Cellulare e dello Sviluppo-CRIN Sapienza Università di Roma, Roma, Italy, Complex traits and polygenic disorders 21 P09.013 A common copy number variant (cNV) encompassing (testing accuracy 0,69; CV consistency (10/10)). For non-atopic asth- two metalloprotease-disintegrin (ADAm) genes is associated ma, significant interactions were found between IL4 (-590C>T), IL1RA with lung function in the EcRHs cohort (VNTR), ADAM33 (11434C>A) loci in Russian adult, with CV consis- M. Bustamante1,2, F. Castro-Giner1,3, R. de Cid4, J. Gonzalez1,3, G. tency (10/10) and testing accuracy 0,68. Escaramis2,5, D. Jarvis6, N. Probst-Hensch7,8, J. Heinrich9, M. Imboden7,8, J. Anto1,3, M. Wjst10, M. Kogevinas1,3, X. Estivill2,5; P09.015 An association of cc16 gene polymorphism with 1Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL), Barcelona, asthma in children Spain, 2Genes and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), V. Tikhonova, A. Voitovich, D. Korostovsev, V. Larionova; Barcelona, Spain, 3Municipal Institute of Medical Research (IMIM-Hospital St.Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. del Mar), Barcelona, Spain, 4CEA, Institut de Genomique, Centre National Background: Clara cell secretory protein 16-kDa (CC16) is an anti- de Genotypage, Evry, France, 5Public Health and Epidemiology Network inflammatory protein produced mainly by Clara cells in the distal re- Biomedical Research Center (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain, 6Respiratory spiratory lung epithelium. A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of Epidemiology and Public Health Group, National Heart and Lung Institute, the CC16 gene (A38G) was previously reported to be associated with Imperial College, London, United Kingdom, 7Swiss Tropical and Public Health asthma. Institute, Basel, Switzerland, 8University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 9Institute Objective: To investigate allele and genotype frequencies of the CC16 of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, 10German gene polymorphism in children with asthma. Research Center for Environmental Health, Helmholtz Centre GSF, Munich, Patients and methods: Study group: 136 children aged 3 -17 years old Germany. including 70 boys and 10 girls with mild asthma and 41 boys, 15 girls Only few studies have investigated the impact of Copy Number Vari- with severe asthma. Control group: 127 healthy children (67 boys and ants (CNVs) on asthma. We performed a pooling Comparative Ge- 47 girls) aged 4-17 years old. Genetic polymorphism of CC16 was nomic Hybridization (CGH) in order to identify CNVs related to asthma, identified by PCR-RFLP (Laing et al., 1998). The data were compared and, in a second stage, we characterized one of the identified CNVs by Chi-square test. and explored its effect on asthma phenotypes in a European popu- Results: Both allele and genotype distribution of the CC16 gene poly- lation-based cohort study (ECRHS). Three pools of DNAs from non- morphism were similar in asthma patients and in controls being line atopic asthmatic, atopic asthmatic and control individuals were ana- with previously reported date. No difference was found when compar- lyzed by CGH with the Agilent 244K array. A loss on chromosome 8 ing CC16 gene polymorphism between groups: mild asthma - severe was detected in the DNA pool from non-atopic asthmatic individuals asthma, severe asthma - control, mild asthma - control. However compared with the DNA pool from the control sample. The CNV was we observed a significant difference in prevalence of 38A allele in located in a cluster containing several ADAM genes and encompassed asthmatic girls compared to girls from control group (88% vs 58%, the 3’ of the ADAM5P gene and the ADAM3A gene. The breakpoints χ2=7.528, p=0.023, OR=1.5 95% CI=1.17 -1.95). Additionally, of 38A were identical in the individuals analyzed by sequencing. The CNV allele frequencies was significantly higher in asthmatic girls compared was genotyped in the HapMap individuals with a FAM labeled PCR to asthmatic boys (88% vs 64%, χ2=8.414, p=0.015, OR=1.5 95% based method, and the minor allele frequencies were 8% in YRI, 14% CI=1.23 - 1.89). in CHB and 45% in CEU. A SNP (rs11985201) was found to be in high Conclusion: We proposed that CC16 gene polymorphism A38G might linkage disequilibrium with the CNV (r2>0.8), and thus it was used as be predisposing factor of asthma development in girls. a proxy to explore the effect of the CNV on asthma phenotypes. In the ECRHS cohort (n=2129), the tag SNP was associated with lung P09.016 ABcG1 transporter in reverse cholesterol transport and function, mainly with predicted Forced Expiratory Volume in the first atherosclerosis development. second (FEV1%) (p=0.0067), and predicted Forced Vital Capacity V. Miroshnikova1, E. Demina1, P. Kurjanov2, A. Vinogradov3, A. Denisenko3, A. (FVC%) (p=0.014). In summary, a common CNV that encompasses Schwarzman1; ADAM5P and ADAM3A genes was associated with lung function in 1Petersburg nuclear physics institute, Gatchina, Russian Federation, 2Saint- the ECRHS cohort. Retersburg Pavlov State Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Saint-Petersburg institute of experimental medicine, Saint- P09.014 study of gene-gene interactions for bronchial asthma Petersburg, Russian Federation. in Russians from Volga-Ural region of Russia Transport of excess cholesterol by high density lipoproteins (HDL) from Y. Fedorova1, A. Karunas1, G. Gimalova2, I. Skachkova2, E. Khusnutdinova1; macrophages in the periphery back to the liver, called reverse choles- 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir terol transport (RCT), plays an important protective role in the develop- State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. ment of atherosclerosis. Macrophage ATP binding cassette transporter Bronchial asthma (BA) is a complex chronic respiratory disease re- G1 (ABCG1) mediates cholesterol effluence to HDL. However it’s role sulting from interactions between multiple genes and environmental in human atherosclerosis development is undiscovered. factors. In this study we have genotyped 21 polymorphic markers in 15 The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of ABCG1 gene genes of cytokines (IL4, IL4RA, IL10, TNFA, IL1B, IL1RA), biotransfor- expression variations on atherosclerosis development. Human periph- mation of xenobiotics (CYP1A1, CYP2D6, GSTT1, GSTM1, MTHFR, eral blood monocytes were obtained from 25 volunteers: 15 patients NAT2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19), and a disintegrin and metalloprotease with angiographically proved atherosclerosis and 10 healthy blood 33 (ADAM33). A total of 295 unrelated participants of Russian ethnic donors. Monocytes were cultured with macrophage colony-stimulating group were recruited, including 172 patients with BA and 123 non- factor (M-CSF) for 24 hours. ABCG1 mRNA levels in monocytes de- asthmatic individuals from Volga-Ural region of Russia. We found rived macrophages were measured using real time PCR and normal- significant associations of IL4(-590C>T), ADAM33(11434C>A) gene ized to beta-actin. ABCG1 gene expression level in macrophages of polymorphisms with asthma susceptibility. Genotype -590T/T and al- patients with atherosclerosis doesn’t significantly differ from the same lele -590T of IL4 gene were associated with an increased risk of atopic value for healthy control: average macrophage ABCG1 mRNA levels asthma (OR=5,04, 95%CI 1,78-14,21; OR=1,88, 95%CI 1,25-2,83, ac- for patients and for healthy individuals are 0.87±0.66 and 1.26±0.55, cordingly). Also we found increased frequencies of ADAM33*11434A/ respectively, (p=0.076). Simultaneously there is positive correlation be- A genotype and ADAM33*11434A allele among patients with severe tween macrophage ABCG1 mRNA level and HDL cholesterol (R>0.65, asthma compared with controls (OR=3,14, 95%CI 1,55-6,37; OR=2,02, p<0.02). These results suggest that ABCG1 transporter regulates HDL 95%CI 1,20-3,38, accordingly). The associations remained significant metabolism and cholesterol content and thereby protects against ath- after an adjustment for age. Generalized multifactor dimensionality re- erosclerosis. duction (GMDR) method was used to analyze gene-gene interactions The study was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research for bronchial asthma. One two-locus model had a minimum prediction (grant 06-04-49609). error (testing accuracy 0,59) and a maximum CV consistency (8/10). This model consisted of TNFA(-308G>A) and ADAM33(11434C>A) loci. Significant gene-gene interactions between TNFA (-308G>A), IL10 (-627C>A), IL4 (-590C>T), IL4RA (Ile50Val), IL1RA (VNTR), IL1B (3953C>T) loci were detected for atopic asthma in Russian children Complex traits and polygenic disorders 21 P09.017 investigating the relationship between premature P09.019 Association analysis of two common filaggrin atherosclerosis and Heme oxegenase 1, Heme oxygenase 2 and mutations (2282del4 and R501X) and atopic diseases in Volga- Kalirin gene in myocardial infarction Ural region of Russia. M. Zamani, S. Ale yasin, N. Sharbaf Shoar; A. S. Karunas1, G. F. Gimalova1, Y. Y. Fedorova1, E. R. Gumennaya2, S. NIGEB, Pajoheshgah, Islamic Republic of Iran. Levashova3, N. N. Ramazanova3, A. R. Biktasheva3, R. R. Murzina3, E. I. Atherosclerosis is the most important cause of Cardio-vascular dis- Etkina3, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; ease and early and sudden unset which its occurrence is related to 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Russian various factors. Oxidant and oxidative stress are among the environ- Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Dermatovenerologic mental factors which cause endothelial vessels hurt. Heme oxygenase dispensary of Bashkortostan Republic, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Bashkir State 1and 2 and Kalirin genes decrease oxidative stress and restrict hurt of Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. endothelial vessels. The aim of this study is investigating the SNPs of Atopic diseases, such as atopic dermatitis (AD), bronchial asthma promotory region of Heme oxygenase 1and Heme oxygenase 2 genes (BA) and allergic rhinitis (AR), are common multifactorial diseases. and study of kalirin genes in patients and control group. Recent studies have suggested that epidermal barrier defect may play Method: Blood sampling was done on 150 patients and 100 normal a crucial role in the development of atopic diseases. Filaggrin is a key persons. protein involved in skin barrier function. Mutations in the FLG gene Results: investigating of promotory part of Heme oxygenase 1, shows are an important predisposing factor for AD, BA with AD and systemic that SNPs No.rs1805173, rs13057211 and rs3074372 with (P<0.001) allergies. Two mutations (2282del4and R501X) in the FLG gene are were meaningful, but SNPs No.rs13057211 and rs3074372 weren’t common in people of European origin. meaningful. The purpose of this study was analysis of the role of FLG mutations in By investigating the Heme oxygenase 2 in the exon 5, substitutions of the susceptibility to AD, BA and AR in Russians, Tatars and Bashkirs A to G in K89E codone (AAG to GAS) were observed as meaningful from Volga-Ural region of Russia. The atopy group consisted of 519 (P< 0.01). BA patients, 284 AD patients and 265 AR patients; the control group By investigating of SNPs (rs578477) and (rs 9289231) in kalirin gene included of 266 individuals. The carrier frequency of 2282del4 muta- show that significant and meaningful correlation with premature ath- tion was 10% in AD Russian patients, 14.2% in Tatars and 21.4% in erosclerosis (P< 0.01). Bashkirs. In AR group, the frequency of 2282del4 was 7.54% in Rus- Discussion: The investigation of the results shows that there is correla- sians, 14.28% in Tatars and Bashkirs. This mutation was present in tion in Iranian population to affecting premature atherosclerosis with 15.78% asthma Russian patients with AD, 22.22% in Tatars and 25% SNPs of promotory part of Heme oxygenase 1 the substitution of A to in Bashkirs. The frequency of 2282del4 was significantly lower in con- G Heme oxygenase 2 and above mentioned SNPs (in result section)of trol group (2.36% in Russians, 1.76% in Tatars and 5.8% in Bashkirs). kalirin genes show that there is a meaningful correlation to increasing The R501X mutation was rarely found in our cohort: only 1,76% atopy susceptibility to premature atherosclerosis among Iranian population. patients carried R501X mutation. The data of this study revealed a strong association of the FLG muta- P09.018 Detection of epistatic effects of FCER1A variants on tion 2282del4 with AD, BA with AD and AR in Russians, Tatars and eczema risk Bashkirs. H. Baurecht1,2, E. Rodríguez1, A. Naumann1,3, S. Wagenpfeil3,2, N. Klopp4, H. Wichmann4, J. Ring1,5, K. Van Steen6, S. Weidinger1,5; P09.020 A large public health effect of a common variant on 1Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Technische Universität München, chromosome 11q13 (rs7927894) on eczema, asthma, and hay Munich, Germany, 2Graduate School of Information Science in Health fever (GSISH), Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 3Institute for I. Marenholz1, A. Bauerfeind2, J. Esparza-Gordillo1, T. Kerscher1, R. Granell3, J. Medical Statistics and Epidemiology IMSE, Technische Universität München, Henderson3, Y. A. Lee1; Munich, Germany, 4Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 1Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, Charité, Berlin, Germany, 2Max- Neuherberg, Germany, 5ZAUM – Center for Allergy and Environment, Division Delbrück-Centrum (MDC) for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, of Environmental Dermatology and Allergy, Helmholtz Zentrum/Technische 3Department of Community-based Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Universität München, Munich, Germany, 6Systems and Modeling Unit, Kingdom. Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of In a genome-wide association study for eczema, a common variant on Liège, Liège, Belgium. chromosome 11q13.5 (rs7927894) has been identified as a suscepti- Allergic diseases are mostly driven by high levels of total and aller- bility locus in four study populations from Central Europe. We aimed to gen-specific IgE levels. The high-affinity receptor for IgE is composed determine the effect of this risk variant on various allergic diseases on of three subunits FCER1A, FCER1B, FCER1G and represents the the population level. More than 7,400 individuals from a large English central receptor of IgE-induced reactions. A genome-wide association birth cohort born in 1991 and 1992, were genotyped for rs7927894. analysis revealed associations between functional FCER1A variants Association analyses were performed for eczema, asthma, hay fever, and total serum IgE levels. Linkage and association of FCER1B vari- allergic sensitization, and combinations of these phenotypes. The ef- ants with IgE and atopic diseases had been reported by previous stud- fect of the risk variant on eczema was restricted to individuals with ies. The FCER1G subunit has not yet been investigated with regard to atopic eczema (OR, 1.31; 95% CI, 1.07-1.60). In contrast, no associa- atopy. Filaggrin (FLG) is the strongest known risk gene for eczema, in tion of rs7927894 with non-atopic eczema was observed. Moreover, particular the allergic subtype of eczema. we detected association with concomitant asthma (OR, 1.50; 95% CI, We investigated the association of FCER1A, FCER1B and FCER1G 1.14-1.97) and hay fever (OR, 1.54; 95% CI, 1.15-2.06). The popula- variants with IgE in a large population-based cohort. We further tested tion attributable risk fraction for atopic eczema was estimated to be for epistatic effects using the model-based multifactor dimensionality 23.8%. The rs7927894 risk allele is a common variant that confers a reduction method (MBMDR) and inverstigated a potential interaction moderate risk for atopic disease, but carries a large public health effect between FLG and FCER1A variants in a eczema case cohort and on atopic eczema and allergic airways disease. Furthermore, the as- population controls. sociation with atopic eczema as well as concomitant asthma and hay We found association of three strongly correlated FCER1A variants fever points to a key role in the atopic march. with total and specific IgE levels as well as allergic sensitization. No associations could be detected for FCER1B and FCER1G. After ad- P09.021 Identification and characterization of copy number justing for FLG effects, a significant epistatic effect of the FCER1A variations in 50 children with autism variants rs10489854 and rs2511211 on eczema risk revealed. H. Sorte1, E. Sponheim2, K. Eiklid1, E. Gjevik2, O. Rodningen1; We conclude that FCER1A variants by themselves and in combina- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevaal, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, tion have an impact of IgE levels and act synergistically to influence Norway, 2KPH-BU, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. eczema risk. Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder that manifests in the first three years of life. The group of pervasive developmental disorders (PDDs), also termed autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), includes the prototypical autism as well as PDD-not otherwise specified (PDD), Complex traits and polygenic disorders 220 Rett syndrome and Asperger’s disorder. Autism is characterized by A/G and +49 G/A G allele and genotype GG carriers was significantly difficulties in managing social interaction and communication, and a higher in patients than in controls (P=0.04, OR 1,84, 95% CI 2.31-1.4; limited, repetitive and stereotyped patterns of reactions and behavior. P=0.001, OR 2,0 95% CI 1.62-2.31 respectively). We showed that the ASDs are etiologically heterogenous, and only 10% of the cases are carriers of A/G, T/C and G/G genotypes of -1661 A/G, -318 T/C and +49 due to known medical conditions (chromosomal imbalances, genetic G/A polymorphisms have an increased risk of genetic predisposition to disorders like Fragile X, Rett syndrome or Tuberous sclerosis). the AITD in Tatar women (OR 7.87, 95% CI 2.03-3.25). Also strong The emerge of new high-resolution screening methods allows for de- association was observed between the increased level of antibodies to tection of submicroscopic genomic aberrations. One of these methods; TPO (> 1000 ME/l) and GG genotype of +49 G/A polymorphism (OR microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) offers 1.3, 95% CI 1.5-4.1); and antibodies to TG (> 100 ME/l) and genotypes the possibility of detecting copy number variations (CNVs, deletions or A/G and G/G of CTLA-4 -1661 A/G and +49 G/A polymorphisms (OR duplications) associated with autism. 1.56, 95% CI 2.25-3.6; OR 1.12, 95% CI 1.9-2.75 respectively). We present the results of applying aCGH for identification of causal CNVs in 50 children diagnosed with autism. Genomic DNA was ex- P09.024 strategies to identify new mutations in patients with tracted from buccal cells and aCGH was performed using 44k and Bardet--Biedl syndrome. 105k human genome CGH oligo microarrays (Agilent Technologies I. Pereiro, T. Piñeiro-Gallego, A. Fernandez-Araujo, D. Valverde; Inc.). Causal CNVs were identified in 9 (18%) of the patients. Two pa- Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology. Faculty of Biology, tients had large aberrations (unbalanced translocation between chro- Universidad de Vigo, Spain. mosome 8 and chromosome 12, idic(15)). Five patients had smaller Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, MIM 209900) is a rare multiorganic dis- CNVs in or close to genes previously associated with autism, and order which a variable phenotype that includes retinal dystrophy, poly- two patients had CNVs not previously reported. Further analyses are dactyl, mental delay, obesity and also reproductive tract and renal ab- needed to determine the significance of these aberrations. Our data normalities. The combination of the late onset of some of the features demonstrates the utility of aCGH as a powerful diagnostic tool for de- of BBS, such as renal disease and loss of vision, and the existence of tection of genomic imbalances in ASD. other genetic syndromes with similar cardinal manifestations can lead to confusion amongst clinicians and the possibility of misdiagnosis. P09.022 common variants in cadherin 10 gene show Until now 14 genes (BBS1-BBS14) have been involved in 70% of the association with autism spectrum disorders in Finnish families, indicating that additional mutations in known BBS genes and population new BBS genes remain to be identified. M. Muona1, K. Rehnström1,2, H. Kilpinen1,2, P. J. Wagner1, L. Peltonen1,2; We utilized a BBS genotyping chip by Asper Ohthalmics to performa 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2Wellcome first screening of the samples. The latest version of the chip contains Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge 107 mutations from BBS1-7, BBS9, BBS10 and BBS12. In the case CB10 1SA, UK, United Kingdom. of BBS8, only SNPs have been included. In five cases a single het- Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are severe neurodevelopmental erozygous mutation was found in BBS1 (p.M390R), BBS2 (p.Y89C) disorders that are highly heritable, but phenotypic and genetic het- and BBS10 (C91fsX). The entire open reading frame of the gene con- erogeneity have made it challenging to identify predisposing variants taining those mutations was directly sequencedin order to detect an across populations. Although 10-20% of ASD cases are known to be additional novel causative mutation within that gene. Novel mutations caused by rare high-penetrance mutations, cytogenetic abnormalities, were detected in BBS1 and BBS10 families, two missense mutation and de novo DNA copy number variation, genome-wide association and two deletions, respectively. Nevertheless, no additional mutations studies (GWAS) with large sample sizes have also revealed common were detected in the BBS2 coding sequence. genetic variants associated with ASDs. Recently, several candidate The combination of the BBS genotyping chip and sequencing of genes genes have been shown in independent studies to be associated with where a heterozygous mutation was detected, seem to be a good ASDs in different populations. To test for association between ASDs strategy to find new BBS mutations. and genetic variants in these genes in the Finnish founder popula- tion, we have genotyped 79 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) P09.025 case - control association study of candidate genes in eight candidate genes in families with autism (n=142) or Asperger and genome - wide association study in Bulgarian patients with syndrome (AS; n=121) and performed association analyses. In the au- bipolar affective disorder tism study sample, the most significant association was observed with A. Yosifova1,2, T. Mushiroda3, M. Kubo4, A. Takahashi5, Y. Kamatani6, an intronic SNP in CDH10, rs1505874 (P=0.000066). In the AS study D. Stoianov7, R. Vazharova1, I. Dimova1, S. Karachanak1, I. Zaharieva1, sample, the most significant association was also observed in CDH10, S. Hadjidekova1, V. Milanova8, N. Madjirova9, I. Gerdjikov7, T. Tolev10, N. but with intronic rs6867043 (P=0.000774). In a recent GWAS (Wang Poryazova11, G. Kirov12, M. Owen12, M. O‘Donovan12, D. Toncheva1, Y. et al. 2009), signals with a strong genome-wide significance were ob- Nakamura2,13; served in six SNPs located between CDH10 and CDH9. Results from 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University, Sofia, our study support the role of CDH10 in ASDs using an independent Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Laboratory for International Alliance, RIKEN Center for sample. To our knowledge, this is the first replicated association be- Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 3Laboratory for Pharmacogenetics, tween ASDs and CDH10 reported. CDH10 is involved in neuronal cell RIKEN Center for Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 4Laboratory for adhesion and in the development of synaptic complexes so our results Genotyping development, Center for Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, further support the hypothesis that neuronal cell-adhesion are impli- 5Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Center for Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, cated in the etiology of ASDs. Japan, 6Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan, 7DPB “St Ivan Rilski” Novi Iskar, P09.023 Association of CTLA- and PTPN22 genes Sofia, Bulgaria, 8Department of Psychiatry, Aleksandrovska Hospital, Medical polymorphisms with autoimmune thyroiditis in tatar population University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 9UMBAL “St Georgi”, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, E. Biktagirova, O. Kravtsova; 10Department of Psychiatry, Dr. Georgi Kisiov Hospital, Radnevo, Bulgaria, Kazan State University, Kazan, Russian Federation. 11Regional Dispensary for psychiatric diseases, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 12Department Autoimmune thyroiditis (AITD) is a common disorder characterized by of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, School of Medicine, Henry the presence of thyroid-specific antibodies against a variety of antigens Wellcome Building, Heath Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 13Laboratory of of thyroid tissue, such as thyroid peroxidase (TPO) and thyroglobulin Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, (TG). Current evidence suggests that susceptibility to AITD is likely to University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. be influenced by the combined effects of several genes and their in- Bipolar affective disorder is a severe psychiatric illness characterized teractions with environmental factors. We genotyped CTLA-4 variants: by episodes of mania and depression. Although the etiology is not -1661 G/A, -318 T/C,+49 G/A and variant 1858 T/C of PTPN22 gene clear, epidemiological studies suggest it is a result of an interaction of in 161 Tatar AITD cases and 137 age/sex matched healthy individuals. genetic and environmental factors. Genetic studies performed so far, Genotypes were determined by the PCR-RFLP method as described however, failed to identify the definite genetic variants associated with earlier. Data was analyzed using Chi-square test and 95% confidential the disease. Our study encloses two approaches. The candidate gene interval (CI). The frequency of CTLA-4 -1661 G allele and genotype approach was conducted prior to and as a part of the genome - wide Complex traits and polygenic disorders 221 association scan. In the first screening of the candidate gene approach CAKUT. Alterations in genes expressed during nephrogenesis are 191 SNPs were genotyped in 94 Bulgarian patients and 184 Bulgarian considered important, with the final phenotypic outcome depending on healthy individuals. SNPs that revealed P value less than 0.05 were additional modifying genetic and environmental factors. The aim of this genotyped in the second screening using an additional independent study is to identify genetic factors involved in CAKUT aetiology. From set of samples consisting of 78 cases and 372 controls. One variant, the AGORA biobank of the Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen- rs1800883, in the HTR5A gene revealed a significant level of P value tre over 700 CAKUT case-parent triads and 10 families with multiple (P=0.000097; odds ratio=1.80 (95%CI, 1.27-2.54); corrected P=0.017) affected members were included in this study, comprising a unique and suggesting the plausible role of this gene in the pathogenesis of bipo- well-documented CAKUT cohort. Mutation analysis of CAKUT candi- lar disorder in Bulgarian population. In the second stage, we conduct- date genes is ongoing by sequencing coding regions and intron-exon ed a genome-wide association scan followed by a replication study of boundaries. Several interesting genetic variants were identified and the top 100 SNPs. The GWAS was performed on 188 BAD patients subsequently functionally tested in vitro. In addition, linkage analysis and 376 control subjects genotyped on the Illumina 550 platform. The was performed in a large CAKUT family with 10 affected individuals. replication study was conducted on 122 BAD cases and 328 controls. This demonstrated suggestive linkage at a 9 Mb locus on chromosome Although our GWAS did not reveal any strong association and none 1. Deep sequencing of this linkage interval is performed to identify of the top 100 SNPs reached the Bonferroni-corrected P value in the the genetic variants involved. In an additional 4 families, genome-wide replication study, the plausible involvement of some variants cannot be exome sequencing was performed. Identification of genetic factors in- entirely discarded. volved in CAKUT facilitates the understanding of its pathogenesis and enables the design of genetic diagnostic screening tests with a view to P09.026 mtHFR 677tt and PON1 55mm homozygotes are early detection and recurrence risk estimations for CAKUT. associated with early occurrence of coronary artery disease but not aortoilliac occlusive disease P09.028 Association between eNOS gene polymorphisms and E. Strauss1, J. Gluszek2, W. Supinski3, K. Waliszewski4, W. Majewski4, A. L. cannabinoid dependence Pawlak1; S. Oguzkan Balci1, M. Nacak2, A. Baransel Isir3, S. Pehlivan1, T. Sever1, A. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, Aynacıoglu2; 2Department of Hypertension University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, 3Regional Hospital, Gorzow Wielkopolski, Poland, 4Department of General and Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department Vascular Surgery University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. of Pharmacology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3University of Gaziantep, Faculty of The methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677C>T, 1298A>C Medicine, Department of Forensic Medicine, Gaziantep, Turkey. and paraoxonase 1 (PON1) -108C>T, L55M, Q192R polymorphisms, Endothelial nitric oxide (eNOS) regulates the production of vasodila- which influence homocysteine metabolism were studied for the pos- tory nitric oxide (NO). Recent studies demonstrated that association sible specificity of involvement in early development of the atheroscle- between eNOS polymorphism and/or NO production and behavioral rotic diseases: coronary artery disease (CAD) and aortoilliac occlusive changes. The aim of this study whether polymorphisms in eNOS gene disease (AIOD). are associated with cannobinoid users in Turkish population. Altogether 619 men, age below 60 years, were recruited: 300 subjects Our study, 94 cases cannobinoid users and 100 age-and sex-matched with CAD, 144 men with advanced stage of AIOD (scheduled for elec- healthy controls were tested for two polymorphisms which were Glu- tive surgery) and 175 control men without symptoms of vascular dis- 298Asp (G894T) and intron 4 VNTR polymorphisms in eNOS gene. eases. The severity of CAD was examined by coronary angiography Genotyping were performed by PCR and/or RFLP. and expressed by the number of affected vessels (one-vessel, two- The distribution of AA, AB and BB genotypes for intron 4 VNTR poly- vessel or three-vessel disease). The differences in allele, haplotype morphism was 59%, 28% and 13% in cases compared with 72%, 25% and genotype distributions were studied. and 3% in the controls (p=0.008). The allele frequency of A and B The frequency of MTHFR 677TT homozygotes in CAD (10,3%) was was 0.729, 0.271 in cases compared with 0.845, 0.155 in the controls higher than in AIOD (4,2%; OR=2,7; p=0,03). The frequency of this (p=0.006). Also, the distribution of GG, GT and TT genotypes for Glu- genotype in CAD subjects with three-vessel disease was 4,9-fold high- 298Asp polymorphism was 46%, 40% and 14% in cases compared er than in AIOD (p=0,001) and 4,1-fold higher than in CAD subjects with with 65%, 35% and 0% in the controls (p=0.03). The allele frequency one-vessel disease (4,8%; p=0,01). The frequency of PON1 55MM of G and T was 0.660, 0.340 in cases compared with 0.825, 0.175 in homozygotes in CAD patients was twice of that in the AIOD+control the controls (p=0.0001). The observed genotype counts was deviated group (p=0,01), but no associations were seen between PON1 poly- significantly from those expected according to the Hardy-Weinberg morphisms and advancement of CAD. Equilibrium (p=0.008 for intron 4 VNTR, p=0.03 for Glu298Asp). In conclussion, the MTHFR 677TT genotype seems to be the spe- This study is the first to search eNOS gene polymorphisms in canna- cific risk factor for both early occurrence and advancement of CAD, binoid users. We conclude that two eNOS gene polymorphisms were whereas the PON1 55MM increases risk only of CAD development associated with either distribution of genotypes and the allele frequen- before 60. Presented analysis shows that the studied genetic back- cies in cannabinoid users. Identification of genetic events in addiction ground in CAD differs from that in AIOD. Supported by grants MNiI may provide clues about etiology and therapeutic targets. N40208131/2499 and 2P05C03828. P09.029 Novel Variations in cardiac troponin t Gene associated P09.027 Genetic factors for congenital anomalies of the kidneys with cardiomyopathy - An indian study and urinary tract (cAKUt): results from the AGORA project P. Nallari1, D. S. Rani2, N. Calambur3, K. Thangaraj2; K. Y. Renkema1, E. M. H. F. Bongers1, I. A. L. M. van Rooij2, N. Roeleveld2, 1Department of Genetics, Osmania University, Hyderabad, India, 2Centre for A. M. van Eerde3, J. C. Giltay3, W. F. J. Feitz4, A. Reginensi5, A. Schedl5, F. Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India, 3Care Hospital, Hyderabad, Schaefer6, B. Franke1, N. V. A. M. Knoers1; India. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cardiomyopathy, a group of primary cardiac muscle disorders includ- Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and ing dilated (DCM) and hypertrophic (HCM) cardiomyopathy, is one of HTA, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, the major causes of heart failure and sudden death. The disease is 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, phenotypically heterogeneous. Some individuals remain asymptom- Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatric Urology, Radboud University atic throughout life, others develop progressive symptoms, or experi- Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Inserm U636, Nice, ence SCD. The genetic basis for disease are mutations identified in France, 6Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Heidelberg University Hospital, sarcomeric genes. Heidelberg, Germany. Cardiac troponin T (cTnT) mutations in particular predispose the af- Congenital Anomalies of the Kidneys and Urinary Tract (CAKUT) oc- fected to SCD. Troponin T (TnT), together with troponin C (TnC), tro- cur frequently in man and comprise the most common cause of end- ponin I (TnI), and tropomyosin, act as regulatory proteins of the sarco- stage renal failure in children. Disorders belonging to the spectrum of mere. TnT is the most important regulatory protein of the sarcomere, these anomalies include renal agenesis, multicystic kidney dysplasia, and exists in many alternatively spliced isoforms. Expression studies and duplex collecting system. Not much is known about the origin of have shown that residues 70-170 forming a part of TnT tail are crucial Complex traits and polygenic disorders 222 for TnT binding to tropomyosin, tropomyosin binding to actin, and sta- PCR expression of neighboring genes and correlate gene expression bilization of the complex. with SNP genotypes. The cTnT gene was screened in 309 cardiomyopathy patients (162 HCM, 147 DCM) and 176 controls. The study identified 2 missense P09.032 Association of a complex CNV region on 8p21.2 with mutations, 5 silent mutations, 14 intronic variations. Of the 21 varia- child and adult obesity in the French population tions obtained , 11 are novel variations. We identified a novel R144W J. S. El-Sayed Moustafa1, A. J. De Smith1, L. J. M. Coin2, R. G. Walters1,2, missense mutation in exon 10 in DCM , predicted to inhibit the force J. E. Asher1, J. C. Andersson1,3, J. L. Buxton1, D. Meyre4, P. Froguel1,4, A. I. F. generation by blocking calcium activation of thin filament. The mutation Blakemore1; also results in loss of recognition site of several restriction enzymes 1Department of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial College London, and thus can be used as diagnostic test. Insilico analysis of other vari- London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, ations revealed that they are likely to alter the splicing efficiency or Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Molecular effect the binding capacity of snRNPs , which will be discussed. and Clinical Medicine and Center for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, The Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden, 4CNRS 8090-Institute of P09.030 investigation of causative mutation in four generation Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France. family with celiac disease using next generation sequencing and Obesity is a growing public health concern exhibiting a high level of genome wide genotyping array heritability, much of which is unaccounted for. We have sought to in- A. Szperl, C. C. van Diemen, C. Wijmenga; vestigate the contribution of copy number variants (CNVs) to the ge- University Medical Center and Groningen University, Groningen, Netherlands. netic susceptibility to child and adult obesity. Celiac disease (CD), caused by a strong immune response to gluten, We have applied our novel CNV prediction algorithm cnvHap to Illu- is the most common food intolerance in Western populations. CD is mina GWAS data from child and adult obesity case-control cohorts strongly associated to human leukocyte a antigen (HLA) DQ2/DQ8 from Northern France. CNVs were identified within a region on 8p21.2 gene which explains some 35% of the heritable risk. A genome-wide encompassing a SNP showing marginal association with obesity in association study for celiac disease identified 26 other loci which to- the combined child and adult obesity dataset (p=5.68x10-4). Further gether explain only another 5% of the heritable risk. To identify ad- investigation of this CNV region (CNVR) revealed it to encompass two ditional CD genes we performed whole-genome linkage in a four- variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs) and a 3,975bp deletion. generation Dutch family. We identified a dominantly inherited linkage The 3,975bp deletion and surrounding VNTRs were subsequently region at chromosome 9p21-13 and a second one on chromosome genotyped using a combination of PCR and fragment analysis in the 6q25 from the model-free analysis. We hypothesize that these regions Northern French child obesity cohort of 688 cases and 592 controls may contain a high risk mutation that plays a causal role in the disease and adult obesity cohort of 693 cases and 776 controls. This revealed development in this family. significant individual associations of both VNTRs and the deletion with In order to investigate copy number variation (CNVs) and find new obesity (p<0.05). Since these variants are each only weakly signifi- candidate loci which could have been missed in the linkage analysis cant, we consider it likely that the genotyped VNTRs and deletion are due to the large spacing between microsatellites, we genotyped 32 out tagging an as yet unidentified causal variant in this region. of 46 family members (18 affected, 14 unaffected including 4 spouses) Detailed investigation of the 8p21.2 region has highlighted the complex using a high-density SNP CytoChip array. We performed CNV analysis genomic architecture of many CNVRs, and emphasises the benefits of using two independent algorithms and found a duplication on chro- the application of an approach combining bioinformatics and molecular mosome 9q34.3 which segregates through all four generations and biology to CNV discovery and genotyping. is present in 8 affected and 1 unaffected family members, but is not present in the spouses. Although we did not find any interesting genes P09.033 Systematic evaluation of the clinical significance of in this region, our duplication might contain regulatory sequences af- inherited and de novo copy Number Variations in families with fecting the expression of others genes. Autism spectrum Disorders We are currently applying a high-throughput exome sequencing ap- M. Poot1, E. van Daalen2,3, C. Kemner2,4, N. E. Verbeek1, M. V. de Jonge2,3, proach to identify point mutations and/or small deletions in linkage T. Dijkhuizen5, P. Rump5, R. Houben2, R. van ‘t Slot1, B. van der Zwaag1, regions. W. G. Staal2,3, F. A. Beemer1, J. P. Burbach3, H. K. Ploos van Amstel1, R. Hochstenbach1, E. H. Brilstra1; P09.031 Allele-specific gene expression (ASGE) of novel celiac 1Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of Child disease associated sNPs and Adolescent Psychiatry, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Neuroscience S. S. Amundsen1, L. M. Sollid1, B. A. Lie2; and Pharmacology, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, Utrecht, 1Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute of Immunology, Rikshospitalet, Oslo Netherlands, 4Developmental Psychology, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Department of University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Institute of Immunology, Rikshospitalet, Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands. Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. Array-based studies have detected a wealth of copy number variations Eleven SNPs within eight genomic regions displayed strong genetic (CNVs) in patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Since some association with celiac disease (CD) in GWAS and follow-up stud- CNVs also occur in healthy individuals their contributions to the patient‘s ies: rs2816316 (1q31, RGS1), rs13015714 and rs917997 (2q11-12, phenotype remain largely unclear. We systematically evaluated the clini- IL18RAP), rs6441961 (3p21, CCR1/CCR3/CCR2), rs17810546 cal significance of de novo and inherited CNVs containing genes being and rs9811792 (3q25-26, IL12A/SCHIP1), rs1464510 (3q28, LPP), transcribed in the brain, by taking into account the Social Responsive- rs13119723 and rs6822844 (4q27, KIAA1109/Tenr/IL2/IL21), ness Scale (SRS) scores of patients and both parents. Thus, CNVs were rs1738074 (6q25, TAGAP) and rs3184504 (12q24, SH2B3). Of these, grouped into four categories. First, de novo CNVs in families with both only rs3184504 locates within the coding region of a gene. parents having normal SRS scores, and second, CNVs inherited from Intronic and intergenic SNPs have to a great extent, and surprisingly, a carrier parent with an elevated SRS score. These are the most likely showed to be subject to allele-specific gene expression (ASGE) and to be causally related to ASD. The genes in these two categories par- are hence consistent with the existence of numerous unannotated ticipate in pathways probably associated with ASD, such as contactin- gene transcripts in the human genome. The source of ASGE is as- based cell communication (CNTN5, CNTN6), phosphoinositol signaling signed to cis-acting factors such as polymorphisms in the flanking re- (PIK3CA), and regulation of neurotransmitter levels (KCNMB4, TPH2). gions of the gene. The de novo CNVs found in patients with at least one parent scoring The aim of our study is to explore cis-effects by performing correla- higher than 1 SD above the mean on the SRS, and the CNVs inher- tion of gene expression and SNP genotypes, as well as to investigate ited from an unaffected parent, while the other parent has an elevated ASGE of SNPs found in transcripts from CD relevant tissue. SRS score, are likely to exert a minor contribution to the phenotype. So far we have studied expression of five SNPs. Two SNPs, rs1464510 Our analysis also indicates that in 6 out of 48 ASD patients two or more (early intron of LPP) and rs1738074 (UTR of TAGAP), showed to be genetic etiologies may be involved. This study extends the scope of expressed and all heterozygous individuals will next be subjected to genome wide CNV profiling beyond de novo CNVs in sporadic patients, ASGE analysis for these SNPs. For the untranscribed SNPs (e.g. and may constitute a first step toward uncovering the missing heritability rs2816316, rs17810546 and rs9811792) we will perform real-time in genome wide screening studies of complex psychiatric disorders.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 22 P09.034 Genome wide analysis of coeliac disease patients with Leiden, Netherlands. atypical HLA risk genotypes Background: The molecular basis of Complex Regional Pain Syndrome K. I. Löytynoja1, E. Einarsdottir1, K. Kaukinen2, K. Kurppa3, M. Mäki3, D. A. van (CRPS) is not known and its diagnosis remains essentially clinical. A Heel4, P. Saavalainen1; constellation of clinical manifestations are present in CRPS accounting 1Department of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of for central and peripheral alterations (e.g., pain, edema, inflammation, Gastroenterology and Alimentary Tract Surgery, Tampere, Finland, 3Paediatric hyperalgesia, allodynia) in which immunological and neurotransmitter Research Centre, Tampere, Finland, 4Centre for Gastroenterology, London, system imbalance have been indicated to play a pivotal role. Gene United Kingdom. expression studies using peripheral blood samples have been broadly Coeliac disease is a multifactorial disorder caused by the ingestion of used for the study and identification of metabolic candidate pathways gluten in genetically susceptible individuals. The genes encoding the as well as immunological diseases. We propose that such a study is HLA DQ2 and DQ8 heterodimers are the strongest genetic risk factors also worthwhile in CRPS with its mixture of central and peripheral hall- for the disease, roughly 90% of patients carry DQ2 in cis (DQ2.5) or marks in which circulating immune cells may be taken as a surrogate trans (DQ2.2 and DQ7) and 5-10% have DQ8. These HLA variants are of neuronal systems hallmarks. also common in the general population, implicating additional genetic Methods: The study was performed on well characterized CRPS cases factors in disease susceptibility. and matched controls and involved in vitro stimulation of whole pe- A recent GWA study of coeliac disease revealed up to 40 risk loci for ripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) before and after stimulation CD, and included 647 samples from the Finnish population. 24 Finn- with inflammatory triggers. After RNA isolation, amplification and fluo- ish patients were found to not carry the most common DQ2.5 or DQ8 rescent labelling, analysis was carried out using Illumina’s BeadChip risk haplotypes. We performed a more detailed HLA typing and found 8v3 protocol. Differentially expressed were analyzed using Ingenuity out that 15 of these carried only half of the DQ2 risk molecules, ei- Pathway analysis (IPA v7). ther DQ2.2 (n=15) or DQ7 haplotype (n=1) alone. 1 patient was totally Results: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between CRPS cases negative and 7 had the trans genotype (DQ2.2 + DQ7). and matched-controls were significantly observed only after in vitro We performed an HLA stratified genome wide association analysis and exposure to inflammatory triggers. Similar basal expression patterns found an association on chromosome 1 (p<10-5) in the group of pa- between CRPS cases and matched controls were detected. tients and controls without the DQ2.5 or DQ8 haplotypes. Furthermore, Conclusions: Preliminary results showed evidence of subtle but sig- we have performed detailed phenotypic analysis of these individuals to nificant changes among molecules involved in inflammatory pathways determine possible atypical coeliac disease in individuals with atypical (only) after in vitro exposure to inflammatory triggers. The study opens HLA risk variants. a new window for the identification of common inflammatory molecules that may be involved in CRPS development. P09.035 A tWO-WAY APPROAcH FOR DEtEctiNG LOci cONFERRiNG sUscEPtiBiLitY tO cOLOREctAL cANcER P09.037 SMURF1 is involved in cardiac development and C. Fernández-Rozadilla1, R. Tarrío1, M. Magdalena1, J. Clofent2, L. de congenital heart defects Castro3, A. Brea-Fernández1, X. Bessa4, A. Abulí4, M. Andreu4, R. Jover5, X. K. D. Ajbro1,2, K. Møllgård2, M. L. Vestergaard1,2, C. A. Clement3, S. T. Llor6, A. Castells7, S. Castellví-Bel7, Á. Carracedo1, C. Ruíz-Ponte1, A. E. G. Christensen3, R. Burdine4, B. Thienpont5,6, K. Devriendt5, E. Bendtsen7, N. Gastrointestinal Oncology Group8; Tommerup1,2, L. A. Larsen1,2; 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, CIBERER, Genomics 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, University of Medicine Group, University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Cellular and Molecular Compostela, Spain, 2Gastroenterología Hospital la Fe, Valencia, Spain, Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Department 3Digestivo Hospital do Meixoeiro, Vigo, Spain, 4Gastroenterología Hospital del of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Department Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 5Gastroenterología Hospital Universitario, Alicante, of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United States, Spain, 6Section of Digestive Disease and Nutrition, University of Illinois, 5Center for Human Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, Chicago, IL, United States, 7Gastroenterología Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, 6Laboratory of Molecular Signalling & Laboratory of Developmental Genetics Spain, 8Asociación Española de Gastroenterología, Barcelona, Spain. and Imprinting, Babraham Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7Fertility Complex diseases, such as colorectal cancer (CRC) are thought to fol- Clinic, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Hospital of low a polygenic model of inheritance in which many low-penetrance al- Odense, Odense, Denmark. leles in several susceptibility loci interact to determine which individu- Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are characterized by a large spec- als finally develop the condition. Following this premise, the determina- trum of structural anomalies of the heart. Occurring in about 1 % of tion of such susceptibility loci has mainly focused o two directions: the newborns CHDs are the most common developmental anomaly. Ar- whole-genome approaches, and the candidate gene selection, in which rayCGH screening identified a 486 kbp de novo duplication of 7q22.1 the screening involves a series of genes that are particularly thought to in a patient with coarctation of the aorta. The region contains three be involved in the evolution of the disease. We have followed the lat- genes; TMEM130, TRRAP and SMURF1. Bioinformatics prioritization ter approach by two different means: the selection of candidate genes identified SMURF1, a regulator of TGF-beta signalling, as a strong can- derived from the fifteen mouse Susceptibility to colorectal cancer (Scc) didate gene for heart development and CHD. SMURF1 interacts with 6 regions, and the determination of the variation in the genes belonging known heart proteins and is highly expressed in human embryonic and to two pathways related to tumorogenesis: Wnt and BMP4. In total, fetal heart. Immunohistochemical analysis of human fetal hearts re- 190 SNPs were chosen from 41 genes to be genotyped in stage one in vealed that the SMURF1 protein show strong, spatially and temporally 515 cases and 515 controls belonging to the EPICOLON I project. The restricted expression during heart development. During differentiation three top-associated SNPs were further replicated in an independent of the P19.CL6 mouse stem cell line, which can differentiate into beat- series of 933 cases and 955 controls (EPICOLON II). Although none ing cardiomyocytes, SMURF1 expression is up regulated. of the SNPs were finally proved to be associated with the disease, we The functional effect on cardiac development for SMURF1 was inves- believe the CYR61 gene and its surrounding region should be further tigated using the zebrafish as a model. Together, our findings suggest investigated in orther to clarify any possible association with CRC. a function for SMURF1 in heart development and CHD. P09.036 transcriptome analysis in complex Regional Pain P09.038 COPACETIC, a genome-wide association study on Syndrome: new insights into inflammatory and neuroplasticity chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (cOPD). signaling pathways J. Smolonska1, H. M. Boezen1, B. van Ginneken2, B. de Hoop2, A. E. Dijkstra1, M. F. Gosso1, D. de Rooijen2, A. M. de Rooij2, J. T. Kamphorst1, E. Alsina- M. Platteel1, D. S. Postma1, M. Oudkerk1, W. P. Mali2, J. Lammers2, H. J. M. Sanchis1, J. van den Dool2, J. Marinus2, J. van Hilten2, A. M. J. M. van den Groen1, P. Zanen2, C. Wijmenga1, *. COPACETIC consortium3; Maagdenberg1,2; 1University Medical Center, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University Medical 1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3EU. Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by persistent, progressive airway obstruction. COPD is a complex dis- ease which develops due to an interplay of environmental factors like Complex traits and polygenic disorders 22 tobacco smoking and genetic factors which are still largely unknown. activity in cultured cells. The aim of our study is to identify novel genetic factors for COPD using To achieve these goals, a population-based genetic association study a genome-wide association study (GWAS). Study participants were is being conducted on appropriate groups of patients and controls. recruited from the Nelson study, a CT-based lung cancer screening Analysis of the preliminary data obtained from genotyping shows an trial in heavy-smokers of Dutch/Belgium descent (>20 pack years). excess of A allele at position -7 and T allele at position -138 among DNA samples were genotyped using Illumina Human610-Quad arrays. patients. The observed differences are not significant at this point, but COPD was defined both as obstruction (FEV1/FVC10% of lung vol- genotyping of proposed sample size has not been completed yet. ume with a density 70% and FEV1%pred >90. To gain statistical power On the other hand, four appropriate vectors that express GFP under we also used blood bank controls with unknown smoking history which the control of different haplotypes of MGP promoter have been con- were genotyped using Illumina Human670-Quad arrays. structed. To assess the effects of haplotypes on promoter activity, vec- Association tests performed on 1030 obstruction cases and 1799 con- tors were transfected into the Hek293 cells and relative expression of trols resulted in 81 SNPs with p value < 1x10-4. The top 384 SNPs GFP was quantified. Analysis of data revealed significant differences in for obstruction were selected for a currently ongoing replication in five GFP expression by different haplotypes of promoter (Student’s T-test: independent (population-based) cohorts comprising a total of 3,603 .p<0.0005). The maximum and minimum activities are seen by promot- obstruction cases and 7,207 controls. ers containing A-T and G-C haplotypes respectively. Our GWAS study on COPD is unique since it includes both CT scan data and lung function for each participant, as well as a detailed smok- P09.041 Study of rs10757274 and rs2383206 polymorphisms on ing history. Therefore we expect to identify loci associated with COPD chromosome 9 as cAD genetic risk factor in sample of iranian in heavy-smokers and possibly also loci that distinguish between the population different COPD phenotypes emphysema and airway obstruction. S. Aleyasin, T. Navidi; National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic P09.039 β-defensin gene cluster copy number analysis in Celiac Republic of Iran. Disease Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the major cause of death worldwide. N. Fernandez-Jimenez1,2, A. Castellanos-Rubio1,2, L. Plaza-Izurieta1,2, F. genome-wide association studies have reported several SNPs on Sanchez-Valverde3, L. Castaño1,4, J. C. Vitoria5,4, J. R. Bilbao1,2; chromosome 9p21.3 associated with increasing CAD risk. Association 1Immunogenetics Lab, Hospital de Cruces, Cruces-Barakaldo, Spain, of rs10757274 and rs2383206 were studied with CAD in 111 cases 2Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology, and 100 controls from Iranian population. Pairs of primers were de- University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain, 3Department of Pediatric signed to amplify DNA fragments containing SNPs by Mismatch PCR- Gastroenterology, Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain, 4Department RFLP technique. The frequencies of genotypes AA, AG and GG For of Pediatrics, University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain, 5Pediatric rs10757274 in cases respectively were 11.7%, 36.9% and 51.4% and Gastroenterology Unit, Hospital de Cruces, Cruces-Barakaldo, Spain. in controls were 12%, 54% and 34%. These frequencies for rs2383206 BACKGROUND: Celiac disease (CD) is a complex, immune-mediated in cases were 9%, 36% and 55% and in controls were 9%, 53% and disorder of the intestinal mucosa with a strong genetic component. 36% respectively. Statistical analysis showed significant associations The nature of CD pathogenesis remains unclear, but both innate and between rs10757274, (P=0.029) and rs2383206, (P=0.036) polymor- adaptive immune responses are involved in the development of the phisms in Iranian population. Association analysis of GG/GG haplo- disease. Human β-defensins are highly inducible, anti-microbial pep- type for rs10757274, rs2383206 presumed a significant increase in tides which form part of the innate immunity. Genomic copy number of the risk of CAD. Frequency of GG/GG haplotype was 43% in cases β-defensin gene cluster is polymorphic (with most individuals possess- (P=0.014, X²=6.058). The risk of CAD with 90% confidence intervals ing 4 copies) and has been associated with autoimmune or inflamma- (CI) were estimated between 34 to 52 percent. tory disorders including psoriasis or Crohn’s disease. AIM: Our aim was to determine whether β-defensin cluster copy num- P09.042 Association of CETP gene polymorphisms with ber variants are associated with CD. coronary heart disease in tatar population PATIENTS AND METHODS: DEFB4, DEFB103 and DEFB104 gene R. Ismagilova, O. Kravzova; copy number was performed by real-time PCR using specific Taqman Kazan State University, Kazan, Russian Federation. probes and primers in 376 CD patients and 376 control individuals. Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) is one of the HDL modify- Gene-specific experiments were performed in sextuplicate (duplicate ing proteins that have both pro- and anti-atherogenic properties. Cho- for each defensin gene) using 4 ng of genomic DNA. Raw data were lesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) gene polymorphism is known to normalized to endogenous Rnase P gene and were analyzed using be associated with changes in lipid profiles. Primary hyperlipidemia is Copy Caller software assuming 4 to be the most common copy num- considered to be a major risk factor for atherosclerosis and coronary ber. Comparisons between groups were performed using χ2. heart disease (CHD). RESULTS: The distribution of samples in to >4, 4 and <4 copy number Herein, we investigated the association of several polymorphisms in bins was 25.9%, 42.5% and 31.6% for patients and 33.5%, 37.0% and the CETP gene (Val421Ile, -971G/A and -629C/A) with genetic suscep- 29.5% for controls, respectively. tibility to CHD in Tatar population. COMMENTARY: β-defensin gene cluster copy number distribution dif- The study included 125 patients with coronary heart disease and 135 fered between celiac and non-celiac groups, showing a trend to small- health individuals Genotypes were determined by the PCR-RFLP er proportion of high copy numbers in CD-patients. method as described earlier. Data was analyzed using Chi-square test and 95% confidential interval (CI). P09.040 Genetic variations of mGP gene promoter and the risk Plasma CETP activity was significantly (P<0.001) higher in primary of coronary artery disease combined hyperlipidaemic individuals than in controls. Plasma HDL- M. Keramatipour1, P. Ahmadi1, M. Abiri1, S. Sadeghiyan2, M. Pedram1; C was higher in both groups, in the B2B2 genotype than in the B1B1 1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics, and B1B2 genotypes, whereas the serum TG concentrations and Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, CETP activity were lower in B2B2 genotype compared with other Department of Cardiology, Tehran Heart Center Hospital, Tehran, Islamic genotypes (B1B1 and B1B2). The genotype and allelic frequencies Republic of Iran. for this polymorphism differed significantly between hyperlipidaemic Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) is a major cause of death worldwide and nonmolipidaemic individuals (P<0.05). In both groups, CETP Taq . Positive family history among patients points to the significance of 1B polymorphism (presence of B2 allele) correlated significantly with genetic elements in the risk of CAD. Two single nucleotide polymor- HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) (r=0.201 and r=0.452 in control and patient phisms (SNPs) at -7 & -138 positions on Matrix- Gla Protein (MGP) groups respectively) and CETP activity (r= -0.123 for controls and r= gene have been suggested to play a role in susceptibility to CAD. Such -0.192 for patients). a role is possibly due to the effect of these SNPs on the level of gene expression. This study aims to investigate the association of these SNPs with CAD in Iranian population and their possible effects on MGP gene promoter Complex traits and polygenic disorders 22 P09.043 Platelet glycoprotein receptor Polymorphism as a risk P09.045 single clone intron deletion detected on BAc Array led factor for coronary thrombosis - A Hospital based study. to the diagnosis Duchennes muscular Dystrophy in boy with S. Dayakar1,2, S. Komandur3, P. S. Rao4, B. Shyamala Sesikeran2, M. D. mental retardation and behavioural disturbances Sadhnani1; S. Vaeth1, U. Eriksen2, S. Pedersen1, M. Schrøder1, U. Jensen1; 1Institute of Genetics Hospital for Genetic Diseases,Ameerpet,Osmania 1Dept. Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, University, Hyderabad-500016, India, 2Apollo Hospitals Educational and 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Risskov, Aarhus, Denmark. Research Foundation,Jubilee hills, Hyderabad-500033, India, 3Department of Background: Molecular Medicine,Jubilee hills, Hyderabad-500033, India, 4Heart Institute, Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a X-linked recessive disor- Apollo Health City,Jubilee hills, Hyderabad-500033, India. der caused by mutations in the DMD gene, which encodes the protein The GPIIb/IIIa complex is an integrin class of adhesion molecule re- dystrophin. One third of DMD cases are caused by de novo mutations ceptors expressed abundantly on platelet membrane with an important in the DMD gene. The absence of dystrophin causes progressive, non- role in platelet physiology. The receptor mediates the interaction of ac- reversible muscle cell degeneration. DMD can be associated by mild tivated platelets with ligands, including fibrinogen, von Willebrand fac- mental retardation and neuropsychiatric disorders such as autism and tor, vitronectin, and fibronectin. Polymorphisms in platelet membrane ADHD. glycoprotein genes can alter their antigenicity, regulate their expres- Case study: sion levels, and modulate their functional properties. It is also known to A five year old boy was referred to us by Children’s Psychiatric Hospi- be involved in the pathogenesis of acute coronary syndromes. Hence tal. The indication for genetic analysis was mental retardation. The boy in this study, we analyzed the PlA2 polymorphism at position 1565 in also showed general developmental delay and attention deficit. exon 2 of the glycoprotein IIIa gene by allele specific restriction diges- Chromosome analysis and Southern Blot analysis for Fragile X syn- tion PCR to identify its importance in the pathogenesis of myocardial drome gave normal results. BAC Array CGH (Cytochip 2.0) revealed infarction (MI). The study cohort included 97 patients with a diagnosis a single clone deletion on Xp21.2 in intron 2 of the DMD gene. To of MI and 112 normal individuals. A1A1 genotype was seen in 57/97 confirm the BAC Array results, we made a MLPA analysis, which sur- (58.7%), A1A2 in 20/97 (20.61%) and A2A2 in 20/97 (20.61%) patients prisingly revealed a duplication of exon 3-7 of the DMD gene, which with MI; while in control group, 94/112(83.92%) had A1A1 genotype, will often give a DMD phenotype. Finally, we did a follow-up study in 14/112 (12.5%) A1A2 and 4/112 (3.57%) carried A2A2. The prevalence an oligonucleotide array-CGH analysis (Agilent 180K), where the com- of PlA2 was 2.4 times higher among the case patients than among the plex DNA copy number changes were not clearly resolved. controls (41.23% Vs 16.07%, P = <0.0001). This study suggests a The referring physician later confirmed that the boy also had muscle strong association between the Pl A2 polymorphism of the glycoprotein weakness. Elevated level of creatine kinase confirmed the diagnosis. IIIa gene and acute coronary thrombosis. Hence, genotyping will en- able identifying the risk of an individual to develop MI and also take P09.046 Association of the variable number of tandem repeats prophylactic measures. (VNtR) polymorphism in 3’-untranslated region (3’UtR) of the dopamine transporter gene DAt1/sLc6A3 with alcoholism in P09.044 Variety of inflammatory bowel disease genotypes in Russian population of siberian region Russian patients. A. V. Marusin1, I. A. Goncharova1, M. I. Rachkovskiy2, E. V. Beloborodova2, N. V. A. Kadnikova1, P. V. Shumilov2, O. A. Schagina1, A. V. Polyakov1; A. Bokhan3, V. A. Stepanov1; 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian state medical Inflammatory bowel disease includes two clinical subtypes: Crohn’s university, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Institute for Menthal Health, Siberian disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Association of several SNPs of NOD2, DLG5, TLR4, OCTN1, OCTN2, Federation. IL1, IL10 and TNFα genes with CD and UC was shown. Some studies have reported that the A9 allele of the VNTR of the gene We investigated these SNPs in our samples. Samples from 108 unre- which encodes the dopamine transporter (DAT1/SLC6A3) is associ- lated patients with CD, 107 unrelated patients with UC and 179 popula- ated with alcohol dependence and alcoholism withdrawal symptoms. tion controls from Russia were examined. DNA was screened for such We investigated VNTR polymorphism of DAT1 gene in three groups: SNPs as R702W, G908R, c.ins3020C of NOD2 gene, R30Q of DLG5, alcoholic men, men and women with alcoholic, viral and mixed etiol- D299G of TLR4, L503F of OCTN1, c.-207G>C of OCTN2, VNTR of ogy cirrhosis and apparently health men control group. The genotype IL1, c.-1082G>A of IL10 and c.-308G>C of TNFα gene. frequencies obeyed the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in all groups. The The allele frequency is shown in table. association of DAT1 VNTR with alcoholism was found (p=0.059 in gen- Allele fr-cy otype level and p=0.025 in allele level). In patients with liver cirrhosis SNPs N CD UC statistically significant genotype frequencies difference between men and women was revealed (p=0.038). In this group, and in subgroups of R702W 0.03 0.04 (p>0.673) 0.03 (p>0.99) men and women no correlation DAT1 variability with age, cirrhosis, al- G908R 0.01 0.01 (p>0.99) 0.02 (p>0.75) coholism and virus carrying period, alcohol doze, cirrhosis severity, cir- c.ins3020C 0.04 0.18 (p<0.001) 0.03 (p>0.83) rhosis etiology, stage of alcoholism, smoking were found. There were R30Q 0.07 0.18 (p<0.001) 0.06 (p>0.739) no differences (in allele frequency) between control and total group D299G 0.13 0.07 (p<0.056) 0.06 (p<0.007) of cirrhosis patients as well as between alcoholic and mixed etiology L503F 0.29 0.38 (p<0.017) 0.38 (p<0.021) cirrhosis men and women. Comparison of 10/10 genotype frequencies c.-207G>C 0.34 0.37 (p>0.59) 0.36 (p>0.718) against other genotypes revealed near significant difference between VNTR 0.27 0.31 (p>0.449) 0.27 (p>0.847) alcoholic and mixed etiology cirrhosis (p=0.059). At the some time, c.-1082G>A 0 0 (p<0.0001) 0 (p<0.0001) patients with cirrhosis only with alcoholic etiology significantly differed c.-308G>C 0.12 0.12 (p>0.896) 0.1 (p>0.594) from control (p=0.033) due to decreased frequency of 10/10 genotype. Thus, DAT1 VNTR polymorphism is associated with the alcoholism Association with investigated SNPs with CD was found for c.ins3020C without cirrhosis and alcoholic cirrhosis but not with cirrhosis mixed of NOD2, R30Q of DLG5, L503F of OCTN1, c.-1082G>A of IL10; and (alcohol and virus) etiology in Russian population of Siberian region. with UC for D299G of TLR4, L503F of OCTN1, c.-1082G>A of IL10. This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Re- On the basis of given results it is possible to assume that NOD2, search (project no. 09-04-99083-r_ofi). DLG5, OCTN1 and IL10 genes play a part in development of Crohn’s disease. And TLR4, OCTN1 and IL10 genes play a part in develop- P09.047 Variations in the 7q32-q34 region containing CHRM2, ment of ulcerative colitis. PTN and DGKI are associated with dyslexia in Finnish and German populations. H. Matsson1, K. Tammilies1, M. Zucchelli1, P. Onkamo2, H. Anthoni1, J. Nopola- Hemmi3, H. Lyytinen4, P. H. T. Leppanen4, G. Schulte-Körne5, A. Warnke6, J. Schumacher7, M. M. Nöthen8, J. Kere1,9, M. Peyrard-Janvid1; Complex traits and polygenic disorders 22 1Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, P09.049 Autosomal Dominant Dyslexia Pedigree maps to 7q21 Sweden, 2Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, D. K. Pal1, L. J. Strug2, W. Li2, L. Addis1, T. Chiang2; 3Department of Child Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, 1King‘s College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Hospital for Sick Children, Finland, 4Department of Psychology, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Toronto, ON, Canada. Finland, 5Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics Reading disability (RDG) has been shown to be comorbid with Rolan- and Psychotherapy, University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 6Department dic Epilepsy (RE), with RE probands having a 6-fold increase in risk for of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, RDG and their unaffected siblings a 3-4-fold increased risk. We there- University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, fore set out to map a locus for RDG in RE families, using multipoint University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 8Department of Genomics, Life and Brain linkage analysis on 25 2-3 generational pedigrees ascertained in the Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 9Department of Medical Genetics, United States. The max HLOD obtained was 3.10 on 7q21 at D7S660, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. under a dominant mode of inheritance, 60% penetrance. Of these 25 We present a genetic study on dyslexia using samples from two in- families, 16 provided positive LOD scores, with the majority of the link- dependent populations. Dyslexia is a common disability in children age evidence coming from 8 French-Canadian families. One particular with adequate educational opportunities, intelligence, neurological French-Canadian pedigree with 20 individuals (14 genotyped), 11 of and sensory functions. The DYX1C1, ROBO1, DCDC2 and KIAA0319 which are RDG affected, provided a multipoint LOD score of 2.10 at genes have so far been the most studied but clearly there are more D7S660 under a dominant mode of inheritance with 99% penetrance, genetic factors accounting for the complex phenotype of reduced cog- with D7S660 providing the maximum multipoint LOD score genome- nitive activities of reading and writing. We present here results from wide. This pedigree appears to be inheriting this trait in an autosomal a fine-mapping approach in Finnish and German dyslectic cohorts. A dominant fashion. D7S660 sits in a gene-sparse region, however, there previously reported region of suggestive linkage (NPL=2.8) with dys- is one gene very close to this microsatellite. We are in the process of lexia was restricted with 15 additional markers followed by genotyping re-sequencing genes at this locus in the French-Canadian pedigree. of 143 SNPs spanning the region. To increase the power and study the effect of stratification for severity of the phenotype we then genotyped P09.050 A novel mutation in the Dj1 gene found in an early 50 SNPs across 1 Mb in an extended sample set of Finnish families onset Parkinson’s disease patient with dyslexia and 1050 individuals (of which 251 affected) from the S. Hosseini1, F. Ghazavi2, N. Ghaemi1, E. Elahi2,1; German population as a replication sample. Several haplotypes show 1Department of Biotechnology, University College of Science, University of significant association with dyslexia between rs2350780 and rs273933 Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Cellular and Molecular on chromosome 7q32-q34. This region harbours the CHRM2, PTN Biology, School of Biology, University College of Science, University of Tehran, and DGKI genes. Several haplotypes overlapping in both populations Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. were included in intron 1 of DGKI (diacylglycerol kinase, iota). All three Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen- genes in this region are expressed in brain. Pleiotrophin (PTN) has erative disease. PD is considered as a complex disease, and both a neurite extension activity and PTN-knockout mice display lower genetic and environmental factors contribute to its etiology. Although threshold for long-term potentiation in hippocampus, thus suggest- PD is generally a disease of the elderly, early onset cases constitute a ing a role in learning and memory. We hereby confirm and refine a small subgroup of the patients. Among the genes known to be associ- dyslexia susceptibility locus harbouring three functionally interesting ated with PD, PRKN, Dj1 and Pink1 are most relevant to early-onset candidate genes on chromosome 7q34 in two independent European Parkinson disease. PRKN encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase, Dj1 codes populations. a protein that apparently plays a neuroprotective role and is involved in the cellular response to oxidative stress, and Pink1 codes a serine/ P09.048 Screening for genes involved in dyslexia using MLPA threonine protein kinase that localizes to mitochondria. In the study technique in Brazilian individuals being reported, we screened Dj1 and Pink1by direct sequencing in 10 E. L. Sartorato, M. C. C. M. Svidnicki, V. C. S. De Moraes, S. M. S. Costa, C. Iranian PD patients with age of onset of less than 30 years. Early onset A. Salgado, S. M. Ciasca; patients were chosen in whom mutations in PRKN had been ruled out Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas - SP, Brazil. by previous mutation screening of this gene. No mutation in the eight Dyslexia is defined as a disorder or learning disorder in the area of exons of Pink1 was found. One homozygous variation, c.G319C in reading, writing and spelling, not as a result of poor literacy, lack of exon 5 of Dj1was observed in one patient. This novel variation causes attention, motivation, socio-economic status or low intelligence, but as the substitution of alanine at position 107 by proline (A107P). This non- a hereditary condition. Complex diseases such as dyslexia are usually conservative substitution occurs at a turn connecting β7 and α5 sec- caused by several susceptibility genes that lead to a similar pheno- ondary structures in the protein. Further analysis is needed to confirm type. Currently, there are 4 prominent genes associated with dyslexia: the pathogenic effect of this mutation. DYX1C1, KIA00319, DCDC2 and ROBO1.The method MLPA (Multi- plex Ligation-dependent probe amplification) was used in this study P09.051 mutation screening of LtBP2 in Ectopia Lentis patients to evaluate deletions/duplications in genes associated with dyslexia. R. Haji-Seyed-Javadi1, S. Jelodari-Mamaghani1, N. Nilforooshan2, S. Yazdani3, The P150 Dyslexia probe mix contains probes for most of the DCDC2 E. Elahi1; exons. In addition, several probes for the KAAG1, KIAA0319 and 1School of Biology, University College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, NRSN1 (VMP) genes that are nearby DCDC2, as well as probes for Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Iran University of the ROBO1 and ROBO2 genes on chromosome 3p12 are present. Medical Sciences, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, In this work 14 dyslexics of Brazilian origin, were analyzed by MLPA 3Ophthalmic Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University MC, Tehran, Islamic technique. The DNA fragments generated in reaction using the P150 Republic of Iran. kit were separated by capillary electrophoresis in DNA sequencer ABI Ectopia Lentis (EL) is a pathologic condition in which the lens in the PRISM 310. Our results indicate that none of the patients showed eye becomes displaced from its normal position. EL sometimes mani- changes in copy number of probes and therefore no duplication or de- fests as an isolated condition termed simple EL, but more frequently letion was observed so far in the regions detected by probes on the kit. as one of the symptoms of a syndrome. Marfan syndrome (MFS) and Finding genes that contribute to the phenotype of complex diseases Weill-Marchesani syndrome (WMS) are diseases often associated represents one of the biggest challenges. The identification of these with EL. To date, Fibrillin (FBN1) is the only gene linked to EL. The genes, the elucidation of their functions, create windows before whom protein coded by FBN1 is a major microfibrillar component of the extra- she can view the complex molecular mechanisms, allowing for real cellular matrix (ECM). Latent TGFβ Binding protein 2 (LTBP2) is also a possibilities of new treatments. microfibrillar component of the extracellular matrix with high structural similarity to Fibrillin, suggesting it too may be a causative gene for ocular disorders involving the ECM. Recently LTBP2 was identified as a Primary Congenital Glaucoma (PCG) causing gene. Several PCG patients harboring LTBP2 mutations were observed to be also affected with EL. The association of LTBP2 with Fibrillin in the extracellular ma- trix, and the observation of EL in some PCG patients harboring LTBP2 Complex traits and polygenic disorders 227 mutations prompted a further investigation of possible role of LTBP2 P09.054 silent c.3306c>t (p.L1102L) mutation in ABcB4 in promoting EL. We therefore screened all 36 exons of LTBP2 in 7 gene causes exon skipping in patient with Primary sclerosing simple EL, 6 MFS, and 2 WMS patients, all of whom exhibited lens dis- cholangitis placement. In addition to several known polymorphisms, a truncating D. Degiorgio1, C. Colombo2, L. Costantino1, M. Seia1, R. Iorio3, G. Ranucci3, L. null mutation in exon 7 of the gene was observed in an MFS patient. Porcaro1, V. Paracchini1, M. Castagni1, G. Maggiore4, D. A. Coviello1; 1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale P09.052 two Novel mutations in scN1A gene in iranian Epileptic Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università degli Patient Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, A. -. Ebrahimi1, M. Houshmand1, S. Tonekaboni2, S. Zainali3, M. Fallah Milan, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico Mahboobpasand1, M. Moghadasi1, M. Mamarabadi1; II, Naples, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Medicina della Procreazione e dell’Età 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shahid Beheshty Medical Science Evolutiva, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Pisana, Pisa, Italy. University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Psture Inestitute, Tehran, Islamic Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis (PSC) is an idiopathic chronic choles- Republic of Iran. tatic disorder described as multifactorial disease in human. However, Epilepsy as a common chronic neurological disorder is characterized Abcb4 knockout mice (Abcb4 -/-) associated with absence of biliary by recurrent unprovoked seizures. Febrile seizures are the most com- phosphatidylcholine evolves in a progressive cholangiophaty leading mon type of epilepsy in infants and children. Our aim was the molecu- to a severe form of PSC while in human the absence of the ortholo- lar analysis of SCN1A gene in affected Iranian patients with GEFS+ gous ABCB4 protein causes progressive familial intrahepatic cholesta- and Dravet syndrome diagnosed clinically to explain genotype-pheno- sis type 3 frequently characterized by rapid evolution to end stage liver type correlation and exact classification. disease. Materials and Method: The 34 unrelated Iranian families with epilepsy We investigated the ABCB4 gene by sequencing of the 27 coding ex- were selected and screened for SCN1A mutations by MLPA, ARMS, ons and by qualitative cDNA analysis in two subjects with PSC dis- and PCR-RFLP confirmed by direct Sequencing. ease. Results: MLPA analysis showed normal pattern, but the direct sequenc- Sequencing analysis identified in one 13 year old boy the silent nucleo- ing revealed that generally 20 of 34 (0.588) probands have a common tide change c.3306C>T (p.L1102L) in exon 26. Searches for putative reported SNPs (p.A1067G; rs2298771), with allelic frequency as 0.706 Esonic and Intronic Splicing Enhancers (ESEs and ISEs, respectively) / 0.294 in patients and 0.515 /0.485 in control group respectively for by ESE-Finder program has predicted that this silent mutation causes A/G. No significant differences between two groups were observed. disruption of SRp40 motif identified in this locus. Qualitative mRNA Moreover four novel allelic variants as missense substitutions included analysis of ABCB4 gene has subsequently showed an heterozygous two new sequence variation (p.F412 I, p.Y1274N) and two previously exon 26-skipping event that causes a deletion of 76 amino acid lo- reported mutations (p.R101G, p.S103G) which were detected in 4 of cated in the Nucleotide binding domain-COOH terminal, but retaining 34 probands, but not in control groups and other healthy normal family the correct open reading frame. members. This study identifies the first ABCB4 silent mutation that causes the Conclusions: It seems that the clinical diagnosis could nearly establish skipping of exon 26 producing a deleterious allele in a child with PSC the classification, but mutation screening helps clinicians to confirm disease. We conclude that also silent mutations in the ABCB4 gene their data. We found mutation in four probands and confirmed the net need further characterization at mRNA level in order to exclude the po- diagnosis. Our data suggest that the clinical sign variations could be tential pathogenic role in subjects with suspected ABCB4 deficiency. also explained considering the role of modifier genes such as mito- chondrial mutations or other genes responsible for drug metabolism P09.055 Filaggrin mutations and their impact on stratum pathways including multiple drug resistance family genes (ABCB1) or corneum lipid levels and other skin barrier parameters in MTHFR. patients with eczema E. Rodríguez1, H. Scheer2, M. Mempel2, H. Baurecht2, L. Cifuentes2, J. Kaae P09.053 distribution of the CyP1B1 and CYP2F1 gene variants Høgh3, L. I. Hellgren3, G. B. E. Jemec4, T. Agner5, S. Weidinger2, J. Mutanu in three ethnic groups of Bashkortostan and case-control study Jungersted4; with cOPD. 1Helmholtz Zentrum München and ZAUM-Center for Allergy and Environment, G. F. Korytina, L. Akhmadishina, T. Victorova; Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Institut of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. Dermatology and Allergy, Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Munich, The aim of this study was to appear interethnic variation interethnic Germany, 3Department of System Biology and Centre for Advanced variation in frequency distribution patterns of CYP1B1 and CYP2F1 Food Science, Technical University of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark, genes polymorphic markers and association analysis with chronic 4Department of Dermatology, Roskilde Hospital, University of Copenhagen, obstructive pulmonary disease The polymorphic markers Leu432Val Roskilde, Denmark, 5Department of Dermatology, Bispebjerg Hospital, (CYP1B1) and c.14_15insC (CYP2F1) were studied at chronic ob- University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. structive pulmonary disease patients (COPD) (N=306) and cases of The discovery of loss-of-function mutations in the filaggrin gene as healthy individuals (N=467) (Russian, Tatar and Bashkir), residents of cause of the monogenic keratinisation disorder ichthyosis vulgaris and Bashkortostan. strong risk factors for eczema was a major breakthrough in complex It was shown that the CYP2F1 gene genotype frequency distribu- disease genetics. Alterations in ceramide levels, changes in skin pH tion patterns differed between three ethnic groups (χ2=21.29, df=4, and increased trans-epidermal water loss (TEWL) are characteristic p=0.0001), because of high frequency of c.14_15insC / c.14_15insC in eczema patients. However, until now no studies have evaluated a genotype in Tatars, whereas in Bashkirs and Russians it was 1.28% potential impact of FLG deficiency on stratum corneum lipid levels and and 0.53%, respectively. On the other hand, high frequency (39.74%) other skin barrier parameters. of wild type/ c.14_15insC genotype was appeared in Bashkirs and only A cohort of 49 German individuals genotyped for the two common FLG 29.95% in Russians and 20.21% in Tatars. mutations (R501X, 2282del4) had stratum corneum samples taken for Association analysis of CYP2F1 gene insertion variant with COPD lipid analysis by high performance thin layer chromatography (HPTLC), have shown high frequency of wild type (86.7%) allele in patients with and TEWL, erythema, skin hydration and pH were measured. In 27 in- very severe stage and manifestation of COPD after 55 years (χ2=4.584, dividuals an additional 24-hour irritation patch test with sodium lauryl df=1, P=0.032; OR=1.799 95%CI 1.048-3.099). It was shown that al- sulphate (SLS) was performed. For analysis, both the eczema group lele and genotype frequency distribution of Leu432Val CYP1B1 gene and the control group were stratified by FLG mutation status (FLGmut/ not differed between Russians, Tatars and Bashkir ethnic groups FLGwt). (χ2=8.433, df=4, p=0.077 and χ2=3.474, df=2, p=0.176). We did not Eczema patients with FLG mutations had significantly higher erythe- find any association of CYP1B1 gene with COPD. ma compared to patients without FLG mutations. FLGmut individuals had significantly higher skin pH values than FLGwt individuals. In the FLGmut eczema group significantly lower levels of ceramide 4 and sig- nificantly higher levels of ceramide 7 were observed compared to both healthy control groups. However, ceramide 7 levels also significantly Complex traits and polygenic disorders 22 differed between FLGwt eczema and FLGwt controls, as did ceramide P09.058 Gene-gene interaction of LKB1-AMPK-TORC2 pathway 1 levels. No significant differences were observed for ceramide 2, 3, components exert an important influence on the occurrence of 5 and 6. t2D in Japanese. Our results approved previous findings of altered ceramide levels in P. Keshavarz1, H. Inoue2; eczema, which however appear to show no clear relationship to FLG 1Guilan University of Medical Science, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The mutations. Institute for Genome research, Tokushima, Japan. The LKB1-AMPK-TORC2 signaling pathway controls glucose homeo- P09.056 search for genetic variants associated with low folate stasis in the liver, and mediates therapeutic effects of insulin sensi- status tizing antidiabetic agents. Given the putative biological interactions J. Sokolová, B. Janošíková, L. Krupková, V. Kozich; among LKB1, AMPK a2-subnit and TORC2 proteins, to examine Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University, First Faculty of whether gene-gene interaction in the three genes (STK11, PRKAA2, Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. CRTC2)encoding component of this signaling pathway increase Results of genome-wide association studies indicate that private muta- susceptibility to type 2 diabetes ,we tested for statistical interactions tions may play an important role in the pathogenesis of complex dis- among SNPs in the three genes with respect to T2D susceptibility. To eases. Since low folate status has been implicated in birth defects, limit multiple testing, we used ht-SNP data sets to represent each gene cancer and cardiovascular disease we searched in candidate genes or locus, and the pairwise gene-gene (locus-locus) interactions were for allelic variants associated with low folate status. From a historical analyzed by GAIA (Genetic Association Interaction Analysis), a re- cohort of 591 controls and 296 patients with coronarographically con- cently developed statistical method for evaluating gene-gene interac- firmed coronary artery disease (Janošíková et al, Mol Genet Metab 79, tions. we observed significant and specific interactions between SNPs 2003:167-75) we have selected 22 controls and 12 patients with both in STK11 and CRTC2 genes, while no interactions were found with plasma and erythrocyte folates below the 10th percentile of the distri- either between the STK11 and CRTC2 SNPs, at least three pairs of bution. In these subjects we have resequenced the coding region of ex- SNPs showed a statistically significant interaction with respect to T2D ons and the adjacent 50-300bp intronic regions in five genes involved risk (rs3829686-rs2072704, rs6510599-rs2072704 and rs741765- in folate metabolism and transport. Sequence analysis of the FOLR1, rs2072704, with the most significant pair (rs6510599-rs2072704) FOLR2, FOLR3, MTHFR and RFC genes in all subjects revealed 5, 1, reaching a p-value of 0.0010 (Permutation-p = 0.019, under an ‘‘ad- 2, 3, and 2 novel variants, respectively, that have not been previously ditive only’’ model). Interestingly, individual SNPs that were found to deposited in the SNP database. Although some of these variants were interact did not necessarily show significant single-locus associations synonymous mutations, in 15 of 34 subjects with low folate status we in our previous study, except for rs741765. Our findings suggest that have identified either missense mutations or putative splicing/termina- gene-gene (SNP-SNP) interaction studies between STK11 and CRTC2 tion codon mutations. Functional testing of these candidate variants influencing susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in Japanese. and their frequency analysis in the entire cohort are now being car- ried out. This study indicates that private mutations in FOLR1, FOLR3, P09.059 An italian Network of isolated populations for genetic MTHFR and RFC genes may be associated with low folate status and dissection of complex traits may thus contribute to the susceptibility for several complex diseases. P. d‘Adamo1, D. Toniolo2, M. Ciullo3, U. Hladnik4, P. Gasparini1,5; This work has been supported by the grant No. NS10036-4/2008 from 1Institute for Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic. Italy, 2Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milan, Italy, 3Institute of Genetics and Biophysics “Adriano Buzzati-Traverso”, Naples, Italy, 4Medical Genetics, P09.057 the obesity-associated sNPs in intron 1 of the FTO M.Baschirotto Institute for Rare Diseases. B.I.R.D. Foundation, Costozza di gene affect primary transcript levels. Longare, Vicenza, Italy, 5University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. B. Horsthemke, T. Berulava; The use of isolated populations to reduce disease heterogeneity of Universitätsklinikum, Essen, Germany. complex disorders is a modern and valid instrument to study genetic As shown by genome-wide association studies, single nucleotide poly- basis of complex diseases. In order to better study multifactorial traits morphisms (SNPs) in intron 1 of the FTO gene are associated with the we have created a network (INGI) that join different isolated villages body mass index and type 2 diabetes, although the functional signifi- in Italy. We choose the populations in order to represent Italian vari- cance of these SNPs has remained unclear. Previous studies have not ability and differences between nord and south. At this moment there revealed any effect of the FTO genotype on total mRNA levels of the are about 1700 people from Val Borbera (nord-west), 1400 from Friuli FTO gene or the neighbouring RPGRIP1L gene. Such studies, how- Venezia Giulia (nord east) and 700 from Carlantino (south). ever, are confounded by the fact that unrelated individuals unavoidably In the isolates we have performed a fully clinical evaluation including differ in genetic background, environmental exposure and life events anamnesis, anthropometrical measurements, three blood pressure es- so that subtle effects cannot be detected. This problem can be cir- timates, a clinical chemistry, evaluation bone densitometry, ECG. We cumvented by determining the ratio of allelic transcript levels in het- have also created a DNA and sera banks. Some specialistic exami- erozygous individuals, where each allele serves as an internal control nations were performed: cardiological (ECG, echocardiogram), odon- for the other. To measure allelic transcript ratios, we developed highly toiatric (orthopantomography), neurological, psychiatrical examination quantitative fluorescence-tagged single nucleotide primer extension and bone densitometry and audiometry evaluations. We have also assays. For FTO, we used unspliced heterogeneous nuclear RNA collected information on dietary habits. and SNP rs9939609. Allelic expression ratios of the neighbouring RP- Moreover we have collected genealogical data using curch and mu- GRIP1L gene were investigated in individuals who were heterozygous nicipality registers. for the RPGRIP1L SNP rs4784319 and heterozygous or homozygous All samples were genotyped using ILLUMINA 370K SNPs-Array and for the FTO SNP rs9939609. In each of five different blood samples inferred using HapMap 2M data. We are currently performing infer- tested, the FTO transcripts containing the A (risk) allele of rs9939609 ences of all the populations using data derived from 1000 genomes were more abundant than those with the T allele (mean 1.38; 95% consortium. Thanks to the high number of phenotypes collected we confidence interval 1.31 to 1.44). Similar results were obtained in fi- are involved in different consortia for the identification of genetic fac- broblasts and adipocytes. We also observed skewed allelic expres- tors for common traits (heart traits like QT and PR intervals, hyper- sion of the RPGRIP1L gene, but skewing was independent of the FTO tension, white and red blood cells, platelets and menarche). We are genotype. Our data suggest that increased expression of FTO leads to currently performing association analysis for POF(premature ovarian increased body weight. failure), bone density, cardiac frequency, etc. but we are open to all possible collaborations. P09.060 iRAK3 gene variants associate with atopic asthma: a replication study in the spanish population M. Pino-Yanes1,2, A. Hernández3, J. Cumplido4, M. J. Torres-Galván5, I. Sánchez-Machín6, J. Figueroa7, R. González6, A. Corrales1,2, M. Casula1,8, T. E. Klassert9, O. Acosta Fernández10, I. García-Talavera10, T. Almeida9, M. Complex traits and polygenic disorders 22 Hernández9, S. Basaldúa1,2, J. C. García-Robaina6, T. Carrillo4, A. Sánchez- Analysis of 1,585,307 confidently imputed SNPs revealed three loci Palacios7, J. Villar1,8, C. Flores1,2; achieving genome-wide significance (p<5x10-8) that were replicated 1CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, in independent study groups of 1761 patients and 3727 control indi- Spain, 2Research Unit, Hospital Universitario NS de Candelaria, Tenerife, viduals of European origin. We confirmed HLA-C (p=2.63x10-23) and Spain, 3Instituto Nacional de Toxicologia y Ciencias Forenses, Delegación IL12B (p=5.60x10-13) as PsA susceptibility genes and observed sev- de Canarias, Tenerife, Spain, 4Allergy Unit, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrín, eral independent signals within the HLA region. The most associated Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, 5Research Unit, Hospital Universitario IL12B variant, located 72kb upstream of the gene, was independent of Dr. Negrín, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, 6Allergy Unit, Hospital previously reported psoriasis-associated IL12B-SNPs. Association to Universitario NS de Candelaria, Tenerife, Spain, 7Allergy Unit, Hospital several intragenic variants of the TRAF3IP2 gene (p=5.48x10-9) includ- Universitario Insular de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, ing the missense-variant R74W (rs13190932) was detected implicat- 8Multidisciplinary Organ Dysfunction Evaluation Research Network (MODERN), ing this component of the IL-17 receptor signalling pathway 1 as a PsA Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrín, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, susceptibility locus. Our study implicates new susceptibility variants Spain, 9Department of Genetics, Universidad de La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain, at known susceptibility loci and in addition identifies a novel pathway 10Neumology Unit, Hospital Universitario NS de Candelaria, Tenerife, Spain. for PsA. Asthma is a chronic inflammatory lung disease that is affected by both genetic and environmental factors. IRAK3 has recently emerged as a P09.062 the role and frequency of glutathione s-transferase new candidate gene for susceptibility as a result of positional cloning P1 polymorphism in Iranian patients affected with reflux of early onset persistent asthma in Sardinian families, with two SNPs esophagitis further replicated in a case-control sample of atopic persistent asthma N. Zendehdel1, N. Zendehdel2, H. Sarie3, M. Doughaiemoghaddam3, A. from Italy. Here we aimed to replicate the association of IRAK3 com- Pourshams4, A. A. Noormohammadi5, H. Gholami6, N. Zendehdel7, M. mon variants with susceptibility to asthma. Dehghani8, S. Latifi-Navid1; Using re-sequencing data of 23 kilobases of non-repetitive gene re- 1National Institue of Genetic Engineering, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, gions from 32 unrelated healthy subjects, we selected a set of 15 2Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic tagging SNPs (tagSNPs), forcing the inclusion of predicted functional of Iran, 3Fayazbakhsh Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Digestive variants and previously associated SNPs. Genotyping was conducted Disease Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5National Iranian by means of SNaPshot® Multiplex System in 611 asthmatic cases and Oil Company Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Iranian Tissue 1407 population-based controls from the Genetics Of Asthma study Bank- Tehran university of medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, (GOA) in the Spanish population. 7Khalig Fars Hospita, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 8Special Medical Center, Variants of IRAK3 showed no association with susceptibility to asthma, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. rhinitis, atopic dermatitis or total IgE. However, multiple SNPs distrib- Background: Reflux esophagitis is a common complication of the gas- uted across the gene associated with early onset asthma (0.009≤p- troesophageal reflux disease. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) have value≤0.043; q-value<0.10) and atopic asthma (0.016≤p-value≤0.050; important role in the protection of cells from the products of oxidative q-value<0.05), replicating the two previously associated SNPs from stress. GSTP1*B allele has a correlation with susceptibility to several the Italian study. Finally, a stratified analysis across Italian and Span- diseases. In this case-control study, the role and frequency of GSTP1 ish samples further supported the strength of the associations (min p = polymorphism was evaluated in Iranian patients with erosive reflux es- 1x10-5 in a joint analysis over >2500 individuals). ophagitis. Taken together, our results confirm that variants of IRAK3 gene might Methods: Seventy patients with reflux esophagitis and seventy-five play an important role in early onset and atopic asthma pathogenesis. normal individuals were enrolled in this study. The grade of esophagitis Supported by FUNCIS 23/07 and grants from the Spanish Ministry of was determined via endoscopy. DNA was extracted from venous blood Science and Innovation PI081383 and EMER07/001 to CF. of each subject using the salting out method. GSTP1 genetic polymor- phisms were detected using the PCR-RFLP method. P09.061 Genome wide association study identifies three loci Results: There was a significant difference between the frequency of associated with psoriatic arthritis non-variant (*A/*A) and variant GSTP1 genotypes (*A/*B, *B/*B) in U. D. Hüffmeier1, S. Uebe1, A. B. Ekici1, J. Bowes2, E. Giardina3, E. both patient and normal groups (P=0.006). Also in the patient group, Korendowych4, K. Juneblad5, M. Apel1, R. McManus6, P. Ho2, I. N. Bruce2, F. the grade B of esophagitis was significantly associated with variant Behrens7, B. Böhm7, H. Wichmann8,9, C. Herold10, M. Steffens10, L. Klareskog11, GSTP1 genotype (P=0.028). The rate of throat pain symptom was T. F. Wienker10, O. FitzGerald12, G. Alenius5, N. J. McHugh4,13, G. Novelli3, H. higher in the no-variant group (P<0.036). Burkhardt7, A. Barton2, A. Reis1; Conclusion: The GSTP1*B allele frequency in Iranian patients with re- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, flux esophagitis and normal control groups is similar to Orientals. In Germany, 2ARC Epidemiology Unit, Manchester Academic Health Science addition, GSTP1 polymorphism is correlated with a higher grade of Centre, University Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Department esophagitis. of Biopathology, Centre of Excellence for Genomic risk Assessment in Multifactorial and Complex Diseases, School of Medicine, University of Rome P09.063 the cA haplotype (-174c, -597A) of the iL-6 gene and “Tor Vergata” and Fondazione PTV “Policlinico Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, systemic sclerosis susceptibility 4Royal National Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Bath, United Kingdom, R. Sfrent-Cornateanu1, O. M. Popa1, C. Mihai1, R. Ionitescu1, I. Ancuta1, M. 5Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine/ Rheumatology, University Bojinca1, C. Bara1, R. Ionescu1, M. Dutescu2, L. Popa3; Hospital, Umeå, Sweden, 6Department of Clinical Medicine, Institute of 1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2C. T Molecular Medicine, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland, 7Division of Rheumatology, Nicolau National Institute of Hematology, Bucharest, Romania, 3Grigore Antipa Department of Internal Medicine II, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, National Museum of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania. Frankfurt/ Main, Germany, 8Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Systemic Sclerosis (SSc) is a complex multiorgan disease. The key Epidemiology, Chair of Epidemiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, steps in its pathogenesis include dysregulation of the immune system Germany, 9Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, 10Institute of Medical and early endothelial damage followed by the fibroblast activation. The Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University Bonn, Bonn, Germany, interleukin-6 (IL-6) gene is implicated in all of these pathogenic path- 11Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 12Department of Rheumatology, St. ways. Vincent’s University Hospital, UCD School of Medicine and Medical Science Objectives: to investigate the influence of the -174 G/C, -597 G/A SNP and Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University and their haplotypes on the susceptibility of SSc. College, Dublin, Ireland, 13Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Materials and Methods: We assessed 118 European Caucasians University Bath, Bath, United Kingdom. subjects (67 SSc patients -86.5%F/13.5%M and 51 healthy controls Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is an inflammatory joint disease distinct from -83%F/17%M) for -174G/C and -597 G/A SNP by PCR-RFLP method other chronic arthritides and frequently accompanied by psoriasis (Hsp 92II, Fok I as specific restriction enzymes). We used for all the vulgaris and seronegativity for rheumatoid factor. In order to identify statistical analyses the software package PLINK vl.07. The haplotype- susceptibility genes, we performed a SNP array based genome wide association tests were based on the expected number of haplotypes association study in 609 German patients and 990 control individuals. each individual has and was studied by the chi-squared test.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 20 Results: The genotype frequencies (Wigginton test) respected Hardy p=0.016) with a further two trend associated. This study provides pre- -Weinberg equilibrium for the controls but not for the SSc group. The liminary evidence that variants in the maternal HHEX - IDE locus are association analysis (Fischer test) showed no difference in the dis- associated with birth weight in SA subjects and also contributes to the tribution of allele frequencies regarding both SNP positions between development of T2D. SSc patients and controls. Four common haplotypes were identified. Among them, the CA haplotype (-174C, -597A) was present in 13.7% P09.066 serotonin receptor 1A -1019c/G polymorphism may SSc patients and 25.8%controls. We found a negative association influence treatment response to escitalopram in patients with (p=0.02) between the CA haplotype and SSc suggesting that this hap- melancholic depression lotype exert a protective effect against disease susceptibility. A. Tammiste1, K. Pettai1,2, T. Eller3, V. Vasar3, D. J. Nutt4, A. Metspalu2,5, E. Conclusions: This study shows no association of the IL-6 -174 (G/C) Maron3,4; and -597 (G/A) polymorphisms alone with SSc, but the CA haplotype 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Estonia, Tartu, (-174C, -597A) could confer a disease resistance in investigated popu- Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Psychiatry, lation. University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Neuropsychopharmacology and Molecular Imaging, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, P09.064 contribution of genetic factors to the variance in the 5Estonian Genome Project, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. frequency and severity of hereditary angioedema episodes In our previous study we demonstrated that melancholic subtype of de- A. Szilagyi1, D. Csuka1, L. Varga1, A. Bors2, L. Kalmar2, A. Tordai2, G. Fust1, H. pression predicted poor treatment response to escitalopram; however Farkas1; this was not associated with the serotonin transporter promoter-linked 13rd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, polymorphic region polymorphisms. Recently, Baune et al reported that Hungary, 2Laboratory of Molecular Diagnostics, Hungarian National Blood functional polymorphism -1019C/G in serotonin receptor 1A gene may Transfusion Service, Budapest, Hungary. have specific role in mediating antidepressant efficacy in depression Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare autosomal disorder caused by with melancholic features. In current study we examined the possible the deficiency of C1-inhibitor (C1INH) and characterized by recurrent impact of this polymorphism on the treatment response to escitalo- episodes of angioedema. Frequency and localization of the edemic pram in patients with major depression and particularly in depressive bouts are quite different sometimes even between members of the patients with melancholia. The 5-HT1A -1019C/G polymorphism was same family carrying identical C1INH mutation. Beside various trig- genotyped in 135 outpatients with major depressive disorder, MDD gering factors the different genetic background may contribute to the (mean age 31.1 ± 11.6 years, 68% females) treated with escitalopram variation of symptoms. We aimed to evaluate the association of five 10-20 mg/day for 12 weeks. Overall, there was no significant associa- polymorphisms of different genes related to the pathogenesis of the tion between -1019C/G polymorphism and escitalopram efficacy in to- disease with the frequency and localization of edemic episodes. More- tal sample of patients with MDD diagnosis. However, the melancholic over, correlation of C1INH concentrate usage with the occurrence of patients carrying GG genotype showed significantly poorer treatment these polymorphisms was also analyzed. response at week 12 of escitalopram medication than melancholic pa- One hundred and twenty-nine Caucasian HAE patients were enrolled tients with C alleles. The results of our study may give additional sup- in the study. The genotype of a 9 bp insertion/deletion polymorphism port to importance of 5-HT1A -1019C/G polymorphism in modulation of of the bradykinin B2 receptor gene, three single nucleotide polymor- antidepressant treatment in the melancholic subtype of depression. phisms of exon 1 (alleles A/B/C/D) within the gene of mannose-binding lectin and the copy numbers of complement component C4 genes were P09.067** Genome-Wide Association study reveals new gene determined applying PCR based methods. The potential influence of for hypospadias. different C1INH mutations on disease severity was also evaluated. L. F. M. van der Zanden1, I. A. L. M. van Rooij1, J. Knight2, S. H. H. M. We found that the analyzed polymorphisms are associated with the Vermeulen1, W. F. J. Feitz1, L. S. Baskin3, A. Nordenskjöld4, N. Roeleveld1, N. V. frequency and localization of attacks. Our data indicate that the stud- A. M. Knoers1, B. Franke1; ied variations are independent predictors of HAE attack frequency and 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2King‘s C1INH concentrate usage irrespectively of the carried C1INH muta- College London, London, United Kingdom, 3University of California, San tion. Francisco, CA, United States, 4Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Characterization of genetic factors influencing severity of edemic at- Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male ex- tacks may help in the near future to find the best therapeutic interven- ternal genitalia with a multifactorial etiology. To identify genetic vari- tion for hereditary angioedema patients with different symptoms. ants contributing to susceptibility for hypospadias, we performed the first Genome-wide Association Study (GWAS) for this malformation P09.065 HHEX-IDE genotype associated with birth weight in using DNA pooling. We included 436 Caucasian cases with isolated south Asians glanular or penile hypospadias from the AGORA project (Aetiologic re- L. K. Towns1, M. Attard2, A. J. Walley2, U. L. Fairbrother1; search into Genetic and Occupational/environmental Risk factors for 1London Metropolitan University, London, United Kingdom, 2Imperial College Anomalies in children) and 494 unaffected Dutch males and allelo- London, London, United Kingdom. typed 906,600 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using Affyme- Within an obesogenic environment the South Asian population have trix 6.0 arrays. Allele frequencies were calculated using k-corrected a higher propensity to develop obesity and T2D. SA infants appear to signal intensities. The highest ranked SNPs that fulfilled quality-control have more central visceral adipose tissue at birth than white Cauca- criteria were selected for individual genotyping. Seven SNPs were lo- sians. Raised levels of adipose tissue increases the risk of T2D and cated in one X-chromosomal gene. As most SNPs in this gene are in cardiovascular disease in adulthood. Low birth weight followed by strong linkage disequilibrium with each other, individual samples were rapid catch up to normal weight in babies has been associated with genotyped for the (intronic) SNP that tagged most other SNPs and insulin VNTR alleles and childhood obesity. HHEX - IDE is a recently for a potentially regulatory SNP in the 5’ upstream region. Both SNPs published candidate region for a role in obesity and T2D in Cauca- showed highly statistically significant association results in individual sians. There is some evidence that HHEX - IDE influences fetal birth genotyping (odds ratio (OR) = 2.45, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.88- weight with a parent of origin effect. Since insulin is an important in- 3.20, p=3.2E-11 and OR=2.25, 95% CI 1.71-2.94, p=3.5E-9, respec- trauterine growth factor, HHEX - IDE is an interesting candidate in ei- tively). These results were replicated in an additional Dutch sample of ther increasing or ameliorating childhood obesity. Our study was de- 75 hypospadias cases and 102 controls (OR=2.18, 95% CI 1.17-4.05, signed to ascertain whether variants in the HHEX - IDE locus of 663 p=0.014 and OR=1.89, 95% CI 1.01-3.53, p=0.045, respectively). SA mothers influence fetal birth weight. Using the Sequenom iPLEX Furthermore, nine SNPs in other genes were genotyped in the indi- assay, 37 SNPs spanning the maternal HHEX - IDE locus have been vidual samples, of which seven showed statistically significant results genotyped. ANCOVA analysis controlling for gestational age, maternal (p<0.05). Replication in 350 hypospadias cases and 350 controls from booking weight, fetal sex and parity revealed one SNP significantly Sweden is ongoing as are experiments studying expression of the X- associated with birth weight (rs12765131 p=0.002) and two trend as- chromosomal gene in relevant human tissue. sociated. Three SNPs were also found to be associated with T2D in the mothers (rs4933236 p=0.011, rs2488073 p=0.020 and rs2497349 Complex traits and polygenic disorders 21 P09.068 Distribution of functional polymorphic variants of pro- P09.070 Detection, genetic impact and distribution of inflammatory related genes RANTES and CCR5 in long-lived hypervariable region in human Na(+)-ca(2+) exchanger (NcX1) individuals intronic region among European, Asian and African populations M. Laplana, J. Fibla; K. Kepp1, E. Org1, S. Sõber1, P. Kelgo1, M. Viigimaa2, G. Veldre1,3, N. IRBLleida, University of Lleida, Lleida, Spain. Tõnisson1, P. Juhanson1, M. Putku1, A. Kindmark4, V. Kozich5, M. Laan1; The positive effect of the immune system protecting against pathogens 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, and tumour-cells spread, can be turned out, later in life, as a detri- Tartu, Estonia, 2Centre of Cardiology, North Estonia Medical Centre, Tallinn, mental chronic inflammation fading longevity. It has been considered Estonia, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Cardiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, that the persistent activation of inflammatory status is related to unsuc- Estonia, Estonia, 4Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University cessful aging meanwhile the prevention of inflammation contributes to Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Institute of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Charles healthy aging. Nevertheless, a pro-inflammatory status is the common University – First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, Tartu, Estonia. phenotype in older people. In order to assess for a genetic component Although short insertions and deletions (indels; <100bp) are abundant in the elderly pro-inflammatory status we have studied the distribution in the human genome, little attention is paid to their effect on gene of functional polymorphic variants of two genes from the chemokine regulation and disease susceptibility. We have targeted non-coding re- pro-inflammatory pathway, RANTES and CCR5, in long-lived indi- gions of cardiovascular disease (CVD) candidate gene, Na(+)-Ca(2+) viduals. A promoter polymorphism of the RANTES gene (rs2107538; exchanger (NCX1) with polymorphism screening among CVD patients -403G/A) and an insertion/deletion polymorphism of the CCR5 gene and identified a 14bp intronic indel (rs11274804). Genotyping among (rs333, delta32) were genotyped in a cohort of 214 subjects; 104 octo- Eastern-Europeans (n=1792) revealed that the analyzed 348bp region genarians (>85 years, 72 women and 32 men) and 110 sex-matched was hypervariable, represented by seven different alleles. The align- healthy young individuals (75 women and 35 men). Selected poly- ments of human-chimpanzee-macaque sequences showed that the morphic variants have functional effects on the RANTES/CCR5 pro- major human variant (allele frequency 90.45%) was actually a human- inflammatory mediated pathway. RANTES-403A rare allele increases specific deletion compared to other primates. In humans, this deletion the promoter transcriptional activity that results in high serum RANTES was surrounded by other short (5-43bp) deletion variants and a dupli- levels favouring a pro-inflammatory status. In contrast, delta32 CCR5 cation (40bp) polymorphism possessing overlapping breakpoints. The deletion variant abrogates functional CCR5 receptor expressions that observed high variation reflects on a potential indel hotspot, which may weaken the pro-inflammatory CCR5 mediated action. No differences have been triggered by the initial deletion in human lineage. Associa- were observed in global genotype and allele distribution between oc- tion of NCX1 intronic 14bp indel (rs11274804) with CVD was studied in togenarians and controls. In contrast, male octogenarians shows and two Eastern-European sample sets: essential hypertension (HYPEST; overrepresentation of RANTES-403A allele (OR=3.2 95%C.I.=1.2-8.5; n=1122; cases n=470/controls=652) and coronary artery disease, CAD p=0.012) and RANTES-403A carrier genotypes (OR=4.0 95%C.I.=1.3- (CADCZ; n=670; cases n=257/controls=413). An association was de- 11.7; p=0.01). Our results suggest a male-specific pro-inflammatory tected between the carrier status of 14bp indel allele and the diagnosis genetic determinant that could contribute to the known gender differ- of CAD (P=0.0016, OR=2.02; Bonferroni significance level α=0.0045), ences in aging. but not with hypertension. The risk for the CAD development was even higher among the patients additionally diagnosed with metabolic syn- P09.069 Oxidative and carbonyl stress-induced DNA damage in drome (P=0.0014, OR=2.34). Consistent with the effect on metabolic patients with inflammatory bowel disease processes, the 14bp indel showed also suggestive evidence for the as- D. Baláková1, M. Baldovič1,2, G. Minárik1, I. Čierna2, M. Bátovský3, T. Hlavatý3, sociation with heart rate, serum triglyceride and LDL levels (P=0.04). L. Kádaši1,4, P. Celec1,5; 1Department of Molecular Biology, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, P09.071 Association between genetic variation in the gene 2Children‘s Hospital, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Faculty encoding coagulation factor Xi and ischemic stroke Hospital, Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Institute of Molecular Physiology E. Hanson1,2, T. Zagoras2, S. Nilsson3, C. Blomstrand1, K. Jood1, C. Jern1,2; and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Institute of 1Institute of neuroscience and physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the Molecular Biomedicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Department of Clinical Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are chronic relapsing Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Department inflammatory disorders of the gastrointestinal tract. Oxidative stress, of Mathematical Statistics, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, defined as an imbalance between the production of reactive oxygen Sweden. species and antioxidative mechanisms, caused by the chronic inflam- Background: Coagulation factor XI (FXI) contributes to hemostasis by mation is one of the potential mechanisms leading to systemic com- activating factor IX and by down-regulating fibrinolysis. Association plications. Mitochondria are organelles with the highest production of between high levels of FXI and atherothrombotic disease including free radicals and lowest antioxidant status, therefore, mitochondrial ischemic stroke (IS) has been reported in a few studies. The aim of DNA (mtDNA) is at high risk of oxidative damage. Increased oxidative the present study was to investigate whether there is an association stress in inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) leads to lipoperoxidation between genetic variation in the gene encoding FXI (F11) and IS. and the production of carbonyl compounds. Carbonyl stress repre- Methods: The Sahlgrenska Academy Study on Ischemic Stroke sents an important pathomechanism in several metabolic diseases, (SAHLSIS) comprises 845 Caucasian patients with IS and 668 Cau- but its role in IBD has not been described yet. casian population-based controls. Stroke subtype was defined using We investigated 212 IBD patients and 47 control subjects. In our study TOAST criteria. Seven tagSNPs in the F11 gene were selected from we analyzed the fragmentation of mtDNA in association with polymor- HapMap. Genotyping was performed with the Illumina GoldenGate as- phisms in ATG16L1 and PTGER4 and carbonyl damage of DNA quan- say. Haplotypes were inferred using the EM algorithm. tified as AGE-specific fluorescence. Results: Three SNPs (rs1593, rs3733440, and rs925451) in the F11 In our cohort of Slovak IBD patients we did not confirm the associa- gene showed significant associations with overall IS. All associations tion of rs3828309 in ATG16L1 and rs4613763 in PTGER4 with IBD remained after adjustment for vascular risk factors with odds ratios decribed in several genome-wide association studies. We did not find (ORs) for the minor allele of 0.69 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.54- any differences in AGE-specific fluorescence of DNA between IBD pa- 0.88), 0.76 (95% CI 0.60-0.96) and 1.24 (95% CI 1.06-1.46), respec- tients and controls. In contrast, fragmentation of mtDNA was found to tively. Genetic variation in the F11 gene was also independently as- be increased in CD patients compared to controls dependeding on the sociated with the etiologic IS subtypes of small-vessel disease (SVD), ATG16L1 genotype. cardioembolic (CE) stroke and cryptogenic stroke. Furthermore, hap- Our findings should be complemented by analyzing additional bio- lotype analysis revealed that two F11 haplotypes were significantly as- chemical markers of oxidative and carbonyl stress in further studies. sociated with overall IS. Conclusions: In this study we found independent associations be- tween F11 gene variation and overall IS as well as the IS subtypes of SVD, CE stroke, and cryptogenic stroke. These findings motivate further studies on the importance of FXI in IS.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 22 P09.072 Genetic variation on chromosome 9p21 shows P09.074 Low frequency variants affecting lipid levels in the association with large-vessel disease in a swedish sample aged Finnish population ≤70 years K. Rehnstrom1,2, I. Surakka2, J. Kettunen2, S. Ripatti2, L. Peltonen1,2; S. Olsson1,2, K. Jood1, C. Blomstrand§1, C. Jern1,2; 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Institute for 1Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Clinical Neuroscience Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. and Rehabilitation, the Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, The SNP genotyping platforms for genome-wide association studies Sweden, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, (GWASs) contain mostly common SNPs, but it has become evident Gothenburg, Sweden. that common SNPs only explain a part of the heritability of complex Background: Ischemic stroke (IS) is a complex disease in which en- disorders. A small number of low frequency SNPs (lfSNPs) are also vironmental and genetic factors make about equal contribution to the present on these chips, but the statistical power to detect associa- etiology. The aim of this study was to independently validate a recent tion between a single low frequency variant and a phenotype is low. finding of an association between genetic variants on chromosome The presence or absence of lfSNPs within a predefined region can be 9p21 and the subtype large-vessel disease (LVD). used as a pseudomarker which provides increased statistical power to Methods: The Sahlgrenska Academy Study on Ischemic Stroke identify genes with multiple low frequency variants contributing to the (SAHLSIS) comprises 844 Caucasian patients, who suffered IS before phenotype. Although these rare variant collapsing methods are primar- reaching the age of 70 years, and 668 healthy Caucasian controls. IS ily developed for resequencing data, here we have used available ge- subtype was defined according to the TOAST criteria, and 111 patients nome-wide SNP data to test for association of low frequency variants were categorized as LVD. Seven SNPs, rs10965227, rs1547705, with lipid measures. rs1333040, rs7857345, rs1333045, rs10757278, and rs1537378 were We used three Finnish datasets (n=8913) with measures of total cho- analyzed. lesterol, HDL, LDL and triglyceride levels. We used QuTie software, Results: The mean age of controls and patients with IS (including LVD) which pools low frequncy variants within genes and tests for differ- was 56 years and the mean age of patients with LVD was 60 years. ences in quantitative trait means in individuals with at least one lfSNP The uncommon (A) allele of SNP rs7857345 was associated with a compared to individuals with none. Summary statistics per gene were decreased risk of LVD after adjustment for age and sex (OR 0.61, 95% combined across datasets using inverse variance meta-analysis. CI 0.44-0.86, p=0.004). This association remained after adjustment In our preliminary analysis, we identified significant enrichment of lf- also for vascular risk factors (OR 0.58, 95% CI 0.39-0.86, p=0.007), SNPs in multiple regions, including 20q13.12 and 6p22.2. Next, the and in this analysis an association with LVD was also detected for genotyping quality of the identified SNPs needs to be addressed. Our rs10965227 (OR 1.57, 95% CI 1.06-2.34, p=0.02). In contrast, no results suggest that low frequency variants, which are usually exclud- significant associations were found for the other three IS subtypes or ed from GWASs, should be included in analyses. Careful inspection overall IS. In addition, an association between rs7857345 and func- of the clustering quality of identified SNPs is needed to exclude false tional outcome two years after LVD was also observed. positive signals. Conclusion: In this relatively young Caucasian population of patients with IS, genetic variation on 9p21 is associated with the IS subtype P09.075 Patogenetics of the liver cirrhosis: Polymorphism of LVD. glutation s-transferase genes I. A. Goncharova1, M. I. Rachkovskiy2, E. V. Beloborodova2, H. Gamal Abd P09.073 Association between connective tissue disorders, bone El-Aziz Nasr2, V. P. Pyzirev1; mineral density and bone methabolism in juvenile idiopathic 1Scientific Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, arthritis patients 2State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. M. V. Moskalenko1,2, M. M. Kostik3, G. S. Demin2, M. N. Ostroumova4, I. G. Deletion polymorphism in genes GSTT1, GSTM1 and polymorphic Makarova4, M. M. Mnuskina4, L. A. Scheplyagina5, V. I. Larionova3; variant in gene GSTP1 (A313G) were studied for their association with 1Institute of Hematology & Transfusiology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, cirrhosis and probability of survival during four years from the moment 2Gene Ltd, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Saint-Petersburg State of inclusion into study. Population of Tomsk region (West Siberia) was Pediatric Medical Academy, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4City’s examined in the current study. We have shown that homozygous dele- Diagnostic Center for Adults N1, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5Scientific tion for GSTM1 (null genotype) is protective factor against develop- and Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology & Immunology, ment of alcoholic and mixed (HCV, HBV and alcohol) liver cirrhosis. Moscow, Russian Federation. The patients in general group and with alcoholic and mixed cirrhosis Background and aims: Connective tissue disorders (CTD) are very had lower frequency of null genotypes for GSTM1 then the control common clinical syndrome among children with juvenile idiopathic ar- group (39.2%; 39%; 34.2%) (p=0.6x10-4; p=0.1x10-2; p=0.1x10-3). The thritis (JIA). The aim of our study was to investigate and compare data null genotypes for GSTM1 and polymorphic variant in GSTP1(A313G) on bone densitometry, bone biochemistry and molecular assay in JIA were associated with four years patients survival. The survived patients patients depending on present of CTD. had higher frequency of null genotypes for GSTM1 (46.6%; 30.2%) Methods: 198 JIA children were included in our study. P. Beighton (p=0.03) and genotypes AA in GSTP1(A313G) (63.1% and 40.5%) and score was used for determinate joint hypermobility index. Bone min- lower frequency of genotypes AG in gene GSTP1 (A313G) (31.1% and eralization was detected by dual-energy X-ray absorbtiometry of lum- 51.2%)(p=0.8x10-2). Chance to survive was higher for patients with bar spine. Bone metabolic parameters such as osteocalcine, parathy- genotype AA in GSTP1 (A313G) (OR=2.52; 1.34<OR<4.75; p=0.3x10- roid hormone and C-terminal telopeptides, Ca and Ca2+, nonorganic 2) and null genotypes for GSTM1 (OR=2.01; 1.06<OR<3.85; p=0.032). phosphorus levels and total alkaline phosphatase (TAP) activity were The probability of a fatal outcome is higher for patients with genotype determinated. Molecular testing of ApaI, TagI, BsmI VDR gene poly- AA in GSTP1(A313G) (OR=2.33; 1.23<OR<4.43; p=0.8x10-2). morphisms, Sp1 Col1a1 gene polymorphism and HindIII BGLAP gene polymorphism were provided by PCR-RFLP. P09.076 Resequencing candidate genes for major depressive Results: We have revealed that CTD was more frequent among JIA disorder in a Dutch cohort patients (79.7%). Low bone mineral density (BMD) for chronological E. C. Verbeek1, M. R. Bevova1, Z. Bochdanovits1, P. Heutink1, W. J. G. age was 3 times higher in CTD children with JIA, in boys also higher Hoogendijk2; (26.7%) than in girls (20.0%). Significantly lower BMD (-0.19±1.05 SD 1VUMC, Dept. Medical Genomics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2VUMC, Dept. and 0.5±0.92 SD, relatively, p=0.01) and higher TAP activity (354.6 Psychiatry, Amsterdam, Netherlands. ±117.2 U\l and 300.1±102.1 U\l, respectively, p=0.05) were detected in Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common complex trait charac- CTD children. There was no difference in genotype and allelic distribu- terized by prolonged dysphoria, changes in appetite and sleeping be- tion of studied genes, impacted in bone metabolism and mineralization haviour, feelings of worthlessness and additional cognitive symptoms. in JIA children, depending on presence of CTD. Besides being a burden for patients and their relatives, MDD is also Conclusion: We have revealed an association between CTD and low one of the leading causes of disability in western civilization, with enor- bone mineralization, high alkaline phosphatase activity and found no mous consequences for the economy and healthcare. difference in frequencies of VDR and Col1a1 genetic polymorphisms In a 2008 genome wide association study (GWAS) for MDD, Sullivan in children with JIA. et al. found a significant single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 piccolo gene (pclo). Pclo codes for a protein that is localized in the distributions depended on the MS anomalies. Conclusion: Genetic presynaptic area. polymorphisms can be associated with some abnormalities of MS in We plan to resequence pclo in 50 control samples to look at all normal males. variants, find possible new risk factors for MDD, refine patterns of in- heritance and to find further evidence that the SNP found by Sullivan P09.079 A genome-wide perspective of genetic variation in et al. is truly the causal SNP. The variations that we want to find are human metabolism SNPs, Copy Number Variations and Insertions/Deletions. C. Gieger1, T. Illig1, G. Zhai2, W. Römisch-Margl3, R. Wang-Sattler1, C. Prehn4, We hybridize genomic DNA to NimbleGen Sequence Capture arrays E. Altmaier3,5, G. Kastenmüller3, B. S. Kato2, H. W. Mewes3,6, T. Meitinger7,8, M. to capture the DNA of interest. Hybridized DNA is eluted using NaOH Hrabé de Angelis4,9, F. Kronenberg10, N. Soranzo11,2, H. E. Wichmann1,12, T. D. and then amplified with ligation mediated PCR. After amplification we Spector2, J. Adamski4,9, K. Suhre3,5; compare the enrichment of our target DNA to genomic DNA for sev- 1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, eral control loci. After having sufficient enrichment (>100x), indexes Germany, 2Department of Twin Research & Genetic Epidemiology, King’s are ligated to the DNA for identification. Samples are then sequenced College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Bioinformatics using an Illumina GAII-machine. Sequence data is then aligned back and Systems Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, to the reference genome and variants are detected by CLC Genomics Germany, 4Institute of Experimental Genetics, Genome Analysis Center, Workbench software. Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany, 5Faculty of Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany, P09.077 complex etiology of an apparently mendelian form of 6Department of Genome-oriented Bioinformatics, Life and Food Science Center mental retardation Weihenstephan, Technische Universität München, Freising-Weihenstephan, K. Gustavson; Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Clinical Genetics, Rudbeck Laboratory,Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany, 8Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts Sweden. der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 9Institute of The genetic causes for an apparently recessive form of non syndromic Experimental Genetics, Life and Food Science Center Weihenstephan, mental retardation, in a large nordern swedish pedigree from an inbred Technische Universität München, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany, 10Division population, are investigated. of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular and After extensive evaluation of the patients, which ruled out a recogniz- Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 11The able pattern of malformation and excluded the most common causes of Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, MR, a comprehensive linkage-wide genome analysis, with 500 micro- United Kingdom, 12Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, satellite markers, was performed in 24 members of this family,including Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität and Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany. 9 mild mentally retarded individuals and 14 non affected individuals . No Serum metabolite concentrations provide a direct readout of biologi- significant LOD score was found with either parametric and non para- cal processes in the human body, and are associated with disorders metric linkage analysis. The highest scores, both with MODSCORE such as cardiovascular and metabolic diseases. Here we present a and SimWalk parametric analysis are located at chromosomes 13, 15 genome-wide association study with 163 metabolic traits using 1,809 and 17. Additionally, a copy number analysis, using an affimetrix 250K participants from the KORA population, followed up in the TwinsUK SNP chip, was performed in this pedigree. No clear cause for the dis- cohort with 422 participants. In eight out of nine replicated loci (FADS1, order was identified; but rather, several variants were present in the ELOVL2, ACADS, ACADM, ACADL, SPTLC3, ETFDH, SLC16A9) the family members, irrespective of their affected status. genetic variant is located in or near enzyme or solute carrier coding These results suggest that the mental retardation in this family, unlikely genes, where the associating metabolic traits match the proteins’ func- what we were expecting, has a heterogeneous etiology; and that there tion. Many of these loci are located in rate limiting steps of important might be several lower effect genes variants enzymatic reactions. Use of metabolite concentration ratios as proxies for enzymatic reaction rates reduces the variance and yields robust P09.078 Polymorphic genetic markers play role in developing of statistical associations with p-values between the metabolic syndrome abnormalities in men 3x10^-24 and 6.5x10^-179. These loci explained 5.6% to 36.3% of A. N. Voytovich1, M. A. Bogdanova1, O. S. Romashkina1, B. I. Smirnov2, A. the observed variance. For three loci, an association with clinical end- A. Bystrova3, T. D. Glebovskaja4, M. I. Badmaeva3, E. I. Krasilnikova3, O. A. points has previously been reported (SLC22A4 with Crohn’s disease, Berkovich3, E. V. Shliakhto3, V. I. Larionova1; FADS1 with hyperactivity and lipid levels, ACADS as susceptibility lo- 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian cus for ethylmalonic aciduria). For several others (ACADM, ACADL and Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Electrotechnical University, St. Petersburg, ETFDH), loss of function of the corresponding gene leads to severe Russian Federation, 3St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, St. Mendelian disorders. As pointed out in a recent editorial, this shows Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Federal heart, blood end endocrinology the potential for discovering key steps in human metabolism, including center n.a. V.A. Almazov, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. common but minor inborn errors or minor variations of metabolism that We investigated genotype distributions of several polymorphisms of are part of the disease process (Mootha, V.K. and Hirschhorn, J.N. genes APOA1 G-75A and C+83T, APOC3 Sst1, APOE, APOA5 T- Inborn variation in metabolism. in Nat Genet. 42 97-8 (2010)). 1131C and S19W, ADRB3 W64R, and ACE I/D to define predictive ge- netic factors of metabolic and physiological abnormalities of the meta- P09.080 Matrix metalloproteinase-9 gene polymorphisms and bolic syndrome (MS). Study population: 501 MS patients (176 males multiple sclerosis and 325 females, average age 61.7±1.0) and 199 controls (115 males A. La Russa1, V. De Marco1, V. Andreoli1, F. Trecroci1, P. Valentino2, P. of average age 40.0±0.5 and 84 females of average age 85.9±0.5). Spadafora1, E. Altomare1, I. Cirò Candiano1, R. Cittadella1; Almost all MS patients were moderately or severely obese, 382 pa- 1Istituto di Scienze Neurologiche C.N.R., Cosenza, Italy, 2Istituto di Neurologia tients had diabetes mellitus type II. Results. The male patients had Università “Magna Graecia” Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy. a higher rate of APOA5 19W-allele carries compared to the controls To investigate the role of the matrix metalloproteinase-9 gene (MMP- (OR=4.77, 95% CI 1.40-16.24). The males with abdominal obesity had 9) in multiple sclerosis (MS), we analyzed the functional -1562C/T a higher rate of APOA1 -75A-allele (OR=2.01, 95% CI 1.12-3.61) car- and -90 (CA) repeat polymorphisms, located in the promoter region n ries and the males without hypertension had a higher rate of APOE of this gene, in 243 Italian MS patients and 173 healthy controls. A E2-allele carries (OR=3.16, 95% CI 1.36-7.35), compared to the con- markedly significant increase of the -1562T allele carriers in MS pa- trols. Also, the rate of APOE E2-allele carries was higher among the tients compared to controls was found (P = 5.6 x 10-5, adjusted OR = patients with triglyceride levels above the 90th age and sex specific 2.57, 95% CI = 1.52- 4.36). Moreover, also carriers of higher than 20 percentile (OR=2.22, 95% CI 1.10-4.48) and among the patients with CA repeats were significantly more frequent among MS patients than total cholesterol levels below the 10th age and sex specific percentile among controls (P = 0.011, adjusted OR = 1.53, 95% CI = 1.06-2.02). (OR=2.47, 95% CI 1.04-5.85), compared to the controls. The only sig- There were no differences in MS disability status, age at onset and nificant difference in female groups was that the patients had a lower disease duration among the genotypes. Haplotype analysis showed rate of ACE D-allele carries compared to the controls (OR=0.85, 95% that the haplotype formed by the -1562T allele and the L allele (lower CI 0.75-0.97). Females had not a significant difference in genotype than 20 CA repeats) was over-represented in MS patients versus con-Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 trols, suggesting it could be a possible risk factor for the disease (P = Conclusion: This is the first study replicating the association between 2.14·x10-5, OR=6.79, 95% CI=2.82-16.35). These results suggest that the MTNR1B locus and diabetes-related traits in overweight and obese genetic polymorphisms of the MMP-9 promoter regions may influence children and adolescents. The effect size in children is higher than in the susceptibility to MS. adults, whereas the effect size differs between BMI-SDS categories. P09.081 Monoamine oxidase A and B genes (MAOA and MAOB) P09.083 and their influence on personality traits in healthy individuals Role of mitochondria in multiple sclerosis A. Khannanova1,2, A. Kazantseva1, E. Khusnutdinova1; M. Houshmand1, H. H. Kumleh1, A. Azadi2; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian 1National institute for Genetic Engineering &Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Academy of Sciencies, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biology, Azerbaijan University of Tarbiat University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Moallem,, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. Complex phenotypes, such as personality traits, are presumably af- Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating disease of the central ner- fected by the interaction of multiple genes of small effect. Since psy- vous system characterized by the morphological hallmarks of inflam- chobiological model of personality was proposed by Cloninger, inter- mation, demyelination and axonal loss. est of scientific groups has been focused on neurotransmitter system We have sequenced the mtDNA HVS-I in 54 MS patients and 100 con- genes. trol subjects. We have found that haplogroups A and K are significantly We aimed to define a single genotype effect of MAOA VNTR and more abundant in MS patients. Thus, these two haplogroups might act MAOB rs6651806 polymorphisms and to check possible interaction synergistically to increase the penetrance of MS disease. effect between them and personality traits (assessed with TCI-125 Kinetic analysis of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I enzyme questionnaire). was performed on intact mitochondria isolated from fresh skeletal We recruited 652 healthy individuals (men-222, women-430) of Cau- muscle in MS patients (n =10) and control subjects (n =11). Mitochon- casian origin (Russians-233, Tatars-419) from Russia (mean age: drial DNA common deletion and deletions were also tested in MS pa- 19.53±2.24 years). The main and interaction effects of gene polymor- tients. Our findings showed that complex I activities were significantly phisms on personality traits were detected under ANOVA and MANO- reduced in patients compared with control. However, we could not find VA (SPSS 13.0). deletion in mtDNA of patients with MS. This study suggested that a Considering MAOA and MAOB genes location, we conducted analysis biochemical defect in complex I activity may be involved in pathogen- in each gender separately. Moreover, our preliminary study demon- esis of MS. strated ethnic differences in personality that indicates the necessity To evaluate the link between MS and LHON primary point mutations, of groups’ combination with respect to ethnicity. ANOVA performed in we investigated 31 non-related Iranian clinically definite MS patients female Tatars group revealed an association between MAOA 4R-allele with optic nerve involvement, as well as 25 patients without involve- and higher Persistence (P=0.023). We observed significantly higher ment of the optic nerve as controls. Our results suggest that there Reward Dependence (P=0.018) and lower Novelty Seeking (P=0.007) is no association between Iranian patients with MS and mtDNA point in Russian male and female carriers with MAOB C-allele respectively. mutations at np 11,778, 3,460, and 14,484. Subsequent MANOVA revealed the influence of MAOB*MAOA interac- We sequenced mitochondrial complex I subunit in MS patient (ND1- tion on Persistence (P=0.021) and Cooperativeness (P=0.015) in Tatar ND6). No pathogenic mutations were found in our patient’s. We con- females, and on Reward Dependence (P=0.004) and Cooperativeness clude that it may mitochondrial nuclear subunit of complex I gene play (P=0.001) in Russian females. roll in MS patient. Our findings point to the possible involvement of enzymes responsible for neurotransmitters degradation (MAOB, MAOA) in approach-related P09.084 CASP-9 exon 1 polymorphism in patients with Multiple personality traits in healthy individuals. sclerosis. F. Trecroci1, R. Cittadella1, F. Condino1, P. Spadafora1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, G. P09.082 Association of a melatonin receptor 1B (MTNR1B) Di Palma1, M. Caracciolo1, P. Valentino2, V. Andreoli1; gene variant with fasting glucose and HOmA-B in children and 1Institute of Neurological Sciences,National Research Council, Pianolago adolescents of high Bmi-sDs groups di Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, C. Holzapfel1,2, M. Siegrist3, M. Rank3, H. Langhof4, H. Grallert2,5, J. Baumert2, Catanzaro, Italy. S. Wipfinger4, C. Irimie4, N. Klopp2, B. Wolfarth3, T. Illig2, H. Hauner1, M. Halle3; The pathogenesis of Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is under strong genetic 1Else Kröner-Fresenius-Centre for Nutritional Medicine, Munich, Germany, control involving several genes. Apoptosis signaling-related genes are 2Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Institute of Epidemiology, Neuherberg, strong candidate genes for involvement in MS, because apoptosis is a Germany, 3Preventive and Rehabilitative Sports Medicine, Munich, Germany, common regulatory mechanism for normal development and homeo- 4Rehabilitation Hospital Schönsicht, Berchtesgaden, Germany, 5Ludwig- stasis of the immune system, and the elimination of autoreactive T cells Maximilians-University, Chair of Epidemiology, Munich, Germany. via apoptosis appears to be impaired in MS. Particularly, CASP-9 is an Background: Genome-wide association studies have shown, that the initiator CASP in the apoptosome-driven apoptosis pathway and plays polymorphism rs10830963 within the melatonin receptor 1B (MTN- an crucial role in the initiation phase of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway. R1B) gene is strongly associated with fasting glucose levels and the To explore the possibility that the genetic alterations of CASP-9 might risk of type 2 diabetes. However, these data are limited to adults and be involved in the development of MS, we analyzed a SNP in a set of little is known whether similar associations are prevalent in overweight 296 MS patients from Southern Italy and 255 healthy controls subjects and obese children and adolescents as well. from the same geographical area: a C to T polymorphism in the codin Objective: The aim of our study was to replicate the findings concerning region of the gene at codon 93 (exon 1). Genomic DNA was isolated fasting glucose in a sample of 472 overweight and obese children and from blood and this polymorphism was determined by PCR-RFLP as- adolescents (mean body mass index standard deviation score (BMI- say. Our results showed no significant differences in the allele and SDS): 2.77 (±0.55) / mean age: 14 (±2) years), who participated in a genotype distribution of the CASP-9 polymorphism between MS pa- short-term weight loss program (energy reduction, increased physical tients and controls. In addition, dividing patients according to disease activity, behaviour therapy). Furthermore, we investigated an associa- type, EDSS, or age and gender did not yield significant differences for tion between genotype and fasting insulin, homeostasis model assess- the examined polymorphism. The present findings from Italian popula- ment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR), beta-cell function (HOMA-B), tion suggest that there was no association between this polymorphism and weight loss as well as changes of glucose during weight loss. and susceptibility to MS. Therefore, in the absence of conclusive data, Results: The minor G allele of polymorphism rs10830963 was associat- we cannot exclude the possibility that our results are only partially in- ed with an increase of fasting glucose levels (0.132 mmol/l, p=6.37x10- dicative because the association between genetic polymorphisms and 5) and decreased HOMA-B (-0.233, p=1.95x10-4). BMI-SDS adjustment MS may also vary with ethnicity. did not change this association. Categorizing the sample into BMI-SDS groups, the significant association was abolished in children with BMI- SDS <2.5. However, for more obese children (BMI-SDS: 2.5≤x<3) the beta estimate was much higher (0.212 mmol/l, p=1.26x10-5).Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 P09.085 complex I deficiency in MS caused by mitochondrial P09.087 The double-faced association of the PRKCA gene with genes or nuclear one ? multiple sclerosis A. Azadi1, M. Houshmand2; E. M. Paraboschi1, G. Soldà1, V. Rimoldi1, C. Dall’Osso1, G. M. Anelli1, D. 1Department of Biology, Azarbaijan University of Tarbiat Moallem, Tabriz, Iran, Gemmati2, P. Zamboni3, A. Salviati4, M. Benedetti4, S. D’Alfonso5, S. Duga1, R. Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Asselta1; Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic disease of central nervous system. Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 2Center Hemostasis & Thrombosis, University Demyelination and devastation of axons occur in this disease. Genetic of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 3Vascular Diseases Center, University of Ferrara, and environmental factors are important in the risk of developing the Ferrara, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche e della Visione, Università disease. Complex I that composed of at least 46 subunits contains di Verona, Verona, Italy, 5Department of Medical Sciences and IRCAD, Eastern seven subunits which are encoded by the mtDNA[subunit ND1-2-3- Piedmont University, Novara, Italy. 4-4L-5 and 6] plus at least 39 nuclear-encoded subunits complex I. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex autoimmune disease of the central About MS,biochemical studies have established that catalytic activ- nervous system characterized by chronic inflammation and progres- ity of complex I has significantly decreased in MS patients compared sive neurological dysfunction. The Protein Kinase C Alpha (PRKCA) with control subjects. To study relationship between MS patients and gene, spanning 508 kb on 17q24.2, was associated with MS in Finn- mtDNA-encoded complex I genes we sequenced from 15 representa- ish, Canadian, and UK populations, in which specific risk haplotypes tive Iranian MS patients and 10 control. Our results showed different were identified. mutations in ND2, ND3, ND4, ND5 and ND6 as following: One patient In this study, we analyzed the role of PRKCA in MS susceptibility in an had a mutation in the ND2 gene at nt5153 A>G,two patients show a Italian cohort of 358 cases and 662 controls. An association analysis mutation in ND3 gene at nt10142 C>T. In ND4 one patient had a muta- was performed by genotyping 3 microsatellites and 20 single nucleo- tion at nt11215 C>T,one patient had a change at nt11353 T>C,three tide polymorphisms (SNPs) covering the whole gene. patients had a mutation at nt11935 T>C. we found a new mutation in Single-marker analysis demonstrated a nominal evidence of associa- two patients at nt12062 C>T in ND4 gene. Eleven patients had a muta- tion for one allele of the microsatellite mapping in the promoter re- tion in ND5 gene at nt12662 A>G.ND6 had a mutation at nt14179 G>A gion of the gene, showing a protective effect (P=0.033; OR=0.12, 95% in one patients and new mutation at nt14263 T>C in another patient. CI=0.015-0.94). Moreover, a risk haplotype composed of 7 SNPs, We couldn‘t find any mutation in ND1 and ND4L genes. Even some spanning a 43-kb-long region of PRKCA, was found (P=0.00074; new mutations in mitochondrial DNA were found in this study we con- OR=1.57, 95% CI=1.24-1.99). Interestingly, this haplotype includes an clude that it may mitochondrial nuclear subunit I may roll in complex I exon characterizing an alternative PRKCA transcript. The expression deficiency in MS patients. of both PRKCA wild-type and of its alternative isoform was significantly down-regulated in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of MS patients P09.086 Repulsive guidance molecule A (RGMA) and interleukin compared to controls (P=0.00097 and P=0.044, respectively). How- 21 receptor (IL21R) show association with multiple sclerosis ever, stratification of expression data according to the presence/ab- I. Kockum1, R. Nohra1, A. D. Beyeen1, J. P. Guo2, M. Khademi1, E. Sundqvist1, sence of the risk haplotype did not reveal any significant difference, M. T. Hedreul1, F. Sellebjerg3, C. Smestad4, A. B. Oturai3, H. F. Harbo5,6, E. suggesting that a fine mapping of the 43-kb region is needed to identify Wallström1, J. Hillert7, L. Alfredsson8, M. Jagodic1, J. Lorentzen2, T. Olsson1; the actual risk variant. 1Neuroimmunology Unit, Department och Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska In conclusion, the identification of both protective and risk alleles in Insitutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Medical Inflammation Research, Department of different regions of PRKCA suggests the existence of multiple mecha- Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Insitutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Danish nisms linking genetic variations in this gene to the pathogenesis of Multiple Sclerosis Center Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, MS. Denmark, 4Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, Norway, 54Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, P09.088 Replication study of Multiple sclerosis susceptibility Norway, 6Faculty Division Ullevål, Oslo University Hospital, University of Oslo, alleles in Austrian patients Oslo, Norway, 7Division of Neurology, Department och Clinical Neuroscience, A. Zimprich1, S. Zehetmayer2, B. Bajer-Kornek1, C. Hotzy1, K. Zebenholzer1, F. Karolinska Insitutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 8Institute of Environmental Medicine, Leutmezer1, P. Lichtner3, T. Meitinger4, E. H. Wichmann4, T. Illig5, C. Gieger5, W. Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Krisotoferitsch6, M. Reindl7, M. Khalil8, S. Fuchs8, H. Schmidt8, F. Fazekas8, T. Background: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex trait which is a chron- Berger7, K. Vass1, M. Schmied1; ic inflammatory disease in which a dysregulated immune response di- 1Univ. Klinik für Neurologie, Medizinische Universität Wien, Vienna, Austria, rected against myelin antigens causes demyelination and axonal injury 2Zentrum für Med. Statistik, Informatik u. Intelligente Systeme, Medizinische the central nervous system. Rat chromosome one harbors overlapping Universität Wien, Vienna, Austria, 3Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institut quantitative trait loci (QTL) for cytokine production and experimental für Humangenetik, München, München, Germany, 4. Helmholtz Zentrum models of inflammatory diseases. Analysis in Advanced Intercross München, Institut für Humangenetik, München, München, Germany, 5Helmholz Lines of (MOG)-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis Zentrum München Institut für Epidemiologie, München, München, Germany, (EAE) resolved the region in two narrow QTL, Eae30 and Eae31 in- 6Neurologische Abteilung, Sozialmedizinisches Zentrum Ost-Donauspital, Wien, cluding the RGMA, IL21R and IL4R genes. Vienna, Austria, 7Univ. Klinik für Neurologie, Medizinische Universität Innsbruck, Hypothesis: Are the same genes that have been implicated in EAE Innsbruck, Austria, 8Univ. Klinik für Neurologie, Medizinische Universität Graz, susceptibility on rat chromosome 1 also risk genes for MS? Graz, Austria. Materials and Methods: RGMA, IL21R and IL4R were covered with 97 Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of tagSNPs which were genotyped in 1018 MS cases and 1215 controls the central nervous system, thought to be mediated by an autoim- from Sweden. Markers (n=17) in haplotypes that showed evidence of mune process. The disease affects over 2 million individuals world association were further tested in 2353 cases and 1770 controls from wide. Population and family based studies have suggested that there Scandinavia. is a strong genetic component. In recent genome-wide and candi- Results: In the combined patient material the rs34925346 SNP in date gene-association studies a number of putative MS susceptibil- RGMA was associated with MS in males (OR=1.33, p<0.006). In ity genes were identified. Here we performed a replication study in IL21R, The rs8060368-rs2214537-rs961914-rs12934152 CGCT hap- 883 Austrian MS cases and 996 controls for 26 risk associated loci lotype was positively associated (OR 1.14, p<0.0009) with MS while (39 SNPs). Eight non-human leukocyte antigen (HLA) loci, were as- the TCCC and TGCT haplotypes were negatively associated with MS sociated with disease susceptibility with nominal significant p-values < (OR 0.87, p<0.004, and OR 0.68). One of the protective haplotypes 0.05: EVI5, RPL5/FAM69A, ASAP2, IL7R, ANKRD15, TBC1D2, IL2RA correlated to lower IFN-γ expression in PBMCs of MS patients. We and CLEC16A. While some loci had been well established before the could not confirm previously reported associations between IL4R and present study, others such as ASAP2 and TBC1D2 were replicated MS. here for the first time. In an attempt to define a biological consequence conclusion: We conclude that RGMA and IL21R and their pathways of risk variants we mined associated SNPs from our study with data are crucial in MS pathogenesis and warrant further studies as potential from a recently performed Expression Quantitative Trait loci eQTL biomarkers and therapeutic targets. study [Heinzen et al]. In this work, genome wide genotyping and ge-Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 nome wide expression profiling was performed in 93 human brain and A statistical analysis (χ2-test) suggests that polymorphism Ile587Val in 80 blood samples. We revealed a strong association between the exon 13 of the EIF2B5 gene should be considered as susceptibility fac- risk allele C of the RPL5 SNP rs6604026 and expression of the non tor in the development of MS (χ2=23.76; p<0.001). In conclusion, our coding small nucleolar gene SNORA66, located in intron 7 of RPL5 data strongly suggest a possible involvement of the eIF2B5 in the de- (p<2.3x10-9). The discovery and validation of new genetic risk factors velopment of MS and that variations in the MS patient strongly depend in independent populations may help toward the understanding of MS on geographic and ethnic factors, thus suggesting the importance of pathogenesis by providing valuable information on biological pathways knowledge the epigenetic contribution in the pathogenesis of MS. to be investigated. P09.091 is there a common evolutionary background for music P09.089** Searching for functional variants in STAT3-region in and language faculties? Analysis of dyslexia candidate genes in Finnish multiple sclerosis patients Finnish families tested for musical aptitude V. Leppä1,2, A. Sulonen1,2, P. Ellonen1, H. Almusa1, E. Jakkula1,3, P. Tienari4, K. P. Onkamo1, L. Ukkola-Vuoti2, K. Salo2, K. Karma3, P. Raijas3, I. Järvelä2; Koivisto5, I. Elovaara6, T. Pirttilä7, M. Reunanen8, A. Palotie1,9, L. Peltonen1,9, J. 1Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Saarela1,10; Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Sibelius Academy, 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute Department of Music Education, Helsinki, Finland. for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Musical aptitude is a cognitive function of the human brain. Common HUSLAB, Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept. of Neurology, Helsinki University Central evolutionary background of music and language recognition has been Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Central Hospital of Seinäjoki, Seinäjoki, Finland, long speculated, based on for example on partially overlapping brain 6Dept. of Neurology, Tampere University Central Hospital, Tampere, Finland, regions in PET studies (Brown et al. 2006). Moreover, low rates in 7Dept. of Neurology, Kuopio University Central Hospital, Kuopio, Finland, 8Dept. a test for musical aptitude, Karma Music test, have been shown to of Neurology, Oulu University Central Hospital, Oulu, Finland, 9The Wellcome reliably predict dyslexia (Karma 2002). Here phonological awareness, Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 10Dept. of Gynecology a basic natural property not dependent on learning and defective in and Pediatrics, Dept. of Child Psychiatry, Helsinki University Central Hospital, dyslexia could be understood as poor auditory structuring ability mea- Helsinki, Finland. sured by KMT. Previously, we have carried out a genome-wide linkage Multiple sclerosis (MS) is considered to be a complex autoimmune analysis for musical aptitude in multigenerational families tested for disease of the central nervous system. Prevalence of MS in the South- musical aptitude using auditory structuring ability test (Karma Music ern Ostrobothnia (SO) region in Finland is 2-fold compared to other test) and Carl Seashores test populations of Northern European descent. We conducted a GWAS in for pitch (SP) and for time (ST). Evidence for linkage was obtained for distantly related SO MS patients using genealogical information and several loci, including DYX6, a candidate locus for dyslexia (Fisher et identified variants in STAT3 to associate with MS. This association was al. 2002), on chr. 18q (Pulli et al 2008). replicated in a sample set of 4638 cases and 10279 controls from 7 In order to understand the neurobiological basis of music in human populations (rs744166 p 2.75 x 10E-10). evolution and communication we analyzed previously reported risk To refine our understanding of the association and to identify potential alleles of a set of dyslexia susceptibility genes: KIAA0319, DCDC2, functional variants we targeted 111 kb of the STAT3-STAT5A region us- DYX1C1, and C2ORF3. Several SNPs were chosen in these loci and ing SureSelect target enrichment method and Illumina GAII -sequenc- genotyped in multigenerational families (N=395). Family-based asso- ing. Ten MS samples were chosen based on the homozygous genotype ciation analyses (FBAT and QTDT) were used for analyzing the data. for associated allele of rs744166 and pooled. In total 34 MS samples Preliminary results in four pools and 19 controls in 3 pools were sequenced. The median point to SNPs in KIAA0319 and DCDC2, which are located next to sequence coverage of 31 was obtained and the preliminary analysis each other on chr. 6 with the Seashore Pitch test, with p-value 0.02. identified 303 unreported variants in the case pool homozygous for the Currently, more families are being genotyped, thus, refined results will rs744166 risk allele. Twenty of them are missense or nonsense muta- be presented in the meeting. tions. None of the variants were found in all pooled MS cases homo- zygous for rs744166, but 13 were specific to the MS pool. In addition P09.092 the role of neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor 3 to validating the mutations we are currently analyzing expression of gene (NTRK) in personality traits variation: focus on the main, STAT3 and near-by genes in PBMCs of 30 MS and 25 control samples haplotypic and GxE effect to monitor if any of the genes are differentially expressed and if the A. Kazantseva1, T. Traks2, S. Koks2, E. Khusnutdinova1; expression correlates with the genotypes of the associated variants. 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Academy of Sciencies, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Centre of Translational P09.090 Ile587Val Polymorphism of the eIF2B5 gene as Medicine, Department of Physiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. susceptibility factor for multiple sclerosis Personality traits are affected by GxE. NTRK3, a key gene in neuro- C. Ungaro1, F. L. Conforti1, M. Liguori1, M. Trojano2, F. Condino1, I. Manna1, trophin signaling, is located within the region 15q25.3-q26.2 previously V. Andreoli1, A. Magariello1, A. Patitucci1, A. L. Gabriele1, L. Citrigno1, W. demonstrated linkage with anxiety-related disorders that points to its Sproviero1, M. Muglia1, A. Gambardella1,3, R. Mazzei1; possible role in personality traits. 1National Research Council, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of Neurological We aimed to examine the main and haplotypic effect of NTRK3 gene and Psychiatric Sciences, University of Bari “Aldo Moro”, Bari, Italy, 3Institute of polymorphisms and to observe GxE interaction contributing into per- Neurology, University “Magna Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy. sonality traits variation in healthy individuals. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory chronic disease character- Study sample consisted of 652 healthy individuals (men-222, wom- ized by a demyelinating process, which is followed by neurodegen- en-430) of Caucasian origin (Russians-233, Tatars-419) from Russia eration. Although the true etiology remains elusive, a lot of evidence (mean age:19.53±2.24 years) without any history of psychopatholo- have provided that genetic factors contribute to disease susceptibility. gies that filled in TCI-125 (Cloninger et al., 1993). Genotyping of 34 Mutations in the eukaryotic translation initiation factor (eIF2B) gene SNPs in NTRK3 gene and genotypes assignment was performed with inherited as autosomal recessive trait cause the Vanishing White Mat- SNPlexTM platform and GeneMapper 4.0 (Applied Biosystems) corre- ter disease (VWM). MRIs of patients with VWM show a diffuse leu- spondingly. A measure of linkage disequilibrium between markers was koencephalopathy with evidence of progressive disappearance of the obtained under Haploview 4.1. Statistical analysis was conducted with cerebral white matter. Genetic and biochemical data of MS patient and PLINK v.1.07 with P-value less than 0.0125 considered statistically MRI data showing VWM images similar to MS lesions, encouraged the significant. present study in which we analyzed the coding region of eIF2B5 gene We revealed an association of rs744994 T/T-genotype (P=0.004) and to evaluate an overlapping between MS and VWM. We analyzed 225 higher Novelty Seeking (NS). Haplotype analysis performed in four unrelated MS patients, all of them diagnosed as clinically established, haplotype blocks (D’>0.7) separately demonstrated lower NS in T*C- definite MS, according to Poser criteria and derived from the Southern haplotype carriers (rs7176520, rs744994) (P=0.007) and higher Per- Italy too. More, 207 age- and sex-matched healthy subjects from the sistence in those bearing A*T*C*G*C*T*T*T haplotype (rs3825885, same geographic area were included. A common variation Ile587Val rs3825884, rs4887205, rs9806762, rs7180942, rs1110306, was found very frequent in the MS patients respect normal controls. rs11073767) (P<0.001). GxE analysis demonstrated stronger associa-Complex traits and polygenic disorders 27 tion between NTRK3 and NS or Persistence in the case of interaction P09.095 cORRELAtiON OF GENOtYPE AND OBEsE with birth. PHENOtYPE OF FRAGiLE X sYNDROmE The region in NTRK3 gene located between rs7176520 and rs744994 R. Rodríguez-López, J. Sáenz, M. González-Carpio, P. Méndez, M. García de (24 kb within 5’-UTR and intron 2) is involved in NS variation, while the Cáceres, T. Herrera, P. Sánchez-Giralt, M. Rubio, L. M. Luengo, M. Núñez, J. region between rs3825885 and rs11073767 (134 kb within introns 4 M. Carbonell.; and 12) is associated with Persistence. Extremeño Health System, Badajoz, Spain. The obese phenotype of fragile X syndrome (FXS) is associated with P09.093 The influence of R229Q polymorphism of the NPHS2 hyperphagia similar to Prader-Willi. Common variants in the fat mass gene on the progression of chronic glomerulonephritis and obesity associated gene (FTO) show evidence for anxiety and J. Reiterová1, H. Šafránková1, J. Štekrová2, M. Merta1, V. Tesař1; increased appetite. We investigated the association of the haplotype 1Nephrology Dept. 1st Fac.of Medicine and General Teaching Hosp., Charles block structure of FTO gene with morbid obesity and with endopheno- University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Biology and Medical types in carriers of FMR1 deletereous alleles. Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Charles We selected the SNP with the strongest evidence for association in University, Prague, Czech Republic. previous studies rs9939609 and rs1477199, rs1861868, rs1477196 Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis FSGS) is a common cause of ne- located within same and contiguous haplotype blocks. We genotyped phrotic syndrome (NS). IgA nephropathy (IGAN) is the most common 194 patients with severe obesity appeared < 14 years, 19 cases of FXS, nephropathy in the world. R229Q polymorphism may increase suscep- 11 premutation carriers and 289 healthy control individuals. TaqMan® tilibility to NS in association with second NPHS2 mutation. We have Assays were used and the CGG repeat lengths were determined in the investigated the influence of R229Q polymorphism in NPHS2 gene on ABI 3130 sequencer using GeneMapper software. SNP frequencies progression of FSGS and IGAN. and estimated four-SNP haplotype frequency were compared among A total number of 268 Czech patients with FSGS and IGAN (174 males, groups. Genotype-Phenotype correlations was established. 94 females) were studied. The diagnosis of FSGS (98 pts) and IGAN The two haplotypes rs1477199A/rs1861868A/rs1477196G/rs9939609A (170 pts) was established from renal biopsy. Patients were divided and AGGA in the FTO gene raised obesity risk with an odds ratio of into two groups: 1. 108 pts (71 males, 37 females, mean age 45.4± 1.31 and 3.35 respectively (p<0.05) in Spanish population. 9 FMR1-re- 10.7 years) with end stage renal disease during 5 years since renal lated individuals carried the AAGA combination in heterozygosity and biopsy(rapid progressors), 2. 160 pts (103 males, 57 females, mean 3 individuals were homozygous. Positive associations with BMI were age 46.5±12.1 years) who had stable clearance of creatinine during 5 detected among them and female sex, ↑ age and longer CGG size also years. As a control group, 100 unrelated healthy subjects (50 males, predisposed to pathology. 50 females, mean age 52.4±9.2 years)were used. Genomic DNA was Obesity and anxiety are associated in some FXS patients. The as- amplified by polymerase chain reaction. Chi-square test was used to sociation between genetic variation in the FTO genotype and obesity compare the distribution of genotypes. Proteinuria was compared by could increase even more the propensity to overweight in this specific ANOVA test. cognitive deficit. Human syndromes as FXS provide novel insights into The distribution of R229Q polymorphism in FSGS pts was: in rapid processes of the hypothalamic satiety centers and obesogenic path- progressors 9.1%, in slow progressors 11.1% of heterozygotes. The ways. distribution in IGAN pts was: in rapid progressors 14%, in slow pro- gressors 10.4% of heterozygotes. Proteinuria was not significantly dif- P09.096 A common haplotype in the NAPEPLD gene involved ferent in R229Q heterozygotes. in endocannabinoid synthesis and obesity in a Norwegian To conclude, we excluded significant influence of R229Q polymor- population based cohort (the HUNt study). phism in the podocin on progression of FSGS and IGAN.Supported by T. Wangensteen1, H. Akselsen1, J. Holmen2, D. Undlien1, L. Retterstøl1; grant project IGA MZ CR NS 9779-4 and VZ 0021620806 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, OSLO, Norway, 2HUNT Research Centre, Department of Public Health and General Practice, P09.094 Association of Genetic Variants in the Apelin Gene to Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Levanger, Norway. Obesity in French caucasians Background: Obesity has a strong genetic component which is still S. J. Clark1, D. Meyre2, L. Towns3, U. Fairbrother3, B. Balkau4, M. Marre5, J. largely unknown. Tichet6, P. Froguel1,2, A. J. Walley1; Material and Method: We investigated the association between se- 1Department of Genomics of Common Disease, School of Public Health, vere obesity and genetic variation in six selected candidate genes, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom, 2CNRS 8090, Institute of Biology, including three drug related genes; gastric lipase (LIPF), cannabinoid Pasteur Institute, Lille, France, 3School of Human Sciences, Faculty of Life receptor 1 (CNR1) and N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine phospholi- Science, London Metropolitan University, London, United Kingdom, 4INSERM pase D (NAPEPLD), and three genes related to inflammation; inter- U780-IFR69, 94807 Villejuif, Paris, France, 5INSERM U695, Université Paris 7, leukin 18 (IL18), six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of the prostate Paris, France, 6Institut Interrégional pour la Santé, La Riche, France. 4 (STEAP4) and nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT). Apelin is expressed in adipocytes and upregulated in obese mice. Its Tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the coding region peptides are secreted by adipocytes in tissue culture and have been of these genes were analyzed in 1632 cases (BMI≥35 kg/m²) and 3379 detected in the plasma of both mice and humans suggesting a pos- controls (BMI 20-24.9 kg/m²) from a Norwegian population based co- sible role as a hormone involved in the regulation of feeding. As such hort, the HUNT study. Apelin is a plausible candidate gene for human polygenic obesity and Results: Single SNPs rs17605251 in NAPEPLD and rs7913071 in LIPF this study was designed to investigate an association between varia- were associated with obesity at a nominal significance level (p<0.05). tion in the Apelin gene and severe obesity. Haplotype analysis revealed a common haplotype in the NAPEPLD Sequenom iPlex assays were designed to genotype thirteen SNPs that was associated with obesity, even after correction for multiple test- within the Apelin gene. Subjects were 1533 obese (896 adults with ing. The allele frequency was 56.8 % in cases and 60.3 % in controls, BMI over 40kg/m2 and 637 children with a BMI>97th percentile for age giving an odds ratio (OR) of 0.87, p=0.0016. Being homozygous for and sex) and 1237 non-obese controls, all French Caucasians. this haplotype gives an OR of 0.79, p=0.00059. Two SNPs, rs2235307 and rs2281068 were found to be associated Conclusion: We identified a common haplotype in NAPEPLD, a rate with severe obesity (p = 0.007 and 0.003) in female children when ana- limiting enzyme of the endocannabinoid synthesis. Individuals who are lysing genotypes. Male and female genotypes were analysed sepa- homozygous for this haplotype have an OR of 0.79 for severe obesity, rately as APLN is located on the X chromosome. When allele frequen- corresponding to a 20% risk reduction. LIPF was associated with obe- cies were analysed in both sexes, one SNP, rs2281068 was found to sity at a nominal level but did not remain significant after correction for be associated in children (p=0.003). P-values remain significant after multiple testing. For the remaining genes; CNR1, IL18, STEAP4 and taking into account effects of multiple testing using the method of Ny- NAMPT we found no association to obesity. holt (p<0.017). In conclusion we report a novel association of the Apelin gene to obe- sity. Re-sequencing of the gene and its promoter region is ongoing to locate the causative variant.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 P09.097** cryptic chromosomal abnormalities are a common Slovenia, 3University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Clinical cause of syndromic obesity: Array cGH study and review Biochemistry, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. R. Hastings1, J. P. Hamilton-Shield2, J. A. Crolla3, R. Newbury-Ecob1; Glutathione-S-reductase (GSR) regenerates the oxidized form of glu- 1Clinical Genetics Department, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation tathione that protects human body from negative effects of reactive Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Department of Child Health, University oxygen species in state of oxidative stress. Recent data suggest that Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3Wessex oxidative stress may influence the development of osteoporosis. An Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom. aim of our work was to associate two GSR gene tag polymorphisms, Chromosomal imbalance causing obesity has previously been recog- located in introns 3 and 10 (A19278G and A45359T), with bone mass nised in both recurrent ‘syndromes’ and unique deletions and/or du- density (BMD) and biochemical bone turnover markers on samples of plications in individual patients. Many of the chromosomal regions 721 volunteers. identified in this manner have identified ‘obesogenic’ genes or are The results showed a statistical significant association between loci which have also been highlighted by genome-wide association A45359T polymorphism and the age of menopause (p = 0,038) in the studies in non-syndromic obesity. We have previously identified chro- subgroup of women, BMD of total hip (p = 0,043) and lumbar spine (p mosomal deletions causing syndromic obesity, including a case sug- = 0,041) in the subgroup of premenopausal women. A presence of T gesting prohormone convertase-2 as a novel cause of obesity. We allele in the genotype has probably a protective impact on BMD. The therefore studied 21 patients with severe childhood-onset obesity, with polymorphism A19278G is statistically significant with lower BMD of or without other features, using array comparative genomic hybridiza- neck (p=0,034) and total hip (p=0,019) of women in the range of 60 to tion (array CGH) to look for chromosomal imbalance. From this co- 70 years old. In addition, by using a dominant model we have found hort we identified 6 patients with copy number variation, in at least 4 out that a presence of at least one allele in conjunction with polymor- of whom this is likely to represent a significant factor in causing their phism is statistically significant with BMD of femoral neck (p=0,0017), obesity (deletions at 16p11.2, 15q11.2, and 1q21.1, and a duplication total hip (p=0,019) and lumbar spine (p=0,010). of 22q11.2). 16p11.2 microdeletion has recently been highlighted in a We conclude that there is a need to find out the mechanism, by which large series of childhood obesity as a recurrent finding, although the these polymorphisms affect age of menopause, bone mineral density causative gene suggested from this (SH2B1) is not deleted in our and and bone turnover markers. However, it is the first time where the as- other cases of 16p11.2 microdeletion with obesity suggesting further sociation of the polymorphisms in GSR gene with BMD occur. obesogenic gene(s) at this locus. All four loci are associated with a neurobehavioural phenotype and it is likely effects are predominantly P09.100 Loci on 1p13, 10p13 and 18q21 are associated with through appetite and satiety regulation, a common finding to the major- susceptibility to Paget’s disease of bone. ity of single-gene causes of obesity, although alteration of metabolism O. M. E. Albagha1, M. Visconti1, N. Alonso1, A. Langston1, T. Cundy2, R. is possible. This indicates that as a group chromosomal imbalance is Dargie3, M. Dunlop4, W. D. Fraser5, M. J. Hooper6, G. Isaia7, G. Nicholson8, J. a common cause of childhood obesity, being more common than a del Pino9, R. Gonzalez-Sarmiento9, M. di Stefano7, A. Tenesa4, J. P. Walsh10, S. recognised single gene cause. H. Ralston1; 1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2University of Auckland, P09.098 Association study on HAPLN1 and MMP genes and Australia, 3Glasgow Royal Infirmary, United Kingdom, 4MRC Human Genetics osteoarthritis Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 5Royal Liverpool University Hospital, United A. Näkki1,2, A. Harilainen3, K. Tallroth3, P. Leino-Arjas4, M. Heliövaara2, J. Kingdom, 6University of Sydney, Australia, 7University of Torino, Italy, 8University Kaprio1,5, L. Peltonen1, J. Saarela1, U. M. Kujala6; of Melbourne, Australia, 9University of Salamanca, Italy, 10Sir Charles Gairdner 1Institute of Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Hospital, Australia. Finland, 2National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3ORTON Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) is a common disease with a strong Orthopedic Hospital, Invalid Foundation, Helsinki, Finland, 4Finnish Institute of genetic component characterised by focal abnormalities of bone turn- Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland, 5University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, over in which mutations of SQSTM1 gene are responsible for ~10% 6University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. of sporadic and ~40% of familial PDB cases. In this study we sought Background. Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease com- to identify novel genetic variants that predispose to PDB by genome mon in the elderly and the heritability ranges between 40-60 %. The wide association study. In the discovery stage, we genotyped 750 disease progresses by the breakage of the extracellular matrix of the patients without SQSTM1 mutations and 1002 controls for 318,237 cartilage formed by collagens, aggregans and hyaluronic acid. Matrix SNPs using the Illumina platform. Quality control procedures were per- metalloproteinases (MMP) are a group of enzymes breaking down the formed on the data to exclude SNPs and samples with low call rate, collagen network and aggrecans. Our aim was to study the putative low genotype quality score, and non-Caucasian ancestry. Analysis role of four MMP genes and hyaluronan and proteoglycan link protein was performed using the Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test adjusting for 1 gene (HAPLN1) in OA, all potentially playing a role in the stability of population structure. Three loci on 1p13, 10p13, and 18q21 showed the cartilage. genome wide significant association with PDB with (P<1.0x10-8). In the Methods. We genotyped a total of 37 tagging SNPs covering the replication stage we genotyped the most significant SNPs (P<1x10-6) MMP3, MMP8, MMP9, MMP13 and HAPLN1 genes in 134 severe fa- from the discovery stage in an independent set of 500 PDB cases and milial hand OA cases, 113 unrelated bilateral primary knee OA cases 535 controls using Sequenom iPLEX platform. The combined dataset and 2436 population based control samples. The Pseudomarker pro- confirmed the association of variants on 1p13 (P=5.4x10-24; OR=0.55), gram was used to monitor for association with individual SNPs and 10p13 (P=6.1x10-13; OR=0.65), and 18q21 (P=5.3x10-13; OR=1.52) SNP haplotypes. and showed evidence for suggestive association with variants located Results. Eight variants in MMP8, MMP9 and HAPLN1 provided nomi- on 3p24, 8q22, 10q24, and 14q32 (P<1x10-5). As well as advance our nal evidence for association with OA (p<0.05). The strongest associa- understanding of the pathogenesis of PDB, the genetic variants we tion signals were observed for rs1940475 in MMP8 in combined OA have identified may have value as diagnostic markers for disease sus- (p=0.008) and for rs17577 in MMP9 in hand OA (p=0.004). ceptibility and severity. The causal genes and their associated signal- Discussion. Initial evidence for association was observed between se- ling pathways may also represent new targets for the design of new vere OA and the MMP8, MMP9 and HAPLN1 genes. We are in a pro- drugs to treat PDB. cess of validating the two most significant associations in a population based Finnish Health2000 cohort of 6000 samples. P09.101 tau and alpha-synuclein and genetic susceptibility to Parkinson Disease in the italian population P09.099 Influence of glutathione-S-reductase gene I. Guella1, L. Trotta2, R. Asselta1, G. Soldà1, M. Zini2, A. Zecchinelli2, G. polymorphisms on bone mineral density and biochemical bone Pezzoli2, S. Goldwurm2, S. Duga1; turnover markers 1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università S. Jurković Mlakar1, J. Osredkar1, J. Preželj2, J. Marc3; degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di 1University Medical centre Ljubljana, Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy. Biochemistry, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Several loci for familial Parkinson disease (PD) have been described, Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Ljubljana, and over the last years significant efforts have been focused on in-Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 vestigating the contribution of common variants to PD risk. Recently, correspondently. Patients with LRRK2 mutations (mutations G2019S 3 independent GWAS have shown a genome-wide significant asso- (n=6); V1613A, (n=2)), patients with sporadic PD (sPD) (n=33) and ciation of SNPs in the SNCA (alpha-synuclein) and MAPT (Tau) re- persons without neurological disorders (controls) (n=18) were taken gions. In this frame, we genotyped a large Italian population of 920 into analyses. PBL alpha-synuclein levels correlated with mRNA SNCA PD patients (306 familial, 614 sporadic) and 920 controls for 13 level (in sPD and controls, p<0.05). mRNA SNCA level did not dif- markers located across the SNCA gene, and for 2 SNPs that define fer between groups while PBL alpha-synuclein was decreased in PD the MAPT H1 clade (previously associated with an increased risk of patients with LRRK2 mutations compared with sPD patients without PD). Single-marker analysis demonstrated nominal evidence of as- LRRK2 mutations (p<0.02) and controls (p<0.05). sociation for: i) 5 SNPs in SNCA: 2 SNPs (rs356219, rs356220) in Thus we received the first data about PBL alpha-synuclein in patients the 3’ region associated with increased risk of PD (P=0.05, OR[95% with LRRK2 mutations and demonstrated the decreased level of PBL CI]=1.15[0.99-1.33], and P=0.05, OR[95% CI]=1.15[1.00-1.33]) and alpha-synuclein in this group along with unchanged level of SNCA 3 SNPs (rs356186, rs2737029, and rs2197120) located in the intron gene expression. These results allow us to suggest the influence of 4 of the gene, associated with a reduced/increased risk of the dis- abnormal LRRK2 functions, caused by LRRK2 mutations, to unmodi- ease (P=4.46E-04, OR[95% CI]=0.74[0.62-0.87]; P=0.03, OR[95% fied monomeric PBL alpha-synuclein level. CI]=1.16[1.02-1.33]; and P=1.05E-03, OR[95% CI]=0.76[0.64-0.89]); ii) both SNPs (rs1800547, rs9468) identifying the MAPT H1 haplotype P09.104 Genetic background of primary ciliary dyskinesia in (P=8.13E-04, OR[95% CI]=0.75[0.63-0.89]; and P=8.36E-05, OR[95% Polish patients CI]=0.72[0.61-0.85]). Moreover, we found a highly significant associa- M. Witt1,2, E. Ziętkiewicz1, B. Nitka1, E. Rutkiewicz1, U. Skrzypczak1, K. Voelkel1; tion between PD and a protective haplotype (P=7.53E-06; 14.1% in 1Inst of human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2International Inst Molec Cell Biology, cases vs 19.9% in controls), spanning 83kb from intron 4 to the 3’ end Warsaw, Poland. of SNCA. Our findings provide additional evidence of SNCA and MAPT Five genes known to be involved in PCD pathogenesis were searched as major PD genes, and underline the concept that, at least in the Ital- for mutations in patients from over 150 Polish families with Kartagener ian population, different allelic variants of SNCA (either protective or syndrome (KS) and with CDO (ciliary dysfunction only). DNAH5. In predisposing) can contribute to PD susceptibility. total, 109 PCD families were screened for the presence of mutations in DNAH5 exons using SSCP/heteroduplex method. Of the 22 muta- P09.102 increased level of FAs mRNA gene in peripheral blood tions, 3 STOPs, in exons 63, 49 and 34, and one missense in exon lymphocytes of patients with LRRK2-associated Parkinson’s 32 (not reported before) were found in more than one family; haplo- disease type background analysis indicated common origin for each of these T. Usenko1, A. Taraskina1, A. Emelyanov1, A. Yakimovsky2, S. Pchelina1,2; repetitive mutations. DNAI1. The search for mutations in DNAI1 was 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, RAS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian conducted in 113 families. The most frequent ones were insertion in Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, intron 1 and missense in exon 17, confirming their previously reported Russian Federation. prevalence among European patients. Our study indicates that muta- Mutations in the Leucine-Reach Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are tions in DNAH5 and DNAI1 are responsible for PCD/KS in at least the most frequent cause of familial Parkinson’s disease (PD) known 15% and 8% families, respectively. RSPH4A. A preliminary search for today. Although the precise physiological and pathological role of mutations in two of six RSPH4A exons revealed the presence of two LRRK2 is unclear, direct link between mutant LRRK2 and activation stop mutations - in exon 1 (1 family) and in exon 3 (in 2 families), a of the extrinsic cell death pathway through FAS receptor has been missense mutation (in 1 family) and 4-nt deletion starting at +2 position suggested. The aim of our work was to estimate level of FAS mRNA of intron 3. RSPH9. A preliminary search for mutations in three exons in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) of patients with LRRK2-associ- revealed a substitution in the 3’UTR (in 1 family). XL-RPGR. In one ated. The levels of FAS mRNA were estimated in PBL of six patients family, a mutation in exon 2 was shown to cause aberrant RNA splic- with LRRK2-linked PD (5 patients with G2019S mutation; 1- V1613A, ing. In another family, a mutation at 5th position of intron 2 was found mean age 65±10), fourteen sporadic PD patients (sPD) without muta- to cosegregate with the disease. tions in LRRK2 (mean age 65±8) and nine persons without neurologi- Support: HEALTH-PROT, GA No 229676. cal disorders (controls) (mean age 76±10) using quantitative real-time PCR with TagMan probes. The level of G protein (GNB2L1) mRNA P09.105 A genetic variant of tFAP2B is associated with was used as internal control. The level of FAS mRNA was higher in anthropometric and adiposity related parameters in women with patients with mutations in the LRRK2 gene (4.0±1.0) compared to sPD PcOs (0.7±0.4) (p<0.0001) and controls (1.1±0.2) (p<0.01). mRNA FAS level N. Schweighofer, E. Wehr, U. Lam, O. Trummer, T. R. Pieber, B. Obermayer- did not differ between sPD and controls (0.7 vs 1.1, p=0.26). Pietsch; Our results suggest that LRRK2 mutations may lead to the activation Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Nuclear of the extrinsic program cell death signaling pathway by means of in- Medicine, Medical University, Graz, Austria. duction of FAS expression in patients with LRRK2-associated PD. Background: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) affects about 6 -15 % of all women and is therefore the most common hormonal disorder P09.103 Alpha-synuclein (sNcA) and mRNA sNcA levels among women of reproductive age. PCOS is associated with a vari- in peripheral blood lymphocytes of patients with LRRK2- ety of clinical problems like infertility, obesity and insulin resistance. associated Parkinson’s disease TFAP2B (Transcriptional factor-activating enhancer-binding protein-2 A. K. Emelyanov1, A. F. Yakimovsky2, A. S. Drozdova1, T. S. Usenko1, S. N. beta) is an adipocyte expressed transcription factor involved in the Pchelina1,2; regulation of adiponectin expression and the development of insulin 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, resistance. This study aimed to evaluate allelic TFAP2B variants for 2Pavlov’s State Medical University of Saint-Petersburg, Saint-Petersburg, obesity and weight associated parameters in PCOS patients. Russian Federation. Methods: We investigated the effect of an A/G SNP in TFAP2B on Mutations in the LRRK2 gene, encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase hormonal, anthropometric and metabolic parameters in 371 PCOS pa- 2 (LRRK2), is the most frequent cause of familial PD known today. tients and 133 non PCOS controls. LRRK2-associated PD cases represent classical PD pathology char- Results: Genotype frequencies of the TFAP2B SNP did not deviate acterized by Lewy bodies, protein deposits found in the neurons. It has from Hardy Weinberg equilibrium and were equivalent in PCOS and been shown that dardarin is co-localized with alpha-synuclein (SNCA), non PCOS controls. In all PCOS patients and especially in overweight/ a major component of Lewy bodies. Alpha-synuclein aggregation is obese PCOS patients (BMI ≥ 25), the G allele of TFAP2B was associ- implicated in PD pathogenesis. However, the influence of dardarin on ated with a significantly higher BMI and changes in body fat composi- alpha-synuclein metabolism and neurodegeneration remains unclear. tion (lean mass, visceral adipose tissue mass). The G allele addition- The aim of the present study was to access alpha-synuclein and SNCA ally influenced weight associated parameters and showed significantly mRNA levels in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) of PD patients with higher systolic blood pressure as well as a trend for increased CRP LRRK2 mutations. mRNA SNCA and alpha-synuclein levels were es- levels. timated by means of quantitative real-time PCR and western blotting, Conclusion: We demonstrate that variants in the TFAP2B gene influ-Complex traits and polygenic disorders 20 ence anthropometric as well as obesity related parameters in women focused on 12 SNPs spanning the MTHFR-coding region: rs3753588, with PCOS, especially with increased BMI. This might be of high impor- rs2066470, rs17037397, rs7533315, rs4846052, rs1801133 (C677T), tance for diagnostic and therapeutic aspects in this frequent disease. rs6541003, rs2066462, rs1801131 (A1298C), rs17375901, rs2274976 (G1793A) and rs1537516. The prevalence of the C677T and A1298C P09.106 An erroneous agenda for personalized medicine. genotypes did not differ significantly between 141 individuals with doc- F. Clerget-Darpoux1, R. Elston2; umented coronary artery disease (CAD) and 126 individuals without 1INSERM, Paris-Sud university, Villejuif, France, 2Case Western Reserve vascular disease from a Russian population. We detected significant University, Cleveland, OH, United States. associations for CAD with rs7533315 (OR=1,60; 95% Cl: 1,08-2,36), Ng et al (Nature, 2009) proposed an agenda for predicting multifacto- rs2066462 (OR=2,71; 95% Cl: 1,13-6,72) and with GCCTTCGCACGC rial diseases using the information on DNA associated variants. We haplotype (OR 2,98, 95% CI 1,53-5,88). Moreover we found one pro- argue here that, under the cloak of comparing the performance of two tective haplotype GCCCTCGCCCGC (OR 0,18, 95% CI 0,04-0,69). In companies, 23andme and Navigenics, Ng et al give credence to their the total sample 40 out of 4096 possible haplotypes were found. The approach with erroneous recommendations. majority of genetic diversity is comprised by 4 common haplotypes, At the outset, they confound relative risk (RR) and predictive risk. The which accounted for 71% of all chromosomes. This study suggests term “relative risk” has no meaning unless the baseline risk relative to that two polymorphisms (rs7533315 and rs2066462) in MTHFR gene which the risks refer is specified. In many parts of the paper, the term should be assessed as new genetic risk factors for CAD. RR refers to the ratio of risk among those who have the allele to that among those who do not. They advise focusing on markers with high P09.109 Significant association of LPP and REL genes in RR and consider them as having high-risk prediction. They seem to Potential cD patients ignore that large allelic RR can result in a very low predictive value. V. Izzo, F. Tucci, M. Morelli, S. Storchi, A. Del Mastro, L. Timpone, F. Paparo, Furthermore, there is no sense to the recommendation that, when a L. Greco; test is marketed, the consumer should be informed of the proportion of Federico II University, Naples, Italy. the disease heritability it explains. The heritability of a disease is usual- A contribution in the pathway of gluten-induced immunoresponse in ly computed as the heritability of a conceptual “liability” that has a com- Celiac Disease (CD) was gained by candidate genes discovered in pletely different distribution under different models. For multifactorial GWAS. These new understanding could help to elucidate the mecha- diseases the underlying model is unknown and likely very complex. nism through which CD manifests in so many different ways: Potential The computation of a predictive risk (and its confidence interval) celiac cases are patients who produce anti-trasglutaminase antibod- should be specific to sub-groups that we cannot define so long as the ies, but haven’t small intestinal mucosa damage. environmental factors involved are partly or totally unknown. 643 CD cases, 105 potential CD patients and 711 controls were geno- P Ng, S Murray, S Levy and J Craig Venter: Nature, vol 461/issue no typed for eight of CD-associated SNPs by Taqman technology. Expres- 7265, 8 October 2009 sion studies of LPP and REL genes were studied by Real-Time PCR using intestinal biopsy samples of 10 CD patients, 10 potential CD and P09.107 the role of sex determination genes in Polycystic 10 healthy controls. Ovary syndrome Candidate Gene SNPs typing shows that the genotype of REL gene O. Trummer, N. Schweighofer, U. Lam, E. Wehr, T. Pieber, B. Obermayer- SNP (rs842647) can differentiate Potential cases from Controls and Pietsch; Celiac patients, and LPP gene SNP (rs1464510) only from controls. Division of Endocrinology and Nuclear Medicine, Department of internal Expression studies show that REL gene only was over-expressed in Medicine, Medical University, A-8036 Graz, Austria. potential patients when compared to controls and CD. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common complex genetic Potential celiac cases are a living model of gradual expression of the disorder. Its inherited basis was established by studies demonstrating phenotype of CD. The different expression of the REL gene, found in its increased prevalence including hyperandrogenemia, insulin resis- potential cases, suggests a probable role in the pathogenic mecha- tance, and disorders of insulin secretion in relatives of woman with nism of the CD. PCOS. Human homologs of sex determination genes in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans (FEM1A, FEM1B) were proposed as candi- P09.110 the combined impact of metabolic gene date genes for PCOS [Goodarzi et al., 2008, Hum. Reprod.], but this polymorphisms on elite power athlete status finding has not been replicated. I. I. Ahmetov, A. M. Hakimullina, I. A. Mozhayskaya; Methods: We investigated the potential role of FEM1A and FEM1B St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian single nucleotide polymorphisms in PCOS in a case control study (370 Federation. affected women with PCOS and 134 healthy controls). Hormonal, met- Power performance is a complex phenotype, subject to the influence abolic and anthropometric phenotypes have been collected. Genotype of both environmental and genetic factors. Whilst the last decade has frequencies did not deviate from Hardy Weinberg equilibrium and were seen a variety of specific genetic factors proposed, each is likely to not different between PCOS and control women. make a limited contribution to an ‘elite’ phenotype: it seems more likely Results: FEM1B variants were significantly associated with higher that such status depends upon the simultaneous presence of multiple CRP levels, even within the normal range. There was a trend in al- such variants. The aim of the present study was to investigate the as- lele-dependent body fat distribution in FEM1A and a significant as- sociations of multiple common metabolic gene (involved in ATP, glu- sociation with acanthosis nigricans in FEM1B gene variants. Metabolic cose, insulin and lipid metabolism, mitochondrial biogenesis, thermo- parameters were not found to be significantly associated with these genesis, regulation of muscle fiber type composition and angiogenesis) FEM polymorphisms. To confirm these findings, further investigations polymorphisms with power athlete status. The study involved 416 Rus- will be performed. sian power athletes and 696 controls. ACE, AMPD1, HIF1A, NFATC4, Conclusion: PCOS women with certain FEM1B alleles might be pre- PPARA, PPARD, PPARG, PPARGC1A, PPARGC1B, PPP3R1, TFAM, disposed for higher CRP levels and therefore be at higher risk for car- UCP2, UCP3, VEGFA gene polymorphisms were determined by PCR- diovascular events than PCOS women without these alleles. RLFP. Four ‘power alleles’ were first identified showing discrete asso- ciations with elite power athlete status (HIF1A 582Ser: 15.8% vs 7.8%, P09.108 Association of SNPs and haplotypes at MTHFR gene P = 0.0054; PPARA rs4253778 C: 19.3% vs 16.4%, P = 0.048; PPARG with coronary atherosclerosis 12Ala: 19.9% vs 15.3%, P = 0.0017; PPARGC1B 203Pro: 7.4% vs E. Trifonova, V. Stepanov; 4.9%, P = 0.017). Next, to assess the combined impact of all 4 gene Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical polymorphisms, all athletes were classified according to the number of Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation. ‘power’ alleles they possessed. The proportion of subjects with a high Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is a key enzyme of (2-5) number of ‘power’ alleles was greater in the best power athletes folate cycle, which catalyzes for the conversion of 5,10-methylene- compared to controls (41.3% vs 25.0%, P = 0.0036). These data sug- tetrahydrofolate to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate. The reducted activity of gest that the likelihood of becoming an elite power athlete depends on this enzyme, often conditioned by the presence of certain MTHFR the carriage of a high number of power-related alleles. alleles, leads to increasing homocystein concentrations in blood. We Complex traits and polygenic disorders 21 P09.111 inherited thrombophilia as a risk factor for pre- 1Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Sweden, 2Institute of eclampsia Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway, 3Department of Medicine, Karolinska E. S. Vashukova1,2, A. S. Glotov1,2, D. R. Bicmullina2, M. S. Zainulina2, V. S. Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of Rheumatology, University Baranov2; Hospital, Linköping, Sweden, 5Rheumatology clinic, University Hospital, Malmö, 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, Sweden, 6Department of Medicine, University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway. 2Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian The purpose of this candidate gene study was to identify SNPs in Federation. genes with a putative role in the pathogenesis of primary Sjögren’s The role of inherited thrombophilia in onset and progression of sever syndrome (pSS). Genes from the type I IFN system, genes involved in complication of pregnancy such as pre-eclampsia still remains obscure. inflammatory processes and lymphoma development and genes previ- The major goal of the present study was to determine the relationship ously shown to be associated with SLE in GWAS were included. between inherited thrombophilia and the risk of pre-eclampsia for preg- The genetic variations of the selected genes were covered with Tag- nant women in Russia. The study was carried out in 77 patients with SNPs and genotyped in two case/control cohorts from Sweden and pre-eclampsia and 100 pregnant women as a control. Pattern of tested Norway, using Illumina GoldenGate assay. After quality filtering, 1121 genes included: factor V Leiden (F5 1691G>A), prothrombin gene (F2 SNPs in 82 genes and 540 patients and 532 controls remained for 20210G>A), polymorphisms of factor 7 (F7 10976G>A), fibrinogene the association analysis. Allele counts and genotype frequencies (FGB -455G>A), plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI1 -675 5G/4G), were compared between patients and controls by Fisher’s exact test. glycoprotein IIIa (ITGB3 1565T>C), glycoprotein Ia (ITGA2 807C>T) Combined p-values and OR of the two cohorts were calculated with and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR 677C>T) genes us- Cochran-Mantel-Haenzel test. Clinical data was extracted from the ing biochip technology. The distribution of genotypes frequencies for patient files. F5, F2, F7, FGB and ITGB3 genes was not statistically significant in We found high signal for association between pSS and several SNPs group of pre-eclamptic patients compared to these ones in the controls. in the FAM167A-BLK region (p=4.7x10-4, OR=1.37) and the TNFSF4 But distribution of genotypes frequencies of PAI1 (χ2=7.365, p=0.025), gene (p=7.4x10-4, OR=1.34), which have not previously been asso- ITGA2 (χ2=6.003, p=0.049) and of MTHFR (χ2=6.198, p=0.045) genes ciated with pSS. In addition we found an expected association with were different in these groups. Thus inherited thrombophilia might be the IRF5/TNPO3 locus (p=5.5x10-6, OR=1.70) and the STAT4 gene considered as a risk factor for pre-eclampsia. Pregnant women should (p=7.0x10-4, OR=1.40). We investigated the correlation between be tested for inherited thrombophilia. the best SNPs in FAM167A-BLK and TNFSF4 and the presence of The work was partly supported by grant of President of Russian Foun- Raynaud´s phenomenon, arthritis, dermal vasculitis, major salivary dation 2008 (MK-2961.2008.7), grant of Russian Foundation for Basic gland swelling, lymphadenopathy, lymphoma, leucopenia, hypergam- Research (N 09-04-13847-ofi-c), and grants of Russian Ministry of Sci- maglobulinemia and anti-SSA/SSB antibodies in the patients. No con- ence and Education (N 02.512.11.2275 and N P2387) vincing correlation was detected between the SNPs and the pheno- types. P09.112 A search for the most reliable biochemical, hormonal, We conclude that genes involved in B cell activation are important in and genetic markers for hypertension in saudi patients the pathogenesis of pSS. A. S. Warsy1, M. A. F. El-Hazmi2, J. S. Al Wakeel3; 1Center for Science and Medical Studies for Girls, King Saud University, P09.114 Absence of mutation in the PRNP gene and Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Department of Medical Biochemistry, Riyadh, Saudi heterozygosity at codon 129 in probands of an iranian family Arabia, 3Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, King Saud University, with two cDJ affected members Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. S. Jelodari-Mamaghani1, F. Sina2, E. Elahi1; This study was conducted to identify presymptomatic markers of hy- 1Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran University of Medical pertension in Saudi. The study included 153 hypertensive patients and Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. (males: 67; females:90) and 369 controls (males:162; females:207). Prion diseases are a group of rare fatal neurodegenerative disorders Blood samples, collected from fasting individuals, were analysed for characterized by accumulation of a host encoded membrane protein biochemical, immunological and hormonal parameters [renal, bone, and exemplified by Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). The causative liver function tests, electrolytes, lipids and lipoproteins, apolipopro- protein is the prion protein (PrP) entirely encoded within the second teins, immunoglobulins and complement levels, insulin, C-peptide, co- exon of the PRNP gene. Up to 15% prion disease cases appear to agulation parameters, leptin and Lp(a)]. The DNA was extracted and be familial and inheritance is considered autosomal dominant. Varia- used for the analysis of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) gene, tions in the gene sequence resulting in altered amino acids promote S gene, glycogen synthetase gene, glucokinase gene, and paraoxi- the aggregation process and ultimately disease status. More than 60 A nase (PON) gene polymorphisms. The results showed that the fre- different pathogenic mutations in PRNP have been identified, and the quency of ACE genotype DD was lower (52.17 % vs 56.03%), while most common cause amino acid changes at positions 102, 178, and that of ID (43.48% vs 41.84%) and II (4.34% vs 2.13%) were slightly 200. Additionally, the variation resulting in methionine/valine polymor- higher in the hypertensive patients compared to the control group but phism at position 129 is considered a genetic susceptibility factor for the differences were not statistically significant. In addition, D and I prion diseases. Here, we report the identification of an Iranian family allele frequency did not show any significant difference. When the dif- consisting of two CDJ affected siblings both of whom first manifested ferent biochemical, haematological, immunological parameters were symptoms in the second decade of their lives. Both exons of PRNP compared, diastolic bp was the highest in the II genotype followed by were screened for mutations by direct sequencing and a mutation was the ID genotype. In addition, HDL levels were lowest in the II genotype not observed. Their genotypes predicted heterozygosity (Met/Val) at while creatinine levels were highest in the DD genotype. For the S position 129. This genotype is not expected to promote disease status. A gene, the genotype A1A1 and A2A2 occurred at a higher frequency, To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of familial incidence while A1A2 occurred at a lower frequency compared to the controls of a prion disease without mutation in the PRNP gene. and the difference was statistically significant. The results showed a significant elevation in Lp(a) in the genotype A1A2. The paper will P09.115 ZNF750 is a nuclear protein whose promoter & 5‘ UtR present these results in Saudi hypertensive patients to identify the variants are found in psoriasis patients most reliable markers. I. Cohen1, R. Y. Birnbaum1, A. M. Bowcock2, S. Sivan1, O. S. Birk1,3; 1Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for P09.113 Polymorphisms in the FAM167A(C8ORF13)-BLK locus Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, Beer- and TNFSF4 (Ox40L) gene are associated with primary Sjögren’s Sheva, Israel, 2Department of Genetics, Washington University School of syndrome Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States, 3Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical G. Kristjansdottir1, G. Nordmark1, S. Appel2, L. Vasaitis1, M. Kvarnström3, P. Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel. Eriksson4, E. Theander5, P. Lundmark1, C. Sjöwall4, J. Brun2, M. Jonsson2, P. We previously showed that a dominant mutation in the novel zinc fin- Söderkvist4, E. Harboe6, L. Gøransson6, L. Padyukov1, M. L. Eloranta1, G. Alm1, ger protein, ZNF750, that is located within PSORS2 locus, causes E. Baecklund1, M. Wahren-Herlenius3, R. Omdal6, L. Rönnblom1, R. Jonsson2, seborrhea-like dermatosis with psoriasiform elements. Furthermore, A. C. Syvänen1; ZNF750 c.-625A>C promoter variant has been linked with familial pso-Complex traits and polygenic disorders 22 riasis in Chinese patients. We now sequenced DNA samples of 250 tion is due to one or several loci within the same region, we performed bone-fide psoriasis patients. No mutations were found in the ZNF750 a stepwise logistic regression analysis using rs13191343 (our most coding sequence. However, sequence variants in the ZNF750 5‘-UTR significantly associated SNP) as covariate in the first step, and the were found in 3 of 250 unrelated psoriasis patients and not in 300 con- most strongly associated SNP from this as an additional covariate in trols. It is yet unclear how this variation affects ZNF750 expression. the next one, until logistic p-values for all SNPs on chromosome 6q To begin to understand ZNF750 function, we determined ZNF750 were above 5.0E-6. We were able to identify 5 distinct SNPs which sub-cellular localization: HEK293 and HaCaT cells were transiently account for most of the observed association. Of these, 4 were rep- transfected with EGFP-ZNF750 constructs of full-length or of partially licated in independent study groups of 1,761 European PsA patients truncated protein, abrogating the ZNF750 NLS. Both confocal fluores- and 3,727 control individuals. They are in no or negligible LD with each cence microscopy and cellular fractionation followed by western blot other, so we conclude that at least four different loci are responsible for analysis demonstrated that ZNF750 is expressed in the cell nucleus the strong association signals for PsA within the MHC region. Addition- both in HEK293 and HaCaT cells. Removal of the nuclear localization ally, there was no evidence for log-linear interaction between these 4 signal of ZNF750 abrogated its nuclear localization. loci among each other and with TNF, coding for a psoriasis drug target Our data suggest that ZNF750 5‘-UTR variants might be associated within MHC. Furthermore, only one locus overlaps one of 3 recently with bone fide psoriasis. Although ZNF750 has a single zinc finger identified loci for psoriasis vulgaris, suggesting that the remainder are C2H2-like motif, its nuclear localization suggests that it might act as specific to PsA and that both shared and distinct genetic factors pre- a transcription factor. dispose for psoriasis and PsA. P09.116 Variants in LD with the LcE gene cluster deletion are P09.118** A CNV in the Epidermal Differentiation Complex, associated with susceptibility to psoriatic arthritis affecting the LcE3c and LcE3B genes , is a susceptibility factor J. D. Bowes1, E. Flynn1, P. Ho1,2, B. Aly1, A. W. Morgan3, H. Marzo3, L. Coates3, for psoriatic arthritis in spanish and italian populations. E. Korendowych4, N. McHugh4, O. FitzGerald5, J. Packham6, I. N. Bruce1,2, A. E. Docampo1,2, E. Giardina3, E. Riveira-Muñoz1,2, R. Rabionet1,2, J. Martin4, J. Barton1,2; Maymó5, J. Fernández-Sueiro6, M. González-Gay7, F. Blanco6, Á. Carracedo8, 1Arthritis Research Campaign Epidemiology Unit, The University of Manchester, G. Novelli3, X. Estivill1,2,9; Manchester, United Kingdom, 2The Kellgren Centre for Rheumatology, Central 1Genes and Disease, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG-UPF), Barcelona, Manchester Foundation Trust, NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre, Spain, 2CIBERESP, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Biopathology, Tor Manchester, United Kingdom, 3NIHR-Leeds Musculoskeletal Biomedical Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 4Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina Research Unit, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, López-Neyra, CSIC, Granada, Spain, 5Rheumatology Unit, Hospital del Mar Leeds, United Kingdom, 4Royal National Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases and y la Esperanza IMAS-IMIM, Barcelona, Spain, 6Rheumatology Unit,Complejo Dept Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom, Hospitalario Universitario de La Coruña, La Coruña, Spain, 7Rheumatology 5Department of Rheumatology, St. Vincent’s University Hospital, UCD School Unit,Hospital Xeral-Calde, Lugo, Spain, 8Fundación Gallega de Medicina of Medicine and Medical Sciences and Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Genómica y CIBERER - Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 6Arthritis de Compostela, Spain, 9Department of Experimental and Life Sciences of the Research Campaign National Primary Care Centre, Keele University, Keele, Pompeu Fabra University (UPF), Barcelona, Spain. United Kingdom. Objective: Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is a complex disorder in which envi- Objective: A common deletion mapping to the PSORS4 locus on chro- ronmental and genetic factors are involved. Recently LCE3C_LCE3B_ mosome 1q21 and encompassing two genes of the late cornified en- del has been defined as a susceptibility factor for psoriasis and rheu- velope (LCE) gene cluster has been associated with increased risk of matoid arthritis, making it a good candidate for PsA. Nonetheless, a psoriasis vulgaris (PsV). One previous report found no association of study performed on German PsA patients did not find association. The the deletion with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) suggesting it may be a spe- aim of this study was to elucidate whether LCE3C_LCE3B_del is as- cific risk factor for PsV. Given the genetic overlap between PsA and sociated with PsA in the Spanish and Italian populations. PsV we have investigated whether SNPs mapping to this locus, and Methods: We tested for the association between LCE3C_LCE3B_del which are in linkage disequilibrium with the deletion, are risk factors for and a linked (r2=0.928, D’=0.98) SNP (rs4112788) with PsA in three in- PsA in a UK and Irish population. dependents case-control datasets (Barcelona: 50 cases and 411 con- Methods: Three SNPs mapping to 1q21 with prior evidence for asso- trols, Galicia: 178 and 124, and Roma: 424 and 450). The Barcelona ciation with susceptibility to PsV were genotyped in 1057 PsA patients and Roma samples were typed for the presence of the LCE3C_LCE3B using Sequenom iPlex chemistry and genotype frequencies com- deletion by direct PCR and for the SNP with a Taqman assay, and the pared with data available for 5575 healthy controls. Two of the SNPs, Galician dataset was only tested for the SNP. Association analysis was rs4112788 and rs4085613, were reported to be highly correlated with performed by R SNPassoc package. the LCE deletion. The third SNP, rs6701216, was previously reported Results: Analysis of the Barcelona dataset showed significant asso- to be associated with PsV in a US population. ciation of the LCE3C-LCE3B_del and rs4112788 with PsA (p=0.0075; Results: The alleles tagging the deletion for both rs4112788 and OR=2.27(1.25-4)) and (p=0.03; OR 1.92(1.06-3.44), respectively). The rs4085613 were significantly associated with increased susceptibility rs4112788 association was confirmed in the Galician dataset (p=0.004; to PsA (p = 0.001, OR = 1.19 and p = 0.001, OR = 1.18 respec- OR 2.22 (1.26-3.84)). A large Italian cohort confirmed both associa- trend trend tively). No association was observed to rs6701216. tions (LCE3C-LCE3B_del p=0.006; OR 1.63(1.15-2.38); rs4112788 Conclusions: The evidence presented here supports the LCE deletion p=0.008; OR 1.61(1.44-2.32)). Joint analysis for the SNP showed an as a risk factor for PsA in a UK and Irish population. It suggests that overall p-value of p=0.00019; OR 1.35(1.19-1.59)). Subphenotype this locus is a risk factor within a shared etiological pathway that con- analysis showed a stronger association for the oligoarticular versus tributes to psoriatic skin disease in both PsV and PsA. poliarticular disease (interaction p-value=0.03). Conclusions: The LCE3C-LCE3B deletion shows association with PsA P09.117 Dissecting the mHc locus in psoriatic arthritis in the Spanish and Italian populations analyzed, presenting a stronger S. Uebe1, U. Hüffmeier1, H. Burkhardt2, M. Apel1, A. Ekici1, H. Wichmann3, C. effect in the oligoarticular cases. Gieger3, T. Becker4, M. Steffens4, C. Herold4, T. Wienker4, A. Reis1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Division of Rheumatology, P09.119 Variants in polyunsaturated fatty acids metabolizing Department of Internal Medicine II, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 3Helmholtz enzymes are associated with neurodevelopment in iNmA birth Center, Munich, Germany, 4Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and cohort Epidemiology, Bonn, Germany. M. Bustamante1,2, E. Morales1,3, J. Gonzalez1,3, M. Guxens1,3, X. Estivill2,4, J. Both psoriasis vulgaris and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) show strong as- Sunyer1,3, M. Torrent5; sociation with SNPs in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 1Centre for Environmental Epidemiology, Barcelona, Spain, 2Genes and region on chromosome 6q. It has, however, proven difficult to interpret Disease Program, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, these data because of complex LD at this region. In a GWAS using 3Municipal Institute of Medical Research, Barcelona, Spain, 4Public Health and 572 German PsA patients and 888 population based controls (KORA), Epidemiology Network Biomedical Research Center, Barcelona, Spain, 5Area association to this locus was confirmed. To clarify whether the associa-Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 de Salut de Menorca (ib-salut) and Fundació Caubet-CIMERA, Balears, Spain. College, Norfolk Place, London, W2 1PG, United Kingdom. Long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFAs) are essential for Blood cells participate in vital physiological processes as oxygen trans- cognitive development, mainly during first months of life. Although for- port, defense against infections and vessel wall integrity. Their numbers mula milks have been started to be supplemented with PUFAs, some and characteristics are in part determined by genetic mechanisms (An- essential PUFAs are uniquely available in human milk. In the present drews NC, Nat Genet 2009). We used the Val Borbera isolated popu- study we have tested direct and indirect effects of genetic variants in lation in the Appenine region of Northern Italy (Traglia et al, Plos One FADS and ELOVL genes on neurodevelopment. Thirty-six tag SNPs 2009) to define genetic variants associated with blood cell traits and were genotyped with the SNPlex technology in 340 Caucasian chil- iron parameters. Using 370K Illumina array we conducted genome- dren from the Menorca INMA (Infancia y Medio Ambiente) birth cohort. wide association studies for 15 hematological and 4 iron traits mea- After excluding variants with low genotyping quality or deviation from sured in the peripheral blood of 1664 individuals. These traits include HWE, twenty seven SNPs were analyzed in relation to neurodevelop- hemoglobin, red cell counts and erythrocyte indices, white cell number ment measured at age 4 years with McCarthy Scales of Children’s and types, platelet and iron parameters. Our analyses replicate 23 loci Abilities test consisting in 6 subscales. The statistical analysis was that recent studies have found associated to blood cells (Soranzo et performed using a likelihood ratio test from a linear model adjusting for al Nat Genet 2009, Ganesh et al Nat Genet 2009, Gudbjartsoon et al main confounders. We also tested interactions between genetic vari- Nat Genet 2009, Chambers et al Nat Genet 2009) and iron (Benjamin ants and breastfeeding (83% breastfeeding, 17% formula milk). After et al Nat Genet 2009) traits. Moreover we found 3 new loci that reach Bonferroni correction, a SNP in the FADS cluster was associated with the genome-wide significance associated to mean corpuscular hemo- the general cognitive and quantitative scales. Two SNPs in ELOVL globin concentration (MCHC), neutrophils count and platelet distribu- genes were associated with the perceptual-performance (ELOVL2) tion width (PDW). These preliminary results require replication in other and motor (ELOVL5) scales. Nominally associations were also found populations, sequencing analyses and functional follow-up to prove for SNPs in these genes and the six McCarthy scales. Finally, an in- their true involvement in quantitative traits variation. teraction between breastfeeding and a SNP in ELOVL5 was found for general cognition, verbal, quantitative and motor skills. In summary, P09.122 the REt51/FKBP52 complex and its involvement in genetic variants in PUFA enzymes, directly or through an interaction Early Onset- Parkinson disease with breastfeeding, seem to have an effect on neurodevelopment. Due D. Fusco1, M. Vargiolu1, M. Vidone1, L. Pennisi1, E. Bonora1, E. Mariani1, S. to the limited number of individuals analyzed, results should be repli- Capellari2, P. Martinelli2, G. Romeo1; cated. 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Neurological Sciences, Bologna, Italy. P09.120 Evaluating the influence of multiple genetic RET51 is a tyrosine kinase receptor expressed in distinct families of polymorphisms on genitourinary and gastrointestinal acute neurons where it promotes different functions. FKBP52 is an immu- morbidity to radiotherapy nophilin with neuroprotective effects on different kind of neurons. We L. Fachal1, P. Peleteiro2, A. Carballo2, M. Santamariña1, A. Blanco1, Á. have demonstrated that RET51 activation by both GDNF and NGF Carracedo1, A. Gómez2, A. Vega1; triggers the formation of RET51/FKBP52 complex. The substitution 1Fundación Pública Galega Medicina Xenómica-SERGAS, Grupo de Medicina of the tyrosine 905 of RET51, a key residue phosphorylated by both Xenómica-USC, CIBER-ER, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Radiation GDNF and NGF, disrupts the RET51/FKBP52 complex. NGF and Oncology Department, Clinical University Hospital, Santiago de Compostela, GDNF have a functional role in dopaminergic (DA) neurons where Spain. RET51 and FKBP52 are expressed with a yet undefined function. The Genetic predictive markers of radiation morbidity are being sought for degeneration of DA neurons is the main feature of Parkinson Disease stratifying radiotherapy for patients and risk assessment of radiation (PD), which is associated to a complex multifactorial aetiology combin- exposure. To evaluate the association of genetic variants with radio- ing environmental, age-related and genetic factors. To clarify if RET51/ therapy-induced acute normal tissue toxicity we enrolled 472 unselect- FKBP52 complex should exert its function in DA neurons we used an ed prostate cancer patients, treated at the Radiation Oncology Depart- indirect approach by screening the genes encoding for RET51 and ment (Clinical University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela) from FKBP52 in a group of 30 Early Onset (EO)- PD patients. We found a 2006-2009, into a prospective epidemiological study. compound heterozygous carrying two mutations in RET and FKBP52 Adverse effects (AE) were documented for 8 weeks using the common genes. Functional analysis performed in the human cell line HEK293 toxicity criteria (CTCv3.0). Patients showing CTC grade ≥1 for genito- have shown that the two mutations expressed simultaneously are suf- urinary (GU) or gastrointestinal (GI) disorders were comprised in the ficient to disrupt the RET51/FKBP52 complex, indicating its potential “case” group. The “control” group consisted of patients without acute role in EO- PD. clinical sensitivity. After a systematic review, we selected previously associated SNPs as P09.123 Association study of CARD8 c. 30T_A (p.C10X) variant so as validated non-synonymous SNPs in the same genes. Altogether, with Rheumatoid Arthritis in tunisian patients 17 SNPs in 6 candidate genes were genotyped. The power to detect M. Ben Hamad1, F. Cornelis2, S. Marzouk3, G. Chabchoub1, Z. Bahloul3, F. odds ratios as low as 1.4 for selected SNPs considering an average Fakhfakh1, H. Ayadi1, E. Petit-Teixeira2, A. Maalej1; population minimum allele frequency (MAF) of 12% was 88% for an 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, sfax, Tunisia, 2GenHotel-EA3886, allelic test. All SNPs were found in HWE in controls. Evry-Paris VII Universities, AP-HP and CHSF Hospitals, Evry-Genopole, The TGFB1 rs1800472 allele T was significantly associated with both France, 3Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Hedi Chaker, the risk of developing GU (OR=1.81; CI95%=1.02-3.22; p=0.04) and sfax, Tunisia. GI AE (OR=2.08; CI95%=1.05-4.13; p=0.03), although this association Caspase activating and recruitment domain 8 (CARD8) may be a did not reach the nominal significance level after Bonferroni correc- negative regulator of NF-κB, which plays a key role in inflammation, tion. and also has a regulatory effect on apoptosis. The common variant Due to the present study is the first to investigate the role of rs1800472 rs2043211 (c.30T>A) introduces a stop codon (Cys10Ter) at position in the acute adverse normal tissue reactions to radiation, we under- 10 of the amino acid sequence (p.C10X). CARD8 full-length (CARD8- stand the need of replicating our results in a greater sample in order to L) was recently found to be associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). convincingly distinguish the proposed effect. The aim of this study was to analyze the frequency of p.C10X in 141 Tunisian patients affected with RA and 191 healthy unrelated controls. P09.121 New loci associated with blood cell and iron traits in DNAs genotyping was carried out with a TaqMan 5‘ allelic discrimi- the isolated population of Val Borbera nation assay on an ABI 7500 real time PCR machine (assay: C__ G. Pistis1, T. Corre1, M. Traglia1, C. Masciullo1, C. Sala1, I. Buetti1, E. Petretto2,3, 11708080_1_) and data were analyzed by chi-squared test, Genotype C. Camaschella1, D. Toniolo1; relative risk and Odds Ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (CI). 1San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy, 2Medical Research Council Our results showed neither allelic nor genotypic significant associa- Clinical Sciences Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, tion of the CARD8 gene polymorphism with RA (p=0.42; p=0.115, re- Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, United Kingdom, spectively); [OR (95% CI) = 1.14 (0.83-1.58)]. The stratification of RA 3Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial patients subgroups according to clinical and immunological data re-Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 vealed significant associations of T/T genotype in HLA-DRB1*10 posi- We employed a two-step case-control association design in order to tive subgroup (n=20) (p=0.009). However, no significant differences reveal schizophrenia susceptibility genes in a Bulgarian sample. Ini- of rs2043211 polymorphism was found according to the presence of tially we performed a candidate gene replication study of 180 SNPs in nodules, another autoimmune disease, erosion, anti-cyclic peptides 59 candidate genes, using 255 Bulgarian patients with schizophrenia antibodies (ACPA) and rheumatoid factor antibody (RF) (p>0.05). and schizoaffective disorder, and 556 Bulgarian healthy controls (by Our results suggest that the CARD8 rs2043211 polymorphism was TaqMan® or Invader assay®). In stage two, a genome-wide association significantly associated with RA susceptibility in patients carrying at study (Illumina Bead Array (550K)) was performed across 188 affected least one allele HLA-DRB1*10. Further replication studies with a larger and 376 healthy Bulgarian subjects. Hundred markers with lowest p- sample size as well as on different populations are needed to confirm values were validated and then followed up in additional set of 99 case this finding. and 328 control samples by Invader assay®. The candidate gene replication study revealed rs6277 (DRD2) (P = P09.124 Functional sNPs in CD2 gene associated with 0.0010, OR = 1.76) as a susceptibility factor for schizophrenia in our rheumatoid arthritis in a Japanese population sample. The GWAS identified strongest association with an intronic A. Suzuki1, R. Yamada2,1, Y. Kochi1, Y. Okada1, K. Matsuda3, K. Shimane1,3, A. SNP of an involved in the pathway of coordination between the tissue Takahashi1, M. Kubo1, Y. Nakamura3,1, K. Yamamoto3,1; size and shape and the cell-type identity in brain development. 1RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan, 2Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, 3The University of Our findings support two of the most widely considered hypotheses for Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. schizophrenia’s etiology: the dopaminergic hypothesis and the malde- Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is well-known as an autoimmune disease velopment of the nervous system hypothesis. and is a chronic inflammatory disorder. Many genome wide association studies were performed and multiple RA-susceptibility loci and autoim- P09.126 severe schizophrenia in males is associated with the mune-susceptibility loci have been identified. These studies suggested presence of mtHFR 677t allele. that multiple genes and its functions were related with disease caus- M. G. Siniauskaya1, I. M. Halayenka1, V. G. Objedkov2, B. I. Navrotsky3, N. G. ing and development. These studies also indicated an important factor Danilenko1; regarding genetic factors of RA and autoimmune diseases; some of 1Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Minsk, Belarus, 2Belarusian Medical State the RA-susceptible polymorphisms also increase the risks of other au- University, Minsk, Belarus, 3Belarusian Republic Center “Mental Health”, Minsk, toimmune diseases as reported. One of the mechanisms of the inflam- Belarus. mation in autoimmune diseases associated with signal transduction Objective: MTHFR gene codes the methylenetetrahydrofolate reduc- via signaling lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM). It was reported tase, one of the important enzyme of folate metabolism, also playing that SLAM family gene, e.g., Ly108 is also associated with systemic role in DNA methylation - thus influencing important cellular pathways. lupus erythematosus (SLE). We studied whether variants of the SLAM The MTHFR C677T mutation has been associated with elevated homo- family gene are associated with susceptibility to RA. The association cysteine levels, that can cause different abnormalities of fetal develop- peak in the block was observed at two functional SNPs (rs3766379 ment: neural tube defects, cardiac dysfunctions and others. Some data and rs6682654) in CD244 in two independent RA cohorts from Japan points the role of this gene mutation in schizophrenia development. (P= 3.23 x 10-8 and P=7.45 x 10-8). We found a Japanese cohort of SLE We studied functional MTHFR C677T alleles variation within schizo- that had the similar genotype distribution with RA cohorts. These dis- phrenic patients families and in control group in order to check if any ease-associated SNPs have been shown to increase their expression association exists between carriers of 677T allele and disease. using luciferase assays. Furthermore, we indicated that rs6682654 Method: 116 schizophrenic patients as well as their mothers and 57 locates on the binding site of USF-1 in CD244 gene and affect on healthy control families were included in research. The patients were the regulation of CD244 expression via USF-1. We supposed that up- differentiated into 2 disease severity groups according clinical data. regulation of CD244 by transcription factors including USF-1 affect on Allelic frequencies for the C677T polymorphism were estimated for all RA. Thus, CD244 is a novel genetic risk factor for RA and may have a studied persons. role for autoimmunity in RA. Results: Strong 677C/T allele ratio frequencies shift was revealed in the group of male patients with mild defect (85/15) as compared to se- P09.125 Identification of two susceptibility variants for vere defect group (66/33) and controls (68/31). We didn’t observe any schizophrenia in Bulgarian sample by case-control association shift in 677C/T frequencies for female patients. Significant differences study approaches (P=0,001) were discovered between groups of male and female pa- E. T. Betcheva1, A. G. Yosifova1, T. Mushiroda2, M. Kubo3, A. Takahashi4, S. tients, subdivided by the severity of disease (mild and severe defect), Karachanak1, I. Zaharieva1, R. Vazharova1, S. Hadjidekova1, I. Dimova1, D. in ratio of individuals bearing 677T allele. Male patients with 677T al- Stoyanov5, V. Milanova6, T. Tolev7, G. Kirov8, N. Kamatani4, D. Toncheva1, Y. lele more often suffer from severe schizophrenia. Nakamura9; Conclusions: To our mind, obtained data reflect the different way of 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University Sofia, schizophrenia development in male and female patients with mild and Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Laboratory for Pharmacogenetics, RIKEN Center for Genomic severe schizophrenia. Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 3Laboratory for Genotyping Development, RIKEN Center for Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 4Laboratory of P09.127 meta-analysis of 4 European genome wide association Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for Genomic Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, scans identifies 3 new QTLs influencing serum amyloid A 5State Psychiatric Hospital St. Ivan Rilski - Ministry of Health of Republic of concentrations Bulgaria, Novi Iskar, Bulgaria, 6Department of Psychiatry, Aleksandrovska C. Marzi1, E. Albrecht1, P. Hysi2, I. Prokopenko3,4, N. Soranzo5, A. Tönjes6,7, W. Hospital, Medical University, 1431 Sofia, St. G. Sofiiski 1 str., Sofia, Bulgaria, Koenig8, W. März9,10, M. Stumvoll6, T. Spector2, T. Illig1, C. Gieger1; 7Department of Psychiatry, Dr. Georgi Kisiov Hospital, 6260 Radnevo, Magda 1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Petkanova 1 str., Radnevo, Bulgaria, 8Department of Psychological Medicine, Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Twin Research and Cardiff University, School of Medicine, Henry Wellcome Building, Heath Park, Genetic Epidemiology Department, King‘s College, London, United Kingdom, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 9Laboratory of Molecular 3Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, of Tokyo, 108-8639, Tokyo, Japan. University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger Recent development of molecular psychiatry identified a number of Institute Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 6Department of Medicine, candidate genes possibly associated with schizophrenia. However, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 7Coordination Centre for Clinical Trials, the studies often result with controversial and non-conclusive outputs. University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 8Department of Internal Medicine Replication studies might help to unravel this problem. The candidate II – Cardiology, University of Ulm Medical Center, Ulm, Germany, 9synlab gene approach requires selection of a small number of candidate mark- Medizinisches Versorgungszentrum Heidelberg, Eppelheim, Germany, 10Institut ers out of a limited number of loci suggested by preliminary studies. für Public Health, Sozialmedizin und Epidemiologie, Medizinische Fakultät In contrast genome-wide association studies enable high-throughput Mannheim der Universität Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. screening without previous knowledge of disease etiology or patho- Serum amyloid A (SAA), a sensitive marker of an acute inflammatory genesis. state, is associated with several severe chronic diseases, such as Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 amyloidosis, Alzheimer’s disease, tumor genesis and rheumatic arthri- using TaqMan probes and primers on an ABI Prism 7900HT instru- tis. Furthermore, SAA concentrations have been reported to be linked ment. SDS v2.3 software was used for genotype calling. Association to obesity, atherosclerosis, and diabetes, three of the risk factors for analyses were performed using 2x2 contingency tables. cardiovascular disease. We conducted a meta-analysis of 4 genome- RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Significant association was ob- wide association scans on baseline SAA concentrations totalling 4,264 served in five regions (Table 1), confirming the implication of several participants of European descent (KORA S4, LURIC, Sorbs, TwinsUK) those genomic regions in CD susceptibility in a southern European and identified 3 independent signals which are distributed across two population. regions. One region is located on chromosome 11 and displays two p independent loci, one of which harbouring SAA1 and SAA2 and the LOCUS SNP Minor allele MAF cases/controls Value other the neighbouring GTF2H1 and HPS5. The other region includes RGS1 rs2816316 C 0.145/0.199 0.0002 the LEPR gene region on chromosome 1. Taken together, the present IL12A/SCHIP1 rs17810546 G 0.132/0.100 0.0286 meta-analysis was the first genome wide association analysis on SAA IL12A rs9811792 C 0.514/0.439 0.0003 concentrations and detected gene regions, which highlight immune SH2B3 rs3184504 T 0.510/0.438 0.0004 response pathways involved in the regulation of chronic inflammation KIAA1109 rs13119723 G 0.178/0.229 0.0024 and implicated diseases and underline a close interplay between SAA and other inflammatory proteins. The majority of GWAs identified loci are replicated accross popula- tions, although allele frequencies may vary. Failure to replicate may be P09.128 Synaptic exocytosis and migraine: association study of in part due to differences in genetic bakground. the sNARE complex and related genes in a spanish population R. Corominas1,2, O. Carreño1,2, M. J. Sobrido3,2, M. Camiña3, M. Vila-Pueyo4, B. P09.130 the i/D polymorphism of the AcE1 is not a risk factor Narberhaus5, P. Pozo-Rosich6, A. Macaya7, B. Cormand1,2; but is a prognostic marker for ischemic stroke 1Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, S. Domingues-Montanari, I. Fernández-Cadenas, A. del Rio-Espinola, M. Spain, 2CIBER Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain, Mendioroz, J. Fernández-Morales, P. Delgado, A. Penalba, P. Chacón, D. Salat, 3Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, M. Ribó, A. Rosell, J. Álvarez-Sabín, J. Montaner; Galicia, Spain, 4Grup de Recerca en Neurologia Infantil, Hospital Universitari Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain. Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 5Neurology Service, Hospital Sant Background: Studies on the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE1) Joan de Déu (Fundació Althaia), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 6Headache gene in ischemic stroke (IS) have generated conflicting results. The Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, goal of our study was to clarify the influence of the ACE1 as a risk fac- Catalonia, Spain, 7Grup de Recerca en Neurologia Infantil, Hospital Universitari tor and prognosis marker for IS. Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. Methods: We genotyped the rs4341 polymorphism, in linkage disequi- Migraine is a complex multifactorial neurological disorder. It has been librium with the rs1799752 (ID polymorphism) in 531 IS cases and 549 suggested that disturbances of ions and/or neurotransmitter levels in healthy controls. We then tested if the rs4341 could influence thrombo- the synaptic cleft may be involved in the pathophysiology of migraine lytic efficacy (measured as frequency of revascularization) and safety by influencing neuronal excitability. The Soluble N-ethylmaleimide (measured as cerebral hemorrhagic complications) in IS patients who sensitive factor Attachment protein REceptor (SNARE) complex received t-PA <3h after symptoms onset. We measured serum ACE plays a key role in the fusion of vesicles loaded with neurotransmitter levels in 130 samples: 27 controls, 68 IS at baseline and 35 IS 24h with the presynaptic membrane. The aim of the present study is to after stroke. investigate the involvement of 15 genes (STX1A, SNAP25, VAMP1, Results: There was no association of the ACE1 variant with IS VAMP2, SYT1, SYT2, CPLX1, CPLX2, CPLX3, CPLX4, STXBP1, (p=0.776), although it affected ACE protein levels (DD=153.5±54.9, SYP, SNPH, NSF, NAPA) encoding proteins that belong to or interact ID=120.4±39.8, II=107.0±45.8 ng/mL, p<0.001). IS cases showed with the SNARE complex through a case-control association study of lower ACE levels than controls in the acute phase (p<0.001), but not 538 migraine patients, 312 without aura (MO) and 226 with aura (MA), at 24h (p=0.673). On another hand, the D allele was associated with and 538 sex-matched controls from Spain. The analysis of 144 SNPs higher revascularization rates in tPA-treated patients (p=0.037 at 1h), displayed several nominal associations in different clinical groups, but without increasing the odds of hemorrhagic complications (p=0.244). only two SNPs in CPLX2 (complexin 2) for MO and one SNP in NSF Protein levels at 24h were also higher in IS patients who revascular- (N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor) for MA remained significant after ized at 24h (174.6±47.9 vs. 116.0±28.1, p=0.028). 15% FDR correction for multiple testing. A replication study with 480 Conclusion: The D allele of the ACE1 I/D and ACE protein levels were cases and 480 controls from Spain is currently underway. not associated with a higher risk of IS in Spanish individuals. However, the ACE1 could be a good pharmacogenetic marker, since it is associ- P09.129 Replication of the celiac Disease GWAs results in ated with higher revascularization rates following t-PA treatment. spanish population L. Plaza-Izurieta1,2, A. Castellanos-Rubio1,2, N. Fernandez-Jimenez1,2, G. P09.131 correlation between different clinical manifestations Gutierrez1, J. R. Bilbao1,2, C. E. G. E. C3; and subphenotype stratification of genetic association in 1Immunogenetics Lab, Hospital de Cruces, Cruces-Barakaldo, Spain, systemic Lupus Erythematosus 2Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology, P. H. Li, P. P. W. Lee, Y. Lau; University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain, 3Spanish Celiac Disease The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. Genetics Consortium, Spain. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex genetic disease with BACKGROUND: Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic, immune-mediated heterogeneous clinical manifestations. An individual can be classified disorder of the gut caused by intolerance to ingested gluten that de- as having SLE when 4 or more of the 11 criteria set by the American velops in genetically susceptible individuals, affecting approximately College of Rheumatology (ACR) have been met. Disease manifesta- 1% of Caucasians. The major genetic risk factors for CD are HLA- tions are therefore varied and diverse, where two SLE patients may DQ2/DQ8 molecules. Nevertheless, these variants are also frequent have non-overlapping subphenotypes. It is known that multiple genes in the general population, so HLA is necessary but not sufficient to ex- are involved in SLE. The phenotypic heterogeneity could be a result plain all genetic susceptibility to CD. Genome-wide association studies of an underlying genetic heterogeneity, with different subsets of sus- (GWAS) have been performed in CD and eigth new loci that contribute ceptibility genes contributing to different phenotypic manifestations. In to genetic risk have been identified and replicated in different popula- this study, we analysed the clinical data from 1211 SLE patients col- tions. lected in Hong Kong, including the 11 criteria from the ACR classifica- AIM: Our aim was to replicate the association of the eigth risk loci in tion criteria and autoantibody production. We also correlated this with the Spanish population. the genotype data for 612 of these patients genotyped by the Illumina PATIENTS AND METHODS: We genotyped 500 CD patients and 470 610-Quad Beadchip in a recent genome-wide association study and healthy controls from the Spanish Celiac Disease Genetics Consor- the genotype data of several well-established SLE susceptibility genes tium collaborative study for GWAs associated single nucleotide poly- for the remaining patients by the Sequenom MassARRAY iPLEX Gold morphisms (SNPs) tagging the eight risk loci. SNPs were genotyped system. Correlation analysis between disease manifestations revealed Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 that several subphenotypes (clinical manifestations and autoantibody sex-matched healthy controls were genotyped for a single biallelic production) tended to cluster together, indicating overlapping of the (G/T) nucleotide polymorphism (rs398702) in the 3’ region of the KC- underlying mechanisms for these manifestations. Furthermore, pa- NMB4 gene using a TaqMan 5’ allele discrimination assay. Analysis of tient-only analysis (e.g. patients with arthritis versus patients without) genotype or allelic frequencies between patients and controls showed showed that many well-established susceptibility genes may be partic- no statistically significant difference (p>0.05). Our data suggest that ularly associated with specific disease subphenotypes. Our study may KCNMB4 gene polymorphism does not act as a susceptibility factor help dissect the intrinsic correlation between different subphenotypes for TLE. Although these findings do not replicate the earlier findings and the correlation between genetic makeup and clinical manifesta- at the SNP level, we believe that many SNPs contribute to disease tions. predisposition in an population-specific manner. Despite our negative results, the candidate gene selection strategy could be quite useful in P09.132 Dissection of genes in the type i interferon pathway the future determination of variants predisposing to disease. reveals two novel risk genes for sLE J. K. Sandling1, S. Garnier1, S. Sigurdsson1, C. Wang1, G. Nordmark2, I. P09.134 Genotyping of the tPmt gene using pyrosequencing in Gunnarsson3, E. Svenungsson3, L. Padyukov3, G. Sturfelt4, A. Jönsen4, A. A. Polish population Bengtsson4, L. Truedsson5, C. Eriksson6, S. Rantapää-Dahlqvist7, A. Mälarstig8, M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska1, K. Milanowska1, L. Jakubowska-Burek2, M. R. J. Strawbridge8, A. Hamsten8, L. A. Criswell9, R. R. Graham10, T. W. Kaczmarek-Rys1, A. Dobrowolska-Zachwieja2, A. Plawski1, R. Slomski1; Behrens10, M. L. Eloranta2, G. Alm11, L. Rönnblom2, A. C. Syvänen1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 1Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, 2Department of Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Internal Diseases, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, University School of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Rheumatology Unit, Department of Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) metabolizes thiopurine drugs Medicine, Karolinska Institutet/Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, which are used in the treatment of several disorders such as inflam- Sweden, 4Section of Rheumatology, Department Clinical Sciences, Lund matory bowel disease (IBD). The therapeutic function of tiopurine University, Lund, Sweden, 5Department of Laboratory Medicine, section of drugs is considerably dependent on the genetic polymorphisms of M.I.G., Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 6Department of Clinical Immunology, TPMT gene. The three main TPMT alleles, TPMT *2 (p.Ala80Pro), *3A Umeå University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden, 7Department of Rheumatology, (p.Ala154Thr, p.Tyr240Cys) and *3C (p.Tyr240Cys), determine 80 - Umeå University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden, 8Atherosclerosis Research Unit, 95% of the intermediate and low enzyme activity, and increase the risk Department of Medicine, Solna Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, for thiopurine-induced toxicity. The aim of our study was to optimize a 9Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center for Arthritis, Department of simple genotyping method to identify main TPMT alleles and to deter- Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, mine the frequency of these changes in the Polish population. We test- 10Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States, 11Department of ed 37 of IBD patients treated with thiopurine drugs and 100 controls. Biomedical Sciences and Veterinary Public Health, Swedish University of Following a PCR protocol, fragments of exon 4, 6 and 9 of TPMT gene Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden. enclosing codon 80, 154 and 240, respectively, were analyzed using Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic autoimmune pyrosequencing. The results were compared with those obtained by disease in which the type I interferon (IFN) pathway plays a crucial standard sequencing. Identification of these sequence variants using role. We have previously shown that five genes in this pathway, IRF5, pyrosequencing is highly sensitive and less time consuming compared TYK2, STAT4, IFIH1 and IRF8 are associated with risk for SLE, as to standard sequencing or restriction fragment length polymorphism well as successfully replicated the previous reports on association for (RFLP). It can be easily integrated in diagnostic testing. Moreover, we IRAK1, TNFAIP3, TNFSF4 and the IRF7 region (KIAA1542). Here we found a TPMT*3A allele frequency of 8,1 % in IBD patients compared investigate 78 genes involved in the type I IFN pathway to identify to 3,0 % among general Polish population. The frequency of TPMT*3C additional SLE susceptibility loci. First, we genotyped SNPs in these allele in heterozygote is of 2,7% in IBD patients and 0,0% in controls. 78 genes and 14 other candidate genes in Swedish SLE patients and TPMT*2 allele was not identified either in patients or the Polish control controls. Genes with P < 0.01 in the initial screen were then followed group. up in an additional Swedish cohort. SNPs in five genes were nominally associated with SLE in this extended cohort. To replicate these find- P09.135 Quality control for large-scale high throughput ings we extracted data from a genome-wide association study on SLE mRNA isolation and transcriptome analyses of subjects of the performed in a US cohort. Combined analysis of the Swedish and US Rotterdam study data confirmed two of these genes as SLE susceptibility loci. Our study M. J. Peters, M. P. Jhamai, F. Rivadeneira, J. B. J. van Meurs, A. G. highlights additional genes from the type I IFN system for further func- Uitterlinden; tional analysis, and more specifically points to the importance of genes Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. in the IFIH1/DDX58 pathway which is activated in cells other than the Introduction: Within the Rotterdam Study (RS), Genome-Wide Asso- plasmacytoid dendritic cells, for example monocyte derived dendritic ciation Studies have successfully identified genomic regions associ- cells, in response to viral infections. ated with several diseases and traits. To identify the genes involved we will study genotype-dependent expression profiles of blood mRNA P09.133 BK channel β4 subunit gene (KCNMB4) and Temporal in 2,000 subjects, but first evaluated quality of transcriptomes of 96 Lobe Epilepsy RS participants. I. Manna1, A. Labate2, U. Aguglia3, L. Mumoli2, G. Palamara2, A. Fratto2,1, P. Materials & Methods: Whole blood cells have been collected for Spadafora1, G. Di Palma1, A. Quattrone2,1, A. Gambardella2,1; ~2,000 RS subjects. RNAs were isolated (Qiagen PAXgene-tubes), 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Cosenza, Italy, amplified and labelled (Ambion Illumina TotalPrep), and hybridized to 2Institute of Neurology, University “Magna Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Regional the Illumina Whole-Genome Expression Beadchips (HT-12). For nor- Epilepsy Centre, Hospital of Reggio Calabria, Reggio Calabria, Italy. malization and analysis, the lumi package of Bioconductor was used Epilepsy is one of the major neurological disorders characterized by (Du et al.,2007). spontaneous and recurrent seizures. Traditionally Temporal Lobe Results: For the pilot of 96 RS subjects 90.6% had sufficient quality Epilepsy (TLE) was considered as a multifactorial syndrome due to (RIN > 7.0) and RNA yield (>1.0ug). After amplification, 98.9% had a environmental factors. Advances in molecular biology have facilitated cRNA yield > 5.0ug. A total of 70 samples were hybridized to 6 Illumina the detection of many genetic alterations that may have a pathogenic WG Expression Beadchips, containing 48,775 probes. After variance- effect in TLE. Large conductance calcium-activated potassium chan- stabilizing transformation and quantile-normalization, 3 samples (low nels (BK) have recently been implicated in the pathogenesis of genetic intensities) and 25,386 unexpressed probes (p < 0.01) were excluded. epilepsy. The remaining 67 samples did not cluster by beadchip, date of blood The objective of this study is to replicate previously published results collection, the person who collected the blood, nor the person who regarding the involvement of KCNMB4 gene in TLE. We used a case- isolated the RNAs. Age and gender were not found to influence the control approach comparing a tag single-nucleotide polymorphism expression profiles. (SNP) located 3’ of this candidate gene between unrelated TLE pa- Discussion: In this pilot set-up we detected no biases in transcriptomes tients and matched controls. A total of 359 patients and 319 age- and during sample collection, preparation or hybridization, consequently Complex traits and polygenic disorders 27 transcriptome analyses of further samples is warranted. On the long nals and, therefore, determine predisposition to different clinical forms run, we will try to replicate earlier reported expression quantitive trait of TB. This hypothesis requires further confirmation. loci (eQTLs) from lymphocytes, while for 4 RNAs microarray-data will be compared to RNA-seq transcriptome-data (generated with Illumina- P09.138 Validation of a novel chromosome 10p CNV associated GAII). with type 2 diabetes J. L. Buxton1, R. G. Walters1, J. S. El-Sayed Moustafa1, L. J. M. Coin1, A. J. de P09.136 tRP channels: a case-control association study with Smith1, A. I. F. Blakemore1, P. Froguel1,2; migraine 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2CNRS 8090-Institute of O. Carreño1,2, R. Corominas1,2, M. J. Sobrido3,2, J. Pardo4, J. Fernández- Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France. Morales5, J. M. Fernández-Fernández6, P. Pozo-Rosich5, B. Cormand1,2, A. The use of SNP genotyping data to identify copy number variants Macaya7; (CNVs) is potentially a highly effective approach for the detection of 1Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, novel common and rare genetic variants associated with disease. Spain, 2CIBER Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain, In order to identify common CNVs associated with Type 2 diabetes 3Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Comostela, (T2D), we applied our novel algorithm cnvHap to Illumina genotyping Galicia, Spain, 4Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Santiago data from stage 1 of a GWAS in a French cohort, for approximately de Compostela, Galicia, Spain, 5Headache Unit, Neurology Department, 300,000 SNPs from 694 cases and 669 normoglycaemic controls. Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 6Laboratory We have characterised in detail a duplication located on chromosome of Molecular Physiology and Channelopathies, Department of Experimental 10p, encompassing a SNP for which increased copy number is as- and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, sociated with an increased risk of T2D (p value <10-10). The variation 7Grup de Recerca en Neurologia Infantil, Hospital Universitari Vall d‘Hebron, in copy number observed at this locus is caused by a combination of Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. a small, 70bp duplication and a larger duplication involving all or part Migraine is a common episodic, chronic and disabling cephalea with of a 20.8kb repeat block. Genotyping of the 70bp duplication reveals a complex inheritance that is caused by the interaction among mul- that, by itself, this variant does not explain the CN association of this tiple genes and environmental factors. The fact that rare monogenic SNP with T2D: the allele frequencies are 0.076 in normoglycaemic forms of the disorder are caused by mutations in genes involved in ion controls (n=909) and 0.074 in cases (n=890). Thus, it appears that transport point at these genes as potential candidates to underlie also the large duplication is responsible for the observed CN association the common forms of migraine. Transient Receptor Potential (TRP) at this locus, either solely or in combination with the 70bp duplication. channels constitute a heterogeneous family of cationic non-selective Ongoing qPCR measurements to genotype the large duplication will channels that work as cellular sensors, playing critical roles in a num- enable confirmation of its association with T2D and interrogation of ber of physiological processes such as touch, vision, olfaction or ther- any possible interactions between the copy number state of the two mo- and osmosensation. TRP channels have been involved in several duplications at this locus. neurological disorders including Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2C, Gua- manian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and mucolipidosis type IV. We P09.139 Hsp70 genes polymorphisms: lack of association with have studied the possible contribution of 14 genes of the TRP super- Undifferentiated spondyloarthritis in Romania family (TRPA1, TRPC1, TRPC3, TRPC4, TRPC5, TRPC7, TRPM4, O. Popa1, M. Dutescu2, M. Bojinca1, V. Bojinca1, R. Sfrent-Cornateanu1, F. TRPM6, TRPM7, TRPM8, TRPV1, TRPV2, TRPV3, TRPV4) to mi- Raicu1, C. Bara1, L. Popa3; graine through a case-control association study with 192 single nu- 1University „Carol Davila“, Bucharest, Romania, 2National Hematology Institute cleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We genotyped 555 migraine patients Prof. Dr. C.T. Nicolau, Bucharest, Romania, 3Grigore Antipa National Museum (124 males and 431 females, 323 migraine with aura -MA- and 232 of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania. migraine without aura -MO-) and 555 controls. Nominal associations Background: Undifferentiated spondyloarthritis (USpA) belongs to the were identified with 11 of these genes, but none of them overcame group of spondyloarthritides, rheumatic inflammatory diseases caused multiple testing corrections. However, we identified a risk haplotype for by genetic, environmental and immunologic factors. migraine in the TRPC4 gene, while TRPC1, TRPM6 and TRPM8 con- Heat shock proteins (hsp) genes polymorphisms have been investigat- tained susceptibility haplotypes to MO and TRPM4, TRPV4, TRPV3 ed in different conditions with an immune component, including spon- and TRPV1 to MA. These results await replication in a second Spanish dyloarthritides. The +1267A/G polymorphism in hsp70-2 gene showed case-control sample, currently underway. a significant association with USpA in Mexican Mestizo patients. Objectives. The aim of this study was to investigate the association of P09.137 the study of association between polymorphism of two known polymorphisms (+190G/C and +1267A/G of the hsp70-1 genes responsible for th1/th2-polarization and tuberculosis in and hsp70-2 genes) with undifferentiated spondyloarthritis in Roma- Russian population of siberia nia. A. Rudko1, A. An2, E. Bragina1, I. Saltikova2, V. Puzyrev1, M. Freidin1; Methods. 75 unrelated Romanian patients with USpA (diagnosed ac- 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian cording to the European Spondyloarthropathy Study Group criteria) State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. and 100 healthy unrelated ethnically matched controls were involved The analysis of inherited basis of predisposition to tuberculosis (TB) is in this study. Patients did not meet criteria for any of the well defined one of the most perspective and actively-developing field of genetics spondyloarthritides. of infectious disease in humans. More than twenty candidate genes All subjects were genotyped for hsp70-1 +190 G/C (rs1043618) by underlying the predisposition to TB were discovered; however, the ef- TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay C_11917510_10 (Applied Biosys- fects of these genes vary in different populations. The aim of this study tems, USA) and for hsp70-2 +1267A/G (rs1061581) by PCR-RFLP was to search for an association of SNP markers of genes respon- with PstI restriction enzyme. Association tests for each polymorphism sible for Th1/Th2-polarization with TB. The study was performed in and haplotype frequency estimations were performed with software a group of 304 Russians from Siberia (Tomsk Region, Russia) with package PLINK v 1.07. TB and 160 healthy controls. We investigated genes encoding for cy- Results. Patients and controls groups were in Hardy-Weinberg equi- tokine ligands and receptors (IL12B, IL12RB1, IFNG, IFNGR2, IL4, librium for both polymorphisms. No association was found between IL4RA, IL1B, IL1RN) and genes involved in intracellular transduction any of the investigated polymorphisms and USpA. Three main haplo- of immune signals (STAT-, SOCS-, PIAS-family genes). The following types were constructed, the most commune being 190G/1267A (65% associations between polymorphic markers and TB were observed: in patients and 62% in controls). There was no association of these IL12B (rs3212227; p=0.044), PIASY (rs760903; p=0.019), PIAS3 haplotypes with the disease. (rs12756687; p=0.019). The SNPs in IL12B and PIASY were mainly Conclusion. The present study shows no association of hsp70-1 associated with secondary TB (p=0.041 and p=0.027, respectively), +190G/C and hsp70-2 +1267A/G polymorphisms and derived haplo- whereas the polymorphism of PIAS3 was associated with primary TB types with susceptibility to undifferentiated spondyloarthritis in Roma- (p=0.001). So, the genes of PIAS-family are new candidate genes nian patients. of predisposition to TB. This observation can reflect the fact that the genes studied influence a balance between Th1/Th2-polarizating sig-Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 P09.140 mthfr gene polymorphism c677t associated with urinary P09.142 Polymorphisms in WNt family genes are associated tract anomalies in girls with nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate J. Behunova1, L. Klimcakova2, L. Podracka1; I. Prane1,2, L. Piekuse1, I. Akota3, B. Barkane3, A. Krumina1, B. Lace2; 1I. Department of Pediatrics, PJ Safarik University Children Hospital, Kosice, 1Department of Biology and microbiology, Riga, Latvia, 2Latvian Biomedical Slovakia, 2Department of Medical Biology, PJ Safarik University, Kosice, Research and Study Center, Riga, Latvia, 3RSU Institute of Stomatology, Riga, Slovakia. Latvia. Background: Folate deficiency could play a role not only in neural tube Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCLP) is a common defects (NTD), but also in urinary tract anomalies (UTA) formation,. birth defect with a prevalence of 1/700 live birth worldwide. NSCLP is We evaluated the frequency of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase a complex trait most probably caused by multiple genetic loci interact- (MTHFR) gene polymorphisms C677T and A1298C in patients with ing with environmental factors and other genes. Genetic variations in UTA and NTD, comparing them to healthy Slovak children. several genes have been identified as contributing to NSCLP up to Methods: The cohort comprised 515 children: 225 patients (132 UTA 12-25%. Vast mayority of the genetic susceptibility loci have not been /85 boys/; 93 NTD /39 boys/ and 290 healthy newborns (147 boys). defined and study results are conflicting. The patients´ DNA was analysed by PCR followed by enzyme restric- The WNT (wingless-type MMTV integration site family) tion. The newborns´ DNA isolated from dry blood spot was analysed (MIM:165330/602864) family genes are involved in regulation of mid- by RT PCR. Genotype frequencies were compared with Pearson χ2or face development and upper lip fusion; therefore they are strong can- Fisher tests. Odds ratio was rated by Garts method, statistic signifi- didates for an etiological role in NSCLP. cance level was determined as ≤0,05. The aim of the study was to confirm WNT3 and WNT9B genes etiologi- Results: The Slovak population frequencies of T allele and TT geno- cal role in the development of NSCLP. type of C677T polymorphism were 25,17% and 6,90%; C allele and CC Materials and methods: 108 nonsyndromic cleft lip (CL) and cleft lip genotype of A1298C: 34,66% and 13,79%; no differences between the with cleft palate (CLP) cases and 182 healthy, unrelated and randomly sexes. NTD patients: no association with MTHFR polymorphisms, no selected individuals as controls from Latvia were genotyped for 29 sex differences. Surprisingly, UTA patients showed significantly higher SNPs by APEX technology, developed by Tartu University, Estonia (A. incidence of C677T polymorphism compared to the controls (T allele Metspalu). resp.TT genotype: 32,95%, p=0,019 (OR=1,9957; 95%CI[1,0086- Association analyses of case-controls were applied by PLINK soft- 3,9486]) resp.12,88% p=0,044 (OR=1,4611 95%CI[1,0633-2,0078]). ware, after data genetic cleaning. This finding was even more significant in girls with UTA: T allele resp. Results All SNPs were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Three SNPs TT genotype frequencies 42,55%, p<0,0001 (OR 95%CI 2,676 [1,629- out of 29 (rs11655598, p<0.001; rs11653738, p=0.001; rs4968282, 4,396]) resp. 19,20% p=0,008 (OR; 95%CI 3,9967;[1,2615-12,6931]) p=0.021) showed a significant association with nosyndromic CLP. compared to the healthy girls. On the other hand, T allele in UTA boys Conclusion: Our data confirms WNT family genes role in the develop- represented 27,6%, compared to 42,6% in girls, p=0,0136. A1298C ment of nonsyndromic CLP. It was considered WNTs interacts with polymorphism in UTA group did not differ from the controls.Conclu- FGFs and BMPs during embryonic development and failure in this sions: Despite no association of MTHFR gene polymorphisms with pathway leads to formation of NSCLP. NTD in our patients, MTHFR gene polymorphism C677T was strongly associated with UT anomalies in girls. This might point to UT devel- J09.01 Association between the Polymorphism of SORL1 and opmental sex-differences related to sex-specific processes of meth- Alzheimer ’s disease ylation, which might be limited due to reduced MTHFR activity. This J. Gharesouran1,2, M. Mohaddes Ardebili1,2, M. Rezazadeh1; hypothesis should be further tested on larger groups of patients. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2These authors contributed P09.141 the pattern of genetic inheritance of voice registers equally to this work, Islamic Republic of Iran. A. L. S. Figueiredo1, E. R. Paradela1, L. A. Agostinho1, C. Rocha1, G. L. The genetic epidemiology of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD) Hadju2, S. R. Middleton1, C. L. A. Paiva1; remains a very active area of research, making it one of the most 1Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro, prolifically published areas in medicine and biology. Numerous puta- Brazil, 2Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UERJ), Rio de Janeiro, tive candidate genes have been proposed. A recent study reported Brazil. significant association of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD) with Little is known about the genetics of voice. Vocal registers arise from multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes in several anatomical configurations which lead to different vibratory pat- SORL1, a neuronal sortilin-related receptor protein, known to be in- terns produced by the vocal cords. The purpose of this retrospective volved in the trafficking and processing of amyloid precursor protein. study was to analyze the different vocal registers in 55 men (tenor, We examined the co-segregation of six statistically significant single- baritone and bass) and 45 women (soprano, mezzo-soprano and nucleotide polymorphisms with the SORL1 gene, in a total of 150 pa- contralto), their descendants and ascending relatives, and to suggest tient samples, and 150 healthy controls from west northern Iran (East- a pattern of inheritance for vocal registers. These people were lyric ern Azerbaijan). The samples were genotyped for the polymorphisms singers of Teatro Municipal, and of two Schools of Music in Rio de Ja- and the genotype frequencies were statistically analyzed. One of the neiro (UFRJ and UNIRIO). The voice registers, when unknown, were SNPs was diagnosed to be individually linked to the gene of study, determined by the lyric singer Maria Bezzi. In this work we observed while the others were linked as haplotypes. the limited variability of the vocal registers and timbres within families, and found a high frequency of tenors (30%) and sopranos (28%) in J09.02 No major genes in autoimmune thyroid diseases: the sample. We also found mezzo-sopranos (14%), baritones (11%), complex segregation and epidemiological studies in a large contraltos (3%), and basses (14%). Forty-five men out of 55 and 41 pedigree from south of tunisia women out of 45 knew their parents´ voice registers. Pedigree analysis N. Bougacha1, S. Ben Arab2, A. Rebai1, M. Mnif3, A. Maalej4, N. Charfi3, J. showed a high similarity of timbres among men and women within the Jouida5, M. Abid3, H. Ayadi1; same family. We suggest a non-mendelian, poligenic and multifactorial 1Center of Biotechnology of sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Faculté de Médecine de Tunis, inheritance. Each register and timbre has a wide “norm of reaction”. Tunisia, 3CHU Hédi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, Therefore, an enormous complexity can exist in the interrelationships Tunisia, 5Dispensaire Bir Hfay Sidi Bouzid, Tunisia. between genetic and environmental factors in determining traits such Objective: The objective of this study is to determine epidemiological as voice registers and timbres. Additional genetic research is needed parameters and transmission mode of autoimmune thyroid diseases to further elucidate the relationship between vocal tract structure and (AITDs) in a Tunisian district which harbour a unique multigenerational function, mechanisms of voice and transmission of voice characteris- family with high prevalence of AITDs (Akr). STUDY DESIGN AND Set- tics, and this work is one relevant initial step. ting: 113 AITDs patients have been subjected to a regular clinical fol- low-up for over 8 years (1992-2000).The coefficient of consanguinity, incidence and prevalence were determined. On the other hand, a com- plex segregation analysis was performed in order to determine AITDs mode of inheritance. Results: We have assessed prevalence (43.6‰) Complex traits and polygenic disorders 2 and incidence (7.2 per 1000 inhabitants) of AITDs in this district. The J09.05 contribution of the mHc class iii region to the mean of consanguinity was estimated at 3% in Akr family and 2.1% in predisposing role of mHc class ii haplotypes in type 1 diabetes control group. Complex segregation analysis gave evidence for a poly- Z. Banlaki1, N. Hosszufalusi1, P. Panczel1, E. Pozsonyi2, A. Hosso2, K. Rajczy2, genic character of theses diseases when compared to the full model G. Fust1, A. Szilagyi1; (Chi2 (ddf=6)= 68.31; p<10-12). The plausible hypothesis of transmis- 13rd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, sion was the co dominant Mendelian inheritance (Chi2 (ddf=3)=60.89; Hungary, 2National Blood Transfusion Service, Department of Immunogenetics, p<10-12).CONCLUSION: Such sample was of a particular utility to Budapest, Hungary. foresee transmission mode of AITDs genetic component. The high Relationship between the human MHC region and type 1 diabetes incidence of AITDs in such a district could be explained by the high (T1D) has been widely investigated and susceptibility to the disease rate of endogamy and consanguinity. A larger scale study should be has been linked to class II alleles. Recent data indicate that other performed in order to establish epidemiological parameters of AITDs genes located beyond the class II region may have modifying effect in Tunisia. on genetic predisposition to T1D, however, the high frequency of the extended ancestral haplotypes in this region hinders the precise lo- J09.03 ADRB2 and GNB3 gene polymorphisms at children with calization of the gene variants which are responsible for the observed bronchial asthma. increased risk. E. A. Isupova, M. A. Vinogradova, M. V. Zdanova, A. N. Lubashova, O. A. In order to evaluate the role of genes in class III and class I regions, Konanova, A. N. Voitovich, P. B. Glazkov, G. A. Novik, V. I. Larionova; we collected 42 Hungarian families with at least one affected offspring. Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Beside HLA-typing, genotype of five polymorphisms and copy number Federation. of C4 genes located in the MHC III region was determined. Statisti- Background: β-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) connected with Gi-pro- cal analysis was performed applying transmission disequilibrium test 2 tein may contribute the development of allergic diseases and play role and chi-square test in a case-control design. As control, 48 Hungarian in bronchial asthma (BA) treatment influencing the response on β2- families with no T1D child were used. agonists. Our data clearly established the previously known class II risk haplo- Aim: To study combination of polymorphisms Arg16Gly (R>G), Gln- types, and furthermore we found that the odds ratio of the class II risk 27Glu (Q>E) of ADRB2 gene and C825T polymorphism in the gene alleles, e.g. DQ8-DR4 differed according to the linked MHC III haplo- encoding the G protein β-subunit (GNB3) in boys and girls with BA types. Our results did not show any influence of the different alleles 3 and healthy children. located at the MHC I region. Methods: We included 273 Caucasian children; aged of 4-17 years; In conclusion alleles in the MHC class III region may have modify- 227 boys (82,6%) and 46 girls (17,4%) affected by BA. Control group ing role on the major susceptibility determinants of T1D located in the included 148 healthy children; 77 boys (52,1%) and 71 girls (47,9%) class II region. These results may contribute to a more precise deter- aged of 4-17 years. The genetic polymorphism of ADRB2 and GNB3 mination of individual risk to T1D and may allow the identification of the genes was performed by PCR-RFLP standard method. responsible gene variants. Results: In group of children with BÀ the combination of genotypes RR/QQ/CT prevails comparing to healthy children (7,7% and 1,4%; J09.06 Association of eNOs rs2070744 polymorphism with ð=0,006; OR=5,36; 95%CI 1,28-22,55). The combination of genotypes diabetic nephropathy in diabetes type ii patients. GG/QE/CT was rarely in children with BÀ comparing to healthy chil- M. Koptides; dren (5,5% and 14,0% accordingly, ð=0,006; OR=2,61; 95%CI 1,37- University of Nicosia, Dept of Life and Health Sciences, Nicosia, Cyprus. 4,94). Diabetic Nephropathy (DN) due to type II diabetes is the leading cause Conclusions: Our results show that combination of genotypes and al- of End Stage Renal Failure. Epidemiological data suggest that there leles ADRB2 and GNB3 are different in children with BÀ and healthy is heterogeneity among type II diabetes patients in different popula- children. tions, which may be partly explained by genetic predisposition to the Identification of genetic combination of “candidate” genes for BA may development of renal and cardiovascular complications of diabetes. be useful for prediction of disease and patient’s response to treatment. However, the molecular mechanisms have yet to be elucidated. Poten- tial candidate genes include the RAAS, and the endothelial nitric oxide J09.04 Association of the CYP2J2*G0T promoter synthase (eNOS) genes. The eNOS is involved in several processes polymorphism with skin allergy in females and its dysfunction may lead to diabetes complications, including DN. L. I. Selezneva, G. F. Mukhammadieva, A. U. Shagalina, A. B. Bakirov; We assessed the association of eNOS polymorphisms T-786C, Glu- Ufa Research Institute of Occupational Health and Human Ecology, Ufa, 298Asp and 4a/b with type II DN patients. Study subjects comprise of Russian Federation. 40 normoalbuminuric diabetes type II (T2DM) patients with duration Cytochrome P450 enzyme, CYP2J2, metabolizes arachidonic acid over 5 years and without antihypertensive treatment and 30 T2DM pa- to epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs). These eicosanoids exert anti-in- tients with DN. Genotyping was performed by Real Time PCR melting flammatory, vasodilator, anti-thrombotic and antioxidant affects. The curve analysis and/or PCR-RFLP. G50T promoter polymorphism in the CYP2J2 gene was found to be The frequencies of the eNOS genotypes CC, TC and TT were 0.2, associated with an increased risk of coronary artery disease (Spiecker, 0.3 and 0.5 respectively, in the control group and 0.17, 0.6 and 0.23 2004; Borgel, 2008) and bronchial asthma (Polonikov, 2007). In the respectively in the case group. Our data showed that the combined fre- present study we investigated the association of the CYP2J2*G50T quencies of the eNOS TC and CC genotypes were significantly higher polymorphism with the risk of allergic disorders in patients from Re- in T2DM patients with DN (0.77) compared to T2DM patients without public Bashkortostan (Russia). A total of 468 subjects were recruited DN (0.5) (P = 0.0362 using Fisher’s Exact Test, 95%CI = 1.037-2.163). into this study, including 116 patients with allergic asthma, 58 with non- No statistically significant differences were observed for Glu298Asp allergic asthma, 70 patients with allergic rhinitis, 64 with allergic skin and 4a/b polymorphisms or the mutant haplotype -786C/298Asp be- disorders (contact dermatitis, hives, eczema) and 160 controls. The tween the two groups. frequencies of the CYP2J2*C50T genotypes did not differ significantly Our results suggest a potential association between the mutant -786C between patients with allergic, nonallergic asthma, allergic rhinitis and allele and DN among T2DM patients. controls. The frequencies of the CYP2J2*G*T genotypes were 6,9% in patients with allergic asthma, 5,2%- nonallergic asthma, 7,6% - al- J09.07 Risk genotypes in scN5A and ANK2 genes for lergic rhinitis and 9,5% in controls. The frequencies of the CYP2J2*T*T hypertrophy in patients with severe arrhythmias genotypes were 0,9%, 0%, 1,5% and 0,9%, respectively. Women A. Vasku1, M. Raudenska1, D. Honsova1, T. Novotny2, J. Bienertova-Vasku1, M. with skin allergy had a higher prevalence of the CYP2J2*G*T geno- Kozak2, P. Kala2, J. Spinar2; type (17,6%) than the gender-matched control group (6,3%, χ2=4,92; 1Masaryk University Brno, Faculty of Medicine,Department of Pathophysiology, p=0,027; OR=1,32). No association was observed for skin allergy Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University Brno, Faculty of Medicine, in males. Thus, CYP2J2*G50T polymorphism may contribute to the Department of Internal Cardiology Medicine, Faculty Hospital Brno, Brno, pathogenesis of skin allergy in females. Further research is needed to obtain more comprehensive results.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 20 Czech Republic. the angiotensin II type 1 receptor as disease predictor at hemorrhagic Purpose: The aim of the study was to evaluate possible association fever with renal syndrome. of two polymorphisms in long QT genes (C5457T in SCN5A gene and The studied groups included 409 patients with HFRS and 52 healthy T3579C in ANK2 gene) with hypertrophy in patients with implantable controls. ACE blood activity was determined by Bühlmann ACE kinetic cardiovertor defibrillator after severe arrythmia episodes. test. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes Methods: Genotypes of the polymorphisms were determined in a sam- by standard phenol-chloroform method. Genotyping was performed by ple of 33 Czech patients, aged 62 ± 8 years with implantable cardio- the PCR-RFLP technique. vertor defibrillator for severe arrhythmias (85% patients with ventricle It was demonstrated that the ACE blood activity increased at HFRS fibrillation, 15% with ventricle flutter, EF= 35±12 %, with hypertrophy and these changes were more significant at more severe form of confirmed in 48 % of patients). disease. ACE blood activity depends on the form, and the period of Results: We observed a significantly lower occurrence of hypertrophy HFRS: nonsignificant decrease is observed only in the feverish period in patients with CT genotype of T3579C polymorphism in ANK2 gene of mild or severe form without complications. In severe form signifi- compared to CC+TT genotypes of the polymorphism (odds ratio=0.56, cant changes of ACE activity were observed, in complicated form - P=0.02, with sensitivity of 30%, specifity of 60%). The CT genotype stable high activity during all disease. Analysis of angiotensin II type of C5457T polymorphism in SCN5A was associated with higher risk 1 receptor polymorphism A1166C demonstrated that neither *A1166 of hypertrophy in comparison with CC genotype (odds ratio = 4.25, and *C1166 alleles nor *A1166/*A1166 and *C1166/*C1166 genotypes P=0.04; sensitivity=33%, specifity 100%). A significant difference in were associated with HFRS severity. interventricular septum diameter between these two genotypes in High ACE activity is not adaptive reaction due to defect in angiotensin SCN5A gene was proved (P=0.005). When both polymorphisms were II binding and it is an adequate metabolic response of an organism to tested simultaneously, a significant risk for all other associated geno- endotheliotropic virus action. type combinations compared to CT(SCN5A)CT+CC(ANK2) genotypes was found (OR=6.19, P=0.02,sensitivity =65%, specifity = 77%). J09.10 Genetic markers of predisposition to development of the Conclusions: In patients with severe arrhythmias with necessity of im- metabolic syndrome in children with obesity. plantable cardiovertor defibrillator, interactions of long QT genes vari- P. Sinitsyn1, A. Khmyrova2, A. Voytovich2, E. Petriaykina3, T. Razorenova4, M. ability can be expected. Some combinations of these genotypes can Shcherbakova1, V. Larionova2; be related to hypertrophy in these patients. 1The Russian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2The St-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St-Petersburg, Russian J09.08 MTHFR, F2 and F5 genotyping in hemodialysis patients Federation, 3The Morozov children‘s city clinical hospital, Moscow, Russian in Bosnia and Herzegovina Federation, 4The Museum of Military Medicine, Saint Petersburg, Russian N. Lojo - Kadric, L. Kapur, J. Ramic, K. Bajrovic; Federation. Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Increasing evidence suggests that there is genetic basis for the meta- Herzegovina. bolic syndrome. MTHFR (methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase) thermolabile polymor- Objective: To study a contribution of candidate genetic markers in de- phism (677C-T mutation) is associated with several diseases such as velopment of major metabolic syndrome components in children with homocysteinuria, thrombosis, and, among others, renal function. F2 obesity. (coagulation factor II, prothrombin) 20210G-A gene mutation is associ- Study groups: 83 children aged 7-18 years old (13,3±0.2 yr) with vary- ated with an increased risk of venous thrombosis, as well as F5 (co- ing degree (I-IV) of obesity. Methods: Body mass index, waist circum- agulation factor V Leiden) 1691G-A gene mutation. ference, blood pressure, and level of triglycerides, HDL-cholesterol, In this study, we genotyped 40 patients with total renal failure which and glucose, were measured. ACE I/D, APOA1 G-75A, APOA5 S19W, currently undergo hemodialysis. For materials we used 6 ml of whole APOC3 Sst1, APO E and W64R ADRB3 genetic polymorphism were blood for DNA isolation. Samples were genotyped for MTHFR 667C-T, identified using PCR-RFLP method. F2 20210G-A and F5 1691G-A mutation by RFLP method with HindIII Results: The genotype analysis showed that 33 out of 58 (57.0%) and HinfI enzyme, respectively. mono- and heterozygous carriers of D allele of ACE gene had a high Regarding MTHFR genotypes in our sample we found 45% of CC - wild- blood pressure. More than half of heterozygous carriers of either al- type genotype, 37.5% of CT genotype and 17.5% of TT genotype. Al- leles - 19W ApoA5 (11 children - 69.0%), -75A ApoA1 (15/56.0%), lele frequencies for C and T allele are 0.6375 and 0.3625, respectively. S2 ApoC3 (9/53.0%) and ε4 ApoE (20/83.3%) - presented with lipid In our sample we found only one heterozygote (GA) for F2 20210G-A disorders typical to metabolic syndrome (hypertriglyceridemia and/or and F5 1691G-A mutation. No mutant homozygote (AA) was found. Al- hypoalphacholesterolemia). In 4 out of 10 (40.0%) children with RW lele frequency for G allele in both F2 and F5 gene was 0.9875 and for genotype of ADRB3 gene presented with hyperglycemia and/or hy- A allele was only 0.0125. After genotyping, we performed chi-square pertriglyceridemia. It was found that the alleles accumulation (D ACE, test on our frequencies compared to NCBI SNP database, and found 19W ApoA5,-75A ApoA1, S2 Apo C3 and ε4 ApoE) correlated with an no statistical significance between our population and world population increase in number of clinical criteria of metabolic syndrome (r > 0.8, in allele frequencies (MTHFR - p=0.105; F2 - p=0.886; F5 - p=0,841). p<0.01). The most common haplotype (MTHFR, F2, F5) for these three genes Conclusion: Accumulation of rare alleles of genes determining lipid in our sample was wildtype haplotype - CCGGGG (45%), followed with metabolism, level of blood pressure, and body mass index may be CTGGGG (32.5%) and TTGGGG (17.5%). Rare haplotypes in our considered as molecular basis of genetic predisposition to extreme sample were CTGGGA (0.25%) and CTGAGG (0.25%). manifestation of metabolic syndrome. J09.09 Angiotensin-converting enzyme activity and J09.11 A New Research on Genetic Predisposition of microtia: polymorphism A1166c of the angiotensin ii type 1 receptor at Endothelial Nitricoxide synthase (NOs3) and myeloperoxidase hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (mPO) might be responsible of the ethiology of microtia I. R. Minniakhmetov1, A. Baygildina2, D. Islamgulov1, F. Kamilov2, T. B. Buyukgural1, T. Sever2, M. Bekerecioglu1, S. Pehlivan2; Khabelova2, E. Khusnutdinova1; 1Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Plastic and 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir Reconstructive Surgery, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 2Gaziantep University Faculty of Medical State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, GAZIANTEP, Turkey. Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) is a group of clini- Objective. The aim of this study was to investigate the links between cally similar diseases that occur throughout Eurasia. HFRS includes Endothelial nitricoxide (NOS3) synthase, Myeloperoxidase (MPO) diseases such as Korean hemorrhagic fever, epidemic hemorrhagic variants and microtia. fever and nephropathia epidemica. HFRS begins as a flu-like illness Methods. Nineteen microtia patients and 40 healthy controls were and may progress to shock, bleeding, and renal failure. Mortality is 6 included in the study. We studied the polymorphisms of MPO (-463) to 15%. and NOS3 (+894 polymorphism and VNTR in intron4) genes using the The research aimed to explore the changes of angiotensin-converting PCR and/or PCR-RFLP method. enzyme (ACE) blood activity and polymorphism A1166C (rs5186) of Results. Significant differences were not determined for MPO (-463) Complex traits and polygenic disorders 21 polymorphism from the genotype distribution and allele frequency undifferentiated connective tissue dysplasia. between microtia and healthy control groups. In contrast, significant differences were determined in the NOS3 (+894 polymorphism and J09.14 Psychological aspects of longevity and their genetic VNTR in intron 4) polymorphisms between microtia and healthy control correlates groups (P < 0.05). D. L. Spivak1, T. Smirnova2, A. Zakharchuk3, I. Spivak2; Conclusion. According to our literature searches our study is the first 1Human Brain Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, St.Petersburg, analyze of the polymorphisms of NOS3 (+894 polymorphism and Russian Federation, 2Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, VNTR in intron 4) on microtia patients. Our data suggest that NOS3 St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Municipal Gerontological Medico-social gene polymorphisms might play important role on the etiyopathogen- Center of St.Petersburg, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. esis of Microtia in Turkish patients. The findings of the current study Psychological functioning of 150 healthy patients of gerontologi- highlight the necessity for prospective longitudinal studies in elucidat- cal clinic, aged 60 to 94 years, was studied (m=76), on the levels of ing the relative contributions of various factors in diseases with a mul- neuroticization (both reactive and personal), psychological defence tifactorial etiology where there is interplay among genetic susceptibility mechanisms (negation, exclusion, regression, compensation, projec- and exogeneus factors. tion, replacement, intellectualization, reactive formation), and intrinsic religiosity (along with features of altered states of consciousness). Si- J09.12 the polimorphism of cytokine genes in patients with multaneously a genetic survey was carried out, directed at detection multiple sclerosis of I/D polymorphism of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), and A1/ A. Khusainova1, T. Nasibullin1, I. Tuktarova1, O. Zaplakhova2, R. Magjanov2, K. A2 (C102T) polymorphism of gene of serotonine receptor 5HTR2A. Bakhtiyarova2, O. Mustafina1; Correlation between ACE and neuroticization was demonstrated by 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Russian means of factor analysis, as well as with functioning of the cardiovas- Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkirian State Medical cular system. Another correlation linked serotoninergic system with the University, Ufa, Russian Federation. age of the patients, as well as the level of their intrinsic religiosity. In The multiple sclerosis (MS) - the heaviest of known central nervous this way, existence of links between the genetic basis of longevity on system diseases- is one of the most topical questions nowadays The the level of major functional systems, and psychological processes, etiology of MS is complex, with strong evidence implicating both en- peculiar for it, was corroborated. The study was supported by Russian vironmental and genetic causes. Many researchers admits that the Foundation for basic Research, grant 09-06-00012a; and by Program leading importance in development of immunopatological process at of Basic Research of the Presidium of Russian Academy of Sciences MS is an infringement of balance proinflammatory (IL-1b, IL-2, IL-6, ‘Fundamental Sciences for Medicine’. IL-12, TNFa) and anti-inflammatory (IL-4, IL-10, TNFb) cytokines. In this study we analyzed the associations of MS with polymorphisms J09.15 the study of CYP21A2 gene mutations in Russian of IL6 (-572G>C), IL10 (- 627C>A) and IL12p40 (1159A>C) gene in woman with recurrent miscarriages Russian of Bashkortostan. DNA of 133 MS patients and 239 controls N. S. Osinovskaya1, T. E. Ivaschenko1, I. Sultanov2; were analyzed by 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian polymerase chain reaction. It was revealed, that in MS patients the Federation, 2St.Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. IL6(-572)*G/*G genotype frequency was higher than in controls Recurrent miscarriage (RM) which is known as one of the three or (89.47% vs. 71.13%, p<0.001, OR=3.45). Concerning polymorphism more repeated and spontaneous pregnancy losses represents an ac- - 627C>A of IL10 gene we couldn’t find differences of the genotype tual problem of modern obstetrics. The mild, nonclassic form of the and allele frequencies between MS patients and controls The associa- congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is known as a common cause tion analysis of IL12p40 gene polymorphic marker with MS has shown of RM (about 25%). CAH is a common autosomal recessive disease that at male the *C/*C genotype is connected with the lowered risk of most frequently due to mutations in the CYP21A2 gene. CAH is re- development MS (OR=0.12). Our study confirms the involvement of sponsible for different forms of virilization of external genitalia in new- cytokines in MS development. born girls and, in its most severe form, if not treated properly can be lethal. Patients with the mild, nonclassic form of the disease have less J09.13 sPi polymorphism of collagen i type gene as a marker severe symptoms complicated with the symptoms of postnatal andro- of undifferentiated connective tissue dysplasia in children with gen excess. Moreover, mutations of CYP21 can lead to various repro- myopia ductive disorders in females so they can be found in RM patients. By R. Bannour1, A. Badmaeva2, V. Brezhesky1, V. Larionova1; means of PCR and RFLP analysis 36 unrelated females with RM and 1Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Russia, Saint-Petersburg, 48 unrelated donors were screened for 11 the most common mutations Russian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Russia, of CYP21A2 gene including gene deletion (delA2), large gene con- Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. versions (including 2 or 3 exons), G110del8nt, P30L, I2splice, I172N, Axial myopia develops due to incorrect intrauterine development of V281L, Q318X, R356W, E6cluster, P453S . the eye (congenital myopia) or the excessive growth of the eyeball. It Mutant alleles were detected in 1 (2%) donor (gene conversion, in- occurs in course of different hereditary connective tissue syndromes cluding V281L and Q318X) and in 6 (17%) RM patients. 3 Q318X het- but more often in undifferentiated connective tissue dysplasia. Col- erozygotes and 3 heterozygotes for three other mutations (I2splice, lagen genes (COL) are candidate to associate with development of R356W, delA2) were registered.Thus according to our data CYP21A2 myopia. OBJECTIVE: to study the association of SpI polymorphism of mutations are responsible for the significant proportion of recurrent gene COL1A1 and children myopia with dysplasia of connective tis- miscarriages. Analysis of CYP21A2 mutations in the females with RM sue. STUDY POPULATION: 40 children (80 eyes) aged 5-18 years (15 could be recommended for revealing patients with the mild, nonclassic girls, 25 boys). Clinical eye and dental examination and genetic testing form of CAH. of SpI polymorphism in COL1A1 were done. RESULTS: Myopia was diagnosed in 7 children (14 eyes): 5 children (10 eyes) with axial myo- J09.16 Are Endothelial Nitric Oxide (NOs3) gene polymorphisms pia 2,75-7,50 DPT and 2 children (4 eyes) with refractive myopia 3,25- important in Rheumatoid Artritis ? 6,50 DPT. Dental abnormalities were detected in 6 children and other S. Pehlivan1, A. Aydeniz2, M. Pehlivan3, T. Sever1, S. Gursoy2, S. Oguzkan bite abnormalities in 25 children. 9 children hadn’t any abnormalities. Balci1; Genotype distribution of COL1A1 revealed that SS genotype was in 1 1Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, child, Ss in 13 children and ss in 26 children. In these 26 children with GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 2Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Department genotype ss: 4 children had low and middle degree of myopia. Among of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 3Gaziantep children caring Ss genotype 2 children had middle and severe myo- University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematology, GAZIANTEP, pia in the absence of dental abnormalities, 2 children with the same Turkey. genotype had bite abnormalities, 1 child had a severe myopia 7, 0 Objective: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory joint de- DPT and dental abnormalities. CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesize that struction. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (NOS3) is involved in key the polymorphism in genes of collagen can influence on appearance steps of immune response. The aim of this study was to explore the of myopia with dental abnormalities and may be with other markers of association between NOS3 gene polymorphisms and clinical param-Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 22 eters in patients with RA. Here we report three examples of clusters identified in different Ital- Methods: Genomic DNA was obtained from the peripheral blood of ian regions, starting from a first patient referred for a clinical genetic 65 patients with RA and 70 unrelated healthy controls. We genotyped evaluation. NOS3 polymorphisms (+894, intron 4 VNTR) using PCR and/or PCR- In the geographical area of Brindisi (Puglia region) we made diagnosis RFLP method. Also clinical parameters, demographic data of the pa- of 3M dwarfism in a child of consanguineous parents. Ten other af- tients and response to drug treatment were recorded. All data were fected people were later identified, by clinical and molecular screening analyzed using SPSS version 14.0 for windows. of CUL7 gene. The number of identified heterozygotes is increasing Results: NOS3 (+894) TT genotype frequencies were significantly thanks to a collaborative program with the local Medical Doctors. higher among RA patients (p=0.029 for TT) than control ones, where- In the Basilicata region, we made diagnosis of Roberts syndrome (co- as no associations with NOS3 (VNTR) polymorphisms. The observed hesinopathy), in two subjects of the same sibship, with consanguine- genotype counts was not deviated from those expected according to ous parents. The molecular screening of ESCO2 gene allowed identifi- the Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (p>0.05). A significant association cation of a “local” mutation in a small geographical area. was detected between these polymorphisms and response to treat- The third cluster of patients affected by a metabolic disorder, the Mu- ment in anti TNFα treatment subgroup (improvement in DAS28 scores colipidosis III, was identified in Calabria, in a little village with less than in RA patients anti-TNFα and DMARD treatments) (p=0.004). 100 inhabitants, and about 90% of families with the same surname. Conclusions: In the present study, we made an investigation to es- Our clinical and molecular study was stimulated by the diagnosis of tablish to the best of our knowledge for the first time an association this disorder in two “unrelated” girls, with different clinical expression between two well-established polymorphisms of the NOS3 gene poly- but considerably increased levels of lysosomal hydrolases. morphisms and clinical parameters in RA. The present study showed that two common polymorphisms of the NOS3 gene were significantly P10.02 AcE i/D polymorphism and human longevity - croatian associated with occurrence of RA. senescence study M. Zajc Petranović1, Ž. Tomas1, P. Krajačić1, J. Miličić1, T. Škarić-Jurić1, S. J09.17 the genetics of suicide Behaviour Tomek-Roksandić2, N. Smolej-Narančić1; S. Ulivi1, P. d‘Adamo1, P. Gasparini1, M. De Vanna2, D. Carlino2; 1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Dr Andrija Štampar 1Medical Genetics, Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS-Burlo Institute of Public Health - Department of Gerontology, Zagreb, Croatia. Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Department of Clinical Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, The insertion/deletion (I/D) polymorphism of the angiotensin-1-con- University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. verting enzyme gene (ACE) has been suggested to be associated Suicide is one of the leading causes of death worldwide (Giegling et with disease and longevity but the findings are confounding. There are al., 2009). Guided by the twin-, adoption-, and family-based evidence indications that the ACE DD genotype predisposes to several cardio- suggesting the existence of genetic diathesis for suicidal behaviors, vascular diseases including hypertension but it is more frequent in the molecular studies began to look for specific genetic components of aging populations. We studied ACE I/D polymorphism and hyperten- this diathesis. The candidate-based association approach has been sion in Croatian senescent population (85-101 yrs; N=300) where we the dominant strategy, and close to 50 candidate genes have been found no genotype association with hypertension, while earlier results investigated. Spurred by the wealth of neurobiologic knowledge, mo- in young Croatian adults (18-40 yrs) showed such relationship for DD lecular geneticists focused primarily on neurotransmitter systems and genotype. Of the investigated risk factors for hypertension, age, fe- less on genes outside of these systems. male sex (OR=2.88; 95%CI=1.49-5.56) and triglyceride concentration Over the past 30 years, indirect evidence for the existence of a genetic showed significant influence, while BMI and cholesterol concentration component in the suicidal diathesis has come largely from family, twin, did not. Further, we tested the association between ACE I/D polymor- and adoption studies. phism and longevity in Croatian population. For comparison we used In order to uderstand if there was association between suicide behav- previously reported frequencies for the general Croatian population iour and genetic factors, we choose 6 isolated populations located in aged 18-80 yrs. The genotype and allele distributions differed signifi- North Italy, in Friuli Venezia Giulia. cantly between two age cohorts with DD genotype being more frequent Suicidal ideation was defined on the Hamilton Rating Scale for De- in senescents than in the younger cohort (42.5% vs. 22.1%), and with pression (HRSD; Hamilton, 1960), it is a widely used interviewer-ad- D allele frequencies of 61.0% vs. 49.4%. This finding supports the as- ministered measure of the depressive symptom severity. The HRSD sociation of ACE I/D polymorphism with longevity while controversial suicide item consists of 4 ratings of suicidal behavior: 0 (“absent”), 1 results have been obtained in other European populations. The es- (“feels life is not worth living or any thoughts of possible death to self”), tablished ACE I/D allele and genotype frequencies fit into the pattern 2 (“wishes he were dead”), 3 (“suicidal ideas or gestures”), or 4 (“at- of increasing gradient of D and DD frequencies in senescents from tempts at suicide”). Northern to Southern Europe. Such genetic differences indicate that D We analysed and genotyped 871 people and the age range was from allele - in addition to being CVD risk factor - might has some unrecog- 18 years old to 65 years old (Akyuz et al.2005). Whole-genome ge- nized advantageous role in successful human ageing. notyping (Illumina - Infinium ) and association analysis (ProbABEL) showed promising preliminary results. P10.03** clear detection of ADIPOQ locus as the major gene for plasma adiponectin: results of genome-wide association analyses including 4659 European individuals P10 Evolutionary and population genetics, P. Henneman1, I. M. Heid2, A. Hicks3, F. Kronenberg4, C. M. v. Dujn5; 1LUMC Human Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of Epidemiology and Genetic epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Regensburg University Medical Center, Regensburg, Germany, 3Institute of Genetics Medicine, European Academy Bozen/Bolzano P10.01 From the diagnosis of Autosomal Recessive disorders (EURAC)., Bolzano, Italy, 4Division of Genetic Epidemiology; Department of to the identification of “clusters” of affected patients, up to Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology; Innsbruck Medical population prevention programs University,, Innsbruck, Austria, 5Department of epidemiology, Erasmus Medical M. Giovannucci Uzielli1, G. Scarselli1, L. Di Medio1, N. Dayan2, E. Gambineri1, Center., Rotterdam, Netherlands. E. Lapi3, S. Guarducci3; Objective. Plasma adiponectin is strongly associated with various 1Department of Paediatrics - University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Genetic components of metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascu- Science, Florence, Italy, 3Ospedale Anna Meyer, Florence, Italy. lar outcomes. Concentrations are highly heritable and differ between In Italy, as well as in other Countries of the old Europe, the Diagnosis men and women. We therefore aimed to investigate the genetics of of Genetic Disorders with Autosomal Recessive inheritance often con- plasma adiponectin in men and women. cerns villagers of small communities, quite closed and with high rate of Methods. We combined genome-wide association scans of three consanguinity, due to historical and geographical reasons. The iden- population-based studies including 4659 persons. For the replication tification of real clusters of subjects affected by specific AR disorders stage in 13795 subjects, we selected the 20 top signals of the com- must be carefully pursued to realize prevention programs at population bined analysis, as well as the 10 top signals with p-values less than levels, by the identification of heterozygote individuals. 1*10-4 for each the men- and the women-specific analyses. We further Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 2 selected 73 SNPs that were consistently associated with metabolic P10.06** Genome-based prediction of breast cancer risk in the syndrome parameters in previous genome-wide association studies to general population: a modeling study based on meta-analyses of check for their association with plasma adiponectin. genetic association studies Results. The ADIPOQ locus showed genome-wide significant p-values M. van Zitteren1, J. B. van der Net1, A. N. Freedman2, C. M. van Duijn1, A. C. J. in the combined (p=4.27*10-24) as well as in both women- and men- W. Janssens1; specific analyses (p=8.66*10-17 and p=2.49*10-11, respectively). None 1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Division of of the other 39 top signal SNPs showed evidence for association in the Cancer Control and Population Sciences, National Cancer Institute, MD, United replication analysis. None of 73 SNPs from metabolic syndrome loci States. exhibited association with plasma adiponectin (p>0.01). Background Genome-wide association studies have identified novel Conclusions. We demonstrated the ADIPOQ gene as the only major susceptibility variants for breast cancer, which potentially can be used gene for plasma adiponectin, which explains 8.7% of the phenotypic to predict breast cancer in asymptomatic women. This review and variance. We further found that neither this gene nor any of the meta- modeling study aimed to investigate the current and potential predic- bolic syndrome loci explained the sex differences observed for plasma tive performance of testing at multiple genetic loci (genetic profiling). adiponectin. Larger studies are needed to identify more moderate ge- Methods Genetic profiles were simulated for a population of 10,000 netic determinants of plasma adiponectin. women, in which we assumed a breast cancer lifetime risk of 10%. Genetic profiles were based on polymorphisms from meta-analysis P10.04 concordance of different genetic markers in human including, in separate scenarios, all polymorphisms or statistically sig- population studies nificant polymorphisms only. We additionally investigated the magni- N. Pojskic, D. Marjanovic, E. Silajdzic, L. Lasic, B. Kalamujic, L. Kapur; tude of the odds ratios (OR) for 1 to 100 hypothetical polymorphisms Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and that would be needed to achieve similar discriminative accuracy as Herzegovina. available prediction models (modeled range of area under the receiver A polymorphism of 10 Alu loci (A25, ACE, APO, B65, D1, FXIIIB, HS2.43, operating characteristic curve [AUC] 0.65-0.75). HS4.65, PV92 and TPA25), 15 autosomal STR loci (D3S1358, THO1, Results Of the 71 polymorphisms that had been investigated in meta- D21S11, D18S51, PENTA E, D5S818, D13S317, D7S820, D16S539, analyses, 26 showed nominally significant associations. AUC was 0.64 CSF1P0, PENT.D, vWA, D8S1179, TPOX, FGA) and 6 blood groups for genetic profiles based on all 71 polymorphisms and 0.62 for the 26 (Rh, MN, Duffy, Kidd, KELL and Lutheran, genotyped using PCR-RFLP significant polymorphisms. Addition of 50 additional variants, each with and PCR-SSP methods) have been observed. Also, polymorphism of risk allele frequencies of 0.30, would require an OR of 1.2 to increase 10 phenotypic traits (red colorblindness, green colorblindness, PTC this AUC to 0.65, 1.3 to increase AUC to 0.70 and 1.4 to increase AUC testing, digital index, ear lobe type, midphalengeal hair, crooked little to 0.75. To achieve AUC of 0.75, even 100 additional variants would finger, tongue rolling, thumb distal extensibility, thumb proximal exten- need ORs of 1.3 to 1.5 per allele, depending on risk allele frequen- sibility) have been estimated within 300 individuals in human popula- cies. tions placed in 10 regions across Bosnia and Herzegovina. Conclusion A substantially large number of genetic susceptibility vari- Main goal was to compare validity of human population genetics analy- ants need to be discovered and validated to improve the predictive ses implementing different type of genetic markers. performance beyond that of current breast cancer risk models. Classical population genetic analyses have been performed, such as deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, genetic diversity, Fst P10.07 and genetic distance. Neighbor-Joining trees were constructed based Estimation of CFTR mutation carrier frequency based on known on results of genetic distance analyses. In order to compare results frequency of p.F0del in Iranian neonates of analysis based on different molecular and phenotypic markers we A. Alavi1, E. Heidary Arash1, K. Inanloo1, S. Banihosseini2, E. Elahi1; have implemented Mantel test for comparison of genetic distance re- 1School of Biology, College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic sults, then the statistical analysis for genetic diversity and genetic dif- Republic of Iran, 2Students’ Scientific Research Center, Tehran University of ferentiation comparisons, as well as inter-rater reliability test. Trees Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. constructed on the basis of the different observed markers traits were Cystic fibrosis is the most common autosomal recessive disease in compared using the tree distance methodology. Modest correlation many Caucasian populations. Approximately one in 2500 newborns in between results of population genetics analyses based on different populations of European ancestry are affected, wherein the average markers has been detected specially between biallelic markers. Strong carrier frequency is 1:25. The disease is caused by mutations in CFTR and clear correlation between biallelic and multialleic markers has not gene. Among the more than 1600 mutations identified in the causative been detected. CFTR gene, the p.F508del allele is the most common worldwide. Among mutated alleles, the frequency of this allele exhibits a north- P10.05 Allele frequencies of apoliprotein E gene polymorphisms west to southeast gradient, ranging from a high of 88% in Denmark to in western romanian population a low of approximately 16% in Iran. In the present study, we screened L. Tamas, E. Seclaman, A. Anghel, C. Samoila; for p.F508del mutation in the DNA of 800 placental cord blood samples University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. obtained from newborns from 4 geographical regions in Iran. Based The aim of this study was to establish the frequency of apoE alleles on the number of carriers identified and the observation that this allele (ε2, ε3 and ε4) and the genotypes in elderly patients (age > 60 years) accounts for 16% of the CFTR mutated alleles of the Iranian popula- with symptoms suggestive for Alzheimer’s disease, from western Ro- tion, the frequency of carriers of CFTR mutations in Iran was calcu- mania. lated to be 0.037 (95% confidence level of 0.037+/- 0.016). This figure Method. 30 patients were selected based on patients’ history, collateral corresponds to 1:27, very close to the carrier frequency of European history from relatives, and the presence of characteristic neurological populations. This finding suggests that CF, contrary to conventional and neuropsychological features. For the genotyping we used Real- thinking, is a disease of considerable public health importance in Iran, Time PCR and melting curve analysis (ApoE ToolSet for LightCycler, and probably in other countries of the Middle East. Roche). Results. We identified 58 apoE ε3 alleles (96,66%) and 2 apoE ε4 P10.08 Study on prevalence of cleft lip and cleft palate and alleles (3,33%). For two patients we had a heterozygous genotype (ε3/ effect of consanguinity among iranian population ε4, 6,66%) and for the rest of the patients the genotypes were homo- H. Karimian, C. Azimi; zygous (ε3/ε3, 93,33%). There was a good correlation between the Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, heterozygous genotypes of the two patients and their symptomatology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. however, even if the diagnostic of Alzheimer;s disease can not be ex- Background: Clefts of the lip and palate are one of the most common cluded for the rest of the patients based only on apoE genotyping, for congenital birth anomalies. Genetic factors play a great role in the eti- genetic investigation we need a more thorough selection of patients. ology of them and the high percentage of the consanguinity of the Also the absence of the risk apoE allele, ε4, in correlation with other parents of the affected persons is one of the reasons. These defects clinical and imagistic findings, may impose for some patients a change not only make abnormal changes on appearance of the neonate, but of diagnosis. make a lot of stress and psychological problems for the patients and Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 2 their families. Study on the prevalence of clefts, their risk factors and as well as (3) the sum frequency of pathogenic alleles of a particular also genetic counseling for affected persons and their families can be gene in the population. The last parameter can be used to calculate a guideline for general population and probably reduce these anoma- the prevalence of the disease and of carriers in the population. lies over the generations. The equation to calculate the sum frequency of pathogenic alleles (q) Methods: A total of 7374 pedigrees of all the patients admitted to the in the population is Department of Genetic, were studied during 2002-2005 and 99 pedi- q = [P(CH).(F+q-Fq)] / [(1-F)(1-∑a2)], i grees with the patients with cleft lip ± palate or isolated cleft palate in which P(CH) is the proportion of compound heterozygotes, F is the were separated. The total number of cases among these 99 pedigrees inbreeding coefficient, and a is the relative frequency of the ith allele. i was 136. The effects of consanguinity, positive family history and sex When the necessary data (a-c) are available, e.g. in a clinical genetic were investigated among cases. laboratory, the method avoids the workload and pitfalls of epidemiolog- Results: 70.8% of patients with syndromic clefts and 58.7% of patients ic surveys. Limitations are broad confidence limits and complications with nonsyndromic CL±P had parents with consanguineous marriage. resulting from population structure. In addition 44.4% of patients with nonsyndromic CL±P had positive family history. P10.11 Association study of 16 susceptibility loci with crohn’s Conclusion: In our population prevalence of nonsyndromic CL±P disease in Russian population (95%CI) is estimated to be 7 in 1000 (5,9) and prevalence of non- Y. A. Nasykhova1, A. P. Zhernakova2, E. A. Festen2, T. E. Ivaschenko1, N. syndromic CP (95%CI) is estimated to be 3.1 in 1000 (1.8,4.4) and V. Semenov3, A. G. Kharitonov3, A. Y. Baranovskii3, R. K. Weersma2, C. consanguinity of parents seems to have a significant role (p=0.02) on Wijmenga2, V. S. Baranov1; prevalence of clefts. 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Medical P10.09 Recurrence of congenital heart defects in families Academy of Postgraduate Studies of St.-Petersburg, St-Petersburg, Russian N. Øyen1,2, H. A. Boyd1, G. Poulsen1, J. Wohlfahrt1, P. K. A. Jensen1, M. Federation. Melbye1; Crohn’s disease (CD) is a chronic relapsing inflammatory bowel disor- 1Dept Epidemiology Research, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen S, der which is thought to result from a complex interplay of multiple genes Denmark, 2Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland and environmental factors. At present the incidence of this disorder University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. increases in the world. Therefore CD remains to be one of the serious Background Knowledge regarding the familial contribution to congeni- problems in the gastroenterology. Genome-wide association studies tal heart defects (CHD) on an individual and population level is sparse. have recently identified more than 30 susceptibility loci for Crohn’s We estimated an individual’s risk of CHD given a family history of CHD, disease. We performed a replication study of 16 SNPs of 15 genes and the contribution of CHD family history to the total number of CHD (PTPN22, IL-23R, IL-10, IL-18RAP, ATG16L1, MST1, IBD5 locus, IL- in the population. 12B, IRGM, BTNL2, JAK2, TNFSF15, NKX2-3, STAT3, PTPN2) in 113 Methods and Results In a national cohort study, we linked all Danish Russian CD patients and 138 controls using TaqMan Assays (Applied residents to the National Patient Register, the Causes of Death Reg- Biosystems). A selection of SNPs was made based on the data from ister, the Danish Central Cytogenetic Register, and the Danish Fam- the original genome-wide association studies. The patients and the ily Relations Database, yielding 1,763,591 persons born in Denmark, controls were recruited in the North-West region of Russian Federa- 1977-2005 of whom, 18,708 persons had CHD. Individuals with CHDs tion. We identified the association of the JAK2 rs10758669 (A>C) poly- were classified by phenotype. We estimated recurrence risk ratios morphism with Crohn’s disease in Russian population. The frequency (RRR) and population attributable risk. Among first degree relatives, of C-allele was significantly higher in CD patients (p=0.018, OR=1.60, RRR for heterotaxia was 79.1 (95% confidence interval 32.9-190), 95% CI=1.10-2.33). The carriers of homozygous C/C or heterozygous conotruncal defects 11.7 (8.0-17.0), atrioventricular septal defect 24.3 A/C genotypes had the 2-fold increased risk of having CD as com- (12.2-48.7); left 12.9 (7.48-22.2) and right ventricular outflow tract ob- pared with the carriers of homozygous A/A genotype (OR=2.07, 95% struction 48.6 (27.5-85.6), isolated atrial septal defect 7.1 (4.5-11.1), CI=1.22-3.52, p=0.0082). Thus, C-allele of JAK2 rs10758669 (A>C) and isolated ventricular septal defect 3.4 (2.2-5.3). The overall RRR for polymorphism could be the risk factor of CD in Russian population. same defect was 8.15 (6.95-9.55), whereas it was 2.68 (2.43-2.97) for different heart defects. Only 2.2% (4.2% when excluding chromosomal P10.12 Pharmacogenetics of coumarins: prevalence of cYP2c9 aberrations) of CHD in the population were attributed to CHD family and VKORc1 polymorphisms in the Lebanese population history in first degree relatives. I. Jureidini, S. Kelechian, N. Hakimeh, N. Chamseddine, R. Naoufal, L. Zahed; Conclusions Specific CHDs showed highly variable but strong familial Saint George Hospital University Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon. clustering in first degree relatives, ranging from 3-fold to 80-fold com- Polymorphisms in the genes encoding the cytochrome P450 2C9 pared to the population prevalence, whereas the cross-over risks be- (CYP2C9) and the Vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKORC1) contribute tween dissimilar CHD were weaker. Family history of any CHD among to the variability in sensitivity to coumarins. Patients with common ge- first degree relatives accounted for a small proportion of CHD in the netic variants of CYP2C9 (*2 & *3) or VKORC1 (-1639A allele) require population. a lower dose of coumarin, a longer time to reach a stable dose and are at higher risk of serious bleeding. P10.10 inferences from the proportion of compound No prevalence for those variants has so far been reported in the Leb- heterozygotes among affected offspring of consanguineous anese population. CYP2C9 (*1/*2/*3) and VKORC1 (A/G) were as- parents sessed by Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Length Polymor- L. P. Ten Kate, M. Teeuw, L. Henneman, M. C. Cornel; phism in 150 unrelated healthy Lebanese volunteers, representing the Dept. Clincal Genetics, Section Community Genetics, and EMGO Inst. for various geographic regions of Lebanon. Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, We found no significant difference in the frequency of CYP2C9 vari- Netherlands. ants and other evaluated Caucasians. However, the frequency of ho- It is well known that consanguineous parents have an increased risk mozygotes for the VKORC1 -1639A was appreciably higher, a finding of autosomal recessive diseases in their children. Although most of the of interest, to be correlated with clinical risk. affected children will show mutations in a homozygous state, some do Lebanese caucasian Black Asian present with two different mutations of the gene concerned. *1 / *1 66 % 70 % 96 % 99 % We wondered what, if any, inferences could be made from the pro- *1 / *2 15 % 29 % 3 % 0 % portion of these compound heterozygotes among affected children of *1 / *3 15 % cYP2c9 consanguineous couples. *2 / *2 1 % We showed that knowledge of (a) this proportion, (b) the inbreeding *2 / *3 1 % 4 % 0 % 0 % *3 / *3 1 % coefficient, and (c) the number and relative frequency of pathogenic G / G 25 % 43 % 72 % - alleles will be sufficient to calculate: (1) the proportion of homozygotes VKORc1 G / A 42 % 45 % 28 % - identical by descent, and (2) the proportion of homozygotes non-identi- A / A 34 % 12 % 0 % - cal by descent among affected offspring of consanguineous parents, Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 2 P10.13 spectrum of CFTR mutations in cF-patients in siberia to assess long-term air pollution exposure to traffic-related NO and 2 region of Russia heating-related SO emissions at the home address of each individual 2 O. Odinokova; over retrospective periods of up to 30 years. We investigated polymor- Institute of Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, phisms in IL6 (-598GA, -573GC, -174GC), TNF (-1031TC, -863CA, Russian Federation. -857CT, -308GA, -238GA), fibrinogen Bβ (-455GA) and PAI-1 (-675 Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a heterogeneous and the most common auto- 4G/5G). somal recessive disorder. We report the results of CFTR molecular Results: Gene-environment interactions were observed for several IL6 screening of CF-patients referred to the Institute of Medical Genet- and TNF SNPs. For example, one-year traffic-NO exposure was as- 2 ics (Tomsk - Russia) in the last five years. The DNA samples of 128 sociated with levels of IL-6 in homozygote IL6-598AA carriers (+266%; unrelated patients affected by cystic fibrosis, classical form, living in 95%CI +59% to +744%) per 28.1 µg/m3 (difference between the 5th Siberia region of Russia had been analyzed. Patients had been tested and 95th percentile of exposure), but not in -598GG/GA carriers (+16%; for mutations: F508del, I507del, 1677delTA, CFTRdele2,3 (del21kb), 95%CI -26% to +80%). One-year heating-SO exposure was associ- 2 R334W, R347P, G551D, R553X, G542X, 2143delT, 2184insA, ated with levels of TNF-α in homozygote TNF-308AA carriers (+164%; 394delTT, 306delTAGA, 3821delT, L138ins, N1303K, W1282X in the 95%CI +15% to +503%), but not in -308GG/GA carriers (-6.5%; 95%CI CFTR gene. In group of 128 tested patients (256 alleles) 86 patients -20% to +9%) per 6.8µg/m3. (67,2%) were either homozygous of compound heterozygous, 41 pa- Conclusions: Genetic variants in IL6 and TNF genes may modify the tients (32,0%) carried only one detected mutation. Allelic frequencies effect of long-term exposure to moderate levels of air pollution on the for tested mutations were: 60,55% (F508del), 7,81% (CFTRdele2,3 levels of inflammatory blood markers in healthy subjects. (del21kb)), 5,47% (2184insA), 1,95% (R334W), 1,56% (N1303K), 1,17% (2143delT) and 1,17% (394delTT), 0,78% (R347P) and 0,78% P10.16 single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in the NOs2 and (W1282X), 0,39% (G542X), 0,39% (R553X), 0,39% (3821delT). We NOs3 Genes are Associated with Exhaled Nitric Oxide found one novel for Siberia region mutation - 2-bp deletion in exon 20 S. Dahgam1, A. C. Olin1, Å. T. Naluai2, F. Nyberg1,3; (CFTR gene) - 3944delGT. We supposed the presence of novel mutat- 1Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at ed allele in two patients due to unusual profile of restriction fragments University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Department of Clinical (during the W1282X-mutation analysis); and subsequently CFTR mu- Genetics, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, tation - 3944delGT - was determined by sequence analysis of PCR- Sweden, 3AstraZeneca R&D, Mölndal, Sweden. products in DNA of these two CF-patients from different regions of Background: Fraction of Exhaled Nitric oxide (FENO) is a non-invasive Siberia. And since we had included testing of 3944delGT mutation in biomarker of airway inflammation. Nitric oxide (NO) is an endogenous our CFTR-mutation panel for screening DNA from patient affected by molecule synthesized from three distinct NO synthase genes (NOS1, cystic fibrosis and for prenatal diagnosis in CF-risk families in Siberia NOS2 and NOS3), and plays an important role in pathophysiology of region of Russia. airway diseases. The genetic regulation of NO and its influence on FENO is not yet well understood. P10.14 study of DFNB59 gene (Pejvakin) promoter mutations Aim: To comprehensively investigate Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms associated with deafness in deaf subjects of chaharmahal va (SNPs) in the NOS genes and association with FENO. Bakhtiari province in iran Method: A population-based study of 2200 randomly selected adults M. Noorbakhsh, M. Abolhasani, E. Farrokhi, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori; was conducted 2001−2003 in Gothenburg, Sweden. FENO was mea- Cellular and Molecular Research Center Shahrekord Univ. of Med.Sci., sured at a flow-rate of 50 mL/s. We genotyped 20 NOS1, 17 NOS2 and Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. 12 NOS3 tag SNPs. We used linear regression models to estimate ef- Background and aims: Hearing loss is a very heterogeneous disorder fects of NOS genotypes on FENO. Models were adjusted for age, sex, and occurs due to genetic, environmental or both causes. More than height, atopy and smoking habits. 100 genes have been predicted to cause deafness. More recently a Results: The mean FENO level for all subjects was 14.9 parts per bil- gene called DFNB59 has been shown to cause neural deafness in lion. In a multi-SNP model, two SNPs in NOS2 (rs9901734 [C/G] and 4 Iranian families. This study aims to investigate the frequency of rs3729508 [T/C]) and one SNP in NOS3 (rs7830 [G/T]) were signifi- DFNB59 promoter mutations in a cohort of 100 deaf subjects in Cha- cantly associated with higher levels of FENO . For rs9901734, sub- 50 harmahal va Bakhtiari province. jects had 5.3% higher levels of FENO per G allele (p= 0.016); for 50 Materials and Methods: One hundred nonsyndromic hearing loss rs3729508, subjects with CC or CT genotypes had 9% higher levels subjects were investigated for presence of DFNB59 promoter muta- compared with TT (p =0.0057); and for rs7830, subjects with GT or TT tions. DNA was extracted by phenol chloroform protocol. The mutation had 5.3% higher levels than GG (p = 0.0485). screening of the gene was performed using PCR-SSCP procedure Conclusion: Based on thorough genotyping of the three NOS genes, and subsequent direct sequencing. polymorphisms in the NOS2 and NOS3 genes were independently as- Results: No mutation was detected in promoter of the DFNB59 in deaf sociated with inflammation in the airways, as measured by FENO . 50 individuals studied. Conclusion: We conclude that the promoter mutations of the gene P10.17 Polymorphisms of folate related genes and a risk of have no contribution in causing deafness in samples studied. However having a child with chromosome aneuploidy to find the cause of deafness in this province, other genes or loci need S. Kiprijanovska, S. Madzunkova, G. D. Efremov, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska; to be investigated in the future. Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. P10.15 interaction between long-term air pollution exposure and Aneuploidy is the most common chromosome abnormality in humans genes in relation to levels of inflammatory markers and is the leading genetic cause of miscarriage and congenital birth S. Panasevich1, K. Leander1, T. Bellander1, U. de Faire1,2, G. Pershagen1,2, F. defects. Several studies indicated that polymorphisms in folate-related Nyberg1,3; genes can lead to DNA hypomethylation and abnormal chromosomal 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, segregation. The aim of this study was to investigate the possible asso- Sweden, 3AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, Mölndal, Sweden. ciation of four polymorphisms in the three folate-related genes (MTH- Background: Air pollution exposure can lead to adverse cardiovascu- FR C677T, MTHFR A1298C, MTR A2756G and MTRR A66G) with a lar effects, possibly via systemic inflammation and altered coagulation risk of having a fetus with chromosome aneuploidy. We studied a total balance. Genetic variation may play a role in susceptibility to these of 48 parents with a fetus with trisomy 21 (n=250, trisomy 18 (n=9), effects. trisomy 13 (n=3), 45, X0 (n=5), 47, XXY (n=3) and triploidy (n=3). The Objectives: To investigate the modifying capacity of genetic variants in parental origin of the aneuploidy was determined by QF-PCR analysis genes related to inflammation (IL6, TNF) and coagulation (fibrinogen of several STR markers on each affected chromosome in the fetus and Bβ, PAI-1) on the effects of long-term exposure to air pollution on blood both parents. The MTHFR C677T, MTHFR A1298C, MTR A2756G and marker levels. MTRR A66G were genotyped by multiplex PCR followed by SNaPshot Methods: We studied a population sample of 1013 men and 493 analysis. The distribution of the allele and genotype frequencies of the women aged 45-70 years from Stockholm. Spatial modelling was used four studied folate polymorphisms in the parents from whom the aneu-Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 2 ploidy originated were compared with the frequencies in their partners Laboratory, Aladár Petz Hospital, Győr, Pécs, Hungary. as well as in ethnic matched individuals from the general population. Background and Aims: Here we analyzed primarily the association of No difference was observed in the allele and genotype frequencies of two glucokinase regulatory protein (GCKR) variants (rs780094 and the four studied folate polymorphisms between the parents from whom rs1260326) with triglyceride and glucose levels in Hungarian type 2 the aneuploidy originated and the control groups. In conclusion, our diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome patients; and also corre- study do not support the relationship between the four studied folate lated the genotypes with the pooled carotid intima-media thickness polymorphisms and a risk of having a child with an aneuploidy. records. Methods and Results: A total of 321 type 2 diabetic patients, 455 meta- P10.18 Distribution of FMR1(CGG) repeats and FRAXAc1/ bolic syndrome patients, and 172 healthy controls were genotyped by n DXS548 alleles in healthy population of Croatia PCR-RFLP. Both GCKR variants were found to associate with serum K. Crkvenac Gornik1, K. Štingl2, Z. Grubić2, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic1, L. Letica1, triglycerides and with fasting plasma glucose. However, significant as- D. Begovic1; sociation with the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus and meta- 1Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Clinical bolic syndrome could not be observed. Analyzing the records of the hospital centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Centre for tissue typization, Clinical patients, a positive association of prevalence the GCKR homozygous hospital centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. functional variants and carotid intima-media thickness was found in the Fragile X syndrome is caused by expansion of a (CGG) trinucleotide metabolic syndrome patients. n repeat within the 5‘ untranslated region of the FMR1 (fragile X mental Conclusion: Our results support that rs780094 and rs1260326 func- retardation 1) gene transcript. The aim of our study was to report the tional variants of the GCKR gene inversely modulate serum triglycer- distribution of FMR1 (CGG) alleles and DXS548-FRAXAC1 haplo- ides and fasting plasma glucose levels, as it was already reported for n types in a healthy Croatian population.EDTA blood samples were col- diabetic and metabolic syndrome patients in some other populations. lected from healthy, unrelated individuals from Croatia. We analyzed Besides this positive replication, as a novel feature, our preliminary a total of 452 (680 X chromosomes) healthy individuals (224 males findings also suggest a cardiovascular risk role of the GCKR minor al- and 228 females) using PCR and electrophoresis on a 6% polyacryl- lele carriage based on the carotid intima-media thickness association. amide gel in an automated sequencer (ALFexpress). Investigation of the FMR1 alleles in a sample of the Croatian population revealed that P10.21 medical genetically study of hereditary disorders in 98.4% alleles were in the normal range (less than 40 CGG repeats). European part of Russia We also identified seven intermediate-sized alleles (40-54 CGG re- R. A. Zinchenko, E. K. Ginter; peats). No carriers with premutations (55-200 CGG repeats) were ob- Research Center for Medical Genetics, Моscow, Russian Federation. served in this sample. The most common CGG repeat allele was 29 Based on a medical genetically study, the genetic diversity of AD, AR allele (20.0%), followed by 28 allele (14.4%). We evaluated the FRAX- and X-linked recessive hereditary disorders (HDs) in 12 regions and AC1 and DXS54 polymorphism in 366 X chromosomes of 200 healthy ethnic groups of Russia were established: Adygean, Maris, Chuvash- subjects (60 males and 153 females). Five different FRAXAC1 alleles es, Udmurt, Bashkirs and Russian from seven populations. The size of were observed, with a predominance of the FRAXAC1-3 (154pb) allele the investigated populations was than 3 million inhabitants. All popula- (66.9%). For DXS548, there were seven different alleles observed with tion was examined by standard protocol of medical genetic research a predominance of the DXS548-7 (194pb) allele (81.7%). The present elaborated in laboratory of genetic epidemiology, Research Centre for study provides information about the distribution of FMR1 alleles in our Medical Genetics. About 2500 HDs of OMIM could be identified by population and represents foundation for all future studies of the fragile this research. Clinical investigations were performed by a geneticist, X syndrome among Croatians. a neurologist, an ophthalmologist and other physicians, focused on diagnostic of HDs. In the 12 Russian regions surveyed, we revealed a P10.19 G-308A polymorphism in TNF gene in different regions total of 460 (217 AD, 185 AR and 58 X-linked) clinically differing HDs of Buryatia (more than 7000 affected). In order to determine the geographic loca- G. Dugarova1, M. Golubenko2, E. Eremina1, V. Puzyrev2; tion of various populations and ethnic groups in a variety of the studied 1Buryat branch of the Institute of Medical Genetics of Siberian Branch of populations of Russia by the prevalence rate (10-3) of AD and AR dis- the RAMS, Ulan-Ude, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Medical Genetics of eases, we performed the cluster analysis with the use of the average Siberian Branch of the RAMS, Tomsk, Russian Federation. linkage method. Analysing the dendrograms showed, that first, all Rus- G-308A polymorphism in the tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) gene sian populations are united into a single cluster, followed by the addi- has been studied in the Buryat population by genotyping samples from tion of the cluster of the Finno-Ugric population and the Chuvashian 16 subpopulations from 5 areas of Republic Buryatiya (total N=865). population. The greatest genetic remoteness by genes of HDs was de- The TNF-alpha G-308A polymorphism was assessed by the PCR and tected for the Bashkirs and the Adygeans. It should be mentioned that restriction analysis. It has been shown that mean frequency of allele the obtained pattern of genetic interrelationships between the studied A in Buryats was 11.5 %. At comparison with other Siberian popula- populations/ethnic groups is largely similar to that obtained while using tions, statistically significant differences with Yakuts were found. The conditionally neutral polymorphic genetic systems. frequency of this polymorphism in Siberian populations (8-19%) is higher than in populations of East Asia (2-6%). In three Buryat sub- P10.22 Y-chromosomal background of gr/gr deletions populations of 16 studied, the deviation of genotype frequencies from D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, P. Noveski1, T. Plaseski2, G. D. Efremov1; Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium has been found. Genetic differentiation 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former coefficient which was calculated for all settlements (Gst=0.0167) and Yugoslav Republic of, 2Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Endocrinology and for 5 investigated areas (Gst=0.0053), did not demonstrate significant Metabolic Disorders, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. differentiation of Buryat population by the given polymorphism. The re- The gr/gr deletion is a common Y chromosome abnormality that re- sults describe the prevalence of functionally significant polymorphism moves 1.6Mb of the AZFc region including two DAZ and one CDY1 in TNF gene, which is associated with various common diseases and gene copies. The relationship between this deletion and male infertility endophenotypes. is a subject of a continuing intense debate. The gr/gr deletion is re- garded as a risk factor for reduced sperm counts in some populations, P10.20 GcKR gene functional variants in patients with type but not in others. We screened a total of 740 men from the Republic 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome: do the rare variants also of Macedonia (520 Macedonians, 140 Albanians and 80 Roma, Serbs, associate with an increased carotid intima-media thickness in Turks and Croats) for the presence of gr/gr deletion. The methodol- metabolic syndrome? ogy included analysis of AZFc specific STS markers, DAZ and CDY M. Mohás1, P. Kisfali2, L. Járomi2, A. Maász2, E. Fehér3, V. Csöngei2, N. Polgár2, gene dosage and single nucleotide variants. The Y chromosome hap- E. Sáfrány2, J. Cseh1, K. Sümegi2, K. Hetyésy4, I. Wittmann1, B. Melegh2; logroups were determined by 28 Y-chromosome SNP markers, which 12nd Department of Medicine and Nephrological Center, Pécs, Hungary, were typed by multiplex PCR/SNaPshot reactions. We found 21 men 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, with gr/gr deletion and gr/gr deletion-b2/b4 duplication; 19 Macedo- 3Department of Radiology, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 4Central nians, one Serb and one Croat. No gr/gr deletion was detected among Albanians. Nine different Y chromosome haplogrous were determined Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 27 among men with gr/gr deletions, three of which (I2a-P37b, R1a1- P10.25 the occurrence of mutations in HFE gene in Romany SRY1532 and J2b2-M241) are among the five most common hap- population in slovakia. logroups in the Republic of Macedonia. The most frequently deleted D. Gabriková, J. Bernasovská, I. Bernasovský, R. Behulová, S. Mačeková, A. DAZ copy was DAZ1/2, whereas the predominantly missing CDY1 Bôžiková, I. Boroňová, A. Sovičová, P. Švíčková, E. Petrejčíková, M. Soták, J. copy was CDY1b. There was a difference in the haplogroup distribu- Čarnogurská, V. Čverhová; tion of carriers with the loss of CDY1a and CDY1b. The ethnic differ- Excellence Centre of Animal and Human Ecology, Faculty of Humanities and ence in the incidence of gr/gr deletion found in our study may have Natural Sciences, University of Prešov, Prešov, Slovakia. relevance for the interpretation of case control studies dealing with Hereditary hemochromatosis is a genetic disease characterized by ac- admixed populations. cumulating of excessive iron in the organism. Three mutations in the HFE gene are associated with the disease: C282Y, H63D and S65C. P10.23 Prevalence of hereditary deafness in population of 7 The aim of this study was to determine the frequency of HFE mutations rural Districts of Kirov region, Russia. in the Romany (Gypsy) population in Slovakia. Romany community A. A. Osetrova1, Y. I. Sharonova2, T. G. Rossinskaya1, R. A. Zinchenko2; in Slovakia is one of the European largest. It represents genetically 1Kirov Regional Teaching Children’s Hospital, Kirov, Russian Federation, isolated population with a rate of consanguinity and inbreeding about 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 10 to 100 time higher than in Slovak (Non-Romany) population. Al- Moscow, Russian Federation. together 212 healthy individuals of Slovak Romany population were The current report analyzes the investigation of prevalence of heredi- analyzed for the presence of HFE mutations. The observed allele fre- tary deafness forms in 7 districts of Kirov region (Bogorodsk, Nema, quencies were 3.8%, 4.5% and 0.0% for C282Y, H63D and S65C mu- Svecha, Sovietsk, Suna, Uni, Shabalino). The total size of the exam- tation respectively. We identified 1.4% of H63D/H63D homozygotes, ined population was made 84,048 persons. The study was carried no individual in our sample was C282Y/C282Y homozygous or com- out according to the protocol elaborated in the genetic epidemiology pound heterozygous. Occurrence of H63D mutation in the Romany laboratory of Research Centre for Medical Genetics. The protocol al- population was significantly lower than in the Non-Romany population lowed to reveal syndromal deafness (not less than 400 hereditary syn- in Slovakia and it was also lower than the prevalence in the Northern dromes) and the isolated relative deafness. The examination included India, where Romanies originate. Probable reason of this result is a ENT physician and ophthalmologist examination, genetic counseling, founder effect and a high degree of inbreeding among Romanies in and DNA-analysis. The DNA diagnosis was made in all cases of non- Slovakia. syndromal deafness and in some cases of syndromal deafness. Dif- ferent forms of deafness were detected in 624 patients (prevalence P10.26 interleukin-23 receptor gene haplotypes in diseases of deafness was 1 per 135 persons). Analysis of etiological structure known to associate with individual interleukin-23 receptor gene showed that deafness resulting from inflammatory diseases of middle mutations ear and presbyacousis had the following prevalence: 1:316 and 1:466 E. Sáfrány1, M. Szabó2, B. Melegh1; respectively. Prevalence of non-syndromal deafness with no history of 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2Robert environmental risk factors was 1:506 persons (from 1:921 in Nema to Koch Hospital, Edelény, Hungary. 1:254 in Suna). Prevalence of syndromal deafness was 1:4,002 (from The interleukin-23 receptor gene (IL23R) encodes a subunit of the 1:9,751 persons in Svecha to 1:1,331 persons in Uni). In 7 districts, IL23-receptor binding the IL-23 cytokine. IL-23 induces differentiation prevalence of mandibulofacial dysostosis was 1:4,000. Examination of naive CD4+ T cells into pathogenic T helper cells (Th17/Th ) that IL-17 by direct sequencing of the encoding part of gene TCOF1 revealed produce proinflammatory cytokines and thus play a role in develop- previously unknown mutation in exon 23 in the heterozygous state that ment of autoimmune diseases. Previously we investigated the pos- leads to substitution of aminoacids alanin for glycin in position 1,176 sible effect of IL23R SNPs on the development of psoriasis (n=214 (Ala1176Gly). Thus, the epidemiological approach to investigation of patients) and ankylosing spondylitis (n=206 patients). In psoriasis we hereditary pathology revealed high prevalence of hereditary deafness observed a significant increase in the carriage of the minor allele of in Kirov region. rs11805303 SNP and in the prevalence of the homozygous genotype of rs2201841 and rs10889677 polymorphisms. The results were simi- P10.24 monogenic hereditary skeletal disorders in Rostov lar in the ankylosing spondylitis group with the addition of rs1004819 region, Russia and rs11209026 allele distributions also showing significant differenc- R. A. Valkov1, T. I. Valkova2, S. S. Amelina2, R. A. Zinchenko3; es from those of healthy subjects’. Based on these results we tested 1Railroad clinical hospital, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 2Rostov the haplotype distributions of IL23R SNPs in these two distinct diseas- regional clinical hospital, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 3Research es. Haplotype blocks were determined using Haploview v4.1 accord- Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, ing to the International HapMap Project database. Block 1 contained Russian Federation. the rs1004819 and rs11805303 SNPs, Block 2 the rs10489629 and The prevalence and incidence of the majority of hereditary skeletal dis- rs2201841 SNPs. We found no significant difference between any of orders (HSD) are remains not studied now, in view of the big diversity the haplotype distributions in psoriasis and ankylosing spondylitis. The of clinical and genetically form. The purpose of the present research fact that two distinct diseases share the same haplotype profile can was studying of prevalence and genetically heterogeneity of HSD in underline the significance of the IL-23/IL-17 pathway and of the IL23R Rostov region (12 districts). The total size of investigated population gene in autoimmune diseases, and more importantly indicates the im- was 497460 persons. The research was conducted under the original portance of studying the effects of not only individual SNPs but also protocol, providing for detection of more than 2500 various hereditary haplotypes on disease development. diseases (OMIM) and syndromes, including all hereditary skeletal dis- orders. In the results 643 patients from 423 families were detected with P10.27 microsatellite allelic imbalance at 14q13.2 indicates different forms of HSD (including isolated forms HSD and the skeletal an additional susceptibility locus for the Juvenile idiopathic dysphasia’s which a part of various hereditary syndromes are). Value Arthritis in Latvian population of prevalence of autosomal dominant (AD) and autosomal recessive I. Trapina1, I. Rumba-Rozenfelde1, N. Sjakste1, T. Sjakste2; (AR) forms HSD was paid off on 10000 surveyed population. For the 1Faculty of Medicine, University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia, 2Institute of Biology, X-linked forms - was paid off on 10000 males. Prevalence of the iso- University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia. lated AD forms of HSD has compounded 5.61 on 10000, AR forms Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is autoimmune, clinically heteroge- - 0.54 on 10000, X-linked forms - 0.12 on 10000 males. Total value of neous, chronic rheumatic disease with onset before age 16 and dura- prevalence (when isolate and syndromes’ forms of HSD was include) tion at least 6 weeks. Both genetic and environmental risk factors are of AD forms have compounded 10.92 on 10000 with appreciable sta- involved in pathogenesis of the disease. The described JIA suscep- tistically authentic variation between districts from 5.54 to 17.56. For tibility genes appear to account only for a small part of genetic con- AR forms the value was amount 1.73 which vary from 0.39 to 3.25, tribution to the disease, other susceptibility loci involved in metabolic for X-linked forms it was 0.60 with vary from 0 to 2.67. Thus, in the pathways affecting disease pathogenesis should be sought. The 14q presented research we managed to estimate prevalence of HSD in locus appears to be prospective from this point of view, as it harbours Rostov region. several genes linked to autoimmune diseases. To identify novel JIA Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 2 susceptibility loci, 270 Kb region of chromosome 14q encompassing families. Their ancestors were traced back to a northern inland region, FAM177A1, KIAA0391 and PSMA6 genes was genotyped in 97 oligo- from where the population spread, migrating along the Ångerman river arthritis (JIoA) and 50 polyarthritis (JIpA) patients and 230 healthy in- valley during the 17th-19th century. Twenty-six index cases are genea- dividuals by five HSMS markers of 14q13.2 region. Direct sequencing logical descendants of a founder couple born in 1605/1614. revealed two variable components of (CAA)n(A)m motif in HSMS602 The 26 haplotyped Y111C families share 3-15 (median 13) uncommon (FAM177A1 gene). Repeat (AC)5AT(AC)n of HSMS701 (KIAA0391 allele-variants surrounding the Y111C locus, with allele-frequencies gene) was variable only in its downstream part. Allele (AC)5AT(AC)15 ranging between 0.02-0.69 (median 0.17) in the healthy controls. Fa- of HSMS701 was found to be in strong association with JIA (P=4.91x10- milial haplotypes co-segregate within the subdivisions of the pedigree, 5, OR=15.43) and close to modest with JIpA (P=1.64x10-3,OR=24). supporting the genealogical data. Alleles (AC)5AT(AC)18 of HSMS701 and (TG)10 of HSMS702 ap- The estimated age of the mutation is 31 generations (95% CI 23; 41). pear to be JIA and JIoA risk factors (P=1.09x10-3,OR=3.16 and Assuming that one generation is 25 years, the mutation is 775 years P=2.00x10-3,OR=7.39 correspondingly), but allele 168bp of HSMS602 old (95% CI 575; 1,025). (P=9.02x10-4,OR=0.28) appears to be protective. Two heterozygote Conclusion: The Swedish Y111C/KCNQ1 founder mutation was prob- genotypes (TG)20/23 of HSMS006 and (AC)22/23 of HSMS801 mani- ably brought to northern Sweden by settlers in the13th century. Strong fested association with JIA (P<2x10-3), but homozygote (TG)19/19 regional founder effects and a mild phenotype probably enabled the was found to be protective (P=5.41x10-4,OR=0.1). Taken together our enrichment of this mutation in the Swedish population. results define an additional susceptibility locus for JIA at 14q13.2 ge- The Y111C founder population constitutes an invaluable asset for fu- nomic region encompassing KIAA0391 and PSMA6 genes. ture studies. P10.28 Geographic distribution of the LCE3C-LCE3B deletion, a P10.30 Polymorphisms of estrogen metabolism genes and susceptibility factor for psoriasis, across different human ethnic longevity: a follow-up study in the italian population. groups R. M. Corbo1,2, R. Scacchi2, L. Positano1, L. Ulizzi1; L. Bassaganyas1, E. Riveira-Muñoz1, M. García-Aragones2, J. R. González3, 1Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, La Sapienza University, Rome, M. Cáceres1, L. Armengol2, X. Estivill1; Italy, 2CNR Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology, Rome, Italy. 1Genes and Disease Program and CIBERESP, Centre of Genomic Regulation Aromatase (CYP19) and estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) are both in- (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 2qGenomics Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain, 3Centre volved in estrogen metabolism. Aromatase catalyzes a critical reaction for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL), Barcelona, Spain. for estrogen biosinthesis from androgens, and estrogen receptor-al- Copy number variants (CNVs) contribute to inter-individual genomic pha mediates the biological action of estrogens. Recent findings have and phenotypic variation. Several studies have demonstrated that revealed that estrogens have a relevant role not only in female but some CNVs show population differences. Mainly CNVs showing popu- also in male ageing. In the present paper we investigated the possible lation differences contain genes related to disease or to functions in- association of ESR1 ( PvuII, rs2234693) and CYP19 (rs4646) poly- fluenced by environment, therefore being potential substrates for natu- morphisms with longevity by means of a follow-up study. The study ral selection. One example is the 32-kb deletion involving the LCE3C population consisted of 258 individuals (43.3% males) born in 1900- and LCE3B genes (LCE3C-LCE3B_del), which has been significantly 1930, who were living in the district of Salerno (Southern Italy) in the associated with risk for psoriasis in European and Asian populations. year 2000. The mortality information of these subjects was collected Since psoriasis is an immune-related skin disease, with a higher prev- in the year 2009. Using the mortality data the sample was divided into alence in subjects descending from Northern European countries, it two groups of subjects surviving over 90 years (≥ 90yrs) or not. The would be expected to find differences on the frequency of LCE3C- analysis of ESR1 and CYP19 genotype distribution revealed an ex- LCE3B_del among populations of different geographic origin. Here cess of homozygotes ESR1 PP (0.30 vs 0.19) and genotypes carrying we provide a comprehensive population genetic analysis of LCE3C- CYP19 T allele (0.69 vs 0.55) in long-lived subjects compared to non LCE3B_del in populations groups from the Human Genome Diversity survivors. The logistic regression analysis showed that, after adjusting Panel (HGDP). We have developed a PCR-based genotyping assay for sex, both ESR1 and CYP19 genotypes were independently associ- and have analyzed the pattern of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between ated with survival over 90 years with OR= 2.20 (C.I.95% 1.04-4.59, p = LCE3C-LCE3B_del and a tagSNP (rs4112788) across the HGDP 0.03) and 1.92 (C.I.95% 1.04-3.55, p = 0.03) respectively. Present find- samples. LCE3C-LCE3B_del was detected in all populations, with ings highlight that estrogen metabolism genes are not only involved in allele frequencies ranging between 30% in sub-Saharan Africans to reproduction, but also in ageing and exert a pleiotropic action across 70% in Native Americans. Strong LD between rs4112788 and LCE3C- the whole human life course. LCE3B_del was detected in all HGDP populations with the exception of the sub-Saharan Africans. The strong LD and the wide distribution P10.31 Pigmentation gene mc1R shows strong genetic of LCE3C-LCE3B_del across populations indicate a single origin for patterning in Eurasia this deletion. Moreover, the data suggest that the differences in the E. C. Royrvik1, K. K. Nicodemus1, N. Y. Yuldasheva2,3, S. Wells4, R. M. population distribution of LCE3C-LCE3B_del are not due to natural se- Ruzibakiev3, W. F. Bodmer1; lection, but are the consequence of genetic drift produced by a strong 1Cancer and Immunogenetics, Department of Clinical Pharmacology, University bottleneck during the expansion of humans out of Africa. of Oxford, Oxford, UK, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Division of Cardiovascular and Diabetes Research, Leeds Institute of Genetics, Health and Therapeutics, P10.29** Age and origin of the swedish Y111c/KCNQ1 founder University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Immunology, mutation Academy of Sciences, Tashkent, Uzbekistan, 4The Genographic Project, A. Winbo1, U. Diamant2, A. Rydberg1, S. M. Jensen2, E. Stattin3; National Geographic Society, Washington, DC, United States. 1Department of Clinical Sciences, Pediatrics, Umeå, Sweden, 2Department The population genetics of the Central Asian heartland is of great inter- of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Heart Centre, Umeå, Sweden, est, both in and of itself and because prehistoric populations ancestral 3Department of Medical Biosciences, Medical and Clinical Genetics, Umeå, to those of Europe and East Asia are thought to have passed through Sweden. this region. However, Central Asia has not been as extensively studied Background: The Y111C/KCNQ1-mutation has been identified as a as the eastern and western parts of the continent. Of particular interest major cause of the Long QT Syndrome in Sweden. Here we investi- in this geographical context is the MC1R gene due to its importance in gate its origin, age and possible founder-nature. skin pigmentation. We present a comprehensive analysis of allele/hap- Methods: All identified Swedish Y111C families were genealogically lotype frequencies from five functional SNPs (rs1805005, rs2228479, investigated. In 26 index families (2 individuals per family) and 24 rs1805007, rs1805008, and rs885479) in MC1R throughout Eurasia, healthy Swedish controls haplotype analysis was performed, using 15 including from 12,151 individuals from 141 regional populations, focus- satellite markers, 6 upstream and 9 downstream of the KCNQ1 gene sing on novel genotype data from 38 Central Asian populations. (distance ~8 cM). The ESTIAGE computer software was used for esti- We performed analyses of allelic differentiation (F ) and direct statisti- ST mating the age of the mutation. cal tests of allele/haplotype frequency differences using Fisher’s exact Results: We have identified 166 Y111C mutation-carriers in 36 index test. These revealed several significant differences between popula-Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 2 tions for all SNPs, and a striking pattern of highly significant differenc- availability of a wide variety of drugs and responsible for the multidrug es between even some Central Asian populations (e.g. p=2.38x10-23 resistance in cancer cells. The aim of this study was to investigate for Iranians from Samarkand and neighbouring Kyrgyz). the genetic variability, haplotype profile and ethnic differences of the Our results confirm divergent trends in eastern and western Eurasia, MDR1 polymorphisms in healthy Roma and Hungarian population with strong minor allele frequency gradients, perhaps reflecting selec- samples. Therefore, 503 Hungarian and 465 Roma healthy subjects tion of different variants in MC1R, such as are seen in other pigmenta- were genotyped for the C1236T (rs1128503), G2677T/A (rs2032582, tion genes. Data from the mitochondrial genome and Y chromosome Ala893Thr/Ser) and C3435T (rs1045642) variants by PCR-RFLP as- are included to provide a framework for interpretation. Finally, as say. Differences were found in the MDR1 1236 CC (20.7 vs. 33.2%) Central Asia consists of a patchwork of linguistic areas with related and TT genotypes (30.8 vs. 21.9%), in T allele frequency (0.551 vs. language groups frequently being geographically distant from one an- 0.443) (p<0.002), and in 3435T allele frequency (0.482 vs. 0.527, other, we investigate whether any subordinate genetic patterning is p<0.04) between the two studied groups. Futhermore, the frequency associated with linguistic rather than geographic affiliation. of CGC, CGT, CTT haplotypes was significantly higher in Hungarian population than in Roma (41.4 vs. 35.3%, 9.04 vs. 6.02%, 2.88 vs. P10.32 the investigation af c1236t and c3435t Polymorphisms 1.08%, respectively; p<0.009), whereas the frequency of TGC and in mDR1 (ABcB1) Gene in Familial mediterranean Fever (FmF) TTC haplotypes was higher in Roma population than in the Hungarian Patients (7.31 vs. 1.68%, 6.67 vs. 2.08%, respectively; p<0.001). The results of A. Rüstemoglu1, S. Yiğit1, Ö. Ates1, N. Bozkurt1, T. Tasliyurt2; MDR1 polymorphisms found in the Hungarian population were similar 1Gaziosmanpasa Unıversıty Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, to that observed in other Caucasian populations, however, some dif- TOKAT, Turkey, 2Gaziosmanpasa Unıversıty Medical Faculty, Department of ferences were observed in the haplotype structure. By contrast, the Internal Medicine, TOKAT, Turkey. Roma population differs from Hungarians, from Caucasians, and also The human MDR1 gene encodes a P-gp (P-glycoprotein) plays a from populations reported so far from India in the incidence of MDR1 key role in determining drug bioavailability, and drug response exist common variants and haplotypes. Observed interethnic differences amongst different populations. Up to date more than 50 SNPs have can have consequences for choice of treatment. been described in the MDR1 gene . FMF is considered as an autosomal recessive hereditary disease, as- P10.34 molecular epidemiology analysis of the most common sociated with a single gene named MEFV. However, about one-third mtDNA mutations in Hungary of FMF patients bear a single mutation on one allele, suggesting that A. Gal1, A. Maasz2, V. Remenyi1, K. Pentelenyi1, K. Komlosi2, B. Bereznai1, A. the disease might be transferred as an autosomal dominant trait with Valikovics3, P. Dioszeghy4, D. Bereczki1, B. Melegh2, M. J. Molnar1; partial penetration. 1Department of Neurology, Centre for Molecular Neurology, Semmelweis The aim of this study was to performe a genotyping and haplotyping University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of analysis of MDR1 gene in FMF patients. Two MDR-1 genetic markers Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 3Department of Neurology, Borsod – Abaúj – Zemplén (C1236T and C3435T) were analyzed in 142 FMF patients and 107 County Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary, 4Department of Neurology, Jósa András unrelated Turkish subjects. All subjects were genotyped by PCR-re- County Hospital, Nyiregyhaza, Hungary. striction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis, and Arlequin Background: Many heteroplasmic point mutations in the mitochondrial Software was utilized to estimate the genotype and haplotype frequen- genome (mtDNA) have been associated with a wide scale of neuro- cies, and SPSS 16.0 Software was utilized to estimate OR and Chi- logical symptoms. We report a prospective 10-year molecular study square tests. of mitochondrial DNA mutations in Hungarian patients with highly sug- In FMF patients showed higher frequency of the 3435 CT genotype gestive of mitochondrial diseases. compared with the control group (0.60 vs. 0.41; P =0.003; odds ratio, Methods: The mutations frequencies of the most common mtDNA [OR], 2,14; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 1.28-3.56) (Table 1). mutations (A3243G, A8344G, A8356G, T8993C, T8993G, G3460A, For the CC-CT (1236-3435) genotype frequency dedected significantly G11778A, T14484C) were investigated in patients with maternal higher in FMF patients compared with the control group (0.13 vs. 0.04; sensoneurial hearing loss, stroke-like episodes, ataxia, epilepsy and P<0.01; OR, 3.83; 95% CI, 1.26-11.68). myopathy with undetermined etiology. We screened 631 Hungarian Table 1 Compared allelic and genotyping frequencies patients in North-East, South-West and Central Hungary for this muta- of MDR1 gene loci with FMF patients and control tion. The mtDNA analysis was performed mostly from blood. If muscle tissue was available, the genetic analysis was performed from muscle Amino FMF Control FMF Control Odds Ratio also. Each substitution were tested by PCR-RFLP methodology with Position Exonacid Allele (N=284) (N=214) P Genotype P (142) (107) (95% CI) different restriction enzymes. change n F n F Results: Of the 631 patients screened for MELAS A3243G, 2,22% 1.72 CC 42 21 0.050 were positive for the mutation, whereas for MERRF A8344G, 2,53% (0.95-3,13) C 152 0.535 98 0.458 carried the mutation and for LS/NARP T8993C, 0,32% and T8993G, 0.84 1236 12 G412G 0.053 CT 68 55 0.285 0.16% carried the mutation. The outcomes for the LHON mutations (0.51-1.38) were and G3460A, 0%, G11778A, 0,32%, T14484C, 0%. In 1 patients 0.75 T 132 0.465 116 0.542 TT 32 31 0.199 the mutation was present only in the postmitotic muscle tissue. (0.42-1.33) Conclusion: The incidence of the most common mtDNA pathogenic CC 24 29 0.55 0.037 point mutations was relatively low in the investigated cohort. The mu- (0.30-1.01) tation frequency of the analysed substitutions was 4,9% in Hungarian C 133 0.468 102 0.477 2.14* patients with suggestive of mitochondrial disorders. Our results sug- 3435 26 I1145I 0.463 ct 85 44 (1.28- 0.003* gest that screening the most common alterations of the mitochondrial 3.56) genome is not sufficient to clarify the molecular background of the mi- 0.65 tochondrial disorders. T 151 0.532 112 0.523 TT 33 34 0.087 (0.37-1.14) P10.35 inferences of maternal genetic heritage of Bayash Roma P10.33 Haplotype profile of multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1/ in croatia ABcB1) gene in the average Hungarian and Roma population M. Peričić Salihović1, A. Barešić1, I. Martinović Klarić2, L. Barać Lauc3, B. samples Janićijević1; C. Sipeky1, E. Safrany1, V. Csongei1, L. Jaromi1, M. Szabo2, P. Kisfali1, A. 1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Lavandula vera, Maasz1, N. Polgar1, J. Bene1, I. Takacs3, B. Melegh1; Zagreb, Croatia, 3The national fondation for science, higher education and 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2Koch technological development of the Republic of Croatia, Zagreb, Croatia. Robert Hospital, Edeleny, Hungary, 32nd Department of Institute of Internal The Bayash are a branch of Romanian speaking Roma living dis- Medicine and Haematology, Semmelweis Teaching Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary. persedly in Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe. In order to The human multidrug resistance gene (MDR1/ABCB1) is an energy- investigate the origin of the Croatian Bayash maternal gene pool, we dependent drug-transport pump, plays an important role in the bio- have sequenced hyper variable segment I (HVS-I) of mitochondrial Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 20 DNA control region and typed relevant RFLP sites in the mitochon- the level of U5 in our study was higher than that found in previous stud- drial DNA of 390 Bayash from two Croatian regions: Baranja (235) and ies occurred in Tunisia. Medjimurje (155). The most frequent maternal lineages of the Bayash in Croatia (M5a and M35) belong to the M cluster testifying about their P10.38 Haplotypic structure of the mitochondrial DNA ancient Indian origin. European admixture in Bayash maternal gene polymerase gamma (POLG) gene pool is most evident in the occurrence of haplogroup H lineages (H1, B. Malyarchuk1, M. Perkova1, M. Derenko1, T. Grzybowski2; H2, H4, H5, H6 and H11) with a frequency of 26%. Characteristic of 1Institute of Biological Problems of the North, Magadan, Russian Federation, Croatian Bayash maternal lineages is a significantly higher frequen- 2The Nicolaus Copernicus University, Ludwik Rydygier Collegium Medicum, cy of haplogroup X2 (19.5%) than in other Roma populations; these Bydgoszcz, Poland. lineages harbour specific HVS-I mutations not present in any of the Variation of mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma (POLG) gene has populations that normally have this haplogroup. been extensively studied in health and disease because it is a ge- Haplogrups and haplotype distribution clearly shows that Bayash from netic locus for several mitochondrial diseases with over 150 mutations Medjimurje represent isolated subset that shares common origin with currently identified (Copeland 2010). However little is known about Bayash from Baranja. Obtained results suggest that today’s Roma and the haplotypic structure of this gene. Here we have sequenced its in- Bayash genetic structure was influenced by endogamy and isolation tron 2 and analyzed distribution of the POLG gene haplotypes in two along with genetic drift in small and dispersed subpopulations and few North Eurasian populations - in Russians (n=63) and Buryats (n=90). episodes of gene flow. Five polymorphic loci - three previously described rs2283430 (G/T), rs2239286 (G/C) and rs2247233 (G/A) and two novel polymorphisms - P10.36 mitochondrial DNA mutation Associated Leber were revealed. Among novel polymorphisms, first of them was a transi- Hereditary Optic Neuropathy: Prevalence Rate Reflected By tion G>A, which is located in position +14 in relation to rs2283430, and Positive Laboratory tests in Hungary second one was a transition A>G at position -5 in relation to rs2239286. A. Maasz, T. Heidecker, B. Melegh; In total, five haplotypes comprising two haplogroups were revealed. Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary. Haplogroup A consists of haplotype TGACA and haplogroup B is rep- Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a maternally inherited resented by haplotypes GGAGG, GGAGA, GAAGG and GGGGG (for early-onset acute or subacute central vision loss. Mitochondrial mu- loci rs2283430, +14 from rs2283430, -5 from rs2239286, rs2239286 tations especially in the subunits of NADH dehydrogenase and cy- and rs2247233, respectively). Interestingly that previously detected in tochrome B encoding genes have been found to associate with the Russian population mutations in exon 3 were found on different back- disease. Here we analyzed the profile of test results of the most com- grounds - G268A on haplogroup A and T251I on haplogroup B. This mon mitochondrial mutations (primary: G3460A, G11778A, G14459A, work was supported by the grant from the Far-East Branch of the Rus- T14484C, G15257C; secondary: C3275A, G3316A, T3394C, T4216C, sian Academy of Sciences (09-3-A-06-221). G7444A, T9101C, G13708A), which variants were analyzed using PCR/RFLP assays and direct sequencing of suspected patients’ DNA. P10.39 Genetic variation in Bulgarians: a mitochondrial DNA A total of 126 patients with LHON resembling phenotype (62 males and perspective 64 females), who were sent to genetic tests between 1999 and 2009, S. K. Karachanak1,2, V. Carossa3,2, D. Nesheva1, A. Achilli3, A. Olivieri3, Y. were involved in the study. Positive test results were found in 31.3% of Yordanov4, A. Galabov5, O. Semino3, A. Torroni3, D. Toncheva1; the males and 26.6% of the females for primary LHON mutations. The 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University-Sofia, 11778A was the most frequent primary LHON mutation both in males Sofia, Bulgaria, 2the first two authors contributed equally to this study, Italy, and females (n=14, 11.1% and n=11, 8.73% of total patients, respec- 3Dipartimento di Genetica e Microbiologia, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, tively). The 3460A was present in one male and five females (3.97% 4Institute of Experimental Morphology and Anthropology with Museum- of total patients); while the 15257C variant was found in four males Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5The Stephan Angeloff (3.17% of total patients), and one female. Surprisingly, the 14484C Institute of Microbiology-Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria. variant, which is one of the most common primary LHON mutations, The structure and diversity of the Bulgarian mitochondrial DNA (mtD- was found in only one patient. Besides, only the T4216C and G13708A NA) gene pool is still almost unknown. In the present study, we have of secondary LHON mutations were detected in our patients (n=16, evaluated the extent and nature of mtDNA variation in the largest Bul- 12.7%, n=10, 7.93% in males; n=18, 14.3%, n=13, 10.3% in females). garian sample to date, comprising 855 healthy unrelated subjects from Our results suggest that the mutation profile of the disease in Hungary across the country. differs from that reported from other European populations. The analysis was performed by sequencing about 850 base pairs (from np 16000 to np 250) of the mtDNA control region, followed by P10.37 mitochondrial DNA diversity in a coastal population from the hierarchical RFLP survey of numerous diagnostic coding-region tunisia markers. Overall, this approach allowed the identification of 586 dif- E. Kerkeni1,2, R. Kefi-Ben Atig3, S. Hsouna3, S. Sfar2, S. Nouira3, S. Abdelhak3, ferent haplotypes and their classification into 79 known haplogroups K. Monastiri2, H. Ben Cheikh1; or paragroups. 102/UR/08-03- Medecine Faculty, Monastir, Tunisia, 201/UR/08-14-Medecine The observed pattern of mtDNA diversity in Bulgarians is mainly Faculty, Monastir, Tunisia, 3Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan shaped by haplogroups (H and U) dated to the Upper Paleolithic pe- Diseases- Pasteur Institute of Tunis, Belvedere, Tunisia. riod. The spread of majority of the subclades of these haplogroups is Situated between Europe, the Middle East and Sub-Saharan Africa, related with waves of post-LGM recolonization. A fraction of the Bul- Tunisia represents a crossroads for human migrations. Studies de- garian mtDNA gene pool is allocated to haplogroups, which represent scribing the maternal lineage of Tunisian population have so far been Neolithic genetic component. conducted mainly on Southern and Northern Tunisia, among Berber In the comparisons of the observed haplogroup frequencies with those and on few non Berber populations. With the aim to enrich the Tu- from a wide range of western Eurasian populations, Bulgarians do not nisian mtDNA reference database we analysed for the first time the group with the great majority of other Europeans and differ substan- mitochondrial DNA variability in the population of Monastir, a coastal tially from Near Eastern populations. This reflects the peculiarity of city from central Tunisia. the Bulgarian mtDNA gene pool, determined by its history and demo- The hypervariable region HVS1 was sequenced and RFLP analyses graphic processes. were carried out in a sample of 52 individuals from Monastir. 46 different mtDNA haplotypes were identified and assigned to 12 hap- P10.40 Analysis of human mtDNA mutational spectrum revealed logroups which showed a high heterogeneous gene pool. The main by phylogenetic reconstruction haplogroups are U (19.2%), H (15.4%), L3 (13.5%) and T (9.6%). The N. Eltsov; Eurasiatic haplogroups were predominant (63%) followed by sub-Sa- Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Brach of the Russian Academy of haran L lineages (23.5%) and specific North African clades: U6 and Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. M1 (13.5%). The mitochondrial genome has been the most widely used system for Compared to previous studies on Tunisian populations this is the first the investigation of the evolutionary history of our species. It has been time that haplogroup U was among the main haplogroup. In addition, the system of choice because of its high rate of sequence divergence Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 21 and its uniparental, maternal inheritance. Advent of human popula- ine concentrations were not significant higher in T/T cariers (18, 94 ± tion genomics has lead to rapid accumulation of complete mtDNA se- 2,91 mkmmol/l, 14,87± 0,84 mkmmol/l, p= 0,11). Significantly higher quences. At present there are more than 6500 human mitochondrial von Willebrand factor plasma levels were in T/T patients compered genomes available in GenBank. This report is based on the study of to C/C (238,57±29,29 ; 177,81±10,05, p= 0,04) and C/T carriers mutational spectrum revealed in phylogenetic tree of all available com- (238,57±29,29, 176,88±12,68, p= 0,04). C/T patients had higher Ca2+ plete genomes. The maximum parsimony tree was reconstructed with concentrations compared to C/C+ T/T (1,23±0,03 mmol/l, 1,15±0,02 the mtPhyl package (http://eltsov.org/mtphyl.aspx). The relationship mmol/l , p=0,01). between mutation frequency throughout the tree and its conservation Conclusion: T allele of MTHFR gene is risk factor for CHF in this group index was studied as well as dependence of aminoacid change po- of patients. We suggest that DNA-tasting of C677T-MTHFR genotype sition in the tree and its physicochemical properties. Equation which is important for the prognosis and following drug treatment of such allows estimating the mutational saturability was deduced with which patients. it was shown that approximately 135 000 complete sequences neces- sary to reach 90% saturation. The analysis revealed mutational hot P10.43 mutation rates of 15 short tandem repeat loci used in spots and showed that approximately 14% of human mitochondrial paternity testing and forensic analysis genomes deposited in GenBank contain errors. E. Sukarova Stefanovska, P. Noveski, G. D. Efremov; Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Macedonian P10.41 mitochondrial genome diversity in Ulchi, the tungusic- Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav speaking tribe of the Russian Far East Republic of. N. Volodko, E. Starikovskaya, R. Sukernik; Knowledge about mutation rates of short-tandem-repeat (STR) or mic- Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Division of rosatellite loci used in paternity testing and forensic analysis is crucial Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. for the correct interpretation of resulting genetic profiles. The aim of The present report is based on the study of mtDNA variation in Ulchi this study was to determine the type and frequency of germline mu- (n=74), a Tungusic-speaking tribe of hunters and fishermen dispersed tations in 15 STR loci. A total of 100 paternity cases were analyzed along the lakes and reaches of the Lower Amur. MtDNA analysis re- using AmpFlSTR Identifiler kit. The parenthood in each of these cases vealed 39 distinct mtDNA haplotypes belonging to 21 Eurasian hap- was highly validated (probability>99.99%). We identified 7 mutations logroups C2-C3, D3-D8, D11, G1-G2, M7-M9, Z, B, F, N9, Y and U4, in 6 different loci (D21S11, D19S433, D16S539, D2S1358, FGA and with overall N macrohaplogroup derivatives frequency 53%, M - 43%, CSF1PO) with locus specific mutation rate varying between 0 and and R - 4%. It is generally accepted, that rapid migration along the 1x10-2, and overall average mutation rate estimated at 2.3x10-3. Five Asian Pacific margin brought undifferentiated M as far as Japan and mutations occurred in the male germline while two mutations could Russian Far East. The regionally differentiated MD, MG and M7 mtD- not be distinguished. All seven mutations were single repeat changes, NA lineages were of our special interest in light of the Late Pleistocene with 5 (71.4%) single repeat gains and 2 (28.6%) single repeat losses. migrations of modern humans into circum-Pacific region. One of our In one paternity case with mutation at D16S539 locus, analysis of Y- major findings is the discovery of M7a2 haplotype with 16140-16187- haplotype using AmpFlSTR Y-filer kit revealed additional mutation at 16209-16223-16519 HVSI motif which is specific for ancient Okhotsk DYS458 locus. The mutation event is very crucial for forensic DNA people (Sato et al. 2007). Ancient admixture of East and West Eur- testing and accumulation of STR mutation data is extremely important asians is also found in the Ulchi population of the Lower Amur region. for genetic profile interpretation. The presence of such haplogroups as N9 and Y in south-eastern Sibe- ria, with 50% frequency of Y in Ulchi, reflects complex genetic and de- P10.44** Gene variants from lipid-related pathways and risk mographic history, including natural selection and founder effects. The for myocardial infarction: Results from two community-based coalescent dates and spatial distribution of N9 and Y across Eurasia longitudinal studies let us to suggest that the root mutation 5417 emerged somewhere in C. SONG1, N. L. Pedersen1, C. A. Reynolds2, A. Syvänen3, J. Prince1, E. Southwestern Asia ~40.0 ka, and its particular derivatives (N9a, N9b, Ingelsson1; Y) have been involved in the eastward expansion, with the Y lineage 1Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, (~23 ka) being the most successful at the periphery. Sweden, 2University of California, Riverside, CA, United States, 3Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. P10.42 Effect of the c677t-mtHFR genotype on metabolic Background: Lipoprotein levels in blood and several familial lipid me- factors of endothelial disfunction: homocysteine concentrations, tabolism disorders are closely associated with initiation and progres- von Willebrand factor plasma levels and ca2+ concentrations sion of atherosclerosis, and incidence of myocardial infarction (MI). in patients with chronic Heart Failure (cHF) who lived in Therefore, we hypothesized that variants in genes associated with Blockaded Leningrad during WWii, st. Petersburg, Russia. circulating lipid levels also would be associated with MI. M. A. Bogdanova1, O. N. Semenova2, A. N. Voitovich1, O. S. Romashkina1, Methods: Using age- and sex-adjusted additive genetic models, we S. I. Yagashkina2, B. S. Smirnov3, V. M. Shmeleva4, L. P. Papajan4, V. I. analyzed 629 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning 59 Larionova1; candidate gene regions proposed to be involved in lipid-related path- 1State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, ways in relation to incidence of MI in 2,523 participants of the Swed- 2Research Center for People, who lived in Blockaded Leningrad, Saint- ish Twin Register (STR; 57% women). All associations with nominal Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3St.-Petersburg Electrothecnical University, P<0.01 were further investigated in the Uppsala Longitudinal Study Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4St.-Petersburg Research Institute of of Adult Men (ULSAM; N=1,095) by in silico replication supplemented Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. with additional de novo genotyping. Introduction: Chronic heart failure (CHF) is a major health problem Results: There were 14 SNP-MI associations in STR with nominal for people, who lived in blockaded Lenigrad (bL) during World War II. P<0.01 that we attempted to replicate in ULSAM. Of these, data al- We have the unique opportunity to investigate remote influence of the ready available from the ABCA1 locus (rs4149313 in STR; rs7031748 prolonged starvation in childhood on development of CHF in senility. in ULSAM [r2=1]) showed evidence of replication in ULSAM; the HDL- We have investigate the associations of the C677T-MTHFR genotype lowering allele was associated with a substantially higher MI risk (haz- on metabolic factors of endothelial disfunction: plasma homocysteine ard ratio, 1.34 and 1.42; 95% confidence interval, 1.09-1.65 and 1.08- concentrations, von Willebrand factor plasma levels and Ca2+ con- 1.87; P, 0.005 and 0.013 in STR and ULSAM, respectively). Direct centrations. genotyping for several other loci is still ongoing. Materials: 489 patients with CHF from bL (420 females and 69 males, Conclusions: In two community-based samples, we observed several age 68-88 years), 156 individuals with CHF from other places, 85 potentially interesting associations between lipid-related SNPs and women after 80 years without CHF. MI incidence. Of these, we could confirm the association between the Genotypes were determined by PCR-RPLF. ABCA1 locus and MI across both studies. However, several other as- Results: There were no differences in genotypes distributions of sociations in our preliminary analysis in STR could represent true find- MTHFR C677T among our groups. In group of patients with severe ings, and replication genotyping is currently ongoing. CHF (75 females, 15 males, age 73±1,8 years) plasma homocyste-Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 22 P10.45** A genome-wide linkage scan of personality traits P10.47 the P53 gene polymorphisms and life and family history reveals new loci of cancer in croatian elderly population N. Amin1, A. C. J. W. Janssens1, I. V. Zorkoltseva2, T. I. Axenovich2, Y. S. Z. Tomas1, P. Krajačić1, M. Zajc-Petranović1, T. Skarić-Jurić1, V. Bisof2, J. Aulchenko1, B. A. Oostra1, C. M. van Duijn1; Miličić1, S. Tomek-Roksandić3, N. Smolej Narančić1; 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Russian Academy of Science, 1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. Oncology, Clinical Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Dr. A. Štampar The Neuroticism-Extraversion-Openness Five Factor Inventory (NEO- Institute of Public Health, Department of Gerontology, Zagreb, Croatia. FFI) categorizes human personality into five broad dimensions Neu- The P53 gene has been suggested to be associated with various dis- roticism, Extraversion, Openness, Conscientiousness and Agreeable- eases and with longevity due to its important functions in preserving ness. These traits are highly heritable (20-60%) and have proven to be the genome integrity. In this retrospective study we investigated the strong predictors of not only several psychiatric and non-psychiatric association of two widely investigated polymorphisms of P53 gene disorders but also to social behavior and work performance. Within the with life and family history of cancer in a sample of Croatian elderly Erasmus Rucphen Family study (ERF), we phenotyped 2368 related population. We studied the Arg72Pro and PIN3 (+16bp) polymor- individuals with the NEO personality inventory. Affected-only genome- phisms in 124 persons aged 85-101 yrs. The allele frequencies in se- wide linkage analysis was performed using the Illumina 6K linkage nescent sample were similar to those reported for general population panel for a set of highest scorers (> 90th percentile, n ~ 200) for each of Croatia: 77.3% vs. 75.9% (for Arg) and 86.6% vs. 85.7% (for A1). of the five traits. Multipoint parametric linkage analysis assuming domi- On total sample level no sex or age differences were found in life and nant and recessive models and non parametric linkage analysis was family history variables or in genotype distribution. However, when two performed. Significant evidence of linkage to chromosome 20p (LOD age groups were formed - “younger” (85-90 yrs; N=58) and “older” (91- = 5.86) was observed for conscientiousness, a trait strongly related 101 yrs; N=66) - new relations emerged. In contrast to older subjects to job performance. Additionally suggestive evidence of linkage was showing homogeneity for tumor occurrence across genotypes in both observed for Neuroticism at 19q (LOD = 3.73), 21q (LOD = 3.42) and polymorphisms, in younger subjects Arg allele as well as ArgArg geno- 22q (LOD = 3.07); Extraversion at chromosomes 1p (LOD = 3.05), 9p type of the Arg72Pro polymorphisms was consistently more frequently (LOD = 3), and 12q (LOD = 4.01); Openness at 12q (LOD = 3.71) and recorded in persons with life and family history of cancer. As it was fre- 19q (LOD = 3.0) and Agreeableness at 2p (LOD = 3.11), 6q (LOD = quently found for younger persons the present preliminary study sug- 3.54), 17q(LOD = 3.32) and 21q (LOD = 3.64). For conscientiousness gests that Arg allele carry increased risk for cancer in aged persons at 20p we identified two distinct haplotypes segregating in 6 families. as well. However, it seems that in very old olds (91+ in the present The region overlaps with one identified earlier for cognitive function in study) the importance of Arg72Pro polymorphism for carcinogenesis the same population. These findings suggest that we have identified a diminishes. Further studies considering more narrowly defined patho- new locus involved in an important personality trait, which may have logical substrate are needed to disentangle the reasons for obtained a wider impact. age-related differences. P10.46 Association between cystatin c polymorphism and P10.48 Polymorphisms with relevant role in platelet function in corpulence Portuguese population H. Hooton1,2, B. Dubern1,2, C. Henegar1,2, R. Alili1,2, P. Galan3, S. Hercberg3, F. M. B. Criado1, L. Pina-Cabral1, V. Carvalhais1, B. Mesquita1, A. Santos1, E. Rousseau4, V. Pelloux1,2, P. Arner5, T. I. A. Sørensen6, K. Clément1,2; Ruivães1, M. Monteiro1, C. Pereira1, C. Andrade1, I. Arrieta2, A. Almeida-Dias1; 1INSERM U872 Team 7 Nutriomique Paris France, Paris, France, 2University 1Centro de Investigação em Tecnologias da Saúde - CITS - CESPU, Paredes, Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris, France, 3INSERM U556, INRA U1125, CNAM Portugal, 2Facultad de Ciencias-Universidad del Pais Vasco, Leioa, Spain. EA3200, university Paris 13, nutritional epidemiology research unit, Paris, Genetic and environmental factors can be responsible of hyper or France, 4INTEGRAGEN, Paris, France, 5Karolinska institute, department hypo- reactivity of platelets. We know that more than 30% of natural of medicine, Huddinge, Lipid laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Institute of variation of platelet reactivity seems to be related with genetic factors. preventive medicine, Copenhagen university hospital, centre for health and The main platelet glycoproteins involved in primary hemostasis are Society, Copenhagen, Denmark. GPIb-V-IX, GPIa-IIa and GPIIb-IIIa. Endothelial nitric oxide sintetase Background: Cystatin C expression rate in adipose tissue and circulat- (eNOS) is also relevant in platelet function. Polymorphisms of these ing levels in blood are two to threefold higher in obese subjects than platelet proteins and endothelial eNOS can induce functional platelet in lean controls. alterations. Differences in platelet reactivity and activation among indi- Work hypothesis: Our hypothesis is that common variants in Cystatin viduals can influence normal hemostasis, presence of thrombosis and C gene could play a role in the evolution of BMI during lifetime. response to antithrombotic therapy. Methods: Tag SNPs were selected to obtain a full coverage of Cystatin The purpose of this work is to determine allelic and genotypic frequen- C coding sequence based on hapmap data. Tag SNPs were genotyped cies of polymorphisms that affect platelet function, namely Kozak, in population based cohorts: 4300 subjects from the SUVIMAX study VNTR and HPA-2 polymorphisms of GP1BA gene (GPIb alfa), P1A of (BMI=23.78 +/-0.05 kg/m², age=49.58 +/-0.10 yrs), 750 women from ITGB3 gene (GPIIIa), C807T of ITGA2 gene (GPIa), Glu298Asp and the SPAWN cohort in Sweden (BMI= 21.73 +/-0.10 kg/m², age=29.16 T-786C polymorphisms of NOS3 gene in a control Portuguese popula- +/-0.16yrs) and 1500 men from Denmark (BMI=27 .00+/-0.16 kg/m², tion. Polymorphisms were studied by RFLP methodology. age=19.92 +/-0.05yrs). Association between BMI evolution and geno- For the seven polymorphisms studied there are no previous data for types was carried out with a linear mixed model. Portuguese population. Our results show that allelic and genotypic fre- Results: One SNP, rs2424577, was significantly associated with differ- quencies in Portuguese population do not differ from the ones found ences in BMI over time in all three groups. G/G carriers had a signifi- for other Caucasian populations. All genotypes are in Hardy-Weinberg cantly lower BMI over time (p<0.05) in the SUVIMAX group and in the equilibrium. subgroup of Danish men who were lean at inclusion (BMI<30kg/m²) The genetic characterization of platelet variants in Portuguese popula- than the carriers of the two other genotypes (A/G and A/A). Surpris- tion obtained in this work will be important for further studies focused ingly, in the SPAWN cohort, G/G carriers had a significantly higher BMI on the role of these molecular markers in specific populations and their than the carriers of the other genotypes. These observations may be possible clinical implications. due to the effect of a specific haplotype, since no such difference was found between males and females in the SUVIMAX group. P10.49 Analysis of two polymorphisms in genes suspected to Conclusions and perspectives: These results bring insights into the take part in crohn’s disease among Polish patients contribution of Cystatin C in time dependant corpulence. Haplotype L. Jakubowska-Burek1, M. Kaczmarek-Rys2, J. Hoppe-Golebiewska2, M. analyses are ongoing in all 3 groups. A. Kucharski1, S. Hryhorowicz2, D. Rakowski2, K. Linke1, R. Slomski2,3, A. Dobrowolska-Zachwieja1; 1Department of Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Internal Diseases, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Science, Research Institute of Nucleic Acids Functions, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Natural Sciences in Poznan, Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 2 Poznan, Poland. thology. Thus PRDX5 gene polymorphism may play a role in human Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) belongs to Inflamma- longevity. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the 5’-flanking tory Bowel Diseases (IBD).The etiology of the disease remains un- regulatory region (c.-540A>C) of the PRDX5 gene may cause a differ- identified, but it is known, that it is characterized by multifactorial and ent expression level of peroxiredoxin 5. polygenic background. In the last few years many genes were defined, The aims of this study were to compare allele and genotype frequency among others ATG16L1 as well as IL23R, which may predispose for distribution in two groups of unrelated healthy persons: young (4-17 the disease. Up till now, in Polish populations these genes were not years old, n=113) and elderly (over 80 years old, n=117, including studied.The aim of the research was the analysis of polymorphisms: long-livers: 90-106 years old, n=65) and to compare allele frequencies rs2241880 in ATG16L1 gene and rs7517847 in IL23R gene.156 Polish between St. Petersburg population and another European population. patients with CD were qualified for this study.Polymorphism analysis Genotyping was carried out by PCR-RFLP-analysis method. The fre- was performed in ATG16L1 rs2241880 gene and rs7517847 in IL23R quencies distributions were compared by using Chi-square test. gene using pyrosequencing.The results were compared with an ad- Results: the frequencies of A and C alleles are 63,7% vs 65,4%, 36,3% equately chosen population group.In ATG16L1 gene the heterozygotic vs 34,6%; the frequencies of AA, AC and CC genotypes are 38,9% variant TC occurred in 47,9% of patients and did not show significant vs 45,3%, 49,6% vs 40,2%, 11,5% vs 14,5% in young and elderly difference as compared to the population group (47,4%). Homozygotic groups, respectively. The genotype distributions are consistent with CC variants occurred among the patients in 22,9% (population 30,8%), Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in both groups. No statistically significant however TT genotype occurred in 29,2% among patients and 21,8% in differences in allele and genotype frequency distributions between healthy population. In IL23R gene the heterozygotic form GT occurred groups were found. There were also no significant differences in allele most often (53,7% in patients and 48,7% in population), and GG geno- frequencies between population of St. Petersburg and European pop- type appeared in 11,6% patients and in 11% of healthy individuals. In ulation (KYUGEN_CAU200) reported in the NCBI dbSNP database turn the TT genotype was observed in 34,7% CD patients and 43% of (n=200, allele frequencies: A-61,2%, C-38,8%). people not afflicted with the disease. Predominant in both genes were heterozygotic variants. In the vicinity of rs2241880 and rs7517847 no P10.52 Population genetic analysis of four microsatellite marker significant changes in the frequency of occurrence of particular geno- linked to retinoblastoma gene types were observed, although in other populations these polymor- A. Ahani, M. T. Akbari; phisms were related to IBD. Medical Geneics Dept., Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P10.50 Population study at six supplementary stR loci in the The most common ocular cancer in children is retinoblastoma. Annual representative sample of multinational Bosnia and Herzegovina incidence in Iran is approximately 100 new cases. Conclusive identi- residents fication of RB1 mutations in retinoblastoma is belived to improve the D. Marjanovic1,2, L. Kovacevic1,3, N. Pojskic1, J. Cakar1, M. Dzehverovic1, D. clinical management of affected children and their relatives. However, Musemic-Buljugic1, K. Bajrovic1; despite clear clinical benefits, RB1 screening remains difficult, most of 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and the alterations being unique and randomly distributed throughout the Herzegovina, 2Genos, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Faculty of Pharmacy, University of entire coding sequence of the huge RB1 gene. In some cases mutation Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. screening of RB1 gene may be time consuming and not beneficial for In our previous population studies of B&H human population, we families that have positive history of retinoblastoma and are planning have used 17 STR loci included in the PowerPlex 16® System and for a new pregnancy. In such cases linkage analysis using polymor- AmpFlSTR®Identifiler®, twelve Y-chromosomal short tandem repeats phic microsatellite markers may be the solution. In this study we are loci incorporated in the PowerPlex® Y System, 14 X-STR loci, as well evaluating the heterozygosity of four microsattelite markers (D13S128, as 28 Y-chromosome NRY bi-allelic markers. All obtained results were Rbi2, RB1.20, D13S156) that are either intragenic or closely linked included in Bosnian referent database. In order of future development to RB1 gene. Peripheral blood samples of 100 normal Iranian people of this database we have decide to analyze 6 additional STR loci were collected on EDTA tubes and DNA was extracted from 5-ml whole (D22S1045, D1S1656, D10S1248, D2S441, D12S391, SE33). There- blood sample using a standard protocol. PCR reactions were fulfilled fore, we have tested 150 unrelated healthy individuals born in the for each marker and the PCR products were separated using 12% Bosnia and Herzegovina, from all three main ethnical groups. Qiagen polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The Heterozygosity of the above DnaeasyTM Tissue Kit was used for DNA extraction from buccal swabs markers is 93%, 69%, 78% and 85% respectively. Our results show and blood stains, Quantifiler® assay for quantification and PowerPlex that these markers can be used for genetic linkage analysis in Iranian ESI 17® System for amplification and detection. Amplification was car- families with retinoblastoma. ried out as described previously. The total volume of each reaction was 25μl. The PCR amplifications have been carried out in PE Gene P10.53 transcription of polymorphic human retrotransposon- Amp PCR System Thermal Cycler according to the manufacturer’s insertions negatively regulates candidate tumor suppressor recommendations. Electrophoresis of the amplification products was genes preformed on an ABI PRISM 310. Numerical allele designations of the A. Nicoulaz1, C. Attanasio2, C. Borel1, S. E. Antonarakis1, B. Conrad1; profiles were obtained by processing with Gene Mappe®r IDv 3.2Soft- 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva ware Deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, observed and ex- Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Genomic Division, Lawrence Berkeley pected heterozygosity, power of discrimination and power of exclusion National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, United States. were calculated. Also, we have compared B&H data with data obtained Transposons comprise a significant fraction of mammalian genomes, from other European populations with available data for observed loci. the function of which only gradually emerges. They are silenced, both Results of this study are going to be used as guidelines in additional in the germline and in somatic cells to avoid the detrimental effects of investigation of B&H human population genetic structure. unrestrained transposition. It is therefore unclear at present, whether transposons escaping repression could exert functions that depend on P10.51 Peroxiredoxin 5 gene polymorphism in the population of their autonomous transcriptional activity in somatic cells. To address saint-Petersburg this, we studied two polymorphic intragenic retrotransposon insertions, A. A. Vasilishina1, A. P. Khmyrova2, O. N. Semenova3, V. A. Isacov2, O. A. Ya5-MLS41 (Alu-SINE retrotransposon in FOG2) and LTR5_Hs (LTR Kononova2, M. M. Shavlovsky1, V. I. Larionova2; retrotransposon in PSD3) that could be present or absent in human 1St. Petersburg Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, Saint-Petersburg, genomes. The allele with the presence of the Alu has a frequency of Russian Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint- 0.4, while that of the LTR is 0.2 in European chromosomes. Normal- Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Research Center for People, who lived in ized gene and retrotransposon expression was analyzed with quantita- Blockaded Leningrad, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. tive PCR in two cell types of ~200 individuals. For these two candidate Peroxiredoxin 5 (PRDX5) is a mitochondrial antioxidant enzyme that breast cancer suppressor genes, we found retrotransposon transcrip- neutralizes reactive oxygen species (ROS). According to the free radi- tion to negatively regulate cellular gene expression. This provides for cal theory of aging, the accumulation of oxidative damages as a result the first time evidence for polymorphic variation in gene-regulatory ret- of ROS attack is probably a reason of the aging and age-related pa- rotransposon transcription. These findings also imply that such regula-Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 2 tory retrotransposons become candidate tumor markers and potentially P10.56 Analysis of nine Y-chromosome stRs (YstRs) in two novel therapeutic targets. Thus, presence or absence of retrotranspo- iranian (Kurds and Lurs) ethnic groups sons could be the causative variation of certain cis-eQTLs. S. M. Alavi, A. Monavarfeshani, N. Nikpoor, L. Safari, A. Farazmand; University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P10.54 Genetic polymorphisms selective value on pre- and We studied nine Y-chromosome short tandem repeat (STR) including postnatal stages of human development DYS19, DYS385 a/b, DYS389 I/II, DYS390, DYS391, DYS392 and M. S. Nazarenko1,2, O. Y. Botkina1, N. P. Babushkina1, E. Y. Bragina1, V. V. DYS393 in two population of Kurds and Lors with the goal of con- Markova1, T. V. Zheykova1, O. G. Polovkova1, I. V. Saltykova2, A. R. Simakina2, structing of a representative Y-STR database including all Iranian eth- M. V. Chepa2, S. V. Buikin1, I. A. Goncharova1, N. V. Tarasenko1, M. V. nic groups. Golubenko1, A. N. Kucher1, V. P. Puzyrev1,2; Blood samples were obtained from 75 kurds and 50 Lors unrelated 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian males. Genomic DNA was extracted by a salting-out procedure and State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. loci were amplified in triplex and monoplex PCRs and alleles were Selective value of putatively functional polymorphisms of several identified by comparison with an in-house constructed allelic ladder. candidate genes for common diseases was the matter of this study. Using an implementation of Analysis of Molecular Variance (AMOVA) The groups of chromosomally normal spontaneous abortions (5-12 provided at the YHRD website, Fst value was calculated and the mul- weeks), middle aged subjects (28-55 years old) and nonagenarions tidimensional scaling analysis (MDS) plot was drawn. (89-100 years old) were collected in the Tomsk population (288 in- The observed haplotype diversity and discrimination capacity were dividuals in total). DNA was genotyped for 19 polymorphisms in 13 0.997 and 90.6% for Kurdish and 0.998 and 94% for Lors population, genes: MTHFR rs1801133:C>T, ACE rs4343:A>G, AGTR1 rs5186: respectively. A>C, GNB3 rs5443:C>T, NOS3 rs2070744:T>C, rs1799983:G>T and The most common allele in Kurds/Lors for respective loci was DYS19, VNTR, ADRB2 rs1042713:A>G and rs1042714:C>G, LTA rs909253: allele 14/14; DYS389I, allele 13/13; DYS390, allele 23/23; DYS391, A>G, TNFA rs1800629:G>A, IL4 rs2243291:G>C, IL4RA rs1801275: allele 10/10; DYS392, allele 11/11; DYS393, allele 12/12; DYS385a, A>G and rs2074570:A>G, IL12A rs568408:G>A, IL12B rs3212227: allele 13/13; DYS385b, allele 16/16 and DYS389II allele 28/29. A>C and rs3212220:G>T, IL12RB1 rs3746190:C>T and rs11575926: Gene diversity value was calculated from the allelic frequency for each G>A. There was redistribution of alleles and genotypes of polymor- locus. The DYS385b locus proved to be highly polymorphic in both phisms of genes TNFA and IL12B in the analyzed groups. The IL12B Kurds (0.833) and Lors (0.824). Also the DYS391 (0.599) and DYS392 rs3212227 AC/CC genotypes (48% vs 35%; p=0.04) and C allele (28% (0.264) loci showed the lowest value in Kurds and Lors, respectively. vs 20%, p=0.04) were registered more often among spontaneous MDS and Analysis of Molecular Variance (AMOVA) revealed large ge- abortions to compare with combined group of middle aged adults and netic distances among Kurdish people living in Iran, Turkey and Iraq. nonagenarions. The TNFA rs1800629 GA/AA genotypes (25% vs 17%, Also based on the same analysis a significant genetic distance found p=0.04) and A allele (14% vs 8%, p=0.04) predominated among living between Iranian Lors and Arabs. population to compare with spontaneous abortions. In conclusion, the current study provided new facts about different selective significance P10.57 AssOciAtiON OF sOD1 GENE ALLELic VARiANt WitH of polymorphisms of genes TNFA and IL12B on the pre- and postnatal DiABEtic NEPHROPAtHY iN tYPE 1 DiABEtEs stages of human development. N. M. Panduru1,2, D. A. Ion2, E. Mota3, M. Mota3, D. Cimponeriu4, M. Panduru2, L. I. Chivu2, R. Chivu2, A. C. Covic5, C. Serafinceanu2, D. M. Cheta2, A. Streinu- P10.55 Additional evidence for the absence of pathogenic Cercel2; significance of mutation T1095C (mitochondrial 12S rRNA) in 1IDNBM „N.C. Paulescu“, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Carol Davila“ University of deafness Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Medicine and O. L. Posukh1, N. V. Volodko2; Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania, 4Genetics Institute of Bucharest 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute University, Bucharest, Romania, 5“Gr. T. Popa“ University of Medicine and of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Novosibirsk, Russian Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. Federation. Diabetic nephropathy is a major complication of type 1 diabetes whose Mutations in the mtDNA may contribute to sensorineural hearing loss pathogenesis is insufficiently known, but oxidative stress and genetic (SNHL) either in isolation or as a part of multisystem disorder. To date, susceptibility seem to be involved. The purpose of this study is to as- several mutations in mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene have been found sess the possible association of +35A/C (rs2234694) polymorphism in association with both aminoglycoside-induced and isolated SNHL. in SOD1 gene with advanced stages of diabetic nephropathy in pa- Pathogenic significance was confirmed only for A1555G and C1494T tients with type 1 diabetes in Romania. There have been enrolled 238 mutations, and remains unclear for other mutations (MITOMAP). The unrelated patients, having type 1 diabetes, divided into group A (106 T1095C mutation has also been shown to be associated with SNHL in patients) with diabetic nephropathy - macroalbuminuria or ESRD (End some families mainly of Chinese origin. We performed mtDNA muta- Stage Renal Disease) and group B (132 patients) without diabetic tion analysis in pedigrees of different ethnic origin with nonsyndromic nephropathy. The genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral SNHL and in indigenous Altaian population (N=230) in the Altai Re- venous blood and the genotyping of +35A/C (rs2234694) polymor- public (South Siberia, Russia). Mutation T1095C was revealed in one phism has been made using the PCR-RFLP technique. The statistical Altaian patient with profound congenital deafness and in one unre- analysis has been made using De Finetti’s program. There has not lated control of Altaian ethnicity. We also performed the phylogenetic been a significant deviation from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for analysis of both mtDNAs with T1095C. The RFLP haplotype and HVS- none of the groups (p=0,229 respectively p=0,894). The data analy- 1/HVS-2 sequence data revealed that both mtDNAs belong to East- sis revealed that the presence of a C allele confers a significant risk Asian mtDNA haplogroup M11. The T1095C is a basal polymorphism (p=0.008) for the advanced diabetes nephropathy (OR=4,940, 95%C. of this haplogroup which has been found earlier in the Altaian popu- I.=1,341-18,198), and the CA genotype (p=0.015) confers a little lower lation with frequency 2.2% (Derenko et al., 2007) and among some risk (OR=4,491, 95%C.I.=1,203-16,766). This study shows the asso- other East-Asian populations. Based on all these facts, we suggest ciation of a mutant C allele of rs2234694 polymorphism in SOD1 gene that the T1095C and deafness in that patient are rather a coincidence with the advanced stages of diabetic nephropathy in patients with type than an association. This case provides additional evidence for the ab- 1 diabetes in Romania, suggesting the involvement of the defence sence of pathogenic significance of the T1095C mutation in deafness. against oxidative stress, as an important link in the pathogeny of dia- This study indicate an importance of mtDNA phylogenetic analysis in betic nephropathy. mtDNA medical studies in order to avoid erroneous diagnosis and to search for immediate causes of disease.Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 2 P10.58 The high SCA1 relative incidence in Poland and the Almaty area. evidence of the founder effect. The mean number of children per woman constituted 3,65. Crow index W. Krysa, A. Sulek, M. Rajkiewicz, W. Szirkowiec, E. Zdzienicka, M. Rakowicz, of total selection (Itot) and its components (Im, If) were 0,34, 0,04 and R. Rola, J. Zaremba; 0,29 respectively.The size of the portion of the population of reproduc- Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland. tive age (36,89 % of the total), family size(3,65 ), and the predominance Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) belong to a group of rare hereditary of the portion of the population (13,39 % of the total) under reproduc- neurodegenerative disorders. In some geographical regions relatively tive allow us to classify this population as growing .The parameters of high prevalence of a certain SCA types resulting from a founder ef- isolation of Malecot distance and endogamy index in Uygur region of fect has been documented. Contrary to the highest worldwide SCA3 Almaty area of Kasakhstan are counted up. Highest local inbreeding is incidence, among patients of Polish origin no SCA3 cases were found, found in the Avat rural county (0,0089).The index of endogamy in over although 138 SCA1 and 23 SCA2 and 3 SCA17 pedigrees were identi- is 0,41. Recent social and economic changes have led to an increase fied. The aim of the study was an attempt at finding evidence of pos- in general and ethic isolation of uigur rural population of Almaty area sible founder effect in the most frequent types of SCA in Poland. of Kasakhstan. SCA1 is the commonest genetic type of SCA in Poland with relative frequency of 67% (among all genetically confirmed SCAs) and ir- P10.61 inherited genetic liver disorder impact on VHc infection regular geographical distribution within the country. Genetic markers: in Latvia D6S89, D6S109, D6S274, D6S288 linked to the ATXN1 gene were L. Piekuse1, M. Kreile1, A. Zariņa1, B. Lāce1, V. Sondore2, A. Krumina1, J. analysed and strong association of D6S89 marker’s variant of 197 bp Keiss2; was observed in 81 pedigrees. 1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2Infectology Center of Latvia, Riga, In SCA2, which account for 11% of spinocerebellar ataxias in Poland, Latvia. no association with the four analysed genetic markers spanning the Infection rate with viral hepatitis C (VHC) is growing each year world- ATXN2 gene was revealed. wide. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is major cause of chronic liver disease. During antiviral therapy there are frequent adverse effects and nega- P10.59 GALNt2 AND tRiB1 GENEs POLYmORPHisms AND tive response to it. Inherited liver diseases as hereditary haemochro- tRiGLYcERiDE LEVELs iN mEtABOLic sYNDROmE PAtiENts matosis, Gilbert syndrome and Wilson disease changes liver cell me- P. Kisfali1, M. Mohás2, A. Maász1, F. Hadarits3, K. Hetyésy4, B. Melegh1; tabolism and possibly influence HCV infection outcome. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Aims - detect mutations C282Y, H63D and S65C in HFE gene, H1069Q Department of Medicine and Nephrological Center, University of Pécs, Pécs, in ATP7B gene mutation, and (TA) repeats in UGT1A1 gene promoter Hungary, 3Central Laboratory, Markusovszky County Hospital, Szombathely, region in HCV patients group and patients group, to evaluate its fre- Hungary, 4Central Laboratory, Aladar Petz County Hospital, Győr, Hungary. quency and impact on clinical outcome. Objectives: The rs17321515 was shown to be associated with severe Material and Methods - DNA samples from 100 VHC patients and 150 HTG and HLP types 2B, 3, 4 and 5,. The human tribbles-1 (TRIB1) healthy individuals. gene is located at chromosome 8q24. In an Asian Malay population, Results - frequency of H1069Q allele in VHC patients group is 0.055 the rs17321515 polymorphism located near the TRIB1 locus showed (in control group 0,06 p=0.0013). Frequency of C282Y allele in patient an association with elevated total- and LDL-cholesterol and with in- group 0.067,H 63D - 0.25, S65C - 0.013 - with no significant difference creased risk of CHD and CVD and also, in a Japanese cohort this from control population (p>0.05). In gene UGT1A1 promoter region variant was significantly associated with triglyceride levels and LDL- (TA)7 allele was found with frequency 0.402 (in control population cholesterol concentrations. 0.37), there were found two alleles (TA)5 in control and patient groups The GALNT2 gene is a member of the GalNAc-transferase enzyme (p>0.05). If patient had at least one of C282Y or H63D mutations dur- family responsible for the transfer of an N-acetyl galactosamine to the ing antiviral therapy were elevated ALAT comparing to other patients hydroxyl group of a serine or threonine residue in the first step of O- group p=0.0331. linked oligosaccharide biosynthesis. The rs4846914 is an intronic vari- Conclusions: Allele H1069Q possibly affects host organism acceptibil- ant of GALNT2 gene, and its minor G allele showed association with ity to HCV infection. HFE gene mutations influence adverse effects elevated triglyceride levels. A Hungarian case-control study evaluated during antiviral therapy. In Latvia is found (TA)5 allele in gene UGT1A1 the association of GALNT2 rs4846914 variant with triglyceride levels, promoter region, that has no influence on VHC clinical outcome but is and explored their possible contribution to the development of isch- rear in Caucasian population. emic stroke. Methods and results: A total of 287 metabolic syndrome patients were P10.62 Genetic structure of Western caucasus populations on genotyped by PCR-RFLP. We observed relationships between triglyc- the base of uniparental polymorphisms erides and any genotypes of TRIB1 and GALNT2. Triglyceride levels S. Litvinov1, E. Khusnutdinova1, I. Kutuev1, R. Khusainova1, R. Valiev1, R. where higher in minor homozygotes than in two other genotype groups Villems2; (rs17321515: AA 2.02±0.23; AG 2.01±0.11 GG 2.42±0.25; rs4846914: 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Science Center of Russian AA 2.18±0.17; AG 1.99±0.14 GG 2.58±0.33 and p<0.05). The total Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Department of Evolutionary serum cholesterol and HDL-cholesterol level did not differ between Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. groups of different genotypes. The populations of western part of the Caucasus represent significant Conclusions: The analyzed TRIB1(rs17321515) and GALNT2 historical, ethno-cultural and linguistic traits. We have analyzed 52 (rs4846914) SNPs are associated with elevated triglyceride levels in markers in coding region of the mtDNA and 48 markers in the non- minor allele homozygotes. recombining part of the Y-chromosome in 592 individuals represent- ing five populations from western Caucasus (Abkhazians, Adyghes, P10.60 Genetic structure of rural population Uygur region of Abazins, Georgians, and Circassians). Y-chromosome haplogroups G- Almaty area, of Kasakhstan M201 and J2 (J-M172) account for more than 50% of all haplogroup di- A. Baysbekova1, G. M. Berezina2; versity in the studied populations. Haplogroup G-M201 in the Western 1Molecular Medicine Center, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 2Scientific Center of Caucasus populations is represented only by subclade G2a (G-P15) obstetrics, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, Kazakhstan. with the insignificantly low exception in the Adyghe population where The study of genetic structure of modern populations of the man is one G1a (G-P20) amounts to less than 1%. In contrast to high frequency of of key problems of genetics. Genetic and demographic information for J2 haplogroup J1 exhibit moderate occurrence and vary from 2 to 6 %. the uygurs population living in the Almaty area of Kasakhstan Republic Haplogroup R1a (R-SRY10831.2) is also present in all studied popula- is presented. The Uygur region consist of the 14 rural districts. The tions. It is difficult to say though whether this component is a result of primary nation amongst the inhabitant in Uygur region were uygurs Eastern European influence or it has arrived from other source. While (56,0%).The marital-migrational structure of Uygur region was stud- analysis of the coding region with high level of resolution is needed ied on the basis of marital recodes. The average value of ethnic mar- to understand the source of high frequencies of haplogroup H, occur- riage assortativeness was found to be 1,68. The respective districts rence of haplogroup U subclades slightly differs in all 5 populations. are formed the region’s genetic structure of uygur rural population of Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 2 P10.63 Analysis of 17 Y-chromosomal stRs loci in the iranian of mammals. In humans there is a cluster of three genes encoding population functional synthetases (OAS1, OAS2 and OAS3). Previously we found N. Amini1, M. Sharafi Farzad2, S. Kiyanfar1, S. Amini1, M. Asheri1, A. Sarhadi1, that five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located within OAS2 M. Tavallaei3, S. Zeinali4; and OAS3 genes are associated with susceptibility/resistance to se- 1kawsar Genomics and Biotech Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, vere tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV)-induced disease in Russian 2Kawsar Genomics and Biotech Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic population. In current study we investigated distribution of the three of Republic of Iran, 3Genetic Research Center, Baghiatalah Medical Science that SNPs (OAS3 rs2285932 (C/T, Ile438Ile), OAS3 rs2072136 (G/A, University, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dep’t of Mol. Med. Ser567Ser) and OAS2 rs15895 (G/A, Trp720Ter relative to p71 iso- Biotech Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Tehran, Islamic form)) in seven human populations from North Eurasia: Caucasians Republic of Iran. (Russians and Germans (from Altai region)), Central Asian Mongoloids One of the smallest human chromosomes is the Y chromosome with (Altaians, Khakasses, Tuvinians and Shorians) and Arctic Mongoloids an average size of 60 Mb. Exchanges is limited to small pseudoauto- (Chukchi). Highly significant differences between populations in geno- somal regions of the X-Y pair between X and Y chromosomes in the type, allele and haplotype frequencies for these SNPs were detected. meiosis. The Y chromosome in most of its length is male-specific and Moreover, we found that these frequencies correlate not only with the effectively haploid and is transmitted from father to his son unchanged ethnicity of the populations but also with their differential exposure to unless a mutational event takes place. TBEV during their evolution. For example, G/G genotype for OAS3 Y chromosome-specific STRs have proved to be an important tool in gene rs2072136 SNP (that according to our previously obtained data paternity cases, especially when the alleged father is deceased, as “predispose” to severe TBEV-induced disease) was found with the well as forensic and non-forensic fields. lowest frequencies in Altaians, Khakasses, Tuvinians and Shorians Blood samples were collected from 135 randomly selected, unrelated who highly contacted with TBEV during their ethnogenesis. Thus, data Iranian males, following procedures that are in accordance with Pro- obtained allow to suppose that TBEV might act as a selection factor in mega kit and FTA Cards. these populations. All 17 (DYS19, DYS389I, DYS389II, DYS390, DYS391, DYS392, DYS393, DYS385a/b, DYS438, DYS439, DYS437, DYS448, DYS458, J10.02 Analysis of genetic polymorphism of tcF7L2 gene of DYS456, DYS635, and Y-GATA-H4) markers were co-amplified us- elderly people, residents of besieged Leningrad. ing the AmpFlSTR Y-filerTM PCR Amplification kit(Applied Biosystems, M. A. Glebova1,2, O. S. Glotov1,2, L. V. Turjeva1, L. P. Khorohinina1, V. S. USA).The amplified products were separated by capillary electropho- Baranov1,2; resis on ABI Prism 3130 XL Genetic Analyzer. The sample run data 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian were analyzed by GeneMapper IDX Software V. 1.0. Allele frequencies Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian were estimated. Haplotype diversity was calculated by Nei‘s formula. Federation. To determine of other parameters we are using Arlequin software and TCF7L2 gene encodes a high mobility group (HMG) box-containing also the online AMOVA tool from YHRD.org3.0 for y-STR haplotyping. transcription factor that plays a key role in the Wnt signaling pathway. Allele frequencies in our study are similar to reported allele frequen- This protein implicates in blood glucose homeostasis. Genetic variants cies in Iranian population on Y-STR haplotype databases. In this study of this gene are associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes, insu- we found some new mutation as off-ladder which most of them are lin resistance. We suggest that ability of this gene to play a part in stor- located on DYS458 marker. age of energy could help to survive of besieged Leningrad residents. Using RFLP method polymorphism of TCF7L2 (rs7903146, IVS3C>T) P10.64 Hints of positive selection in the promoter of the gene of 97 elderly people was analyzed. This polymorphism was in- coagulation Factor Vii gene in populations of Asian descent vestigated in 2 groups: 26 elderly people were survived in condition G. Athanasiadis1, M. Gayà-Vidal1, E. Esteban1, R. Carreras-Torres1, J. of besieged Leningrad (Group1) and 71 elderly people (group2) from Dugoujon2, M. Gibert2, P. Moral1; North-West region of Russia. Distribution of genotypes of TCF7L2 1Unitat d’Antropologia, Dpt. de Biologia Animal, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat gene was significantly different between groups (p=0.046, df=2). In- de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CNRS and University Toulouse III Paul creasing of T allele in group1 compared with group2 (26.9% and 12%, Sabatier, Toulouse, France. accordantly, χ2=6.34, p=0.01) was founded. Background.- Immoderate blood clotting constitutes a risk factor for It could be speculated that person with certain T allele of TCF7L2 cardiovascular disease in modern industrialised societies, but is be- genes has some metabolic advantages for longer survival in condition lieved to have conferred a survival advantage, i.e. faster recovery from of besieged Leningrad. Further it is necessary to perform studies of bleeding, on our ancestors. more numerous groups of different age to estimate the role of age- Aim.- Here, we investigate the evolutionary history of Coagulation regulating genes in condition of besieged Leningrad. Factor VII gene (F7) through the analysis of 5 mutations from the F7 promoter associated with the risk for cardiovascular diseases, as well J10.03 Analysis of TGFβ1 gene polymorphism in Balkan as 6 neutral SNPs from the flanking region in 3 populations of Asian Endemic Nephropathy descent (Bolivian Quechuas and Aymaras and Siberian Yakuts). Z. M. Krcunovic1, I. Novakovic1, D. Cvetkovic2, N. Maksimovic1, D. Bukvic3, S. Methods.- A total of 133 individuals were typed with the iPLEX™ Gold Simic-Ogrizovic4, S. Jankovic5, L. Djukanovic4; assay on the Sequenom MassARRAY® Platform for the 11 polymor- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Biology, Belgrade, phisms. Population differentiation and selection tests were performed Serbia, 3Institute of Endemic Nephropathy, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Institute of and linkage disequilibrium patterns were investigated. Nephrology CCS, Belgrade, Serbia, 5Institute of Epidemiology, Belgrade, Results.- No linkage disequilibrium between adjacent mutations -402 Serbia. and -401 was observed in any of the samples, while the long-range Balkan endemic nephropathy (BEN) is a multifactorial disorder with haplotype test detected a potential signal of positive selection for the still unexplained hereditary component. Similarity of BEN and cyclo- F7 promoter in the Native Americans, as well as the Yakuts. sporine nephropathy suggests possible common ethiopathogenetic Conclusion.- Our data suggest that, in contrast with published data mechanisms. Considering the role of transforming growth factor β1 from the Mediterranean region, the F7 promoter may have undergone (TGFβ1) in kidney disease, and the link to renin-angiotensin-aldoste- positive selection in at least some populations of Asian descent. rone system (RAAS), we performed analysis of G915C polymorphism in TGFβ1 in BEN patients. It is known that the less common C allele of J10.01 Variability in the 2‘-5‘-oligoadenylate synthetase gene the TGFβ1 polymorphism is associated with a lower TGFß1 production cluster in human populations from North Eurasia capacity. A. V. Barkhash1, V. N. Babenko1, V. F. Kobzev1, A. G. Romaschenko1, M. I. The study was carried out in a group of 50 patients with BEN diagno- Voevoda1,2; sis according to criteria of Danilovic, derived from endemic region in 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute Kolubara district, Serbia. Two control groups consisted of 50 healthy of Internal Medicine, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. persons (C) and of 45 patients with other nephropathies (NBEN), both 2‘-5‘-oligoadenylate synthetases (2‘-5‘OAS) are a family of interferon- matched by age and gender. DNA for gene analysis was extracted induced enzymes which play an important role in the antiviral defense from peripheral blood leukocytes. For detection of TGFβ1 G915C gene Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 27 polymorphism PCR/RFLPS method was used. TGFβ1 serum level and A.actinomycetemcomitans & not among Porphyromonas gingivalis urine excretion in some patients were also measured by ELISA. & Prevotella spp. There were no significant difference between the We found that frequency of TGFβ1 CC genotype was 33.33%, 14.29% overall frequencies of carrying allele 2 of IL-l A, IL-1B among smoker and 33.33% in BEN, C and NBEN group, respectively. Our results and non-smokers. The percentage of non smokers having healthy showed significantly higher frequency of TGFβ1 CC genotype in both periodontal status was much higher than smokers. On the other hand, BEN and NBEN group than in C group. There was correlation between smokers recorded much higher percentage for mild, moderate and se- TGFβ1 genotypes and serum levels of that growth factor. vere periodontitis. The difference was statistically significant concern- The obtained results indicate the significant role of immune mecha- ing the percentage of those with severe periodontitis. nisms in emergency of kidney diseases such as BEN and other ne- Conclusion: Environmental factors play either a direct (i.e., causative phropathies, and could help the further investigation of genetic factors factor) or indirect (modifying factor) role as a risk factor for periodonti- that contribute to BEN pathogenesis. tis. The association between genetic polymorphism of allele 2 of IL-l A, IL-1B expression & smoking habits caused a synergistic effect for pro- J10.04 the combination of rare alleles of some gene gression of periodontitis. Smoking initiated A.actinomycetemcomitans polymorphism in children and adolescence with risk factors of growth. cardio Vascular Disease (cVD) A. Khmyrova1, A. Vasina2, P. Sinitsyn3, I. Moreno3, E. Kobysia4, I. Yubrina4, O. J10.06 ANALYsis OF POLYmORPHism At tHREE NUcLEAR Kononova1, L. Lubashova1, T. Razorenova5, V. Larionova1; GENOmE DNA LOci iN UiGURs 1St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian G. M. Berezina1, A. G. Bayisbekova2, G. S. Svyatova1, Z. S. Makhmutova1; Federation, 2St.Petersburg State Pavlov University, Saint-Petersburg, 1The Scientific Center of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology, Almaty, Russian Federation, 3The Russian State Medical University, Moskow, Russian Kazakhstan, 2The Institute of Molecular Medicine, Almaty, Kazakhstan. Federation, 4St.Petersburg State Mechnikov Academy, Saint-Petersburg, The polymorphic nuclear locus in human genome are the objective Russian Federation, 5Military Medical Museum, Saint-Petersburg, Russian genetic markers for the analysis of hereditary polymorphism of the Federation. modern human populations and evolution. Objectives. To study rare alleles of gene polymorphisms intron4 eNOS, A total of 131 unrelated healthy Uigur people of Kazakhstan were stud- I/DACE, W64RADRB3, Q/E2ADRB2, G/R16ADRB2, G-75AApoA1, ied. In lust studies the genotypes and allelic frequencies of ACE, PV92, C+83TApoA1, SstApoC3, S19WApoA5, TRA25, APOA1, YaNBC148, YaNBC27, CCR5 genes were revealed. -1131T<CApoA5 distribution in children and adolescents with risk fac- The distribution of the empirical genotypes and allelic frequencies and tors of CVD. the indexes of heterozygosity of all genes were completely conformed Study population. We included 100 children and adolescence, whose to theoretical of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p>0,05), except for PV92 parents suffered SVBD and having risk factors of CVD, age of 5-17 gene (χ2=10,6; p<0,001), for TPA25 gene (χ2=5,1; p<0,001), for YaN- years (68 males,32 females). BC148 gene (χ2=5,1; p<0,001). Control group included 145 children and adolescents (73 males, 72 The genotypes and allelic frequencies of TNFa gene were: GG - females) of the same age. 36.6%; AA - 1.5%; GA - 61.8%; G - 67.6%; A - 32.4%. The frequencies Methods. The analysis of intron4 eNOS, I/DACE gene polymor- of TP53 gene’s genotypes and alleles were: PP - 38,2%, AA - 15,3%, phisms was performed by PCR. G-75AApoA1, C+83T ApoA1, SstA- AP - 46,6%, P - 61,5%, A - 38,5%; and of ITGB3 gene’s were: LL - poC3, S19WApoA5, -1131T<CApoA5, W64RADRB3, Q/E27ADRB2, 19,1%, PP - 10,7%, LP - 70,2%, L - 54,2%, P - 45,8%. G/R16ADRB2 gene polymorphisms were determined by PCR-LRFP The frequencies of TP53 gene’s genotypes were corresponded to Har- method. dy-Weinberg equilibrium completely (p>0,05); the genotypes of TNFa Results. Significant differences were detected between the groups in and TGB3 gene’s frequencies weren’t corresponded to Hardy-Wein- frequency of Q/E27ADRB2 gene polymorphism Q27-allele 0,57 vs 0,44 berg equilibrium (χ2=20,3; p<0,0001 for TNFa and χ2=20,9; p<0,0001 1 2 and E27-allele 0,43 vs 0,56 (n=100 vs n=145 respectively ;p=0,02) for ITGB3 gene). Results of combination of rare alleles investigated gene polymorphisms Thus, the results of our research are evidence of the probable com- are: one rare allele - 2% vs 17,9%, 2 rare alleles- 17% vs22,1%, 3 rare pound ethnic history of Uigur people. alleles - 29% vs 25,5% , 4 rare alleles 26% vs 15,2,%,5 rare alleles - 13% vs 6,2%, 6 rare alleles 12% vs 4,1%, 7 rare alleles 1% vs 0%, J10.07 A short tandem repeat polymorphism in the inducible 8 rare allele 0% vs 0,7% (n=100 vs n=145 resp.). In control group 9% nitric oxide synthase gene in Buryat and Russian populations. of children and adolescence haven’t rare alleles of investigated gene E. E. Tymkovskaya1, N. V. Petrova1, T. A. Vasilyeva1, R. A. Zinchenko1, B. T. polymorphism. Batajargalova2, J. L. Mizernitskiy3; Conclusions: In group of children and adolescence, whose parents 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, suffered SVD and having risk factors of CVD, frequency of E27 al- 2Children‘s polyclinic № 2, Chita, Russian Federation, 32- Moscow Research lele gene polymorphism Q/E27ADRB2 was higher. Combination of 3-6 Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. rare alleles investigated polymorphisms can be considered as addi- Nitric oxide (NO), an important molecule in various biologic processes tional risk of CVD. that include airway inflammation is synthesized from L-arginine by iso- forms of NO synthase (NOS). Overproduction of nitric oxide (NO) by J10.05 the impact of genetic variability and smoking habits on inducible NO synthase (iNOS) has been implicated in the pathogen- the prevalence of periodontitis among adults esis of several diseases including airway inflammation of asthma. A F. S. Bayoumi, F. M. Metwaly, H. M. Rashad, E. H. Abouel-Ezz.; highly polymorphic pentanucleotide (CCTTT)n repeat located in the National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. iNOS gene promoter region has been shown to be functionally impor- Aim : Elucidate the effect of genetic variance of inflammatory media- tant in the regulation of iNOS transcription. tors expression ,the influence of microbial expression, and smoking as Genotype and allele frequency of (CCTTT)n repeat in the promoter re- a risk factors for periodontitis gion of the iNOS gene, were analyzed in 90 healthy Buryat individu- Material &Methods: Sample of this study composed of 50 smokers & als and in 107 Russian individuals. The Buryats are the ethnic minority 50 non smoker volunteers (unrelated and of the same ethnic popu- group of Siberia, which belongs to Mongolic group and the Russians lation) with 40-60 years old .Their periodontal status was estimated belong to East Slavic peoples. We have identified significant difference through periodontal examination ( full mouth clinical attachment loss in allele frequencies of repeats between these ethnic groups. In Rus- measurement ,probing depths ,plaque index scores, and bleed- sians 7 alleles with 9-15 repeats were identified, whereas 10 alleles with ing on probing). Isolation and detection of certain oral pathogens; 10-19 repeats were revealed in Buryats. The most common allele in A.actinomycetemcomitans , Porphyromonas gingivalis ,and Provetella Russians was 12-repeats (26,6%), in Buryats was 14-repeats (13,9%). intermedia was performed . Genotype for bi-allelic IL-1A+4845, IL- Alleles of 17, 18 and 19 repeats were detected only in Buryat samples. lB+3954 gene polymorphisms using mouth wash was detected by According to literature data 17-repeats, 18-repeats and 19-repeats had PCR based methods. been reported previously in Chinese population and had not been re- Results: There were a significant difference only between the two ported in Caucasians. The panel and the frequencies of studied iNOS groups (smokers &non-smokers) as regards to colonization of alleles in Russian sample correspond to those ones in Caucasians.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 J10.08 Distribution of the ABO Blood Groups and RH in determined in Kazakhs. KAZAKH. We have found that more than 55% of mtDNA lineages belong to M. S. Kirikbayeva1, G. M. Berezina1, A. M. Kalimagambetov2; East-Eurasian specific hgs (D, C, G, A, M, F). The supercluster D was 1The Scientific Center of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology, Almaty, found with high frequency (18,1%). The frequencies of the hgs were: Kazakhstan, 2Kazakh national university name of al-Farabi, Almaty, C - 9,5%, G - 6,6%), A -3,0%; M -2,6%; F -3,6% were determined in Kazakhstan. Kazakhs. The gene pool of any ethnic group it is a result of centuries-old genetic The Western-Eurasian specific hgs (H, T, J, K, U2, U5, HV) were ob- significant demographic transformations. Therefore it is represented served in Kazakhs with frequency 41%. Hg H was found with frequen- interesting to carry out research of genetic structure of population of cy 14,1% . The frequencies of the hgs T (3,9%), J (3,6%), U5 (3,0%), Zhambyl raion (district) of Almaty region of Kazakhstan on blood type K (2,6%), W (1,6%) V (0,7%) and I (0,3%) were found in Kazakhs ABO and Rhesus factor markers. Research materials: archival records populations. of the Kazakh patients of the hospital of Zhambyl raion of Almaty re- We studied 5 polymorphic locus of Alu-insertion : ACE, TPA25, PV92, gion (N =3112). APOA1, NBC27 in population of Kazakhs (n=224). We observed fre- The parity allele’s ABO is presented by the formula: ABO*O > ABO*A quencies of insertion for ACE, APOA1, PV92, TPA25, NBC27, and > ABO*B > ABO *AB. In the Kazakh population the phenotypes fre- their frequencies were respectively 51,3 %, 85% ,52,7%,48,4 %,28,3 quency were as follows: ABO*O = 36.18%, ABO*A = 30,17%, ABO*B % in Kazakhs. = 25.42%, ABO*AB = 8.23% and RH*d = 1.06%. In the rural popula- The obtained data may prove useful in studies of ethnogenetic history tion the alleles frequencies were as follows ABO*O = 0.599; ABO*A = of Kazakhs. The obtained data allowed us to construct a phylogenetic 0.215; ABO*B = 0.185 and RH*d = 0.103. In Kazakh population the tree for Kazakhs on female lineage and to detect position of the stud- heterozygosity (h) indices in respect to the ABO and RH alleles were ied population between ethnic groups in Europe and Asia. e 0.560 and 0.185, respectively. The rural population of Zhambyl raion the heterozygosity indices in re- J10.11 mtDNA and Y-chromosomal variation in populations of spect to the ABO and RH alleles were lower than the some rural popu- sakha (Yakutia) lations of Almaty region. Nevertheless, distribution of the phenotypes S. A. Fedorova1, E. K. Khusnutdinova2; frequency of the ABO and RH keeps within the variations peculiar to 1Yakut Research Center of RAMS, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of the population Central and the Central Asia, in some cases coincides Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. with those variations on the people of the Eastern Europe and Forward We have characterized, at high phylogenetic resolution, mtDNA Asia, but the heterozygosity were differs for Russian of Moscow and variation (n=694) and Y chromosome haplotypes diversity (n=318) in Ukrainians of Donetsk region. populations of Sakha (Yakutia) -the Autonomous Republic situated in northeastern part of the Russian Federation that comprises 1/5 part of J10.09 the i/D polymorphism of AcE gene may be involved in Russia’s total land area. The results were analyzed in a broader con- the left ventricular (LV) remodeling process text of the Eurasian mtDNA and Y-chromosomal variability. Extended S. V. Kuzmina1, M. A. Bogdanova2, A. N. Voitovich2, O. S. Romashkina2, O. A. analysis confirms that Yakutia was colonized from the regions west and Mutafyan1, V. I. Larionova2; eastward of Lake Baikal with minor gene flow from Lower Amur/South- 1St.Petersburg State Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, Saint- ern Okhotsk region and/or Kamchatka. The genetic portraits of studied Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical ethnic groups (Sakha or Yakuts, Evenks, Evens, Yukaghirs, Dolgans) Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. were obtained and scenarios of ethnogenesis suggested by historians Background: LV remodeling is the manifestation of a target organ and archaeologists were compared with genetic reconstructions. We damage from arterial hypertension (AH). The role of renin-angiotensin considered our results in connection with some epidemiologic and mo- system (RAS) genes in the remodeling process has been studied in lecular genetic researches of hereditary diseases characterized by a adults. high prevalence in the region such as spinocerebellar ataxia type 1, The aim of this study was to evaluate the RAS gene polymorphism in myotonic dystrophy, 3-M syndrome. LV remodeling process in children with AH. Methods: 82 children aged 5-17 with systolic AH were studied. LV J10.12 The C677T and A1298C Mutations in the mass was calculated by Devereux formula. LV mass index was calcu- methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase Gene among the Kazakh lated by dividing LV mass by height2.7. The sex-specific 95th percentile Population for LV mass index in normal children and adolescents was used as Z. S. Makhmutova, G. S. Svyatova, G. M. Berezina; a cutpoint (Daniels et al., 1995). Relative wall thickness was consid- The Scientific center of obstetric, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, ered abnormal when it was 0.41. The I/D polymorphism of ACE gene, Kazakhstan. M235T polymorphism of AGT gene, and A1166C polymorphism of The presence of the C677T and A1298C mutations in the methylene- AGTR1 gene were detected with PCR-RFLP. tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene has been regarded as a ge- Results: Concentric LV remodeling was found in 7 (9%) patients, con- netic risk factor for neural tube defects, some complication during the centric hypertrophy - in 6 (7%), eccentric hypertrophy - in 10 (12%), pregnancy and coronary artery disease. and normal LV geometry - in 59 (72%) patients. The genotype DD The prevalence of their mutations has been reported from various frequency of I/D polymorphism of ACE gene was significantly higher populations. We have investigated the frequencies of MTHFR muta- in children with concentric LV remodeling compared to children with tions in 303 unrelated Kazakhs and compared our results with the find- normal LV geometry (57% vs 22% p < 0.05). No significant difference ings of other researchers. The frequencies of C677T mutation were: was found between genotypes and allele frequency of both AGT and CC - 59,1%, CT - 39,4% and TT - 1,6%. Kazakh population, as well AGTR1 gene polymorphism in patient according to their LV geometry. as Canadian Inuit, South African and sub-Saharan African, show the Conclusion: LV remodeling was found in 23 (28%) of hypertensive chil- lowest TT genotype in this study. According to a previous report of dren. We suggested that the I/D polymorphism of ACE gene may be other authors the Mexican population has a highest frequency of TT involved in the LV remodeling process. genotype (34,8%). The frequencies of A1298C mutation of Kazakh were: AA -55,2%, AC - 38,4% and CC - 6,4%. The prevalence of CC J10.10 tHE ANALYsis OF tHE GENE POOL OF KAZAKH homozygosis wasn‘t rare amongst Kazakhs and hasn’t significant dif- G. S. Svyatova, G. M. Berezina; ferences from other world populations. The Scientific Centre of Obstetric, Gynecology and Perinatology, Almaty, In addition we revealed the frequencies of MTHFR mutations in 84 Kazakhstan. women with fetuses with various neural tube defects. The frequencies The goal of the present research was: to study the polymorphism of of C677T mutation were: CC -48,8%, CT -42,9% and TT - 8,3%. The mitochondrial DNA and DNA of the nuclear genes in Kazakh popula- frequencies of A1298C mutation Kazakh were: AA -44,0%, AC - 41,7% tion. and CC -14,3%. Thus, homozygosity for C677T and A1298C muta- We have analyzed the 129 polymorphic positions, 44 different hap- tions in the MTHFR gene may be a possible genetic risk factor for logroups (hg) of mtDNA of 304 Kazakh mtDNA samples. The variability neural tube defects in the Kazakh population. index of haplotypes was 0,99 and the 80,7% unicum haplotypes were Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 J10.13 Research of hereditary ophthalmopathology of the Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, Rostov Region, Russia. Romania. O. L. Kireeva1, S. S. Amelina2, O. V. Khlebnikova1, R. &. Zinchenko1; Several genetic investigations have been attempted to elucidate the 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, association of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene polymor- 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Rostov, Russian Federation. phism and arterial hypertension.The essential role of the renin-angio- A genetically epidemiological examining of the population of Rostov tensin system (RAS) in controlling blood pressure has been well estab- Region (twelve districts) was implemented. Total size of investigated lished. Genes encoding components of the RAS have been proposed populations was 454524 persons (90% Russians). The research was as candidate genes that determine genetic predisposition to hyperten- conducted under the original protocol, providing for detection of more sion. The purpose of this study was to analyze angiotensin-converting than 2500 various hereditary diseases and syndromes, including all enzyme (ACE) insertion/deletion (I/D) polymorphisms in romanian hy- hereditary ophthalmopathology. Hereditary eye pathology is a large pertensive children in Mures region. Twenty hypertensive children (1- heterogeneous group of genetic diseases with different prevalence 17 years old, blood pressure ≥95th percentile for age, sex and height) rate in various populations. Hereditary diseases eye were diagnosed and a control group of thirty normotensive children were included in as isolated ones, and they were also a part of hereditary diseases and the study. We analyzed the ACE gene I/D polymorphism by using a syndromes. Prevalence rate of isolated hereditary eye diseases was polymerase chain reaction assay, and agarose gel electrophoresis 4,6 (with variation for districts from 0,5 to 9,6 per 10000 of population). system. The results of the study showed that the frequency of DD, ID The most frequent hereditary pathology eye was retina degeneration and II genotypes were 21,43%, 42,86% and 35,71 % in hypertensive the prevalence rate of which made up 1,3 (with variation for districts group respectively 46,67%, 43,33% and 10 % in control group with from 0,2 to 4,5 per 10000). Various forms of congenital cataracts (cata- significantly higher frequency of II genotype in patients as compared ract lamellar, cataract-microcornea synrome, microphthalmia with cat- to the control group. The frequency of ACE II genotype in patients with aract) were ranked second as per their prevalence. Total prevalence secondary hypertension (35.71%) was significantly higher than in con- rate there of was 1,3 (from 0,2 to 2,8 per 10000). Prevalence rate of trols (6,67%) in the men. This result suggested that ACE II genotype congenital monogenic malformations of eye was as follows: coloboma may be associated with secondary hypertension in the men, not in the of iris 0,2 (with variation for districts from 0,2 to 1,3 per 10000), aniridia women, and showed the possibility of ACE II genotype as a potent 0,1 (from 0,2 to 1,7 per 10000), ptosis hereditary congenital 0,5 (from risk factor for secondary hypertension for the men not for the women. 0,2 to 2,1 per 10000). Ehlers-Danlos, Marfan, Usher, Sturge-Weber Acknowledgments: This study was supported by a CNCSIS Grant - syndromes, osteogenesis imperfect were the most frequent mono- 137/2008 for Young PhD, Romania. genic syndromes followed by eye pathology. Prevalence of hereditary diseases of retina and congenital cataracts in the Rostov region turned P11.002 study of the AcVR1 gene expression and regulation. out higher than in other previously examined populations of Russia. M. Mura1, F. Giacopelli1, S. Cappato1, R. Ravazzolo1,2, R. Bocciardi1; 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, J10.14 Analysis of uncoupling protein 2 and 3 genes 2University of Genoa and CEBR, Genoa, Italy. polymorphisms in elderly people, residents of besieged ACVR1 encodes a BMP type I receptor mutated in Fibrodysplasia Os- Leningrad. sificans Progressiva, a severe form of heterotopic ossification. Mecha- I. V. Tarkovskaya1,2, O. S. Glotov1,2, L. P. Khoroshinina1, V. S. Baranov1,2; nisms regulating ACVR1 expression are still unknown. According to 1Ott‘s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russia, data available in GenBank, ACVR1 has two main transcripts differing St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St-Petersburg State University, St- for their 5’UTR end. Our bioinformatic analysis of the genomic region Petersburg, Russia, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. containing the gene reveals the presence of several ESTs, predicting Our goal was to investigate whether polymorphisms in UCP2 and the existence of multiple transcripts in which different 5’UTR exons UCP3 genes influence life expectancy. UCP2 and UCP3 belong to mi- are combined to a common coding sequence. The 3’UTR region is tochondrial carrier protein family of genes which provides opportunity common to all transcripts and contains AU-rich elements and putative, to study thermogenesis in humans. These genes supervise heat ex- well-conserved binding sites for miRNAs. change which influences preservation of energy necessary not only for Following the above prediction, we found transcripts with different living, but also survival in extremely situations. exon composition at the 5’UTR and show their expression profile in We have analyzed UCP2 Ala55Val and UCP3 C-55T polymorphisms different tissues. These data suggest complex regulation, with different by RLFP method of 133 elderly people (group 1) and also of elderly 46 transcription start sites and promoter regions and possible elements residents of besieged Leningrad (group 2) from North-West Region of controlling transcript stability or translation. Russia. Distribution of genotypes of UCP2 gene was significantly dif- Functional analysis of the 3’UTR region by Luciferase reporter as- ferent between groups (p=0.032, df=2). Increasing of Ala allele in group says revealed a negative role in gene expression. ACVR1 transcript, 1 compared with group 2 (23.3% and 6,5%, accordantly, χ2=6.26, assessed by quantitative PCR after treatment with inhibitors of tran- p=0.012) was founded. No significant different between genotypes of scription, appeared unstable. We show experiments that demonstrate the C-55T polymorphisms in the UCP3 gene was found. However, we negative regulation by miRNAs: transfection of Pre-miR miRNA Pre- are registered increasing frequency of T allele in group 1 compared cursor Molecules in presence or absence of specific Anti-miR miRNA with group 2 (33,8% and 26,1%, accordantly, p=0.098). Inhibitors showed an effect of mir-365, -148b, -384, -381 on ACVR1 Consequently we suggest that UCP2 Ala55Val polymorphisms are sig- transcript, quantified by quantitative PCR. nificant for survival. It also seems interesting that Val allele which is as- Our results highlight the complexity of transcriptional and post tran- sociated with reduced thermogenesis is prevalence in elderly residents scriptional regulation of ACVR1 gene expression. of besieged Leningrad. On the basis of these results we suppose that those who have Ala allele, have less charge of heat. P11.003 correlation Between transposon-Derived Repeats and markers of Germline methylation in the Human Genome M. I. Sigurdsson1,2, A. V. Smith3, H. T. Bjornsson4,5, J. J. Jonsson1,2; P11 Genomics, Genomic technology 1Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Dept. of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali - University including bioinformatics methods, gene Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Icelandic Heart Association, Reykjavik, Iceland, structure and gene product function and 4McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University Epigenetics School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5Harriet Lane Pediatric Residency Program, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, P11.001 Genetic analysis of AcE polymorphisms in children MD, United States. with secondary high blood pressure A potential relationship between transposon-derived repeats (TDR) C. Duicu1, C. Banescu2, E. Kiss1, V. Bodescu1, I. Muntean3; and human germline methylation is of biological importance since it 1Pediatric Department No 2, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, could affect the expression and function of nearby genes. Further- Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania, 2Genetic Department, University of Medicine more, DNA methylation has been proposed to serve as a defense and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania, 3Third Cardiology mechanism against genome stability threats posed by TDR. Using a Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 270 recently published marker of germline methylation, density of HapMap data generated on capillary electrophoresis instruments using frag- methyl-associated SNPs (mSNPS), we studied the correlation of the ment analysis software tools. We will demonstrate how key features in marker and regional proportion of TDR. After correcting for confound- the software, such as sample quality values, allele binning and report ers, we found a strong negative correlation between proportion of Alu analysis, enable this workflow to be a significant improvement over repeats and mSNP density for 125-1000 kb windows. However the traditional detection methods. correlation between the proportion of L1 repeats and mSNP density For Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or human thera- was negligible in 125-500 kb windows, but strong and negative for peutic or diagnostic use. the largest 1000 kb windows. Using bisulfite sequencing methylation data from the Human Epigenome Project on sperm, the final product P11.006 Two new cases of 6q16 microdeletion: clinical findings of the male germline, we found a lower proportion of Alu repeats ad- and cognitive profile associated jacent (3-15 kb) to hypomethylated amplicons. In contrast, we found a C. Orellana1,2, J. Bernabeu3,2, M. P. Roselló1, S. Monfort1, S. Mayo1, S. Oltra1, higher proportion of L1 repeats adjacent (3-5 kb) to hypermethylated R. Quiroga1, F. Martínez1; amplicons. 1Unidad de Genetica. Hospital Universitario La Fe, VALENCIA, Spain, Our results indicate that DNA methylation is unlikely to be a global 2Departamento MIDE. Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 3Unidad de defense system against genome stability threats by TDR. Although a Oncología Pediátrica. Hospital Universitario La Fe, VALENCIA, Spain. cause-and effect relationship should not be determined using correla- Introduction: most patients with interstitial deletion at 6q16 showed hy- tion data, we offer the most parsimonious explanation of our results. It potonia and developmental delay, some of them have also a Prader- suggests the germline insertion of the two major human repeat families Willi-like phenotype with obesity. Here we present detailed clinical and (L1 and Alu) into hypomethylated regions. This is followed by post-in- cognitive findings in two new patients with 6q16 microdeletion. sertional methylation of sequences adjacent to L1 repeats or post-in- Material and methods: whole genome array-CGH was performed on sertional selection against L1 repeats in hypomethylated regions. Agilent oligo-chip 44K. Microsatellite markers were used to confirm the array-CGH findings. A number of neuropsychological tests were per- P11.004 iron/copper metabolism in mild cognitive impairment formed to establish the cognitive-behavioural profile of the patients. (mci) and Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) Results: in a series of 200 patients with mental retardation associated M. Martins1,2, Â. Crespo2,3, L. Marques3, E. Marcelino1, C. Maruta1, S. Costa4, with congenital anomalies, we found two patients with an interstitial de- Â. Timóteo4, F. S. Couto1, A. Herrero4, A. Verdelho1, M. Guerreiro1, C. Costa4, A. letion in 6q16. Both deletions occurred de novo in the paternal chromo- de Mendonça1, L. Costa3; some, and are very similar in size (9-10 Mb) and position (from posi- 1Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de tion 93,932,682 to 104,244,422). Detailed cognitive-behavioural profile Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 3Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, showed interesting similarities with a generalized cognitive deficit in all Lisbon, Portugal, 4Hospital Fernando Fonseca, Amadora, Portugal. the tested areas specially in language and fine motor skills tasks. In Alzheimer’s disease is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disease. behaviour highlights: cognitive slowing and attention deficits. Patients with MCI are at higher risk for progressing to dementia of the Discussion: The clinical characteristics of these two new cases of 6q16 Alzheimer type, and therefore represent an important population to un- deletion are compared with those previously reported cases with simi- derstand AD and early neurodegeneration mechanisms. lar deletions. We also propose that this anomaly could be associated In this study, we further investigated the implication of the redox-active with a characteristic cognitive-behavioural profile. biometals, copper (Cu) and iron (Fe) imbalance in the oxidative injury hypothesis of AD pathogenesis by: (I) comparing serum biochemical P11.007 Fine-mapping analysis of the 5q35 region through a markers of Fe/Cu metabolism in a sample of 73 AD patients, 24 MCI 60K customized cGH-array in patients with sotos syndrome. patients and 60 controls; (II) testing, in the same sample, a set of Fe/Cu J. NEVADO1, E. Vallespin1, P. Arias1, M. Palomares1, A. García-Cazorla2, E. metabolism-related genes and APOE for association with MCI/AD. Geans3, A. Rodriguez4, V. Soler5, M. Del Campo6, L. Perez-Jurado6, E. Guillen7, Significant differences were found between AD patients and con- A. Martinez-Carrascal8, P. Lapunzina1; trols for serum Fe concentration (p=0.001) and transferrin saturation 1INGEMM-IdiPaz/CIBERER-Madrid (HULP), MADRID, Spain, 2S. Neurología, (p=0.007). A significant association with AD was found for TF - trans- Hospital San Juan de Dios, Barcelona, Spain, 3S. Genética, Hospital San Juan ferrin gene (p=0.0082) and for the first time for SLC40A1 - ferroportin de Dios, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Donostia, San Sebastian, Spain, 5Hospital (Fpn) gene (p=0.0355). APOEε4 was also significantly associated with de Madrid, Montepríncipe, MADRID, Spain, 6Unitat de Genética, Hospital del AD (p=0.0004), in agreement with previous studies. Statistical analysis Vall de Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain, 7Hospital de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, is underway for the MCI population. 8Hospital de Requena, Requena, Valencia, Spain. We hypothesize that the lower serum Fe concentration observed in AD Sotos syndrome is an overgrowth disorder characterized by exces- patients can be due to impaired Fe excretion from cells, since Fpn is sive growth during childhood, macrocephaly, distinctive facial gestalt, the only known Fe exporter in mammalian cells. The intracellular accu- learning difficulty and other variable minor features. The diagnosis is mulation of Fe, particularly in the brain, where Fpn is also expressed, suspected after birth because of excessive height and head circum- would lead to a rise in oxidative damage, contributing to the AD physio- ference, advanced bone age, hypotonia and feeding difficulties. In pathology. The advent of using a pre-AD state such as MCI may further Europeans, mutations (85%) and deletions (15%) of the NSD1 gene contribute to elucidate the involvement of Fe metabolism in AD. located at chromosome 5q35 (coding for a histone methyltransferase implicated in transcriptional regulation) are responsible for the majority P11.005 An automated analysis protocol for aneuploidy of cases. detection of QF-PCR data generated on capillary electrophoresis Sixteen out of 101 patients with Sotos syndrome have deletions en- instruments compassing the NSD1 gene. All patients were initially diagnosed with E. Currie-Fraser1, S. Sharp1, V. Bansal1, S. Higgins2; a combination of MLPA and/or microsatellite analysis. A customized 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Gen-Probe Life Sciences, 8x60K oligonucleotide CGH array, spanning the 5Mb surrounding the Abington, United Kingdom. NSD1 locus, was designed to evaluate the critical Sotos syndrome Molecular methods for aneuploidy analysis have become important region. tools for the study of chromosome abnormality in conditions such as Four patients had very small deletions (3.8-12.2 Kb) affecting some Down syndrome, Edwards syndrome and Patau syndrome. NSD1 exons (1,2, 5, 9-12) and the remaining individuals showed larg- Researchers who routinely perform this type of research have a need er deletions (0.8-2 Mb) including the entire NSD1 and some neighbour for automation of data analysis and concise report generation. An in- genes. In addition to the classical deletion, one patient also had distal novative strategy for the detection of chromosomal aneuploidy at the 5q35 duplication encompassing ADAMTS2 and TRIM41, suggesting a molecular level is analysis of short tandem repeat markers using quan- different mechanism of rearrangement of the distal chromosome 5. titative fluorescence PCR. Such techniques will help diminish work- Oligonucleotide CGH-array is a useful tool for fine-mapping analysis of flow bottlenecks introduced by more time consuming, conventional the 5q35 region in patients with Sotos syndrome and microdeletions. research methods. This poster will present an automated procedure Partial, small deletions of the NSD1 gene and large deletions affecting for analysis and report generation for aneuploidy detection of chro- other genes can be correctly diagnosed with this technology. Further mosomes 13, 18, 21, and of sex chromosomes X and Y, in sample comparative studies of patients with well characterized genotype, phe-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 271 notype and microdeletion sizes and breakpoints will help to determine erned by the presence of specific cis-regulatory regions (cis-motifs) possible influence of clinical outcomes. residing within the promoter region of genes and the functional interac- tions between the products of specific regulatory genes (transcription P11.008 The study of DNA methylation patterns in the forkhead factors-TFs) and these cis-motifs. Bioinformatic tools can be utilised to transcription factor (Foxp3) gene in asthmatics and controls formulate putative predictions on how specific cis-motifs may influence S. Zeilinger1, N. Klopp1, H. Baurecht2, E. Rodriguez2, T. Illig1; the expression patterns of specific genes or groups of genes (e.g. iron 1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research metabolism pathway). Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Division of Method: Environmental Dermatology and Allergy, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich and • Retrieve 2kb 5-prime UTR (promoter) sequences from the human ZAUM-Center for Allergy and Environment, Technische Universität München, Ensembl database. Munich, Germany. • Conserved Nucleotide Sequence (CNS) analysis of promoter regions Background: DNA methylation is the most frequent and stable form of using specific software tools (e.g. VISTA). epigenetic modifications. Epidemiological evidence increasingly sug- • Computational analysis and in silico design of promoter models us- gests that environmental exposures early in development have a role ing probabilistic detection methods such as expectation maximization in susceptibility to disease in later life. (MEME). DNA methylation of genes critical to T-helper cell differentiation may in- • Refined analysis and identification of detected motifs analyzed using duce polarization toward or away from an allergic phenotype like asth- TRANSFAC and JASPAR. ma. One of these genes is Foxp3, which is specifically expressed in T Results: Specific and/or combinations of cis-motifs were discovered regulatory cells (Tregs) and plays a central role in Treg development within a CNS identified in the promoter of seven of the tested iron and function. Methylation leads to less Foxp3 expression and reduced genes. Within these motifs, relevant tissue- and pathway-specific TF- Tregs function. Asthma is probably characterized by a deficiency in binding sites were predicted to occur. Tregs allowing TH2 cells to expand. Discussion: Accurate analyses of cis-motif architecture combined with Aim: To investigate the impact of environmental exposures on the integrative in silico modelling (once validated by experimental analy- methylation status of asthma candidate genes and on the develop- sis) could offer insights into complex mechanisms governing tran- ment and severity of asthma phenotypes later in life. scriptional regulation, serving as a refined approach for prediction and Methods: The detection of DNA methylation is based on the ability to study of regulatory targets. distinguish cytosine from 5-methylcytosine in the DNA sequence and is performed through chemical modification of DNA by bisulfit treat- P11.011 Analysis of in-silico tools for the prediction of ment, followed by PCR, base-specific cleavage and analyses of the pathogenesis in missense variants cleaved fragments by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (Sequenom- E. Hellen, A. Devereau; EpiTYPER Software). NGRL Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Results: The methylation patterns of the Foxp3 gene will be investi- Missense variants occurring in disease related genes can often cause gated in a subset of the KORA survey (F4; 100 asthmatics and 100 pathogenesis by mutating the protein product of the gene. However, controls). First results point to no methylation differences in human missense variants can also occur with non-pathogenic effects, coding blood between asthma cases and controls. for amino acid changes which do not significantly affect the protein product. It is often very difficult to determine whether an unknown vari- P11.009 Unblocking the flow of genetic variation data - a variant ant is pathogenic or not. In silico tools can predict the pathogenicity of browser case study a variant based on the change in amino acid. These tools use features G. Dobson, M. Cornell, A. Devereau; such as the evolutionary conservation of the amino acid position or the NGRL, Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. physical characteristics of the amino acids such as size, hydrophobic- As part of the EU framework 7 project Gen2Phen we are working to ity and polarity. provide effective mechanisms to allow genetic variation data to flow Although a large number of tools exist which aim to predict the patho- between systems. There is a large quantity of such data available, genesis of a missense mutation, only a small number of these tools are but it is stored, accessed and presented in heterogeneous ways. In regularly used by laboratory scientists. This study aims to benchmark most cases it is useful for human consumption, but difficult to access these, and other, prediction tools and to provide guidance about which for machines. Moreover, there are social and legal issues involved are the most reliable. which complicate the sharing of this data. With the increasing neces- Ten prediction algorithms have been chosen for the analysis. The sity of automated analyses, and the resulting need to integrate data ability of these tools to accurately predict both pathogenic and non- into a range of bioinformatics applications, it is important to address pathogenic missense mutations was assessed. The performance was this data flow problem. Here, we discuss some of the issues involved assessed using a dataset consisting of 1656 pathogenic variants and and the solutions that the Gen2Phen partners are developing. These 570 non-pathogenic variants, retrieved from locus specific databases include web service interfaces for machine-to-machine communica- (LSDBs) for 26 different genes. The results of the analysis show that tion, a model and format for exchange of variant data and a refer- while some of the tools currently used by laboratories are high per- ence sequence standard which provides a means to record variation forming, other less well known tools may be a useful addition to the in an unambiguous and immutable fashion. We demonstrate the use of bioinformatics analysis of unknown missense variants. these technologies through their integration into a gene browser appli- cation (the NGRL Universal Browser) which provides a unified view of P11.012 Haplotype Specific Amplification in High Throughput variation data from multiple sources. We assess what improvements in tumor sequence Data data flow have been made by comparing with our own experiences of N. Dewal1, M. Freedman2,3, T. LaFramboise4, I. Pe‘er1; performing the same data integration tasks before the contributions of 1Columbia University, New York, NY, United States, 2Dana Farber Cancer Gen2Phen and after. We also identify improvements that could further Institute, Boston, MA, United States, 3Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, streamline the flow of data in the future. United States, 4Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States. P11.010 In silico analyses of promoter regulatory targets in the During tumor progression, culprit genes and variants confer selec- iron metabolism pathway tive advantage to progenitor cancer cells via allowing them to bypass N. J. Strickland, M. G. Zaahl; normal growth control mechanisms. Regions of somatic amplification Department of Genetics, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa. represent one such variant type and are a hallmark of tumor genomics. Aim: Investigate the promoter region of genes of the iron metabolism When integrated with single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) informa- pathway by employing comprehensive bioinformatic analyses, in order tion at the germline level - the second variant type - causal oncogenes to elucidate specific mechanisms of gene regulation. may be localized within such regions. This integration was explored Introduction: The human genome is a system regulated at many differ- previously on SNP arrays using allele specific copy number calls at ent levels. Transcriptional regulation is the first, and arguably the most each marker. However, the relative sparseness of SNP arrays and the important, step in the process of gene expression. This process is gov- fidelity of these calls leave room for improvement. The advent of high Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 272 throughput sequencing technologies provides an exciting opportunity genes, the promoter regions were included as well. So far, 250 patients to examine massive amounts of genomic data at the nucleotide reso- were sequenced for all 34 cardiomyopathy genes. The mutation detec- lution. We propose a novel Hidden Markov Model-based method that tion rate is around 99% and about 98% of the novel exonic variants analyzes tumor sequence data to infer amplified alleles and haplo- can be confirmed by conventional sequence analysis. In addition to types in pre-determined somatically amplified regions. Our method is mutations detected in the 13 genes routinely tested for HCM or DCM, designed to handle biases in read data as well as handle rare variants. we identified mutations in the 21 additional genes, some of which were Furthermore, it utilizes existing information from public repositories, the first for those new candidate genes. We present several families in such as the 1000 Genomes Project, when inferring haplotypes. We which up to 4 pathogenic mutations were identified. thus believe our method will help further the integration of variant types in sequence data and aid the cancer community in identifying causal P11.015 Specific missense mutations affecting the N-terminal variants. region of NiPBL almost completely abolish adherin complex formation with the cohesin-associated protein mAU-2 P11.013 cellular expression of human plakophilin-2 mutations D. Braunholz1, M. Albrecht1, M. C. Gil-Rodríguez1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, J. suggests the involvement of proteolytic degradation in Wilde2, M. A. Deardorff2, F. J. Kaiser1; the disease process of arrhythmogenic right ventricular 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Childrens Hospital, Philadelphia, cardiomyopathy PA, United States. F. Kirchner1, A. Heuser1, L. Thierfelder1, B. Gerull2; Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a dominantly inherited genetic 1Max-Delbrueck Centre for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 2University of disorder. The phenotype is characterized by typical facial features, up- Calgary, Department of Cardiac Sciences, Calgary, AB, Canada. per limb defects, growth and mental retardation. Mutations in the co- Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a geneti- hesin associated factor NIPBL or the highly conserved structural com- cally determined heart muscle disorder characterized by progressive ponents of the cohesin ring SMC1A and SMC3 have been identified in loss of cardiomyocytes and fibro-fatty replacement. The armadillo about 60% of the patients. protein plakophilin-2 (PKP2) has been identified as the most preva- NIPBL directly interacts with MAU-2 to form a heterodimeric complex lent disease gene. To get further insights in the underlying genetic called adherin which regulates the loading and unloading of cohesin mechanisms of these mutations and to investigate their influence on onto chromatin. cellular junctions integrity, protein stability and cell signalling we over- Using two hybrid-based techniques we could narrow down the criti- expressed different human missense (C796R, S615F, K654Q) and cal region for this heterodimerization to a stretch of 40 amino acids frame-shift (C693fsX741) mutations in epithelial cell lines (A431, Hela- within the N-terminus of MAU-2 and the N-terminal region of NIPBL. M2). Sequencing analysis of NIPBL in a cohort of about 100 patients with In contrast to the wild-type protein and two unclassified variants (V587I, CdLS, identified six new missense mutations affecting this region. I531S), which showed the expected localization at the junctional Reporter gene assays of these six as well as two further mutations plaque, the mutant proteins demonstrated a cytoplasmatic expression could show that missense mutations G15R and P29Q almost com- pattern with accumulation around the nucleus. Western blot analysis pletely abolish the NIBPL-MAU-2 complex formation. Whereas muta- demonstrated significantly lower levels of the mutant PKP2 proteins. tions S111T, A179T, P192L, D246G, L254V and S262A do not alter Additionally we investigated direct interactions of mutant PKP2 with heterodimerization. desmoplakin (DSP) by co-expressing both proteins. In contrast to the While no detailed clinical data was available for patient P29Q, patient proper membrane associated localization of PKP2 and DSP after co- G15R is severely mentally retarded, shows a typical CdLS phenotype transfection of both wild-type proteins - mutant PKP2 proteins were without any abnormalities of the limbs. not able to interact with DSP to enable the assembly at the junctional Our data show for the first time that specific missense mutations affect- plaque. This indicates the requirement of functional PKP2 for DSP in- ing the N-terminal region of NIPBL can almost completely abolish ad- tegration in to the desmosome. herin complex formation. Whether these mutations result in an altered To prevent the potential degradation of mutated PKP2 proteins we cohesion loading or unloading to distinct gene loci which maybe modify used different inhibitors of the calpain and ubiquitin-proteasome sys- the expression of specific genes is currently under investigation. tem (UPS) and could stabilize the mutant proteins at equal amounts compared with the wild-type protein. In summary, we describe evi- P11.016 Centaurin-α2 and tubulin interaction increases dence that mutations in PKP2 produce unstable proteins in vitro, which microtubule stability might be removed rapidly from the cell by proteolytic degradation. M. Stroppi1, D. Cartelli2, G. Cappelletti2, M. Venturin1, S. Rigoletto1, E. Battaglioli1, P. Riva1; P11.014 cHiP-based sequence analysis of 34 cardiomyopathy 1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli genes reveals new genes involved in Hcm and Dcm and multiple Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Biologia, Università degli Studi di pathogenic mutations in single patients Milano, Milan, Italy. I. Krapels1, W. van Dijk1, A. Stassen1, P. Lindsey1, Y. Arens1, A. Helderman1, Centaurin-α2 is constituted by an Arf-Gap zinc binding domain and two C. Marcelis2, J. van der Smagt3, S. Heymans1, P. Volders1, R. Jongbloed1, H. PH domains. In EGF stimulated cells, centaurin-α2 localizes at plasma Smeets1, A. van den Wijngaard1; membrane through PIP2/PIP3 binding and it promotes the inactivation 1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2University of Arf6, involved in intracellular vesicular trafficking and in cytoskeletal Medical Center St Radboud Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Utrecht Medical Center rearrangement. With the final aim of elucidating the centaurin-α2 mo- Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. lecular pathways and its biological role/s, we searched for centaurin- Inherited cardiomyopathy is a common cardiac disease with a preva- α2 interacting proteins by an yeast two-hybrid assay: our studies evi- lence of 1:500 for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and 1: 2500 for denced the interaction between centaurin-α2 and tubulin β, confirmed dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). The large genetic and clinical hetero- by coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Confocal microscopy analysis geneity and the laborious screening methods, hamper rapid detection allowed us to co-localize centaurin-α2 with microtubules. By western of the genetic cause in all cases. Current diagnostic screening solves blotting analyses we found that centaurin-α2 is preferentially associ- only 60-70% of the families by testing a limited number of genes and ated with polymerized fraction of tubulin and remained associated with usually stops when a pathogenic mutation is found. However, double microtubules resistant to cold or/and nocodazol treatment. Moreover in pathogenic mutations seem to be present in 5-10% of the familial cell transfected with centaurin-α2, we observed an increase of acety- cases. In order to create a fast, parallel genetic screening pipeline for lated microtubules (MT), a well known marker of stable MT, suggesting inherited cardiomyopathy, we designed a resequencing array (Cardio- that centaurin-α2 increases the stability of MT. CHIP) covering 34 genes in duplicate (300Kb). Genes known to be We are going to define the centaurin-α2 domain/s interacting with tubu- involved in DCM, HCM, non compaction cardiomyopathy, Limb Girdle lin β by β-galactosidase assay and immunofluorescence experiments. Muscular Dystrophy and candidate genes based on their presence in We will check by live imaging the co-localization of centaurin-α2 with the sarcomere and Z-disc were included, as also exons and flanking tubulin β during its translocation from cytosol to membrane, by means introns (38bp) covering the heart- and muscle-specific RNA-isoforms of GFP-centaurin-α2 transfection following EGF stimulation. Our find- were included. The 5’UTR and 3’UTR regions and, for a selection of ing allow us to speculate that centaurin-α2 can move to plasma mem-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 27 brane through microtubule anchoring and that this protein could act as P11.019 study of gene expression by DNA microarray agent stabilizing microtubules. technology in c-kit mutant mice G. Cardos1, C. Ardeleanu1,2, G. Butur1, M. E. Hinescu1,2; P11.017 Heterozygous 5p13.3-13.2 deletion in a patient with type 1“Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Carol i chiari malformation and bilateral Duane retraction syndrome Davila“ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. F. Bayrakli1, I. Guney2, K. Bilguvar3, T. Cankaya4, M. Gunel3; The c-kit gene codifies for a tyrosine-kinase receptor with essential 1 Cumhuriyet University, School Of Medicine, Department Of Neurosurgery, role in development of interstitial Cajal cells (ICC) from gastro-intesti- Sivas, Turkey, 2 Marmara University, School Of Medicine, Department Of nal tract, involved in digestive motility and neurotransmission, but also Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3 Yale University, School Of Medicine, in GIST (gastro-intestinal tumors) pathogenesis. Interstitial Cajal-like Department Of Neurosurgery, New Haven, Ct, United States, 4 Dokuz Eylul cells (ICLC) have been identified in several extra-digestive organs, University, School Of Medicine, Department Of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey. their functions being yet unknown. Chiari malformations are part of the spectrum of cranio-spinal malfor- In order to contribute in understanding the physiology of ICC and ICLC mations. Duane‘s syndrome is an unusual congenital form of strabis- we have performed comparative investigation of gene expression in mus characterized by horizontal eye movement limitation and specifi- normal and mutant mice by DNA microarray. cally by globe retraction with palpebral fissure narrowing on attempted Total RNA was extracted by AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) from adduction. Here we report a 22-year-old syndromic male patient that different digestive and extra-digestive organs sampled from control combines the clinical and radiological features of these two malforma- and mutant mice (WBB6F1/J-KitW/KitW-v/J strain) and analyzed by tions. Bioanalyzer and RNA 6000 Nano assay Kit (Agilent Technologies). The authors used high-resolution array-based comparative genome DNA microarrays from Whole Mouse Genome Microarray Kit (Agilent hybridization (CGH) analysis to characterize the ~2.2 million-bp dele- Technologies) hybridized and scanned by Agilent DNA Microarray tion on chromosome 5 that accounts for this syndromic clinical presen- Scanner were analyzed by Feature Extraction 5.1.1. and GeneSpring tation. Genetic analysis using array-based CGH revealed a deletion GX 10.Expression Analysis Software (Agilent Technologies). affecting multiple genes at the 5p13.3-13.2 locus. Quantitative real- DNA microarray analysis showed differential expression (>2 fold) of time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on genomic DNA confirmed more than 3000 genes in mutant versus control mice. Thus, genes this genomic lesion. involved in apoptosis, intra-cellular transport and inter-cellular com- A syndrome combining features of Chiari malformation and bilateral munication (such as Wnk1, Sema5a, Nf1, Tnfrsf21 genes) were down- Duane’s retraction syndrome can be added to the group of entities that regulated. Other genes involved in transcription regulation (such as result from deleterious genetic variants involving a group of genes and Eif4a1, Zfp593, Zfp69, Dmbx1), cellular transport and cell junctions possibly producing contiguous gene syndrome. The deletion detected (Hbb-b1, Abi2, CaCng8), signal transduction and metabolic process in our patient can be easily detected using either array-based chromo- regulation (Calcr, Cyp3a44, Mcpt1 genes) were up-regulated in mu- somal analysis or quantitative RT-PCR. tant versus control mice. Some of these genes may become candidate biomarkers for studying ICC and associated pathology in humans after P11.018 SOLiD™ ChIP-seq kit for ChIP and ChIP-Sequencing validation by RT-qPCR. from low cell number samples Financial support: PN 06.26 - 02.18 and PN 09.33.02.09 Projects O. Stephan1, P. Loni2, C. Rucipero3, D. Kissinger2, K. Clancy2, D. Leon2, M. Nisha2, R. Hart3, Z. Chen2, R. Bennett2; P11.020 increased sensitivity of copy number variation using a 1Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany, 2Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, new high density array cGH platform. United States, 3Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, United States. R. Selzer, C. Shaw, K. O‘Moore, T. Richmond, J. Geoghegan, N. Jiang, R. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay is the widely used and James; a powerful method to identify regions of the genome associated with Roche NimbleGen, Inc., Madison, WI, United States. specific proteins. Combined with massively parallel next-gen DNA se- Array CGH methods are widely used to investigate DNA copy num- quencing technology, ChIP-sequencing provides a high resolution digi- ber variation (CNV) associated with complex disorders. Disease-as- tal solution for genome-wide survey of protein-DNA interactions. sociation studies have become increasingly focused on CNVs, and We developed a SOLiD ChIP-seq kit, which offers an optimized ChIP recent reports show links between CNVs and schizophrenia (Stefans- workflow and an efficient ChIP-seq library construction from low cell son 2008; Stone 2008), autism (Sebat 2007; Marshall 2008; Glessner number samples. ChIP procedure is usually laborious, time consum- 2009), and cancer. More recently, the focus of CNV research has mi- ing, and requires large starting cell numbers. We use MAGnify ChIP grated to detection of rare variants, with an allelic frequency of less System, which is suitable for fast enrichment of chromatin complexes than 5% (Conrad 2009, Manolio 2009). In an effort to increase detec- and DNA recovery, for ChIP workflow in the kit. It is able to use less tion of rare variants as well as more common CNVs, we sought to than 300,000 cells for ChIP thus preserving precious samples such as develop the highest density oligo array available for CNV detection, as primary cells and biopsies. This new approach allows faster throughput well as a more sensitive algorithm for CNV detection on NimbleGen to investigate different chromatin and transcription time-course events arrays. as well as enable antibody screening to determine ChIP compatibil- The NimbleGen 2.1M and 3x720K CNV arrays contain empirically op- ity. In addition, we develop a sensitive ChIP-seq library construction timized probes, with the most comprehensive collection of targeted re- procedure which enables users to construct a complex library using gions available, including Asian population-specific CNV regions. Utili- as low as 1 ng ChIP DNA. Combining with SOLiD’s high sequencing zation of the CNV arrays enabled detection of several hundred CNVs throughput, SOLiD ChIP-seq offers a highly sensitive, hypothesis-neu- per individual. When compared to whole-genome tiling arrays, 2- to tral approach to accurately characterize protein-DNA interactions at 3- fold more CNVs were detected with the CNV arrays. The Nimble- genome-wide scale. Gen CNV arrays detected 300% and 245% more CNVs, respectively, Using SOLiD ChIP-seq kit, we characterize transcriptionally permis- and the higher probe density allowed 2-fold higher detection of CNVs sive and repressive histone H3 modifications and transcriptional regu- shorter than 1 kb when compared to competitor arrays. The increased lators in the MCF7 cells on the SOLiD platform. The data demonstrate sensitivity of CNV detection was aided by an improved segmentation that SOLiD ChIP-seq kit provides a streamlined and reproducible as- algorithm (segMNT), included in NimbleScan v2.6 software. A compar- say for the enrichment of chromatin/protein complexes, DNA recovery ison between the segMNT v1.1 and segMNT v1.2 algorithms shows in- using magnetic bead capture technology and construction of sequenc- creased sensitivity in detection of CNVs resulting in about 2-fold more ing library. CNVs detected per sample with segMNT v1.2. P11.021** Phenotypic severity of CRLF1 associated disorders depends on the secretion of the mutated protein A. Meloni1, J. Herholz2, M. Marongiu1, F. Chiappe1,3, M. Deiana1, C. Roche4, G. Zampino5, H. Hamamy6, Y. Zalloum7, P. Waaler8, G. Crisponi9, L. Crisponi1, F. Rutsch2; 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 27 Ricerche, Monserrato (CA), Italy, 2Department of General Pediatics, Münster techniques are being continuously improved to increase the reliability University Children’s Hospital, Münster, Germany, 3Università degli Studi di and precision of this method[1]. Here we present the development of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 4Hospital Universitario La Paz Neurologia Pediatrica an improved mutation detection method using a pool of 40 mutations of Paseo de la Castellana, Madrid, Spain, 5Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR) Policlinico Universitario “A. Gemelli”, Servizio di Neurofisiopatologia, L.go A. that include the 21 most frequent in the Caucasian UK population. An Gemelli, Roma, Italy, 6Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, extensive oligonucleotide design was produced by the IsoDice software Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland, 7Arab Medical Center, and utilized in order to identify probes sets with the highest sensitivity Amman, Jordan, 8Øvre Folldalslia, Rådal, Norway, 9Casa di cura Sant’Anna, and specificity. This design study allowed us to address, investigate Cagliari, Italy. and identify many factors that affect the hybridization kinetics of oligo- Crisponi syndrome (CS) and Cold-induced sweating syndrome type 1 nucleotides. A direct-hybridization gain-of-signal approach[2] allowed (CISS1), are disorders caused by mutations in the cytokine receptor- the selection of probe pairs for each mutation, working optimally under like factor 1 (CRLF1) gene. The two syndromes share some clinical one single hybridization condition. Testing of the oligonucleotide pairs characteristics, including dysmorphic features, scoliosis and cold in- on different microarray platforms showed the robustness and reliability duced sweating, while Crisponi patients usually show a severe clinical of the method, showing conserved discrimination between wild type course in infancy involving hyperthermia, muscular contractions and and mutant genotypes. IsoDice and the hybridization protocol were feeding difficulties. applied to 13 polymorphisms linked to cardio vascular diseases and To evaluate a potential genotype/phenotype correlation and whether optimal probe pairs were successfully selected. We have shown a cost CS and CISS1 represent two allelic diseases or manifestations at dif- effective, simplified and comprehensive CFTR genotyping method on ferent stages of the same disorder, we performed a detailed analysis of microarrays that can be readily expanded to include additional muta- the clinical phenotype of 19 patients carrying mutations in CRLF1. 14 tions, and adapted as a diagnostic tool for other diseases. of these patients were originally classified as Crisponi syndrome and 5 as Cold induced sweating syndrome type 1. P11.024 Association of Xq28 recurrent duplication with We studied the functional significance of the mutations by site directed Dandy-Walker malformation: a putative role for filamin A as mutagenesis and analysis of the mutant constructs after transfection. predisposing factor. We found that phenotypic severity of the two CRLF1 associated disor- F. Martínez, S. Monfort, M. P. Roselló, S. Oltra, R. Quiroga, S. Mayo, C. ders does not depend on the different type/localization of mutation but Orellana; on altered kinetics of secretion of the mutated CRLF1 protein. Unidad de Genética. Hospital Universitario La Fe, VALENCIA, Spain. A lacked, delayed or partial CRLF1 secretion was associated with a The Dandy-Walker malformation is considered as a continuum of pos- severe clinical phenotype, while a full secretion was associated with a terior fossa anomalies comprising from the classical malformation to milder clinical phenotype. megacisterna magna of unknown etiology. We therefore propose a novel classification of patients with CRLF1 Three patients of the same family, two brothers and one maternal mutations depending on the secretion of the mutated protein. nephew, with mild-moderate mental retardation, and Dandy-Walker malformation in two of them, were investigated by array-CGH. P11.022 Identification of cryptic recombination signal A duplication of nearly 0.3 Mb was observed at Xq28 between posi- sequences containing cpG sites tions 153.2 to 153.5Mb, that perfectly overlaps with the recently de- A. Y. Gubsky1, V. G. Zinkovsky2; scribed copy-number gain with two, three or five copies of the genes 1Odessa National I.I. Mechnikov University, Odessa, Ukraine, 2University of annotated. Our results fit well with the suggestion that the copy num- Opole, Opole, Poland. ber correlates with the severity of clinical features, where GDI1 is the It is known that inhibition of interactions between RAG1/2 proteins most likely candidate gene in impaired cognition. However, the Dandy- and their DNA target sites in vitro can be caused by mCpG sites lo- Walker malformation or megacisterna magna, clearly associated to cated inside target sites. For example, methylation at the third cytosine this CNV in four different families, is better correlated with FLNA copy of heptamer on the top strand responsible for direct inhibition DNA number. Altogether, it is present in 4/8 patients with two copies and in cleavage by RAG1/2. By contrast, mCpG sites at other positions block 2/2 patients with three copies of this gene. RAG1/2-mediated cleavage if mCpG interact with methyl-CpG bind- At present the mechanism(s) underlying Dandy-Walker malformation ing-domain proteins. remains unknown. A pathogenic theory holds that the primary defect is In this study we analyzed nucleotide composition of 5649 human cryp- vermis hypoplasia due to an inhibition of cell migration from rhomben- tic recombination signal sequences (cRSS) which supposedly have cephalon. Filamin A, a widely expressed protein that regulates reorga- high recombination potential (their heptamer/nonamer sequences nization of the actin cytoskeleton, is required for locomotion of many corresponded to CACAGTG/ACAAAAACC structure or differed from cell types. Mutations in this gene lead to a broad range of congeni- them for 1-2 non functional nucleotides). These cRSS previously were tal malformations, including a localized neuronal migration disorder. found by us in the human genome outside Ig and TCR loci. We con- Hence, deregulation of neuronal migration favoured by an increased sider, that RAG1/2 theoretically can interact with such motives and expression of filamin A would be in good accordance with a predisposi- mediate instability of human genome when V(D)J-recombination sys- tion to this abnormality. tem gets out of control. We have found CpG sites in 1513 (27%) cRSS (697 of such cRSS are located in protein-coding genes). 1245, 180, 87 P11.025 tHE iNsiLicO DAtABAsE: AN EFFiciENt stARtiNG and 1 cRSS have 1, 2, 3 and 4 CpG, respectively. Methylation at the POiNt FOR GENOmic DAtA ANALYsis third cytosine of the heptamer can be possible at 221 cRSS. We found N. Walker; that 26%, 69%, 5% CpG are located in heptamers, spacers, nonamers IRIDIA, Université Libre de Bruxelles,, Brussels, Belgium. of cRSS, respectively. CpG frequency in 23cRSS is 3.3-fold bigger There is a large and rapidly growing amount of genomic data freely than in 12cRSS (cRSS with 23 bp and 12 bp spacers, respectively). available in the public domain, but this data is often in a raw form We propose that in vivo when V(D)J-recombination system gets out of and requires tedious and error-prone retrieval and compilation before control 1513 cRSS containing mCpG will be less effective interact with it can be used in analysis tools. The In Silico database allows fast RAG1/2 then 4136 cRSS without mCpG. data import and collaborative curation from the public databases. Raw biological data are pre-processed uniformly and the biological sample P11.023 Development of a simplified and sensitive microarray- description is compiled into a thesaurus form. These features allow the based method for mutation detection with optimised probes for efficient aggregation of the data as well as the sample annotation from cystic fibrosis multiple studies for joint analysis. M. Paolucci1, L. Lonie1, M. Macek jr2, J. Ragoussis1; The genomic datasets compiled in the In Silico database can then be 1Wellcome Trust center for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Charles seamlessly queried and retrieved along with the biological information University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. for export to analysis platforms such as R/bioconductor and GenePat- Oligonucleotide microarrays represent a versatile platform which al- tern. lows the rapid and cost effective screening of a large number of muta- We compare and contrast the functionality with other similar systems tions and sequence variations in specific parts of genomes. Microarray and outline the key features of the systems. We present a case study Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 27 over the term «age» across multiple human expression datasets. The We used electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and filter bind- system is available at http://insilico.ulb.ac.be ing experiments to address whether rRPS19 binds to the 5’ untrans- lated region (5’ UTR) of its own mRNA and whether this interaction P11.026 Diagnostic mutation Database, Repository of UK is of biological significance. We show that RPS19 binds specifically molecular Diagnostic mutation data to the 5’ UTR of its own mRNA with an equilibrium binding constant B. Kattamuri1, A. Devereau1, G. Taylor2; (K ) of 4.1±1.9 nM. The binding is sequence and structure dependant D 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory , Manchester, Manchester, United as mutations introduced into the 5’UTR lower RPS19’s affinity to the Kingdom, 2Genetics & Experimental Therapeutics, Leeds, United Kingdom. substrate. Additionally, we investigated the mRNA binding properties The Diagnostic Mutation Database (DMuDB) is a repository for sharing of two mutant RPS19 proteins (W52R and R62W) identified in DBA variant data among UK molecular diagnostic laboratories, developed patients. We observed a significant increase in K for both proteins D and curated by the National Genetics Reference Laboratory (NGRL) in (16.1±2.1 and 14.5±4.9 nM, respectively), indicating a reduced RNA Manchester, UK. The database is accessed through a secure website. binding capability (p<0.05). We suggest that the binding of RPS19 to Data are anonymised and are shared according to the Data Protection its mRNA has a regulatory function and hypothesize that the weaker Act 1998. They are uploaded manually (one referral at a time) by labo- RNA binding of mutant rRPS19 may have implications for the patho- ratories when diagnostic reports are issued, or in bulk (more than one physiological mechanisms in DBA. referral at a time) by the database curator. DMuDB variant names are based on HGVS nomenclature but it can also store other nomencla- P11.029** Tissue-specific conserved coexpression for disease ture systems. NGRL has also developed the Universal Browser to view gene prediction and hypotheses generation data from DMuDB , dbSNP, LSDBs and other data sources graphically R. M. Piro, U. Ala, I. Molineris, E. Grassi, C. Damasco, C. Bracco, P. Provero, in an integrated display. F. Di Cunto; DMuDB was first released in 2005. It is centred on patient referrals Molecular Biotechnology Center, University of Torino, Italy., Torino, Italy. and presently holds 6,900 referrals which contain more than 13,000 Even considering recent technological and methodological advances, individual variants in 30 genes. There are 228 active users from 39 such as next generation sequencing and genome-wide association diagnostic laboratories. BRCA variants (~9200) and HNPCC variants studies, the identification of genes involved in human hereditary dis- (~1100) currently predominate but the range of data is expanding, for ease remains a demanding task that can be significantly aided by com- example we are currently expanding DMuDB to support EGFR muta- putational predictions. tion, treatment and response to treatment information. We discuss a method based on high-throughput microarray expres- Users outside of UK laboratories can enquire about variants in DMuDB, sion data that uses the conservation of coexpression as a powerful and will be put in touch with a relevant submitting laboratory when filter for biological significance and allows to specifically focus on tis- appropriate. We are also developing partnerships, e.g. with ENIGMA sue-specific relationships between disease and candidate genes. group for BRCA data and InSIGHT for Lynch Syndrome data, so that The most important novelty of our approach, the tissue-specificity that DMuDB data can be submitted to publically accessible databases. we show to be highly complementary to multi-tissue coexpression, has allowed to identify novel high-confidence candidates for several P11.027 A novel mutation on cOcH gene in an italian family. genetic diseases. Moreover, disease gene prediction via tissue-spe- M. Perrone1, F. Faletra1, A. Fabretto1, N. Pirastu2, A. Somaschini2, C. Zadro2, C. cific conserved coexpression can additionally generate meaningful hy- Zadro2, P. Gasparini1; potheses about functions of candidate genes and biological processes 1Medical Genetics-Department of Reproductive and Developmental Sciences, underlying disease. Notably, these hypotheses can be important also Trieste, Italy, 2Medical Genetics-IRCCS Burlo Garofolo Hospital, Trieste, Italy. for cases other than disease conditions, and have provided us with Hearing loss is the most common form of sensory impairment, affecting several promising novel candidates for pluripotency. millions of individuals worldwide. Pre-lingual non-syndromic hearing Through an explicit integration of phenomics, in particular the con- loss is present in 1 on 700 children and it is thought that in half of the cept of phenotype similarity, we can apply our method also to disease cases the hearing impairment is caused by genetic factors. Progres- phenotypes with so far unknown molecular basis. We present a user- sive late onset hearing loss is much more frequent than pre-lingual friendly web tool for custom analysis, discuss the results obtained, and deafness. Most cases are caused by interactions of non-genetic (in- describe a case study that confirms USP9X as a particularly interest- fection, acoustic trauma and ototoxic drugs) and predisposing genetic ing candidate for X-linked mental retardation. The latter is also a proof factors. We analysed an Italian family with a bilateral sensorineural of concept that our method can be efficiently integrated with deep se- hearing loss attended in many family members and inherited in an quencing to provide high-confidence candidate genes. autosomal dominant manner. The subjects were genotyped with the SNPs array using the Hu- P11.030 targeted Diagnostic sequencing of patients with manCNV370-Duo platform (Illumina, San Diego, California) accord- genetic disorders ing to manufacturer’s protocol. Then we performed parametric linkage E. Turbitt, K. Bell, A. Sinclair, S. White; analysis using Merlin which identified a close to significant 40 Mb locus Murdoch Children‘s Research Institute, Parkville, Australia. on chromosome 14. It has been estimated that 5% of live births are affected by a genetic The only gene known to cause deafness in this region was COCH. The disorder that will manifest before adulthood. These disorders can have sequence of all exons and the flanking regions of the gene allowed us a significant, lifelong impact on affected individuals and their families, to identify a novel mutation A487P. This mutation was found in all of the along with major economic burdens on society in general. Being able affected family members and was not found in healthy family members to provide a rapid and accurate diagnosis is beneficial for effective or in 100 healthy controls. treatment of patients as well as counselling of family members. Recent developments in DNA sequencing technologies have great P11.028** Diamond-Blackfan Anemia associated mutations in potential for advancing genetic research and diagnosis. Sequencing Ribosomal Protein s19 impair its binding to its own mRNA the entire genome of an individual however is still prohibitively expen- A. Fröjmark, J. Schuster, P. Nilsson, J. Badhai, A. Virtanen, N. Dahl; sive for the majority of research and diagnostic laboratories, and the University Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden. amount of data that needs to be analysed will in the majority of cases Diamond Blackfan Anemia (DBA) is a congenital pure red cell aplasia preclude a rapid result being provided to the clinician. (OMIM 205900) typically presenting within the first year of life. The dis- We have developed a technique that captures multiple genomic re- ease is also associated with growth retardation, congenital malforma- gions of interest for sequencing. It is based on the immobilization of tions and heterozygous mutations in a subset of ribosomal protein genes. target DNA to small nylon filters, which are then used to capture se- Heterozygous mutations in the ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19) gene are quences of interest from fragmented and bar-coded genomic DNA. We observed in approximately 25% of DBA patients. The mutations result in have trialled this technique using PCR products and BAC sequences perturbed rRNA processing and impaired ribosomal subunit formation. as capture material and in each instance have found >10,000 fold en- The mechanisms whereby disruption of ribosome biogenesis results in richment for the DNA sequences targeted. We are currently developing anemia remain to be defined. We hypothesized that RPS19 interacts several specific target mixes, particularly focussing on genes involved with its own mRNA as part of a regulatory mechanism. in Disorders of Sex Development (DSD) and Premature Ovarian Fail-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 27 ure (POF). This approach has the potential to allow the rapid and cost- of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of Computer Sciences, effective diagnosis of a range of genetic disorders. University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Pathology Dept. of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Estonian Genome Project, Tartu, Estonia, 6Dept. of Genetics, P11.031 Automatically extracting implicit knowledge from Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. literature for biological data interpretation and function DNA methylation changes are common and relatively stable in various prediction. types of cancer and may be potentially used as diagnostic or prog- H. van Haagen1, J. den Dunnen1, B. Mons1, M. Schuemie2, P. ‘t Hoen1; nostic biomarkers. Over 100 methylated loci and genes were previ- 1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ously known in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We’ve focused The amount of scientific knowledge needed to generate hypotheses, our methylation study on early-stage NSCLC. conduct experiments and interpret results in the biomedical domain We’ve analysed stage I NSCLC samples from 49 patients together with is increasing rapidly, and reading all the relevant literature is already 19 matching macroscopically cancer-free control samples for methyla- infeasible for any human. This is especially true when studies become tion changes with Infinium HumanMethylation27 beadarrays (Illumina more and more interdisciplinary. To tackle this problem we developed Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) that cover the predicted promoter regions techniques that generate „concept profiles“ from literature, an ap- of over 14 500 genes. Cluster analysis was performed with Limma proach we call “Biosemantics” (www.biosemantics.org). program of Bioconductor package in R statistical computing software. Biosemantics tools include Anni, a multipurpose text-mining tool that We’ve detected 264 genes hyper- and 423 genes hypomethylated in can be used to analyse gene expression profiling data, and Nermal. NSCLC (Bonferroni corrected, p<0.01). From these genes, 113 genes Nermal predicts Protein-Protein Interactions (PPIs) based on the simi- were differentially methylated in adenocarcinoma and 194 genes differ- larity of the context in which the individual proteins appear in literature. entially methylated in squamous cell carcinoma (Bonferroni corrected, It outperforms previously developed PPI prediction algorithms that rely p<0.01). Five genes showed significant differences in methylation level on the conjunction of two protein names in MEDLINE abstracts. We in the patients with up to 1 years survival, compared to patients with 5 show significant increases in coverage (76% vs. 32%) and sensitivity and more years survival (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p<0.05). At the time (66% vs. 41% at 95% specificity) for the prediction of PPIs currently of abstract submission, correlation analysis with gene expression data archived in six PPI databases. The practical value of the method for of the differentially methylated genes is underway. discovery of novel PPIs was illustrated by the experimental confirma- The methylation markers found will need a further validation. To our tion of the predicted interaction between CAPN3 and PARVB, based surprise, the number of hypomethylated genes in stage I NSCLC was on shared concepts such as Z-disc, dysferlin and alpha-actinin. Us- higher compared to the number of hypermethylated genes. ing similar Biosemantics approaches we are currently studying the predictive power of our methods for relationships between genes and P11.034 Quantitative one-step DNA methylation analysis using phenotypes (e.g. diseases). Using roll back analysis we simulate the native genomic DNA as template prediction of a disease-causing gene before publication of the actual T. von Känel1, D. Gerber1, A. Schaller1, A. Baumer2, E. Wey2, C. B. Jackson1, F. landmark paper describing the connection between the gene and the M. Gisler1, K. Heinimann3, S. Gallati1; disease. 1University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 2University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. P11.032 improved detection of cell-free methylated DNA in During the last few years, analysis of DNA methylation has become plasma a standard procedure in both research and diagnostics. Analysis of I. S. Pedersen1, H. B. Krarup1, O. Thorlacius-Ussing2, P. H. Madsen1; DNA methylation currently requires multi-step procedures that are 1Section of Molecular Diagnostics, Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry, Aalborg either based on conversion of unmethylated cytosines by bisulfite or Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 2Dept. of Surgical Gastroeneterology, Aalborg on methylation-sensitive endonucleases. In the present study, we in- Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. vestigated the potential of a novel one-step approach we refer to as Detection of cell-free methylated DNA in plasma is a promising tool quantitative one-step DNA methylation analysis (qOSMA). The assay for tumour diagnosis and monitoring. Due to the very low amount of is based on the combination of methylation-sensitive FastDigest® en- cell-free DNA in plasma, sensitivity of the detection methods are of ut- donuclease digestion and quantitative PCR (qPCR) in a single reac- most importance. The vast majority of currently available methods for tion, with reaction conditions providing DNA digestion in a first step, analysing DNA methylation are based on bisulphite-mediated deami- followed by endonuclease inactivation and qPCR. The degree of DNA nation of cytosine. Cytosine is rapidly converted to uracil during bisul- methylation is determined by comparing the quantification cycles (C) q phite-treatment, whereas 5-methylcytosine is only slowly converted. of reactions containing either a methylation-sensitive endonuclease Hence, bisulphite-treatment converts an epigenetic modification into a or a sham mixture with no endonuclease. Using our novel approach, difference in sequence, amenable to analysis either by sequencing or we correctly diagnosed the imprinting disorders Prader-Willi syndrome PCR based methods. However, the recovery of bisulphite-converted (PWS) and Angelman syndrome (AS) in 35 individuals by determining DNA is very poor. Here we introduce an alternative method for the methylation levels of the SNRPN promoter. Control reactions interro- crucial steps of bisulphite removal and desulphonation, vastly improv- gating an unmethylated locus detected possible endonuclease inhibi- ing recovery, especially for specimens with low levels of methylated tors and were simultaneously used for copy number assessment by DNA (table 1). means of standard qPCR with the deltadeltaC method. In addition, q Table 1 Detection frequency of methylated copies we propose a model for digestion bias correction, which significantly Methylated genome copies 1.25 2.5 5 10 increases assay accuracy and allows analysis of DNA samples with decreased digestibility like they occur in retrospective studies. Our pro- Detection frequency* 31 % 45% 66% 86% cedure strongly reduces both hands-on time and the risk of handling *calculated as the percentage of positive results of 18 markers anal- and pipetting errors and allows DNA methylation analysis to be com- ysed 6 times each. pleted in less than 90 minutes after DNA extraction, predestining the The method is based on an accelerated deamination step and mag- assay for high-throughput analyses. netic silica purification of DNA in combination with a first round of PCR amplifying 18 methylated markers concurrently, followed by individual P11.035 Deep sequencing analysis of pre-mRNA splicing in the detection of the 18 methylated markers by real-time PCR. This method human DMD gene. allows low levels of DNA to be easily and reliably analysed, a prereq- I. Gazzoli, Y. Ariyurek, G. van Ommen, J. den Dunnen, A. Aartsma-Rus; uisite for the clinical usefulness of cell-free methylated DNA detection Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, in plasma. Netherlands. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a recessive X-linked disorder P11.033 methylation markers of early-stage non-small cell lung and is caused by mutations in the DMD gene that disrupt the open cancer reading frame, resulting in a truncated and non-functional protein. The K. Kirotar1, T. Vooder1,2, R. Kolde3, K. Välk1, M. Solovjova1, R. Roosipuu4, T. absence of the dystrophin protein causes a progressive neuromuscu- Annilo1, A. Metspalu1,5, N. Tõnisson1,6; lar degeneration, which develops into complete loss of muscle fibers 1IMCB University of Tartu / Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 2Lung Clinic and muscle function. A possible conversion in a milder phenotype is Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 277 achieved by an innovative approach which restores the semi-function- Here we describe a novel Bioanalyzer assay prototype that is able to al dystrophin proteins, using antisense oligonucleotides (AONs). This perform fast, sensitive, high resolution separation of labeled DNA frag- strategy has been successfully used for single and double exons skip- ments on a modified Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer instrument. A new dena- ping, but it is not full efficient for multiple exons, although it might be turating gel matrix has been developed that enables the separation of improved by an increased acknowledge of the splicing of DMD gene. DNA fragments between 10 and 550 bp with a resolution approaching We present a first preliminary study of a complete transcriptome analy- 2 basepairs. By the use of an internal size standard very precise sizing sis of the human DMD gene, characterizing all encoding transcripts, results can be achieved (standard deviation approx. 0.1-0.2 bp). The splice junctions, the order of intron removal and alternative splicing. significantly increased resolution of the new assay together with the To accomplish these aims, we performed deep sequencing of entire possibility to use an internal size standard enables applications like 2.4 Mb DMD transcript (Solexa Illumina), after the capture of the frag- STR-typing and MLPA analysis on the Bioanalyzer. mented reverse transcripts by hybridization to oligonucleotide probes in solution (SureSelect system from Agilent). To target all introns, 79 P11.038 GENCODE: Creating the Human Reference Geneset exons and the 8 alternative transcripts, we created a biotinylated li- A. Bignell1, A. Frankish1, B. Aken1, M. Diekhans2, F. Kokocinski1, M. Lin3, M. brary, which minimally overlap to the complete coding and non-coding Van Baren4, J. Gilbert1, M. Brent4, M. Gerstein5, R. Guigó6, R. Harte7, M. Kellis3, regions. Paired end sequencing will allow confirmation of the enriched S. Searle1, J. Harrow1, T. Hubbard1; DMD gene. The enormous amount of processed data can support a 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Center for different correlation between the transcripts abundance and the re- Biomolecular Science and Engineering, University of California, CA, United moved introns stage, providing a novel insight into the mechanism and States, 3MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Broad the regulation of the splicing of DMD gene. Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Laboratory for Computational Genomics and Department of Computer Science, Washington P11.036** A functional link of DYt1 and DYt6 dystonia: University, St. Louis, MO, United States, 5Department of Molecular Biophysics Repression of tOR1A (DYt1) gene expression by the and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States, 6Centre for transcription factor activity of tHAP1 (DYt6) Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 7Center for Biomolecular Science and A. Erogullari1,2, A. Osmanovic1, A. Rakovic2, S. Orolicki2, D. Braunholz1, T. Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, United States. Lohnau2, M. Albrecht1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, C. Klein2, K. Lohmann2, F. J. The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) project aims to identify Kaiser1; all functional elements in the human genome. Having the best possible 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Section of Clinical and Molecular annotation of coding and non-coding genes and pseudogenes is an Neurogenetics at the Department of Neurology, Lübeck, Germany. essential part of achieving this goal. The GENCODE consortium are Dystonia is clinically characterized by involuntary twisting, repetitive producing the reference human gene set which will provide the basis movements and abnormal postures. The monogenic forms of prima- for subsequent analysis. This is being achieved using a combination of ry (isolated) dystonia are associated with mutations in two genes: i) manual annotation, computational prediction and experimental valida- mutations in the TOR1A gene cause DYT1 dystonia; ii) mutations in tion. The manual gene annotation, while requiring support from tran- the recently identified THAP1 gene lead to the phenotypically similar script or protein evidence, is both informed by and QC tested against DYT6 dystonia. The THAP1 protein is a sequence-specific DNA-bind- computational gene predictions of alternatively spliced transcripts, ing factor involved in transcriptional regulation, with a characteristic supported introns, U12 introns, coding exons and pseudogenes to en- THAP zinc-finger domain at the N-terminus. sure high sensitivity and specificity. Manually annotated gene models To illuminate the molecular association between DYT1 and DYT6 dys- are then validated by RT-PCR and sequencing. tonia, we performed luciferase reporter gene assays. For this, the TO- To achieve a more complete coverage of loci and alternative splice R1A core promoter was narrowed down to a stretch of 200 bp and in- variants (including the complete set of Consensus Coding Sequenc- serted into the pGL4 luciferase reporter plasmid. Co-transfection of the es (CCDS)), manual annotation from the HAVANA group has been TOR1A core promoter with a THAP1-expression plasmid decreases merged with automated gene predictions from Ensembl. A non-redun- TOR1A promoter activity in a concentration-dependent manner. In ad- dant set of transcripts with confidence levels to clearly indicate their dition, DYT6 dystonia-associated mutant THAP1 proteins generated source has been created and is available via the Ensembl and UCSC via site directed in-vitro mutagenesis showed impaired THAP1-medi- genome browsers and DAS servers. ated repression of TOR1A. This was confirmed in vivo by measuring In addition to the ENCODE project, both the 1000 Genomes Project TOR1A expression in primary fibroblasts from THAP1 mutation carri- and the International Cancer Genome Consortium have adopted GEN- ers by quantitative PCR, where mutation carriers showed a two-fold CODE as the reference gene set for analysis. increase in DYT1 expression as compared to controls. Furthermore, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in human neu- P11.039 Gene expression analysis under the action of selank roblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) to prove that THAP1 binds to the TOR1A and its fragments promoter. T. Kolomin, M. Shadrina, Y. Agniullin, S. Shram, P. Slominsky, S. Limborska, Our data collectively demonstrate that THAP1 regulates the transcrip- N. Myasoedov; tion of TOR1A, establishing transcriptional dysregulation as a cause Institute of Molecular Genetics Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, of dystonia. Further, we provide evidence that the molecular pathways Russian Federation. underlying DYT1 and DYT6 dystonia are linked with a central role of Selank is a synthetic peptide which consists tuftsin (Thr-Lys-Pro-Arg) TorsinA in the pathogenesis of dystonia. and C terminal Pro-Gly-Pro peptide. Selank has a nootropic and anx- iolytic effects, and exhibits an antiviral effect. P11.037 A novel approach for denaturating high-resolution To study the effect single and course intranasal Selank administra- DNA electrophoresis of mLPA and stR-typing samples in tion on gene expression we have analyzed the expression profiles of microfluidic chips 12000 genes in rat hippocampus. Single and course administration of M. G. Gassmannn; Selank caused a more than 2,5-fold change in the expression of 18 Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany. and 15 genes, respectively. Both single and course administration of The Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer instrument platform is designed for per- Selank caused change in the expression of five genes: Actn1, Cx3cr1, forming fast electrophoretic analysis of DNA, RNA and proteins based Fgf7, Ptprn2 and Xtrp1. Also it was shown that the effect of Selank on microfluidic chip technology. It is widely used for the analysis of PCR on the expression of these genes in the spleen is much stronger than products and restriction digests. However, the resolution of the current in the hippocampus. The most significant increase was observed for DNA assays is not sufficient to separate DNA fragments generated in three genes (Ptprn2, Actn1 and Cx3cr1) after a single administration applications like e.g. STR-typing, AFLP and MLPA. As these methods of Selank. require a very high resolving power in the electrophoresis involving de- For a more detailed study the action of Selank and its fragments - Gly- naturing conditions, usually capillary-based DNA sequencers are used Pro, Arg-Pro-Gly-Pro and tuftsin - on the gene expression analyzed the to separate the DNA fragments. However, due to a growing number of expression of 84 genes involved in processes of inflammation in the new applications, there is a strong demand for an alternative separa- mouse spleen 6 and 24 hours after single intraperitoneal injection of tion platform that is fast, flexible and easy to use. peptides. The result was a significant change in the expression of 34 Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 27 genes. In most cases the response was observed 6 hours after of pep- peats. Nevertheless there is a subgroup of patients presenting clinical tides injection. Also should be noted that each of the peptides gives an signs of disease without D4Z4 contraction (FSHD-2). Current hypoth- individual picture of changes in the expression of genes under study. esis on FSHD-1 pathogenesis foresee the presence of an epigenetic molecular mechanism, but, how the contraction of D4Z4 array could P11.040** Deficiency of Npps attenuates atherosclerosis lesion determine alterations in chromatin structure and trigger transcriptional progression in apoE deficient mice deregulation of target genes is not clear. Moreover the specific gene(s) Y. Nitschke1, G. Weißen-Plenz2, R. Terkeltaub3, F. Rutsch1; responsible for FSHD phenotype have not yet been identified. To clar- 1Münster University Children’s Hospital, Münster, Germany, 2Leibniz-Institute of ify some of these aspects, we used the Human GeneChip Exon 1.0 Atherosclerosis Research, Münster, Germany, 3Department of Rheumatology/ ST platform to analyze the global gene expression profiles of FSHD-1, Immunology, VAMC, UCSD, La Jolla, CA, United States. FSHD-2 and controls proliferating myoblasts and the corresponding Mutations in ENPP1 are associated with media calcification in general- myotubes. Comparisons of normal and FSHD-1 myoblasts identified ized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI). ENPP1 encodes for Ecto- a greater number of deregulated genes in comparisons to normal and Nucleotide Pyrophosphatase/ Phosphodiesterase 1 (NPP1), which FSHD-1 myotubes, suggesting a defect in early stages of FSHD-1 dif- generates inorganic pyrophosphate, a physiologic inhibitor of hydroxy- ferentiation. Moreover, the gene-expression profiles of FSHD-1 and apatite deposition. The role of NPP1 in atherosclerosis is not known. FSHD-2 myoblast exhibited different categories of deregulated genes, Npps/apoE double knockout mice were generated by cross-breeding demonstrating that different molecular mechanisms are responsible of Npps-deficient ttw/ttw mice with apoE null mice and were fed a high the disease. The obtained results also suggest that miRNAs could be fat/ high cholesterol diet. Atherosclerotic lesion area and calcification involved in the regulatory network of FSHD. Our approach provided were examined. In 28 week old Npps+/-apoE-/- and Npps-/-apoE-/- mice new insights into the molecular mechanism of FSHD, allowing the atherosclerotic lesion size was 64% ± 20% and 59% ± 22% smaller identification of new candidate genes that may represent potential tar- than in Npps+/+apoE-/- mice (p<0.05). However, there was no signifi- gets for clinical application. cant difference in plaque calcification, whereas only Npps-/-apoE-/- mice developed media calcification. In aortic smooth muscle cells isolated P11.043 chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in mice from Npps+/-apoE-/- and Npps-/-apoE-/- mice expression of the pro-ath- heterozygous for the Fgf10 gene erogenic mediator osteopontin (Opn) was 14% ± 8% and 30% ± 7% J. Klar1, C. Brunmark2, C. Brange2, H. Falk-Håkansson2, J. Badhai1, N. Dahl1; less than in Npps+/+apoE-/- mice (p<0.05). Opn was previously shown 1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, to be a chemoattractant for monocytes and macrophages, which play 2Department of Biological Sciences, AstraZeneca, Lund, Sweden. a key role in early stages of atherosclerosis, i.e. monocyte transen- The most important risk factor for the development of Chronic Ob- dothelial migration, differentiation into macrophages and macrophage structive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is cigarette smoking, but only a uptake of modified lipoprotein. The present study shows that a truncat- minority of smokers will develop COPD, which implies that genetic fac- ing mutation on one or both alleles of Npps reduces atherogenesis in tors may be involved. Familial aggregation of lung function has been a mouse model of atherosclerosis. We found evidence that decreased demonstrated and COPD also demonstrates clustering within families, plaque formation in mice carrying mutations in Npps was mediated which supports a genetic contribution to pulmonary function. Genetic through decreased Opn expression levels. We conclude that although studies in human and animal models suggest that genes originally mutations on both ENPP1 alleles lead to GACI, heterozygosity of the associated with lung developmental processes could be implicated ENPP1 locus may be protective against atherosclerosis. in COPD. Fibroblast growth factor-10 (FGF10) signalling through the FGFR2b receptor is required for the development of many branched P11.041 High throughput targeted Resequencing of the Human organs including lungs, thyroid, pituitary, lacrimal, and salivary glands. Exome Using solution-Phase sequence capture The most compelling evidence that the FGF10-FGFR2b pathway is X. Zhang, B. Thomson, J. Wendt, M. D‘Ascenzo, M. Brockman, T. Richmond, essential for lung development was first demonstrated by the profound T. Albert, D. Burgess; disruption of branching morphogenesis in mice with either disrupted Roche NimbleGen, Madison, WI, United States. FGF10 or FGFR2b gene. Human exome resequencing is an efficient way to identify functional We hypothesized that haploinsufficiency of Fgf10 influence lung func- genomic variation underlying both Mendelian and complex genetic tion and lead to the development of lung disorders. To examine this diseases (e.g. cancer, diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease). The term hypothesis, we measured the pulmonary functions of mice heterozy- “exome” refers to all the exons in the human genome, which are ar- gous for Fgf10. Fgf10 +/- mice show decreased body and lung weight, guably the most functionally relevant 1% of the genome. Currently although the lung/body weight ratio does not differ from the wild type over 80% of all known mutations for human genetic diseases reside in littermates. Fgf10 +/- mice exhibit a significant decrease in FEV75, coding exons and splicing sites, making resequencing this 1% portion FVC, as well as a decrease in the FEV75/FVC quota when compared of the genome highly attractively. Here we present a high throughput to wild type littermates. This would correspond to an airway obstruction method to capture ~36Mb of target sequence, encompassing the lat- in humans. From our results, we suggest that the FGF10 pathway may est definition of the human exome, in a single tube with 2.1 million be highly relevant in search of targets for intervention in obstructive distinct DNA oligonucletide probes. Probe design, library construction, lung disease in humans. library amplification, hybridization and washing have been optimized to delivery highly uniform, specific, and reproducible enrichment of the P11.044 microFiND approach for Fluorescence in situ human exome. We demonstrate that deep coverage of the exome and Hybridization (FisH) detection of genetic lesions from scarce accurate detection of variants can be achieved using this technology at cell samples in hematological malignancies only a fraction of the cost of whole genome sequencing. R. Carbone1, A. Zanardi1, S. Venturini1, S. Fabris2, D. Bandiera1, E. Barborini1, G. Lambertenghi Deliliers2, A. Neri2; P11.042** Comparison of gene expression profile during normal 1Tethis S.r.l., Milano, Italy, 2Medical Science Department, University of Milan and FsHD myogenesis support a defect in early stages of the and Hematology 1, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore disease Policlinico, Milano, Italy. S. Cheli1, S. Francois2, B. Bodega1, F. Ferrari3, E. Tenedini3, E. Roncaglia3, S. Despite improvements in sensitivity for the identification of chromo- Ferrari3, E. Ginelli1, R. Meneveri2; somal aberrations by fluorescence based methods (1, 2), low cell 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of number recovery from pathological samples may make it difficult in Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Milano- diagnostics. Therefore, processing of limited number of cells still rep- Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 3Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of resents a technological challenge. Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. We have developed a microfluidic device (microFINDTM) for collect- Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is an autosomal ing living cells for FISH analysis. microFINDTM is a glass slide coated dominant disorder mainly associated with a contraction of the subtelo- with a nanomaterial (3) that immobilizes cells inside a microchannel: meric repeat D4Z4 on chromosome 4. The D4Z4 copy number is high- a miniaturized FISH protocol is carried out and the slide evaluated by ly polymorphic in normal individuals ranging between 11-150 copies, high resolution fluorescence microscopy. whereas almost all FSHD patients (FSHD-1) carry fewer than 11 re- We validated microFINDTM in samples from patients affected by Mul-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 27 tiple Myeloma (MM), a malignant proliferation of bone marrow plasma pyrin and the proapoptotic protein Siva-1 to the pathogenesis of FMF. cells. Often, cell purification is needed for investigations because of Materials and methods: The three-dimensional model (3-D) model of the small percentage of clonal plasma cells present in the bone mar- Siva-1 was created with MODELLER and the Swiss-model automated row. We analyzed 4 MM patients: PCs were purified from bone mar- protein structure homology-modelling server. HEK293 (human embry- row aspirates using MidiMACS system (4) and directly immobilized on onic kidney) and THP-1 (human monocytic leukemia) cell lines were microFINDTM. used for transfection experiments and apoptosis was measured by We compared FISH performance by microFINDTM and standard FACS-Annexin-PE staining using the Annexin-V kit. protocol of specific MM genetic lesions and demonstrated that micro- Results: In the 3-D model of Siva-1 we defined three distinct domains. FINDTM approach allows FISH analysis of scarce cell samples (down In immunoprecipitation experiments on transfected HEK293 cells, Siva to 1000 plasma cells/µl), with the same reproducibility compared to bound both to wild type pyrin and its mutant forms. No differences in standard protocol. rates of apoptosis in THP-1 upon transfection with mutant forms of Furthermore the assay miniaturization offers a cost saving approach pyrin were observed. Patients with FMF did not display any mutations (only 0.3µl of fluorescent probe/sample) suitable for automation and in the Siva gene. throughput increase for screenings of MM in a “chip” configuration. Conclusions: The positions of the PRYSPRY C-terminal domain of 1. Ntouroupi et al. Br J Cancer. 2008 (99) pyrin, found mutated in FMF patients, are not required for binding to 2. Medintz et al. Int J Nanomedicine. 2008 (3) Siva-1. We were not able to demonstrate an increase of Siva-induced 3. Carbone et al. Biomaterials. 2006 (27) apoptosis in the presence of the mutant forms of pyrin. Siva is unlikely 4. Fabris et al. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 2005 (42) to contribute to the pathogenesis of FMF through the postulated mo- lecular mechanism. P11.045 molecular characterization of FKRP related Limb-Girdle type 2i muscular Dystrophy P11.047 A missense mutation within the fork-head domain of the T. Fagerheim1, M. Alhamidi2,1, E. Kjeldsen Buvang2, V. Brox1, M. Van Ghelue1, FOXG1 gene affects its nuclear localization Ø. Nilssen1,2; T. Le Guen1,2, Y. Fichou1,2, J. Nectoux1,2, N. Bahi-Buisson2,3, D. Héron4, J. 1University Hospital of North Norway, Norway, 2University of Tromsø, Institute of Chelly1,2, T. Bienvenu1,2; Clinical Medicine, Norway. 1Inserm, U1016, Paris, France, 2Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy type 2I (LGMD2I) is an autosomal, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France, 3Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Necker- recessive, disorder caused by mutations in the FuKutin-Related Pro- Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital tein gene (FKRP). Muscle biopsy extracts from LGMD2I patients show Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. incomplete/aberrant O-glycosylation of the membrane/extra-cellular- The fork-head box G1 gene (FOXG1, MIM 164874) encodes a tran- matrix protein alpha-dystroglycan. However, our knowledge of the scriptional factor that is critical for forebrain development. It has re- function of FKRP is limited and the underlying molecular aetiology of cently been associated with the congenital variant of Rett syndrome LGMD2I is currently unknown. (RTT, OMIM 312750), and so far 17 mutations, including microdele- Here, we provide data on the posttranslational modification and molec- tions, nonsense, missense, splice and frame-shift have been reported. ular self-interaction of FKRP (495aa). Deglycosylation of FKRP with ei- We screened the coding region by direct sequencing in 50 patients ther PNGaseF or EndoH results in a FKRP MW shift from 58 to 54 kDa. affected by postnatal microcephaly, and identified two missense When over expressed in mammalian cells, FKRP assembles into DTT mutations: the c.326C>A (p.L109P) substitution inherited from the sensitive complexes of 115 -120 kDa that are DTT insensitive upon healthy father; and the de novo c.730C>T transition, which induces in vitro chemical cross-linking. Pair-wise Yeast 2-Hybrid experiments the p.R244C mutation within the DNA-binding fork-head domain. This with FKRP/FKRP in bait/pray combination sustained growth of yeast latter mutation is carried by an 8-year-old girl, who was born at full term on selective medium. Immunogold Transmission Electron Microscopy with normal weight and height, but relative little head circumference of rectus femoris muscle sections show that antibodies to FKRP co- (33 cm, 10th percentile). At last evaluation, she presented with severe localize with Golgi marker mg160 microcephaly (<3rd percentile), and MRI showed frontal, gyral simpli- We conclude that FKRP in human skeletal muscle, is localized to the fication without pachygyria, severe hypomyelination, and thin corpus the Golgi compartment, close to the Z-lines between the myofibrils. callosum. She was able to walk with aid and combined dyskinetic FKRP contains two potential N-glycosylation sites. Both are occupied movement disorders with hand stereotypies, relative good eye contact with high mannose (and/or hybrid) oligosaccharides. FKRP homo- and communication skills that contrast with severe motor impairment. dimerization, indicated by chemical cross-linking, was confirmed by We constructed a plasmid encoding the mutant FOXG1_p.R244C pro- pair-wise Yeast 2-Hybrid analysis. FKRP involvement in higher MW tein to investigate its subcellular pattern. Immunofluorescence analy- complexes (>180 kDa) was also observed. The content of these com- sis of the wild-type protein revealed a homogeneous nuclear staining plexes remains to be investigated. excluding the nucleoli, while the mutant showed abnormal nuclear foci in a large proportion of cells, suggesting that its mislocalization may re- P11.046 siVA is unlikely to contribute to the pathogenesis duce and/or impair target recognition. Molecular analyses are currently of Familial mediterranean Fever (FmF): A genetic, structural in progress to investigate FOXG1 putative targets and to elucidate the biological and functional study molecular pathways involved in the pathophysiology of the disease. E. Petraki1, D. Vassou1, E. Eliopoulos2, D. Iliopoulos3, I. Aksentijevich4, P. Sidiropoulos5, D. Kardassis6, D. T. Boumpas7, G. N. Goulielmos1; P11.048 Methylation patterns associated with FRA12A 1Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics, Medical School of S. Metsu, L. Rooms, R. F. Kooy; Crete, Heraklion, Greece, 2Laboratory of Genetics, Agricultural University of Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Belgium, Antwerp, Athens, Athens, Greece, 3Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Belgium. Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, Boston, Dynamic mutations are repetitive sequences that undergo unstable MA, United States, 4Genetics Section, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, inheritance. Repeat expansion may lead to methylation and transcrip- National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Bethesda, tional silencing of associated genes, which is a major cause of human USA, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Department of Rheumatology, Clinical diseases, including cognitive dysfunction. When cells are grown under Immunology and Allergy, University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece, specific cell-culture conditions they become visible as chromosomal 6Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Medicine, University of Crete, gaps or breaks, called fragile sites. So far, eight rare folate-sensitive Greece, Heraklion, Greece, 7Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Human fragile sites were cloned, four of which are associated with mental re- Genetics, Medical School of Crete and Department of Rheumatology, Clinical tardation. Immunology and Allergy, University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece. Recently we cloned FRA12A and demonstrated that the molecular ba- Background: Mutations in MEFV gene encoding pyrin account for Fa- sis of this rare folate-sensitive fragile site is a CGG-repeat expansion milial Mediterranean fever (FMF), which is characterized by recurrent, at the 5’ end of the DIP2B gene, resulting in methylation of its pro- acute and self-limiting attacks of fever. Pyrin plays a major role in the moter region. The phenotype of FRA12A-carriers varies from severe regulation of IL-1 beta secretion and the pathogenesis of FMF. mental retardation to apparently unaffected. Recurrent miscarriages Aim: To explore the potential contribution of the interaction between have also been reported. In all affected patients the repeat was meth-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 20 ylated. In unaffected FRA12A carriers however, the repeat was either Easy, low-cost genome-wide detection of novel gene fusions allows methylated or unmethylated. Expression of the DIP2B gene was on interrogation of large numbers of samples and discovery of biologically average higher in unaffected FRA12A carriers compared to affected important gene fusions. patients. Unmethylated FRA12A carriers rather showed overexpres- sion of DIP2B. P11.051 Using GEN2PHEN software to integrate genotype-to We hypothesized that the difference in expression and phenotypic fea- phenotype data. tures could be the result of the varying degree of methylation of CpG- M. J. Cornell, G. Dobson, A. Devereau; islands between affected patients and unaffected FRA12A carriers. National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, Manchester, United Therefore we are establishing a methylation profile of the CpG-islands Kingdom. surrounding the repeat for all available patients, their family members The GEN2PHEN project is developing new software to enable the in- and a control population. So far we found convincing evidence that at tegration of Genotype-To-Phenotype data. In order to assess the ef- least one CpG-island is less densely methylated in unaffected carriers fectiveness and utility of GEN2PHEN software, we are conducting a than in affected carriers, supporting our hypothesis. series of project evaluations with the clinical and research communi- ties, using the software to explore and interpret areas of biomedical P11.049 Validation of two new PcR technologies for diagnostic importance. The second evaluation focuses on three areas. testing of the Fragile X cGG repeat as well as FMR1 methylation (1) Generating LRGs to describe BRCA1 and BRCA2. At present, status. many genes have multiple locus specific databases (LSDBs) devel- E. M. J. Boon, P. A. van Bunderen, E. Bakker; oped by different research groups. This can create problems for clini- Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. cal scientists since it may not be clear how variant data in these data- Almost all cases of Fragile X syndrome are caused by an expansion bases can be reconciled. GEN2PHEN has developed the LRG (Locus of a CGG repeat in the 5’ UTR of the FMR1 gene to more than 200 Reference Genomic) standard to describe reference sequences and is repeats. Molecular diagnostic testing is currently performed by both developing web services to allow LSDB data to be accessed by other PCR of the CGG repeat and Southern blot analysis. programmes. We are validating two new PCR technologies from Asuragen Inc. USA. (2) Development of a BioMart for LSDB data. This allows users to com- The first is a kit that supports two PCR configurations: a gene-specific pose complex queries over multiple datasets, such as genetics vari- FMR1 PCR and a CGG repeat primed PCR. With this kit it should be ants and phenotype ontologies. possible to detect the full range of CGG repeats and provide informa- (3) Routine calculation of the consequence of genetic variation. Ge- tion on the zygosity status in all samples. We tested 75 samples (25 nome resquencing projects are generating large quantities of variation prenatal and 50 postnatal) including full expanded alleles, premuta- data. This creates a need for software that enables the consequence tions, intermediates, homozygous normal females and normal males. of genetic variation to be determined. The SNP Effect Predictor anno- All results were concordant with previous results. In cases of homozy- tates variants using the Ensembl API and databases. gous normal females, the CGG repeat primed PCR was proven to be For each area we will present tools to researchers and clinicians and very useful and Southern blot analysis is no longer required in these gather feedback. This will be used to ensure that deliverables remain cases. relevant to needs. The second technology we are validating is a prototype PCR method that was developed to detect the FMR1 methylation status. Currently, P11.052 Advances in gene expression microarray profiling the methylation status can only be detected by performing Southern from small amounts of adenocarcinoma and normal total RNA Blot analysis, which is very labor intensive, needs a lot of input, has samples a low throughput and is not amenable to automation. We have tested A. Bergstrom Lucas, G. Lin, S. Jacobs, S. Fulmer-Smentek, E. Leproust; both prenatal and postnatal samples to investigate whether this meth- Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States. ylation PCR could replace the Southern Blot analysis. Gene expression profiling by microarray analysis provides an impor- Data from both PCR technologies will be presented in this poster as tant avenue for understanding biological mechanisms, classifying tis- well as in the Eurogentest Satellite meeting. sue and tumor types, and identifying signs for diagnosis and progno- sis. To address the need for high sensitivity gene expression profiling P11.050 Easy, accurate genome-wide detection of gene fusions of low quantities of total RNA, we have developed a modified linear with the sOLiD system using Bioscope software amplification procedure that generates quantities of Cy-labeled cRNA P. Vatta, O. Sakarya, H. Breu, L. Popescu, A. Siddiqui, F. C. Hyland; suitable for oligonucleotide microarray experiments from total RNA in- Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. put amounts as low as 10 nanograms. This new procedure, available in Gene fusions are implicated in the initiation of tumorigenesis and are the new Low Input Quick Amp Labeling Kit, employs the AffinityScript important diagnostic/prognostic indicators in leukemia and solid tu- Reverse Transcriptase, a mutant MMLV-RT that binds primer-template mors. complexes with 10-fold higher efficiency than wild type MMLV-RT, re- The SOLiDTM System 4.0 generates up to 1 billion mapped reads per sulting in increased cDNA yields and improved sensitivity from smaller run, enabling genome-wide hypothesis-free detection of gene fusions. sample inputs. The protocol uses a single round of IVT amplification DNA barcoded paired-end reads facilitate cost-effective concurrent se- without purification of the cDNA product resulting in labeled cRNA quencing of many samples. in less than one day, enabling gene expression profile comparisons We developed a novel algorithm to detect exon junctions with strand- in less than two days. Comparisons of probe signals from technical specific SOLiD system transcriptome sequencing, to predict fusion replicate samples demonstrate high reproducibility with wide dynamic transcripts and alternative splicing. For paired-end whole transcrip- ranges, and generally comparable signals across a broad range of tome sequencing experiments, we require two types of evidence; the input amounts. This new labeling approach was used to detect differ- two tags must map uniquely to two different exons, and a single tag ences in gene expression between cancerous and normal cells using must span the exon junctions. Single-read placement is done with a new gene expression arrays with updated content resulting in gene novel algorithm that allows fast detection of reads split between any expression profiling results consistent with the current literature. pair of exons. Gene fusions are called if there is sufficient non-redun- dant evidence of both types. P11.053 Next generation sequencing to reveal new variants into We validated the algorithm with real and simulated data; we detect cancer research >80% of simulated human gene fusions at well covered exons. X. Yang; We sequenced UHR, and we predicted 36 fusions using initial thresh- BGI Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. olds. We validated these predictions with TaqMan assays. 44% of our The human genome lies at the core of human disease research. The predictions were correct, including the three previously annotated remarkable technological advances in sequencing have enabled the gene fusions in UHR; BCR-ABL1, BCAS4-BCAS3 and GAS6-RASA3. sequencing of individual human genomes. We validated an additional 13 novel gene fusions, many of which are Using next generation sequencing technology such as Illumina/So- putative read-throughs from genes in close proximity. 13 of these gene lexa, we could get an all-round view of complex diseases including fusions are also present in the MCF7 breast cancer cell line. cancer at DNA level, RNA level, and epigenetic level.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 21 Applying whole genome resequencing and with a high enough level ants, 13 presumably abolish splicing and 38 are predicted to be leaky; of coverage, somatic mutations from cancer genome can be obtained. intronic cryptic splice site activation is predicted for 10 acceptor and The accompanying pathogen genomes will also be collected. 7 donor sites. BRCA2: Of 916 missense changes, 2 abolish a single Exome capture sequencing is a relatively economical strategy at the donor splice site, 15 are leaky splicing mutations (at 8 donor sites) present stage, which is more suitable. This study will analyze the exome and 5 activate in frame cryptic splice sites. One of 63 synonymous of several human cancers by concurrently sequencing several cancer changes abolish splicing and 5 reduce splice site recognition. Of 161 exomes and their paired non-disease tissue. Cancer-specific genetic intronic changes at natural sites, 35 are predicted to be leaky and one mutations will be identified by directly comparing exon sequences from activates a cryptic acceptor splice site. Splicing mutations in BRCA1/ a patient’s tumor to its non-disease exons. In addition, SNP genotypes BRCA2 that coincide with intronic, silent and/or missense changes af- will be calculated for each patient as well as structural variations. fecting the same splice site are frequently leaky, suggesting that high Next generation sequencing could also be applied to RNA of cancers levels of these gene products are essential for tumour suppression. to investigate the first phenotypic effects of all the DNA changes. Start- ing with RNA, using transcriptome sequencing, digital gene expression P11.056 mutation screening by High Resolution melt Analysis in profiling and small RNA sequencing technologies, cancer-specific al- early onset forms of Hereditary spastic Paraplegias. terations in expression levels, aberrant splicing and fusion transcripts P. Montieri1,2, C. Babalini1, M. Varlese1,2, L. Carosi1,2, G. Bernardi1,2, A. could easily be defined. Orlacchio1,2; With further adaptation sequencing technology could be extended to 1Laboratorio di Neurogenetica, CERC-IRCCS Santa Lucia, Roma, roma, Italy, detect epigenetic changes of the cancer genome. Whole-genome bi- 2Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Università degli Studi di Roma “TorVergata”, sulfite sequencing, MeDIP-sequencing and ChIP-sequencing are used Roma, Rome, Italy. to discover aberrant DNA methylation and histone modifications, which The hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are an etiologically hetero- are now well established in the development and progression of can- geneous group of neurological disorders which results from the se- cer and other complex diseases. lective degeneration of upper motor neurons, of which key diagnostic clinical findings are spasticity and pyramidal weakness of lower limbs. P11.054 Display of high-throughput genomic data in the Ucsc Although genetically diverse with 46 genetic loci for HSP and 20 Genome Browser genes identified, it is often difficult to separate the disorders on clinical R. M. Kuhn1, A. S. Hinrichs1, A. S. Zweig1, G. Barber1, D. Karolchik1, W. J. grounds. Kent1, D. Haussler1,2; This study aims at genetic-molecular investigation of families affected 1Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering, Santa Cruz, CA, United by early onset forms of ADHSP, ARHSP, and apparently sporadic cas- States, 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Santa Cruz, CA, United States. es, based on HRM, direct sequencing and MLPA techniques. The UCSC Genome Browser has become an valuable tool for the We performed HRM tecnique (LightCycler 480, Roche Molecular Sys- analysis of genomic data. Attracting over 3 million hits a week from tems) to screen two “early onset” HSP genes, SPG3A and SPG5A. more than 80,000 different IP addresses per month, it provides ac- We studied a total serie of 9 unrelated autosomal dominant and 5 au- cess to genome annotations, links to other online resources and an tosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia families, and in 18 ap- integrated view of disparate datasets. parently sporadic patients, manifesting either pure or complex forms Increasingly focused on data of relevence to human health, the brows- of the disease. Then by direct sequencing we analyze samples with er has released data tracks displaying annotations from the Database putative mutations. of Genetic Assocation Studies of Complex Deseases and Disorders Sequencing the SPG3A gene disclosed a novel heterozygous mis- (GAD), Online Mendelian Inhertance in Man (OMIM), Genome-wide sense mutation in exon 12, observed also in another family showing association studes from NHGRI (GWAS), the Database of Genomic similarity in phenotype. On the whole we identified six mutations, of Variants (DGV), commercial gene-chip probe mappings for compara- which three novel: one segregating in two unrelated ADHSP families, tive genome hybridization and other datasets valuable to research and two in two unrelated ARHSP families, the others in apparently sporadic clinical geneticists.. cases. These public data are displayed together, mapped against the UCSC Our data confirm an high mutational frequency in SPG3A and SPG5A Genes track and data from dbSNP, and the ENCODE, HapMap and genes in early onset forms of ADHSP and ARHSP (respectively 20% other projects, providing users with a graphical view of complex data and 7%) and apparently sporadic cases. from many sources at once. Users can upload their own lab data to view alongside these resident tracks. P11.057** molecular strategies for Hypertrophic With the increasing availability of next-generation sequencing, many cardiomyopathy Genetic Analysis: correlation between laboratories are generating large datasets requiring genomic coordinate genotyping and expression data mapping. New data formats are now available for the UCSC browser S. R. Susana1,2, A. T. Freitas3, C. M. Machado4, P. Branco5, L. Silveira5, I. M. to create a custom track from private data on the browser without up- Carreira6, M. Antunes7, C. Monteiro1, A. R. Fernandes8,9; loading gigabytes of data. We describe how to use the compression 1Faculdade Farmácia, Universidade Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Universidade and indexing scheme that creates a file on the user‘s machine. This is Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias, Lisboa, Portugal, 3INESC_ID/IST, accessed by the Genome Browser, which extracts only the information Universidade Técnica de Lisboa, Portugal, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Departamento de needed for the custom track at the display coordinates . Informática, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 5Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias, Lisboa,, Lisbon, P11.055 comprehensive in silico prediction of mRNA splicing Portugal, 6Un. Citogenética e Diag.Pré-Natal, Fac. Medicina, Universidade de effects in BRcA1 and BRcA2 variants Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Hospitais da Universidade de Coimbra,, Coimbra, P. K. Rogan1, E. Mucaki1, S. Bacopoulous1, K. Gerster1, P. J. Ainsworth2; Portugal, 8Centro de Química Estrutural, Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, 1University of Western Ontario (UWO), London, ON, Canada, 2London Health Portugal, 9Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias, Lisboa, Sciences Centre / UWO, London, ON, Canada. Lisbon, Portugal. The influence of variants of uncertain significance in the BRCA1 and Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common hereditary BRCA2 genes has confounded testing for predisposition to and herita- cardiovascular disease. The benefits of a gene-based diagnosis for bility in breast cancer. Variants are often singletons, in which the phase both basic research and clinical medicine are limited by the high con- is unknown, and the familial history is either sparse or unavailable. siderable costs of current genetic testing strategy due to the elevated Using information theory-based analysis, we examined the all vari- number of genes and mutations involved in HCM. We demonstrate ants in the Breast Cancer Information Resource for potential effects coupling Mass Spectrometry Genotyping and High Resolution Melting on natural splice sites. BRCA1: Among 505 missense changes, 5 are as a new strategy for HCM diagnosis. This strategy allowed us to iden- splicing mutations that abolish 2 donor sites and 15 are leaky splicing tify HCM known mutations and several new mutations in sarcomere mutations that occur at 4 acceptor and 5 donor sites. Most leaky muta- and cytosqueleton genes including a mutation in CSRP3 gene, not tions have <20% of normal splice site strength, however some have usually studied in current HCM genetic diagnosis. In a new approach modest effects. Of 58 synonymous codon substitutions, one abolishes we hypothesized that sarcomere gene transcripts represent molecular and 3 are predicted leaky donor site splice sites. Of 124 intronic vari- markers for HCM evaluation being gene expression profile an indicator Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 22 of the cardiac remodeling process. Real-Time analysis of sarcomere P11.060 Evaluation of cellular activity status by in situ Proximity genes have been done using RNA extracted from interventricular sep- Ligation Assays tum and skeletal biopsies from HCM patients. Unsupervised machine O. Söderberg, I. Weibrecht, K. Leuchowius, M. Jarvius, T. Conze, C. Clausson, learning methods were used to distinguish differences between groups U. Landegren; of patients, tissues and genes. Clustering algorithms revealed two main Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. groups both with a strong correlation between the genomic expression Although there are several methods for determining levels of proteins pattern in cardiac and skeletal muscles for MYH7 and TNNI3 genes. in tissues and cells, there is a great need for more selective methods The transcriptional differences between the two group clusters could as well as methods that will enable detection of the functional state of be due to different morphologic HCM features and to DNA genetic proteins. The activation status of proteins is in most cases regulated by profile. Moreover, the correlation (sarcomere-skeletal) transcriptional post-translational modifications (PTMs) such as phosphorylation that profile will allow the inference of skeletal muscle as a valid biomarker cause structural changes in the proteins and thereby expose catalytic of HCM. Together the new genotyping strategy and the establishment sites or promote interactions with other proteins. By binding partner of a correlation of the genetic-transcriptional profile will have important proteins, i.e. forming protein complexes, they will gain additional func- implications for HCM clinical management and prognosis. tion such as the ability to target substrate molecules. There is also a need to measure many parameters in single cells, such as protein P11.058 Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells for disease levels, protein activity, mRNA expression and DNA sequence to obtain modeling of neurodevelopmental disorders a more accurate view of the status of the cell and to identify cell-to-cell J. Schuster, M. Sobol, J. Dahlqvist, G. Annerén, N. Dahl; variation in a heterogeneous cell population such as a tissue section. University Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden. The activity status of a protein or signaling pathway can be visualized Congenital neurological and neurodevelopmental disorders constitute with in situ Proximity Ligation Assays using a pair of antibodies target- a heterogeneous group which affects approximately 3% of the popula- ing the interacting proteins or PTM, using an attached DNA molecule tion. Genetic factors play a major role in a large proportion of cases. to the antibodies to template the creation of a circular DNA molecule Studies of the underlying disease mechanisms have been hampered that is a surrogate marker for the interaction. It can then be ampli- by the unavailability of the appropriate tissues as well as the lack of fied by rolling circle amplification and detected with a single-molecule model systems. The recent progress in genomic reprogramming of hu- resolution in fixed cells or tissues. Combining this method with padlock man somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) followed probes, for detection of DNA and mRNA with a single-nucleotide reso- by lineage specific induction has provided a tool for the study of human lution, now gives us the tool to monitor cellular activity status in clinical disorders. With the availability of patient derived somatic cells, e.g. material. fibroblasts, the method offers a unique opportunity to study and model specific human disorders that affect neuronal cells. P11.061 Optimization of the protocol for DNA purification from We have established somatic cells from different neurodevelopmental blood for Thermo Scientific KingFisher Flex disorders including lissencephaly, leukodystrophy, agenesia of corpus M. Suomalainen, S. Suomalainen, V. Puro, V. Kytöniemi, A. Lamberg; callosum and acrania. These cells are being reprogrammed to iPSC Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vantaa, Finland. and analyzed for pluripotency, i.e. potential to differentiate into cells The pure and intact DNA or RNA is an important starting point for vari- of the three germ layers, and differentiated into neuronal cells. iPSC ous experiments. Thermo Scientific KingFisher Flex offers an efficient derived neuronal subtypes will be scored for number, morphology, and rapid automated system for isolation of high quality nucleic ac- migration and apoptosis. iPSC from normal individuals are used as ids. The technology is based on magnetic rods transferring particles controls. The expected results from this effort will provide novel and through several purification phases and it is adaptable for all magnetic basic understanding about pathophysiological mechanisms in neuro- particle separation kits. developmental disorders. To obtain the optimal yield and ratio of purified DNA we analyzed the mixing speeds of the protocol for DNA isolation from blood. Faster mix- P11.059 transgenerational methylation changes induced by the ing speeds were found to increase the yield of DNA and additionally endocrine disruptor vinclozolin on imprinted genes the slow mixing speeds resulted in the impurities in the elution buffer. A. Paoloni-Giacobino1,2, C. Stouder1; However, especially in the heated steps with simultaneous mixing the 1Geneva University Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Swiss Center for slow speeds are necessary. Applied Human Toxicology, Geneva, Switzerland. In several applications the highest possible ratio of isolated DNA is not Endocrine-Disruptors have been suggested to affect the reproductive the prime goal but instead the briefness of the protocol is essential. We system. In this study, Vinclozolin, an endocrine-disruptor with anti-an- compared conventional and rapid protocols for DNA purification from drogenic properties, was administered at low doses (50mg/kg/day) different volumes of blood. The results indicated that although DNA to pregnant mice at the time of embryo sex determination. The pos- isolated with the conventional protocol had better quality and quantity sible effects on the differentially methylated domains of 5 imprinted than DNA isolated with the rapid protocol, the latter proved to have genes: H19, Gtl2, Peg1, Snrpn and Peg3 were examined in the male sufficient quality for several down stream applications, for example for offspring, by bisulfite treatment - pyrosequencing, over 3 generations. PCR. Both somatic and germ cells were analysed. In the sperm of controls The KingFisher® Flex together with the easily modified Thermo Scien- the percentages of methylated CpGs were close to the expected theo- tific BindIt software provides large variety of options to create different retical values. However, in the in utero exposed mice, VCZ induced purification protocols. Mixing combinations can be optimized depend- impressive changes in the percentages of methylated CpGs of all 5 ing on the starting material, the purified product or demands on the genes. The effects of VCZ were transgenerational, with however a rapidity of the protocol. gradual disappearance from F1 to F3. No uro-genital malformations were noticed. A possible effect on spermatogenesis was explored. In- P11.062 An automated analysis protocol for research of terestingly, the mean sperm concentration of the VCZ-administered KRAs/BRAF mutation detection for data generated on capillary female offspring was severely decreased as compared to the controls, electrophoresis instruments in the F1 generation. The effect was no more significant in the F2 and E. Currie-Fraser1, J. Walker1, J. Wang2; F3 generations. 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2TrimGen Corp., Sparks, These drastic changes in the pattern of methylation of the examined MD, United States. imprinted genes, in the germ cells of the offspring, congruent with a Biomarker research continues to be an important focus in oncology deleterious effect on sperm concentration, suggest that the observed studies, including the role of KRAS and BRAF mutations in CRC and methylation changes may indeed be responsible for the observed other EGFR-associated cancers. This has lead to increased research spermatogenic impairment. of these genes as possible predictive markers and targets for contin- ued study. With this increased interest comes a need for automation of data analysis and report generation to decrease bottlenecks in the research laboratory by reducing manual review time. This poster will present an Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 automated workflow for detection of KRAS and BRAF mutations and genesis still remains a bioinformatic and experimental challenge. concise report generation in sample data generated on capillary elec- trophoresis instruments using fragment analysis software tools. We P11.065 cOmPARiNG HAPLOtYPEs iN tHE PREsENcE OF will demonstrate how key features in the software, such as sample NOisE: APPLicAtiON FOR LiNKAGE stUDiEs quality values, allele binning and report analysis, enable this workflow B. Markus, O. Agamy, O. Birk; to be a significant improvement over visual scoring methods. The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics at the National Institute for For Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or human thera- Biotechnology in the Nege, Beer-Sheva, Israel. peutic or diagnostic use. The availability of high-throughput data enables detailed comparison of genomes between individuals. This holds great promise for genetic P11.063 KRAs mutation screening by HRm analysis: a mapping, especially in isolated populations, where Identity By Descent comparative study (IBD) haplotypes are found in loci associated with autosomal recessive C. Lauricella, F. Orsini, A. Colosimo, N. Marziliano, V. Motta, M. Gambacorta, diseases. Implementing a simple framework for pair-wise IBD infer- S. Veronese; ence, we address the two main challenges in IBD mapping: unreliable Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedale Cà Granda Niguarda, MILANO, Italy. estimates of allele frequency and marker errors. In this study we pro- Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common hu- pose a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) for comparing haplotypes be- man malignancies with more than 300.000 cases both in the United tween pairs of individuals and demonstrate its efficacy in whole genome States and in the European Union each year. Kirsten RAS (KRAS) is scans for linkage analysis. A comparison of haplotypes is mapped to a a small GTPase that plays a key role in Ras/mitogen-activated pro- new marker space, {0, 1}, which represents the IBS (Identical by State) tein kinase signaling pathway (GO:0008284); somatic mutations in status for each marker between the individuals. The distribution of the the KRAS gene are frequently found in many cancers and result in a new marker is less sensitive to allele frequencies and allows a direct constitutively active protein. Furthermore the responses to anti-EGFR assessment of mistyped markers in the candidate IBD regions. monoclonal antibodies therapies in colorectal cancer are associated with the KRAS mutational status P11.066 Blood transcriptome of childhood malaria This study aims at performing the KRAS mutation detection on for- A. B. W. Boldt1,2, Y. Kalmbach1, M. P. Grobusch1,3, C. Tena-Tomás1, A. Dzeing4, malin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor tissues by High Resolu- M. Kombila4, M. Bonin5, I. J. T. Messias-Reason2, B. Mordmüller1,3, P. G. tion Melting analysis (HRM) and compare the results with sequencing Kremsner1,3, J. F. J. Kun1; analysis. 1Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, Methods: Thirty FFPE samples were macrodissected to enrich sam- 2Hospital de Clínicas, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil, 3Medical ples for tumor cells. KRAS gene amplification was performed using Research Unit, Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, 4Tropical two different sets of primers for HRM and direct automated sequenc- Medicine and Mycology, University of Libreville, Libreville, Gabon, 5Institute for ing. Human Genetics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Results: Our results showed a strong concordance between the HRM We recently identified apoptosis as an important factor in generating analysis and cycle sequencing (29/30, 96,6%); however the HRM lymphopenia during malaria. In this work, we pursue a deeper under- could not predict the type of mutations. In only one sample (3.3%) the standing on the genetic mechanisms underlying this disease process. HRM analysis showed a mutated profile which was not subsequently To this end, we investigated the genomic transcriptional profiles of confirmed by direct sequencing. whole blood of healthy children and children with asymptomatic infec- Conclusion: We plan to expand our cases to validate its efficacy as a tion, uncomplicated malaria, malaria associated with severe anemia prescreening tests, also in terms of specificity and sensitivity. and cerebral malaria. We hybridized 5 U133A and 5 U133B Affymetrix Our preliminary data support the notion that HRM analysis could be an microarrays for each condition. The profiles were confirmed by FACS affordable test and valuable methodology for the detection and screen- (CD35, CD55 and CD71) and real-time PCR (24 genes) results and ing of somatic KRAS mutations in clinical samples prior confirmation compared with GEO data from other authors. We also used Ingenu- cycle sequencing. ity systems software to find immune pathways significantly affected by gene regulation. A set of immunoglobulin gene segments was P11.064 Detection of translocation breakpoints in a leukemia repressed in asymptomatic infection, as well as genes involved in B cell line by sOLiD(tm) sequencing of mate paired fragments cell receptor signaling and dendritic cell maturation. Genes and cor- L. B. Cavelier1,2, C. Tellgren-Roth1, U. Gyllensten1; responding pathways become activated in uncomplicated malaria, 1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, as well as TLR signaling. Genes involved in lymphocyte ICOS-ICO- 2Clinical Genetics, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. SL signaling, IFN-signaling, HLA class II antigen presentation and in The aim of this project is to combine current massive sequencing the cross-talk between dendritic and NK cells were repressed during technology and bioinformatics to generate a sequence-based karyo- severe malaria. Allergenic eosinophil and basophil genes were also type with kilobase resolution. As a pilot project we have performed a repressed. Severe malarial anemia was specifically characterized by translocation analysis on a whole genome sequence generated from reticulocytosis and altered expression of complement regulatory pro- a B-cell leukemia cell line previously characterized using G-bandning, teins, whereas only a few genes encoding inflammatory products were M-FISH and affymetrix SNP.6 array. Two mate-paired libraries were activated during cerebral malaria. The transcriptional profiles found in constructed using two different fragment sizes. The sequenced librar- blood cells of children with severe malaria suggest an imbalance of ies contained the 25 bp paired-ends of fragments with an average size key regulatory processes, the restoration of which by novel supportive of 1,5kb and 3,2 kb. A total of 16*109 basepairs were obtained of which therapies could prevent adverse outcomes. 5,5*109 were present in paired fragments. The translocation analysis was performed by selecting reads matching to two different chromo- P11.067 Analysis of association of the polymorphic locus somes and sorting them according to the position of the first and then Fnu4Hi in the gene for monoamine oxidase mAOA with the second tag. The fragments were clustered in pairs according to the indicators of nonverbal intelligence of human. library fragment size. Groups with at least four fragments and pres- A. Maraleva, O. Gumerova, V. Gorbunova; ent in both sequencing runs were retained while those present in an Bashkir State Pedagogical University name of M.Akmully, Ufa, Russian independent control sample were removed. This filtering resulted in Federation. 50 groups of fragments representing hypothetical translocation break- Monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) - an enzyme that plays an important points, including two of the translocations characterized cytogeneti- role in the metabolism of neuroactive and vasoactive amines in the cally. Breakpoint analysis revealed the juxtaposition of an enhancer central nervous system and peripheral tissues. The gene encoding element located on 12p to the MYC gene on 8q, as the underlying MAOA, localized on the X chromosome (p11.4-p11.3). The analysis change of one of the previously known translocations. Experimental associations of polymorphic variants Fnu4HI the gene MAOA with the verification of the remaining hypothetical rearrangements will be per- level of nonverbal intelligence of human. formed. In summary sequencing of mate paired fragments can easily Materials and methods. Analysis Fnu4HI polymorphism in the gene identify interchromosomal rearrangements at kilobase precision but MAOA conducted in 200 unrelated individuals aged 18-35 by poly- identification of significant rearrangements relevant to disease patho- merase chain reaction (PCR) with subsequent processing amplifikons Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 appropriate restriction endonuclease. The level of intellectual develop- in K562 cells. However siRNAs directed at the DNA binding protein of ment (IQ) in the subjects was determined by the method of Cattell. In LARC (i.e. hnRNP C1/C2) do not have the same effect. To further these accordance with the index IQ study population were divided into two findings, we have embarked on creating K562 cells stably expressing groups: high (above 110 points) and normal (90-110 points) level of hnRNP C1/C2 shRNAs using lentiviruses. To this end, five hnRNP C1/ intellectual development. C2 shRNA-pLKO.1 vectors were screened in HEK 293T cells. Two Results. Analysis of the association evidence of significant differences gave ≥60% target transcript knockdown levels after normalization for in the distribution of genotype frequencies between the study groups transfection efficiency. These vectors were subsequently packaged due to increased frequency of geterozygous genotypes MAOA + / - and used to transduce K562 cells. Cells transduced with these vec- (36.84% vs 19.75%, P = 0.002) and reducing the frequency of geno- tors grow very poorly relative to those infected with the pLKO.1 control type MAOA - / - (48.42% vs 65.43%, P = 0.035) in the group of individu- vector_suggesting that hnRNP C1/C2 down-regulation causes growth als with high levels of intellectual development. inhibition. We are in the process of determining the hnRNP C1/C2 and Thus, the association established polymorphic locus Fnu4HI in the γ-globin expression levels of these cells using qRT-PCR. gene MAOA with indicators of nonverbal intelligence. This work was partially funded grant from the Ministry of Education of P11.070** Relevance of the novel mecP2 target genes scG10 Russia „Thematic Plan 2008-2010“ and PN1 in the pathogenesis of Rett syndrome J. Nectoux1,2, Y. Fichou1, T. Le Guen1, N. Bahi-Buisson1,3, J. Chelly1,2, T. P11.068 Gene expression changes after losartan treatment in Bienvenu1,2; patients with marfan syndrome 1Université Paris-Descartes, Institut Cochin, Inserm, U1016, Paris, France, T. Radonic, P. de Witte, M. J. H. Baars, B. J. M. Mulder, M. Groenink, A. H. 2Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Laboratoire de Zwinderman; Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France, 3Assistance Publique – Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a common genetic disorders with an inci- Paris, France. dence of 2-3 in 10 000 live births. Aortic dilatation is the main cause of Rett syndrome (RTT) is a progressive neurodevelopmental disorder morbidity and mortality of Marfan patients. Losartan, an antihyperten- that occurs almost exclusively in girls, with an incidence between sive drug inhibits the aortic dilatation in a mouse model of MFS. 1/10,000 and 1/15,000 births. Classical RTT is characterized by a pe- Methods riod of apparently normal development until 6-18 months of age, fol- We analyzed gene expression in snap frozen punch skin-biopsies of lowed by a period of regression, with deceleration of head growth, loss 26 patients before and after 4 weeks of losartan therapy using Human of speech and acquired motor skills. More than 90% typical RTT pa- Exon 1.0 ST Array (Affymetrix). Whole Transcriptome Gene Expres- tients have heterozygous mutations in the X-linked MECP2 gene that sion (WTGE) analysis in 52 samples was analyzed using Significance encodes the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2, a transcriptional modulator. Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) method for paired samples. Separate In a previous study, we identified SCG10 and PN1 as potential novel analyses of pathways involved in MFS and alternative splicing under MeCP2 target genes in human primary fibroblasts. Here, the signifi- losartan were performed. Results were validated using rtPCR. cant SCG10 down-regulation was confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR Results and western-blot in the Mecp2308/y mouse model, either in adult ce- WTGE analysis revealed 79 differentially expressed genes (delta=0.54, rebral tissues or in a primary cortical neuron culture. Down-regulation q<5%). When analyzed for functional annotation using FatiGO, lipid of PN1 was also confirmed by shRNA experiments targeting MECP2 metabolic process was the most significant term (p=7.1 E-10). From in the human neuroblastoma-derived SH-SY5Y cell line. SCG10 is a the WTGE and pathway analysis 7 most significant genes with highest neuron-specific protein that accumulates in the central domain of the fold change were validated using rtPCR (Table 1). Alternative splicing axonal growth cone where it acts as a potent microtubule-destabilizing analysis revealed 2 significant genes, ACSM3 and ADCY6 (delta=0.3, factor enhancing neurite outgrowth, while Protease-nexin 1 (PN1) is q=0), known to be involved in left ventricular hypertrophy, blood pres- a protease inhibitor secreted by the astrocytes, with postulated roles sure regulation and obesity. in regeneration and regulation of neurite outgrowth. In the adult mam- Conclusion malian nervous system PN1 has been shown to be expressed in the Clinical dosage of losartan seems to decrease TGF-β signaling path- olfactory system and by some glial cells in response to neuronal in- way by modulating the expression in CIDEA and ENG genes in Marfan jury. Deficit in both proteins may explain in part how MeCP2 deficiency patients. The exact role of genes involved in lipid metabolic process in affect neuronal function, leading to reduced dendritic branching and MFS is yet to be defined. short dendritic spines observed in the RTT cortex. Genes with prominent expression levels change under losartan therapy P11.071 MeCP2_270 mutant protein is expressed in astrocytes Gene Fold Function as well as in neurons and localizes into the nucleus iD change C. Bodda1, L. A. Kifayathulla1, J. P. Arunachalam1, H. Y. Agbemenyah1, F. NRNPH2 1.22 Nuclear mRNA splicing Laccone1, A. U. Mannan1,2; CPS1 2.22 Proteolysis , novel association with homocysteine levels 1Instiute of Human Genetics, University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany, Insulin secretion, adaptive responses to acute orthostatic stress GAL 2.05 2DFG-Research Center Molecular Physiology of the Brain, Goettingen, preventing syncope in susceptible individuals Germany. CIDEA 1.26 Negative regulation of TGFβ pathway MECP2 gene encoding for methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) Regulation of TGFβ signaling pathway, modulation of immune is a transcription factor that recognize methylated CpG dinucleotides ENG 0.85 response and binds symmetrically to such target DNA sequence. Mutations in FADS2 1.81 Unsaturated fatty acid biosynthetic process , metabolic syndrome MECP2 gene is the main cause for Rett syndrome (RTT). RTT is a FADS1 1.59 Unsaturated fatty acid biosynthetic process, metabolic syndrome progressive neurodevelopmental disorder, which affects primarily girls during early childhood and it is one of the most common causes of P11.069 K562 cells stably expressing hnRNP c1/c2 shRNAs mental retardation in females. The R270X is one of the most frequent have growth inhibition recurrent MECP2 mutations among RTT cohorts. The R270X mutation M. Hosseini, S. Farashi, J. Gharasouran, M. Banan; resides within the TRD-NLS (Transcription Repression Domain-Nucle- Genetics Research Center; University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation ar Localization Signal) region of MeCP2 and causes a more severe Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. clinical phenotype with increased mortality as compared to other muta- MBD2 acts as a repressor on the human γ-globin gene. However the tions. To evaluate the functional role of R270X mutation, we generated protein does not act by binding directly to CpG residues in the γ-globin a transgenic mouse model expressing MeCP2_270_EGFP (human promoter. In one model, MBD2 may act by binding indirectly to γ-globin mutation equivalent) by BAC recombineering. The expression pat- regulatory regions through an associating complex. One such complex tern of MeCP2_270_EGFP was similar to that of endogenous MeCP2. identified in K562 cells is the LCR-associated remodeling complex Strikingly, MeCP2_270_EGFP localizes in the nucleus, contrary to the (LARC). Here we have set out to test this model. Previous results from conjecture that the R270X could cause disruption of the NLS. Quanti- our lab suggest that MBD2 siRNAs can augment γ-globin expression tative expression analysis of MeCP2 target genes revealed up-regula-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 tion in Mecp2_270_EGFP transgenic mice as compared to wild type pression during osteoblastogenesis is increased as cells differentiate mice. In primary hippocampal cells, we show that MeCP2_270_EGFP to osteoblasts. ROR2 as a non-cononical Wnt signaling regulates os- was expressed in astrocytes by co-localization with the astrocyte spe- teoblastogenesis. cific marker, glial fibrillary acidic protein. Our data showing expression of MeCP2_270_EGFP in the transgenic mice astrocytes further rein- P11.074 Quantitative and qualitative analysis of SNRPN gene force the recent findings concerning the expression of MeCP2 in the methylation for Prader-Willi syndrome by real-time PcR with glial cells. methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting analysis C. C. Hung1,2, S. Y. Lin3,4, C. N. Lee4, Y. N. Su1,2; P11.072 A New High-speed conversion Kit for the Direct 1Graduate Institute of Clinical Genomics, National Taiwan University College of Detection of methylated DNA Extracted from gDNA, cancer, Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan Blood or cell Line tissues for Research Utilizing capillary University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, Electrophoresis National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department S. R. Berosik, C. Liu, W. Liao, E. Schreiber, M. Wenz; of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Life Technologies Corporation, Foster City, CA, United States. Taiwan. DNA methylation influences cellular differentiation and higher organism Introduction Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman syndrome development. DNA methylation in the promoter region of genes plays a (AS) are caused by deletion at a common region of chromosomal central role in epigenetics and is associated with transcriptional silenc- 15q11-13 or uniparental disomy of chromosome 15 (UPD15). Identi- ing. Controlling or regulating gene expression by DNA methylation is fication of CpG methylation status at the SNRPN gene locus can be related to: cell cycle regulation, embryonic development, X-chromo- used as a diagnostic test for PWS. some gene silencing, chromatin structure and Oncogenesis. Methods Here we show that real-time PCR with methylation-sensitive A methylation kit has been developed to provide a faster, more stream- melting analysis (MS-HRM) is a sensitive and specific assay detecting lined research protocol that allows direct bisulfite conversion from bio- CpG methylation status as well as copy number aberrations in a single logical samples (cell lines, tissues, blood and purified DNA) with com- tube. We established this duplex assay for the analysis of 38 individu- parable or better performance than existing kits. Without pretreatment als with Prader-Willi syndrome, 2 individuals with Angelman syndrome, of DNA with bisulfite, methylation patterns are lost after PCR amplifi- and 28 unaffected individuals. cation of DNA. Traditionally, the bisulfite conversion incubation step Results By comparing the copy number, deletion type and non-deletion has been time consuming and labor intensive. Treatment of DNA with type resulting in real-time PCR with marked copy number changes. In bisulfite reagent converts C-bases to uracil (U) without significant con- MS-HRM, the peak at lower melting temperature (85 °C ) belonged to version of the 5-methyl cytosine (5mC), subsequently resulting in PCR the paternal allele (unmethylated) while the peak at higher melting tem- amplification of 5mC as C-bases and the U-bases are read as thymine perature (89 °C) belonged to the maternal allele (methylated). The Tm (T-bases) on capillary electrophoresis platforms. Available bisulfite of the two alleles demonstrates clearer distinction in a derivative plot. conversion methods require DNA extraction from paraffin, while this The genotyping results obtained were fully concordant with traditional procedure is capable of direct bisulfite conversion from unprocessed methylation PCR and all 68 samples were identified successfully. FFPE specimens. Complete conversion is achieved within 2-3-hrs. Conclusions Our results show that the real-time PCR with MS-HRM We describe a direct bisulfite conversion of gDNA samples within 2-3- strategy is good alternative for molecular diagnosis of PWS and AS. hours that has also been tested on cancer, blood, and FFPE samples. The in-house protocol provides detailed information about deletion and These research samples are run in parallel with an existing bisulfite kit UPD genotypes as a significant strategy in clinical applications for epi- and the results compared on the 3500 capillary electrophoresis plat- genetics in a routine laboratory. form. The 3500 series Genetic Analyzer is for research use only. Not in- P11.075 High-throughput genomic and tissue microarray tended for any animal or human therapeutic or diagnostic use. expression profiling reveal the placental gene expression signature of early-onset HELLP syndrome similar to that of P11.073 the role of methylation status of 5‘ UtR end of ROR2 early-onset preeclampsia gene in osteoblast differentiation of mscs. T. Varkonyi1, B. Nagy1, T. Füle1, A. Tarca2, K. Karaszi1, J. Schönleber1, P. M. Noruzinia, G. Tarfiei; Hupuczi1, I. Kovalszky1, J. Rigo Jr1, H. Meiri3, Z. Papp1, R. Romero2, N. G. Tarbiat Modares University, School of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Than1; Republic of Iran. 1Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Perinatology Research Branch, Several transcription factors such as Runx2 and Osterix are involved Ditroit, MI, United States, 3Diagnostic Technologies, Yokneam, Israel. in osteoblast differentiation. ROR2 is a orphan receptor tyrosine ki- Background: The involvement of the placenta in the pathogenesis of nase that acts as a co-receptore in Non-canonical Wnt signaling path- preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome is unquestionable. In this study way. It is shown that ROR2 expression increases during differentiation we aimed to examine placental gene expression and reveal candidate of MSCs to osteoblast and then decreases as cells progress toward biomarkers. osteocytes. Methods: Placental specimens were obtained from women with ear- MSCs isolation and expansion: human bone marrow mesenchymal ly-onset preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome as well as from control stem cells(hBMSCs) is isolated using combining Ficoll-mediated dis- women who delivered preterm or at term. After histopathological ex- continuous density gradient centrifugation with plastic adherence. amination, fresh-frozen placental specimens were used for microarray isolated mononuclear cell layers were then suspended in DMEM and expression profiling followed by pathway analyses. A linear model was plated in culture flasks and incubated for overnight and then the non- used to fit -DCt values as a function of study groups while adjusting adherent cells were washed away leaving behind the adherent cell for gestational age. Data was further analyzed by qRT-PCR and by population. Flow cytometric analysis was use to identify the isolated immunostainings on tissue microarrays constructed from paraffin-em- hBMSCs. bedded placental specimen. Osteoblast differentiation: for osteoblastic differentiation, the hBMSCs Results: Placental gene expression was gestational age-dependent were incubated for 21 days by Bone Differentiation Medium(BDM) . among preterm and term controls. Out of the 350 differentially ex- Alizarin red staining and RT-PCR for ALP and osteocalcin confirm os- pressed genes in preeclampsia and 555 genes in HELLP syndrome, teoblastic differentiation. a large group of 226 genes had expression changes. Of these 226 Methylation specific PCR(MSP): MSP is used for analyzing methyla- genes, many encode proteins that have already been implicated as tion status of 5‘ UTR end of ROR2 gene in MSCs and osteoblastic cells putatitive biomarkers for preeclampsia. Enrichment analyses revealed in different stages. Results: that differentially expressed genes are mostly attributed to the same 5‘ UTR end of ROR2 gene in MSCs is hyper methylated and methyla- biological processes, expressed in similar cellular compartments and tion is reduced as cells differentiate toward osteoblastic progenitors participate in the same pathways in early-onset preeclampsia and and finally this region is hypo methylated in mature osteoblasts. HELLP syndrome; however, there were some biological processes Discussion: overrepresented in only one of these syndromes. This finding confirms previous studies, which showed that ROR2 ex- Conclusion: High-throughput genomic and tissue microarray expres-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 sion profiling revealed that the placental gene expression signature in P11.078 Real-time quantitation of primary transcripts of early-onset preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome largely overlaps. Ac- microRNA genes cordingly, a common cause and pathophysiologic processes may lead Y. Liang, F. Fan, E. Langit, J. Lu, P. Brzoska, C. Chen, L. Wong; to shared placental and clinical features in these severe syndromes. Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. Regulation of mature microRNA (miRNA) expression has been shown P11.076 Dynamic miRNA profiles in human diseases during the course of biogenesis under different contexts: from tran- A. Keller1, A. Wendschlag1, P. Leidinger2, A. Bauer3, J. Hoheisel3, P. Staehler4, scription, processing of pri-miRNA to pre-miRNA by Drosha, to pro- E. Meese2; cessing of pre-miRNA to mature miRNA by Dicer. A mature miRNA 1Biomarker Discovery Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Department of Human can be processed from two or more stem-loop precursor loci, which Genetics, Medical School, Saarland University, Homburg, Germany, 3Division are denoted with numeric suffixes such as -1, -2, etc. As of the 14th of Functional Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Release of the miRBase, there are 154 genes among the 750 miRNA Germany, 4febit biomed GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany. genes that belong to this category. To interrogate regulation of miRNA MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have demonstrated their potential as biomark- expression at the transcriptional level for those that can be processed ers in a variety of studies. A particularly promising approach is the de- from multiple genomic locations, it requires assays to specifically termination of miRNA fingerprints in patients from body fluids rather quantitate the precise locus of interest. We have developed a pipe- than tissue biopsies. line to design and select real-time RT-PCR assays to quantitate pri- We measured miRNA profiles in different body fluids (including blood mary transcripts of miRNA genes. These assays are designed against and serum) of about 1,000 patients suffering from different diseases, genomic DNA sequence so the genomic DNA needs to be removed including cancer (among others lung tumors, pancreatic cancer, pros- by prior enzyme treatment. We showed that the TaqMan® Pri-miRNA tate cancer) and inflammatory diseases (multiple sclerosis, pancreati- Assays have minimally detectable or no background using either cell tis, COPD). Analyses were based on all known miRNAs as annotated lysates or commercial tissue total RNA. Excellent linearity was seen in miRBase version 12.0 or higher. To extract relevant information from using cDNA synthesized from total RNA, or using 1ng/ul or greater of this large data set, we implemented a dynamic miRNA database. This genomic DNA. The specificity of the assays to distinguish loci that are database contains the miRNA profile and clinical information for each processed into identical mature miRNA was demonstrated using sub- sample such as the TNM status of a cancer patient. miRNA profiles cloned plasmids, as well as using breast cancer cell lines that showed from different diseases and controls can be easily extracted and an- concordant expression patterns among such loci with published data alyzed. In addition, the profiles can be used for classifying patients in human breast cancer. based on the developed biomarker signatures. Besides the compari- son of diseases and controls, the flexibility enables numerous relevant P11.079 MicroRNAs with a potential influence on SERCA2 diagnostic tasks, for example distinguishing between lung cancer and protein expression in human myocardial infarction COPD patients. Since the database content is steadily increasing, E. Boštjančič, N. Zidar, D. Glavač; more specific questions can be approached, for example the identifi- Institute of Pathology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. cation of putative differences between metastasizing and non-metas- Cardiac sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum calcium ATPase-2 (SERCA2) tasizing cancers. plays a central role in myocardial contractility. SERCA2 mRNA and Taken together, our database contains the largest collection of com- protein reduction may contribute to various form of heart disease. plex miRNA profiles from patients’ body fluids and will help scientists SERCA2 is regulated at post-translational level by phospholamban, and clinicians alike to address many questions of different nature. and since correlation between decreased SERCA2 mRNA and protein levels is not always observed, we purposed that it may be in addition P11.077** miR-103 and miR-107 are involved in the regulation of regulated at post-transcription level. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), post-tran- cDK5R1/p35 expression. scription regulators of gene expression, have been reported to influ- S. Moncini1, A. Salvi2, M. Venturin1, P. Zuccotti1, A. Nicolin1, G. De Petro2, S. ence a wide variety of physiological as well as pathological conditions, Barlati2, P. Riva1; including cardiovascular disease. Since correlation between SERCA2 1Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Università degli Studi di Brescia, and miRNA expression was not previously reported, we focused on Brescia, Italy. miRNAs that could potentially influence SERCA2 expression in human CDK5R1 encodes for p35, an activator of CDK5, which is involved in myocardial infarction (MI). neuronal migration and differentiation during CNS development. A lot SERCA2 protein expression, analyzed by western blot, was decreased of microRNAs (miRNAs) target sites for twenty different miRNAs have in infarcted tissue when compared to remote myocardium, and 21 miR- been predicted by PicTar in CDK5R1 3’UTR. A Real-Time PCR of 5 NAs were up-regulated when analyzed by miRNA microarrays in the selected miRNAs performed in human cell lines showed an inverse same tissue. MicroRNA binding prediction to SERCA2 mRNA, using correlation between miR-103 and miR-107 levels and p35 expression, several in silico approaches (TargetScan, PicTar, miRBase, miRanda, suggesting a negative effect of these miRNAs on CDK5R1 expres- microrna.org, miRDB, RNA22, mFold) identified 213 putative miRNAs. sion. We carried out transient transfection of SK-N-BE neuroblastoma By combining miRNA microarray, target prediction and western blot cells with miR-107/103 precursors (pre-miR-107/103) and antagonists results, we identified 8 miRNAs (miR-34a, miR-214, let-7i, miR-100, (anti-miR-107/103). 48h after pre-miR-107 transfection, a significant miR-122, miR-199-3p, miR-199-5p and miR-497) with a potential influ- reduction of p35 levels was observed, by 38% with 50nM and 49% ence on SERCA2. In a proportion of samples, up-regulation of miR- with 100nM of precursor. Otherwise, if anti-miR-107 (50-100nM) was 122 was confirmed using real-time PCR, and miR-100 up-regulation transfected, an increase of 1.4-1.8 folds in p35 levels was observed, and SERCA2 down-regulation is in accordance with other research compared to the untransfected control. Similarly, the transfection of performed on cardiomyopathies and neonatal cardiomyocytes. Our re- pre-miR-103 (50-100nM) or anti-miR-103 (50-100nM) caused a reduc- sults indicate that some miRNAs, in addition to phospholamban, may tion (35-40%) or an increase (76-83%) of p35 levels, respectively. Lu- be involved in the regulation of SERCA2 expression in MI. ciferase assays on 3’UTR constructs cotransfected with miR-103/107 showed that 4 out of 9 predicted target sites might be functional. De- P11.080 Real-time quantitation of custom-multiplexed TaqMan® letion of the binding sites is in progress: at present deletion of site microRNA Assays 1 shows increasing of luciferase activity, while deletion of site 2 pro- L. Wong, T. Gulham, C. Chen; duces no effects. Finally, transfection of miR-103 or miR-107 reduces Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. SK-N-BE migration ability by 47 and 45% respectively following in vitro MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are ~22 nucleotide endogenous RNA molecules scratch assays. The obtained findings indicate that miR-103 and miR- that play an important role in the regulation of developmental and 107 regulate CDK5R1/p35 expression and allow us to hypothesize physiological processes in animals and plants. Studies indicate that that a miRNA-mediated mechanism might influence CDK5 activity and miRNAs are efficacious biomarkers for the classification of tumors, its pathway. and are involved in the multilevel regulation of gene expression. Over 10,000 mature miRNAs for hundreds of species are listed in miR- Base and a growing number of novel miRNAs are being discovered. To determine the level of miRNA expression, Applied Biosystems de-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 27 veloped the stem-loop RT based TaqMan MicroRNA Assays, a robust including those for which the inheritance cannot be determined, as method showing large dynamic range, high specificity and sensitivity. well as rare inherited CNVs. These results indicate that our classifica- We have recently developed a protocol to allow custom-multiplexing tion method will be of value for objectively prioritizing CNVs in clinical of the stem-loop RT primers, for a faster, more flexible approach for research and diagnostics. miRNA validation. In combination with an optimized pre-amplification method, we evaluated randomly selected miRNA assays in multiplex P11.083 Functional analysis of SNPs affecting mRNA splicing pools of 12, 24, 48, and 96 primers. Expression correlation for the linked to genome-wide association study (GWAs) loci common assays in the various multiplex was >0.98. Average delta Ct E. J. Mucaki, T. Whitehead, P. K. Rogan; between individual miRNA assays and custom pooled assays was 1.0. University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. Seven 96-plex of randomly selected miRNA assays were also evalu- We have investigated alternatively spliced mRNA isoforms in genes ated with total RNA from brain and placenta. Results showed minimal whose abundance and structure are altered by allele-specific splic- background with only 0.7% of the assays, from a total of 672, with Ct ing effects. We used information theory-based models of constitutive < 35 for the no template reactions. In addition, comparable expression splicing to search for splicing mutations among all validated HapMap pattern was observed using the delta, delta, delta Ct approach in which Phase II SNPs. We developed software (calculating ΔRi, in bits) to >93% was <1.0 when normalized to an endogenous control, and the predict mRNA splicing effects associated these polymorphisms and different methods and samples. annotate genomic sequences with information changes at natural and potential cryptic splice sites. 3097 SNPs produced ΔRi≥ 1 bit (≥ Δ2 P11.081** RNA expression profiles of Familial Hemiplegic fold) splice site changes in natural splice sites (963 donors, 2134 ac- migraine mouse models with relevance to migraine-associated ceptors). To support these predictions, exon microarray expression cerebellar ataxia data from HapMap Phase II individuals (GEO Accession GSE7851) B. de Vries, P. A. C. ‚t Hoen, L. A. M. Broos, S. C. Koelewijn, B. Todorov, R. R. was used to determine which SNP-affected natural sites show allele- Frants, M. D. Ferrari, J. M. Boer, A. M. J. M. van den Maagdenberg; specific changes in splicing index (the ratio of the exon to core probe- Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands. set cDNA hybridization intensities). Public mRNA and EST libraries The CACNA1A gene encodes the α1 subunit of voltage-gated Ca 2.1 were also queried for supporting evidence of cryptic site activation, as V Ca2+ channels. Mutations in CACNA1A are associated with familial well as diminished use of affected natural sites. Predictions were con- hemiplegic migraine (FHM), a rare monogenic subtype of migraine firmed by analysis of the abundance of each predicted splice isoform with aura that can be accompanied by cerebellar ataxia and/or epilep- for each SNP genotype. Using real time RT-PCR, 11 out of 12 (and one sy. Two extremes of the FHM clinical spectrum are seen with missense equivocal) SNPs tested with ΔRi > 1 bit exhibited significant changes mutations R192Q and S218L. Whereas R192Q mutation carriers suffer in splicing consistent with levels predicted by information theory. Ge- from pure FHM, S218L patients have a severe phenotype with FHM, nome-wide, strengths of 16906 cryptic and natural splice sites (ΔRi cerebellar ataxia, seizures, and brain edema after mild head trauma. > 0.9 bits) were found within 10kb of SNPs significantly associated Recently, knock-in Cacna1a mouse models were generated that carry with various phenotypes by GWAS. The most common phenotypes either the R192Q or S218L mutation. Here we investigated their RNA included 2799 SNPs proximate to GWAS SNPs associated with CNS- expression profiles in the occipital cortex and cerebellum because of related disease, 2004 with cardiac diseases, and 2110 with obesity- their relevance to aura and ataxia, respectively. Despite pronounced related diseases. consequences at molecular and neurobiological level, only modest dif- ferences in gene expression were observed in the cortex. This was P11.084 Arrayed Primer Extension (APEX-2) as a flexible not due to lack of power in our study since we observed extensive multiplex PcR-based method for nucleic acid variation analysis differential expression of genes in the chromosomal region surround- K. Krjutskov1, T. Viltrop1, P. Palta1, A. Metspalu2,3; ing the CACNA1A gene mutation, which are probably not related to 1IMCB, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Genome Centre, University of Tartu, Tartu, the phenotype of the mice. Expression differences were much more Estonia, 3Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. pronounced in the cerebellum of S218L mice and could be linked to Mutation detection and SNP genotyping are basic techniques in hu- their ataxic phenotype. Most strikingly, tyrosine hydroxylase, a marker man genetic- and molecular diagnostic laboratories. Currently numer- of delayed cerebellar maturation, is strongly up-regulated in cerebel- ous commercial and custom assays are available, but none of them is la of S218L mice. In addition, neuronal pathways, such as biogenic prioritized due to diverse applications and therefore “one size doesn’t amine synthesis pathways show signs of up-regulation as well. Our fit for all”. The key parameters for successful genotyping methods are findings indicate that migraine-associated phenotype cerebellar ataxia accuracy, flexibility, high throughput, and inexpensive cost. We devel- in Ca 2.1 mutant mice is best reflected in the basal RNA expression oped an up to 640-plex multiplex-PCR protocol and combined it with V profiles. four-color arrayed primer extension (APEX) detection method, APEX- 2. In APEX-2, each studied locus is amplified in multiplex PCR and P11.082 Accurate distinction of pathogenic from benign CNVs in detected on a microarray. For multiplex PCR, two oligonucleotides are mental Retardation required for each locus. Primers in the multiplex reaction are mixed J. Y. Hehir-Kwa1, N. Wieskamp1, C. Webber2, R. Pfundt1, H. G. Brunner1, C. together and involved in the first phase of PCR, using a standard pro- Gilissen1, B. B. A. de Vries1, C. P. Ponting2, J. A. Veltman1; tocol. All formed products are then amplified in the second, universal 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, primer phase of PCR. After purification and concentration of the mul- 2University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. tiplex-PCR products, single base extension on an oligomicroarray is Copy number variants (CNVs) have recently been recognized as a performed and genotypes are called. common form of genomic variation in humans. Hundreds of CNVs The principle of APEX-2 was published in 2008 and after that, many can be detected in any individual genome using genomic microar- applications using various plex sizes and different DNA sources simul- rays or whole genome sequencing technology, but their phenotypic taneously (mitochondrial, autosomal, and Y chromosome DNA) have consequences are still poorly understood. Rare CNVs have been re- been carried out. Furthermore, we have studied DNA extraction meth- ported as a frequent cause of neurological disorders such as mental ods from blood and saliva for multiplex PCR, scanned optimal primer retardation (MR), schizophrenia and autism, prompting widespread design parameters and looked deeply into all reaction and cycling implementation of CNV screening in diagnostics. In previous stud- conditions. APEX-2, as a custom genotyping assay has high accuracy ies we have shown that, in contrast to CNVs found in the general (99.86%), flexibility (50 - 1,000 plex) and throughput, and has a poten- population, MR-associated CNVs are significantly enriched in genes tial to become a reliable and user-friendly genotyping tool. whose mouse orthologues, when disrupted, result in a nervous system phenotype. We have developed and validated a novel computational P11.085 Molecular neurocytogenetic, in silico and proteome method (GeCCO) that differentiates between benign and MR-associ- (interactome/reactome) evaluations of brain-specific somatic ated CNVs using genomic features to annotate each CNV. This meth- genome variations in neurodegenerative diseases od is able to achieve a high accuracy when classifying a cohort of I. Y. Iourov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, T. Liehr3, A. D. Kolotii2, I. A. Demidova2,1, individuals with unexplained MR (~1,800). We demonstrate the benefit A. K. Beresheva1,2, V. S. Kravets2, O. S. Kurinnaia2,1, M. K. Tagirova1, E. A. of applying such computational methods to the interpretation of CNVs, Saprina1,4, I. V. Soloviev1, Y. B. Yurov1,2; Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian P11.087 Next generation sequencing: setting a new stage for Federation, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, DNA diagnostics? Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, R. J. Sinke, A. Pósafalvi, J. J. E. Bergsma, L. G. Boven, F. van Dijk, G. te Jena, Germany, 4Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Meerman, J. P. van Tintelen, J. D. H. Jongbloed; Moscow, Russian Federation. Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Chromosome instability (CIN) is associated with neurodegeneration in Netherlands. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) (Iourov et al., DNA diagnostic care suffers from laborious, time consuming proce- 2009). Here, we have attempted to determine cellular and molecular dures and limited possibilities to screen all genes for a given disease. basis of this relationship. High-resolution interphase molecular cyto- This results in incomplete, expensive diagnostic care and long report- genetic and in silico analyses showed that CIN involves specific chro- ing times. Here, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) provides a unique mosomal loci in the AT cerebellum: 14q12 (FOXG1B, NOVA1), 7p14, solution, enabling mutation analysis of all known disease-associated Xp22.1, Xp22.3 (FRA7C, FRAXB, FRAXC). The AD brain demonstrat- genes in one single experiment. Application of NGS would significant- ed a dramatic 10-fold increase in levels of chromosome 21-aneuploidy ly improve the diagnostic care for both patients, by maximizing their (6-15%). We further performed a proteomic (interactomic/reactomic) chances on a timely identified causal mutation, and family-members at study analyzing either loci disrupted by CIN or crucial intracellular pro- risk, by enabling carriership-testing in many more cases. cesses in context of our data. Genes disrupted in the AT cerebellum in- To assess the applicability of NGS in routine diagnostics, we compared teract with SMAD pathway (SMAD2, SMAD4 at 18q21.1) of TGF-beta the performance and quality of NGS using an Illumina-GAII to currently response, required for proper apoptosis and cell cycle progression. used methods. Additionally, these data implicate that neuronal-specific alternative Mutation detection was performed in 10 patients diagnosed with Ar- splicing is likely to be affected in AT (NOVA1 disruption). Reactomic rhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy. For these patients study suggested that G1/S DNA damage checkpoint p53-dependent the ARVC-associated genes DSC2, DSG2, PKP2, DSP, JUP, DES, pathway is altered by ATM mutations only without additional CIN ef- PLEC1, and TMEM43 were analyzed. These eight genes were PCR- fect. According to our and literature data, it is supposed that G2/M DNA amplified and subsequently analysed by NGS and CSCE/Sanger se- replication checkpoint pathway should be primarily affected in the AD quencing. brain. However, neither interactome nor reactome evaluation has elu- Our results indicate that NGS allows the readily detection of all mu- cidated elements playing a role in this pathway that have been found tations when using in-house developed software tools and appropri- to be involved in AD brain-specific CIN. Therefore, we concluded that ate parameters for data analysis. The variations detected included 2 neurodegeneration in the AD brain is mediated by DNA-replication- pathogenic mutations and 12 uncertain variants. There was a 100% independent aneuploidization and chromosome specificity is achieved concordance between the two methods. NGS could indeed provide by natural selection during brain ontogeny. We conclude that bioinfor- a mutation detection method that performs better than currently used matic and proteomic analysis is a required addition to studies discover- techniques. A considerable reduction of reporting times is feasible us- ing mechanisms of complex multisystem disease. ing NGS for the mutation analyses of disease genes. Further aspects dealing with data-quality, data-interpretation, detection of false-posi- P11.086 Resequencing of the candidate region for 16q-ADCA tive and false-negative results and implications for further implementa- and detection of an insertion polymorphism by fragment tion will be discussed. assembly data using massively parallel short-read sequencing. T. Kaname1,2, M. Tsukahara3,2, K. Yanagi1, K. Fujimori2,4, I. Kikuzato2,5, M. P11.088 Teruya2,6, Y. Imada7,2, M. Nezuo7,2, S. Yano7,2, Y. Sato2,5, Y. Miwa7,2, T. Hirano2,4, targeted Next Generation sequencing Pipeline For Large-scale R. Hirano8, H. Takashima8, K. Yoshiura9, N. Niikawa10, K. Naritomi1; Genomic studies 1Medical Genetics, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan, 2Okinawa P. Staehler1, A. Borries1, M. Scheffler1, Y. Chen1, A. Keller2; Cutting-Edge Genome Project, Okinawa, Japan, 3TTC, Tropical Technology 1febit biomed GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Biomarker Discovery Center, Center Ltd, Okinawa, Japan, 4Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Heidelberg, Germany. Tsukuba, Japan, 5OSTC, Okinawa, Japan, 6Okinawa Industrial Technology Massively parallel DNA sequencing technologies, combined with se- Center, Okinawa, Japan, 7TTC, Tropical Technology Center Ltd., Okinawa, quence capture methodologies, have accelerated the investigation Japan, 8Neurology and Geriatrics, Kagoshima University Graduate School of of specific genomic regions while reducing the time, cost, and effort Medicine, Kagoshima, Japan, 9Human Genetics, Nagasaki University Graduate needed to interrogate multiple loci. Combining the SOLiD 3plus Sys- School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan, 10The Research Institute tem with febit’s HybSelect Sequence Capture Solution in one stream- of Personalized Health Sciences, Health Sciences University of Hokkaido, lined targeted NGS pipeline, we established a powerful facility to re- Hokkaido, Japan. sequence large genomic regions in hundreds of clinical samples per Next Generation Sequencing technologies have brought new ap- study in a very economical way and within short time. proaches of genetic analyses for personal genome or human diseas- Demonstrating the power of this targeted re-sequencing pipeline, we es. The technologies can accurate giga-base order of sequence within present the results of a series of research studies that investigated a single run, allowing for complete resequencing of whole candidate clinically relevant genomic regions with an overall performance of region of a genetic disease in patients, whose responsible gene is not resequencing several hundred thousand bases in over 400 clinical identified. samples within 4 weeks. Multiplexed analysis of barcoded and pooled We picked one candidate region of a neurologenetic disorder, the au- samples drastically enhanced throughput and reduced cost per sample tosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia linked to chromosome 16q22 in these studies, whose results will be further discussed in upcoming (16q ADCA), as an example of the resequencing approach. The candi- high-impact publications. date region of 16q ADCA spanning 500kb was extracted and amplified The presented facility will allow targeted sequencing of more than in Japanese individuals by long-range PCR. Then, a fragment library 1,000 barcoded samples per week, serving large scale genomic stud- from the region was constructed and sequenced to a depth >400-fold ies and clinical research, thus taking next generation sequencing to using the SOLiD 3 system. Comparison of each sequences and the the next level. genome database allowed us to find novel variations in Japanese indi- viduals in addition to known SNPs. P11.089 Evaluation of the ABI SOLiD sequencing technology for Recently, an insertion polymorphism near the BEAN gene has been routine genetic diagnosis: a pilot study on BRCA1 and BRCA2 found. One type of insertion might be associated with 16q-ADCA. C. Houdayer1,2, V. Moncoutier1, B. Zeitouni3,4, L. Castéra1, E. Barillot3,4, M. We investigated whether the fragment analysis but not mate-paired Stern1,5, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,5,2; analysis could detect the insertion. A survey for the depth of reads from 1Institut Curie, Service de Génétique Oncologique, Paris, France, 2Université fragment assembly could detect such insertion. Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 3Institut Curie, service de bioinformatique, The resequencing approach of whole candidate region for a genetic Paris, France, 4Inserm Unit 900, Paris, France, 5Inserm Unit 830, Paris, France. disease might be a powerful tool to find not only SNPs but also in/del Molecular diagnosis in the coming years might be based on high mutations in patients. throughput technologies that would simultaneously explore a large number of genes for an impressive number of patients. Thus we have Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 designed a pilot study to determine if the SOLiD technology could fulfill on Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs), a target tissue of the requirements of molecular diagnosis. the syndrome. We analyzed 28 samples from molecularly defined NS Twenty patients fully genotyped by reference methods and harboring patients (17 with PTPN11, 6 with SOS1 and 5 with the recently identi- various mutations on BRCA1 and BRCA2 (transitions, transversions, fied SHOC2 mutation), and 21 samples from age- and sex-matched insertions and deletions from 1 to 20 bp) were included. DNAs were controls. We then selected genes differentially expressed between enriched for BRCA exonic regions and flanking introns by in-house control samples and each of the three mutation subgroups. Interest- multiplex PCRs and the Multiplicon assay. ingly, the transcriptional signatures so obtained displayed remarkable A targeted re-sequencing experiment was performed using the SOLiD gene-specificity: each mutational subgroup (PTPN11, SOS1, SHOC2) v3 system and the molecular barcoding. Four among the 20 barcodes was well distinguished from control samples by its own signature and performed poorly but all patients were correctly identified. displayed limited transcriptional overlap with the other subgroups, By using BFAST, 60% of the 100Mb reads were uniquely mapped to which is not consistent with a homogeneous generic NS molecular the amplicon sequences with an average depth-of-coverage of 3500X. profile. Systematic leave-one-out cross-validation confirmed that the We called potential SNPs and small indels with SAMTools and filtered transcriptional signatures are potentially useful not only to discriminate out most of false positives using the minimum coverage, the minimum control from NS samples, but also to subdivide NS samples based on allele ratio and distribution of the heterozygosis frequency as main fil- the mutated gene. In silico data mining revealed common features of tering parameters. All specific point mutations were successively local- PBMCs from NS patients, such as functional alteration of the JAK/ ized and identified along with expected polymorphisms. STAT and γ-Interferon pathways. These data provide evidence of a Few variations were found that were absent using our reference meth- high potential for GEP analysis of PBMCs both as a diagnostic tool and od, thus needing Sanger sequencing to decide between SOLiD false to dissect the molecular complexity of Noonan syndrome. positives or diagnostic false negatives. Next steps are the detection of large rearrangements and inclusion of a larger number of genes and P11.092 improved structural characterization of chromosomal patients. breakpoints using high resolution custom array-cGH Overall this pilot study shows that the SOLiD system plus a dedicated A. Lindstrand1, J. Schoumans1, P. Gustavsson1, N. Hanemaaijer2, H. bioinformatics pipeline fulfill the diagnostic requirements. Malmgren1, E. Blennow1; 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2University of Groningen, Groningen, P11.090 multiplex target enrichment using DNA indexing for Netherlands. ultra-high throughput sNP and cNV detection. Array-CGH is a powerful tool for the rapid detection of genomic imbal- E. M. Kenny, P. Cormican, W. P. Gilks, A. S. Gates, C. T. O’Dushlaine, C. ances. By customizing the array it is possible to increase the resolution Pinto, A. P. Corvin, M. Gill, D. W. Morris; in a targeted genomic region of interest and determine the structure Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 8, Ireland. of the breakpoints with high accuracy, as well as to detect very small Screening large numbers of target regions in multiple DNA samples for imbalances. We have used targeted custom arrays to zoom in on 38 sequence and structural variation is an important application of next chromosomal breakpoints from 12 different patients carrying both bal- generation sequencing but an efficient method to enrich the samples anced and unbalanced rearrangements. in parallel has yet to be reported. We describe a method that combines We show that it is possible to characterize unbalanced breakpoints DNA samples using indexes or barcodes prior to target enrichment within 17 to 20 000 bp, depending on the structure of the genome. All to facilitate this type of experiment. Sequencing libraries for multiple of the deletion and duplication breakpoints were further refined and po- individual DNA samples, each incorporating a unique 6bp index, are tential underlying molecular mechanisms of formation is discussed. In combined in equal quantities, enriched using a single in-solution tar- one of seven carriers of apparently balanced reciprocal translocations get enrichment assay and sequenced in a single reaction. Sequence we detected a small deletion of 200 bp within the previously FISH-de- reads are parsed based on the index, thus allowing sequence data to fined breakpoint, and in another patient, a large deletion of 11 Mb was be analyzed at the level of the individual DNA sample. We show that identified on a chromosome not involved in the translocation. use of indexed samples does not impact on the efficiency of the enrich- Targeted custom oligonucleotide arrays makes it possible to perform ment assay. Using sequencing libraries containing 3- and 9-indexed fine mapping of breakpoints with a resolution within the breakpoint re- HapMap DNA samples, the method was found to be highly accurate for gion much higher compared to commercially available array platforms. SNP identification. Even with sequence coverage as low as 8x, 98.8% In addition, identification of small deletions or duplications in appar- of sequence SNP calls were concordant with known genotypes. Addi- ently balanced rearrangements may contribute to the identification of tionally, we observed a strong correlation between sequence coverage new disease causing genes. and copy number variant (CNV) genotype in the indexed samples at a known CNV region (rho=1, p<0.0005). This method introduces signifi- P11.093 the Opitz BBB/G syndrome protein complex regulates cant flexibility into next generation sequencing study designs. Within the translation efficiency of the ephrin B1 mRNA a single sequencing experiment, it has the capacity to analyze the ex- S. Schweiger1, B. Aranda-Orgillés2, S. Krauss3, R. Zeller1, S. Roepcke3, S. onic regions of hundreds of genes in tens of samples for sequence and Krause3, M. Fuchs3, J. Aigner3, R. Schneider4; structural variation using as little as 1μg of input DNA per sample. 1University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom, 2Max-PLanck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Max-Planck Institute for Molecular P11.091 transcriptional hallmarks of Noonan syndrome in Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. peripheral blood mononuclear cells The MID1 protein, mutations in which cause a hypertelorism / hypo- G. Picco1, D. Cantarella1, G. Baldassarre2, C. Isella1, N. Crescenzo2, F. spadias syndrome called Opitz BBB/G syndrome, assembles a ribonu- Timeus2, N. Chiesa2, G. Merla3, L. Mazzanti4, C. Rossi4, G. Zampino5, M. cleoprotein (mRNP) complex that associates with mRNAs. The identity Tartaglia6, M. Silengo2, E. Medico1, G. Ferrero2; of these mRNAs and the potential implications of their interaction with 1University of Torino, Candiolo, Italy, 2University of Torino, Department of the MID1 protein complex remain unclear. We show here that the eph- Pediatrics, Torino, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, rin B1 (EFNB1) mRNA associates with the MID1 protein complex. Eph- Italy, 4Department of Pediatrics, Sant’ Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, rins are pathfinder molecules regulating embryonic patterning. Muta- Italy, 5Department of Pediatrics, Sacro Cuore Catholic University, Rome, Italy, tions in EFNB1 have been identified in patients with craniofrontonasal 6Department of Cell Biology and Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, dysplasia, another hypertelorism syndrome. We furthermore show that Roma, Italy. the MID1 protein complex regulates the translation of EFNB1, which is Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant syndrome charac- remarkably reduced in cells from OS patients leading to a compensa- terized by a distinctive facial appearance, heart defects and skeletal tory increase of EFNB1 transcription and an impaired responsiveness abnormalities, rarely associated with mental retardation or juvenile my- towards ephrin receptor stimuli in these cells. Our data not only bring elomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Germline mutations responsible for further insight into the pathogenesis of OS and other hypertelorism NS affect genes of the RAS-MAPK pathway, which regulates cell pro- syndromes, but also provide evidence for a novel and unexpected liferation, differentiation and senescence by ultimately controlling gene mechanism regulating EFNB1 function. expression. To investigate the transcriptional consequences of such mutations, we performed Global mRNA Expression Profiling (GEP) Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 20 P11.094 involvement of sOX9 and FGF23 in RUNX2 regulation in P11.096 Jörg D. Hoheisel1, Nathalia Giese2, markus Büchler2, osteoarthritic chondrocytes Andreas Keller3, Andrea Bauer1 T. Orfanidou1, A. Tsezou2; J. D. Hoheisel1, N. Giese2, M. Büchler2, A. Keller3, A. Bauer1; 1University of Thessaly, Medical School, Laboratory of Cytogenetics and 1Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Larissa, Greece, LARISSA, Greece, 2University of Thessaly, Surgery of the University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 3febit biomed, Medical School, Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Medical Genetics, Larissa, Heidelberg, Germany. Greece, University of Thessaly, Medical School, Department of Biology, Our research aims at the development and immediate application of Larissa, Greece, Larissa, Greece. new technologies for an analysis, assessment and description of both Osteoarthritis is a metabolic disease, including altered expression the realisation and regulation of cellular function from genetic informa- pattern of several genes in articular chondrocytes.Chondrocytes‘ hy- tion. pertrophy includes matrix remodelling, proliferation and apoptosis, Pancreatic cancer is at the centre of attention. Global studies are un- characteristics associated with the progression of osteoarthritis. We in- der way on SNP- or mutational variations, the epigenetic modulation of vestigated possible associations between RUNX2, SOX9 and FGF23 gene promoters, differences in transcription factor binding, changes of expressions in articular chondrocytes in order to elucidate their contri- transcript levels of coding and non-coding RNAs, on the actual protein bution in the osteoarthritic cartilage. SOX9, FGF23, RUNX2 and MMP- expression and the intensity of protein interactions. We also pursue 13 mRNA expressions were evaluated in osteoarthritic and normal genome-wide knock-out studies for the identification of genes that are chondrocytes by real-time PCR while MMP-13 protein expression by critical for tumour development and progression. immunofluorescense. RUNX2, FGF23 and SOX9 were downregulated By combining the data, we aim at an understanding of cellular regula- using small interfering RNA technology. The effect of human recombi- tion and its biological consequences. In combination with clinical facts, nant FGF23 on SOX9 and RUNX2 expression was tested in normal the knowledge is used for the creation of means of early diagnosis, chondrocytes. We found higher expression of RUNX2 and FGF23 and accurate prognosis and the analysis of treatment results as well as the a decreased expression of SOX9 mRNA in osteoarthritic chondrocytes establishment of new therapeutic approaches. compared to normal (p<0.0001). RUNX2 downregulation resulted in As part of the above, we performed a comparison of variations in the reduced MMP-13 expression in osteoarthritic chondrocytes and inhibi- abundance of miRs in blood and tissue of patients with pancreatic can- tion of SOX9 in increased RUNX2 and MMP-13 expression in normal cer or chronic pancreatitis and samples from healthy donors. Apart chondrocytes, while inhibition of FGF23 resulted in reduced RUNX2 from identifying miRs, which are prognostic markers for survival, we expression in osteoarthritic chondrocytes (p<0.0001). Silencing of also found miRs that discriminated clearly between tumour, pancreati- RUNX2 or FGF23 did not affect SOX9 mRNA levels in osteoarthritic tis and normal. In addition, we identified a dozen miRs that varied their chondrocytes. Moreover simultaneous downregulation of SOX9 and transcript levels identically in both tumour tissue and blood, while only upregulation of FGF23 in normal chondrocytes resulted in additive up- one would be expected by chance. Their functional roles within tumour regulation of RUNX2 mRNA expression. Treatment of normal chondro- cells as well as possible intercellular activities will be discussed. cytes with hrFGF23 resulted in increased RUNX2 mRNA expression, http://www.dkfz.de/funct_genome/ while it had no effect on SOX9 mRNA expression. We demonstrated convincing associations between RUNX2, SOX9 and FGF23 in rela- P11.097 Positional integratomic approach in identification of tion to MMP-13 expression in osteoarthritic chondrocytes, contributing genomic candidate regions for Parkinson disease to a better understanding of the abnormal gene expression and carti- A. Maver, B. Peterlin; lage degeneration processes associated with osteoarthritis. Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenera- P11.095 the short isoform Of P75NtR As A major Player in tive disorder, characterized by progressive symptoms of tremor, rigidity, Postnatal Hippocampal signal transduction and bradykinesia. Genetic factors have been implicated in its etiology; M. A. Sabry, F. Al- Rowaihi, M. Al-Ramadan, A. Baqer; however precise genetic basis of PD is unclear. Recently, abundance Arabian Gulf University, Manama, Bahrain. of data originating from studies employing high-throughput technolo- The pro-nerve growth factor p75 neurotrophin receptor (P75NTR) is a gies to reveal alterations in PD on genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, member of TNF receptor superfamily. Oligoheteromeric signaling of and other levels, offer the possibility to integrate this information into a P75NTR, in association with the ligand-selective neurotrophin receptor, comprehensive picture of changes occurring in PD. tyrosin kinase receptor (Trk) promotes cell survival. P75NTR signalling, In our study, datasets from various types of studies in PD (linkage, in the absence of Trk association, has crucial functions in apoptosis, genome-wide association, transcriptomic studies of brain and blood facilitation of hippocampal long-term depression (LTD) and regulation samples and proteomic studies) were obtained from online reposito- of axon growth/arborisation and Schwann cell migration. ries or were extracted from available research papers. Subsequently, In a quantitative RT-PCR approach, we studied the expression of human genome assembly was subdivided into regions, and signals the full-length isoform (L) and the short isoform (S) of P75NTR during from aforementioned studies were sorted into corresponding regions postnatal development of the rat hippocampus and explored their dif- according to their position in the genome. For each study type, regions ferential modulation by PTU- induced hypothyroidism initiated during were then prioritized according to signal significance and number of prenatal development. signals located in each region. Sum of ranks from different studies was The most important result that stands out in this investigation is the high used in final prioritization of genomic regions. postnatal expression level of S isoform of P75NTR, which is comparable We have identified 5 genomic regions containing overlaps of signifi- to that of the L isoform in control and hypothyroid rat hippocampus, cant signals originating from 5 different study types and 98 regions both at ages 2 and 6 weeks, which would reflect important functional containing overlaps from 4 different study types. Identified regions postnatal roles of the S form. In control hippocampus, the expression contain plausible candidate genes for PD, in addition to genes previ- levels of the L isoform is comparable at ages 2 and 6 weeks, while the ously associated with PD. short isoform is down-regulated, but is still considerably expressed, We present a novel approach for identification of PD candidate genes, at age six weeks compared to its expression level at age two weeks. based on positional integration of data across various types of omic In hypothyroid hippocampus, each of L and S isoforms is significantly studies. Furthermore, this approach can easily be extended for identi- down-regulated between ages 2 and 6 weeks. Hypothyroidism signifi- fication of candidate genes in other complex diseases. cantly down-regulates the hippocampal expression of both L and S iso- forms of P75NTR, only at age 2 weeks. The investigation highlights the P11.098 Integrative microRNA and proteomic approaches in potential functional significance of L-S partnership in postnatal murine Parkinson’s Disease (PD) P75NTR signalling. M. Martins1,2, A. Rosa3,2, N. Charro4, B. V. Fonseca1,2, S. Violante2, L. C. Guedes1, T. Mestre1, M. Coelho1, M. M. Rosa1, D. Penque4, J. M. Vance5, J. J. Ferreira1, S. A. Oliveira1,2; 1Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 3Universidade da Madeira, Madeira, Portugal, 4Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 5University of Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 21 Miami, Miami, FL, United States. mania and depression in BD and is still to date, the first choice pro- PD is the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder, affecting phylactic treatment. Besides the high rate of excellent Li responders over one million individuals worldwide. The main pathological hallmark (~30-40%), a significant fraction of patients present patterns of partial of PD is the loss of dopaminergic neurons within the substantia nigra, or non response to prophylactic treatment with Li. It has been shown leading to insufficient formation and action of dopamine in the basal that the variability in Li response is strongly influenced by genetic de- ganglia circuitry. The cardinal clinical signs are muscle rigidity, resting terminants. A large number of studies have investigated the role of tremor, bradykinesia and, in more advanced cases, postural instabil- genes in modulating the response to Li reporting contrasting findings. ity. In our study, we have genotyped 50 individuals divided in two groups, This complex disease is governed by many genetic and non-genetic according to their degree of Li response. The eleven-point treatment factors. To identify novel susceptibility genes for idiopathic PD, we response scale we employed (full response cut-off ≥7) allowed us to are using the “genomic convergence” approach with microRNA and classify 25 BD patients as non-responders (scored with 0) and 25 as proteomic profiling. This strategy converges data from genetic studies full responders (scored with 8 or higher). These patients were geno- with expression profiling experiments. typed using the Affymetrix Array 6.0 SNP microarrays (Santa Clara, We conducted microRNA expression profiles in peripheral blood CA, USA). Data were statistically evaluated using the Genespring mononuclear cells of 19 PD patients and 13 controls, using microar- software using a p-value cutoff of 0.01. We have identified 38 SNPs rays spotted with probes for 763 human microRNAs. 18 microRNAs significantly associated with Li response, with p-values ranging from were differentially expressed and pathway analysis of their predicted 1x10-5 to 4x10-6. The genomic loci hold genes encoding for elements target genes revealed an over-represention of pathways recently of G-proteins coupled receptors, LIM-domain binding proteins, sodium linked to non-Mendelian forms of PD. We also carried out a proteomic channels and GABA receptors. This study enriches the battery of ge- analysis in pooled blood serum of 30 PD patients and 28 controls us- netic biomarkers that would personalize Li treatment of BD patients. ing a 2D-DIGE approach. 41 differentially expressed spots were ob- tained and 23 proteins have already been identified. Isoforms and P11.101 Epigenetics changes for the diagnosis of malignant post-translational modifications are being evaluated and their type and pleural effusions contribution to the disease mechanisms will be further analysed. The L. De Chiara1, I. Pereiro1, M. Botana2, V. Leiro2, A. Fernandez-Villar2, D. microRNAs and respective target genes, as well as proteins differen- Valverde1; tially expressed will be tested for association with PD. We believe that 1Universidad de Vigo, Spain, 2Dept. Pneumology. Complejo Hospitalario this approach will allow us to identify specific novel genes/transcripts Universitario de Vigo, Spain. playing a role in the etiopathogenesis of idiopathic PD. DNA hypermethylation in promoter regions of a gene is recognized as an important epigenetic mechanism of transcriptional silencing of P11.099 the slc26a4 loop mouse mutant, a model for Pendred tumor regulatory genes during cancer development. This study could syndrome, has defects in biomineralization, with unique calcium provide valuable information for diagnostic purposes. oxalate stone formation in the inner ear We collected 60 patients with pleural effusion with diverse etiology: A. Dror1, Y. Politi2, H. Shahin1, D. R. Lenz1, S. Dossena3, C. Nofziger3, H. tuberculosis, para-pneumonia, or cancer. Fuchs4, M. Hrabé de Angelis4, M. Paulmichl3, S. Weiner2, K. B. Avraham1; DNA was extracted with a Qiagen Kit and after bisulfite treatment, a 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler methylation-specific PCR (MSP) was performed. We analyzed the fol- Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Department of lowing genes: p16/INK4a, BRCA1 and RARβ. Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 3Institut The study population included 37 men (61.7%), with a mean age of of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, 56.98±21 years. Thirty-three patients (55%) were former or current Austria, 4Institute of Experimental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, smokers. Malignant pleural effusion was diagnosed in 28 patients, Neuherberg, Germany. while benign pleural effusion due to tuberculosis or para-pneumonia Human mutations in SLC26A4 lead to a non-syndromic and syndromic was present in 18 and 14 patients, respectively. form of deafness, DFNB4 and Pendred syndrome, respectively. Here The promoter hypermethylation frequencies of benign and malig- we show inner ear mineralization defects in a new mouse mutant iden- nant pleural effusion, respectively were: p16/INK4a (9.4% vs 17.9%), tified in an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) screen, named loop, that car- BRCA1 (46.9% vs 35.7%) and RARβ (12.5% vs 17.9%), therefore no ries a recessive missense mutation in a highly conserved region of significant differences were detected. Promoter methylation of at least Slc26a4, rendering this mouse a model for human deafness. Defects one gene was detected in 64.3% of the patients with malignant pleural were identified in biomineralization, the formation of minerals, which effusion, while hypermethylation of at least two genes was observed is part of the process that produces skeletons, shells, and teeth. Im- in 14.3% of them. paired halide transport activity resulted in the formation of giant calci- Our preliminary results show that the methylation status of the pro- um oxalate mineral bodies not found in the body under normal circum- moter region of p16/INK4a, BRCA1 and RARβ has no diagnostic utility stances and described here in the inner ear for the first time. Infrared for malignant pleural effusion. The methylated condition of some of the and Raman spectroscopy, together with high resolution scanning elec- benign pleural effusions could be related, as previously reported, with tron microscopy and immunohistochemistry of otoconia components, inflammation and infection, besides certain lifestyle factors such as demonstrated drastic changes in crystal morphology and composition. smoking and high-fat diet, that are related with an increased likelihood Detailed histological analysis revealed that the giant minerals are ec- of cancer risk. topically distributed within the vestibular apparatus, mimicking imbal- ance conditions in human as a result of displaced otoconia. P11.102 A study of angiotensin converting enzyme gene polymorphism in children with pulmonary hypertension P11.100 Whole genome pharmacogenomic analysis of bipolar C. Banescu1, R. Toganel2, C. Duicu3, K. Csep1, C. Suteu4, I. Pascanu5; disease patients under lithium treatment 1Genetic Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, A. Squassina1, J. Borg2, M. Manchia1, C. Chillotti3, R. Ardau3, G. Severino3, M. Romania, 2Cardiology Pediatric Department, University of Medicine and Georgitsi4, K. Mitropoulos5, M. Del Zompo3, G. P. Patrinos4,5; Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, Romania, 3Pediatric Department No 2, University 1University of Cagliari, Department of Neuroscience, Cagliari, Italy, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, Romania, 4Pediatric Cardiology of Malta, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, Laboratory of Molecular Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, Romania, Genetics, Msida, Malta, 3University of Cagliari, Department of Neuroscience 5Endocrinology Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, „B.B. Brodie“, Section of Clinical Pharmacology, Laboratory of Molecular Romania. Genetics, Cagliari, Italy, 4University of Patras, Department of Pharmacy, Patras, Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) plays an important role in the Greece, 5Erasmus MC, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, MGC- pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension. The ACE gene has been Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands. considered a candidate gene for contributing to the development of Bipolar Disorder (BD) is a lifelong psychiatric disease characterized by hypertension and cardiovascular diseases. The ACE gene contains a manic and depressive episodes affecting 1-5% of the general popu- polymorphism based on the presence (insertion I) or absence (dele- lation. Among the most effective mood-stabilizing treatments, lithium tion D) within an intron of a 287-bp nonsense DNA domain, resulting in (Li) represents the mainstay in the therapeutic management of acute- three genotypes (DD and II homozygotes, and DI heterozygotes).Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 22 In this study we determined whether the deletion (D)/ insertion (I) Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. polymorphism in the ACE gene may be associated with pulmonary hy- Low copy repeat RCCX in major histocompatibility complex region on pertension. We performed a case-control study with 26 patients with human chromosome 6 consists of four duplicated genes, C4, CYP21, pulmonary hypertension and 20 healthy controls. Genomic DNA was STK19 and TNX. One active gene and one pseudogene belong to ev- extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes by standard methods. The ery duplicated gene pair except for C4, which has two active copies. ACE genotypes of the patients were determined through restriction RCCX is prone to rearrangement that generates additional duplica- enzyme digestion of a PCR fragment (PCR-RFLP).There were identi- tions, conversions and deletions resulting in monomodular, trimodular fied 34,61% (9) DD homozygotes, 53,84% (14) DI heterozygotes and chromosome structures and the complete lack of active CYP21 (CY- 11,53% (3) II homozygotes. No statistical significance differences in P21A2), the most common cause of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. A allelic distribution were detected between groups. series of allele-specific long PCR covering the whole region of RCCX Acknowledgements: The study was realized in the research program has been developed in order to investigate the structure of RCCX. project Mami no 41-042/2007 financed by the Romanian Ministery of This technique has been enables to sequence three copies of identical Education, Research and Youth. gene from a diploid genome and the haplotypes of CYP21A2 gene in many cases. Unique CYP21A2 haplotypes determined a few specific P11.103 Novel variation c.1-219G>A in PRKN promoter converts chromosome variants with two CYP21A2 copies in Caucasians. Phylo- sp1 binding site to mZF1 binding site genetic analysis was performed on CYP21A2 haplotypes derived from Z. Fazlali, F. Ghazavi, E. Elahi; mono-, bi- and trimodular RCCX to trace the derivation of chromo- School of Biology, College of Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. some variant with duplicated CYP21A2. It was shown that recurrent We have observed five variations in the promoter region of the PRKN rearrangements generated these chromosome variants, and the newly gene by direct sequencing. Three of the variations are novel. The influ- arisen chromosomes underwent independent fixation processes. The ence of the five variations on the binding sites of transcription factors structure of chromosomes variants with duplicated CYP21A2 implies was studied using “TFSEARCH ver.1.3 “on the http://www.cbrc.jp/re- distinct recombination mechanism, and their recurrent generation shed search/db/TFSEARCH.html. The analysis showed that variations c.1- light on some evolutional aspects of human low copy repeats. 324A>G, c.1-65C>T, c.1-42T>C have no significant effects on binding sites of transcription factors, but c.1-355T>G and c.1-219G>A, respec- P11.106 Next Generation sequencing for Extended Applications tively, affect binding sites of the Cp2 and Sp1 transcription factors. in Basic and clinical Research C.1-355T>G causes the deletion of a binding site for Cp2; based on L. K. Joe, J. C. Briggs, R. N. Fish, N. Fong, B. A. Gigliotti, N. M. Hoag, A. C. reported data, frequencies of the relevant alleles at this position were Kivett, R. C. Nutter, R. A. Padilla, N. Patel, L. L. Xu, J. S. Ziegle; not significantly different between PD patient and control groups. The Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. novel variation c.1-219G>A converts a binding site of Sp1 transcrip- Advances in Next Generation Sequencing are rapidly taking place. tion factor to a binging site of MZF1 transcription factor. Sp1 regulates As a result, a broader range of scientists may apply the technology the expression of a large number of genes involved in a variety of to their basic or clinical research. Scientists conducting basic or clini- processes such as cell growth, apoptosis, differentiation and immune cal research often design and utilize assays for tagging and counting responses. MZF1 is expressed in totipotent hemopoietic cells as well applications (Whole Transcriptome and Small RNA) or targeted rese- as in myeloid progenitors. Some findings suggest that Mzf1 can act quencing analysis. In order to perform such assays in these research as a tumor/growth suppressor factor. The frequencies of the G and settings, the sequencing system must include an end-to-end workflow A nucleotides at position c.1-219 in PRKN in PD patient and control that is accurate, faster, and easier-to-use. We report on improvements groups are not known. The possible relation of c.1-219G>A in the pro- to the hardware, software, and chemistry components of a Next Gen- moter of PRKN needs to be investigated. Genetic variations in pro- eration Sequencing platform that provide such solutions for sample moter sequences have been shown to affect susceptibility to various preparation, sequencing and analysis. complex diseases. P11.107 investigation of RNA-seq as a tool for sNP detection. P11.104 QKI-7 regulates expression of interferon-related genes E. M. Quinn, E. M. Kenny, P. Cormican, A. S. Gates, M. Gill, A. P. Corvin, D. in human astrocyte glioma cells W. Morris; E. M. Lindholm Carlström1, L. Jiang1, P. Saetre2, E. Jazin1; Institute of Molecular Medicine and Dept. of Psychiatry, Trinity College Dublin, 1Physiology and developmental biology, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Clinical Dublin, Ireland. neuroscience, Karolinska institute, Stockholm, Sweden. The development of Next Generation Sequencing offers the potential The human QKI gene, called quaking homolog, KH domain RNA of new methods for mapping and quantifying transcriptomes. In par- binding (mouse), is a candidate gene for schizophrenia encoding an ticular, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has been used for measurement RNA-binding protein. This gene was recently shown to be essential of transcript abundance, studying the diversity of splice isoforms and for myelination in oligodendrocytes. QKI is also expressed in astro- testing allelic influence on gene expression. Given that the majority cytes, but its function in these cells is not known. We studied the effect of disease related SNPs are likely to be located in coding regions, of small interference RNA (siRNA)-mediated QKI depletion on global we investigated RNA-seq as a method of identifying sequence vari- gene expression in human astrocyte glioma cells. The most significant ants (SNPs) in the transcribed regions of the genome. We performed alteration after QKI silencing was the decreased expression of genes RNA-seq on lymphoblast cell line RNA samples from a trio of HapMap involved in interferon (IFN) induction (P = 6.3×10-10), including IFIT1, samples that have been whole-genome sequenced. The sequencing IFIT2, MX1, MX2, G1P2, G1P3, GBP1 and IFIH1. All eight genes were method per sample was 40bp single reads in 2 lanes of an Illumina down-regulated after silencing of the splice variant QKI-7, but were flow cell. Genes were categorised based on their coverage levels and not affected by QKI-5 silencing. Interestingly, four of them were up- RNA-seq data was compared to the existing ‘positive control’ DNA regulated after treatment with the antipsychotic agent haloperidol that sequence data. For genes (n=5077) where sequence coverage was also resulted in increased QKI-7 mRNA levels. These results show greater than 20X, 92% of SNPs identified in the data were true se- that QKI-7 levels and IFN-related gene levels are co-regulated in as- quence variants. For the same set of genes, 82% of expected vari- trocytes. Furthermore, our findings suggest a novel role for QKI-7 as a ants were successfully identified. We also detected a number of novel regulator of IFN production in astrocytes. SNPs that Mendelised within the trio, but were not reported from the published whole-genome sequencing data. Whole-genome rese- P11.105 Recurrent rearrangements and fixations form the quencing is the most comprehensive method of variation detection but structure of low copy repeat RccX it is costly. We demonstrate that in addition to transcriptome analysis, A. Szilagyi1, A. Patocs2, Z. Prohaszka3, G. Fust3, M. Doleschall1; RNA-seq can detect a very high proportion of sequence variation in 1Inflammation Biology and Immungenomics Research Group, Hungarian expressed genes. It is potentially a very useful technique for detecting Academy of Sciences - Semmelweis U., Budapest, Hungary, 22nd Department coding SNPs in disease tissue samples. of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 33rd Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 P11.108** Key steps in finding pathogenic variants for P11.110 seq + PA: combining sequencing (seq) and individual monogenic diseases using targeted and exome resequencing Peak Analysis (PA) for Quantification of DNA Methylation and data minor sequence Variation Detection C. Gilissen, A. Hoischen, K. Nikopoulos, B. van Bon, N. Wieskamp, P. Arts, E. Schreiber, A. Tobler, C. Davidson; B. van Lier, M. Steehouwer, P. de Vries, R. Collin, B. B. A. de Vries, F. C. S. Life Technologies - Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. Cremers, H. G. Brunner, J. A. Veltman; Fluorescent DNA sequence traces generated by Sanger sequencing Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. on automated capillary electrophoresis (CE) instruments primarily re- With the development of efficient enrichment strategies for next-gen- veal the composition and exact sequence of nucleotide bases. How- eration sequencing it is now possible to either screen specific genomic ever, an additional layer of information may be present in the peak loci (e.g. linkage regions) or even the entire human exome for genomic height of a given base reflecting a measure of abundance. variations causing disease. We will discuss our approach and high- Here we report a novel method, Seq+PA, that allows the separation light key criteria to successfully identify disease-genes from such large of the four dye traces used in BigDye® Terminator 3.1 sequencing data sets. For this we used two datasets, one using the NimbleGen chemistry and inclusion of a 5th LIZ® dye-labeled size standard. This array enrichment approach in combination with Roche 454 Titanium enables alignment by size of multiple samples and subsequent data sequencing for analysis of all coding sequence in a 40Mb linkage re- analysis of each individual peak characteristics, such as size, height gion in two families with Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy (FEVR). and area by GeneMapper® software. We have used the Seq+PA In addition, we applied exome sequencing using the ABI SOLiD 3.5 method for direct bisulfite PCR sequencing and were able to detect system in patients with Schinzel-Giedion Syndrome. A key criteria for methylated cytosines in CpG pairs to a level of 5%. We have also ap- reliably calling sequence variants is sequence coverage. We found plied the method for sensitive detection of somatic mutations. To that that at least 15-fold coverage is required for reliably detecting variants. end, DNAs with a normal or mutant genotype at codon 12 in the KRAS This criterion was reached for more than 80% of the targeted exome gene were mixed in various ratios and processed for PCR and Seq+PA using the Agilent SureSelect enrichment method and identified approx- analysis. The mutant allele was noticeable at a 5% level. Taken to- imately 20,000 variants per exome. Up to 95% of these variants has gether, the method described here has the potential to enable a more previously been reported in SNP databases. Further prioritization of quantitative analysis of DNA sequence traces for sensitive detection of variants is based on functional consequences of variants, evolutionary minor sequence variations. conservation, and on combining data from multiple patients. This has Disclaimer: For Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or allowed us to rapidly identify TSPAN12 as the causative gene for FEVR human therapeutic or diagnostic use. and SETBP1 as the causative gene for Schinzel-Giedion Syndrome. These examples demonstrate the possibilities of next-generation se- P11.111 Development of sureselecttm target Enrichment system quencing when combined with robust enrichment systems, highlight Human All Exon Kit and indexing Kit for the sOLiDtm system the importance of control SNP datasets and show that bioinformatic M. Visitacion, B. Novak, C. Pabón-Peña, A. Giuffre, J. Ong, S. Joshi, S. pipelines are crucial to the rapid identification of disease genes. Happe, D. Roberts, E. Leproust; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States. P11.109 NBs-NGs: an ultra-throughput selective next- The identification of genetic variants and mutations associated with generation sequencing method for clinical diagnostics human disease requires the development of a robust and cost-effec- A. ElSharawy1, N. Schracke2, A. Keller2, M. Forster1, I. Thomsen1, M. tive approach for systematic resequencing of candidate regions in Schilhabel1, P. Rosenstiel1, S. Schreiber1, P. F. Stähler2, R. Güimil Garcia2, A. the human genome. Agilent Technologies has further developed the Franke1; SureSelect Target Enrichment System to allow for the capture of larger 1Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology (ICMB), Kiel, Germany, 2febit biomed genomic regions of interest as well as the multiplexing of numerous GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany. samples and sequencing on the SOLiD System. The inherent deep Translating the impact of next-generation sequencing (NGS) at the sequencing of the SureSelect Target Enrichment System in combina- basic research level into molecular diagnostics is a current technical tion with the SOLiD System has easily facilitated sufficient read depth challenge, to enable analysis of specific sets of candidate genes in and on-target performance for Agilent’s Human All Exon Kit, a kit that multiple clinical samples. The coupling of NGS with front-end technol- covers roughly 38 megabases (or 1.22%) of human genomic regions ogy offers a promising solution if multiplexing can be built-in to ramp- corresponding to the non-overlapping exons from the NCBI Consen- up the whole process. To allow assigning of individual samples and sus SDS database (CCDS), including > 700 miRNAs from the Sanger pinpointing variant carriers in each sequenced pool, multiplexing using v13 database, and > 300 additional human non-coding RNAs. In ad- molecular barcodes represents a logic extension of sample pooling dition, the high read depth generated by the SOLiD System not only schemes. Indeed, we were in advance to tackle this challenge and allows for deep coverage of a large target region such as the human developed a New Barcoded Selective NGS (NBS-NGS) approach that exome, but also for multiplexing numerous samples. With the advent combines two technology platforms, which both have in-built multi- of multiplexing, the ability to achieve targeted enrichment on multiple plexing capability and allow accurate SNP detection. Briefly, barcodes samples on a single quad is maximized, saving researchers time and are ligated to individual samples during library preparation, pooled, money without sacrificing performance. In summary, the SureSelect enriched via microfluidic DNA microarrays, and subsequently rese- Target Enrichment System paired with the SOLiD System, provides quenced using NGS. The ability of retracting the barcoded targets of easy to use in-solution protocols that are automatable and cost-effec- individual samples not only reinforces traditional LIMS (Laboratory tive approaches to analyze discrete genomic regions with unprece- Information Management Systems) in regulating data production, but dented depth and accuracy also eliminates the need for special experimental and logarithmic de- signs of overlapping pooling approaches. The performance of NBS- P11.112 towards fully streamlined, quality-assured, automated NGS was tested in three different stages and multiplexing levels. The next-generation gene tests results reflect a compromise of obtaining reasonable key enrichment S. Chen1, L. Vliegen1, T. De Staercke1, Y. Moreau2, H. Cuppens1; measures on one hand and ultra-cost reduction on the other. We be- 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2ESAT, Leuven, Belgium. lieve that NBS-NGS opens up new avenues for comprehensive large Using highly parallel pyrosequencing, we developed a CFTR genetic scale genomic studies, and its inherent flexibility may render routine test format in which the complete coding region and exon/intron junc- deep resequencing for diverse clinical settings feasible. The current tions of the CFTR gene are sequenced in an amplicon sequencing state of benchmarking of other technology platforms will also be pre- approach. Since that pyrosequencing may not correctly call homo- sented at the conference. polymeric nucleotide stretches, we included tagged ARMS primers at such positions, so that the number of nucleotides can also be called through their tag, besides counting the number of nucleotides that are obtained in homo-polymeric nucleotide stretches in reads. To increase robustness, 2 amplicons are generated for each region, in which one test result can be used for quality-assurance of the other test result. Quality-assurance of the complete genetic test process and automat-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 ic processing was realized by spiking samples with DNA molecules. P11.115 Frequency of serotonin transporter promoter gene These molecular bar codes can be processed simultaneously with the polymorphism in opium addict people DNA fragments under investigation. The test will be quality-assured N. Ghasemi1, M. Shiekhha1, S. Yasini2; from the moment that the sample is spiked. The test will be only valid 1Research and Clinical Centre for Infertility, Yazd SS medical sciences when the correct spiked sample tag is associated with the molecular university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Yazd SS medical sciences university, bar code at the end of process. Not only can sequencing reveal a mu- Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. tation, it will also identify the sample carrying the mutation. This allows A disturbance in brain serotonergic transmission has been repeatedly automatic generation of a report, thereby excluding potential errors reported in association with behavioral disorders. The responses to compared to reports generated by human intervention when test result serotonin reuptake inhibitors appear to be impaired in substance use and patient information are combined in a genetic report. disorders with co-morbid depression, which reflecting genetic polymor- This format can be transferred to genetic analysis of any gene. phisms involved in the control of serotonergic activity. The frequency of short (‘‘S’’) allele 5-HTT promoter polymorphism, that appear to P11.113 Post-Light sequencing with semiconductor chips influence gene function by reducing transcription efficiency. The as- J. M. Rothberg; sociation of polymorphism with substance abuse disorder and major Ion Torrent, Guilford, CT, United States. depression (MD) was confirmed. Ion Torrent Systems has developed a DNA sequencing system that Thirty one opium dependent subjects, males, aged 20-50 years, en- directly translates chemical signals into digital information on a semi- tered the study, after informed consent. They were consecutive admis- conductor chip. This approach leverages a trillion dollars of investment sions to the treatment program of the public health service for outpa- from the semiconductor industry taking advantage of existing state- tients‘ addiction treatment. They were not paid for their participation of-the-art chip fabrication technology, and the entire semiconductor and accepted to enter the study as volunteers. Thirty one normal vol- design and supply chain. Unprecedented scalability and cost reduc- unteer were chosen for control, which were matched in age , sex and tion result from decades of Moore‘s Law advances in semiconductor socioeconomic situation with cases. technologies that are brought to bear within a few years for DNA se- The 5-HTT promoter region was amplified by polymerase chain reac- quencing. tion (PCR ). The PCR products were resolved in 2.5% agarose gel Ion Torrent sequencing takes place in semiconductor microchips that containing 50 mg/ml ethidium bromide in TAE buffer (40 mM Tris-ac- contain sensors which have been fabricated as individual electronic etate, 1mMEDTA pH 8.0). Each gel contained one lane of 50 bp ladder detectors, allowing one sequence read per sensor. Current configura- to identify the 450 pb fragment designed as L and the 406 bp fragment tions have 1.5 million sensors in a 1 cm2 chip, with proof of principle to designated as S. enable densities over 100 million sensors per chip. The frequency of alleles and genotypes was not different in cases and The sequencing chemistry itself is remarkably simple. Native nucle- controls. However, the odd ratio was 1.8 and 1.7 respectively. In con- otides are incorporated into the growing strand by native DNA poly- clusion, this study did not showed strong association between 5-HTT merase. As a base is incorporated, a direct electrical measurement of gene and opium addiction. the incorporation event is made and the sequence is read out directly into the digital domain. Thus, sequencing is direct, efficient, and mas- P11.116 From rare cell phenotype to rare variant genotype: sively parallel, requiring no specialized reagents and no optical sys- Analyzing heterogeneous samples with single cell resolution tems. Using native DNA chemistry with real time detection enables run using microdroplet technology times to be very short, on the order of an hour with a throughput on the S. E. Kellett, M. Samuels, M. Medkova, E. Brouzes, E. Dahan, J. Larson, D. order of 100 Megabases per hour. We will present data and describe Link; metrics from the adenovirus and E. coli genomes. RainDance Technologies, Lexington, MA, United States. There is a growing need to examine heterogeneous samples (tumor P11.114 integration of a novel and intuitive user interface for a cells, stem cells, antibody producing cells, or the human microbiome) new next-generation sequencing platform expands usability in with single cell resolution. Combining single cell isolation methods with basic and clinical research laboratory settings sequencing efforts will advance the understanding of tumorigenesis by R. C. Nutter, D. Leon, S. Chang, S. Yerramalli, L. Jones, M. Mariano, M. elucidating “driver” vs. “passenger” mutations in tumor cell populations Storm, L. Xu; and circulating tumor cells, and inform the design of “personalized” Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. tumor-specific therapies. The introduction of high-throughput next-generation sequencing sys- We are developing a novel microdroplet and microfluidic platform that tems is revolutionizing the use of sequencing data for a wide range of enables a variety of single cell analyses. Uniform picoliter-nanoliter vol- genetic analyses. Once limited to ultra-high throughput, large geno- ume aqueous droplets suspended in an immiscible oil stream provide typing centers, new instrumentation has been developed that is more unique opportunities for fluorescence-based analytical techniques, amenable to basic and clinical laboratories. Combined with the depth including novel phenotype-based sorting at rates of several hundred and accuracy of large amounts of sequencing data generated, it is cells per second, and false positive rates of 2-5% and false negative clear this technology has tremendous potential for integration in dis- rates of <1%. The encapsulated droplet microenvironment also en- ease and clinical research. To support this potential for research ad- ables unique sorting modalities beyond current fluorescence-activated vancement in personalized medicine, it is important for a sequencing cell sorting, including selection based on cell secreted molecules, and instrument’s user interface to be intuitive, reliable and easy to use. A highly sensitive sorting based on enzyme amplified signals. new high throughput sequencing system being developed has a newly We demonstrate the use of microfluidic-generated single cell droplets designed user interface to guide a researcher from the initial setup to in workflows that include phenotype-based capture of desired individ- real time monitoring, final data validation and export. With a spike-in ual cells from a heterogeneous sample coupled directly to single cell process control, the instrument will automatically perform a pre-run genomic characterization. For example, whole genome amplification sample assessment and provide real time performance reports during within the encapsulated single cell microdroplets can be followed by the sequencing run. The guided workflow interface streamlines sample droplet PCR-based targeted amplification of many thousands of se- setup, provides flexibility for a user to disable individual sample or in- lected genomic loci from each cell, for analysis using any Next Gen- dividual tags of a sample to save time and reagents based on experi- eration Sequencing platform. mental needs. The real time reporting at the instrument or on a com- patible mobile device provides the user assurance of optimized data P11.117 Potentially functional single nucleotide quality and quantity. We will show examples of user interfaces that will polymorhphisms (pfsNP) in the human genome enable a broad range of laboratories to use high throughput sequenc- C. G. Lee1,2,3, J. Wang2, M. Ronaghi4,5, S. Chong2,6; ing for applications such as targeted resequencing or RNA-Seq. For 1National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University of research use only. Not intended for any animal or human therapeutic Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 3DUKE-NUS Graduate Medical School, or diagnostic use. Singapore, Singapore, 4Illumina, San Diego, CA, United States, 5Stanford Genome Technology Center, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 6National University Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. barcodes have been added and then used in a multiplexed emulsion With >14,000,000 non-redundant single-nucleotide-polymorphisms PCR and deposited into a single spot for sequencing. (SNPs) that have thus far been deposited in dbSNP, identifying pheno- The barcode design requires only 5bp of sequencing to distinguish type-causing SNPs poses significant challenges. Here, we integrated 20-plex samples and 10bp for 96-plex samples. The barcodes are col- >40 different algorithms/resources to identify ~1,000,000 SNPs from orbalanced at every position in sets of four. Importantly, clear discrimi- dbSNP with potential functional significance (pfSNPs) based on pre- nation between barcode samples is achieved by a minimum Hamming vious published reports, inferred potential functionality from popula- distance of 3 colorspace calls. tion-genetics approaches, as well as predicted potential functionality. The barcoded adaptors were validated by SOLiD(TM) sequencing of These pfSNPs are reasonably well-distributed across the entire hu- E. coli fragment libraries. Error rates and quality value (QV) scores for man genome and are enriched in the promoter and genic regions. We the barcode reads were found to be consistent across the final set. have also developed a customizable, well-annotated pfSNP-web-re- Mapping rates and QV scores were consistent for the E. coli reads, source that is aimed at facilitating knowledge-discovery and hypoth- indicating minimal effects of the barcode decamers on bead templat- esis-generation through better data-integration and a biologist-friendly ing and sequencing efficiency. Ongoing development studies include web-interface. For all HapMap-genotyped SNPs, information regard- integration of the barcoding system with PCR, array and in-solution ing the distance as well as the r2-LD of a nearby HapMap-genotyped based methods of target enrichment for enhanced multiplex process- pfSNP is given. The pfSNP-resource addresses all ambiguity in SNP ing capability. The SOLiD(TM) barcode adaptors will enable the high information, providing complete information about a particular SNP levels of library multiplexing afforded by the increasing throughput of that will facilitate better hypothesis generation. The query interface is the SOLiD(TM) System. not only user-friendly but highly customizable such that different com- binations of queries are possible, using Boolean-logic to facilitate the P11.120 Paired end sequencing on the solid platform identification of pfSNPs at a user-specified frequency in a specified- E. T. Dimalanta1, L. Zhang1, L. Sun1, K. S. Eusko1, D. M. Dhingra1, D. S. population that is expressed in user-specified tissues and/or belong(s) Perez1, M. R. Lyons1, A. E. Sannicandro2, J. M. Manning1, H. E. Peckham1, E. to a user-specified pathway(s) and/or is associated with user-specified Tsung1, S. M. Menchen2, A. P. Blanchard1, K. J. McKernan1; disease/drug pathway(s). Furthermore, to facilitate better hypothesis 1Life Technologies, Beverly, MA, United States, 2Life Technologies, Foster City, generation, gene/pathway information is also integrated into the query CA, United States. result. Additionally, detailed related information regarding the function- The SOLiD™ platform is a revolutionary sequencing system that utiliz- al consequences of the pfSNPs are also provided in the query result to es sequential ligation of fluorescently labeled oligonucleotide probes, facilitate better understanding of the results and aid in the generation enabling high fidelity and ultra-high throughput sequencing. Previous of hypotheses. This web-resource will thus be useful to researchers sequencing protocols for the SOLiD™ system have only been avail- focusing on SNPs/association studies. able in the forward direction (3’ to 5’). Sequencing in the reverse direc- tion (5’ to 3’) is ideal as it enables fragment library paired end sequenc- P11.118 Allele-specific copy number measurements on CGH ing. To this end, novel ligation chemistries were developed to support microarrays 5’ to 3’ read lengths of up to 35 bases. This paired end sequencing B. Curry, N. Sampas, B. Peter, P. Anderson, P. Costa, A. deWitte, J. Ghosh, L. technology will be incorporated into the SOLiD V4 platform, increas- Bruhn; ing effective read length, maximizing throughput per run, and meeting Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara,, CA, United States. special research interests, such as whole transcriptome studies. Accurate measurements of genomic copy number are important for understanding developmental disorders, oncogenesis and normal P11.121 Genetic interaction between sox10 and Zfhx1b during genetic variation. In addition to variation in total copy number, there enteric nervous system development has been increasing interest in assessing the effects of variation in L. Stanchina1, T. Van de Putte2, D. Huylebroeck2, M. Goossens1, N. the number of copies of individual alleles, as estimated from the copy Bondurand1; numbers of variant alleles at SNP sites. 1IMRB INSERMU955, Creteil, France, 2Laboratory of Molecular Biology We have developed an assay on Agilent SurePrint G3 microarrays that (Celgen), Center of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium. allows concurrent measurement of precise total copy number (CN) and The involvement of SOX10 and ZEB2 in Waardenburg-Hirschsprung allele-specific copy number (AsCN). Depending on the array design, disease (hypopigmentation, deafness, and absence of enteric ganglia) 10 to 30% of probes are allocated to measure SNPs in parallel to total and Mowat-Wilson syndrome (mental retardation, facial dysmorphy CN on the same array. By digesting with a restriction enzyme that se- and variable congenital malformations including Hirschsprung dis- lectively cuts one variant allele, we can measure the copy number of ease) respectively, highlighted the importance of both transcription the uncut variant along with the total copy number of the surrounding factors during enteric nervous system (ENS) development. The ex- genomic region. We have measured genotypes at up to 80,000 SNP pression and function of SOX10 are now well established, but those of sites across the human genome, and typically obtain greater than 99% ZEB2 remain elusive. Here we describe the expression profile of Zeb2 concordance with published genotypes. and its genetic interactions with Sox10 during mouse ENS develop- We are able to make reliable SNP calls from single probes, by using a ment. Through phenotype analysis of Sox10;Zeb2 double mutants, we genotyped internal reference to correct for labeling and hybridization show that a coordinated and balanced interaction between these two bias. The normalized response is linear in copy number and highly re- genes is required for normal ENS development. Double mutants pres- producible. Log ratio distributions are nearly Gaussian, with well-sepa- ent with more severe ENS defects due to decreased proliferation of rated distributions corresponding to different copy numbers. enteric progenitors and increased neuronal differentiation from E11.5 We describe the novel algorithms we use for measuring CN and onwards. Thus, joint activity between these two transcription factors is AsCN and for estimating our confidence in the genotype calls, and crucial for proper ENS development and our results contribute to the show examples of cytogenetic abnormalities associated with known understanding of the molecular basis of ENS defects observed both syndromes. in mutant mouse models and in patients carrying SOX10 and ZEB2 mutations. P11.119 A Balanced, Error-correcting Barcoding system for Multiplexed SOLiD™ Sequencing P11.122 microarrays study of valproic acid treatment effect on J. Vanhatalo; gene expression in spinal muscular atrophy derived human Life Technologies, Helsinki, Finland. fibroblast cultures. A set of 96 barcoded adaptors designed for the SOLiD(TM) System M. Hlavna1, L. Fajkusova2, B. Tichy3; have been validated for use with paired end libraries. During library 1Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk preparation, the P2 adaptor is replaced with a multiplex adaptor con- University, Kamenice 5, CZ-62500, Brno, Czech Republic, 2University Hospital sisting of three segments: a primer binding site, a barcode decamer and Brno, Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Cernopolni 9, CZ-62500, a P2 PCR priming site. The barcode and target DNA are sequenced as Brno, Czech Republic, 3Center of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, two separate reads from the same strand to identify the libraries of ori- Department of Internal Medicine – Hematooncology, University Hospital Brno gin of multiplexed samples. Libraries may be pooled at any step after and Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Cernopolni 9, CZ-625 00, Brno, Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 Czech Republic. vitro for possible splicing aberrations and compared the accuracy of a Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) in patients is caused by loss of the sur- variety of bioinformatics approaches for predicting the observed splic- vival motor neuron (SMN1) gene, in the presence of the SMN2 gene. ing aberrations associated with each UV. We performed in vitro mo- As a result of point mutation in exon 7 almost all of SMN2 pre-mRNA lecular characterization of RNAs corresponding to 8 intronic variants is spliced improperly and exon 7 is excluded. Valproic acid (VPA) is in BMPR2, ACVRL1 and ENG. In seven cases, a deleterious effect on an inhibitor of histondeacetylases (iHDAC) and one of most potent RNA splicing was seen. Five splice-site prediction softwares (SSPPs) experimentally tested drug in SMA treatment. It is believed that VPA were used to predict whether an effect on RNA splicing was expected could increase production of functional SMN protein by two possible for these variants. 70% of the predictions were informative. No false ways: (1) increasing SMN2 transcription alone, or/and (2) modulation positive prediction was seen. However we observed 5% of false nega- of SMN2 splicing by increasing transcription of splicing factors such as tive predictions. In particular, no splicing anomaly was predicted for the Htra2-β1 and hnRNP-G. In our in vitro experiments on SMA derived c.625+10G>A variant in ACVRL1 whereas a deletion in the exon5 was fibroblast cultures treated with VPA, we observed no VPA effect on detected by mRNA analysis. SMN2, Htra2-β1 or hnRNP-G expression or on increasing protein lev- For molecular genetics laboratories, bioinformatics tools for prediction els as well. It has been published, but not in association with SMA, that of splicing aberrations are useful but need improvement before be- VPA exhibit neuroprotective effect by increasing expression of Bcl-2 in ing used without supporting molecular studies to assess the functional CNS. Based on these facts we decided to investigate general effect of consequences of a variant. VPA treatment on gene expression and also to investigate differenc- es in gene expression between SMA patients and healthy one’s. For P11.125 subtle discrepancies of AsF/sF2 EsE sequence motif that purpose we perform 20 separate cDNA microarray analyses. 141 among human tissues: a computational approach genes show more then 2-fold up-regulation and 51 down-regulation O. Siala1, F. Baklouti2, F. Fakhfakh1; after VPA treatment and 221/124 genes show different gene expres- 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, SFAX, Tunisia, 2Centre de sion between patients and healthy control. These sets of genes have génétique moléculaire et cellulaire, LYON, France. been further analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis Software to The intron removal during the pre-mRNA splicing in higher eukaryotes predict new possible VPA treatment target genes and genes implicated requires the accurate identification of the two splice sites at the ends in SMA disease. of the exons, or exon definition. However, the consensus sequences at the splice sites provide insufficient information to distinguish true P11.123 investigation of splicing noise in human aged splice sites from the large number of the false ones that populate the peripheral blood cells primary transcripts. Additional information is provided by cis-acting K. Mellert, D. Kaufmann; regulatory sequences that serve to enhance or repress splicing, and Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany. that may be exonic or intronic in nature: the splicing enhancers and Splicing in human is regulated by the interaction of more than 300 the splicing silencers, respectively. In our study, we tested by com- proteins and 5 snRNAs with hnRNA sequences. Errors in this process putational approach if the exonic splicing enhancer motif binding to emerge as aberrant splice products. To ensure a high splicing fidelity, the SF2/ASF SR protein is conserved among several groups of hu- the aberrant splice products are degraded by RNA surveillance mech- man genes. The results showed that the SF2/ASF ESE consensus anisms as the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). Misspliced in was conserved between genes within the same chromosome, within frame exons are e.g. not recognised by the RNA surveillance mecha- different chromosomes and between different levels of muscular cells nisms and occur in low frequencies in mRNA populations. We sug- differentiation. However, this motif displays subtle variations within the gested that the frequency of these errors (splicing noise) increases consensus sequence between genes expressed in different tissues. with age. To test this, missplicing of 2 in frame and 2 out of frame NF1 These results can emphasize the presence of different translational exons was investigated by qPCR of wildtype and misspliced mRNA. isoforms of the SFRS1 gene encoding for the SF2/ASF, or different As described, splicing noise increases in vitro e.g. by cold shock. We post-translational protein maturations in different tissues. This tissular found differences in splicing noise between untreated cultured human discrepancy can also account for the alternative splicing of several fibroblast and after treatment with cold shock or puromycin inhibiting genes between tissues. NMD. Though, no correlation to the age of the donors or the population doublings of the fibroblasts in the investigated NF1 exons was found. P11.126 mosaic uniparental disomies and aneuploidies as large In peripheral blood cells of 11 healthy donors, no correlation of splic- structural variants of the human genome. ing noise to the age (15y - 85y) could be observed, too. However, the B. Rodríguez-Santiago1, N. Malats2, N. Rothman3, L. Armengol4, M. Garcia- splicing noise increased with the length of the upstream intron. Our Closas3, M. Kogevinas5,6, O. Villa1, A. Hutchinson7, J. Earl8, M. Gaëlle2, K. studies show, that splicing is a process with a high fidelity during age- Jacobs7, D. Rico2, D. G. Pisano2, A. Tardón9,10, C. Alfredo11, G. Thomas7, A. ing in the investigated peripheral blood cells indicating the significance Valencia2, D. Silverman3, F. X. Real2, S. J. Chanock3,7, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,12; of correct splicing in proliferating cells. 1Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, CIBERER U735, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro Nacional de Investigaciones P11.124 Effect of intronic variants in BmP receptor genes Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain, 3Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, involved in hereditary angiopathies. comparison of splice site National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4QGenomics, prediction softwares and mRNA genetic testing. Barcelona, Spain, 5IMIM, Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology, M. Eyries1,2, Y. Lahely1, F. Coulet1,2, M. Carette3, B. Girerd4, F. Chabot5, F. CIBER en Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Barcelona, Spain, 6National School Soubrier1,2; of Public Health, Athens, Greece, 7Core Genotyping Facility, National Cancer 1Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique et d’Angiogénétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié- Institute, Frederick, MD, United States, 8Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Salpétrière, Paris, France, 2Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, Oncológicas,, Madrid, Spain, 9Centre for Research in Environmental 3Centre de compétence pour la maladie de Rendu-Osler en Ile-de-France, Epidemiology, Barcelona, Spain, 10Departamento de Epidemiología y Medicina Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France, 4Service de Pneumologie et Réanimation Preventiva, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain, 11Grupo de Oncología Respiratoire, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Clamart, France, 5Service des maladies Molecular, Hospital General Universitario de Elche, Elche, Spain, 12Programa respiratoires et réanimation respiratoire, Hôpital de Brabois, Nancy, France. de Medicina Molecular i Genètica, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) and Hereditary Haemorrhagic Barcelona, Spain. Telangiectasia (HHT) are two hereditary vascular diseases in which Mosaicism is defined as the co-existence of cells with different genetic mutations were described in genes involved in TGF-β signalling. Mu- composition within an individual, caused by post-zygotic somatic mu- tations in BMPR2 are present in more than 70% of familial PAH and tation. Although somatic mosaicism for chromosomal rearrangements in 10-30% of patients with idiopathic PAH. About 70-80 % of HHT have been well described in disease, their frequency in normal indi- patients have mutations in ACVRL1 or Endoglin (ENG) genes. An in- viduals is poorly defined. We analyzed signal intensity log R ratios creasing number of detected variants cannot be classified as either and B-allele frequency data from high density Illumina 1M SNP-ar- disease-associated mutations or neutral variants. These so-called un- ray applied to blood or buccal DNA samples of 1,991 adult individuals classified variants (UVs) include variants that are located in intronic included in the Spanish Bladder Cancer/EPICURO study. We have sequences. The purpose of this study was to test a panel of UVs in found mosaic abnormalities in autosomes in 1.7% samples, including Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 27 21 segmental uniparental disomies, 8 complete trisomies and 11 large Kit and the SureSelect Targeted Enrichment Indexing Kit, with the Il- (1.5-37 Mb) copy number variants. Alterations were observed across lumina system, provide in-solution protocols that are automatable and the different autosomes with recurrent events in chromosomes 9 and easy to use. This creates a cost-effective approach to analyze specific 20. The high cellular frequency of most mosaic anomalies detected genomic regions with unprecedented depth and accuracy. and their presence in normal adult individuals suggests that this phe- nomenon is a more common source of genomic variation than previ- P11.129 the Agilent technologies’ sureselecttm Platform: ously recognized. Somatic mosaicism represents a new addition to Flexible High Performance target Enrichment system for Next the expanding repertoire of inter- and intra-individual genetic variation, Generation sequencing Applications some of which causes somatic human diseases but also modifies pen- C. Pabon1, S. Happe2, A. Giuffre2, B. Novak1, M. Visitacion1, S. Joshi2, J. Ong2, etrance and/or expressivity of inherited disorders and might influence A. Wong1, J. Eberle1, S. Hunt1, R. Kanemoto1, D. Roberts1, E. Leproust1; late onset of multifactorial traits. Capturing and classifying all relevant 1Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2Agilent Technologies, genomic variation features in cells from different tissues, and at differ- Cedar Creek, TX, United States. ent developmental stages, constitutional or acquired, should lead to a Next-generation sequencing technology has dramatically increased better understanding of our complex and evolving human genome and the ability to sequence DNA in a massively parallel manner. This im- its relation to both diseases and traits. provement in throughput is currently enabling scientists to discover rare polymorphisms, structural variants, and novel transcripts at an P11.127** 3Dm: determining undertemined variants in genetic unprecedented rate. Nevertheless, routine genetic screens in large co- disorders using protein super-family data horts of individuals remain cost-prohibitive through whole genome se- H. J. Joosten1, R. Kuipers1,2, P. Schaap2, V. Martin dos Santos2; quencing approaches. To this end, Agilent Technologies has leveraged 1Wageningen University - Bio-Prodict, Wageningen, Netherlands, 2Microbiology, its ability to efficiently manufacture high fidelity long oligonucleotides Wageningen University, Wageningen, Netherlands. to develop the SureSelect platform, a portfolio of sample-preparation 3DM, a tool initially designed for protein engineering, is a system that products that enables next-generation sequencing users to focus their makes use of protein super-family data to predict effects of mutations. analysis on particular genomic loci with substantial cost savings. We This tool can automatically generate super-family databases that con- hereby demonstrate the flexibility and functionality of the SureSelect tain many different types of protein related information, such as a high- in-solution method through the targeted sequence analysis of: (i) ge- ly accurate structure based multiple sequence alignment, mutational nomes of multiple species, (ii) subsets of the human genome such information automatically scanned from literature, amino acid contact as the exome and disease-focused designs, and (iii) custom content information, solvent accessibility, etc. All data is connected to each ranging in size, complexity, and chromosomal location. We discuss other via the multiple sequence alignment making the protein super- performance with respect to capture efficiency, uniformity, reproduc- family systems powerful tools for prediction of effects of mutations. ibility of enrichment, and ability to detect SNPs. The high specificity These systems have been used to predict specific mutations that im- and excellent sequence coverage across multiple designs demon- proved enzyme features such as catalytic activity, enzyme specificity strates the utility of SureSelect for a wide variety of applications. More and thermostability. These result have been published in peer review importantly, several of the capture libraries are now incorporated into articles. standardized catalog products for ease of ordering, consistency of per- Recently, the 3DM tool has been applied to predict the effects of under- formance, and reliability of comparison across multiple laboratories. mined variants (UV’s) in genetic disorders. For many genetic disorders We also introduce an improved desktop version of Agilent’s eArray there is an increasing amount of publications describing phenotype software module that streamlines custom content design for human, associated mutations in disorder-related genes. 3DM’s literature scan- model organisms and any other genome available privately or through ner can automatically collect published disease related mutations and the UCSC Genome Browser. stores these in a protein super-family system. To retrieve, visualize, and analyze stored and new mutation data for their (potential) effect P11.130 High coverage targeted resequencing of matched tumor we have developed Validator, a web-based tool specifically designed normal samples and FFPE samples using selector technology for DNA-diagnostics. Validator uses all data from a 3DM database to O. Ericsson1, H. Johansson2, M. Isaksson2, E. Falk2, F. Roos1, L. Moens2, M. link a genetic disorder to UV’s. Nilsson2; 1Olink Genomics, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Genetics and Pathology, P11.128 Development of SureSelecttm paired end sequencing Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. Kit and sureselecttm indexing Kit With the advent of novel techniques increasing the DNA sequencing A. A. Giuffre1, J. Ong1, S. Joshi1, C. Pabon2, M. Visitacion1, B. Novak2, E. throughput by orders of magnitude compared to traditional Sanger LeProust2, D. Roberts2, S. Happe2; sequencing, a need for improved sample preparation techniques that 1Agilent Technologies, Cedar Creek, TX, United States, 2Agilent Technologies, enrich for multiple genomic loci in parallel has emerged. We present Santa Clara, CA, United States. a simple and scalable technique for highly specific amplification of a The dramatic increase in throughput of sequencing data from next- large number of target sequences based on a dramatically improved generation sequencing platforms has enabled scientists to study selector probe protocol. We applied the technique for deep sequenc- the genome with unprecedented depth and accuracy. However, the ing of all coding exons of 28 genes known to be mutated in cancer in expense of large cohort studies using a whole genome approach is breast cancer cell lines and matched normal and cancer lung cancer substantial. Agilent’s SureSelect Target Enrichment Kit for Paired- tissues, including formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue. At 20% of End Illumina sequencing analysis allows in-solution selection of a the mean amplicon sequencing depth 98% of the targeted exon bps researcher’s specific genes of interest with improved sequencing cov- were covered at mean sequencing depth with a 95% on target speci- erage, enhanced ability to assess structural variation, and increased ficity. Copy number variations could readily be identified and validated confidence in SNP calls compared to the single-end protocol. Improve- using microarray data. Matched fresh frozen and FFPE samples were ments to the Version 2.0 SureSelect Paired-End Kit have made it fast- used to validate analysis of FFPE material and concordance with Hap- er and easier, while increasing performance. The improvements to the Map genotype controls was 99%. The selector technology provides Version 2.0 SureSelect Paired-End Kit have also been applied to the a powerful approach for single tube amplification and high coverage SureSelect Indexing Kit. The SureSelect Indexing Kit, in combination targeted, scalable resequencing without dedicated instrumentation. with Illumina’s Multiplexing Kit, allows researchers to take advantage of targeted enrichment and the increasing capacity of the Illumina GA. P11.131 Diabetes-associated loci are significantly over- The SureSelect Indexing Kit enables up to 12 gDNA libraries to be represented among genes bound by tcF7L2 in vivo uniquely “tagged” and then combined on one flow cell lane, with the J. Zhao1, J. Schug2, M. Li3, K. H. Kaestner2, S. F. A. Grant1,4; advantage of enriching for only those specific genes of interest. The 1Division of Human Genetics, The Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, ability to combine targeted enrichment and indexing together maxi- Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2Department of Genetics and Institute of mizes the number of samples that can be sequenced at one time, pro- Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, University of Pennsylvania School of viding optimum time and cost savings without sacrificing performance. Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Department of Biostatistics and In summary, the SureSelect Target Enrichment Paired-End Version 2.0 Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, sion changes detected by capillary electrophoresis were compared Philadelphia, PA, United States. to TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays for the above transcripts. For Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has been implicated in type 2 di- Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or human therapeutic abetes and cancer. To uncover its downstream targets in vivo, we per- or diagnostic use. formed chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) in the colorectal carcinoma cell-line, HCT116, P11.134 Werfarin resistance genotype assessment on where TCF7L2 is abundantly expressed. In three independent chro- patients with acute coronary syndromes and hypertrophic matin samples we found 1,357 discrete binding sites within 500kb of cardiomyopathy 1,352 annotated genes i.e. approximately 6% of all RefSeqs. Pathway N. Marziliano1, F. Orsini1, P. Merlini1, C. Lauricella1, A. Colosimo1, S. Veronese1, analysis of this gene list with the software package, Ingenuity, ranked M. Gambacorta1, R. Petraroli2, L. Egry3, F. Mauri1; “Diabetes” as the most significant annotation (P-value = 2.62×10-9). 1Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedale Cà Granda Niguarda, MILANO, Italy, 2Applied We found TCF7L2 binding sites co-localized with seven of the twenty Biosystems, MILANO, Italy, 3Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United one (33.3%) type 2 diabetes loci detected by genome wide associa- States. tion (GWAS) to date, namely CDKN2A/B, ADAMTS9, CDKAL1, FTO, Warfarin is the most frequently prescribed oral anticoagulant used for PPARG, TCF7L2 and WFS1. Interestingly, we observed four TCF7L2 the prevention and treatment of thromboembolic problems. However, binding sites within the TCF7L2 gene itself, with one in the classical the drug has severe side effects of bleeding with an estimate of events promoter region and three within intron 3. The intron 3 observation occurring at a rate of 1.3 to 2.7 per 100 patient-years. The influence is highly notable as this is the precise region of TCF7L2 previously of CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genotypes on warfarin dose has been con- reported to be very strongly associated with type 2 diabetes. These sistently demonstrated in diverse racial/ethnic patient groups in obser- findings suggest that TCF7L2 may be a central node in the regulation vational studies and randomized clinical trails suggesting that patients of human diabetes-associated genes. of Asian, European and African ancestry require, on average, lower, intermediate and higher dose of warfarin respectively. P11.132 A high-resolution anatomical atlas of the transcriptome In this research study we made use of the TaqMan® Drug Metabolism in the mouse embryo Genotyping Assays and the ABI PRISM 7900HT Real Time platform G. Diez Roux1, &. EURExpress Consortium2; to genotype known variants in the CYP2C9*2 and *3, CYP4F2, and 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy, 2FP6: Grant VKORC1 genes in 50 patients with Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) Agreement Number: 512003. and 50 patients with genotyped Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM). During fetal development organs and tissues acquire specialized The genotyping workflow has been also tested on the Applied Biosys- physiological functions. This process is dependent on an orchestrated, tems Next Generation Real Time Instrument. cell type specific expression of genes. We generated the first genome- In the ACS patients the following polymorphisms were not in the Hardy- wide transcriptome atlas by RNA in situ hybridization of an entire mam- Weinberg equilibrium: rs2108622, rs1799853 and rs1057910 (p<0.005) malian organism, the developing mouse at embryonic stage E14.5. whilst in the HCM patients the following polymorphisms were not in the This public resource consists of a searchable database of annotated Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium: rs1799853 and rs1057910 (p<0.010). In images that can be interactively viewed. We generated anatomy based both cases the frequency of the “adverse” allele was more represented expression profiles for nearly 16,000 coding genes and over 400 mi- in the patients’ population than in the controls’ population. This might croRNAs. We identified 990 tissue specific genes that are a source due to a selection bias being patients with difficulties in stabilizing of novel tissue-specific markers for 37 different anatomical structures. an optimal anti-coagulant therapy. Moreover, the results on the ABI The quality and the resolution of the data revealed novel molecular PRISM 7900HT were perfectly reproducible on the Next generation domains for several developing structures, such as the telencephalon, Real Time PCR platform. and a novel organization for the hypothalamus. The digital transcrip- tome atlas is a powerful resource to determine co-expression of genes, P11.135 Whole genome and transcriptome amplification in large to identify cell populations and lineages and to identify functional as- biobanks sociations between genes relevant to development and disease. N. Klopp1, T. Illig1, C. Korfharge2, H. Wichmann1; 1Helmholtz Center München German Reseach Center for Environmental P11.133 High Coverage Gene Expression Profiling on the Health, Munich-Neuherberg, Germany, 2Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany. Applied Biosystems 3500xL Genetic Analyzer Biobanks are a key resource in unravelling the molecular basis of dis- A. Pradhan1, C. J. Davidson1, M. Kondo2, A. Felton1, R. Araki3, S. Ando3, M. eases, identification of new targets for therapy and improvement of Abe3; attribution in drug discovery and development. The scientific trend in 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems biobanking shows the need for stable techniques for amplification of Japan, Tokyo, Japan, 3National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, biomaterials, which can be used for samples stored under very dif- Japan. ferent conditions. The focus of the project is the standardisation and Whole transcriptome expression profiling is typically performed using validation of the innovative techniques of whole genome amplification hybridization-based microarray methodologies. However, there are a (WGA) and whole transcriptome amplification (WTA) in the context of number of limitations to microarray-based approaches such as low biobanks. A general standardized protocol for WGA and WTA proce- sensitivity and specificity, poor dynamic range, and, importantly, micro- dures that use Phi29-DNA-polymerase in biobanking will be devel- array expression profiling results are restricted to specific sequence oped.The major aims of our project are: annotations and content. The HiCEP (High Coverage gene Expression 1. To establish standardized WGA protocols for large biobanks Profiling) method was developed to address the above shortcomings 2. To develop standardized WGA tools to recover genomic DNA, which in gene expression profiling and provide a sensitive method for de- is in plasma or tecting a large proportion of transcripts in both known and unknown serum samples and from FFPE- tissue or blood spots genes, with low false positive rate. Here we demonstrate the use of 3. To optimize the WGA procedure by extensive quality control mea- the new Applied Biosystems 3500xL Genetic Analyzer for the detection sures of WGA of transcripts unregulated by ionizing radiation (IR). mRNA samples products were prepared from mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) at 0, 3, 6 4. To develop and establish WTA of large biobank samples and 24 hours after IR exposure. The expression of p21, CyclinG1, 5. To optimize WTA procedures by extensive quality control of WTA Gadd45a was assessed to demonstrate the capabilities of the 3500xL products system for gene expression analysis. The optional normalization re- Furthermore, the concept of the project is to transfer the results of agent (GeneScan™ 600 LIZ® Size Standard v2.0) and compatible WGA and WTA solution to national and international organisations in run module enable increased precision and accuracy in relative peak the field of biobanking. The development of the proposed, innovative area or height determinations, which are particularly important for the and specialized tools and customized solutions will help to expand and detection of slight expression changes. In addition, flexible GeneMap- secure biobanks. per® Software v4.1 was used to create reports and calculations to give user-configured tools for reporting HiCEP results. Further, the expres-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics 2 P11.136 characterizing Human Diversity by Whole Human the WBS deleted region. Preliminary results showed that both miR- Genome sequencing of southern African Genomes 590-5p and miR-590-3p miRNA strands are downregulated in cell lines T. Harkins1, S. Schuster2, W. Miller2, V. hayes3; of WBS patients. Because individual miRNAs regulate the expression 1Life Technologies, Beverly, MA, United States, 2Pennsylvania State University, of multiple target genes, we speculated that the downexpression of PA, United States, 3Children‘s Cancer Institute Australia, y, Australia. miR-590 in WBS has strong influences on the generation of the large By using a combination of next generation sequencing technologies spectrum of phenotypes because of the wide altered control of its tar- and exome enrichment, we have sequenced two complete and named get genes. This project moved from the idea that if we can modulate individual genomes from South Africa. These individuals are !Gubi, a the action of such miRNA, we will find a possible “large spectrum” Kalaharian Bushmen, and Archbishop Desmond Tutu, representing an therapeutic target for WBS. admixture comprised of two of the largest African Bantu groups. By In order to asses the biological pathways controlled by miR-590, and focusing on genomes from the southern African, we help establish the to identify the set of its putative target (PTs) genes, we exploited global extent of diversity within the human genome. For example, we are transcriptome analysis in cells following overexpression and inactiva- able to show that the diversity between two bushmen that live less tion of miR-590. than 1500 km from each other is greater than the diversity observed Preliminary, by qPCR, luciferase assays, and western blot analysis, between a Caucasian compared to an Asian. By using a combination we have validated a set of predicted miR-590 PTs identified by query- of sequencing technologies, we are able to generate a high quality ref- ing HOCTAR a recently developed software for miRNA target predic- erence genome that can be used as a comparative tool for the broader tion. We are now performing functional assays on some selected PTs community. Initial analysis of !Gubi’s genome identified at least 1.3 to assess their biological relevance on WBS. The results of these com- million SNP’s that were novel when comparing to the public reference prehensive analyses on miR-590 will be presented. databases. We used high density genetic arrays to both validate these SNP’s and determine what percent are shared verse private. As all P11.139 Using transcription modules to identify pathways participants in this project are believed to be near 80 years in age perturbed in Williams-Beuren syndrome and in good health, we believe that their genomes can provide a tool C. N. Henrichsen1, G. Csárdi1,2, M. Zabot3, C. Fusco4, S. Bergmann1,2, G. to identify alleles that provide protection against disease and in some Merla4, A. Reymond1; instances demonstrate that previously indentified disease causing al- 1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of leles appear to not cause disease in this population. These findings will Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, ultimately help the community understand rare variants across popula- 4IRCCS „Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza“, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. tions that may contribute to disease and potential drug treatment. No global assessment of the dysregulations caused by the Williams- Beuren Syndrome (WBS) deletion exists to date. We profiled the tran- P11.137 Ancient DNA research without PcR: the power of true scriptomes of skin fibroblast cell lines from WBS patients and compared single molecule sequencing. them to matched controls. We identified 366 differentially expressed E. Altena1, M. van Galen2, M. Hestand2, J. T. den Dunnen2, P. de Knijff1; genes that were significantly enriched in extracellular matrix genes, 1Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes, as well as genes the Netherlands, 2Leiden Genome Technology Center (LGTC), Leiden University products of which localise to the actin cytoskeleton, microsome and Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. vesicular fractions. We then used public expression datasets from hu- DNA extracts from archaeological samples tend to contain low quanti- man fibroblasts and the Iterative Signature Algorithm (ISA) to establish ties of DNA that is highly fragmented and chemically damaged. In addi- “transcription modules”, i.e. subsets of genes that exhibit a coher- tion the samples are highly contaminated with microbial DNA after being ent expression profile over a subset of microarray experiments. The embedded in soil for hundreds or thousands of years. Analysis of this majority of these modules are highly enriched in genes with common DNA using shotgun sequencing approaches therefore usually yields functional annotation, but they have the added advantage of including only low amounts of DNA of interest (a few percent). We reasoned that genes that have no or fragmented annotation. Hence, this modular a major effect was the methodology used, enriching the higher qual- approach increases the power to identify pathways dysregulated in ity contaminating DNA. We tested this hypothesis by analysing five WBS patients, thus providing additional candidates for genes and their ancient DNA samples of human origin using Helicos‘ true Single Mol- interactions modulating the WBS phenotypes. Dysregulated modules ecule Sequencing technology (tSMS). The samples were from skeletal are often interconnected and share multiple common genes, suggest- remains of five individuals buried between 1225 and 1850 AD in the ing that intricate regulatory networks controlled by a few key regulators city of Eindhoven (The Netherlands). The samples were also analysed are disturbed in WBS. Our results emphasize the role of the extracel- using Sanger (mtDNA HVR1 and autosomal STRs) and Roche/454 lular space in the pathophysiology of WBS and provide novel clues shotgun sequencing. While the methods involving DNA amplification about other affected processes. We identified, for example, variations yielded only <5% human sequences, singe molecule sequencing gave in the expression of GABA receptor components that could have con- yields of up to 40% and more. tSMS sequencing allowed us to deter- sequences at the cellular and synaptic level and common features with mine the gender of all samples and for three the entire mtDNA was other syndromes, such as dysregulation of the Di George Syndrome covered (average coverage of 30x, some regions >100x). Based on critical region 2 gene (DGCR2). these initial results we foresee a whole range of new studies that can be performed using low quality DNA samples, incl. archaeological, fo- P11.140** An epigenetic profile of active and inactive X rensic, and archived (FFPE) samples. For our study on the ancient chromosomes correlates gene methylation with inactivation remains, we now suddenly have a range of new possibilities, incl. full status genome sequencing, we could not have envisaged before. E. Stathaki1, E. Migliavacca1,2, Y. Dupre1, P. Jacobs3, S. Antonarakis1, A. Sharp1; P11.138** Exploring the role of miR-590 in Williams Beuren 1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of syndrome Bioinformatics, Switzerland, 3Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury C. Fusco1, L. Micale1, V. A. Gennarino2, B. Augello1, M. G. Turturo1, E. V. District Hospital and Division of Human Genetics, University of Southampton, D’Addetta1, S. Banfi2, G. Merla1; UK, United Kingdom. 1Medical Genetics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni X chromosome inactivation is a dosage compensation process that Rotondo, Italy, 2TIGEM, Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, silences most genes on one X chromosome in each female cell. In or- Italy. der to characterise epigenetic changes that accompany this process, Williams Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a recurrent genomic disorder we generated comparative DNA methylation profiles in both Turner caused by hemyzygosity of 28 contiguous genes at 7q11.23. Patients syndrome (45,X), and normal females (46,XX). Methylated DNA was with WBS have a characteristic constellation of medical and cognitive immunoprecipitated and hybridized to tiling oligonucleotide arrays, findings. Despite a significant advance in the last years still much has generating epigenetic profiles of active and inactive X chromosomes. to be learnt in order to further translate the knowledge into a better We observed that X-inactivation is accompanied by increased DNA care of patients. methylation of the inactive X specifically at CpG islands. While both We investigated the role of miR-590, the only miRNA located within intra- and inter-genic CpG islands are influenced, the biggest increase Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 00 in methylation occurs at the promoters of genes silenced by X-inactiva- that small RNA extracted from FFPE samples was successfully con- tion. In contrast, genes escaping X-inactivation have low methylation verted to small RNA libraries. The expression profiles from FFPE and levels that are similar between active and inactive X chromosomes, fresh frozen samples were in good correlation, suggesting that miRNA while genes that undergo unstable/polymorphic X-inactivation show molecules are less affected by sample degradation and RNA-protein intermediate increases in methylation proportionate to their frequency crosslink. This study provides a foundation for miRNA expression of inactivation. Thus promoter methylation and susceptibility to X-inac- analysis on SOLiD™ system using FFPE samples in cancer and other tivation are directly correlated. We utilised this fact to predict nine ad- diseases. ditional Refseq genes that escape X-inactivation, and performed com- parative sequence analysis of differentially methylated CpG islands on the inactive X to identify sequence features that may contribute P12 molecular basis of mendelian to the X inactivation process. As our study included Turner syndrome disorders patients with single X chromosomes of both maternal and paternal ori- gin, we searched for parent-of-origin specific methylation indicative of imprinting (Skuse, Nature 387:705), but were unable to find any. P12.001 Whole mitochondrial genome screening in two families Our study provides the first complete epigenetic profile of X-inactiva- with hearing loss: detection of a novel mutation in the 12s rRNA tion, giving novel insights into the phenomenon of dosage compensa- gene tion. E. Mkaouar-Rebai1, N. Fendri-Kriaa1, N. Louhichi1, A. Tlili1, C. Triki2, A. Ghorbel3, S. Masmoudi4, F. Fakhfakh1; P11.141 ZNF397, an interphase specific novel mammalian 1Human Molecular Genetic Laboratory. Faculty of Medicine of Sfax, Tunisia, centromere SCAN-zinc finger protein. 2Service de Neurologie Infantile, C.H.U. Hédi Chaker de Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service S. L. Bailey1,2, A. N. Graham1,2, D. F. Hudson1,2, K. H. A. Choo1,2, P. Kalitsis1,2; d’O.R.L., C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba de Sfax, Tunisia, 4Unité Cible pour le 1Chromosome and Chromatin Research Laboratory, Murdoch Childrens Diagnostic et la Thérapie, Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Tunisia. Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2Department of paediatrics, University of Sensorineural hearing loss has been described in association with Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. different mitochondrial multisystemic syndromes, often characterized Our laboratory has previously identified a novel centromere protein, by an important neuromuscular involvement. Until now, mutations in ZNF397, using a centromere-positive autoimmune serum from a pa- mitochondrial DNA, specially in the 12S rRNA, the tRNASer(UCN) and tient with watermelon stomach disease. ZNF397 protein belongs to the the tRNALeu(UUR) genes were implicated in syndromic or non-syndromic classical CysHis group of the zinc-finger protein superfamily, which hearing loss either as a primary cause or as predisposing factors. In 2 2 is one of the largest families in the human proteome. It contains two this study, we performed a whole mitochondrial genome screening in conserved domains; a leucine-rich SCAN domain and nine CysHis two unrelated Tunisian families with inherited hearing loss in which we 2 2 zinc fingers. Bioinformatic analysis shows that ZNF397 is conserved in did not find nuclear mutations in the GJB2, GJB3 and GJB6 genes. placental mammals. To date, only a few proteins containing zinc-finger Results showed the presence of a novel homoplasmic mutation in domains have been identified at the centromeric or pericentric loci in the mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene in the two probands of these two various eukaryotic organisms. families who belong to two differents haplogroups: L3 and H6a1. The Stable GFP-ZNF397 human cell lines demonstrated that ZNF397 is m.735A>G mutation affects a conserved nucleotide of the mitochondrial centromeric and it co-localises with constitutive centromere protein 12S rRNA gene in primates and other species and had a conservation CENP-A during interphase to early prophase of human cells. Dele- index of 78.5 % (11/14). We also detected known polymorphisms and tion and domain-swap constructs indicate that the SCAN domain is 6 novel mitochondrial variants (m.4313T>C (MT-TI), m.8649A>G (MT- necessary, but not sufficient, for centromere localisation. ZNF397 also ATP6), m.9329G>A (MT-CO3), m.9467T>C (MT-CO3), m.10308C>T localises to an active neocentromere, not the inactive α-satellite cen- (MT-ND3), m.11926A>G (MT-ND4). This study described a new mito- tromere on a pseudo-dicentric neocentromere chromosome. Knockout chondrial mutation associated to hearing loss and confirmed that the studies in mice have revealed that ZNF397 is not essential for chromo- mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene is a hot spot for mutations associated some segregation or development. with hearing impairment. The presence of ZNF397 in interphase cells but not on mitotic chromo- somes suggests that it is not a constitutive structural protein and that it P12.002** characterization of the genetic defect underlying an is unlikely to be directly involved in microtubule capture, mitotic segre- autosomal recessive leukodystrophy gation, or cytokinesis. An attractive hypothesis is that ZNF397 plays a J. Zolotushko1, H. Flusser1, B. Markus1, M. Heverin2, I. Björkhem2, S. Sivan1, role in the regulation of transcription at the centromere. O. Birk1,3; 1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute of P11.142 microRNA analysis using RNA extracted from matched Biotechnology, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Division of Clinical formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) and fresh frozen Chemistry, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Sweden, 3Genetics samples on sOLiDtm system Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel. J. Gu, K. Lea, E. Zeringer, S. Heater, J. Schageman, K. Bramlett; An Israeli-Bedouin kindred presented with an autosomal recessive Life Technologies, Austin, TX, United States. phenotype of convulsions near birth, mental retardation and cerebral Archived formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens repre- palsy. Brain MRI demonstrated significant reduction in white matter sent excellent resources for biomarker discovery, but it has been a and agenesis of corpus callosum. Linkage analysis ruled out asso- major challenge to study gene expression in these samples due to ciation with twelve genes known to be associated with inherited de- mRNA degradation and modification during fixation and processing. fects of white matter or agenesis of corpus callosum. Using 250K SNP MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression at post-transcriptional microarrays, a region of homozygosity on chromosome 1p33-1p32.3 level and are considered as important regulators of cancer progres- was identified and further narrowed down using polymorphic markers sion. Next generation sequencing technologies such as SOLiD™ pro- to 7.5 cM (7 Mb) between D1S2824 and D1S200, with a maximum vide an ideal method for measuring the abundance of miRNA mol- two-point LOD score of [Zmax] = 4.39, recombination fraction [θ] = ecules in different cancer stages and provide insightful information on 0.0 at D1S2748. Six candidates of the 62 genes in the linkage inter- tumorigenesis. However, currently there is no good method to system- val were sequenced, identifying a novel missense mutation, C307T, in atically study miRNA expression in FFPE samples on next generation DHCR24, resulting in substitution of arginine to cysteine at amino acid sequencing platforms. 103 (conserved exposed residue) within the flavin adenine dinucleo- We have designed and developed a ligation-based miRNA detec- tide (FAD) binding domain. tion method to capture small RNA sequences in FFPE samples and DHCR24 (24-dehydrocholesterol reductase) encodes an FAD-depen- convert them into templates suitable for sequencing on the SOLiD™ dent oxidoreductase expressed in the endoplasmic reticulum mem- System. Total RNA was isolated from matched lung cancer and breast brane, which catalyzes the reduction of the delta-24 double bond of cancer FFPE and snap frozen tissues using Ambion RecoverAll™ kit. sterol intermediates during cholesterol biosynthesis. Missense muta- Enriched small RNA from these samples was used for library prepara- tions in this gene have been associated with desmosterolosis. Plasma tion, followed by sequencing on SOLiD™ system. Our results show sterol quantification in two affected individuals demonstrated a normal Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 01 cholesterol level, but ~300-fold increased levels of desmosterol prov- P12.005 comprehensive approach to the diagnosis of Alpha ing deficient activity of 24-dehydrocholesterol reductase. thalassemia in iran The novel DHCR24 mutation we describe leads to excessive desmo- N. Bayat, S. Ebrahimkhani, M. Parvin, S. Jalilnejad, L. Yektamaram, H. sterol accumulation much beyond that previously described, and a Imanian, V. Hadavi, A. Azarkeivan, N. Almadani, F. Afroozan, R. Kariminejad, A. unique severe novel clinical phenotype. Kariminejad, H. Najmabadi; Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Iran, P12.003 A recurrent homozygous deletion in ADAMTSL in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. isolated ectopia lentis Thalassemias are a group of anemia-like blood disorders that oc- T. M. Neuhann1, J. Artelt1, T. F. Neuhann2, S. Tinschert1, A. Rump1; cur most commonly in people with Mediterranean, African American 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Dresden, Germany, 2Private Practice, Munich, and Asian backgrounds. These conditions can range from mild to life Germany. threatening. Over the last 18 years more than 3000 families with a his- To date, only two different homozygous mutations in ADAMTSL4 have tory of affected individuals with thalassemia have been referred to our been reported in patients with isolated ectopia lentis, each mutation in center. Most of them were Beta-thalassemia patients and significant one consanguineous family. numbers of them had normal hemoglobin A level indicating they were 2 We report five individuals from four non-consanguineous and non-re- either Beta silent or Alpha thalassemia carriers. lated families with isolated ectopia lentis. All of them have the identical Since 7 years ago that alpha thalassemia investigations were estab- homozygous ADAMTSL4 mutation not reported so far: 20 bp of coding lished in our laboratory, variety of approaches and methods have been sequence are deleted within exon 6 (NM_019032.4:c.759_778del20). set up to analyze these individuals such as Gap PCR, hybridization In a screen of 360 ethnically matched unaffected individuals, we found assay, Alpha1 and Alpha2 globin gene direct sequencing. two further heterozygous mutation carriers. The most common alpha thalassemia deletion among our patients This deletion is flanked by a perfectly matching 8 bp direct repeat as was -alpha3.7 (44.9%). The next four most frequent deletion/mutation(s) well as two perfect DNA polymerase α frameshift hotspots, suggest- were poly A2, -alpha4.2, alphaIVS-I, 5 nt and --MED with frequencies of 18.2, ing a repeat mediated recurrent mutation event. However, the deletion 9.1, 6.5, and 4.3%, respectively. Five other mutations, alphacd19(GCG-GC) always comes along with the same SNP-haplotype in all individuals (4.0%), alphaCS (3.3%), -(alpha)20.5 (2.1%), Hb Adana (1.8%), and poly (affected as well as carriers), suggesting a single founder. These find- A1 were seen in frequencies above 1%, while the remaining 11 muta- ings might best be explained by a “mixture” of both scenarios: a repeat tions comprised 0.4% each. Other novel mutations for alpha thalas- mediated mutation due to the local DNA sequence environment oc- semia such as alphacd99, and 3’UTR nt46 have also been identified. We curred in a small number of individuals, i.e. there is a small group of have also identified few individuals with beta silent mutations. At pres- different founders for the very same mutation. ent we are able to perform carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis for Our results further support the association of ADAMTSL4 null-muta- over 99 percent of referral cases. tions to isolated ectopia lentis. Screening of ADAMTSL4 should be considered in all patients with isolated ectopia lentis, with or without P12.006 Alpha-thalassemia deletions found in Romanian family history. In patients from non-consanguineous families, we pro- patients with alpha-thalassemia pose a two-step diagnostic approach starting with an examination of C. Tecuceanu1, R. Talmaci2, L. Dan1, M. Dogaru3, D. Coriu2; exon 6 before sequencing the entire coding region of ADAMTSL4. 1Genetics Institute of Bucharest University, Bucharest, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Carol Davila“, Bucharest, Romania, 3“Fundeni“ P12.004 mutation analysis in families with autosomal dominant Clinical Institute, Bucharest, Romania. polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) in czech Republic Alpha-thalassemia is a hereditary hemoglobin disorder caused by de- J. Štekrová1, V. Elišáková1, J. Reiterová2, S. Svobodová1, V. Kebrdlová1, M. fects in the alpha-globin genes. The majority of the mutations involved Merta1, V. Tesař2, M. Kohoutová1; in alpha-thalassemia are extended alpha globin gene deletions. 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics,1-st Faculty of Medicine and General The purpose of our work was to implement a molecular diagnosis ap- Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Dept. of proach for patients with suspicious diagnosis of alpha-thalassemia. Pa- Nephrology,1-st Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Charles tients with modified levels of cell blood count (RBC, MCV, MCH), levels University, Prague, Czech Republic. of HbA2 1-2,9% and excluding other causes of hypochromic anemia ADPKD is the most common hereditary renal disease. The progres- were tested for the most common alpha-thalassemia deletions. DNA sive formation and enlargement of renal cysts causes the decline in samples extracted from peripheral blood of all 43 subjects included in renal function. the study were genotyped using the GAP-PCR molecular method. The disease is caused by mutations of PKD1 (in 85 %) and PKD2 (in Our results showed ten patients with modifications in the alpha-globin 14 %) genes. Protein products of these two genes polycystin-1 and genes, as following: three patients are carriers of the 3.7kb deletion polycystin-2 may interact with each other forming a large membrane- and in four patients was identified the MED I deletion. An interest- associated komplex which has a crucial role in the regulation of cell ing finding was the identification of alpha triplicated status (ααα=anti proliferation, differentiation and normal renal tubulogenesis. The iden- 3.7kb) in 3 patients. In one of these, alpha triplicated status is associ- tification of mutations in genes could help to find the functional impor- ated with cd 8 (-AA) β-thalassemia mutation resulting in a thalassemia tant areas of polycystins and thus reveal the molecular mechanism of intermedia phenotype. pathogenesis of this disease. Both PKD genes are high variable; in In conclusion, our study shows that Mediterranean alpha-thalassemia the PKD database (http://pkdb.mayo.edu) 846 different variants of the deletions -3.7 kb and MED I are quite frequently found in alpha-thalas- PKD1 gene and 139 different variants of the PKD2 gene have been semia cases from our country and it is the first report about alpha-thal- reported. assemia in Romania. This approach could be a very efficient applica- The mutation analysis of PKD1 gene in our laboratory has so far de- tion in prenatal diagnosis for a thalassemia prevention programme in tected mutations in 37 families. Only the mutation p.Arg4021X was our country. detected in two families; other mutations are unique for individual This work was supported by the grant PN II 41-045 from the Romanian families; 29 mutations are unique for Czech population. The mutation Ministry of Education and Research. analysis of PKD2 gene has so far detected mutations in 30 families. The mutation p.Pro68fsX23 was identified in 9 families and mutation P12.007 the genetic aspects of hereditary angioedema in p.Gln160X in 5 families; 12 mutations are unique for Czech population. Russia Determination of localization and type of mutations within the PKD A. V. Dmitrieva1, E. N. Medunitsyna1, E. A. Bliznetz2, T. V. Latysheva1; genes and their genotype-phenotype correlation in ADPKD families 1State Institution State Scientific Center “Institute of Immunology of the Federal improves DNA diagnostics together with the assessment of the clinical Medicobiolog, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Center for Medical prognosis of patients. Genetic, Moscow, Russian Federation. Supported by the grant projects IGA MZ CR NR/9427-3 and VZ Hereditary angioedema (HAE) types I and II are the chronic disease MSM0021620806 concerning group of primary immunodeficiencies, connected with the qualitative or quantitative genetically determined defect of the genes coding synthesis esterase inhibitor of a complement component C1 Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 02 (C1- inhibitor), are shown in recurrent angioedema of a skin and mu- Sequencing was performed for PRSS12 but no mutation was found. cous membranes. The HAE prevalence is 1/10,000-150,000. The ge- Further its two loops were subjected to the Genome wide scanning by netic aspects studying of hereditary angioedema will allow to carry out using SNP6.0 array for detection of homozygous regions. No common differential diagnostics angioedema, including pre-symptomatic diag- homozygous region was found for both loops while five homozygous nostics, and to optimize the treatment in Russia. In present work for regions were found for a single loop. By checking genotypes for these the first time in Russia the mutation analysis in SERPING1 (C1NH) two loops, no match was found. It made the molecular genetics of MR6 gene, coding C1- inhibitor, at the patients with recurrent angioedema, very complicated and we have to consider several aspects for MR6 was performed. including compound heterozygosity, more than a single gene and its A pilot sample included 6 patients. DNA sequencing of the entire cod- clinical features. One probability for MR6 can be the novel syndromic ing region and exon-intron junctions in SERPING1 gene was carried ARMR with several genes. All these observations for MR6 shows the out in all patients. The mutations were found in 5 patients: three mu- complexity of ARMR. tations at patients with HAE type I (c.623_624insA, c.706T>G and c.1249+2T>G) were novel, two mutations at patients with HAE type P12.010 Genetic linkage analysis in a cohort of iranian families I and II (c.578T>C and c.614G>A) were found earlier among patients with autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing impairment from Spain and USA. The first results indicate high efficiency of SERP- M. A. Tabatabaiefar1,2,3, F. Alasti3,4, L. Shariati2, E. Farrokhi2, M. R. Nooridaloii1, ING1 gene sequencing for HAE types I and II molecular genetic diag- M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori2, G. Van Camp3; nostics. In one patient with HAE types I a mutation in coding region of 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of SERPING1 gene was not found. In publications the rare mutations in Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cellular and Molecular regulatory gene areas and long deletions, not revealed by sequencing, Research Center, School of Medicine, Shahrekord University of Medical are described. To increase efficiency of molecular genetic diagnostics Sciences, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medical Genetics Center, we schedule to design analyzing systems for those mutations. Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, 2610, Antwerp, Belgium, 4National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology P12.008 Apoptosis resistance following DNA damage in Ataxia (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. telangiectasia and Nijmegen Breakage syndrome cells is Hearing impairment (HI) is the most frequent sensory birth defect in conferred by a novel defect in mitochondrial p53 accumulation human. Autosomal recessive non-syndromic HI (ARNSHI) is the most V. Turinetto, L. Orlando, E. Lantelme, L. Accomasso, V. Minieri, A. Amoroso, M. common type of hereditary HI. Over 70 loci are known, in which more De Marchi, D. Delia, C. Giachino; than half of the corresponding genes have been identified. Consan- University of Turin, Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, Orbassano guinity is a highly accepted custom in Iran and therefore the Iranian (Turin), Italy. population offers an opportunity to study different AR disorders, includ- We have previously shown that whereas T-cells from normal individu- ing ARNSHI. In 31 ARNSHI families GJB2, the most common cause als accumulate high amounts of total p53 and undergo apoptosis when of HI, was excluded. Fifteen known ARNSHI loci were analyzed by treated with the genotoxic agent Actinomycin D (ActD), those from homozygosity mapping. Later, families with S-Link values ≥ 3.3, ex- Ataxia Telangiectasia (AT) and Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome (NBS) cluded for the 15 known AR loci, were analyzed by Illumina 6K chips patients resist ActD-induced apoptosis. We have now found similar re- (Linkage IVb panel). sistance on the part of the p53-null Jurkat T-cell line, a further evidence Ten families were found to be linked to 6 known loci by homozygosity indicating that ActD initiates a p53-dependent, non-redundant apop- mapping: DFNB4 (4 families), DFNB63 (2 families), DFNB7/11 (1 fam- totic pathway. This prompted us to look for defective p53 accumulation ily), DFNB9 (1 family), DFNB2 (1 family) and DFNB21 (1 family). Five by AT and NBS cells following ActD treatment. Surprisingly their total out of the 31 families studied were qualified for a whole genome scan, p53 level was only slightly less than that of normal T cells, though 3 of which showed significant linkage based on the SNP array out- immunofluorescence and protein fractionation experiments revealed comes. The linked regions in the first and second families overlap with that this accumulation was highly defective in the cytosol and nearly 2 known deafness loci, with no gene identification yet, while the third undetectable in their mitochondria. Specific inhibition of mitochondrial family presents linkage to a new genomic region. Further analyses p53 translocation with μ pifithrin (μ-PFT) in control T-cells reduced were performed for the fine mapping of the linked regions to narrow the apoptotic response by 86%, whereas treatment with α-PFT, which down the boundaries of the loci and increase the chance of finding the blocks p53-mediated transcription, had no effect. These data con- corresponding disease-causing genes. DNA sequencing of candidate firmed that ActD-induced apoptosis depends on a mitochondrial p53 genes in all 3 families is going on. function. Export blockade experiments showed that nuclear export is not required for mitochondrial p53 translocation. P12.011** the power of array-cGH in diagnosing rare autosomal Our results disclose an undescribed defect in mitochondrial p53 accu- recessive nonsyndromic mental retardation. the example of mulation in AT and NBS T-cells that makes them resistant to apoptosis TUSC. following DNA damage. C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, C. Bonnet3, M. Béri3, P. Callier4, B. Aral5, M. Payet4, C. Ragon4, A. Mosca-Boidron4, N. Marle4, A. Masurel-Paulet1, F. Mugneret4, L. P12.009 molecular Genetics of Autosomal Recessive mental Faivre1, P. Jonveaux3; Retardation (ARmR) in consanguineous Pakistani families. 1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2Centre de Référence Maladies Rares S. Rehman1, L. Hansen2, S. Bakhtiar1, M. Farooq1, M. Tariq1, I. Ahmad1, N. «Anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs» de l’interrégion Tommerup2, S. Baig1; Grand-Est, Dijon, France, 3Département de Génétique, CHU Brabois, Nancy, 1National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), France, 4Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, PTB, CHU, Dijon, France, 5Laboratoire Faisalabad, Pakistan, 2Wilhelm Johansen Centre for Functional Genome de Génétique Moléculaire, PTB, CHU, Dijon, France. Research ICMM, PANUM Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark. Mental retardation (MR) is the most frequent handicap in children, af- Mental retardation (MR) is a complex phenotype characterized by sub fecting 2% of the general population. Despite recent advances, the average general intellectual functioning and deficiency in at least two causes of nearly 40% of MR remain unclear. Although more than 60 of self-survival skills which appear during childhood. Incidence of MR X-linked MR genes have been identified, only six genes (PRSS12, is relatively high in Pakistan because of high consanguinity. Autosomal CRBN, CC2D1A, GRIK2, TRAPPC9 and TUSC3) have been impli- recessive form of MR (ARMR) is genetically heterogeneous with eight cated in nonsyndromic autosomal recessive MR (NS-ARMR). These loci and six genes reported. In the present study, we identified seven genes are involved in different pathways, namely synaptic proteolysis, large consanguineous Pakistani families with autosomal recessive regulation of mitochondrial energy metabolism, regulation of I-kappaB mode of inheritance having multiple affected births with MR. Purpose kinase/NF-kappaB cascade, induction of long-term potentiation and of the study was to improve the understanding on protective measure- N-glycosylation, underlying the extreme heterogeneity of pathological ments for ARMR. mechanism involved in NS-ARMR. TUSC3 encodes a subunit of the Nucleic acid (DNA) was extracted and subjected to STS marker anal- ER-bound oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex that catalyzes a yses for mapping of homozygosity in known genes and known loci pivotal step in the protein N-glycosylation process. Only one frameshift regions. All families were excluded for all known regions except MR6 mutation and a large 120-150 Kbp deletion have been previously re- (consists of three loops), which seems to be linked with PRSS12 gene. ported in two consanguineous families. By high resolution 105K CGH-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 array, we identified a homozygous 177-238 Kb duplication, including P12.014 Ataxia-telangiectasia as model for study of heightened exons 2-6 in TUSC3, in two sibs with severe MR from consanguine- radiosensitivity and premature aging ous parents. Affected patients presented with normal mensurations, I. M. Spivak, E. A. Polubotko; dysmorphic features similar to previously reported cases, moderate to Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St.Petersburg, Russian severe MR with insuffisant speech and normal walk, epilepsy in the fe- Federation. male patient, behavioural disturbances in the male patient, and without Diseases with distinct progeroid features may serve as models for any malformation. This observation confirms the implication of TUSC3 natural aging. Neurodegenerative syndrome ataxia-telangiectasia in NS-ARMR, the expanding clinical spectrum of CDG syndromes to (AT) show progeroid features on both the level of the entire organism NSMR and the importance of the high resolution of CGH-array in the and isolated cells. Heightened radiosensitivity by AT correlates with identification of intragenic rearrangements of genes implicated in MR diminished DNA repair potential, and inability to form cell cycle blocks and rare diseases. after irradiation. AT heterozygote carriage tends to be quite high, 4 to 11% in various populations. Thus it is really important to detect the P12.012 congenital sick sinus syndrome caused by a novel levels of radiosensitivity and premature aging by AT-heterozygotes. In homozygous mutation in the scN5A gene our study, the following makers of aging were studied in 2 different Z. N. Al-Hassnan1,2, S. Tulbah1, S. Majid1, N. Dzimiri1, W. Al-Manea1, M. Al- AT families: activity of SA-β-gal, presence of γ-H2AX foci, diminished Fayyadh1; amount of HP-1-γ and of methylated forms of histone H3 (3MeH3K9 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and 3MeH3K27), SAHF (senescence associated heterochromatin fo- 2Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. cus) formation, structural disturbances of nuclear lamina and actine Sick sinus syndrome (SSS), caused by sinus node dysfunction, is cytoskeleton in intact cells. In order to define the level of radiosen- characterized by inappropriate sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, or sitivity, dynamics of the appearance and elimination was measured: chronotropic incompetence. The disorder, which presents with synco- in case of DNA breaks, by means of comet assay; in case of 53BP1 pe, presyncope and dizziness, often requires cardiac pacing. Familial and γ-H2AX foci and p21, by method of indirect immunofluorescence; SSS is known to be inherited in either autosomal dominant; caused by checkpoint formation by flow cytometry. Cells of AT patients and their mutation in the HCN4 gene, or autosomal recessive; caused by muta- blood relatives (heterozygote carriers of disease) were demonstrat- tion in the SCN5A gene. ed to reveal features of both premature aging, and radiosensitivity. It Here we present the molecular finding in a large inbred family with should be noted that in cases of AT-heterozygotes, the level of expres- SSS. The index case, a 1 year old boy, presented with a history of sion of features of aging and radiosensitivity tended to be intermediate frequent attacks of syncope. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus between AT patients, and healthy donors. The study was supported by bradycardia and 2nd degree atrioventricual block. Four of his siblings Program of Basic Research of the Presidium of Russian Academy of had a similar presentation and all of them underwent cardiac pacing. Sciences ‘Fundamental Sciences for Medicine’. The ECG in their consanguineous parents was unremarkable. Se- quencing the entire coding region for SCN5A revealed a novel homo- P12.015 Bak proapoptotic gene alteration in iranian patients zygous substitution (c.5548T>C) leading to replacement of cysteine with Ataxia telangiectasia by arginine at position 1850, which was not detected in 100 ethnically A. Isaian1, M. Sanati2, T. Dork3, N. Bogdanova4, M. Houshmand2; matched controls. 1Department of Pediatrics, Pediatrics Center of ExcellenceTehran University In this work, we report a novel homozygous SCN5A mutation in con- of Medical SciencesNational Institute of Genetic Engineering, Tehran, Islamic genital SSS. The in vitro biophysical characterization of the mutant, Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of Genetic Engineering, Tehran, Islamic which is in progress, may provide insight into the molecular pathogen- Republic of Iran, 3Gynaecology Research Unit, Medical School of Hannover,, esis of the recessive form of SSS. Hannover, Germany, 4Gynaecology Research Unit, Medical School of Hannover,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P12.013 molecular investigation of TBX1 gene in individuals Introduction: with Asperger syndrome Ataxia telangiectasia(AT) is an autosomal recessive multisystem dis- M. Simioni1, C. E. Steiner1, A. C. Fett-Conte2, A. Barbosa-Gonçalves3, V. L. order characterized by variable immunodeficiency, progressive neuro- Gil-da-Silva-Lopes1; degeneration, occulocutaneoustelangiectasia, and an increased sus- 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Campinas (Unicamp), ceptibilityto malignancies. This study was designed to studythe role Campinas, Brazil, 2Faculdade de Medicina de S.J. do Rio Preto, São José of proapoptotic BAK gene in a group of patients with AT to elucidate do Rio Preto, Brazil, 3Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho the possiblerole of these genes in progression of malignancies in this (UNESP), São José do Rio Preto, Brazil. disease. Asperger syndrome (AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder from the Materials and Methods: Autism Spectrum Disorders. It is characterized by impairments in so- Fifty Iranian patients with AT were investigated in this study. The entire cialization and ritualistic and stereotypic behaviors. Despite of the de- coding regions of the BAK gene (exons 2-6 )were amplified using poly- scription of mutations in several genes, the etiology remains unknown. merase chain reaction (PCR). The PCR products were separated by Genetic and early developmental factors are considered important for 2% agarose gel electrophoresis, and all positive samples were verified its occurrence. Behavioral and psychiatric disorders are a prominent by direct sequencing of PCR products using the same primers used for part of the 22q11 deletion syndrome. Furthermore, there is a description PCR amplification, Big Dye chemistry, and Avent 3100 Genetic Ana- of one individual with AS and mutation in TBX1 gene that is mapped in lyzer following the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). 22q11.2 region. Therefore, the objective of this study was to perform Results :Eight of fifty Iranian AT patients (16%) exhibited a C>T transi- a mutation screening of TBX1 gene in individuals with AS. We ana- tion in exon 2 (c342C>T) of the BAK gene, while none of the healthy lyzed 14 subjects. Mutation screening of TBX1 by direct sequencing controls had such alteration (P=0.0001).Frequency of this alteration detected several synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), inother population(NCBI SNP Database rs2227925) was3.9% which in already reported in NCBI database. The sequence variant 1189A → C our pateints were higher . was identified in one patient. This Asn397His transversion was geno- Discussion: typed in a sample of 100 control individuals and it was found in 20% of Alteration in the proapoptotic BAK gene was found in our study, which them. This kind of mutation in TBX1 gene may be more common than could elucidate involvement of the mitochondrial pathway mediated expected, however it’s relevance in pathogenesis of AS still remains to apoptosis in accelerating and developing ofcancers and in immuno- be determined considering the clinical and genetic heterogeneity of the pathogenesis of AT. Such altered apoptosis in AT could play some disease and the restricted number of individuals studied. roles in developing cancers in this group of patients. P12.016 A new missense mutation in the transmembrane domains constitutively activates the human ca2+ receptor C. Airault1, A. Nizou1, C. Magdelaine2, A. Liendhard3, F. Sturtz2, A. Lia-Baldini1; 1EA4021 – Biomolécules et thérapies antitumorales, Université de Limoges, Limoges, France, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 de Limoges, Limoges, France, 3Service de Pédiatrie, Centre Hospitalo- did not show abnormal methylation in KvDMR1 region and H19 gene. Universitaire de Limoges, Limoges, France. The molecular analysis confirmed the diagnosis of BWS in 3 out of Gain-of-function mutations of the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) 4 families tested. The MS-MLPA proved to be a powerful method in have been identified in patients with familial and sporadic hypercalciu- detection abnormal methylation profile, which is essential in clarifying ric hypocalcaemia. We described here a new heterozygous missense the diagnosis of BWS. mutation localized in the transmembrane domains of CaSR, carrying by a subject with autosomal dominant hypocalcaemia. Analysis of in vi- P12.019 A recessive form of Best’s vitelliform macular tro functional properties of the mutant receptor to react to extracellular dystrophy caused by a novel mutation in VMD2 gene calcium did not reveal the expected leftward shift in the concentration- T. Piñeiro-Gallego1, M. Álvarez2, I. Pereiro1, S. Campos2, D. Valverde1; response curve for the mutant compared to wild-type receptor, but a 1Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology. Faculty of Biology, constitutive effect of this mutant which exhibits 100% of the wild-type Universidade de Vigo, Spain, 2Department of Ophthalmology. Complexo receptor activity even in the absence of extracellular calcium. This find- Hospitalario Universitario de Vigo, Spain. ing, which has never been described to our knowledge, suggests the Vitelliform macular dystrophy (VMD2, OMIM#153700) or Best disease importance of this new mutation or of the surrounding region on the is an early-onset autosomal dominant retinal dystrophy, associated activation of the CaSR protein. with a reduced or absent electro-oculogram (EOG) and large depos- its of lipofuscin-like material in the subretinal space. This disorder is P12.017 Genetic testing for Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: one progressive and loss of vision may occur. Mutations in VMD2, which year experience. encodes the protein bestrophin, have been associated with Best dis- K. R. Smith1, T. Antoniadi1, M. Williams1, A. Churchill2, J. Carter2; ease. Clinical features in patients with mutations in VMD2 seem to 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Bristol Eye Hospital, cluster into at least four major categories that include a recently de- Bristol, United Kingdom. scribed autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy (ARB, OMIM#611809). Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome (ARS) describes a group of genetically We characterized the phenotype in a consanguineous family with ARB and phenotypically heterogeneous disorders that primarily affect the and a novel mutation in VMD2 gene. anterior segment of the eye. Individuals with ARS present with a char- Four family members were examined clinically regarding age, best acteristic spectrum of ocular anomalies and to a lesser extent systemic corrected visual acuity test, fundoscopy, electro-oculogram (EOG), malformations. One of the most debilitating features of this disorder electroretinogram (ERG), fluorescein angiography (AGF), optical co- is the increased risk of glaucoma with approximately 50% of affected herence tomography (OCT) and fundus autofluorescence. All 11 exons individuals acquiring this progressively blinding disease. Identifying an of VMD2 were amplified by PCR and mutation analysis was carried out “at risk” group allows glaucoma development/progression to be moni- sequencing these PCR products. tored and treated appropriately. The siblings showed a novel homozygous VMD2 gene missense mu- ARS is an autosomal dominant disorder with an incidence in the UK tation p.R130S, (c.388C>A) in exon 4, and the parents were hetero- estimated at 1/250,000. There are 5 known genetic loci for ARS, situat- zygous for the same mutation. The siblings had multifocal vitelliform ed at 4q25 (PITX2), 6q25 (FOXC1), 11q13 (PAX6), 13q14 and 16q24. lesions, both presented reduced ERG and preserved good visual acu- We have recently implemented a UK Genetics Testing Network service ity. The girl suffered vitelliform material reorganization with the right for the detection of mutations in PITX2 and FOXC1. The two stage eye showing a pseudohypopion type, and left a retractile-atrophic type. screening procedure involves quantitative analysis using an “in house” The boy suffered vitelliform disc regression and also had abnormal designed MLPA kit and subsequent point mutation analysis by DNA EOG. sequencing in dosage negative cases.To date 41 patients with a clini- Our study demonstrates the uselfulness of VMD2 mutational analysis cal phenotype of ARS have been screened; four had a FOXC1 dele- in the diagnosis of bestrinopathies. A novel homozygous mutation in tion and one had a deletion of PITX2. A total of eight point sequence VMD2 is associated with ARB. changes were identified in both genes, including 5 novel variants. In silico investigation was also performed for the novel findings. Here we P12.020 Further evidence of genetic heterogeneity of present our results and discuss our conclusions regarding testing and cAcD disease associated with inherited drusen in a large the significance of the genetic testing for this syndrome. consanguineous tunisian family F. Ouechtati1,2, O. Belhadj Tahar3, A. Mhenni3, S. Chakroun1, I. Chouchene1, S. P12.018 MLPA analysis for molecular diagnosis of Beckwith- Oueslati4, A. Rebai5, A. Jeddi Blouza3, S. Abdelhak1; Wiedemann syndrome 1Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases, UR04/SP03 Pasteur M. Lukova1,2, T. Todorov1,2, L. Angelova3, E. Simeonov4, A. Todorova1,2, V. Institute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Oculogenetics Unit UR17/04, Hedi Rais Mitev1; Institute of Ophthalmology, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Department of Ophthalmology, La 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia Medical Unversity, Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 4Child Neurological Diseases, U05/UR08-02, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Madico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, Faculty of Medicine of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 5Unit of Bioinformatics, Center of 3Laboratory of Medical Genetics, “St. Marina” Hospital, Varna, Bulgaria, biotechnology of Sfax, Tunisia. 4Department of Pediatrics, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. Central areolar choroidal dystrophy (CACD) is a rare inherited disease Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an overgrowth disorder, which causes progressive profound loss of vision in patients during characterized by tissue and organ hyperplasia, macroglossia, devel- their 4th decade. It is characterized by atrophy of retinal pigment epi- opmental abnormalities and an increased risk of embryonal tumours thelium, photoreceptors and choriocapillaris. As the locus responsible (mostly Wilms tumour). The disease is multigenic, due to dysregulation for CACD disease is PRPH2 gene or CACD locus, we checked if both of the expression of imprinted genes in the 11p15 chromosomal re- loci are involved in a large Tunisian family. gion. BWS is mainly caused by genetic and epigenetic abnormalities. A multiplex consanguineous family originating from the North of Tuni- Abnormal demethylation of the maternally methylated KvDMR1 region sia was studied. The family included twenty one affected individuals (DMR-differentially methylated region), as well as hypermethylation of in three living generations, six of whom presented with drusen. A link- the normally unmethylated maternal H19 gene have been described age analysis was performed using microsatellite markers flanking the in BWS patients. The molecular diagnosis of BWS is currently very PRPH2 gene and encompassing the CACD locus in 17p13.3 locus. difficult and sofisticated. Here we present the successful application of Peripherin gene was screened by direct sequencing. methylation sensitive multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification The parents were unaffected in this family and both sexes were af- (MS-MLPA) protocol for molecular diagnosis of BWS. The method is fected in the siblings suggesting an autosomal recessive inheritance divided in two steps - copy number test, which permits deletions/dupli- of CACD. Linkage analysis and mutational screening showed an ex- cations assessment and methylation test, which gives the possibility to clusion of linkage to both PRPH2/RDS gene and CACD locus in this analyze methylation status of KvDMR1 and H19 gene. family. Four families were referred to our laboratory with clinical diagnosis of This first molecular study of CACD in Tunisian families gives further BWS. The MS-MLPA analysis showed demethylation in KvDMR1 re- evidence for genetic heterogeneity of central areolar choroidal dys- gion in one family, loss of methylation in KvDMR1 region in the second trophy. family and H19 gene hypermethylation in the third family. One family Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 P12.021 the age of mutation c.550delA in cAPN3 gene. Medicine, St. Anne´s University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic. O. P. Ryzhkova, E. Dadali, O. Scagina, G. Rudenskaya, A. Polyakov; Introduction: Significant percentage of sudden cardiac death (SCD) Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. below the age of 40 years has a genetic background, mainly due to the Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, type 2A (LGMD2A, MIM 253600) is long QT syndrome (LQTS) and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventric- considered the most frequent autosomal recessive MD almost every- ular tachycardia (CPVT). CPVT is an arrhythmogenic disease charac- where in the world. The causative gene is CAPN3 located in chro- terized by stress- or exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmia, syncope, mosomal region 15q15.1-q21.1 and encoding a muscle-specific pro- or early sudden death. The cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) gene tease, calpain 3. Sixty nine unrelated Russian patients of LGMD were (chromosome 1q42-q43) has been identified as a gene responsible for screened for CAPN3 mutations by direct sequencing and SSCP. In 28 CPVT inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. The RyR2 gene, which patients (40.5%), eighteen already known end five earlier not described encodes the cardiac Ca2+ release channel, is localized across the sar- (c.106delG, c.1000delC, c.1128G>A, c.1557delCT, c.1915+10C>T) coplasmic reticulum (SR) of cardiomyocytes. RyR2 plays a crucial role mutations were detected. In 3 patients mutation was detected only in in the excitation-contraction coupling in cardiac muscles. There are one allele. Mutation c.550delA was found in 20 of 28 patients (71.4%) over 70 human RyR2 mutation discovered so far that are clustered in in homozygous (4 cases), compound heterozygous (14) or heterozy- several discrete regions of the polypeptide, which are important for the gous (2) state, thereby in 42.9% (24/56) of affected alleles. In this work modulation of channel function. This work aims to discover the occur- to estimate the age of the c.550delA mutation we were analyze seven rence of CPVT among low-age deaths by examination on DNA level. microsatellite markers (D15S994, D15S968, D15S514, D15S778, Method: Mutation screening of RyR2 gene is performed on genomic D15S779, D15S780 and D15S659) flanking the CAPN3 gene in 19 DNA samples extracted from both myocardium of death subjects and chromosomes bearing the mutation and in populations chromosomes peripheral blood of the relatives. PCR amplified fragments covering (96). In all families cases equal haplotype was found for D15S514, areas with known mutations were analyzed by sequencing. For map- D15S779, D15S780 markers. The equal haplotype for more mark- ping of the deletions RYR2 exons, we use probes for multiplex ligation- ers (D15S968-D15S514-D15S779-D15S780-D15S778) was found dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis. on six chromosomes bearing the mutation. The frequencies of vari- Conclusion: This methodical approach enable us to identify CPVT ous “founder haplotype” decay derivatives were used to estimate the causal RyR2 mutations. The cause of death determination and exami- original time of the spreading of the c.550delA mutation. The mean nation of relatives enable the recognition of CPVT, and to the relatives, age was equal to 64 generations for Russian population. Assuming it will offer the chance of appropriate sudden cardiac death preven- a mean generation length of 30 years, the time since origin would be tion. about 1900 ± 300 years. Supported by grant IGA MZ NR/1044-3 P12.022 mitochondrial DNA tRNAcys mutation in a family with P12.024 Genetic analysis of CCBE1 in Generalised Lymphatic Frontotemporal Dementia and Parkinson’s disease Dysplasia G. Provenzano1,2, F. Annesi1, E. De Marco1, D. Civitelli1, P. Tarantino1,2, K. Kalidas1, P. Ostergaard1, F. Connell1, G. Brice2, S. Mansour2, P. Mortimer1, F. Rocca1, V. Greco1, V. Scornaienchi1, I. Manna1, M. D’Amelio3, A. S. Jeffery1; Gambardella1,4, A. Quattrone1,4, G. Annesi1; 1St George‘s, University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2South West 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of Thames Regional Genetics Unit, London, United Kingdom. Neuroscience, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, University of Messina, Messina, Generalised lymphatic dysplasia is a congenital disorder characterised Italy, 3Dipartimento Universitario di Neuroscienze Cliniche (DiNeC), University by extensive peripheral lymphoedema with visceral involvement. In of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 4Institute of Neurology, University of Magna Graecia, some cases it presents in utero with hydrops fetalis. Autosomal domi- Catanzaro, Italy. nant and recessive inheritance has been reported. We have recently Mitochondrial dysfunction has been implicated in the pathogenesis reported a pathogenic homozygous mutation in the CCBE1 gene in a of some neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson’s disease patient with extensive, autosomal recesive, generalised lymphatic dys- (PD) and Frontotemporal dementia (FTD), because of the essential plasia and clinical features consistent with Hennekam syndrome. Al- role of mitochondria in energy metabolism and apoptosis. FTD is the ders et al reported CCBE1 mutations in 5/22 patients with Hennekam second most common type of primary degenerative dementia. Some syndrome; a syndrome characterised by widespread lymphoedema. patients present an overlap between PD and FTD both in neuropatho- Recent studies of ccbe1 in zebrafish have shown this gene to be re- logical and clinical aspects. This may suggest a similar physiopathol- quired for lymphangiogenesis and venous sprouting. The zebrafish ogy and an involvement of mitochondrial DNA in FTD, as it has been mutant, full of fluid (fof), showed very severe oedema. associated to PD. In order to explore whether mitochondrial mutations Mutation screening of the CCBE1 gene was carried out in contribute to the susceptibility of these diseases, we analysed an ital- 1. Twenty four patients with various presentations of generalised lym- ian family with parkinsonism and FTD. phatic dysplasia (this included patients with visceral involvement such Genomic DNA was isolated from whole blood and the entire mitochon- as intestinal lymphangiectasia, pulmonary lymphangiectasia, pleural drial gene was amplified by PCR and sequenced. We also screened effusions and pericardial effusions). the proband of the family for PINK1, DJ-1, LRRK2, PGRN and TAU 2. Twenty patients or fetuses with non immune hydrops fetalis. genes and we excluded mutations in these genes. No novel variants were identified in patients of either group. These re- From the sequencing of the entire mitochondrial genome, we identi- sults indicate that CCBE1 is responsible for causing generalised lym- fied a G5783A homoplasmic mutation, already reported in literature. phatic dysplasia in only a small proportion of patients. Further studies This mutation was identified in the proband (FTD + PD), in his brother elucidating the pathway in which CCBE1 has a role and its interactions (FTD), in his maternal uncle (PD), in his mother, in his sister but not with other genes, will possibly enable the identification of other candi- in his father. Restriction enzyme digestion revealed absence of the date genes contributing to the pathogenesis of generalised lymphatic mutation in 50 controls. This mutation occurs at the T arm of tRNAcys, dysplasias resulting in the disruption of the stem structure, which may reduce the stability of the tRNA. In conclusion, we provided further evidence of the P12.025 the importance of PHOX2B sequence analysis and involvement of mitochondrial DNA variation in PD and FTD. family studies in congenital central Hypoventilation syndrome; primarily a polyalanine repeat disorder P12.023 Mutation screening of RyR2 gene for confirming S. Burton-Jones1, D. E. Fransen van de Putte2, C. Faulkner1, J. C. Evans1, T. catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in cases Patrick1, P. Lunt3, P. Fleming4, E. K. Bijlsma5, M. Williams1; of sudden unexpected deaths. 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical I. Valášková1,2, J. Kadlecová1,2, R. Gaillyová1,2, T. Novotný3, T. Pexa4, M. Sepši3; Genetics, University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Clinical Genetics 1Dpt. of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Faculty Department, St Michael’s Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Child of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Dpt. of Internal Life & Health, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 5Department of Cardiology, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Forensic Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome (CCHS) is a rare, life threatening condition, resulting from abnormal autonomic control of Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 breathing. Other autonomic nervous system abnormalities, includ- frequent deformity. CMT is the most common inherited disorder of the ing Hirschsprung disease and neuroblastoma, may feature in severe peripheral nervous system with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 2,500. cases. CMT is a heterogeneous disorder making classification a challenge. The paired-like homeobox gene PHOX2B is disease-defining in CCHS. Clinical classification is based on distribution of muscle weakness, age Approximately 90% of individuals are heterozygous for expansions of at onset and mode of inheritance. Later neurophysiology subdivided a 20-residue polyalanine repeat tract, with affected alleles containing CMT into type 1 and 2, depending on whether the median motor con- 24 to 33 alanines. Most expansions occur de novo, but mildly affected duction velocity (MCV) is less or above 38 m/s. A third form has inter- or asymptomatic parents mosaic for the mutation or fully heterozy- mediate MCV (25-45 m/s). CMT is also classified due to molecular gous, are not rare. The remaining cases have missense, nonsense or genetic mutations. At present 43 genes are identified causing inherited frameshift mutations. peripheral neuropathies. The duplication of peripheral myelin protein Bristol has provided a specialist CCHS UKGTN service since 2005, 22 (PMP22) is the most common cause of CMT. Other copy number supported by local clinical expertise in genetics, paediatrics and respi- variants (CNV) have not yet been assigned to the phenotype. ratory medicine, and has identified 54 cases in total. 48 probands have Methods. A girl with a CMT phenotype and some additional clinical polyalanine expansions, including affected non-identical twins. In 30 features was referred for investigation. families with expansion mutations where both parents were available Findings. Mutation analyses for the most common CMT genes were for testing, 4 parents (13%) were somatic mosaics and 2 (7%) were negative. Further analyses revealed the cause of her de novo phe- fully heterozygous for the expansion, one showing non-penetrance. notype. 13-20% UK cases are therefore not de novo and potentially recurrent. Interpretation. The involved genes explain different aspects of her phe- Six probands have non-polyalanine-repeat mutations. Five have notype. frameshift mutations (two novel, c.721_739del and c.861dupT); where detailed clinical information was provided, all these patients had a se- P12.028 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) and novel vere neonatal onset with intestinal aganglionosis. We present a Dutch mutations in GJB1 and LITAF pedigree in which father and son are both symptomatic with variable H. Høyer1, A. K. Eek1, M. B. Russell2, G. J. Braathen1,2; severity; both have the point mutation c.419C>A (p.Ala140Glu). This 1Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway, 2Head and and other cases from the Bristol cohort illustrate the importance of Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University Hospital, Oslo, family studies in this intriguing disease, and further establish genotype/ Norway. phenotype correlations. Background: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common inherited disorder of the peripheral nervous system with an estimated P12.026 A new alternative, evolutionarily conserved exon within prevalence of 1 in 2,500. CMT is a heterogenous disorder making clas- the cDKL5 gene sification a challenge. Neurophysiology subdivided CMT into type 1 Y. Fichou1,2, J. Nectoux1,2, T. Le Guen1,2, N. Bahi-Buisson2,3, J. Chelly1,2, T. and 2, depending on whether the median motor conduction velocity Bienvenu1,2; (MCV) is less or above 38 m/s. A third form has intermediate MCV (25- 1Inserm, U1016, Paris, France, 2Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, 45 m/s). Up to date 43 genes causing CMT have been identified. CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France, 3Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Necker- Mutations in Gap Junction Protein, beta-1 (GJB1) / Connexin 32 (Cx32) Enfants Malades, Paris, France. on Xq13.1. is the second most common cause of CMT. Connexin pro- The cyclin dependent kinase-like 5 gene (CDKL5, MIM 300203) is teins are arranged in hexameric arrays and form gap junctions which composed by 20 coding exons and encodes a serine/threonine kinase facilitate the transport of ions and small molecules between cells. that has been associated with the early-onset seizure variant of Rett Mutations in the transcription factor Lipopolysaccharide-induced TNF syndrome (RTT, MIM 312750) and X-linked infantile spasms (ISSX, factor (LITAF) / Small Integral Protein of Lysosome/Late Endosome MIM 308350). So far more than 50 mutations, including nonsense, (SIMPLE) on 16p13.3-p12 causes CMT1C. missense, splice, frameshift and microdeletions, have been reported Patients and families with CMT are regularly referred to Telemark Hos- in patients with CDKL5-related encephalopathy, affecting quasi- pital for diagnostics and genetic counselling exclusively girls. We report the coincidental finding of an additional Methods: Novel mutations in GJB1 and LITAF discovered during the 123-base pair exon within the CDKL5 gene by transcript analysis in last year will be presented. Pedigrees and symptomatology will be de- a human fibroblast primary culture. Bioinformatic study indicated an scribed. extremely conserved sequence in vertebrates both at the nucleotide Results: Our results will be presented at the conference. and amino acid levels (>95% similarity in mammals), suggesting a po- tential functional relevance. Curiously, and unexpectedly considering P12.029 Four novel connexin32 mutations in patients with X- the sequence conservation, no sequence homology was found with linked charcot-marie-tooth disease other regions of the human genome. We further constructed a plasmid T. Asadchuk, K. Mosse, N. Rumyantseva; DNA including the supplemental exon to investigate the cellular pattern National Center of Research and Applied Medicine «Mother and Child», Minsk, of the protein in COS-7 transfected cells and studied the expression Belarus. of the CDKL5 transcript including this new exon in mouse tissues. Al- The CMT 1X is X-linked type of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, an in- though no evident difference in terms of cellular localization between herited demyelinating neuropathy, associated with mutations in Cx32 the “wild-type” CDKL5 protein and the 41-aminoacid longer protein gene (GJB1) coding for the gap junction protein, connexin 32. has been observed, additional experiments will be required to inves- We identified GJB1 gene mutations in 7 of 33 (21%) male probands tigate the functional relevance of this novel, evolutionarily conserved with CMT where X-linked type inheritance cannot be excluded. These domain. Most importantly, considering that all mutations have not been nucleotide changes were also found in 13 of their 17 relatives including detected in atypical RTT patients, variants in this exon may contribute all the six mothers available for testing. to the genetic basis of the remaining cases and are currently being Four of the seven mutations are novel and associated with the severe considered for genetic screening in our laboratory. phenotype. Two of these four missense mutations are c.149C>G in E1 domain resulted in a serine at codon 50 being replaced by cysteine P12.027 syndromic charcot-marie-tooth, a neglected entity? (Ser50Cys) and c.268C>A in TM2 domain (Leu90Ile). One substitution G. J. Braathen1,2, D. K. Bergsaker3,4, M. B. Russell1,5; is nonsense - c.398G>A in TM3 domain which changes tryptophan 133 1Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University into stop codon (Trp133Stop). One sequence variation is a rare type Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway, 2Department of Laboratory Medicine, Genetic of nonstop mutation c.851G>T in C-end resulted in a stop codon being section, Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway, 3Department of Paediatrics, replaced by leucine (Stop284Leu). New missense mutations were not Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway, 4Frambu, Resource Centre detected in normal subjects. Three known mutations Y135C, V181M for Rare Disorders, Oslo, Norway, 5Faculty Division Akershus University and E208K were also identified in this group. Hospital, University of Oslo, Nordbyhagen, Norway. CMT1X caused by GJB1 mutations is the second most common type Background. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a peripheral neu- of CMT in Belarus. Now GJB1 is routinely screened in all CMT1 fami- ropathy usually characterized by slow and progressive weakness in lies negative for 17p11.2 duplication and with no male to male trans- legs. The symptoms often progresses to the hands. Pes cavus is a mission.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 07 P12.030 two splice-site mutations in the NtRK1 gene in a at Sultan Qaboos University hospital, Sultanate of Oman. The parents patient with congenital insensitivity to pain an anhidrosis: a are first cousins and the disease fits the autosomal recessive pattern novel mutation in intron 16 of inheritance. Linkage analysis was initiated using 10K SNP chip mi- E. Sarasola-Díez1, M. J. Garcia-Barcina1, J. A. Rodríguez2, E. Garrote3, J. croarray on Affymetrix platform. Analyzing the genotypes in the affect- Arístegui3; ed individuals and by looking at the regions of homozygosity shared 1Unidad de Genética del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA by the affecteds and comparing them to the parents have revealed / Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Departamento de Genética, mainly two regions of homozygosity. The first was 44 consecutive ho- Antrología Física y Fisiología Animal de la UPV/EHU, Leioa, Spain, 3Servicio de mozygous markers on chromosome 2 between markers rs953222; Pediatría del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA / Servicio Vasco rs2310401 corresponding to the following cytogenetic band 2p12- de Salud), Bilbao, Spain. 2q12.1 and the second was 12 consecutive markers in chromosome 9 Congenital insensitivity to pain and anhidrosis (CIPA, #256800) is a between rs888225; rs756777 corresponding to band 9q33.3-9q34.2. rare genetic disease characterized by the lack of reaction to noxious Microsattelite analysis of both homozugous regions confirmed linkage stimuli and anhidrosis. It is caused by mutations in the NTRK1 gene to the region in chromosome 2 and excluded the region on chromo- (OMIM *191315), which encodes the high affinity tyrosine kinase re- some 9. The region on chromosome 2 overlaps with region mapped for ceptor I for Neurotrophic Growth Factor (NGF). Jalili syndrome, 2q11. Hence we undertook sequencing of the CNNM4 We present the case of a female patient referred to our Hospital in or- gene which is involved in Jalili syndrome that is described as auto- der to study her prolonged fever of unknown origin associated with oral somal-recessive cone-rod dystrophy and amelogenesis Imperfecta. leukokeratosis. The clinical diagnosis of CIPA was made at the age of However, the family that we identified has the cone dystrophy but not 8-months, and was confirmed by the detection of two splice-site muta- the amelogenesis imperfect. tions in NTRK1. The first mutation, c.574+1G>A, already described, is Sequencing of the CNNM4 gene did not reveal any sequence variation located at the splice donnor site of intron 5. We also found a second from the normal sequence published in gene bank. mutation, c.2206-2 A>G, not previously reported in the literature, which is located at the splice acceptor site of intron 16. Each parent was P12.033 A diagnostic approach to children with congenital confirmed to be a carrier for one of the mutations by DNA sequencing ataxia and cerebellar atrophy analysis. It has been proposed that the c.574+1G>A mutation would G. Zanni1, A. D‘amico1, A. Terracciano1, S. Barresi1, F. Renaldo2, M. Muglia3, F. cause exon 5 skipping during NTRK1 mRNA splicing. By analysing Piemonte1, G. Tozzi1, R. Carrozzo1, S. Boldrini4, F. Santorelli1,5, E. Bertini1; mRNA from the patient, her parents, and several other relatives, we 1Unit of Molecular Medicine, Dept of Neuroscience, Bambino Gesù Childrens confirm this prediction and, more importantly, we provide evidence that Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, the novel c.2206-2 A>G mutation also disrupts normal NTRK1 splicing, Paris, France, 3Institute of Molecular Biology CNR, Mangone, Cosenza, Italy, leading to the use of an alternative splice acceptor site within exon 17. 4Unit of Pathology, Bambino Gesù Childrens Hospital, Rome, Italy, 5IRCCS- Currently, the patient is 6 years old and her psychomotor development Stella Maris, Calambrone, Pisa, Italy. conforms to her age (RMN, SPECT and psychological study are in the Congenital cerebellar ataxias are heterogeneous and poorly classified range of normality). conditions caracterized by severe neonatal hypotonia, psychomotor delay, followed by the appearance of ataxia within the first years of P12.031 cOL7A1 mutation database life. We performed muscle biopsy in a series of patients with early- K. Wertheim-Tysarowska1, A. Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska1, C. Kowalewski2, K. onset ataxia and neuroradiological evidence of cerebellar atrophy. Re- Woźniak2, A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, J. Bal1; duced levels of Coq10 were found in the skeletal muscle of 10 out of 1Medical Genetic Department, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 60 patients that were screened. A novel mutation in the ADCK3/Coq8 2Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. gene (R347X) was identified in a female patient with ataxia, seizures COL7A1 encodes collagen VII, protein responsible for epidermis-der- and markedly reduced Coq10 content. In a 2.5 years old male patient mis integration. Mutations in COL7A1 cause Dystrophic Epidermolysis with normal Coq10 levels and apparently non syndromic congenital Bullosa (DEB) - genodermatose characterized by spontaneous or me- ataxia with early strabismus, muscle morphology showed myopathic chanically induced bullous formation. There are about 520 COL7A1 changes with autophagic vacuoles that prompted us to screen for SIL1 mutations known, which result in either disturbance of protein forma- gene mutations. A recurrent nonsense mutation (R111X) was identified tion, interaction and function or complete lack of collagen VII. Thus in this patient, leading to early diagnosis of Marinesco-Sjogren syn- disease can be inherited in either dominant or recessive mode. In this drome. Following these studies, we think that muscle biopsy is a valu- paper we present the first COL7A1 locus specific database. The db able diagnostic approach to this subgroup of genetic conditions and project is in agreement with HGVS guidelines (den Dunnen JT, Hum should be implemented in children with congenital cerebellar atrophy. Mutat. 2009 30:493-5). Using of the system is free of charge as well as logging in, which is required for submitting data. The db is aimed P12.034 cRYGc analysis in a family with primary congenital to gather all COL7A1 gene, protein and variants-related information, cataract including e.g.: traditional and HGVS’s nomenclature mutation name, L. Gonzalez-Huerta1, O. Messina-Baas2, J. Toral-Lopez3, S. Cuevas- graphic view of mutations and SNPs (DNA, RNA and protein level). Covarrubias4; Each mutation is linked to the page comprising details as: identification 1Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 2Oftalmologia, method, pattern of inheritance, consequence of mutation on molecular Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 3Genetica, ISSEMYM, and clinical level. Data can be easily submitted by logged in users Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 4Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico; Facultad de after completing detailed submission form (including both molecular Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D.F., Mexico. and phenotypic details). The majority of information gathered in the Cataract is the leading cause of reversible blindness in childhood with system is based on YES/NO answers thus searching and statistic tools an occurrence of 1-6/10,000 live new born. Cataracts are character- are expanded. COL7A1 mutation database was designed in order to ized by the location and structure of opacities, i.e. shape, size, color unify and simplify molecular diagnostics and to collect multicenter and refractive quality. Cataract may be an isolated anomaly or part of a genotype-phenotype data, which will, as we hope, serve in the future syndrome. The majority of inherited non-syndromic cataracts are trans- to find correlation between them. Supported by NN407171134 and NN mitted as an autosomal dominant trait. Mutations in the CRYG genes, 402233137 which encode the main cytoplasmic proteins of the human lens, have been associated with cataracts of various appearances. The aim of the P12.032 mapping of an autosomal recessive cone dystrophy to present study was to identify the disease locus for congenital cataract 2p12-2q12.1 in a family of five affected individuals from Oman in a non-consanguineous family with three affected members. DNA A. H. Alkhayat AlShehi1, A. Ganish1, F. AlMamari1, A. H. Crosby2, J. A. from leukocytes was isolated to analyze the CRYGA-D cluster genes. Raeburn1; DNA sequencing analysis of the three affected members showed a 1Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman, 2St Goerge‘s University of London, novel heterozygous missense mutation in the CRYGC gene. Analysis London, United Kingdom. of the two unaffected members of the family and the normal parent A family of five affected children age ranging from 19 to 7 years have showed a normal sequence of the CRYGA-D cluster genes. This mu- been diagnosed with cone dystrophy in the ophthalmology department tation was not found in a group of 120 unrelated controls discarding a Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 possible polymorphism. In this study we describe a novel mutation in and ISLET1 genes in the pathogenesis of the investigated CHDs; ii) the CRYGC causative of congenital cataract. corroborate the association between ZFPM2/FOG2 mutations and ToF and suggest that these mutations may occur in a substantial per- P12.035 A new diagnostic approach on genetic deafness, first centage of patients with DORV; iii) confirm that mutations outside the cases of congenital deafness diagnosed by custom molecular NKX2.5 gene homeodomain are responsible for a subset of patients microarray (Array cGc) with ToF; iv) exclude a major contribution of GATA4 gene copy number A. Palmeiro1, A. Lopes1, L. Dias1, L. Ramos2, E. Galhano3, L. Nunes4, M. variants in CHD pathogenesis. Costeira5, P. Vidal-Ríos6, T. Lourenço4, J. Sá1,2, P. Rendeiro1, H. G. Santos1, P. Tavares1; P12.037 Analysis of the GJB2 and GJB genes in italian patients 1CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra EPE, with nonsyndromic hearing loss: frequencies, novel mutations, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Maternidade Bissaya Barreto EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, genotypes and degree of hearing loss. 4Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Central, E.P.E., Lisboa, Portugal, 5Centro P. Primignani1, P. Castorina2, F. Lalatta2, C. Radaelli1, L. C. Trotta1, L. Hospitalar do Alto Ave EPE, Guimarães, Portugal, 6Complejo Hospitalario de Garavelli3, P. Formigoni3, A. Murri4, D. Cuda5, U. Ambrosetti6, A. Cesarani6, D. Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. A. Coviello1; Introduction: Congenital hearing loss/deafness is the most common 1Medical Genetics Laboratory - Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale birth defect and the most prevalent sensorineural disorder in developed Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Service - Fondazione countries but currently only a minority of genes is included in genetic IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3Medical diagnostics. Genetic factors are considered to cause more than 50% of Genetics Service - Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 4ENT the cases of congenital deafness in children. Genetic deafness can be Department - Ospedale ‘‘Guglielmo da Saliceto,’’, Piacenza, Italy, 5ENT inherited, as an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked Department - Ospedale ‘‘Guglielmo da Saliceto’’, Piacenza, Italy, 6ENT recessive trait, as well as by mitochondrial inheritance. Over 400 ge- Department - Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, netic syndromes that include deafness have been described. Moreover, Milan, Italy. in some syndromes deafness may appear as the first symptom, while Mutations in the GJB2 gene, which encodes the gap-junction protein other pathological manifestations may have a later onset during devel- Connexin 26 (Cx26), are the most common cause of nonsyndromic opment. Molecular testing is a vital asset to complement the differential hearing loss (NSHL) and account for about 32% of cases. The subjects diagnosis between nonsyndromic and syndromic hearing loss. referred to our Hospital were affected by sensory neural deafness with Method: Using a custom microarray panel (Arrays CGC - Patent Pend- various degrees (from mild to profound) of hearing loss (HL). Since ing) that contains 312 point mutations, identified in 32 main genes in- January 2001 we analyzed 1102 patients and identified mutations in volved on congenital deafness it is possible to identify the molecular 707/2204 chromosomes. We characterized 41 different mutations and basis of the most common forms, both syndromic and nonsyndromic. six polymorphisms in 399 NSHL subjects. Our data confirm 35delG as Results: The samples analyzed were obtained from an already scru- the most frequent GJB2 mutation in the Italian population, account- tinized population, so the most common genetic alterations were al- ing for about 65% of all the mutated GJB2 alleles analyzed. We also ready excluded. We analyzed 69 cases and in 16 we detected muta- identified five novel variants of unknown pathogenetic significance: tions or sequence variants on CDH23, GJB2, GJB3, MYO1A, MYO7A, the p.V156I aminoacid substitution, the c.-216T>C, the c.-41G>C and OTOF, SLC26A4 and WFS1. the c.-96G>C heterozygous changes in the 5’UTR and the c.684C>A Conclusion: The usual diagnostic approach only analyses few genes. change in the 3’UTR of the gene. The GJB6 gene deletion, del(GJB6- With this approach we can drastically increase the number of genes/ D13S1830), which can cause HL in combination with GJB2 mutations mutations analyzed maintaining accuracy but reducing turnaround in trans, was identified in nine patients, while the del(GJB6-D13S1854) time. This approach greatly enhances genetic diagnostics, allowing was not observed in our cohort of patients. Our study also tried to early decision-making process in patient management as well as new provide information about GJB2 genotypes and degree of HL. Pheno- epidemiologic data. types of subjects carrying biallelic GJB2 mutations show a variable in- tra and interfamilial degree of HL. We collected audiometric data from P12.036 molecular analysis of novel and known candidate 200 patients with biallelic DFNB1 mutations or with dominant mutation genes in patients with isolated congenital heart defects in GJB2 to determine the degree of HL to correlate the genotypes with A. De Luca1, A. Sarkozy2,3, V. Guida1,2, F. Lepri1, R. Ferese1,2, F. Consoli1,2, M. the audiological phenotypes. Dentici1, C. Iannascoli1, P. Vergara1, R. Vijzelaar4, A. De Zorzi5, P. Versacci6, M. Digilio7, B. Marino6, B. Dallapiccola8; P12.038 A novel truncation mutation in the GJB1 gene, causing 1Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, an X-linked, charcot -marie-tooth disease. Rome, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine „Sapienza“ University, C. Vinkler1, E. Leshinsky-Silver2, D. Lev1; Rome, Italy, 3Northern Genetic Service, Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle 1Institute of Clinical Genetics Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 2Molecular University, United Kingdom, 4MRC Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Pediatric Genetics Laboratory, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel. Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 6Division of X-linked CMT (CMTX) accounts for 10%-20% of all hereditary demy- Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics,“Sapienza“ University, Rome, elinating neuropathies. At least five genes and loci are known to be as- Italy, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, sociated with CMTX. Most common are mutations in the GJB1 gene. IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 8Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy. The GJB1 gene encodes the gap junction protein connexin32 (Cx32) Mutations of the ZFPM2/FOG2, GATA4, NKX2.5 genes have been Mutations in the GJB1 gene result in a demyelinating neuropathy that associated with the pathogenesis of non-syndromic congenital heart predominantly affects motor axons. Although variable expression has defects (CHDs), in particular conotruncal (CTD) and septal defects. been described occasionally for the same mutation, it has been previ- Here, we aimed to better evaluate the occurrence and the prevalence ously suggested that premature truncation mutations result in a sever of mutations in these genes as well as in two novel candidates (ISLET1 neuropathy. We describe a family with CMTX, due to a novel truncation and GDF1) in a cohort of 202 individuals with different CTDs, includ- mutation with a mild to moderate presentation. ing tetralogy of Fallot (ToF), double outlet right ventricle (DORV) and The proband is a 72 y old male who complained of mild gait distur- truncus arteriosus. Furthermore, we verified the possible occurrence bances since the age of 20 years. By the age of 43 his gait started of GATA4 gene deletions/duplications in a cohort of 161 additional to deteriorate slowly. At the age of 63 he was admitted to a rehabili- patients, including ToF, atrial and atrioventricular septal defects and tation center with moderate leg weakness, mild arm weakness and Ebstein anomaly. DHPLC analysis disclosed no putative pathogenic bilateral drop foot. EMG studies were compatible with sensorymotor mutation in GATA4, ISLET1, and GDF1 genes. Three distinct ZFPM2/ axonal neuropathy. Family history was compatible with an X linked FOG2 missense variants (Glu30Gly, Ile227Val, Met544Ile) were identi- inheritance pattern with no male to male transmission. The molecular fied in 3 of 178 (0.6%) with ToF and 2 of 13 (15.4%) with DORV. One study revealed a c.633-634insTA mutation in exon 2 of the GJB1 gene. known missense change (Arg25Cys) was detected in NKX2.5 gene This novel mutation creates a frameshift, resulting in a premature stop in two (1.1%) patients with ToF. MLPA analysis revealed that GATA4 codon (p.Leu212fsX42) MLPA signals were all within the normal range values in all patients. Most GJB1 mutations cause neuropathy through loss of normal Cx32 The present results i) exclude a major contribution of GATA4, GDF1, function.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 We suggest that a less severe phenotype in this family may be due to P12.041 Simultaneous detection of common cystic fibrosis the rather distal truncation of the protein, retaining some of the normal mutations by reverse-hybridization teststrips function of the protein. H. Puehringer, B. Rauscher, C. Oberkanins; ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria. P12.039 Decreased expression of PtEN transcript level in Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most common autosomal recessive a cowden syndrome patient without detectable PtEN gene disorders, with an incidence of approximately 1 in 3000 live births in mutations Caucasians. CF is caused by mutations in the cystic-fibrosis trans- D. Turchetti1, L. M. Pradella1, R. Zuntini1, I. Neri2, C. Misciali2, G. Gasparre1, G. membrane regulator (CFTR) gene, encoding a chloride channel pro- Romeo1; tein. Patients with classical CF accumulate viscous mucus in the respi- 1Unit of Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy, 2Unit of Dermatology, Bologna, Italy. ratory and gastrointestinal system, leading to chronic lung infections, Cowden Syndrome (CS) is an autosomal dominant disease character- excess salt loss, difficulties in digestion, and ultimately to a shortened ized by multiple mucocutaneous lesions, benign tumors and cancer life expectancy. More than 1000 CFTR mutations have been described predisposition. to date, the majority being very rare or private. The most frequent mu- 80-85% of patients with CS carry detectable mutations in the PTEN tation worldwide F508del accounts for 30-72% of CF chromosomes gene. These mutations cause decreased protein expression, rais- depending upon ethnicity. Overall there is great heterogeneity in the ing the hypothesis of a haploinsufficiency mechanism underlying CS remaining pathogenic mutations, as type and distribution vary sub- pathogenesis. stantially between populations. Mutational analysis of the PTEN gene, based on direct sequencing of We have developed a reverse-hybridization assay (Cystic Fibrosis the entire coding sequence and promoter region and on the search for StripAssay) for the rapid and simultaneous analysis of common CFTR deletions and duplications with MLPA, is performed at our laboratory in mutations. The assay covers 23 mutations recommended by the CS and CS-like patients to a diagnostic purpose. So far, in all patients ACMG plus 10 additional ones prevalent in different parts of Europe, with CS but one we have found pathogenic PTEN mutations, including as well as the IVS8 polyT (5T/7T/9T) variants. Thus a coverage of two novel small deletions in exon 5 and 6. 70-93% can be obtained almost all over Europe. The test is based on In the only patient without detectable PTEN mutations, we performed multiplex DNA amplification and hybridization to teststrips presenting a PTEN expression analysis based on qReal Time PCR on cDNA ob- parallel array of allele-specific oligonucleotide probes for each mutant tained from the peripheral blood cells of the patient and Epstein Barr and wild-type allele. The procedure is rapid, simple and convenient, virus-transformed human B lymphocytes. accessible to automation and requires very small amounts of samples, The analysis showed that PTEN transcript was about 40% lower com- which is of particular importance for prenatal diagnosis and newborn pared to healthy controls, being, however, higher than in a patient har- screening. Currently the Cystic Fibrosis StripAssay is validated in a bouring a frameshift mutation predicted to induce mRNA decay. The multi-center study. (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at) reduction of the transcript found in this case led us to hypothesize an epigenetic mechanism altering PTEN expression, which is currently P12.042 Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator under investigation. If confirmed, this would represent a novel, and gene mutations in patients from the middle Black sea region of probably uncommon, mechanism of PTEN dysfunction, as a previous turkey study on PTEN-negative CS patients failed to find decreased expres- H. Bağcı1, S. Güneş1, N. Kara1, E. Taşkın1, N. Karakuş1, K. Özdamar2; sion of PTEN transcript levels despite decreased protein expression, 1Ondokuz Mayıs University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, suggesting a dysregulation at protein level. Samsun, Turkey, 2Osman Gazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Biostatistics, Eskişehir, Turkey. P12.040** involvement of LTBP and FBLN mutations in Cystic fibrosis (CF; OMIM no.#219700) is the most common autoso- patients with autosomal recessive cutis laxa : clinical and mal recessive disorder in the Caucasian population (1/2500). Disease molecular considerations is caused by mutations in cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance P. Vlummens, T. Van Damme, F. Malfait, L. Van Laer, A. De Paepe; regulator (CFTR; 602421) gene. The aim of this study was to deter- Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. mine the frequencies of the 36 mutations in CFTR gene in patients with Hereditary cutis laxa delineates a heterogeneous group of conditions CF from the middle Black Sea region of Turkey. characterized by abnormalities of the elastic fibers and presenting with We screened 254 patients with suspicion of CF for CFTR mutations loose, sagging and inelastic skin and variable systemic manifestations. using a multiplex PCR based reverse hybridization assay. Mutations in the fibulin-5 gene (FBLN5) cause an autosomal recessive Overall, CFTR mutations were detected in 13.0% of the patients, while form of cutis laxa (ARCL) characterized by severe skin laxity, pulmo- no mutations were detected in 87.0%. F508del allele was present at nary emphysema and peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis. Very few 8.8%; N1303K 0.8%; I148T 1.2%; W1282X 0.8%; 2789+5G-A 0.4%; FBLN5 mutations however, have been identified so far and the ge- R1162X 0.4%; 1706del117 0.4%, E60X 0.4%, and dele2,3 0.4%. Of netic defect remains unknown in a significant proportion of patients. the 33 patients with CFTR gene mutation(s), 24% were homozygotes, Recently the gene encoding the latent transforming growth factor-beta 70% were heterozygotes with single mutations, and 6% was com- binding protein 4 (LTBP4) was shown to be implicated in families with pound heterozygotes with two mutations. an ARCL phenotype. In the current study, we examined a cohort of We were able to identify 10 different allelic combinations of the 36 16 patients with ARCL. Direct sequencing of FBLN5 in all patients mutations tested in CFTR gene in Turkish patients in whom CF was identified 1 known and 1 novel mutation (p.C217R and p.E391X) in suspected. The data seems to indicate that the Turkish population may 2 probands, whereas molecular analysis of LTBP4 in the 14 remain- have variable genetic heterogeneity at the CFTR locus. ing probands identified 9 novel loss-of-function mutations (p.R448X, p.C617X, p.S803X, p.Q1221X, p.Q1296X, p.R1377X, c.1263delC, P12.043 cFtR mutations in newborns with c.4114dupC and c.780+2T>G) and 1 known mutation (c.4127insC) in hypertrypsinogenemia in Russian population a total of 8 patients. These results show that LTBP4 mutations are N. V. Petrova, Z. A. Kusova, T. A. Vasilyeva, E. E. Timkovskaya, N. Y. more prevalent than FBLN5 mutations in ARCL. Phenotypic com- Kashirskaya, N. I. Kapranov, R. A. Zinchenko; parison between LTBP4 and FBLN5 mutation positive patients shows Research Centre for Medical Genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. overlapping but also distinguishing clinical features, i.e. LTBP4 muta- Cystic Fibrosis (CF; OMIM no.219700) is the most common severe au- tion positive patients have more severe gastro-intestinal and urinary tosomal recessive disorder in Caucasians caused by mutations in the tract involvement. Our results also suggest LTBP4 as the first gene to cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. test in the molecular work up of patients with ARCL. The spectrum of presentation of cystic fibrosis (CF) is significantly var- ied. Neonatal hypertrypsinogenemia is one of the clinical symptoms due to the functional insufficiency in the pancreas. Neonatal screening for CF consists of the immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) test usually as the first step. The aim was to search the CFTR mutations common in Russian CF patients in newborns with the first positive IRT test result. DNA samples extracted from dried blood spots of 990 newborns with Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 10 the first positive IRT test result were analyzed for 11 CFTR muta- ing; esonic rearrangements were carried out by multiplex ligation-de- tions (CFTRdele2,3(21kb), F508del, Idel507, 1677delTA, 2184insA, pendent probe amplification (MLPA). We have found a stop codon mu- 2143delT, 2183AA>G, 2184delA, 394delTT, 3821delT, L138insA). All tation (R303X) in the exon V of the DCX gene in one unrelated female newborns were born Moscow during 01.01.2008 to 31.12.2008 period. with SBH and we have excluded deletions and duplications by MLPA Screened mutations shared 67,5% out of all mutant alleles of CF pa- in all the patients. These preliminary data suggest an involvement of tients from Russia. MultiplexPCR and gel electrophoresis were car- other genes besides DCX, unless some variants are located in the ried out for mutation screening. 5 persons with two CFTR mutations unexplored 5-untranslated region or in the promotor sequences of this (3 - F508del/F508del, 1 - CFTRdele2,3(21kb)/CFTRdele2,3(21kb), gene. The analysis of the other major gene implicated in these disor- 1 - F508del/2184insA) and 38 persons with one mutant CFTR allele ders, LIS1, is still in progress. However, since a small percentage of (26 heterozygous for F508del, 5 - CFTRdele2,3(21kb), 2 - 2143delT, genetically undiagnosed cases of lissencephaly have been reported, it 2 - 2184insA, 1 - 3821delT, 2 - L138ins) were revealed during the in- would be interesting to extend our study to other genes, such as ARX, vestigation. TUBA1A, FLNA, involved in cortical development. The total frequency of identified CF mutant alleles in Moscow newborns with the first positive IRT test result was 0.02424 (0.01883÷0.03073). P12.046 mutational screening of the 35delG of the connexin 26 This evaluation is significantly higher than the frequency of these gene among Libyan Non syndromic Recessive deafness cases mutations in the Russian population defined previously (0.00642 A. Elwindi1, K. M. M. Telesi1, E. Zarik1, H. Rtemi1, S. Masmoudi2, M. M. Sharif1, (0.0041÷0.00951; χ2=29,26; p<0.001). S. S. Saleh1, N. S. Enattah1; 1Biotechnology Research Center (BTRC), Twisha, Tripoli, Libya, Tripoli, Libyan P12.044 Phenotypic consequences of the ΔF508 mutation in Arab Jamahiriya, 2Laboratory of human molecular genetics, Medical faculty, pancreatic insufficient Iranian CF patients Sfax, tunisia, Sfax, Tunisia. A. Khodadad1, S. S. Banihosseini2, H. Asgharian3, S. Hasheminasab2; A single mutation (35delG) in the GJB2 gene, encoding the gap-junc- 1Children‘s Medical Center Hospital, Tehran University of Medical tion protein connexin 26, accounts for the majority of nonsyndromic re- SciencesChildren Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, cessive deafness (NSRD) in many different populations. This mutation Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Students’ Scientific Research Center (SSRC), represents a deletion of a guanine within a strecth of six Gs between Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, nucleotide positions +30 and +35 of the GJB2 cDNA (35delG). The 3Department of Biotechnology, University College of science, University of aim of this study is to determine the frequency of this mutation among Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the Libyan NSRD patients. To screen for this mutation, we analyzed Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is the most common lethal recessive autosomal the genomic DNAs of 139 affected patients, originating from different disease in European populations, with an estimated incidence of one in parts of the western Libya and were genotyped by direct restriction 2000 live births. Hundreds of mutations in the causative gene, CFTR, enzyme analysis of the targeted amplified PCR products. Out of 139 have been identified. The ΔF508 mutation is the most common mutation samples, 11 samples were heterozygous for the 35delG mutation and and constitutes approximately 70% of the mutated alleles worldwide. were verified by direct sequencing. This result shows that most likley CF is associated with a wide phenotypic spectrum, and the spectrum several genetic loci uderlie the NSRD in Libya as 35 delG mutation of phenoptypes varies in different geographical regions and amongst were found to expalin only 8% ofthe NSRD cases. Further analysis of different ethnicities. Homozygosity of the ΔF508 mutation is generally the GJB2 gene and other deafness genomic loci in Libyan patients is associated with a very severe phenotype. Here, we aimed to assess warranted. the overall phenotypic effects of the ΔF508 mutation in a subgroup of Iranian CF patients exhibiting pancreatic insufficiency. Genotype/phe- P12.047 Homozygosity for iVs1+1G>A GJB2 (connexin-26) notype correlations of patients homozygous for the ΔF508 mutation, splice site mutation in 73 unrelated patients with nonsyndromic heterozygous for this mutation, and those not harboring a ΔF508 allele hearing loss from East siberia were assessed. Thirty six patients were studied. Demographic, clinical, N. A. Barashkov1, L. U. Dzhemileva2, S. A. Fedorova1, F. M. Terutin3, E. E. radiologic and paraclinical data were recorded. The ΔF508 mutation Fedotova3, E. K. Khusnutdinova2; was screened by an allele specific PCR protocol. Descriptive and ana- 1Yakut Research Centre of Complex medical problems, Siberian Branch of lytical statistics of the results were performed using SPSS16 software Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute and the χ-squared test. Seven (19.4%) patients were heterozygous for of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Centre, Russian Academy of ΔF508, 2 (5.6%) were homozygous, and 27 (75%) did not harbor the Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Republican Hospital ¹1 – National Centre mutation. Occurrence of dyspnea and bronchiectasia was significantly of Medicine, Yakutsk, Russian Federation. higher in homozygous patients compared to the group without a ΔF508 We studied GJB2 mutation spectrum in patients with nonsyndromic allele. Amount of chloride ion in the sweat, and fat droplets in the stool hearing loss (NSHL) in the Sakha Republic (East Siberia, Russia). A were also higher in the homozygous group. No other statistically sig- total of 150 patients with NSHL of different ethnic affiliation (Cauca- nificant difference was observed among the groups. sians and Asians) were analyzed by PCR-SSCP and further sequenc- ing of GJB2 gene. The molecular screening of IVS1+1G>A was per- P12.045 mutational analysis of the DCX and LIS1 genes in formed using by PCR-RFLP method [Sirmaci et al., 2006], detection patients with Lissencephaly and subcortical band heterotopia of del(GJB6-D13S1830), del(GJB6-D13S1854) was carried out using from southern italy appropriate protocols [del Castillo et al., 2005]. V. Greco1, E. V. De Marco1, F. E. Rocca1, F. Annesi1, D. Civitelli1, G. GJB2 mutations (IVS1+1G>A, 35delG, V27I, M34T, V37I, 312del14, Provenzano1,2, P. Tarantino1,2, V. Scornaienchi1, A. Gambardella1,3, G. Annesi1; 333-334delAA, R127H, E114G) and one large deletion of 342kb - 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Cosenza, Italy, del(GJB6-D13S1830) were found in 50.9% of Caucasian and 68.9% 2Departement of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiology, University of Asian patients chromosomes. One of the common mutation in of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Caucasian (Russian) patients is 35delG, in Asian (Yakut) patients is Catanzaro, Italy. IVS1+1G>A. We found 73 unrelated patients with IVS1+1G>A muta- Classical lissencephaly (LIS) and subcortical band heterotopia (SBH) tion in homozygote state, in 18 individuals IVS1+1G>A was detected or ‚double cortex syndrome’, are neuronal migration disorders asso- in compound heterozygote state with other GJB2 mutations. Molecular ciated with epilepsy and mental retardation. SBH is usually caused screening of IVS1+1G>A in hearing individuals from 6 populations of by mutations in the doublecortin (DCX) (Xq22.3-q23) gene, and much Sakha Republic (Yakuts, Dolgans, Evenks, Evens, Yukaghirs, Rus- less frequently in the LIS1 (17p13.3) gene. Both genes encode pro- sians) showed that it was one of the common allelic variant in Turkic- teins involved in microtubule homeostasis. DCX mutations predomi- speaking populations of Yakuts and Dolgans. This is a first report of nantly cause SBH in heterozygous females and severe lissencephaly IVS1+1G>A in East Asians population. High prevalence of IVS1+1G>A in males, although rare males with SBH and DCX mutations have been in Yakut isolate population may be a result of common founder effect. reported. In this study, we have analyzed familial and sporadic patients This work was supported by RFBR (09-04-01123-à) and RHSF (08- with SBH or LIS from Southern Italy to investigate abnormalities of the 06-84602a/U). DCX gene. We have performed a mutational analysis of this gene in 7 patients (5 sporadic and 2 familial) with SBH or LIS by direct sequenc-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 11 P12.048 GJB2 caused hearing loss in Russia Hospital, Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece. E. A. Bliznetz1, V. A. Galkina1, T. G. Markova2, G. N. Matyushchenko1, A. V. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations are present in less than one Polyakov1; per cent of children with prelingual deafness, but more frequent at a 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2National later age. In the Caucasian population, at least 5% of postlingual, non- Research Centre for Audiology and Hearing Rehabilitation, Moscow, Russian syndromic hearing impairment is due to known mtDNA mutations, rep- Federation. resenting the most frequent cause of hearing loss after the 35delG mu- Mutations in Connexin 26 gene (GJB2) are responsible for more tation in the GJB2 gene encoding connexin 26. MtDNA mutations usu- than half of all cases of prelingual nonsyndromic recessive deafness ally lead to progressive hearing loss with an age of onset varying from (PNSRD) in Caucasians. The carrier frequency of the c.35delG muta- childhood to early adulthood. Interestingly, there is a great variability of tion in GJB2 gene was found to be as high as 1-4% in the European phenotype between individuals harboring the same mitochondrial mu- populations. The aim of this study was to estimate GJB2 caused cases tation, even within the same family, and the phenotype may range from fraction and mutation spectrum in 367 Russian patients with PNSRD. profound deafness to completely normal hearing. In the past years, the The c.35delG mutation frequency was most high and was found to be debate on mitochondrial mutations has been about penetrance, tissue 79% in all mutant chromosomes. Therefore, from homozygous and specificity and the mechanisms of modifier genes that can modulate heterozygous/compound heterozygous c.35delG carriers frequen- the severity of the phenotypic expression of the deafness-associated cies, the calculated portion of GJB2 caused deafness is to be 47%. mtDNA mutations. A synergism between GJB2 and A1555G mtDNA The c.35delG mutation frequency was calculated to be 77% in GJB2 mutations has been suggested and can be explained by an ability to caused cases. Another mutations c.-3202+1G>A or IVS+1G>A (4%), maintain the normal turnover rate of the connexin 26 gap junction pro- c.313_326del14 (3%), c.235delC (3%), c.167delT (2%), p.Glu120del tein because of the reduced amount of ATP caused by the A1555G (1%), p.Leu90Pro (1%), p.Met34Thr (1%), p.Trp24X (1%) and found in mutation. Here we present families originating from Spain, Japan, and one chromosome mutations p.Arg32His, p.Leu205Pro, p.Glu129Lys, Greece, all harboring one GJB2 and one deafness-causing mtDNA p.Arg184Gln, c.-3224C>A, c.129delG, c.290_291insA, p.Gly200Arg, mutation, and we discuss the impact of the coexistence of mitochon- which last four are novel, were revealed at compound heterozygous or drial and GJB2 mutations in these families. homozygous state. Five questionable sequence variations (p.Val27Ile, p.Val37Ile and novel c.*3C>A being 1% apiece; p.Val153Ile and P12.051 Low penetrance of the G7444A mitochondrial DNA p.Gly160Ser in 1 chromosome) was found at heterozygous state; only deafness-causing mutation in a Greek family in one patient p.Val37Ile was compound heterozygous with c.35delG. H. Kokotas1, L. Yang2, M. Grigoriadou1, Y. Gyftodimou1, G. S. Korres1, E. The mutation 309 kb del in GJB6 gene (delGJB6-D13S1830) was not Ferekidou1, D. Kandiloros3, S. Korres3, M. X. Guan2, M. B. Petersen1; found in the patients with one mutant chromosome only. That, in gen- 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, ‘Aghia Sophia’ Children’s eral in GJB2 caused deafness, the portion of patients with one mutant Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children‘s allele only remains to be 17%, in which 12% are patients heterozygous Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 3Department of at c.35delG, is to have been investigated. Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Athens University Medical School, Hippokration Hospital, Athens, Greece. P12.049 spectrum and frequency of SLC2A mutations among Mitochondria harbor their own DNA, known as mtDNA, encoding cer- czech patients with non-syndromic hearing loss tain essential components of the mitochondrial respiratory chain and R. Pourová1, P. Janoušek1, M. Jurovčík1, M. Dvořáková1, M. Malíková1, D. protein synthesis apparatus. MtDNA mutations have an impact on cel- Rašková2, O. Bendová3, Z. Kabelka1, J. Astl3, P. Seeman1; lular ATP production and many of them are undoubtedly a factor that 1Charles University in Prague, Second Medical Faculty, Prague, Czech contributes to sensorineural deafness, including both syndromic and Republic, 2Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Charles University in Prague, non-syndromic forms. Mitochondrial disease is characterized by an First Medical Faculty, Prague, Czech Republic. impressive degree of variation, and both inter- and even intrafamilial Mutations in SLC26A4 cause Pendred syndrome (PS) - hearing loss variation is the rule rather than the exception. The G7444A mtDNA mu- with goitre - or DFNB4 - non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) with inner tation affects COI (the precursor of tRNASer(UCN)), encoding the first ear abnormalities as Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct (EVA) or Mondini subunit of cytochrome oxidase. The mutation has been associated with Dysplasia (MD). We tested 303 unrelated Czech patients with early non-syndromic hearing loss in only a few families worldwide, and has NSHL, all GJB2 negative, for SLC26A4 mutations and evaluated their been reported alone or in cosegregation with other mtDNA mutations. clinical and radiological phenotype. Among 115 available HRCT/MRI In this study we describe the first Greek family with the G7444A mtDNA scans we detected 3 MD (2.6%), 3 Mondini-like affections (2.6%) and mutation, which to our knowledge is the first reported also harboring 16 EVA (13 bilateral - 19.2% and 15.6% respectively), 61 HRCT/MRI the GJB2 35delG mutation. The proband, his brother and their mother scans (73.4%) were EVA/MD negative. We found mutation(s) in 26 had the G7444A mtDNA mutation and also the GJB2 35delG mutation patients (8.6%) and biallelic mutations in 8 patients (2.7%) out of 303 in heterozygosity. The phenotype of the family members carrying the tested. In 18 of 26 (69%) patients with at least one mutation, no sec- two mutations was extremely variable; the proband had hearing loss ond mutation could be detected even using MLPA. The spectrum of and various other symptoms; his brother had speech delay but normal SLC26A4 mutations in Czech NSHL patients is broad without any hearing and oral communication skills; the mother had normal hearing prevalent mutation. We detected 21 different mutations of which 4 are and speech. Our study demonstrates a low penetrance of the G7444A novel. The most frequent mutations in Czech patients are p.Val138Phe mtDNA mutation in this family, and indicates that a possible synergism and p.Leu445Trp representing 18% and 8.9% of pathogenic alleles re- between the G7444A mtDNA mutation and the GJB2 35delG mutation spectively. The other mutations have not been found more than twice. seems rather unclear. Among 13 patients with bilateral EVA, biallelic mutations were detect- ed in 6 patients (50%). In EVA-negative patients no biallelic mutations P12.052 molecular analysis of patients with congenital adrenal were found but 4.9% had monoallelic mutations. SLC26A4 mutations hyperplasia in Uberaba and Uberlândia region, mG, Brazil are present mostly in patients with EVA/MD and/or progressive HL and R. L. Silva-Grecco1,2, M. D. B. Silva2, U. R. Souza2, R. J. Petroli2, F. B. Coeli2, those with affected siblings. M. A. S. Balarin1, H. M. C. Palhares1,3, M. Borges3, D. C. Gomes4, M. P. de Supported by Czech Ministry of Health Grant Agency - IGA NS 9913/4 Mello2; and VZ FNM 64203/6501. 1Laboratório da Disciplina de Genética Humana, Universidade Federal do Triângulo Mineiro – UFTM, Uberaba - MG, Brazil, 2Laboratório de Genética P12.050 Unclear interactions of GJB2 and mitochondrial DNA Molecular Humana do Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética mutations in families presenting non-syndromic deafness (CBMEG), Universidade Estadual de Campinas – UNICAMP, Campinas - SP, M. B. Petersen1, M. Grigoriadou1, G. S. Korres1, E. Ferekidou1, D. Kandiloros2, Brazil, 3Disciplina de Endocrinologia, Universidade Federal do Triângulo S. Korres2, H. Kokotas1; Mineiro - UFTM, Uberaba - MG, Brazil, 4Disciplina de Endocrinologia, 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, ‘Aghia Sophia’ Children’s Universidade Federal de Uberlândia - UFU, Uberlândia - MG, Brazil. Hospital, Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Otorhinolaryngology Deficiency of 21-hydroxilase (21-OHD) is the most common form of - Head and Neck Surgery, Athens University Medical School, Hippokration congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), an autosomal recessive disor- der. Clinical forms of CAH are divided as: classical (salt-wasting or Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 12 simple virilizing) and non-classical form. This variability is associated CA, E110D and G12D. Neither point mutations nor large deletions in with mutations in the CYP21A2 gene that in 85% of the cases are GJB6 gene were found. Mean frequency of GJB2 mutations was 18% derived from its non-functional pseudogene (CYP21A1P). Analyses in Iranian populations. of deletions, large gene conversions and pseudogene-derived muta- Discussion: GJB2 and GJB6 mutations are not major causes of hear- tions in a group of patients with 21-OHD were performed. Patients are ing loss in Iranian groups compared to European cohorts. We suggest from a geographic region in Brazil different from those already studied. other genes may be involved in our populations. However, GJB2 gene Molecular genotypes were obtained for 121 subjects representing 33 should be checked for all patients, at first. unrelated families. Eleven children (31.4%) presented with the salt- wasting, two (5.6%) with the simple virilizing, twenty (60%) with the P12.055 most distal Renal tubular Acidosis (dRtA) cases non-classical, and two (5.6%) have not been classified. From a total of in cyprus are caused by two ATPV1B1 founder mutations 21 affected alleles segregating in the patients with the classical form originating around 17th century Ac. First prenatal diagnosis. 19% and 14% carried, respectively, large gene conversions and dele- K. Voskarides1, A. Elia2, P. Demosthenous1, A. Michalopoulou3, M. Malliarou3, tions. Each of pseudogene-derived mutations IVS2-13A/C>G, I172N E. Georgaki4, Y. Athanasiou5, C. Patsias5, A. Pierides6, C. Deltas1; and cluster 6 was found in 9.5% and Q318X was identified in 4,8%. 1Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, IVS2-2A>G and 992_993insA mutations that are not pseudogene-de- 2Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, rived were identified in two alleles. Seven out of the 34 affected al- Cyprus, 3First Department of Paediatrics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, leles in the non-classic presented the mutation V281L (20.5%). Within 4Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Agia Sophia Childrens Hospital, Athens, this group, conversion, IVS2-13A/C>G and I172N were found each in Greece, 5Department of Nephrology, Nicosia General Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, one allele (3%). Nineteen and 70% alleles remained undetermined, 6Hippocrateon Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. respectively, in classical and non-classical forms. Comparing to others Mutations in the ATP6V1B1 gene (subunit B1 of apical H+ ATPase) studies in Brazil, frequencies for conversion and deletions are higher cause a recessive form of distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA), associ- for the group studied here indicating that regional characteristics within ated also with early sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL). In this study, the country might influence mutation frequencies. nine dRTA families from Cyprus and one from Greece were analyzed for mutations in ATP6V1B1 gene by DNA re-sequencing and PCR- P12.053 Novel Homozygous mutation in DSP causing skin RFLPs. Fragility-Woolly Hair syndrome: report of a large family and Results show that 78% of dRTA cases in Cyprus are caused by review of the desmoplakin-related phenotypes 229+1G>T and R157C mutations in ATP6V1B1 gene. Both mutations M. A. Al-Owain, S. Wakeel; originate to common founders as it has been proved by flanking mic- King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. rosatellite markers and haplotype analysis. 229+1G>T mutation was Desmoplakin is member of the plakin family of cytoskeletal linkers. estimated to be older than 400-yo through Linkage Disequilibrium es- Along with other proteins, plakins are crucial for the function of the timation and a specific equation. The mutations are not clustered in desmosomes. Linking desmoplakin to certain types of cardiocutane- specific geographic regions of the island, probably due their old age. ous syndromes has been a hot topic recently. Skin fragility-woolly hair No genotype - phenotype correlation was found for these two founder syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder involving the des- mutations with relation to progressive SNHL. A known (L81P) and a mosomes and is caused by mutation in the desmoplakin gene (DSP). novel mutation (912delT) were found in the Greek family. Prenatal di- We report five members from a large family with skin fragility-woolly agnosis was performed for one Cypriot family, after parents demand, hair syndrome. The proband is a fourteen-year-old girl with palmoplan- showing that the embryo was heterozygous carrier. tar keratoderma, woolly hair, variable alopecia, dystrophic nails, and Existence of only two ATP6V1B1 mutations in the Cypriot population excessive blistering to trivial mechanical trauma. Cardiac evaluation is an advantage for easy and fast molecular diagnosis. The age of revealed normal heart. The skin biopsy from a blister showed variably onset of SNHL varies in our patients and probably is not related to necrotic roof and moderate spongiosis in the adjacent epidermis. Ho- ATP6V1B1 genotypes. Effective therapy for most of the syndrome mozygosity mapping and linkage analysis revealed a high LOD score symptoms is not satisfactory for some parents who choose prenatal of 4.7 in the region in the short arm of chromosome 6 that harbors the diagnosis to ensure their child’s health. DSP gene. Full sequencing of the DSP gene demonstrated a novel ho- mozygous c.7097 G>A (p.R2366H) mutation in all affected members, P12.056 Detection of Duchene muscular dystrophy carriers with and the parents were heterozygous. This is the report of the 3rd case/ quantitative fluorescent PCR family of the skin fragility-woolly hair syndrome in the literature. We A. Kuskucu1,2, N. Buyru2, P. Oflazer3, S. Hacihanefioglu2; also present a clinical and molecular review of various desmoplakin- 1Bakirkoy Women and Children‘s Health Education and Research Hospital, related phenotypes, with emphasis on onset of cardiomyopathy. The Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University Cerrahpasa School of Medicine Dept. diagnostic approach to this family depicts the value of linkage analysis Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3İstanbul University Istanbul School og versus the candidate gene strategy. Medicine Dept. Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is most common X linked neu- P12.054 DFNB1 hearing loss in iran romuscular disease. DMD is progressive, lethal and results from mu- N. Mahdieh1, A. Shirkavand2, M. Raeisi2, H. Bagherian2, Z. Shahab Movahed2, tations in Dystrophin gene at Xp21.2. Partial gene deletions respon- M. Masoudifard2, M. Mashayekhi2, F. Keshavarzi3, S. Zeinali4,2; sible for up to 60-65% DMD cases and 5-10% of cases result from 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modares gene duplications which are located in two “Hot spot” regions. Point University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar‘s Human Genetic mutations and insertion of few nucleotides account for the remaining Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Sanandej Azad University, cases (25-30%). Mutations are either inherited from female carriers Sanandej, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur (2/3) or occur de novo (1/3). In affected males, deletions can be easily Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. detected using multiplex PCR. But determining female carrier status Introduction: DFNB1 is the most prevalent locus causing nonsyndromic is difficult. This difficulty reflected in the great variety of techniques sensorineural hearing loss in many populations. Mutations in GJB2 & 6 that have been used for this purpose, such as linkage analysis, FISH, genes are the main cause of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hear- MLPA. In our study we used gene dosage method quantitative fluo- ing loss (ARNSHL). Mutation detection is essential for carrier detection rescent PCR (QF PCR). QF PCR refers to the amplification of DNA and genetic counseling of the families affected by hearing loss. fragment using fluorescence-labeled primers, followed by quantitative Materials and Methods: We investigated 91 patients from fifty fami- analysis to determine copy number of DNA fragments. We used this lies affected by ARNSHL. Clinical studies and genetic counseling were method to determine deletions in 23 DMD patients, who were previ- performed for all families. GJB2 and GJB6 genes were sequenced ously diagnosed and 24 female in carrier status. We tested 18 exons, directly. Also, we checked three known large deletions in GJB6 gene. promoter region and STR markers as internal control. We found the We also compared our results with the previous studies in Iranian same results, which previously reported, in 19 patients. In 3 patients populations. we found an extra exon deletion and in 1 patient we found less exon Results: Frequency of GJB2 mutations was 20% in this study. Here, we deletion than previously found. In 19 families females were carriers. report three novel mutations in GJB2 gene: 313-322delAAGTTCAT- As a result we conclude that QF PCR is a fast, reproducible robust Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 1 method for detection of deletions of DMD patients and it’s useful for P12.059 Further improvement in the i-PEP method for low copy carrier screening. number DNA profiling at forensic genetics Z. Zafari1,2, F. Rahiminejad1, S. Kiyan Far1, A. B. Sarhaddi1, A. Shirkavand1,3, M. P12.057 The first MLPA analysis of dystrophin gene R. Mashayekhi1,4, A. Ghasemi1,5, S. Zeinali1,6; duplications in iranian DmD/BmD patients 1Kawsar‘s Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, M. Hayat Nosaeid1, S. Fallah Mohammad2, S. Jamali1, R. Mahdian1, L. 2Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biology Group, Faculty Kokabee1, A. Hosseinian3, S. Zeinali1; of Sciences, Razi University, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Biology 1Molecular medicine department, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Group, Faculty of Science, Science and research Branch of Tehran, Islamic Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar Genetics Research Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Islamic Azad University of Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shahid Rajaei Cardiovascular Jahrom, Jahrom, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Biotechnology Research Center, Medical and Research Center, Iran Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of Iran. DNA profiling has become one of the most robust and reliable methods Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy and Becker Muscular Dystrophy can be at forensic identification; However, an insufficient DNA quantity (less caused by deletions, duplications or point mutations in the DMD gene. than 100 Pg or 33 copies), found often in forensic evidence samples, is Partial gene duplications account for up to 5-10 % of DMD and up to a major hindrance. Amplification of such low copy number (LCN) DNA 5- 19% of BMD cases. Cases with gene duplication in DMD/BMD are samples, is attainable with the most efficient whole genome amplifica- determined by quantitative methods such as MAPH, Sothern blotting tion (WGA) method, named improved primer extension preamplifica- and Q-PCR that are laborious and technically demanding. We have tion (I-PEP) PCR. applied multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay By initial assessment of existing methods (i.e. PEP and I-PEP) on to simultaneously screen all 79 DMD gene exons for deletions and du- serially diluted DNA, it was attempted to reach an improved method plications in DMD/BMD patients. MLPA was performed using the SAL- leading to reliable profiling with the lowest amount of template. This SA MLPA kit P034-A2 and P035-A2 (MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, the method employs degenerate 15-mer PCR primers followed by specific Netherlands) based on the instruction of manufacture. MLPA samples amplification of DNA with specific primers. Subsequent to the amplifi- consisted of approximately 200 ng of genomic DNA. All amplified frag- cation with the new modified and improved I-PEP, which we term KI- ments were separated using capillary electrophoresis on ABI PRISM PEP PCR, complete DNA profile was obtained using only 2.5 pg of 3130 Genetic Analyzer. The area under peak for each individual ampli- input DNA. Using this method, a fragment size of 1106 bp was effort- fied fragment was measured using the gene marker software (v.1.6). lessly amplified with the specific primers. These results demonstrated Analysis of mutations was performed in 20 unrelated DMD patients fifty percent reduction in the template amount reported to be required previously found to be negative for large deletions by standard multi- by commercial DNA identification kits using the I-PEP method. In con- plex PCR assays. Gene duplication was found in five patients (25%) clusion, the utility of KI-PEP PCR, not only increases the low quantity with various lengths from 4 to 22 exons across dystrophin gene. This of DNA, but also provides optimum length appropriate to DNA typing. is the first report of the relative frequency of duplicational mutations Keywords: DNA Profiling, Forensic genetics, LCN DNA, Whole ge- in Iranian DMD/BMD patients. The DMD MLPA test provides a simple nome amplification, Improved primer extension preamplification PCR, and cheap DNA- based test for deletion/duplication screening of total KI-PEP PCR dystrophin gene.This technique can follow by Real-time PCR assay to confirm the genetic defects in DMD gene and to improve the precision P12.060 Dubowitz-syndrome associated with Hyper-igE- of genetic counseling. syndrome in a female patient. No evidence thus far for a common genetic basis. P12.058 High Resolution Agilent 244K oligoarray CGH analysis P. M. Kroisel1, A. C. Obenauf1, C. Windpassinger1, D. Pfeifer2, K. Wagner1, K. of a patient with DmD and mR M. Roetzer1, T. Schwarzbraun1, M. R. Speicher1, C. Woellner3, M. Beitzke4, B. S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, M. Tzetis1, N. Vogiatzakis1, K. Kekou1, K. Giannikou1, A. Grimbacher5; Pampanos1, A. Dinopoulos2, E. Kanavakis1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Core Facility II Genomics, 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 23rd Dept. of Freiburg, Germany, 3Dept of Immunology & Molecular Pathology, UCL, London, Pediatrics, University Hospital “ATTIKON”, Athens, Greece. United Kingdom, 4Dept of Neurology, MUG, Graz, Austria, 5Dept of Immunology, The dystrophinopathies include a spectrum of muscle disease caused Division of Infection & Immunity, UCL, London, United Kingdom. by mutations in the DMD gene encoding for dystrophin. The clinical An association of Dubowitz-syndrome and Hyper-IgE-syndrome phenotype is variable, ranging from mild (muscle cramps, asymptom- (HIES) or Job-syndrome thus far has just extremely rarely been re- atic increase in creatine phosphate kinase), to severe (progressive ported. HIES, a rare disorder, is heterogeneous with an autosomal muscle disease, classified as Duchenne - Becker muscular dystro- dominant form caused by mutations of the STAT3-gene but autosomal phy). Dystrophin is expressed in skeletal muscles, cardiac muscle, ret- recessive variants of HIES with at least two different causally related ina and brain. The DMD gene has 7 known promoters, among these, genes have been identified as well. Dubowitz-syndrome, a very rare Dp71 and Dp140 are particularly abundant in foetal brain, which has disease, follows an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. Recently led to the suggestion that they may contribute to the cognitive defects a microdeletion/duplication has been reported in a patient with Dubow- in DMD. Intellectual disability is well described in association with up to itz-syndrome. Here we describe another patient with an association 30% of cases of Duchenne, with a preferential impairment of verbal IQ. of both syndromes. She is now 30 years old and fulfils the required Here, we present a specific case of DMD with a tandem de novo dupli- diagnostic criteria for HIES and Dubowitz-syndrome as well. It was cation of exons 2-18 of the DMD gene (diagnosed by array-CGH and possible to demonstrate that a de novo heterozygous mutation of the subsequently confirmed with MLPA analysis) in a patient with predict- STAT3-gene is responsible for her Hyper-IgE-syndrome. Cytogenetic ed DMD phenotype and profound microcephaly, facial dysmorphism and microarray CGH analysis using an Agilent 244 k oligonucleotide and brain atrophy. Additional a-CGH findings that could contribute to chip ruled out an aberration or genomic imbalance up to the resolution his severe phenotype were a 3.0Mb deletion in 10q23.31- q23.33, re- achieved. In addition an Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array sulting in haploisufficiency of amongst others the FER113 gene, which 6.0 analysis was performed for homozygosity mapping of larger ge- has been implicated as a possible modifier of DMD phenotype and nomic blocks of a possible LOH since a consanguinity of the parents of a 0.703Mb deletion of Xq21.31 containing the PCDH11X gene which the patient is not unlikely. Several larger segments of suspected LOH plays a fundamental role in cell-cell recognition and is essential for of up to about > 3 Mbs which will be analyzed in more detail have been the segmental development and function of the central nervous sys- identified. This might allow narrowing down candidate gene regions for tem. This case shows a central nervous system-specific and restrictive Dubowitz-syndrome however none of the larger LOH loci maps to the phenotype for a disorder that is conceptualized as being progressively STAT3-gene or any other known HIES gene locus. neuromuscular in clinical expression.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 1 P12.061 Duchene/Becker muscular Dystrophy, fenotype- jective: The purpose of this study was to analyse the COL7A1 gene genotype correlations and folate cycle genes interaction and perform genotype-phenotype correlations in Czech patients with V. C. Sacara1, E. Scvortova1, M. V. Duka2, S. A. Groppa1; DEB. Methods: Mutations in the COL7A1 gene were characterised 1Centre of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Moldova, using polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencing. Results: DNA Republic of, 2University of the Academy of Sciences of Moldova, Chisinau, analysis of the COL7A1 gene was performed in 27 probands with di- Moldova, Republic of. agnosis of RDEB and 6 probands with diagnosis of DDEB. 29 different MTHFR, MTRR and MTR are the most important enzymes in the ho- sequence variants were found, ten of which have not been reported mocysteine and methionine metabolic cycle. The enzymes functions previously In the set of our RDEB patients, the most frequent muta- are to convert 5 and 10-methylenetetrahydrofolate into 5-methyltetra- tion was the splice site mutation c.425A>G (29,6% of RDEB mutant hydrofolate, providing methyl radicals to homocysteine and synthesiz- alleles). The novel mutations comprised “silent” glycine substitutions ing methionine in this metabolic process. A common (C677T) poly- (p.Gly1845R, p.Gly2296Glu, and Gly2557Arg), the novel nonsense morphism in the MTHFRgene results in thermolability and reduced mutation p.Ser609X, three splice site mutations (c.3894+1G>A, MTHFR activity that decreases the pool of methylTHF and increases c.5856+1G>A and c.6751-2delAG), the deletion c.4556delG, the in- the pool of methyleneTHF. Recently, another polymorphism in MTHFR sertion c5644insA, and the missense mutation p.Lys1981Arg. A mis- (A1298C) has been identified that also results in diminished enzyme sense mutation of Lys was not described in DEB association so far. activity also as MTRR A66G polymorphism. We tested whether car- The patient´s phenotype associated with p.Lys1981Arg was milder in riers of these variants alleles have the worst effect of the myopathyc comparison with patients´ phenotypes associated with substitutions of process. Gly and Arg detected in our DEB patients.Conclusions: In summary, We analyzed DNA of 14 patients with the Duchene muscular dystro- screening the COL7A1 gene is useful for understanding different clini- phy. The PCR multiplex deletion test (two 9 plex mixes) are used for cal variants of DEB. detection of distrophin deletions MTHFR, MTRR variant alleles were This work was funded the Czech Ministry of Education (LC06023 and determined by a PCR - RFLP assay. MSM0021622415). Patients with in-frame deletions in dystrophin gene in combination with heterozygous status MTHFR, MTRR genes have severe clinical pic- P12.064 splicing abnormalities in the DMD gene ture instead the mild. Patients with mild clinical picture have the next J. Juan-Mateu1, E. Verdura1, L. Gonzalez-Quereda1, E. Gallardo2, E. Rivas3, genotype of folate circus genes: 677TT, 1298CC. M. Marotta4, M. Madruga5, I. Illa2, M. Roig6, J. Colomer7, A. Nascimento7, M. During researches were we found out incidence of C677T(21,4%). Baiget1, P. Gallano1; This mutation lead to redaction activity of MTHFR with 35-60% which 1Genetics. HOSPITAL SANT PAU. CIBERER, BARCELONA, Spain, influence myopathyc process. The proband (43 years old) with dele- 2Neurology. HOSPITAL SANT PAU. CIBERNED, BARCELONA, tion of 47-48 exons and with genotype C677C and C1298C had not Spain, 3Pathology. HOSPITAL VIRGEN DEL ROCIO, SEVILLA, Spain, very severity clinical feature. Analysis of MTRR polymorphism reviled 4Neuropaediatrics. HOSPITAL VALL DE HEBRON, BARCELONA, Spain, prevalence of A66G(92,9%). 5Neuropaediatrics. HOSPITAL VIRGEN DEL ROCIO, SEVILLA, Spain, Were set interaction between genes of folate circus MTHFR, MTRR, 6Neuropaediatrics. HOSPITAL VALL DE HEBRON, BARCELONA, Spain, MTR and difficulty of Duchene/Becker Miodistrophy 7Neuropaediatrics. HOSPITAL SANT JOAN DE DEU, BARCELONA, Spain. The most common form of Duchenne and Becker muscular dystro- P12.062 cOL7A1 mutation spectrum in patients with Dystrophic phies causing mutations are large intragenic deletions and duplica- Epidermolysis Bullosa in Poland tions that account for 60 to 80% of all cases. The remaining cases are K. Wertheim-Tysarowska1, A. Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska1, C. Kowalewski2, A. caused by small mutations consisting of nonsense, missense, small Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, K. Woźniak2, J. Bal1; insertion-deletions and a wide range of complex changes due to ab- 1Medical Genetic Department, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, normalities of normal splice processing. Genomic based techniques 2Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. have sometimes limited ability to detect such changes. Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa (DEB) is genodermatose caused by The technical approach that we used consisted in: 1) immunohis- mutations in COL7A1, which spans 32kb and comprise 118 exons. Its tochemical and western-blot analysis of patient’s muscle biopsies product - collagen VII, forms homotrimers which further assembles into against dystrophin and different muscle dystrophy associated proteins, anchoring fibrilis, structures responsible for epidermis-dermis integra- 2) exclusion of exonic deletion and duplication in DMD gene by MLPA tion. Mutations in COL7A1 can result in either disturbance of anchoring technique, 3) muscle biopsy RNA sequencing of total coding region fibrilis formation and function or complete lack of collagen VII. There and, 4) further confirmation in targeted genomic DNA. are about 520 COL7A1 mutations known, of which only few are recur- We describe one DMD and five BMD patients diagnosed by clinical rent, mainly among individual ethnic groups. We present the results and immunohistochemical criteria, in which further genetic analysis of molecular analysis of 31 DEB patients of Polish origin. We found revealed the presence of different mutations that alter normal splicing that c.425G>A is the most frequent mutation in our group of patients process. Exceptions to the reading frame rule were observed in two (42% of patients; 27% of alleles). Another recurrent mutations are: patients. c.682+1G>A (13%; 6% respectively) and, unreported in the literature Two of them destroy the normal donor-site, one leading to exon skip- data before*, c.7154delC (10%; 5% respectively). Our analysis is still ping and the other causing partial intron transcription. Another creates proceed, but up to now we also found 11 rare variants, including 7 a new donor splice site inside the coding region deleting 5 exonic bp. changes unreported before*. In conclusion, our work is the first CO- The fourth one, creates a cryptic exon in deep intronic region. The fifth L7A1 genotyping study performed in Polish DEB patients. Our results mutation located at the donor site, leads to normal splice efficiency re- enable us to propose patients of Polish origin the molecular diagnostic duction. In the last case, a BMD patient presents a nonsense mutation scheme, which will be completed soon. and a partial skipping of the mutated exon that could explain the milder *according to PubMed and HGMD free version. phenotype that has been observed. Supported by NN407171134 and NN 402233137 P12.065 Dyt1 mutations in primary torsion dystonia in iranian P12.063 Analysis of the COL7A1 gene in czech patients patients with dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa, novel and recurrent M. T. Akbari1,2; mutations. 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Medical L. Fajkusová1,2, L. Kopečková1, B. Jeřábková1, H. Bučková1; Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk university, Brno, Early-onset, generalized primary torsion dystonia (PTD) is an auto- Czech Republic. somal dominantly inherited disorder, characterized by involuntary Backgroud: Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB) is an inherited movements and abnormal postures. The majority of cases are caused skin fragility disorder where blistering occurs in the sublamina densa by a 3-bp deletion (GAG deletion at position 946) in the DYT1 gene on zone at the level of anchoring fibrils of the dermo-epidermal junction chromosome 9q34 that allows for specific genetic testing. Forty eight zone. Both autosomal dominant (DDEB) and recessive (RDEB) forms patients with early onset primary torsion dystonia were screened for result from mutations in the type VII collagen gene (COL7A1). Ob- mutation in exon 5 of the DYT1 gene using PCR and DNA sequenc-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 1 ing. In this study, we examined 48 Iranian patients with dystonia, and P12.068 Congenital factor XIII deficiency caused by two found the mutation in 8 patients (17%). The results showed that the mutations in eight Tunisian families: molecular confirmation of a prevalence rate of DYT1 mutation in Iranian patients was not too much founder effect different from European (27.3%) and Asian (22.2%) patients with early N. Louhichi1, M. Medhaffar2, I. Hadj Salem1, E. Mkaouar-Rebai1, N. Fendri- onset primary torsion dystonia. Kriaa1, H. Kanoun1, F. Yaïch1, T. Souissi2, M. Elloumi2, F. Fakhfakh1; 1Human Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service of Hematology. P12.066 secondary genetic determinants of phenotypic severity C.H.U. Hédi Chaker de Sfax., Sfax, Tunisia. in recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) Introduction: Inherited factor XIII (FXIII) deficiency is a rare bleeding J. E. Mejía1,2, A. Décha1,2, V. Pendaries1,2, N. Pironon1,2, M. Titeux1,2, S. disorder characterized by an umbilical bleeding during the neonatal Turczynski3,4, L. Tonasso1,2, G. Gasc1,2, C. Bodemer5, A. Hovnanian1,6; period, delayed soft tissue bruising, mucosal bleeding spontaneous 1Inserm, U563, Toulouse, France, 2Université Toulouse III Paul Sabatier, intracranial hemorrhage and soft tissue hemorrhages. Congenital Toulouse, France, 3Inserm, U781, Paris, France, 4Université Paris V René FXIII deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder, usually attributed Descartes, Paris, France, 5Dermatology Department, Necker-Enfants Malades to a defect in the FXIIIA and B subunits coding respectively by F13A Hospital, Paris, France, 6Genetics and Dermatology Departments, Necker- and F13B genes. Aim: The aim of this study was to determine the Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France. molecular defects responsible for congenital factor XIII deficiency in RDEB is a skin blistering disorder caused by type VII collagen deficien- eight Tunisian families. Methods: Molecular analysis was performed cy, responsible for a wide spectrum of disease severity. Correlation be- by direct DNA sequencing of polymerase chain reaction amplified frag- tween COL7A1 genotypes and RDEB severity is incomplete, and we ments spanning the coding regions and splice junctions of the FXIIIA showed previously that an MMP1 promoter polymorphism associates subunit gene (F13A) in probands and in families’ members and com- with higher severity. Using microarrays, we analyzed the transcriptome pared with the reported sequence of this gene. Results: In all patients, of cutaneous cells cultured from three brothers with consanguineous FXIIIA activity was undetectable and the FXIIIB was within the normal parents, homozygous for the same missense COL7A1 mutation but re- range. Direct sequencing of the F13A gene in all probands showed spectively affected with localized, generalized, and severe generalized two mutations: the c.869insC mutation found in eight patients and the RDEB (RDEBL, RDEBG, RDEBSG). RDEBL fibroblasts expressed 10- c.1226G>A transition found in only one. We also confirmed the pres- fold higher levels of TGFB2 mRNA than RDEBSG cells (2.5-fold higher ence of a founder effect for the first frequent mutation by using two than RDEBG), 2-fold higher concentrations of TGF-β2 in conditioned microsatellite markers, HUMF13A01 and a generated ployAC marker medium, and larger pools of SMAD proteins. Transcripts increased in (HUMF13A02). Conclusion: We describe here molecular abnormali- RDEBL fibroblasts relative to RDEBSG clustered to gene ontologies of ties found in nine Tunisian probands diagnosed with FXIIIA deficiency. cell adhesion and extracellular matrix (ECM). NF-AT-binding motifs The identification of the founder mutation and polymorphisms allowed were overrepresented in the corresponding gene promoters. The recip- a genetic counselling in relatives of these families and the antenatal rocal transcript set was heterogeneous and depleted in those gene on- diagnosis is now available. tologies. Interferon response motifs were remarkably overrepresented in the gene promoters. Transcripts increased in RDEBL keratinocytes P12.069 Frequency of PRF1, STX11 and UNC1D mutations in relative to RDEBSG mapped to gene ontologies of mitosis, DNA replica- patients with a genetic diagnosis of familial hemophagocytic tion and repair, and the cell cycle, with higher cyclin B mRNA levels. lymphohistiocytosis The reciprocal transcript set was depleted in those categories, and M. Entesarian1,2, M. Meeths1,2, E. Rudd1,2, M. Nordenskjöld2, J. Henter1; proliferation inhibitor CDKN2A mRNA was augmented. The fibroblast 1Department of Women´s and Children´s Health, Karolinska Institutet, TGF-β2 profiles indicate a protective role for this pleiotropic cytokine Karolinska University Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of as a regulator of ECM and several signaling pathways of immunity Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University and inflammation. We observed no TGFB2 allelic polymorphism in this Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden. RDEB sibship, however, suggesting that TGF-β2 changes are second- Familial hemophagocytic lymhohistiocytosis (FHL) is a rare autosomal ary to an upstream regulatory gene. recessive lethal condition characterized by fever, cytopenia, hepato- splenomegaly and hemophagocytosis. It is usually rapidly fatal without P12.067 mutation R163W in the KRT gene in a mexican adequate therapy. The hallmark of FHL is defect apoptosis triggering family with Epidermolytic Palmoplantar Keratoderma and new and deficient lymphocyte cellular cytotoxicity. Four disease-causing associated features genes have been identified PRF1, UNC13D, STX11 and, most recent- J. Lopez-Valdez1, M. Rivera-Vega2, L. Gonzalez-Huerta2, J. Cazarin- ly, STXBP2. We have reviewed the frequency of biallelic mutations in Barrientos3, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias4; different FHL genes in a large, multi-ethnic cohort of 54 patients/fami- 1Genetica, Hospital General De Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 2Genetica lies with a genetic diagnosis of FHL. These patients were analysed up Hospital General De Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 3Dermatologia, Hospital to mid 2009, no patients had then been analyzed for STXBP2. Bial- General De Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 4Genetica, Hospital General De lelic mutations in PRF1, UNC13D and STX11 were demonstrated in Mexico; Facultad De Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autonoma De Mexico, 27/54 (50%), 15/54 (28%) and 12/54 (22%) patients, respectively. We Mexico D.F., Mexico. observed a significantly higher prevalence of STX11 mutations in the Background: The epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma (EPPK), an Turkish patients compared to European patients (10/23 vs. 0/15, p = autosomal dominant genodermatosis, is the most frequent form of the 0.003). In Middle East patients, PRF1 was the most common disease hereditary palmoplantar keratodermas. The EPPK is characterized by causing gene (10/16, 63%). hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles. About 90% of patients present Another autosomal recessive immunodeficiency associated with de- mutations in the KRT9 gene, generally affect the highly conserved coil velopment of a hemophagocytic syndrome including partial albinism is 1A region of the α-helical rod domain of keratin 9, a domain important Griscelli syndrome type 2 (GS2) caused by mutations in RAB27A. We for keratin heterodimerization. Objective: To perform a clinical and mo- have identified RAB27A mutations in five patients/families with a clini- lecular study in a Mexican family with EPPK. Methods: We analyzed cal diagnosis of GS2. In addition, we have identified two patients with clinically and genetically a family with 12 affected members with EPPK. X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLP) type 1 and one patient The KRT9 gene was analyzed from genomic DNA through PCR and with XLP type 2 caused by mutations in SH2D1A and XIAP, respective- DNA sequencing analysis. Results: The 12 affected members of the ly. Genetic analysis has proven to be a most helpful tool in diagnosis of family had hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles. We detect R163W FHL and related disorders. Moreover, genetics is essential for prenatal mutation in the KRT9 gene in all affected members of the family. screening and carrier testing. Conclusions: Although the R163W change in the KRT9 gene is the most frequent mutation in EPPK, only 2 families have been reported P12.070 Resequencing of LDLR and APOB genes in patients with knuckle pads associated to this mutation. with clinical diagnosis of Familial Hypercholesterolaemia A. C. Alves, M. Bourbon; Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal. Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is a monogenic condition caused in most cases by mutations in LDLR gene, but mutations in APOB Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 1 and PCSK9 genes are also cause of FH. These 3 genes are currently 1,3,5,11,13,15,16,17 and 18 of LDLR gene using PCR-SSCP strat- studied in the “Portuguese FH Study”. From the 359 families with a egy. clinical diagnosis of FH studied, only 48% of these have a detectable Results: Tow different LDLR gene variations including heterozygote mutation in the 3 genes mention above so, other mutations in these 3 mutation 283T>A and polymorphism 1959T>C were identified in 1 and genes or other gene defects must exist to explain the cause of hyper- 9 FH Families studied respectively. cholesterolemia in the remaining families. In order to find if a LDLR Conclusion: We conclude that LDLR gene mutation many not be the or APOB mutation was been missed by current methods, the coding major cause of FH in the population studied and the cause of FH in regions and exon/intron boundaries of LDLR and APOB gene, of 65 in- chaharmahal va Bakhtiari province remains to be detected in other dex patients with clinical diagnosis of FH and no detectable mutations loci or genes. in LDLR and APOB genes, were resequencing by a novel method, py- Familial Hypercholesterolemia, Low density lipoprotein receptor rosequencing. By this method a pool of the 65 DNAs was sequenced gene,PCR-SSCP together several times and the results are given based on number of alleles estimated taking into account the frequency of each alteration, P12.073 PcsK9 alterations in patients with Familial total number of reads obtained for each fragment and number of indi- Hypercholesterolaemia viduals sequenced. In the LDLR gene 41 alterations were detected, V. Francisco, A. C. Alves, A. M. Medeiros, M. Bourbon, O. behalf of most of them are polymorphism, 3 were positive controls and 3 new investigators of Portuguese FH Study; alterations. In the APOB gene 87 alterations were detected, being 27 Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal. previously described SNPs. Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is characterized by increased lev- Pyrosequencing allows the rapid sequencing of a large number of in- els of LDL cholesterol and premature Coronary Heart Disease (CHD). dividuals, but apart from its high cost, it has some limitations and re- Although LDLR and APOB defects are more common causes of FH, quires an improvement of technique. mutations in PCSK9 also cause FH. The Portuguese FH Study was developed to identify FH patients in order to prevent the development P12.071 Portuguese Familial Hypercholesterolemia study: of premature CHD. The aim of this study is the molecular analysis of comparison of the effect of LDLR gene mutations in FH patients PCSK9 gene, in patients with no mutation in LDLR or APOB gene. A. M. Medeiros, A. C. Alves, S. Silva, V. Francisco, M. Bourbon, O. behalf of A total of 425 index patients have been studied and a mutation in investigators of Portuguese FH Study; the LDLR or in the APOB gene was found in 169 patients. Until now Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal. a total of 48 index patients without mutation in LDLR or APOB, 11 Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common genetic disorder children (TC 256±34,4 mg/dL; LDLc 189±30,1 mg/dL) and 37 adults (1/500) associated with high levels of plasma cholesterol and prema- (TC 340±43,6 mg/dL; LDLc 240±36,9 mg/dL) were completely tested ture coronary heart disease (pCHD). In the Portuguese FH Study the for genetic defects in PCSK9 gene. The 12 exons and exon-intronic genetic diagnosis is based on molecular study of LDLR, APOB and boundaries of the PCSK9 gene were amplified by PCR and direct se- PCSK9 genes, but mutations in the LDLR gene account for the major- quence. All possible mutations and polymorphisms were annotated. ity of identified mutations. The aim of the present work was to analyse Two unrelated patients were found to be heterozygous for a novel mu- the phenotype of FH patients carrying a null or a defective allele muta- tation in PCSK9, predicted to cause a single amino acid substitution, tion in LDLR. D374H. Both presented a severe phenotype (premature CHD; patient To this date a total of 404 individuals were identified with a genet- 1, TC 567 mg/dL; LDLc 503mg/dL; patient 2, TC 444 mg/dL). The ic defect in LDLR. Mean levels of total cholesterol and LDLc in the polymorphisms, c.43_44insCTG in exon 1 and E670G, A>G variant in paediatric and adult group were calculated using SPSS v.17. Pae- exon 12, showed a higher incidence in the Portuguese population than diatric patients with null mutations presented mean total cholesterol the revealed in other Caucasian populations. FH patients with PCSK9 of 312.88±71.15mg/dL and LDLc of 242.21±67.74mg/dL Paediatric mutation have a rare but more severe form of the disease. patients carrying a defective allele mutation presented levels of total cholesterol and LDLc of 272.15±59.67mg/dL and 196.75±51.94mg/dL. P12.074 A novel mevalonate kinase gene mutation in Adult FH patients with null mutations present mean total cholesterol of combination with mVK V377i substitution and the common 369.33±91.14mg/dL and LDLc of 281.79±99.62mg/dL. Adult FH pa- mEFV V726A mutation. tients carrying a defective allele mutation presented a mean level of M. Amorini, L. Rigoli, R. Gallizzi, P. Romeo, G. E. Calabrò, C. Salpietro; total cholesterol of 334.98±67.94mg/dL and LDLc of 250.19±68.01mg/ Dipartimento di Scienze Pediatriche Mediche e Chirurgiche, Messina, Italy. dL. In the first group 21.4% had pCHD and in the second 13.3%. All Hyper-IgD (HIDS) syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder char- differences observed were statistically significant. acterized by recurrent episodes of fever associated with lymphade- Null allele mutations in LDLR gene (large deletions, small deletions/ nopathy, arthralgia, gastrointestinal disturbance, and skin rash. HIDS insertions, nonsense and splicing mutations) are predicted to result in is caused by mutations of MVK gene. Familial Mediterranean fever the production of a non-functional protein and present this way a much (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by fever and severe phenotype. The type of mutation is important to access the synovial inflammation. FMF is caused by mutations affecting both al- cardiovascular risk of these patients. leles of gene MEFV. In the present study we present data from a Sicilian patient with typi- P12.072 study of LDL receptor gene mutations in patients with cal symptoms of the FMF, but only heterozygous mutation in MEFV familial hypercholesterolemia in chaharmahal va Bakhtiari (V726A) and compound heterozygous in MVK gene (V377I, P228L, in- province. herited from the mother and father respectively). The P228L is a novel S. Asadi mobarake1, e. farrokhe2, G. Mobini2, M. Banitaleby2, J. Saffari missense mutation involving the exchange of a proline (CCA), highly Chaleshtori2, M. Taherzadeh2, F. Shayesteh2, H. Nazem1, R. Haji Hosini1, f. conserved in mammals and birds, with a Leucine (CTA). Roghani2, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori2; The proband then is affect from unusually form of HIDS (IgD no detect- 1Payamenoor Univ.Tehran,Iran,Islamic Republic of, Tehran, Islamic Republic able, proteinuria and serum amyloid A levels are of 120,00 ug/ml). This of Iran, 2Cellular and Molecular Research Center,Shahrekord Univ. of Med.Sci, findings encourage our assumptions about the oligogenic transmis- Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. sion of the syndromes associated with periodic fevers, on the basis Background and aim: Familial hypercholesterolemia is an autoso- of the identification of 3 mutated alleles in 2 different genes. The third mal dominant inherited disorder characterized by increased level of mutation in the gene MEFV could play a role epistatic, modifying the low-density lipoprotein cholesterol that leads to lipid accumulation in spectrum symptoms of HIDS. tendons and arteries ,premature atherosclerosis and increased risk Further study on HIDS and FMF wider population would is important of coronary heart disease (CHD). Familial hyper cholesterolemia is not only to clarify the genetic heterogeneity of this family of syndromes, caused mainly by mutations in low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) but mainly to establish a new diagnostic and therapeutic approach to gene. The aim of this study was to analyse the LDLR gene mutations these patients. in a group of patients from chahar mahal va Bakhtiari province. Methods: in this descriptive -lab based study ,57 suspected FH patients were screened for mutations in promoter and exons Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 17 P12.075 mEFV gene mutations in patients with FmF from the P12.077 Identification of novel loci linked to Familial Pulmonary middle Black sea region of turkey. Fibrosis H. Bagci1, K. Ozdamar2, E. Taskin1, N. Karakus1; F. K. E. Kamel, S. Bartlett, G. Fox, R. Batia, E. Sala, N. Duguid, B. Noble, L. 1Ondokuz Mayis University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Edwards, H. Yang, M. Dube, B. Fernandez, M. O. Woods; Biology, Samsun, Turkey, 2Osmangazi University, Department of Biostatistics, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John‘s, NL, Canada. Eskisehir, Turkey. Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) is pathologically characterized by Background: Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an autosomal inflammation and fibrosis of the lung parenchyma. It is a late onset recessive disease presenting with recurrent bouts of fever, inflamma- disease with variable penetrance that generally develops from 50-70 tion of serosal membranes, skin rashes, and joint problems. FMF is years of age and is associated with an estimated survival of 20-50% at frequenty seen in populations of Arab, Armenian, Jewish, and Turkish 5 years after diagnosis. The prevalence of IPF in Newfoundland is 117 ancestry. Disease is caused by mutations in MEFV gene, sequence cases per million, which is much greater than the prevalence in the UK variants of which totals 188 according to the Infevers Database. The of 1.34 cases per million. Familial Pulmonary Fibrosis (FPF) is patho- purpose of the present study was to determine the frequencies of the logically indifferent to IPF; however an earlier age of onset is frequently 12 mutations in MEFV gene in patients with FMF from the middle Black observed in FPF families. SFTPC, TERT, TERC, SFTPA2 and ABCA3 Sea region of Turkey. are the genes known to be associated with the disease. Method: We screened 3904 patients with suspicion of FMF for MEFV We hypothesize that there is a gene(s) carrying a mutation(s) that is mutations using commercially available FMF StripAssayTM method, a the underlying cause of FPF in Newfoundland families. We sequenced multiplex PCR based reverse hybridization assay. the 5 known FPF genes in 59 probands and excluded them as FPF Results: Overall, MEFV mutations were detected in 47.80% of the causing in the vast majority of individuals. Six families with 37 affected patients, while no mutations were detected in 52.20%. Of the 2755 and 205 unaffected individuals were selected for novel gene discovery. MEFV alleles identified, M694V allele was present at 46.75%; M680I The pedigrees are consistent with an autosomal dominant inheritance 21.67%; E148Q 14.66%; V726A 8.78%; P369S 3.19%; A744S 1.38%; pattern, which is consistent with previous reports of FPF. Genome- R761H 1.20%; F479L 1.13%; K695R 0.91%; and M694I 0.33%. Of wide scans with a 10cM microsatellite set and a 610k SNP-chip sug- the 1866 patients with MEFV gene mutation(s), 21.65% were homo- gested linkage to multiple chromosomal loci. zygotes, 52.79% were heterozygotes with single mutations, 25.19% Using paremtric, non-parametric and homozygosity haplotyping analy- were compound heterozygotes with two mutations, and 0.38% were ses we indentified a number of novel loci linked with FPF in these fami- with complex genotypes (n: 7 patients; 2 patients with E148Q/E148Q/ lies. A candidate-gene approach is being utilized to select genes within M680I/M680I genotypes, 2 patients with M694V/E148Q/P369S geno- the regions of interest for sequencing. Genes are selected based on types, 2 patients with M680I/E148Q/P369S genotypes, 1 patient with association with lung diseases, function and mRNA expression. V726A/V726A/E148Q genotype). Conclusions: We were able to identify 53 different allelic combinations P12.078 DNA bank for Polish patients with a predisposition for of the 12 mutations tested in MEFV gene in Turkish patients in whom intestinal polyposis FMF was suspected. We will present, the genotype-phenotype cor- A. Plawski1, M. Podralska1, R. Slomski1, D. Lipinski1, P. Krokowicz2, M. Drews2, relations in depth. J. Paszkowski2, W. Cichy2; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Karol Marcinkowski University P12.076** Detection of a hotspot for mutations in KitLG of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. responsible for Familial Progressive Hyper- and Hypo- Intestinal polyposis syndromes include a group of diseases conditioned pigmentation by the occurrence of hereditary mutations. Here we present a collec- M. Amyere1, T. Vogt2, J. Hoo3, F. Brandrup4, L. Boon5, M. Vikkula1; tion of DNA samples derived from persons from families with a diag- 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université nosed adenomatous polyposes which comprise: familial polyposis coli catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Dermatology, together with its recessive form, Turcot’s syndrome, inherited mixed University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, polyposis as well as persons with recognised hamartomatous polypo- SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York, NY, United States, ses: juvenile polyposis, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Cowden syndrome 4Department of Dermatology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, and Proteus syndrome. The objective of this study was to present cur- 5Centre for Vascular Anomalies, Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques rent achievements associated with the establishment of the DNA Bank Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium. for intestinal polyposis. At the present time, the DNA Bank comprises Familial Progressive Hyperpigmentation and Hypopigmentation (FPHH) the total of 1097 DNA samples derived from 449 families with intestinal is an autosomal dominant disorder with reduced penetrance. Clinical polyposis of which 945 samples come from persons in whose families signs consist of progressive diffuse, partly blotchy hyperpigmented Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) occurred. In addition, the col- lesions, multiple café-au-lait spots intermingled with hypopigmented- lected data also contain material for analyses derived from 25 families appearing maculae, and lentiges. Histological and ultrastructural sec- with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and 20 families with juvenile polyposis tions from the hyperpigmented lesions display strong basal hyperpig- as well as single cases with the Cowden syndrome, Proteus syndrome mentation of the epidermis with numerous melanophages containing and desmoid tumors. The performed molecular investigations allowed large amounts of melanin. In contrast, the hypopigmented-appearing identification of mutations ranging from 44 to 50%. maculae show slight basal hyperpigmentation of the epidermis, with The study was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher virtually no melanophages in the upper dermis. FPHH is distinct from Education projects FPH, in which no hypopigmented features are present, and which is no. N402 481537, N401 331936 phenotypically and histologically closer to Dyschromatosis Universalis Hereditaria 2 (DUH2). We performed a genome-wide linkage analysis P12.079 STXBP2 mutations are not detected in group of Russian in seven families with FPHH using Affymetrix SNP GeneChips, and patients with Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis identified linkage on 12q21.12-q22. This locus overlaps with that of (FHL). DUH2. Moreover, one mutation was reported in the KITLG gene in N. Poltavets1, M. Maschan2, A. Polyakov1, G. Novichkova2, A. Maschan2; this locus in a Chinese family with FPH. We discovered three different 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal mutations in four of our FPHH families. The reported FPH substitution Research Clinical Center for pediatric hematology, oncology and immunology, was found in two families, and two novel substitutions in the other two Moscow, Russian Federation. families. Thus, mutations in the same gene cause FPH and FPHH, FHL is a rare inherited immune dysregulation syndrome characterized and most likely DUH2. Interestingly, all the mutations are located in by a defect in natural killer cell function and caused by mutations in a highly conserved third β-strand in KITLG, suggesting an important PRF1, UNC13D and STX11 genes (FHL2, FHL3 and FHL4). These role in activation of the downstream signalling pathway, which affects genes code the proteins involved in perforin-dependent NK and T cells melanocyte migration and melanin distribution. This pathway groups cytotoxicity. A new genetic form FHL5 had been described in 2009. other Mendelian disorders with dyspigmentation, such as piebaldism, The causative FHL5 gene is STXBP2 (19p) coding syntaxin-binding neurofibromatosis type 1 and Legius syndrome. Morever, hair and skin protein 2 (Munc 18-2). Munc 18-2 protein interacts with syntaxin 11 color was recently associated with the KITLG locus. and is involved in the regulation of vesicle transport in NK cells and Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 1 cytotoxic T lymphocytes. performed followed by sequencing in order to identify the AGG inter- DNA samples of sixteen Russian FHL patients (3 girls and 13 boys) ruptions. were examined for mutation in coding region of SXTBP2. The diagno- To evaluate the instability we used an interspersion rate parameter. sis in all cases was established according to the criteria of the Histio- Statistics: Mann-Whitney test, ROC curve test and Spearman test and cyte Society. The investigation of PRF1, UNC13D and STX11 genes Box Plot to evaluate the diagnostic technical efficiency. coding regions had not reveal mutations. Results: After the 10 firts CGG repeats, the number of interspersed No mutations were detected in coding region of STXBP2 gene in DNA AGG among grey alleles is nearly the half than among the normal con- samples of these patients. A number of previously reported SNP`s were trol alleles this was evaluated with the Mann-Whitney test. detected. Only a few new nucleotide substitutions were revealed: Values below or equal to a threshold value of 0.89 are considered c.247-29G>A (GL6, 7, 8, 25, 29, 30) instable alleles with high risk of expansion; with 91,7% sensitivity and c.429+12G>C (GL7, 8) 89,2% specificity. c.794-4C>T (GL24) Conclusion: Low “interspersion rate” is correlated with high risk of ex- c.960+22C>T (GL25) pansion upon transmission. We propose a revision of the instability c.902+32insC (GL29) risk of intermediate alleles, especially in genetic counselling for male- c.1288C>T (p.430Arg>Cys) (GL7) female transmissions. c.1034C>T (p.345Thr>Met) (GL8) c.1375C>T (p.459Arg>Trp) (GL29) P12.082 An unusual case of fragile X syndrome due to partial c.1538+35G>T (GL11) deletion of FmR1 c.1697-34C>G (GL29) A. Lott1, H. Gabriel1, I. Hikkel2, M. Gencik1; Some of these polymorphisms could prove to be missence mutations, 1diagenos, Osnabrueck, Germany, 2medgene, Bratislava, Slovakia. so the further population and functional analysis should be performed. The most common cause of fragile X syndrome is the expansion of a FHL5 does not appear to represent a frequent form among Russian CGG trinucleotide repeat in the 5’UTR region of FMR1, which leads to patients. functional silencing of this gene by hypermethylation. However, in rare cases (< 1%) the loss of FMR1 gene function is due to partial or whole P12.080 Existence of FMF-like condition unrelated to MEFV gene deletions, ranging in size from single nucleotides to several Mb. D. Babikyan, H. Hayrapetyan, T. Davtyan, T. Sarkisian; Here we report on a 9 year old boy with features compatible to fragile Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia. X syndrome. ArrayCGH using a whole genome 44k Oligo-array (Agi- Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is the most prevalent hereditary lent) revealed a small deletion of 70-170kb on Xq27.3, including the autoinflammatory disease which arises from mutations of MEFV gene gene FMR1NB and possibly a part of FMR1: arrXq27(146.844.547- regulating the innate immune system. A systematic mutation screen- 146.915.743)x1 (ISCN 2009, hg18). ing among Armenians revealed a group of patients (n=46) with clini- To further characterize this result and to determine if the deletion was cal symptoms of FMF but without demonstrable MEFV mutation com- maternally transmitted, we performed MS-MLPA for fragile X syndrome pared to FMF patients with expected straight forward recessive form of (Kit ME0289-B1, MRC Holland).This analysis confirmed a normal inheritance. Given the frequent identification of single-mutation cases methylation pattern in the patient and his mother and a deletion of (30%) may be due to the recognition of a broader FMF phenotype, and exons 15 to 17 of the FMR1 gene in the patient but not in his mother. extremely high frequencies of MEFV mutant alleles among healthy Ar- Finally, the breakpoints were further analyzed by long distance inverse menian carriers (1:3), this supports the existence of new, FMF-like au- PCR (LDI-PCR) and sequencing. toinflammatory condition unrelated to MEFV. The stratified genotype- Summarized, these results prove in our patient a de novo deletion of phenotype analysis revealed some significant differences between two the 3’ part of the FMR1 gene with the proximal deletion breakpoint in clinically-similar conditions. Although the cardinal feature of FMF, pe- intron 14, protruding 118 kb distal including the FMR1NB gene. To our riodic fever was significantly higher among FMF patients (p=0.0095), knowledge, this is the first case of a deletion of only the 3’ part of FMR1 still it was detected in 83% of FMF-like patients without MEFV muta- and the distally neighboring gene FMR1NB, resulting in a phenotype tions, which importantly explains nearly all cases of FMF in whom no compatible to fragile X syndrome. MEFV mutation have been identified. Despite similar clinical picture, some features such as artralgia and skin elements were more frequent P12.083 Evidence for existence of a founder effect for the among patients with the suspected syndrome (p=0.0001). The search common mutation (W374X) in Perforin gene causing familial of autoinflammatory cytokine-markers also revealed a higher frequen- hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis cy and a higher level of IL-10 in FMF-like patients (0.77pg/ml in 33,3% G. Balta, H. Okur, A. Gurgey; cases) compared to healthy controls (0.41pg/ml in 16,3% cases) and Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. FMF-patients (0.17pg/ml in 7,6% cases). Thus, changing the concept Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) is a rare autoso- regarding broader FMF phenotype may call for a higher awareness mal recessive disorder of immune dysfunction caused by mutations in of the existence of MEFV-unrelated autoinflammatory condition distin- Perforin, Munc13-4, Syntaxin 11 and recently STXBP2 genes. Although guishable from other autoinflammatory syndromes but yet indiscern- FHL is a very rare disorder, it is relatively common in Turkish population ible from MEFV-related FMF. probably because of the frequent consanguineous marriages. Perforin gene Trp374Stop (W374X) mutation in exon 3 (1122 G>A) appear to P12.081 Risk measure for expansion upon transmission in be the major genetic cause of FHL in Turkish population. In our studies FmR1 grey alleles on the molecular pathologies of FHL, we have identified this mutation B. Lopez1, J. A. Garrote2, E. Velasco1, M. J. Alonso1, M. Duran1, A. Blanco1, I. in a total of unrelated 17 families coming from southeastern part of Fernández-Carvajal1; Turkey except 2 from middle part. Abreast studies of these families in 11Laboratorio de Genética Humana, Unidad de Diagnóstico Genético y haplotype analysis exploiting the genotyping of 5 different polymorphic Perinatal, Valladolid, Spain, 2Facultad de Medicina, Valladolid, Spain. microsatellite markers closely flanking Perforin gene indicated that Fragile X Syndrome is due to an expansion of CGG-repeat tract in the W374X mutation was obviously segregated with the same conserved 5´-untranslated region of the Fmr-1 gene. In normal alleles, every 9-10 haplotype in all families except one where the mutation segregates not CGG repeats a trinucleotide AGG is inserted which seems to provide with the conserved haplotype but with only one of the conserved allele stability to this sequence. Its absence or deletion at the 3´ end may be of a very close marker in linkage disequilibrium. The distribution of prone to expansion upon transmission. this allele was quite different between patients (1.0) and controls from Aim: To study AGG interspersion pattern in order to evaluate grey al- healthy Turkish population (0.30). This and one family who has fully lele stability and its predisposition for fragile X syndrome. conserved haplotype were originated from the middle part of Turkey Patients and Methods: Herein, we describe a study performed on 37 while all the rest 15 families from the southeastern part. These results male blood samples among the 40-55 CGG repeats range coming may suggest that all families inherited the same disease allele from a from neuropediatric units and a group of 12 samples <40 CGG repeats common ancestor. In conclusion, this study provides evidence for the as normal controls. possible existence of a founder effect for the mutation. This study was PCR test to amplify the CGG triplet repeat region of Fmr-1 alleles was supported by TUBITAK (Project No: 105S386-SBAG-3193).Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 1 P12.084 Molecular diagnosis for FMR1 related disorders two genes revealed a novel frameshift mutation [c.451-delG] and the P. Rendeiro, R. Cerqueira, I. Miguel, A. Palmeiro, P. Tavares; E47X mutation in the same family. Haplotype analysis for microsatellite CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal. markers and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) closely flanking Introduction: The Fragile X Mental Retardation 1 gene (FMR1) is asso- the GJB2 gene revealed the presence of two haplotypes associated ciated with three distinct conditions: Fragile X Syndrome (FXS), Fragile with the E47X mutation, suggesting that two founder effects for this X-associated Tremor/Ataxia Syndrome (FXTAS) and Premature Ovar- mutation are responsible for hearing loss among Tunisian population. ian Failure (POF). The most common molecular basis of FMR1-related This report presents an illustration of how consanguinity and founder disorders is an abnormal expansion of CGG repeats in the 5‘ untrans- effect could increase familial clustering of hereditary mutations within lated region of the FMR1 gene, which are hypermethylated, causing the same family. no FMR1 expression. Based on the size of the expansion, it is possible to distinguish four types of alleles: normal (NL), intermediate, premu- P12.087 MLPA technique identifies large deletions in Gitelman tation (PM, associated with both FXTAS and POF) and Full-Mutation syndrome (FM, associated with FXS). Despite being a low-resolution and time M. Syrén1,2, N. Borsa1, A. Bettinelli3, S. Salardi1, C. Calderone1, D. A. Coviello1, consuming technique that requires large amounts of genomic DNA, S. Tedeschi1; Southern-Blot is still the most commonly used method for diagnosing 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda, Ospedale FMR1 related disorders. In alternative, we adopted the combination of Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Materno-Infantili, direct PCR and fluorescent methylation-specific PCR (ms-PCR) (as Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, published by Zhou Y. et al. 2006). Ospedale Mandic, Merate (Lecco), Italy. Method/ Results:From 300 samples studied by conventional PCR, 66 Gitelman syndrome (GS) is part of the renal tubulopathies, character- were referred to ms-PCR with the following results: 59 females had a ised by hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, high renin and aldosterone. normal ms-PCR pattern, 3 males with a FM pattern, 2 females and 1 The disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. male with a PM pattern and 1 female with a gray zone allele. All the Most mutations detected in GS are point mutations defined by se- results were verified by southern-blot confirming the sensibility of this quencing. About 30% of GS-patients show only one mutation after method. coding sequences analysis. Conclusion: This approach confirms the efficiency to rapidly determine Rarely, deletions of one or more exons have been described in GS-pa- the allele status of males and females, including homozygous females tients. We therefore hypothesized that the missing mutation of our het- on standard PCR, according to their unique GeneScan™ electrophe- erozygous GS-patients could be a deletion or a duplication (del/dup). rogram patterns. We screened 13 heterozygotes for abnormal exon copy number, plus two brothers showing a homozygous absence of PCR product in exon P12.085 Analysis of granulin gene in patients with familial 26. frontotemporal dementia The Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification was performed J. M. Uterga1, M. J. García-Barcina2, E. Sarasola2, N. Liaño2, J. M. Fernández1, using the commercial kit (MLPA®, MRC Holland) to determine the A. Rodríguez-Antigüedad1; copy number of 25 out of the 26 exons of the SLC12A3 gene. 1Servicio de Neurología del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA The MLPA fragments were loaded on 3130xl Genetic Analyzer (Ap- / Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Unidad de Genética del Hospital plied Biosystems) and analysed using the appropriate software. Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA / Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, MLPA confirmed the homozygous deletion of exon 26 in the 2 brothers; Spain. four heterozygotes showed a 50% copy number reduction of at least Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD;MIM # 600274) represents one exon. the second most common dementia subtype in patients younger than Direct sequencing permits a high detection rate for point mutations 65 years. Positive family history is observed in up to 50% of FTLD whereas large del/dup are missed. patients. Most of these cases are linked to a region in chromosome We have introduced the MLPA technique as second screening after 17q21, and in some of these families the microtubule-associated pro- sequencing the coding region of the gene. It will be interesting to see tein tau gene (MAPT; MIM # 157140) was found to be the causative the proportion of large del/dups among mutations in GS and their im- gene. Other families with FTLD mapping to 17q21 and without varia- pact on the disease. This will furthermore permit to define if the propor- tions in MAPT, carried mutations in the gene encoding progranulin and tion of del/dup could justify the introduction of MLPA as a first screen- known as granulin (GRN; MIM # 138945). ing method. Mutation screening of GRN gene was performed in 11 unrelated pa- tients with familial FTLD using automatic sequencing. We did not iden- P12.088 Phenotypic variability of non-syndromic hearing loss in tify any pathogenic mutation in coding regions or intronic boundaries. a Lur family due to delE120 mutation in GJB2 gene However, five different polymorphisms were found (one not reported in N. Mahdieh1, H. Bagherian2, A. Shirkavand2, M. Sharafi2, S. Zeinali3,4; the literature) and the identification of a risk haplotype combining these 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modares polymorphisms and others already described is being carried out. University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar‘s Human Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biotechnology Research P12.086 Segregation of a new mutation in SLC2A and E47X Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Kawsar‘s mutation in GJB2 within a consanguineous tunisian family Human Genetic Research Center, Islamic Republic of Iran. affected with hereditary deafness Introduction: Hearing loss is the most common sensory defect in the M. Hmani-Aifa1, M. Bensaid1, H. Dhouib2, Z. BenZina3, A. Ghorbel2, F. Moreno4, world. The genetic basis of this condition is very complex. Molecular H. Ayadi1; variations in GJB2 gene are the common cause of hearing impairment 1Targets for Diagnosis and Therapy, Centre of Biotechnology, Sfax, Tunisia, in Caucasians. One expects that affected members of a family with 2Service d‘O.R.L., C.H.U.H. Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service d’Ophtalmologie, same mutation have similar phenotype. Here we report phenotypic C.H.U. H. Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Unidad de Genética Molecular, Hospital variability in hearing loss among the members of a Lur family. Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain. Case Presentation and Methods: A Lur family from Lorestan province Autosomal recessive forms of hearing loss account for approximate- in western Iran having hearing impairment came for genetic counsel- ly 80% of genetic cases. At least 60 genes have been identified to ing. There were two brothers with variable degrees of nonsyndromic cause autosomal recessive syndromic and non-syndromic hearing sensorineural hearing loss. Clinical examinations, audiological tests loss. Among these genes, SLC26A4 in which mutations have been re- and molecular studies including GJB2 gene sequencing and detection ported to be responsible for non syndromic hearing loss (DFNB4) and of Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) deletion were performed. Pendred syndrome characterized by the association of sensorineural Results: Sequencing GJB2 gene revealed delE120 mutation in both hearing loss and the presence of goiter. This gene encoded a chloride brothers in homozygote form. Since one of them was profoundly deaf transporter protein called Pendrin. Mutations in GJB2 gene result in and the other was mildly affected, we were expecting different geno- autosomal recessive (DFNB1) and dominant (DFNA3) non-syndromic types or other causative effects. Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) not was found. hearing loss. We describe a Tunisian Consanguineous Family show- Discussion: Phenotypic variability between members of different family ing linkage to GJB2 and SLC26A4 genes. Mutation analysis of these members with the same type of mutation can be expected which may Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 20 be due to the role of modifying factors but within the same family is less tosomal recessive hearing losses in some regions. Approximately 10 likely, particularly to the extend seen in our study. to 50% of the patients with GJB2 mutations carry only one mutant allele. This study aims to determine whether GJB6 deletions are the P12.089 The inheritance of a missense c.487A>G mutation in second mutant allele causing the disease in the GJB2 heterozygous GJB2 gene in two iranian families. cases studied. M. Falah1, M. Houshmand2, S. Akbaroghli3, S. Mahmodian1, M. Farhadi1; We examined 45 unrelated GJB2 heterozygous autosomal reces- 1Department and Research Centre of ENT & Head and, Tehran, Islamic sive non-syndromic hearing loss subjects for presence of del (GJB6- Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, D13S1830) and del (GJB6-D13S1854) mutations, using multiplex Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 33Tehran welfare Organization, Tehran, Polymerase Chain Reaction. Islamic Republic of Iran, 4National institute of genetic engineering and We detected none of the two deletions of GJB6 in the patients studied. biotchnology, Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. So GJB2 gene deletions; GJB6-D13S1830 and GJB6-D13S1854 are Background: Mutations in GJB2 gene are the most common cause of not the second mutant allele in patients with only one GJB2 mutant hereditary hearing loss. The majority of GJB2 mutations are recessive, allele in studied samples in Iran. but a few dominant mutations have been associated with hearing loss. This study introduces some new fact about M163V mutation in GJB2 P12.092 compound heterozygosity for Hemoglobin Knossos gene in two Iranian families. and cd 39 mutation in a young Romanian patient Material and Methods: Genomic DNA of Two unrelated Iranian families R. TALMACI1, L. Dan2, M. Crisan3, R. Stoia3, M. Dogaru3, S. Badelita1, D. with sensorineural hearing loss were obtained from six family mem- Coriu1; bers and screened for GJB2 mutations with direct sequencing. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2Genetics Institute Results: Fathers of both families showed late onset hearing impair- of Bucharest University, Bucharest, Romania, 3“Fundeni“ Clinical Institute, ment in fourth decade of the life, but hearing loss in children was early Bucharest, Romania. onset in both families with more severity rather than fathers. Also, one In the frame of beta-thalassemia mutation screening study, we inves- grandfather of every family showed late onset hearing loss in seven tigated the first Romanian patient with thalassemia major due to com- decade. The analysis of familial pedigree revealed anticipation in phe- pound heterozygosity for Hb Knossos and cd 39 (C-T) mutation. Hb notype and autosomal dominant inheritance. There was a substitution Knossos (cd 27 [G-T]) is characterized by reduced synthesis and by of A to G in exon 2 at nucleotide 487(M163V). This mutation was het- interaction with beta-thalassemia, in which the double heterozygotes erozygous in fathers and children while mothers were normal. display typical features of thalassemia intermedia. Here we report the Discussion: Previously, M163V always introduced as unknown het- first case of Hb Knossos in our country. erozygous not even as compound heterozygous. Researcher showed Molecular analysis of the mutations in the β-globin gene has been the produced protein of M163V failed in the formation of homotypic performed using the PCR based methods: DGGE, ARMS-PCR and junctional channel. PCR-RFLP. Direct DNA sequencing confirmed that the propositus is Due to other mutation in this nucleotide was reported as M163L in compound heterozygous for Hb Knossos (cd 27 GCC-TCC) and cd 39 autosomal dominant inheritance that defects trafficking to the plasma (C-T) mutation. membrane and increase cell death. Hb Knossos is a variant with a single base substitution causing amino Our finding can confirm the autosomal dominant inheritance of this acid replacement and alternative splicing of precursor beta-messenger mutation. This hypothesis was further supported by conservation of RNA by activating cryptic donor sites in the exon I. CAG-TAG substi- the methionine residue at position 163 across the 23 mammalian spe- tution at codon 39 in beta-globin gene changes codon 39 into a stop cies. codon terminating translation. Hb Knossos displays a slightly decreased oxygen affinity; this factor P12.090 molecular analysis of the GJB2 gene in congenital may compensate in part for the severe anemia of the double heterozy- sensorineural hearing impairment in a sample of mexican gotes. In our case co-inheritance of Hb Knossos with severe β0 muta- patients tion causes the beta-thalassemia major phenotype and this is impor- M. Rivera-Vega1, P. Berruecos2, D. Castro-Coyotl1, M. Arellano-Sanchez1, L. tant for genetic counseling.This work was supported by the grant PN II Gonzalez-Huerta1, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias3; 41-045 from the Romanian Ministry Education and Research. 1Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 2Audiologia y Foniatria, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 3Genetica, P12.093 screening of genes causing Huntington disease Like Hospital General de Mexico, Facultad de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D.F., phenotype Mexico. A. Patitucci1, P. Tarantino1, F. Annesi1, I. Manna1, A. Magariello1, A. L. Congenital sensorineural hearing impairment is the most common Gabriele1, F. L. Conforti1, R. Mazzei1, C. Ungaro1, L. Citrigno1,2, W. Sproviero1,3, sensory defect with an incidence of approximately 1 in 500 newborns. A. Gambardella1,3, M. Muglia1; Almost half of cases of hearing loss are due to genetic factors of which 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of 70% are classified as nonsyndromic. Autosomal recessive transmis- Neurosciences, Psychiatric and Anesthesiological Sciences, University of sion remains the most frequent. The discovery of different mutations Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University „Magna Graecia“, leading to hearing loss has led to clarify the molecular basis of dis- Catanzaro, Italy. ease. Mutations in the GJB2 gene, which encodes for connexin 26, is Huntington disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant disorder of the responsible for more than half of cases of genetic origin. In the present central nervous system, characterized by involuntary choreic move- study we analyzed the GJB2 gene in 16 Mexican families and found in ments, progressive motor impairment, psychiatric symptoms and 87% of cases different mutations. A relevant fact was the high preva- cognitive decline. HD is caused by an expansion of CAG trinucleotide lence of heterozygous, we consider that the most likely cause of hear- repeats in the IT15 gene located on chromosome 4p16.3, encoding ing loss was additional participation of the GJB6 gene, at least in the for Huntingtin. There is a group of disorders with clinical features of analyzed sample. HD but negative for trinucleotide repeats expansion in the IT15 gene, known as HD-Like disease: Huntington disease like 1 (HDL1), an au- P12.091 study of two deletions in GJB6 gene as the second tosomal dominant disease, caused by an extra octapeptide repeat in mutant allele in GJB2 heterozygous autosomal recessive non- the prion protein gene (PRNP), on chromosome 20p12; HDL2, with syndromic hearing loss subjects in iran. autosomal dominant inheritance, caused by CAG repeats expansion D. Kooshavar1, E. Farrokhi2, M. Hashemzade chaleshtori2; above 40 repeat in the Junctophilin-3 (JPH3) gene, on chromosome 1Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 16q24.3. Furthermore, two dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), 2shahrekord University of Medical Science, molecular and cellular research dentatorubralpallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) and Spinocerebellar center, shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. Ataxia (SCA17), may also have overlapping symptoms with HD. Hereditary non-syndromic hearing loss is inherited in autosomal reces- We report a group of 455 Italian patients with Huntington phenotype: sive pattern in about 80% of cases. Mutations in GJB2 gene (connexin 154 out of 455 resulted negative for the IT15 CAG expansion. These 26) and two deletions in the GJB6 gene (connexin 30); del (GJB6- patients were firstly tested for JPH3 gene CAG expansion, but we did D13S1830) and del (GJB6-D13S1854), are accounted for 50% of au- not found CAG expansion in any patient, according to the previous Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 21 data in Caucasian population. Then, we tested the patients for other P12.096 New mutations in WFS1 gene are involved in isolated HD-like genes: PRPN gene, Atrophyn 1 (ATP1) gene and TATA-binding deafness with ascending or U-shape audiometric curves, as well protein gene (TBP). All patients resulted negative for all tested genes as “frontier phenotypes” excluding one patient carrying TBP expansion causing SCA17. S. Marlin1, L. Jonard1, M. Niasme1, C. Bonnet1, M. Louha1, D. Feldmann1, Our study confirms the importance of testing all actually known genes R. Couderc1, H. Dollfus2, V. Drouin-Garraud3, D. Lacombe4, F. Fellmann5, C. involved in HD-like phenotypes. Francannet6, G. Lina-Granade7, F. Denoyelle1; 1Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Hautepierre, Strasbourg, P12.094 the most common causes of hearing loss in patients France, 3Hôpital Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France, 4Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, REfered to genetic counciling. France, 5Hôpital Saint Jacques, Besançon, France, 6Hotel Dieu, Clermont T. S. Zimovina; Ferrand, France, 7Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France. National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Introduction: Wolfram syndrome (also called DIDMOAD for Diabetes Belarus. Insipidus, Diabetes Mellitus, Optic Atrophy and Deafness) is an auto- Objectives: Hearing impairment is a common disorder that affects somal recessive syndromic disease due to mutations in WFS1. Domi- about 10% of general population and its prevalence increases with nant mutations of WFS1, usually located in exon 8 and affecting C-ter- age. One in 1000 children is born deaf, with about 60% of case being minal region of the protein wolframin, are also found in non-syndromic due to genetic factors in developed countries. Mutations in the Con- deafness, predominantly affecting low frequencies (DFNA6/14/38). nexin 26 (GJB2) and Connexin 30 (GJB6) genes cause nonsyndromic Methods: We have screened WFS1 gene in a wide cohort of sporadic deafness. Mutations in the Connexin 26 gene play a major role and or familial cases of non-syndromic deafness, characterised by ascend- account for about 50% of all autosomal recessive deafness in Europe. ing or U-shape audiometric curves. The most common mutation in northern Europeans is the deletion Results: 35delG (GJB2). GJB2 mutation, 167 delT occurs almost exclusively in Fifteen heterozygous mutations (including eleven missense mutations the Ashkenazi Jewish. and one duplication) have been identified in WFS1 sequence, some Patients and methods: The aim of the study was to elucidate the of them being present in several unrelated families. We could also causes of hereditary nonsyndromic loss of hearing in 45 members detect WFS1 mutations in « frontier phenotypes », meaning autosomal of unrelated families with the diagnosis of grade III-IV nonsyndromic dominant deafness associated with either diabetes mellitus or optic bilateral sensorineural deafness undergoing genetic counciling. The atrophy. search for mutations in the GJB2 (35delG, 167 delT) gene and GJB6 Conclusion: The molecular screening of WFS1 is recommended in (delGJB6-D13S1830) gene was performed. non-syndromic hearing impairment predominantly affecting low or Results and Conclusions: We have detected mutations in 18 out of middle frequencies. It might also be useful in autosomal dominant « 45 persons screened. Eleven persons were homozygous, six hetero- frontier phenotypes » associating deafness and either optic atrophy zygous for 35delG mutation, one had compound heterozygosity for or diabetes. 167 delT/ delGJB6-D13S1830, and one had heterozygosity for del- GJB6-D13S1830 mutation. It was possible to consider the reason of P12.097 Genotype phenotype correlation in iranian patients with decrease in hearing established at 11 patients on which both chromo- Hemoglobin H disease somes it has been revealed 35delG, and at one patient with compound S. Ebrahimkhani1, A. Azarkeivan1, N. Bayat1, M. Houry Parvin1, S. Jalil Nejad1, heterozygosity for 167 delT/ delGJB6-D13S1830. The mutations in S. Zand1, Z. Golkar1, V. Hadavi1, H. Imaniyan1, C. Oberkanins2, H. Najmabadi1; Connexin genes are the common reason of hearing loss in Belarus. 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria. P12.095 mutation screening of mitochondrial DNA in non- Background: Some genotypes of HbH patients have severe anemia syndromic hearing loss and are dependent on regular blood transfusion. This retrospective M. Mignardi1,2, E. Marasco1, C. Bergonzoni3, M. Montaguti3, D. Bastia1, M. study provides the molecular genetics of HbH disease and determines Cenci4, M. Seri4, G. Romeo4, V. Mantovani1,4; the genotype-phenotype correlation in a group of HbH patients in 1Centro Ricerca Biomedica Applicata CRBA, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Iran. Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Methods: DNA analysis of 40 patients with HbH disease was performed Sweden, 3U.O. Otorinolaringoiatria, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, by Polymerase Chain Reaction. Suspected cases with α-thalassemia Italy, 4U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. was more analyzed by Reverse dot blot hybridization and sequencing Background: Maternally inherited deafness accounts for approximate- to confirm the diagnosis. ly 1% of hereditary hearing loss (HL). Several mitochondrial mutations Results: Of the total 40 respondents, 27 (67.5%) were female and 13 have been associated to this condition, but their occurrence and pen- (32.5%) were male with mean age 25.73 (SD±16.07) years. Eight pa- etrance among different populations remain poorly investigated. Aim of tients (20%) were undergoing regular blood transfusion from whom four our study was to screen mitochondrial DNA in Italian patients affected (10%) needed blood transfusion after 30 years of age. Five (12.5%) by non-syndromic sensorineural HL. 252 unrelated patients and 26 underwent irregular transfusion, and 27(67.5%) didn’t have history of normally hearing subjects have been screened for the mitochondrial any transfusion. Four patients (10%) had a history of splenomegaly, mutations most frequently reported associated to deafness (A827G, and severe hypochromic microcytic anemia. 961delTinsC(n), C1494T, A1555G, A3243G, A7445G, 7472insC, Most frequent mutations observed, were -α3.7/--MED in 10 cases (22.5%) T7510C and T7511C), by using dHPLC and sequencing. All samples and --20.5/-5 ntα in 6 patients (15%) and --20.5/~-α3.7 in 4 cases (10%). have been also checked for mutations in the connexin genes GJB2/ We could find a positive correlation between mutation and transfusion GJB6. dependency (P value =0.03) Results: A1555G, A3243G, A827G, 961delTinsC(n) mutations have Conclusion: Regarding to results we can conclude that particular gen- been found each in 1/252 (0,4%) patients. The last two mutations were otypes of alpha thalassemia may produce mild disease with no need also detected each in 1/26 (3,8%) normal hearing subjects. No one of for transfusion and are not recommended for prenatal diagnosis. On the other common HH-associated mutations has been detected. In ad- the other hand some special genotypes such as --MED/αCSα, αCSα/~αCSα, dition, four new variants have been found in four patients: 3168 insT, and αPolyA1α/αPolyA1α lead to regular or irregular transfusion dependency. A3261G, 7471delC and A7576G. In this condition prenatal diagnosis is necessary and may advise par- For A3261G and 7471delC variants the analysis of the tRNA second- ents for abortion. ary structure as well as the check of phylogenetic conservation strong- ly suggest a pathogenetic role. P12.098 Rapid, sensitive and discriminatory HbS and HbC Conclusion: The mitochondrial mutations commonly associated to HH mutation detection using High Resolution melting Analysis resulted less frequent among the Italian patients than in other popu- S. J. Van Dooren, K. Endels, K. Keymolen, S. Seneca, I. Liebaers, W. Lissens; lations. A827G and 961delTinsC(n) variants could be either very low Centre for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Belgium. penetrance mutations or non-causative polymorphisms, whereas two Background: Hemoglobinopathies are common monogenic diseases novel variants here detected are suggestive for having a causative forming a major public health problem due to their severity and dis- role in HH. abling nature. Genetic identification of the two most frequently ob-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 22 served missense mutations in the beta-globin gene, HbS and HbC, P12.101 WKN1/HSN2 gene analysis in two families with are important epidemiologically and aid in prevention of the sickle cell hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type ii trait and other serious hemoglobin disorders. G. Pacheco-Cuellar1, L. Gonzalez-Huerta1, J. Valdes-Miranda1, S. Zenteno- Aim: Our increasing patient population of Mediterranean, African and Bacheron2, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias3; Middle Eastern origin urge for the need of a rapid, inexpensive and 1Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 2Neurologia, high-throughput genetic testing for HbS and HbC variants. Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 3Genetica, Hospital General Results: Classical high resolution melting analysis with an optimized de Mexico; Facultad de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D.F., Mexico. PCR amplicon of 110 bp allowed a sensitive and reliable identification Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies (HSANs) are clinical- of the two neighbouring HbS (c.20A>T) and HbC (c.19G>A) mutations. ly and genetically heterogeneous. They are classified into five different Discriminatory melting profiles were observed for all possible combi- types characterized by variable sensory and autonomic dysfunction nations of mutations: HbAA, HbAS, HbAC, HbSS, HbCC and HbSC, due to peripheral nerve degeneration. Currently at least seven genes and confirmed the results obtained by Hb-chromatography and PCR are associated with HSANs. Mutations in the protein kinase with- followed by restriction digestion. Within the wild type control popula- nolysine(K)-1/hereditary sensory neuropathy type 2 (WNK1/HSN2) tion tested, mainly consisting of Belgian and North African individuals, gene cause autosomal recessive HSAN type II, an early-onset ulcero- two other aberrant melting patterns were observed. Sequencing of all mutilating sensory neuropathy. HSN2 is a nervous system-specific samples with aberrant melting patterns revealed one polymorphism at gene within the WNK1 gene which is located on 12p33.33. In the pres- position c.9 either in heterozygous or homozygous state. Further test- ent study we report two unrelated Mexican families with HSN2 due to ing including samples from over 35 other nationalities did not disclose HSN2 gene mutations. The only exon of HSN2 was PCR amplified and other melting profiles. sequenced from genomic DNA. Diagnosis of HSN2 was made based Conclusion: This HbS and HbC HRM seems a promising, inexpensive on clinical findings. We identified a mutation in the coding region of and high-throughput alternative to PCR and restriction digestion analy- HSN2. Both families harbour a homozygous deletion of eight nucleo- sis, although further validation is needed prior to implementation in a tides that predicted to cause a novel stop codon located 11 nucleo- post- and prenatal diagnostic setting. tides after the original sotp codon. Such mutation potentially creates a protein with additional amino acids that may disrupt any regulatory P12.099 Molecular analyses of F8 gene in Serbian Hemophilia A function of the 3`untranslated region downstream from the normal stop patients codon. N. S. Lakic1, A. Krstic1, M. Guc-Scekic1, D. Micic1, M. Kuzmanovic1, N. Rasovic1, N. Konstantinidis2; P12.102 Identification of a new locus on chromosome 9p for a 1Mother and Child Health Care Institute, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Children Health syndrome associating spastic Paraplegia, Axonal Neuropathy Care Institute, Novi Sad, Serbia. and congenital cataract segregating in an Autosomal Recessive Hemophilia A is an X-linked recessive bleeding disorder. It is caused pattern (sPANcAtAR syndrome) by mutations within F8 gene, which result in deficient activity of the H. Azzedine1, H. Tonekaboni1, K. Saadi2, E. LeGuern1, M. Chaouch2, N. factor VIII. More than 900 various mutations of F8 gene have been Birouk3; detected and reported in HAMSTeRS database, until now. In order to 1INSERM/UPMC UMRS975, Paris, France, 2Service de neurologie Hopital initiate characterization of mutations in Serbian hemophilia A patients, de Ben Aknoun, Algiers, Algeria, 3Service de nerophysiologie Hôpital des we started with detection of the most frequent rearrangements of F8 spécialités, Rabat, Morocco. gene, inversion of intron 22 (type 1 and type 2) and intron 1. Using Hereditary Spastic Paraplegias (HSP) as well as Axonal Peripheral inverse shifting-polymerase chain reaction (IS-PCR) we screened 24 Neuropathies (APN) could be transmitted as dominant or recessive patients and their families, so far. Inversion of intron 22 was found in traits. HSP are subdivided in pure and complicated affections. They 6 patients (25%), Inv22-type 1 in 5 patients and Inv22-type 2 in one are clinically characterized by progressive bilateral lower-extremity among them. Analyses showed presence of intron 1 inversion in 2 pa- spastic weakness due to corticospinal tract deficits. Degeneration is tients. All identified mutations were associated with severe phenotype. maximal at the distal ends of the corticospinal tracts and, to a lesser Carrier status was also analyzed in overall number of families. All of extent, at the distal ends of dorsal column fibbers. Both axonal and de- these results will be further discussed and compared with the present myelinating peripheral neuropathies are also known as Charcot Marie literature data. Tooth disease that is the most frequent neuropathy with an incidence of 1/2500. P12.100 An inverse shifting-polymerase chain reaction for Many years ago, in 2 large consanguineous families originated from genotyping hemophilia-causative rearrangements involving north Africa, including 2 and 3 affected individuals respectively, we per- int22h and int1h hotspots in the factor Viii formed a wide genome search using 400 microsatellites markers. We L. Kokabee, M. Kokabee, S. Zeinali, M. Karimipoor; identified positive Lod Scores in different regions of the genome. Ad- Molecular medicine department, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur ditional polymorphic markers were necessary to test these regions. All Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of them were excluded except one on chromosome 9 P. More than 20 Hemophilia A (HA) is an X -linked coagulation disorder with a world- additional microsatellite markers were tested in this last region lead- wide incidence of approximately 1 in every 5000 males. Almost one ing to a 30 cM homozygous interval of segregation in the 2 analyzed half of patients with severe HA have large inversions that disrupt either families. Other families with the same phenotype are recruited in order intron 22 (Inv22) or intron 1 (Inv1) of the factor VIII gene (F8). In order to refine the locus and identified the responsible gene. to improve the molecular diagnosis of Inv22 and Inv1, due to problems in using southern blotting and Long-PCR strategies for detection of P12.103 Genetic analysis of the high bone mass phenotype Inv22, efforts are being made to generate new diagnostic tests. Re- segregating in a small spanish family cently, inverse shifting-PCR (IS-PCR) has been developed to over- P. Sarrión1,2, L. Mellibovsky3, R. Urreizti1,2, N. García-Giralt3, G. Yoskovitz3, R. coming this defect. Here we report the reproducibility of the modified Güerri3, X. Nogués3, A. Diez-Perez3, D. Grinberg1,2, S. Balcells1,2; method in genotyping of Inv22 and Inv1 in some Iranian HA patients. 1Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, For this purpose, 4 known cases ( 2 affected males with Inv22 and 2 2CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 3URFOA, IMIM, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, carrier females) previously confirmed by southern blot and 7 cases Spain. ( 3 severe HA males, 2 carrier females and 2 normal males) were High bone mass (HBM) was originally defined as an asymptomatic au- analyzed. BclI digestion followed by self-ligation to create BclI circles, tosomal dominant condition characterized by increased bone mineral and finally PCR was performed on genomic DNA. A perfect match was density (BMD) due to gain-of-function mutations in the LRP5 gene. In obtained for 4 cases analyzed by southern blot. In new patients, one the general population, BMD is normally distributed, and at the high affected male and one carrier female were positive for Inv22. It seems extreme of the curve people display BMD values similar to those found IS-PCR technique have proven to be a rapid, robust and reliable tech- in HBM patients. The range of densities of HBM is defined by a sum nique for genotyping of inv22 in HA patients. Zscore > 4 (totalLS-Zscore + TotalHip-Zscore). In the BARCOS cohort of postmenopausal women, 0.6% of individuals display BMD values in this range (10 probands). Whether they have mutations in the LRP5 Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 2 gene is unknown. We present one familiar case (family of proband P12.106 Application of SNP-arrays to the identification of nº10) in which the mother and one of the two sibs have BMD values in genomic rearrangements causing inherited metabolic disease the range of HBM: mother, sum Zscore = 5.12; HBM-like son = 5.01, L. R. Desviat, P. Rodríguez-Pombo, C. Pérez-Cerdá, B. Merinero, L. Gallego, normal son = 3.41. R. Navarrete, M. Ugarte, B. Pérez; As a first approach, we undertook sequencing of relevant exons (2, 3, Centro de Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain. 4, 9, 10, 11, and 12) of the LRP5 gene, plus all the coding sequences Our group performs the genetic diagnosis of more than 50 different in- of the DKK1 gene, and no mutations were found. herited metabolic diseases (IMD). In all the IMD studied there is a vari- A second approach consisted on cosegregation analyses of markers able number of patients with incomplete genotype after application of within several candidate genes and this phenotype. Combining SN- standard mutation detection techniques (sequencing of PCR-amplified Plex genotyping and results from a SNP array we could exclude the cDNA and/or exonic fragments) which do not allow the identification of following genes: LRP5, DKK2, IL6R, RANK, BMP2, and KRM1.The pathological genomic rearrangements (deletions, duplications…). We only gene cosegregating was RANKL. As a final step, we sequenced have applied array-based technologies to detect this type of genetic RANKL in the proband but no mutations were found. Thus, LRP5 is not lesions in patients with IMD. We have used the Illumina platform for the cause of HBM in this family, neither are several other candidates. whole genome analysis (Human Hap-Quad 610K) and DNA extracted from blood or fibroblast samples. We have identified novel deletions P12.104 Genotype-phenotype correlation in families with myelin affecting the ALDH7A1 gene (causing piridoxine-dependent epilepsy, protein zero (MPZ) gene mutations OMIM 107323), the GLDC gene (causing non-ketotic hyperglycinemia, E. L. Dadaly1, T. B. Tiburkova1, O. A. Schagina1, V. P. Fedotov2; OMIM 239300) and the BCKDHA gene (causing maple syrup urine 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2VOCDC disease, OMIM 608348). In one patient with homocystinuria, cblE type genetic counseling, Voronezh, Russian Federation. (OMIM 602568) and in one propionic acidemia patient (OMIM 606054), Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) is the most com- SNP-arrays revealed the presence of copy neutral homozygous seg- mon cause of inherited peripheral neuropathies with a frequency es- ments encompassing the corresponding genes, consistent with seg- timated at 1/2500. Electroneuromyographic examination distinguishes mental uniparental disomy (UPD) being the underlying mechanism of a demyelinating forms (CMT1) and an axonal forms of the disease disease. These are the first cases of UPD causing homozygosity for a (CMT2). The MPZ gene encoding basic protein of the peripheral my- pathogenic mutation in these diseases. Further microsatellite analysis elin. Different HMSN forms are resulted MPZ gene mutations. will determine the pattern of parental segregation of the correspond- Electrophysiologically, pathologically and genetically examinations ing chromosomes giving clues to the mechanism leading to UPD. The were performed to Russia CMT patients. We evaluated demyelinating results underscore the importance of completing the genetic analysis and axonal features of 36 patients from 17 families with MPZ muta- using novel technologies and of testing the parents of a child with an tions. The demyelination polyneuropathy with early onset and lower autosomal recessive disease to provide accurate genetic counselling motor conduction velocity (MCV) in median nerve was detected in 15 especially in terms of recurrence risk for future pregnancies. families (88%). The axonal polyneuropathy with late onset and normal MCV was detected in two families (12%). P12.107 clinical and genetic study of an italian family with Mutation’s allocation in protein’s domains were analyzed by us. In the Autosomal Recessive spastic Paraplegia associated with majority of cases (81%) mutations localize in Ig-alike domain. How- dysarthria and hearing loss ever, correlation between clinical implications and mutation’s location A. Magariello1, A. Patitucci1, L. Citrigno1,2, A. L. Gabriele1, R. Mazzei1, were not found in comparably with other author. F. L. Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, M. Caracciolo1, R. Compagnato1, D. Celi3, W. Sproviero1,4, A. Gambardella1,4, M. Muglia1; P12.105 Novel Rearrangements in Partial Deletions in the 1Institute of Neurological Sciences -CNR-, Piano Lago di Mangone (CS), Italy, PMP22 Gene in two spanish Families 2Department of Neurosciences, Psychiatric and Anesthesiological Sciences, I. Banchs1, C. Casasnovas2, E. Lopez1, L. De Jorge1, V. Volpini1; University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3IRCCS Centro Neurolesi “Bonino 1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM)-IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet Pulejo”, Messina, Italy, 4Institute of Neurology, University “Magna Graecia”, de Llobregat, Spain, 2Dep. of Neurology. Hosp. Uni. de Bellvitge-IDIBELL, Catanzaro, Italy. L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are genetically and phenotypi- Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) is an cally heterogeneous disorders characterized by progressive spastic- autosomal dominant inherited disorder characterized by episodic and ity in the lower limbs. Both “uncomplicated” and “complicated” forms recurrent demyelinising neuropathy of the peripheral nervous system. have been described. HSPs may be inherited as an autosomal domi- HNPP is mainly caused by a 1.4 Mb deletion in the CMT1A/HNPP nant (AD), autosomal recessive (AR), or X-linked form. To date, 19 region at 17p11.2-12, which includes the Peripheral Myelin Protein 22 AR-HSPs loci have been mapped. The AR-HSPs have varying age at (PMP22) gene. This region has an elevated rate of rearrangements onsets and are mostly complicated forms. The aim of this study was because of a high density of repetitive elements, which account for to perform a linkage analysis in a small consanguineous AR-HSP Ital- 43.37% of the entire CMT1A/HNPP region. Alu sequences represent ian family comprising five members one unaffected and two affected around 23% of these repetitive elements. siblings in which the parents were first cousins. The neurological ex- We studied the 1.4Mb deletion in two families with HNPP, using al- amination of the two affected members revealed spastic paraplegia, lelotyping studies and MLPA. Only with the MLPA kit we were able to cerebellar dysarthria, hearing loss, Babinski and Hoffmann signs. Age identify two partial PMP22 gene deletions. For further characterisation at onset was in childhood. Autozigosity mapping was performed us- of these deletions we performed a qGenomics array: ing microsatellite markers linked to the following AR-HSP loci: SPG5, *Family CMT-482: The deletion spans about 30.46 kb, from exon 8 of SPG7, SPG11, SPG14, SPG15, SPG20, SPG21, SPG23, SPG24, CDRT1 gene to exon 4 of PMP22 gene. Both breakpoints occur in a SPG26, SPG27, SPG28, SPG30, HSP-TCC and to three recessive 36 pb region of perfect homology, within two Alu sequences, located in spastic-ataxia loci (SACS, SAX3, SAX2). In the two affected patients a CDRT1 intron 7 and PMP22 intron 4. homozygous region was observed only with the microsatellite markers *Family CMT-1678: The deletion spans about 368 kb, from exon 3 to associated to SPG26 locus on chromosome 12. The haplotype recon- 3’UTR of the PMP22 gene. The rearrangement is probably enhanced struction and analysis of recombination narrowed the SPG26 locus to by the presence of two shared bases (AG) at the breakpoints that are a 20 cM region flanked by D12S59 and D12S1649 markers. As the located in intron 2 and 3’ UTR of PMP22 gene. current SPG26 locus on chromosome 12 is still large to select can- These results show that MLPA improves the sensitivity of the genetic didate genes, analysis of additional SPG26-linked families could be diagnosis of HNPP and contributes to understanding the molecular useful to further refine the candidate region and facilitate the selection mechanisms of genomic rearrangements in the CMT1A/HNPP re- of candidate genes. gion.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 2 P12.108 Juvenile Huntington disease in Russian families Breakpoints of pathogenic variants were characterised to provide in- G. E. Rudenskaya1, N. M. Galeeva1, S. A. Kurbatov2; sight into the underlying mutational mechanisms and indicated a pre- 1Medical Genetics Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Genetic dominance of mitotic rather than meiotic events. By effectively bridging Counseling Department, Voronezh, Russian Federation. the gap between karyotype-level investigations and X chromosome Juvenile Huntington disease (JHD) manifests before 21 years and exon re-sequencing, this study informs discussion of alternative mu- amounts 2-9 per cent of all HD cases. JHD pathogenesis is related to tational mechanisms, such as non-coding variants and non-X linked anticipation and imprinting, its typical features are akinesia and rigid- disease, which might explain the shortfall of mutation yield in the well- ity (in contrast to chorea in adult HD), paternal inheritance and hun- characterised IGOLD cohort, where currently disease remains unex- tingtin mutations with amount of CAG repeats >60, though atypical plained in two thirds of families. cases exist and maternal inheritance is possible. Eight JHD cases, 6 unrelated and 2 brothers, are presented. Seven patients, one of the P12.111 Jervell and Lange Nielsen syndrome a new brothers among them, had rigid JHD with onset in 7-12 years and mu- manifestation of p.S38G in KCNE1 gene. tations containing 63-81 repeats; in the second brother (57 repeats) M. Farhadi1, M. Falah1, M. Houshmand2, O. Aryani3, H. Emamdjomeh1, A. JHD started in 20 years and represented like hyperkinetic form with Asghari1; no dementia. All cases were familial, but HD history in some was not 1Department and Research Centre of ENT & Head and neck Surgery of Iran evident due to anticipation and/or erroneous diagnosis. Thus, HD in a Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for grandfather started in 60 years, 7 years after JHD onset in his grand- Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, daughter (78 repeats); JHD in the mother started in 19 years and was 3Medical Genetic Laboratory Special Medical Centre., Tehran, Islamic Republic misdiagnosed as multiple sclerosis. Maternal JHD transmission was of Iran. seen in other two families, both mothers had “classic” HD with rela- Autosomal recessive Jervell and Lange Nielsen syndrome (J-LN) is a tively early onset. One more family illustrates anticipation and differ- condition that causes profound hearing loss and disruption of heart‘s ences between sibs: JHD in a girl started in 10 years (78 repeats), her normal rhythm . J-LN caused by homozygous or compound heterozy- 19-year-old brother was asymptomatic (49 repeats), HD in the father gous mutations on the KCNQ1 or on the KCNE1 genes encoding the started in 48 years (45 repeats). In many cases diagnosis was delayed I current channel. ks (up to 18 years after onset) which proves JHD underestimation. JHD An 8-year-old girl was referred to the Department and Research cen- should be considered even in ‘non-familial’ cases, and DNA testing for tre of ENT because of sensorineural hearing loss and twice history of huntingtin mutations should be routine. fainting episodes and QT prolongation 527 msec and with consanguin- eous parents. P12.109 A novel PcBD gene mutation in an iranian patient with Genomic DNA was obtained from peripheral blood, screened KCNE1 Hyperphenylalaninemia mutation with direct sequencing. M. Raeisi1, N. Mahdieh2, H. Bagherian1, R. Vahidi1, M. Masoudifard1, S. Direct sequencing showed P.S38G that caused serine by a glycine re- Zeinali1,3; side at amino acid position 38 ,this change reported before separately 1Kawsar research center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Ilam University with noise-induced hearing loss and in patient with Atrial Fibrillation of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Dep’t of Mol. Med., that here for the first time represented with Jervell and Lange Nielsen Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic syndrome. Republic of Iran. Due to Jervell and Lange Nielsen syndrome is a reason for young Neonatal screening for PKU is carried out nationally and our center syncope so examination of presence of KCNE1 gene mutation can is one of the referral centers for molecular analysis of PKU in Iran. usefully contribute to diagnosis and medical from preventing death. Hyperphenylalaninemias are common disorders of phenyalanine ca- tabolism. Six genes including PAH, PTPS, DHPR, GTPCH, SR and P12.112 tackling rare diseases using new possibilities; KFsD PCBD independently play role in this disorder. and tOD cracked A 2-year-old boy was referred to our center for genetic diagnosis of J. T. den Dunnen1, R. Al-Momani2, Y. Sun2, E. Aten2, E. Bakker2, M. H. PKU. PAH gene was sequenced but no mutation was found. Using Breuning2; STR based linkage mapping approach, BH4-metabolizing genes were 1Leiden Genome Technology Center, Human & Clincal Genetics, Leiden screened. Pattern of autozygosity by descent (ABD) suggested that University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Human & Clincal Genetics, PCBD gene may be involved in this family. This gene was sequenced Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. and a homozygous T>C substitution (X105Q) was found in the termi- Due to recent developments in sequencing technology (next genera- nation codon. tion sequencing - NGS) the cost to sequence large genomic regions, full human exomes and even complete genomes is rapidly decreasing. P12.110 Fine-scale survey of X chromosome copy Number We have applied these new possibilities to tackle unresolved cases of Variants Underlying intellectual Disability monogenetic diseases where cases are rare, families too small and/or A. Whibley1, V. Plagnol1,2, P. Tarpey3, F. Abidi4, T. Fullston5,6, M. Choma1, C. candidate gene regions were too large. Regions of interest were tar- Boucher1, L. Shepherd1, L. Willatt7, G. Parkin7, R. Smith3, P. Futreal3, M. Shaw5, geted by PCR amplification and/or hybridisation capture (on array / in J. Boyle8, R. Stevenson4, G. Turner8, A. Hackett8, M. Field8, C. Schwartz4, J. solution) using custom-design or X-chromosome exome probe sets. Gecz5,6, M. Stratton3, F. Raymond1; The first case cracked was Keratosis Follicularis Spinularis Decalvans 1Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, (OMIM 308800), a rare genetic disorder affecting both skin and eyes. 2University College, London, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Sequencing of genes in the candidate region implicated only mutations Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4J.C.Self Research Insitute of Human Genetics, in the MBTPS2 gene as causing KFSD. Other mutations in this gene Greenwood, SC, United States, 5Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital, Adelaide, have been recently shown to cause IFAP syndrome (OMIM 308205), a Australia, 6University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 7Addenbrookes Hospital, disease with partially overlapping phenotype. A second case was Ter- Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8Hunter Genetics Service, Waratah, Australia. minal Osseous Dysplasia (OMIM 300244), a rare male-lethal X-linked Copy number variants in 251 families with evidence of X-linked intellec- dominant disease characterized by skeletal dysplasia of the limbs, tual disability (XLID) were investigated by array comparative genomic pigmentary defects of the skin, and recurrent digital fibroma during hybridization on a high-density oligonucleotide X chromosome array infancy. Pathogenic mutations were found in only 1 gene in the candi- platform. We identified pathogenic copy number variants in 10% of date region with all unrelated patients studied so far having an identi- families, with mutations ranging from 2kb-11Mb in size. The challenge cal mutation. The variant X-chromosome was fully inactivated in all of assessing causality was facilitated by prior knowledge of XLID-as- samples analysed, making it difficult to prove the pathogenic effect of sociated genes and the ability to test for co-segregation of variants the mutation, suggested to affect splicing. Further diseases are under with disease through extended pedigrees. Fine-scale analysis of rare analysis; our progress will be reported at the meeting. variants in XLID families leads us to propose four additional genes, PTCHD1, WDR13, FAAH2 and GSPT2, as candidates for XLID causa- tion and the identification of further deletions and duplications affecting X chromosome genes but without apparent disease consequences. Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 2 P12.113 molecular genetic evaluation of patients with Klinefelter de Compostela-CIBERER, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Genetics of syndrome Cardiovascular and Ophthalmologic Diseases, Hospital-University Complex T. M. Sorokina, V. B. Chernykh, L. F. Kurilo, O. P. Ryzhkova, E. A. Bliznetz, A. of Santiago (CHUS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 4National Genotyping V. Polyakov; Center (CEGEN), University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Compostela, Spain. Moscow, Russian Federation. Purpose: Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is the earliest and most The Klinefelter’s syndrome (KS) is the most common chromosomal severe form of all inherited retinal dystrophies, responsible for congen- disorder characterized by testicular dysgenesis, male hypogonadism ital blindness. To date, 14 LCA-associated genes have been identified and infertility. The aim of our study was to evaluate genetic factors that by linkage analysis, homozygosity mapping and/or candidate gene may be involved in phenotypic variability in KS patients. analysis: AIPL1 (17p13.1), CEP290 (12q21.3), CRB1 (1q31-q32.2), Materials and Methods: We examined 20 non-mosaic KS patients. The CRX (19q13.3), GUCY2D (17p13.3), IMPDH1 (7q31.3-q32), LCA5 Y-microdeletions and the androgen receptor (AR) gene were analyzed. (6q14.1), LRAT (4q32.1), RD3 (1q32.3), RDH12 (14q23.3-q24.1), Classic AZF deletions were tested according to EAA/EMQN guidelines RPE65 (1p31), RPGRIP1 (14q11), SPATA7 (14q31.3) and TULP1 (1999). Partial AZFc deletions were detected by mPCR of following (6q21.3). Mutations in these genes account up to 70% of the LCA pa- STSs: sY142, sY1197, sY1192, sY1291, sY1206, sY1054 and sY1125. tients, suggesting that additional causative mutations in new and/or PCR with primers flanking (CAG)n polymorphic region in exon 1 of the previously known genes remain to be identified. In this study, we have AR gene and methylation-sensitive restriction with enzyme HpaII were used a genome-wide homozygosity mapping strategy to identify novel used to determine CAG repeat length and the X-inactivation. mutations in LCA individual with inbred or outbred background. Results: No complete AZF deletion was found. Partial AZFc deletions Material And MethodS: Patients from a Spanish cohort of 28 reces- were detected in 15% patients. All individuals presented Yq microdele- sive LCA families were genotyped with GeneChip 500K Affymetrix tions were azoospermic. In two patients the b2/b3 deletion was found, SNP microarrays. Known mutations in eight LCA genes were previ- in the other one rare partial AZFc deletion was detected. The mean ously excluded with a genotyping microarray based on arrayed primer CAG repeat number was 21.25. Only 42% patients were found to be extension (APEX) technology. the heterozygotes. Non-random X- inactivation was revealed in these Results: Several homozygous segments were identified in all the 28 individuals. Long AR (CAG)n repeat allele (n>26), was detected only patients, regardless of the absence of proven consanguinity. Eight in 2.6% examined chromosomes. families (28%) shared a homozygous region at chromosome 6q13- Conclusions: Our study demonstrated an absence of classic AZF dele- 14.1, encompassing the LCA5 locus. By direct sequencing, two novel tions in KS patients. Partial AZFc deletions were found out with enough homozygous mutations were identified in LCA5 gene in two of the eight high frequency. Non-random X-inactivation and long AR (CAG)n al- families: 1) a frameshift p.Glu132fsX5 and 2) a missense p.Ser202Pro. leles apparently are rare in KS patients. The further large cohort stud- Both variants were not found in a Spanish cohort of 100 healthy indi- ies will allow more accurately assessing a frequency of partial AZFc vidual controls. deletions and their significance in KS patients. Conclusions: This study underlines homozygosity mapping as a use- ful approach to identify novel pathogenic mutations in LCA molecular P12.114 Familial Hypercholesterolemia in the czech Republic diagnosis. L. Tichy1, K. Stehlikova1, P. Zapletalova1, L. Duskova1, L. Kopeckova1, T. Freiberger2, L. Fajkusova1; P12.116 Homozygosity mapping in a turkish family with Leber 1University Hospital Brno, Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, congenital Amaurosis by high density sNP microarray Brno, Czech Republic, 2Saint Ann Hospital, Center for Cardiovascular Surgery D. Yücel1, R. K. Özgül2; and Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic. 1Hacettepe University, Department of Molecular Biology, Ankara, Turkey, Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disorder 2Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health, Department of Pediatrics, caused by mutations and large rearrangements in the gene encoding Ankara, Turkey. the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR). The frequency of hetero- Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is one of the most severe heredi- zygotes is 1/500. The frequency of homozygotes or compound hetero- tary eye disease that represent genetic cause of congenital visual im- zygotes is 1/1 000 000. pairment in infants and children. LCA is a genetically heterogeneous In the set of Czech patients with FH, we found 75 types of causal small condition, consisting of a group of autosomal recessive retinal dystro- DNA rearrangements (18 of them were not described so far) and 9 phies. Recent molecular genetic studies have linked 12 genes (AIPL1, types of large DNA rearrangements (6 of them were not described so CEP290, CRB1, CRX, GUCY2D, LCA5, RD3, RDH12, RPE65, RP- far) in LDLR. Large DNA rearrangements were analyzed using MLPA. GRIP1, TULP1, LRAT) to LCA. Difficulties in clinical classification of Using long-range PCR, PCR, and DNA sequencing, we analyzed LCA cases can cause misdiagnosis. Beside this, the genetic hetero- breakpoints of deletions/duplications identified in our FH patients. In genity and complexity of several LCA genes has hampered routine 8 rearrangements, we characterized their exact extent and breakpoint molecular analysis. High-throughput molecular screening techniques sequences. The results showed that 6 events were products of un- are necessary to surmount this issue. equal allelic homologous recombination (NAHR) between Alu repeat In this study, whole genome genotyping was performed by Affymetrix sequences. The remaining 2 events apparently originated from non- 250K SNP arrays in a consanguineous Turkish family in which four chil- homologous end joining (NHEJ). NHEJ has not been described in rela- dren have macular coloboma type LCA. Homozygosity mapping have tion to LDLR up to now. shown linkage to chromosome 14 in this family. LCA causing RDH12 From 1253 FH probands, causal events were found in 476 of them. gene located in this chromosomal region was selected as a first candi- Further, we designed genotyping microarray based on the technology date gene for mutation screening. In four patients, Thr49Met mutation APEX (Arrayed Primer Extension) that enable detection of 75 muta- in exon 2 was identified by direct sequence analysis in RDH12 gene. tions found in the Czech population and 75 most common mutations RDH12 mutations account less than 3% of all LCA-associated gene from another European population. The validation results indicate that mutations. Therefore, RDH12 gene is not primarily preferred among the FH chip seems to be a suitable tool for the first line screening of other responsible genes for mutation screening studies in LCA. In mutations in the LDLR gene. large LCA families, homozygosity mapping could be used as a rapid This work was supported by grant MSMT 2B08060 and LC06023. identification of disease causing locus and molecular diagnosis. P12.115 Identification of novel mutations in LCA5 gene by P12.117 mutation Analysis of Limb Girdle muscular Dystrophies genome-wide homozygosity mapping in patients with Leber in the czech Republic congenital amaurosis K. Stehlikova, Z. Hruba, L. Fajkusova; M. Corton1,2, E. Vallespin1, A. Ávila-Fernández1, B. Almoguera1, R. Riveiro- University Hospital, Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Brno, Álvarez1, D. Cantalapiedra1, J. Aguirre-Lambán1, M. A. López-Martínez1, M. Czech Republic. Brión2,3, A. Carracedo2,4, C. Ayuso1; Limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are a group of disorders 1Genetics Department, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz-CIBERER, CAIBER characterised by progressive involvement of proximal limb girdle mus- Unit, Madrid, Spain, 2Genomics Medicine Group, University of Santiago cles.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 2 Limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A) is an autosomal was supported by deficiency in merosin and calpain3 in the CMD pa- recessive disorder characterized by atrophy and weakness of proximal tient and LGMD patients respectively. Mutation analysis revealed two girdle muscles. LGMD2A is caused by mutations in the CAPN3 gene distinct mutations: a c.8005delT frameshift deletion in exon 56 of the (15q15) that encodes the muscle specific protein, calpain-3 (p94). LG- LAMA2 gene (MDC1A) was found in the CMD patient and a new ho- MD2A is the most frequent form of LGMD in many European coun- mozygous mutation c.1536+1G>T in the donor splice site of intron 12 tries. of the CAPN3 gene (LGMD2A) was found in the LGMD patients for the Another relatively common form of LGMD is LGMD2I caused by muta- first time. RTPCR performed on total RNA from a LGMD2A patient’s tions in the FKRP gene (19q13.3) that encodes a protein which partici- muscle biopsy showed a complete retention of intron 12 in CAPN3 pates in the glycosylation of α-dystroglycan in the muscle fibre. cDNA generating a premature termination codon which potentially elic- We performed analysis of the CAPN3 gene and FKRP gene in a cohort its the nonsense mRNA to degradation by NMD (nonsense-mediated of patients with preliminary diagnoses of LGMD at both the mRNA lev- mRNA decay). Our data indicate that mRNA analysis is necessary to el using reverse transcription-PCR or at the DNA level using PCR and clarify the primary effect of genomic mutations on splicing efficiency direct sequencing. We screened 175 unrelated patients for mutations that alters mRNA processing and expression level. in the CAPN3 gene. 40 patients (23%) were found to carry mutations in the CAPN3 gene. We detected 16 previously reported mutations and P12.120 Establishing web-based gene variant databases for all 3 novel mutations (c. 802_945del, c. 1783_1788del, p.Q619X). Our mendelian disorders results show that mutation 550delA is the most frequent CAPN3 defect I. F. Fokkema1, J. Celli1, P. E. Taschner1, J. T. den Dunnen1, &. the Gen2Phen in Czech LGMD2A patients (53 %). We screened 76 unrelated patients Consortium2; for the most common mutation in the FKRP gene (p.Leu276Ile). The 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2www. mutation was found in 5 patients (7%). gen2phen.org, United Kingdom. This work was supported by grans MSMT LC06023 and 2B08060 The EU-funded Gen2Phen project (http://www.Gen2Phen.org/) aims to provide advanced informatics solutions to link genotypes to phe- P12.118 The frequency of Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy 1C in notypes. One deliverable is to establish web-based gene sequence southern italy variant databases (LSDBs) for all human genes involved in Mende- P. Spadafora1, M. Liguori1, M. Caracciolo1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, I. Manna1, lian disorders. This should provide all those involved an easy, cheap G. Spinelli1, V. Andreoli1, R. Cittadella1, F. Trecroci1, A. Quattrone1,2, A. and effective way to share their findings and use the full collection to Gambardella1,2; draw conclusions on the potential phenotypic consequences of a given 1Institute of Neurological Sciences - National Research Council, CS, Italy, variant, e.g. „pathogenic or not“ when in a clinical setting. Recently, a 2Institute of Neurology -Department of Medical Sciences, University “Magna study was completed that sequenced the coding exons of all genes Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy. on the X chromosome in 208 families with X-linked mental retarda- Caveolin-3 (Cav3) is a protein composed of 151 amino acids mainly tion. All sequence variants identified were stored on a gene-by-gene expressed in skeletal muscle tissue where it seems to play a key role basis in a single LSDB installation containing 542 genes (http://www. in the maintenance of plasma membrane integrity. In addition cave- LOVD.nl/MR). The platform used, LOVD, allows easy web-access, olin-3 has been implicated in signal transduction and vesicular traf- submitting and curating variants and viewing and querying of the col- ficking. Mutations in the gene encoding caveolin-3 (CAV3), located lected information. Individual databases can be customized to specific on chromosome 3p25, were first identified in patients with autosomal user needs, directly link to other sources (internet, intranet, local-PC dominant limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD1C), hyperCKemia, files) and exchange data with central repositories. By mid-2010, the rippling muscle disease and distal myopathy. Mutations in CAV3 gene LSDBs established will be extended to cover all human genes involved were also reported in long QT syndrome and in Sudden infant death in Mendelian disorders. To make this resource most useful, we invite syndrome. Recently, missense mutations in CAV3 gene were associ- clinicians and researchers working on genetic disorders world-wide ated with an autosomal recessive LGMD phenotype.To evaluate the to submit their findings. In addition we solicit volunteers to become a frequency of LGMD1C in southern Italy we performed the molecular gene guardian (curator), checking incoming information and thereby analysis of CAV3 gene in clinically suspected LGMD patients. The ex- ensuring data quality. ons and flanking intronic boundaries of the gene were analysed by Funded by the European Community‘s Seventh Framework Pro- sequencing. Among the screened 50 LGMD patients we identified only gramme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement nº 200754 - the a patient with a heterozygous 3bp microdeletion (290-293del) in exon GEN2PHEN project. 2 of CAV3 gene, resulting in loss of a phenylalanine (Phe97del). This mutation has been previously identified by other authors in an Italian P12.121 contributions of alternative splicing to transcript family. The autosomal dominant forms of LGMD are relatively rare and diversity: novel variants of machado-Joseph Disease gene represent probably less than 10% of all cases. Our findings indicate (ATXN) that the frequency of the LGMD1C in southern Italy is around 2%. Our C. Bettencourt1,2, C. Santos3, R. Montiel4, M. Costa5,6, P. Cruz-Morales4, L. R. future plain is to perform the molecular analysis of the other genes Santos1, N. Simões1, T. Kay7, J. Vasconcelos8, P. Maciel6, M. Lima1,2; involved in the pathogenesis of LGMD in order to evaluate the relative 1University of the Azores, Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 2Molecular and proportion of the different types of LGMD in southern Italy. Cellular Biology Institute (IBMC), Porto, Portugal, 3Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para la P12.119 Novel mutations in cAPN3 and LAmA2 genes Biodiversidad, CINVESTAV-IPN, Irapuato, Mexico, 5University of Michigan, Ann associated with genetic and phenotypic heterogeneities within Arbor, MI, United States, 6University of Minho, Braga, Portugal, 7Hospital of D. a single consanguineous family involving both congenital and Estefania, Lisbon, Portugal, 8Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta Delgada progressive muscular dystrophies. - Azores, Portugal. I. HADJ SALEM1, L. Nacim1, R. Souad2, T. Chahnez3, F. Faiza1; Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is a late onset neurodegenerative dis- 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine. Faculté de Médecine de order that presents clinical heterogeneity, not completely explained by Sfax, Tunisia, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Biotech RDP. Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, its causative mutation. MJD is caused by an expansion of a CAG tract Tunisia., Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service de Neuro-pédiatrie. C.H.U. Hédi Chaker de at exon 10 of the ATXN3 gene (14q32.1), which encodes for ataxin-3. Sfax, Tunisia, Sfax, Tunisia. The main goal of this study was to analyze the occurrence of alterna- Limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) and congenital muscular tive splicing at the ATXN3 gene, by sequencing a total of 415 cDNAs dystrophy (CMD) are two common forms of neuromuscular disorders clones (from 20 MJD patients and 14 controls). Two novel exons were which are distinguishable by their age of onset but with probably simi- described for the ATXN3 gene. Fifty-six alternative splicing variants, lar underlying pathway. In this study, we report the immunohistochemi- generated by 4 types of splicing events, were observed. From those cal, western blot and genetic analyses in a large consanguineous variants, 50 were not previously described and 26 were only found in Tunisian family with two branches including seven patients sharing MJD patients samples. Most of the variants (85.7%) present frame- similar LGMD2 phenotype in one branch and one CMD patient inthe shift, which leads to the appearance of premature stop codons. Thirty- second. Linkage analyses were compatible with the LGMD2A locus in seven of the observed variants constitute good targets to nonsense one family branch and with MDC1A locus in the other one. This result mediated decay. The remaining variants are likely to be translated into Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 27 at least 20 different isoforms. According to the presence/absence of 2Leibniz Institute for Age Research/Fritz Lipmann Institute, Jena, Germany, known ataxin-3 domains, it can be predicted that some of those vari- 3Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Reference Center for ants may contribute to increased toxicity, while others may be protec- leukodystrophies, Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Robert Debré, tive. Findings from this work confirm that alternative splicing consti- Paris, France. tutes an important mechanism regulating protein diversity and indicate Thyroid hormones (TH) are known to be essential for proper brain de- that there is genetic variability, other than that found in genomic DNA, velopment, notably for myelination by controlling oligodendrocyte (the which may be enrolled in the MJD pathogenic process, as well as in central nervous system (CNS) myelinating cells) differentiation. Never- the neuropathology of other polyglutamine disorders. theless, nothing is known about TH transporters in oligodendrocytes. We reported that patients with mutations in the TH transporter mono- P12.122 clinical and genetic studies of tunisian and Algerian carboxylate 8 (MCT8) display not only an X-linked mental retardation families with mal de meleda disease associated with spastic paraplegia but also a myelination delay. This O. Mamaï1, M. Gribaa1, L. Boussofara2, L. Adala1, I. Ben Charfeddine1, A. observation suggested that MCT8 participates in TH transport in oligo- Amara1, R. Bhouri1, M. Denguezli2, A. Saad1; dendrocytes and we demonstrated that this is the case in human and 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, de Génétique moléculaire et de Biologie de mouse oligodendrocyte cell lines. la Reproduction Humaines, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service de Dermatologie et de Another member of the MCT family, MCT10, has recently been identi- Vénérologie. CHU Farhat HACHED, Sousse, Tunisia. fied as a new TH transporter expressed in the mouse CNS in white Mal de Meleda MDM (OMIM 248300) is a rare autosomal recessive matter structures where oligodendrocytes are localized. We therefore palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) with prevalence of 1 in 100000. Clini- sought whether MCT10 could play a role in TH transport in oligoden- cally, it is characterized by transgressive PPK, particularly over the drocytes and whether MCT10 mutations could be responsible for dys- joints, perioral erythema, brachydactyly and nail abnormalities. The myelinating phenotypes. We established that MCT10 is implicated in progressive lesion can lead to a severe functional handicap with re- T3 transport, at least in the human oligodendrocyte cell line MO3.13, duced mobility of hands and feet including spontaneous amputation of since MCT10 silencing using siRNA impairs 25+/-8.02% of T3 trans- digits. It is caused by mutations in SLURP1 gene located in chromo- port. Together, MCT8 and MCT10 account for at least 63+/-2.6% of T3 some 8 (8q24.3). transport in MO3.13. We are now looking for MCT10 mutation in dys- Here we investigate 2 consanguineous families. The first is Tunisian myelinating phenotypes of unknown origin in a cohort of 45 patients with one affected women and the second is Algerian with 2 affected presenting a myelination defect at birth. Results from the sequencing children. A detailed disease history with the age of onset, distribution, of the 6 coding exons of the MCT10 gene will be presented. and clinical course of their skin lesions were noted and a full clinical These results will contribute to better define how TH are transported examination was performed for every patient. We proceed to direct into oligodendrocytes and to assess whether MCT10 could be impli- sequencing of the 3 exons in the SLURP1 gene. Sequence analysis cated in human pathology. revealed 2 kwon mutations in exon 2; c.82delT in the Tunisian family and +1 iVs2 G>A for the Algerian family. P12.125 Identification of an X-chromosomal microdeletion in a patient suspected of the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome using P12.123 medullary cystic kidney disease: further evidence of a dense sNP array. genetic heterogeneity based on a large Portuguese family E. C. Friesema1, F. Rivadeneira1, M. Jhamai1, A. G. Uitterlinden1, A. Zung2, T. G. Miltenberger-Miltenyi1, J. Calado2, F. Carvalho2, C. Teixeira3, S. Jorge3, H. J. Visser1; Viana2, A. Gomes da Costa3, E. Almeida3; 1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Kaplan Medical 1Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lisbon, Center, Rehovot, Israel. Lisbon, Portugal, 2Hospital Curry Cabral, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Hospital Santa Thyroid hormone (TH) is crucial for the development of different or- Maria, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal. gans, in particular the brain. Different TH transporters have been iden- Background: Medullary cystic kidney disease type 2 (MCKD2) is a rare tified including monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8). The clinical autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by gout, tubulointersti- importance of TH transporters is shown in patients with mutations in tial nephropathy and end-stage renal failure (ESRF). The disease is MCT8 (SLC16A2). The patients suffer from severe X-linked psycho- caused by mutations in the uromodulin gene (UMOD, 16p12.3). Be- motor retardation in combination with disturbed TH levels, especially sides, MCKD1, with overlapping phenotype to MCKD2, but milder high serum T3 levels, now referred to as Allan-Herndon-Dudley Syn- symptoms and with later age-at-onset is associated with a candidate drome (AHDS). disease locus on chromosome 1q21. A male patient with severe psychomotor retardation, elevated T3 se- Patients and Methods: We investigated a Portuguese family of 4 gen- rum levels and suspected of having AHDS was referred to our lab for erations suffering of MCKD2 syndrome. The proband of the family de- genetic studies. PCR analysis of MCT8 showed the presence of exon veloped ESRF at the age of 28 years. Further nine family members 1, while exons 2-6 were missing. We used the Illumina HumanHap were affected. The disease showed a typical autosomic dominant trait 610-Quad array to determine in the patient the approximate size of in the family. We tested the entire coding region of the UMOD gene for the deletion downstream of MCT8 and if the deletion comprised other mutations with PCR and direct sequencing analysis. genes. DNA of the mother and two randomly selected female controls Results: Affected family members showed elevated serum uric acid were also investigated. There was a complete loss of 9 SNPs involving levels. Renal biopsy, carried out in one affected family member re- 45.5 kb around MCT8 which was confined to the DNA of the patient. vealed signs of a tubulointerstitial disease. Immunohystochemistry of Further analysis by PCR-based mapping revealed an X-chromosomal the kidney showed staining of uromodulin in tubule profiles. Genetic deletion between 59.6 and 82.7 kb. analysis of the UMOD gene showed three non-pathogenic variants but In conclusion, using a high-density SNP array we could determine that did not reveal any pathogenic mutations. the deletion in the patient was limited to MCT8 and of likely de novo Conclusion: The clinical and pathological characteristics of this family origin considering that the mother was not a carrier of this X-chromo- suggest a clear MCKD2 syndrome. The missing of pathogenic muta- somal deletion. We confirmed that the patient is an AHDS patient with tions in the UMOD gene points out the genetic heterogeneity of this a large MCT8 deletion, which probably explains his phenotype by the disease and broadens the phenotypic spectrum of non-UMOD related suggested lack of MCT8 expression. MCKD. Further investigations of this family might be helpful in identi- fying candidate genes for MCKD1 and describe genotype-phenotype P12.126 mEFV mutations in iranian patients suffering from correlations. familial mediterranean fever: analysis of 12 mutations H. Imanian1, M. Rostami1, V. Hadavi1, C. Oberkanins2, H. Najmabadi1, H. P12.124 monocarboxylate transporter 10 (mct10) implications Loghmani Khouzani1; in oligodendrocyte t3 transport and in dysmyelinating 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic phenotypes Republic of Iran, 2ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria. C. Vaurs-Barrière1, G. Giraud1, S. Mirafzal1, Y. Capri1, H. Heuer2, E. C. H. Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal-recessive inher- Friesema3, T. J. Visser3, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1,4; ited inflammatory disorder. It is characterized by recurrent episodes of 1GReD UMR INSERM U931 CNRS 6247, Clermont-Ferrand, France, painful inflammation in the abdomen, chest or joints. The responsible Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 2 disease gene, designated MEFV, has been mapped on chromosome P12.129 The Arg468His mutation in MFN2 is the most frequent 16p13, comprises of 10 exons and encodes a protein called mareno- cause of cmt2A in spanish Patients strin or pyrin, which is found in white blood cells. Because of non- C. Casasnovas1, I. Banchs2, J. Cassereau3, N. Gueguen4, A. Chevrollier4, J. specific clinical symptoms, the molecular genetic analysis of MEFV Martínez-Matos1, D. Bonneau4, V. Volpini2; significantly improves early and precise FMF diagnosis. 1Unitat de Neuromuscular. Neurology Department. Hospital Universitari de In this study we used multiplex PCR and reverse-hybridization (FMF Bellvitge - IDIBELL,, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat. Barcelona, Spain, 2Center for StripAssay, ViennaLab Diagnostics) to analyze the following 12 MEFV Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) – IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, mutations: E148Q, P369S, F479L, M680I (G/C), M680I (G/A), I692del, Spain, 3INSERM, U771, Département de Neurologie, Centre hospitalier M694V, M694I, K695R, V726A, A744S and R761H in 250 Iranian pa- universitaire., Angers, France, 4INSERM U694, Département de Biochimie et tients, which were referred to us based on clinical criteria indicating Génétique, Centre Hospitalier., Angers, France. FMF. Introduction: The most common form of axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth We identified MEFV mutations in 60.4% of our patients. Out of these disease (CMT) is type 2A, caused by mutations in mitochondrial GT- mutations, 83.5% were located in exon 10, while the remaining 16.5% Pase mitofusin 2 (MFN2). were found in other exons. The most common mutation was M694V Objective: To establish the incidence of MFN2 mutations in a cohort of (42.3%), which is known to be a founder mutation in other populations. Spanish patients with axonal CMT neuropathy. In 39.6% of patients we could not identify a mutation that could explain Material and Methods: We studied 85 families with suspected axo- their clinical status. Some of our patients were sent for comprehensive nal CMT. All MFN2 exons were studied through direct sequencing. A MEFV sequencing, but no additional mutation was identified. bioenergetics study in fibroblasts was conducted using a skin biopsy taken from a patient with an Arg468His mutation. P12.127 X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets with audio- Results: Twenty-four patients from 14 different families were identified vestibular symptoms - a model for understanding meniere’s with nine different MFN2 mutations. MFN2 mutations were responsible disease? for CMT2 in 16% ± 7.7% of the families studied and in 30.8% ± 14.2% C. Frykholm, U. Friberg; (12/39) of families with known dominant inheritance. The Arg468His Surgical sciences, Uppsala, Sweden. mutation was the most prevalent (6/14 families). A bioenergetics study The etiology of Meniere’s disease (MD) is unknown. Some individuals in fibroblasts was conducted using a skin biopsy taken from a patient with X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (XLH) exhibit audio-vestibular with this mutation. These bioenergetic studies showed the typical re- symptoms similar to MD. We hypothesized that XLH patients may be sults of MFN2 patients. investigated in order to gain insight in the biochemical disturbances un- Conclusion: The Arg468His mutation is the most prevalent (6/14 fami- derlying MD. A three-generation XLH-family with a known PHEX-gene lies) mutation in MFN2 causing CMT2A in Spanish patients and our mutation was studied. Some individuals with XLH had audio-vestibular study confirmed that it is actually pathological, presenting as a neu- symptoms, some did not. Past phosphate substitution, blood labora- ropathy in a mild to moderate degree. tory tests, audiological tests and inner ear images (CT and MRI) were studied in several affected family members. The differences found in P12.130** Role of the microRNA-183 family in the pathogenesis the study of these XLH individuals, with and without audio-vestibular of hereditary nonsyndromic hearing loss in the italian symptoms, will be presented. population G. Soldà1, F. Oldoni1, R. Asselta1, P. Primignani2, P. Castorina3, C. Radaelli2, D. P12.128 Molecular genetic testing of mental retardation in Coviello2, S. Duga1; Bulgaria 1Dip. Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli Studi T. Todorov1,2, A. Todorova1,2, D. Avdjieva3, P. Dimova4, R. Tincheva3, V. Mitev1; di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS, 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Madico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Medical Genetics, UO Audiology, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore 3Department of Pediatrics, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4“St. Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy. Naum” Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. The mir-183 microRNA (miRNA) family is composed of mir-183, mir-96, Mental retardation is highly heterogeneous in clinical and genetic point and mir-182, which are coordinately expressed from a single genetic of view. Here we discuss on: Fragile X syndrome (FXS), Rett syn- locus in vertebrates. This highly conserved miRNA family is essential drome (RTT), Prader-Willi/Angelman syndromes (PWS/AS) and mi- for differentiation and function of the vertebrate inner ear. In 2009, 2 crodeletion syndromes (MDS). The genes studied are: FMR1, MECP2, mutations in the human MIRN96 gene have been reported in 2 Span- CDKL5, ARX, and methylation analysis of exon 1 of the SNRPN. Multi- ish families affected by autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensori- plex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis was used neural hearing loss (AD-NSHL). This represented the first evidence to look for large deletions/duplications, to screen for microdeletion syn- implicating a point mutation within a miRNA in a Mendelian disease. dromes, and to clarify methylation status of FMR1 and SNRPN genes. We screened a total of 770 NSHL patients and 808 normal-hearing Our results in the group of FXS revealed about 12% mutations in the Italian controls for mutations in MIRN96, MIRN182, and MIRN183. FMR1 gene. A mosaic case full mutation/normal allele was detected. Neither of the 2 previously reported MIRN96 mutations were found, The genetic tests in the group of RTT girls revealed about 26% muta- suggesting that they might represent private mutations. Instead, at tions along the MECP2 gene. No CDKL5 gene mutations were detect- least one putative novel mutation within mir-96, +57T>C, was iden- ed. The genetic tests in the group of PWS/AS revealed 64% mutations tified in a patient with a family history of AD-NSHL. The detected along the 15q11-q13 region. The MLPA analysis in the group of MDS variant replaces a highly evolutionarily conserved nucleotide located revealed genetically confirmed cases with diagnosis Williams Beuren outside the mature mir-96, and is predicted to reduce the stability of and Wolf-Hirschhorn syndromes. Altogether, we manage to clarify the the pre-miRNA secondary structure (dG from -34.4 to -30.4 Kcal/Mol). molecular basis in about 30% of our mentally retarded patients. The Moreover, the variation occurs within the seed region of the mature percentage of genetically proved diagnosis among our RTT patients, mir-96*, which is processed from the complementary strand of the mir- PWS/AS and MDS cases is relatively high, which represents a good 96 precursor. The mir-96* seem to have been maintained throughout clinical recognition of these pathological entities. On the contrary, the vertebrate evolution, although its sequence is only partially conserved. percentage of the genetically confirmed FXS cases is relatively low. Very little is known about mir-96* expression and function. The effect of Most probably this is due to the characteristics of this group, being mir-96+57T>C on mir-96 processing as well as on mir-96* processing/ clinically mixed and containing some definite autistic cases. target recognition is currently underway by ex-vivo expression experi- Acknowledgements: The study was supported by the grant No 27/2009, ments in human cell lines. Sofia Medical University, Bulgaria P12.131 severe mitochondrial DNA depletion in infancy. S. Seneca1,2, J. Smet3, R. Van Coster3, L. De Meirleir4,2, W. Lissens1,2, M. Bonduelle1,2, I. Liebaers1,2; 1UZ Brussel, CMG, Brussels, Belgium, 2Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium, 3University Hospital Ghent, Division of Paediatric Neurology Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 2 and Metabolism, Ghent, Belgium, 4UZ Brussel, Division of Paediatric Neurology, tion). In literature this mutation was described as the cause of mild OI Brussels, Belgium. type I with an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. In our sample Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number reduction, known as the mi- this Arg361X mutation resulted in severe OI type III. The c.1243 C>T tochondrial DNA depletion syndrome (MDS), is a common cause of mutation (Arg415X) also causes premature termination codon. Three severe mitochondrial disorders of infancy and early childhood. MDS polymorphisms in the promoter region (-1997G/T, +1245G/T and - results from defects in nuclear encoded factors involved in mtDNA 1663indelT) of COL1A1 gene were shown to be associated with the maintenance and within the past years mutations in the POLG1, bone mineral density. Analysis of -1997G/T polymorphism revealed DGUOK, MPV17, PEO1, SUCLG1, TK2, SUCLA2 and TYMP genes statistically significant differences in genotype frequencies distribution have proven to be implicated in the pathogenesis of this disorder. The between the patients with OI (29) and the control group (150): -1997G/ clinical phenotypes associated with the different gene alterations vary T genotype was shown to be the factor risk of fracture development considerately but present either as a hepatocerebral or a myopathic (OR=2.38, 95%CI 1.06-5.34). While -1997G/G genotype might be syndrome. considered as protective one (OR=0.4, 95%CI 0.19-0.98). Statistically We have identified a homozygous p.E85 deletion in exon 3 of the significant differences were demonstrated with respect to genotype RRM2B gene in a neonate. The patient, born to first-cousin Cauca- combinations of COLIA1 polymorphisms -1997G/T, -1663indelT and sian parents, presented with lactic acidosis, severe hypotonia, deaf- +1245G/T between individuals with OI and control group. Genotypes ness, blindness and hyperammonemia. Muscle biopsy showed RRF, combination -1997G/T+-1663I/D+1245G/T was associated with high a combined respiratory chain defects and massive subcomplexes of risk of fracture development (OR=11.84, 95%CI 2.06-68.09), whereas ATP synthase both with traditional spectrophotometry and BN-PAGE. combination -1997G/G+-1663I/I+1245G/G - was shown to be protec- Western blotting using antibodies against selective OXPHOS subunits tive (OR=0.45, 95%CI 0.22-0.95). indicated the preservation of nuclear encoded complex II. She died at 2 months of age. Mutations of the RRM2B gene, encoding the cyto- P12.134 V851M mutation in the CLCN1 gene causes recessive solic R2 subunit of a p53 controlled ribonucleotide reductase (p53R2), myotonia congenita have been reported to cause severe depletion of muscle mtDNA by V. Adir1, H. Furman1,2, A. Shalata1, Z. U. Borochowitz1,2; Bourdon et al. 2007. Indeed, < 5% residual amount of mtDNA was 1The Simon Winter Institute for Human Genetics, Haifa, Israel, 2Technion measured in muscle tissue of our patient. Aberrations in these 9 genes Institute of Technology, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel. count only for a minority of all MDS cases. It is expected that other Myotonia Congenita (MC), one of the most common forms of non-dys- genes involved will be identified soon. trophic types of myotonia, may show both dominant (Thomsen dis- ease) and recessive (Becker disease) modes of transmission, both of P12.132 motor chip: a cGH microarray for neuromuscular which may be caused by mutations in CLCN1(7q35), which encodes disorders a chloride channel that is present in skeletal muscle. In this study we G. Piluso1, M. Dionisi1, A. Torella1, F. Del Vecchio Blanco1, S. Aurino1,2, V. describe 2 Arab families with MC, from two different villages in north- Nigro1,2; ern Israel. The first family was referred to genetic counseling because 1Seconda Universita di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 2TIGEM, Napoli, Italy. of an undefined myotonia in a child. The family tree showed a reces- Neuromuscular disorders are a highly heterogeneous group of geneti- sive pattern of heredity. The entire CLCN1 gene was sequenced and a cally determined diseases in which at least 245 different genes have change in the coding region of exon 22 was found. The 2551G>A sub- been involved (www.musclegenetable.org). stitution causes a missense mutation V851M, located in the conserved We developed a specific array CGH assay, called the “Motor chip”. CBS2 domain in the C terminus of the CLCN1 channel. All of the af- The Motor chip includes 465 genes selected for (i) their involvement fected children in the extended family were found to be homozygous in Mendelian neuromuscular disorders (245), (ii) their involvement in to the V851M mutation, while their parents and the healthy siblings muscle specific metabolic pathways and/or functions (97), (iii) their were found to be heterozygous to the mutation. The second family was muscle-specific expression level (48), or (iv) the putative interaction of previously described by us (Muscle Nerve. 2009 Aug 20). In this family their protein product with LGMD genes (75). a novel missense mutation [568GG>TC (G190S)] was found in twelve The selected genes correspond to 42,665,641 bp of genomic sequence members which transmitted the condition in an autosomal dominant and to 3,543,193 bp of coding sequence that was covered by selecting manner with incomplete penetrance. 38,481 specific 60 bp long probes (coverage 99.8%). The design was developed using the Agilent platform and the 8X60K format, represent- P12.135 Myotonia congenita: identification of new mutations in ing the most cost-effective option. The free surface of the array was the cLcN1 gene randomly filled with probes from Agilent Human Genome 44K CGH I. Torrente1, E. Pisaneschi1, A. Modoni2, M. Lo Monaco2, L. Merlini3, B. array, covering the whole human genome. Dallapiccola4, E. M. Valente1; Validation experiments were carried out using DNA samples from dys- 1IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, trophic patients in which deletions/duplications had previously been 2Department of Neuroscience, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Rome, identified in different genes (DMD, CAPN3, and SGCG). All the aber- Italy, 3Muscle Unit, Medical Genetics Section, Department of Experimental rations were correctly addressed. Diagnostic Medicine, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 4Bambino Gesù We next tested 24 samples from LGMD patients for which no muta- Hospital, Rome, Italy. tion was found. The Motor chip identified one patient with two complex Myotonia congenita (MC) is a hereditary muscle disorder character- SGCG gene deletions, one patient with a DYSF gene duplication in- ized by delayed relaxation of skeletal muscle after voluntary contrac- volving the first 5 exons and other minor aberrations. A second gen- tion (myotonia) that can be inherited either as an autosomal-dominant eration of the Motor chip is currently under development. We consider (Thomsen Disease, OMIM 160800) or recessive trait (Becker Disease, that this tool may be very useful for the diagnosis of all unknown neu- OMIM 255700). The clinical features of the two conditions are very romuscular disorders. similar but can be distinguished by severity and inheritance pattern. Both disorders are caused by mutations in the CLCN1 gene on chro- P12.133 Analysis of cOL1A1 gene in Osteogenesis imperfecta mosome 7q35, encoding the skeletal muscle chloride channel ClC-1. patients in Bashkortostan Republic of Russia In the general population, the incidence is reported as 1:23.000 live D. Nadyrshina, R. Khusainova, E. Khusnutdinova; births for the dominant form and as 1:50.000 for the recessive form. Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Russian Academy To date 137 mutations have been described in literature. In the pres- of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. ent study, we analysed for mutations the CLCN1 gene in a panel of Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a clinically and genetically heteroge- 101 clinically well-characterized unrelated patients originating from dif- neous disorder of connective tissue. We carried out the analysis of ferent countries (69 males and 32 females). Detailed clinical charts COL1A1 gene in 36 patients from 30 families with OI from Bashkor- were collected for each patient. Mutation analysis was conducted by tostan (Russia). Two nonsense mutations (Arg361X and Arg415X) in DHPLC screening of all coding exons followed by direct sequencing. COL1A1 gene have been detected using SSCP analysis. Both muta- We identified 54 different mutations in 67 patients (66%), of which 27 tions convert CGA which encodes arginine to TGA that results in a were novel. The mutation spectrum in our analysis was composed of premature stop codon (causes a 50% reduction of collagen produc- 31 missense, 12 non-sense, 6 splicing and 5 frameshift mutations. Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0 Among the 101 investigated patients 45 (44%) were homozygous or processes may represent a component of physiopathology of some compound heterozygous for two CLCN1 mutations, 22 (21%) were common human diseases. heterozygous for one mutation and 34 (33%) were negative. The pres- Aim. To test the possible distribution of homozygous deletions of exons ent study expands the CLCN1 gene mutation spectrum and will con- 5 of the NAIP gene in patients with obesity, diabetes, breast cancer, tribute to further understand the molecular basis underlying the MC colorectal cancer and spinal muscular atrophy. phenotypic variability. Subjects: Clinical data and blood samples were collected from unre- lated obese subjects (n=150), T1DM (n= 150), T2DM (n=150), breast P12.136 myotonic dystrophy type 2 in Russian families cancer (n=100), colorectal cancer (n=70) and spinal muscular atrophy N. Galeeva, G. Rudenskaya, E. Dadaly, A. Polyakov; patients (n=90). We selected healthy subjects (n=150) with normal Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. BMI (<25 Kg/m2) as a control group. Myotonic dystrophy (dystrophia myotonica, DM) is genetically hetero- All samples were investigated for NAIP exon 5 homozygous deletion geneous. Along with ‘classic’ widespread DM1 caused by expansion of by duplex PCR. CTG-repeats in DMPK gene there exists an infrequent DM2 caused by Results: The homozygous absence of NAIP exon 5 was detected in expansion of CCTG-repeats in zink finger protein 9 gene (ZNF9) and obese subject (n=2), T1DM (n=2), T2DM (n=3), breast cancer (n=3), found exclusively in European populations. DM1 and DM2 share main colorectal cancer (n=5), spinal muscular atrophy (n=38) and in the features though DM2 has some distinctions: mean age of onset is 48 control group (n=4). We have observed that the higher frequency of yrs, muscle weakness is predominantly proximal in contrast to distal deletion was present in spinal muscular atrophy patients (42.2%), OR myopathy in DM1, myalgia is a characteristic feature, cardiomyopathy = 26.67, 95%CI= 9.0779<O.R.<78.3722, p<0.00001. The incidency of is rare and cognitive disorders are not seen while other extramuscular deletion in the control group (2.66%) is higher compared with data features are similar to DM1; anticipation is not typical, and congenital reported in other population. forms do not exist, but reverse anticipation is possible. We present first Conclusion: The homozygous deletion of NAIP was simmilar in all lots, Russian DM2 cases. In one family the mother and the daughter were excepting spinal muscular atrophy group, and seems to be at most a affected at the age of 21 and 15 accordingly. Daughter at the age of 21 weak contributor to investigated pathology with the mentionned excep- had weakness only in muscles of brush. Mother at the age of 60 had tion. hypotrophy of muscles of brush and footstep. In the second family a Study supported by grant PN2,42-161/2008 55-year-old woman was an only patient. Weakness became apparent in 50 yrs, myopathy was predominantly distal in upper and diffuse in P12.139 Familial isolated cardiomyopathy caused by amutation lower limbs, myotonia was mild, intractable myalgia was a prominent in the flavoprotein subunit of succinate dehydrogenase symptom, extramuscular features were cataracts and hearing loss. E. Mohammad1, A. Levitas2, G. Harel Levy1, V. Chalifa Caspi3, E. Manor4, J. C. We developed a new system composed of 3 primers for identify ex- Beck5, A. Saada6, V. Sheffield5, R. Parvari1,7; pansion. One of primers was complimentary for CCTG-repeats and 1Dept Gen & Virology, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, for another FAM-marked primer. This enabled to record signal by se- 2Division of Pediatrics, Soroka Medical Center, Beer Sheva 84105 and Faculty quencer. Thus we detected expansion in our patients and confirmed of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, clinical diagnosis. 3National Institute of Biotechnology Negev, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 4Institute of Genetics, Soroka Medical Center, Beer P12.137 impact of sequence interruptions on PcR based Sheva 84105 and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the molecular testing of myotonic dystrophy type 1 Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 5Dept. of Pediatrics - Division of Medical Genetics; J. Radvansky1, A. Ficek1, P. Resko1, G. Minarik1, L. Kadasi1,2; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular States, 6Deparment of Human Genetics and Metabolic Diseases. Hadas- sah- Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2SAS, Institute of Molecular Physiology and Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 7National Institute of Genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia. Biotechnology Negev, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is the most common autosomal Cardiomyopaties are the most common disorders resulting in heart dominant neuromuscular disorder of adults associated with unstable failure. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), a disorder characterized by expansions of a (CTG)n repeat tract in the 3´-untranslated region of cardiac dilatation and reduced systolic function, is the most frequent the DMPK (Dystrophia Myotonica Protein Kinase) gene. Conventional cause. However, recessive neonatal isolated dilated cardiomyopathy fluorescent PCR and triplet-repeat primed PCR (TP-PCR) represent has scarcely been associated with a mutation. A defect of the human widely used methods for detection of normal range and expaned al- succinate dehydrogenase(SDH) is a rare condition in human, repre- leles. In our study, we focused on recently described unusual sequence senting 2% of respiratory chain(RC) deficiencies. Its clinical presenta- interruptions inside the CTG tract and their effect on these PCR based tion is highly variable, ranging from early onset encephalomyopathies testing methods. In our assay, both complementary strands of the to tumor susceptibility in adults. We present the association of a muta- amplicons produced by conventional fluorescent PCR were labelled tion in the SDHA gene with the clinical manifestation and interfamil- with different fluorescent dyes. In addition, TP-PCR was performed in ial variability of 15 patients diagnosed with dilated and hypertrophic both forward and reverse direction. According to our results, the pres- cardiomyopathy. The cardiomyopathy is presumably caused by the ence of the unusual (CCGCTG)n containing repeat motifs may lead significant specific reduction of the SDH enzymatic activity in heart to mistyping and false results both in conventional and in TP-PCR. In muscle whereas substantial activity is retained in skeletal muscle and amplifiable alleles using conventional PCR the presence of sequence lymphoblastoid cells. Identification of the SDHA as the mutated gene interruptions may lead to abnormal electrophoretic mobility of one of was hindered since patients with a similar clinical presentation belong- the complementary strands. In TP-PCR they may lead to discontinu- ing to the same enlarged family proved to have mutations in another ous or even prematurely terminated signal. Since the results obtained gene and a father homozygous for the mutation is not affected. The by our combination of methods complemented each other, the simulta- same mutation was previously reported to cause a multi-systemic fail- neous use of bi-directionally labelled conventional PCR and TP-PCR ure leading to neonatal death and to Leigh syndrome. Thus this study performed in both directions seems to be advantageous for increasing highlights the extreme variability that results from homozygosity of the of the reliability and accuracy of the DNA based DM1 diagnostics. same mutation in a nuclear encoded respiratory complex. P12.138 The distribution of homozygous deletions of exons 5 of P12.140 mapping of the neurodegenerative disease PHARc the NAiP gene in subjects with different diseases T. Fiskerstrand1, D. H’mida-Ben Brahim2,3, S. Johansson1, A. M’zahem4, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, M. Toma1, M. Stavarachi1, T. Burcos2, E. Popa2, I. B. I. Haukanes1, N. Drouot2, J. Zimmermann5, A. J. Cole6,7, C. Vedeler1,8, C. Popa2, S. Stanilescu2, A. M. Craciun3, C. Serafinceanu3; Bredrup1, M. Assoum2, M. Tazir9, T. Klockgether5,10, A. Hamri4, V. M. Steen1,8, H. 1Institute of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Coltea Boman1, L. A. Bindoff1,8, M. Koenig2, P. M. Knappskog1,8; Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3Institute of Diabetes, Nutrition and Metabolic 1Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2CNRS-INSERM-Universite Diseases “N. Paulescu”, Bucharest, Romania. de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 3CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Centre The NAIP gene (5q13.1) is involved in the inhibition of apoptosis and Hospitalo-Universitaire Ben Badis, Constantine, Algeria, 5Universitätsklinikum, the innate immune response. The alteration of balance between these Bonn, Germany, 6Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 1 7Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 8University of Bergen, related patients suspected of having NF1 and which resulted negative Bergen, Norway, 9Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Mustapha, Algiers, Algeria, for NF1 mutations. Using direct cDNA sequencing approach, we identi- 10Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrangungen (DZNE), Bonn, fied six novel changes: one splice error, two frameshift mutations, two Germany. missense changes and a presumed polymorphism. PHARC: Peripheral neuropathy, Hearing loss, Ataxia, Retinitis pig- In conclusion, we strongly recommend molecular analysis of the mentosa, and Cataract, is a progressive autosomal recessive, neuro- SPRED1 gene in patients with clinical criteria of NF1 and without an degenerative disease that was initially ascertained as a phenocopy for identified causative NF1 mutation, in order to increase the sensibility of Refsum’s disease. Recognition of the first symptoms is typically in the diagnosis and to offer a specific genetic counselling. teens and cataract, hearing loss and a predominantly demyelinating peripheral neuropathy are present in all adult patients. Retinitis pig- P12.143 concurrence of germline mutations in the NF1 and mentosa typically starts in young adult life and progresses slowly. The BRCA1 genes in a family with Neurofibromatosis type 1 and onset and severity of ataxia are variable. Patients with this disease do Breast cancer not manifest abnormalities of peroxisomes, and we embarked on ge- J. Gardenyes1, B. Campos1, O. Díez2,3, O. Abad1, P. Fàbregas1, I. Valenzuela4, netic characterisation on the assumption that this would provide new N. Gadea4, J. Balmaña4, V. Volpini1; insights into the pathology of such complex neurological syndromes. 1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) - IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de PHARC was originally mapped to a 16 Mb region on chromosome Llobregat, Spain, 2Oncogenetics Laboratory, Vall d‘Hebron University Hospital, 20 in a Norwegian family. Subsequently, we have narrowed down the Barcelona, Spain, 3Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain, candidate region using SNP-arrays in a further 19 patients from four 4Medical Oncology Department, Vall d‘Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, different countries. In these patients, we have identified four loss of Spain. function mutations in a recently characterized gene, two of which rep- Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common dominant autosomal dis- resent founder events in Norway and Algeria, respectively. order caused by mutations in the NF1 gene. Its clinical manifestations and severity are highly variable, even between members of the same P12.141 clinical and genetic study in an italian family with family. The main manifestations of NF1 are café-au-lait spots, neurofi- neurofibromatosis type 1 bromas, intertriginous freckling, Lisch nodules, and malignancy, includ- A. L. Gabriele1, M. Ruggieri2, A. Patitucci1, A. Magariello1, R. Mazzei1, F. ing peripheral nerve sheath tumors, central nervous system gliomas, L. Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, G. Di Palma1, L. Citrigno1,3, W. Sproviero1,4, A. and a variety of other tumours not so clearly defined. The association Gambardella1,4, M. Muglia1; between NF1 and breast cancer or other gynaecologic malignancies 1ISN-CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of Paediatrics, University seems uncommon and has been scarcely referred in the literature. of Catania, Catania, Italy, 3Department of Neurosciences, Psychiatric and However, a recent population study suggested that NF1 females have Anesthesiological Sciences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 4Institute of a five-fold risk of breast cancer diagnosed <50 years of age. Neurology, University ‘Magna Graecia’, Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy. We have observed a family with two females affected by both NF1 and Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant early-onset breast cancer, and a male with NF1. Taking into account disorder with an estimated incidence of 1 in 3,500 births. Clinically, it that the family presented criteria of the two hereditary syndromes we is characterized by cafe-au-lait (CAL) spots, neurofibromas, freckling evaluated whether the concomitance of both disorders could be at- of the axillary or inguinal region, Lisch nodules, optic nerve glioma, tributed to a NF1 mutation and its supposed increased risk of breast and bone dysplasias. NF1 is caused from inactivating mutations of the cancer or to the concurrence of two germline mutations, one in the 17q11.2-located NF1 gene. To date, more than 1000 different germline NF1 gene and the other in a BRCA1/2 gene. Mutation analyses of NF1 mutations ranging from single nucleotide substitutions to large NF1 and BRCA1 were carried out in one of the females affected by genomic rearrangements have been identified. We present a clinical both diseases. We identified a frameshift mutation in BRCA1 and a and molecular study of an Italian family with Neurofibromatosis type 1. nonsense mutation in NF1. The proband, 10-years-old, showed large cafè-au-lait (CAL) spots and Our findings strengthen the importance of considering all phenotypic freckling on the axillary region and only a plexiform neurofibromas on features in families with both NF1 and malignant tumours, analysing the right side. His father, 47 year old, showed in addition to the similar cancer predisposing candidate genes, to offer a specific risk assess- signs, numerous neurofibromas on the thorax, abdomen, back, shoul- ment and management of both conditions. der of the various size. Other two family’s members ( a brother and a sister) presented only little cafè-au-lait (CAL) spots. The mutational P12.144 High-resolution melting analysis helps to speed up analysis of the NF1 gene revealed a novel frameshift insertion muta- mutation scanning in the NF1 gene tion in the exon 4c (c.654 ins A) in all affected members of the family. D. Brigger, F. Joncourt, S. Gallati; The segregation of the mutation with the affected phenotype and its Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland. absence in the 200 normal chromosomes suggest that it is responsible Neurofibromatosis type1 is the most common tumor-predisposing dis- for the NF1 phenotype. order in humans. The large size of the NF1 gene and the fact that pathogenic changes, mostly point mutations, are dispersed through- P12.142 Identification of SPRED1 mutations (Legius syndrome) out the entire gene with no evidence of mutational hot spots, makes in patients clinically suspected of having Neurofibromatosis mutation detection quite laborious and costly. In order to speed up type 1 mutation scanning and reduce workload and costs we implemented O. Abad, B. Campos, J. Gardenyes, P. Fàbregas, V. Volpini; NF1 analysis by High-resolution melting on a LightCycler® 480. PCR- Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) – IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de conditions for amplification of all 60 coding exons including adjacent Llobregat, Spain. intronic splicing regions were optimized. Amplification products were Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) [MIM 162200] is a common dominant checked by PAGE for absence of by-products and sequenced in order autosomal disorder, affecting 1 in 3500 individuals, and caused by mu- to ensure specificity. Validation was performed by testing DNA from 28 tations in the NF1 gene at 17q11.2. Clinical diagnosis of NF1 requires patients with mutations previously detected using PCR-SSCP-analy- the presence of at least 2 of 7 criteria defined by the National Institutes sis. Compared to wild-type controls all 28 mutations yielded a clearly of Health (NIH), being the most distinctive features the café-au-lait distinguishable melting curve visible on a difference plot. In addition spots and neurofibromas. heterozygosity for 7 of the most frequent SNPs was also easily de- Recently, germline loss-of-function mutations in the SPRED1 gene, tected. Since in the yet limited group of patients tested to date no false located at 15q14, have been related with the Legius syndrome or NF1- negatives were observed, sensitivity was judged to be close to 100% like syndrome [MIM 611431]. This condition belongs to a group of dis- as required for such a test. A small number of false positives were orders with overlapping phenotypes known as neurocardio-facial-cuta- also found. Analysis of a sufficient number of DNA samples in order neous syndromes, caused by mutations in genes of the RAS signalling to estimate the rate of false positive calls is ongoing. In conclusion, cascade. Most of patients with a SPRED1 mutation fulfil NIH criteria High-resolution melting has proven to be a suitable method for rapid for NF1, although they usually have a more moderate phenotype than and cost effective mutation scanning in the NF1-gene. those with a NF1 mutation. In this study, we screened for mutations of SPRED1 gene in 145 un-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 2 P12.145 two de novo Gc donor splice sites abolishing the P12.147 A mild phenotype of autosomal dominant cmt2K authentic site in NF1 gene in patients with clinical features of disease caused by a new mutation in the GDAP1 gene Neurofibromatosis type 1 J. Pilch1, D. Kabzińska2, A. Kochański2; B. Campos1, X. Roca2, J. Gardenyes1, O. Abad1, P. Fàbregas1, V. Volpini1; 1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, 1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) - IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de Poland, 2Neuromuscular Unit, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Llobregat, Spain, 2Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. United States. Hereditary neuropathies are highly heterogeneous group of neuro- Accurate pre-mRNA splicing is crucial for gene expression. Splicing logical diseases. The most frequent inherited peripheral neuropathy involves the recognition of conserved elements at both exon-intron in humans is Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT). It can be classi- boundaries. The 5’ splice site (5’ss) comprises the last three nucleo- fied based on clinical, electrophysiology and nerve biopsy morphologi- tides of an exon and the first six of an intron, and the ‘GU’ dinucleotide cal analyses. Severity of CMT phenotype is determined by mutated at the 5’ end of introns is almost invariable. gene and type of mutation. Initially CMT4C4 disease was reported as Genomic variants in both coding and non-coding sequences can a hereditary sensory neuropathy inherited as an autosomal recessive cause unexpected deleterious splicing defects. Mutations in the neu- trait caused by mutations in the GDAP1 gene. In 2005 two GDAP1 rofibromin 1 (NF1) gene, located at 17q11.2, cause Neurofibromatosis mutations (Arg120Trp and Thr157Pro) were reported in CMT families type 1 (NF1) [MIM 162200], an autosomal dominant disorder affecting with autosomal dominant trait of inheritance (CMT2K). To date over 1 in 3500 individuals worldwide. Over the last decade, NF1 mutation 30 mutations were identified in the GDAP1 gene, only 4 of them are screening strategies at both DNA and RNA level revealed that a sig- inherited in autosomal dominant trait. The authors present a family (3 nificant proportion of mutations affected splicing, even when canonical affected patients), with a new Ala156Gly mutation in the GDAP1 gene splicing sequences were unaffected. which was transmitted as dominant trait. Phenotype is characterized Here, we report two novel genomic variants (one translationally silent by a pure axonal sensory-motor neuropathy with a marked involve- and one missense) in NF1 exon 43 in five patients from two unrelated ment of the lower limbs, associated with additional features (cardiac families with clinical features of NF1. These mutations create two dif- arrhythmia). ferent de novo GC 5’ss, abolishing use of the intact authentic GU 5’ss. We conclude that: (i) CMT2K disease is a mild form of sensory-motor The effects of both mutations on splicing in patient cells were recapitu- pure axonal neuropathy, (ii) GDAP1 gene analysis should not be lim- lated using minigene constructs transfected into mammalian cells. It is ited only to AR-CMT cases. remarkable that two de novo GC 5’ss are found within the same exon, because naturally-occurring GC 5’ss are rare (<1%) and there are very P12.148 Molecular diagnostics of neurofibromatosis type 1 few cases of cryptic or de novo GC 5’ss. (NF1) in slovak patients based on analysis of entire coding Our findings highlight the importance of studying mutations at DNA region of the NF1 gene and mLPA and RNA level in order to clarify their pathological effect and to provide A. Rybarova1, M. Nemethova2, D. Ilencikova3, K. Hlinkova3, A. Hlavata1, L. adequate genetic counselling. Kovacs1, L. Kadasi4,2, A. Zatkova4,2; 12nd Pediatric Department of the Faculty of Medicine and University Children‘s P12.146 two novel mutations in the NF2 gene in patients with Hospital, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular neurofibromatosis type 2. Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, M. J. García-Barcina1, E. Sarasola-Díez1, L. Madariaga2, L. Rodeño2, C. Ruiz- 3Department of Cancer Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Espinosa2, M. A. Fernández-Cuesta2; Slovakia, 4Laboratory of Genetics, Institute of Molecular Physiology and 1Unidad de Genética del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA / Genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia. Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Servicio de Pediatría del Hospital Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1;1:3500) is caused by mutations in RAS Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA / Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, negative regulator- neurofibromine 1. Molecular diagnostics requires Spain. analyses of the entire NF1 gene. mRNA-bases screening protocols Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is a rare dominantly inherited syn- are preferred since approximately one third of the pathological NF1 drome caused by inactivating mutations in the NF2 tumour suppressor mutations affect mRNA splicing, out of which 30% would remain un- gene on chromosome 22. Vestibular schwannomas, usually bilateral detected when only methods based on the analysis of DNA are used. (BVS), and intracranial meningiomas (IM) occur in 90% and 50% of Complex analysis of the NF1 gene has not been routinely available in patients, respectively. Slovakia yet. We introduced and employed diagnostic protocol based In this study we present 4 cases that have been seen in our hospital in on the sequencing analysis of complete coding region of NF1 as de- the last year (Table 1) veloped by Messiaen and Wimmer (2008), as well as MLPA analysis We report two novel mutations: c.641T>C, p. Leu214Pro, a missense employing P122, P081 and P082 sets (MRC-Holland). Screening in 37 mutation in exon 7 and c.810+1dupG, a splice site mutation in the in- Slovak NF1 patients was completed at the time of abstract submission. tron 8 donnor site. Missense mutations (case 2) predominantly cause cDNA sequencing uncovered the presence of small NF1 mutations in mild phenotypes with an statistically greater survival than nonsense 29 patients: 18 frameshift, 4 misssense, 3 stop mutations, 3 typical and frameshift mutations. Phenotype is more variable in patients with splicing changes, and one in-frame deletion in exon 39. No mutation splice-site mutations (case 4). Furthermore, it is described that carriers was found in 8 patients. Detailed clinical data review showed that 4 of of splice site mutations in exons 1-9 are significantly younger at onset them did not fulfill clinical criteria, thus diagnosis of NF1 was excluded. of symptoms and have significantly more mengiomas than those with MLPA analysis was performed in remaining 4 patients that lack small other mutations. NF1 mutations. Type I deletion of the entire NF1 gene and surrounding Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 region was identified in 2 of them (6,3%), and the intragenic deletion of 5 continuous NF1 exons was uncovered in one additional patient Age of onset 50 55 45 14 (3,1%). Thus, our protocol enabled us to identify disease causing mu- Hearing loss Presentation Imbalance Headache Neck tongue syndrome tations in 32 out of 33 clinically confirmed NF1 patients (97%). 25 years ago BVS Bilateral VIII and BVS P12.149 NmD-chip, a European consortium for next generation IM: ponto- III schwannomas, Finding BVS IM (fronto- genetic diagnostics by DNA arrays cerebellar IM (Meckel cavum, temporal) The NMD-Chip Consortium; angle posterior cranial fossa INSERM, Marseille, France. NF2 molecular Inherited NeuroMuscular Disorders (NMDs) form a very large and het- study (Sequencing No mutation c.641T>C No mutation c.810+1dupG erogeneous group of genetic diseases, that can be split in Duchenne/ and MLPA) Becker (DMD/BMD), limb girdle (LGMD), or congenital muscular dys- trophies (CMD), and Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathies (CMT). Their overall prevalence is estimated around 1 out of 1000 people. The current diagnosis is based on a differential molecular genotyp- ing by a complex and time consuming gene by gene approach. As a Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  consequence, about 30 to 40 % of patients remain devoid of a precise Auxologico Italiano, Cusano, Milano, Italy. genetic diagnostic. Noonan syndrome is an autosomal dominant genetic disease char- The aim of the NMD-Chip project is to design, develop and validate acterized by congenital heart defects, short stature and characteristic high throughput DNA arrays to efficiently diagnose NMD patients. The facial features. Mutations in PTPN11, RAF1, SOS1, KRAS, and NRAS new tools originating from this project will allow assessing all known are responsible for 60-75% of the cases, thus additional genes, are ex- genes implied in a group of disease in one shot. Besides, the project pected to be involved in Noonan syndrome pathogenesis. The geno- will also allow to identify new disease causing mutations by using ex- type/phenotype correlation has been hindered by the relatively few re- tensive candidate genes exploration. ported genotyped cases. Expanding the case numbers will benefit the Indeed, 4 types of chips are being designed, 2 for known NMD genes, clinical community. A mutation analysis has been performed on RAF1, and 2 for candidate genes testing. In each case, both CGH arrays to SOS1 and on the SOS1-interacting GRB2, in twenty-four NS patients detect CNV, as well as Sequence Capture for massive re-sequencing previously found to be negative for PTPN11 and KRAS mutations. We (point mutation detection), are set up. We use the new generation of identified four mutations in SOS1 and one in RAF1, while no GRB2 HD2 12-plex chips (Roche-Nimblegen). variants have been found. Interestingly the RAF1 mutation was pres- The NMD-Chip Consortium comprises 13 European laboratories ent in a patient also carrying a newly identified p.R497Q familial SOS1 strongly involved in molecular diagnostics from 8 countries. The proj- mutation, segregating with a typical NS SOS1 cutaneous phenotype. ect has been funded by the European FP7 Health call for a 2.9 millions The new SOS1 mutations have been predicted to dysregulate the pro- of euros, and has started from October the 1st, 2008. The commercial tein activity by bioinformatics. Functional analysis demonstrated the version of the chips should emerge by the end of year 2011. R497Q-SOS1 mutation leads to Jnk activation, but had no effect on the Ras effector Erk1. We propose that this variant might contribute P12.150 SOS1 mutation analysis in Noonan syndrome and to the onset of the peculiar ectodermal traits displayed by the proband associated isolated congenital heart defects amidst the more classical NS presentation. The characteristic cutane- F. Lepri1, A. De Luca1, C. Rossi2, G. Baldassarre3, F. Pantaleoni4, V. Fodale4, ous traits, frequently shown by NS patients carrying SOS1 mutations, M. Dentici1, M. Bonaguro2, P. Daniele1, M. Digilio5, G. Zampino6, A. Selicorni7, might be associated to the activation of both Jnk/Erk pathways. To our F. Stanzial8, F. Faravelli9, I. Kavamura10, G. Neri11, M. Faienza12, A. Pilotta13, M. knowledge, this is the first reported case of a NS patient harbouring Silengo3, G. Ferrero3, B. Dallapiccola14, M. Tartaglia4; mutations in two NS genes, allowing us to propose a genotype/pheno- 1Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, type correlation in the family. 2Unità Operativa di Genetica Medica, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Turin, Italy, 4Dipartimento P12.152 A novel missense mutation in the NDP gene in a child di Ematologia, Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, with Norrie disease Rome, Italy, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children V. P. Fedotov1, N. N. Vasserman2, E. P. Povalyaeva1, A. V. Polyakov2; Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 6Istituto di Clinica Pediatrica, Università Cattolica 1Genetic counseling, Medical Diagnostic Centre, Voronezh, Russian del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 7Clinica Pediatrica I, IRCCS, Fondazione Federation, 2Research centre for medical genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Policlinico Milano, Italy, 8Servizio Multizonale di Consulenza Genetica, Federation. Ospedale di Bolzano, Italy, 9S.C Genetica Umana, Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Norrie disease (ND) MIM 310600 is a X-linked recessive disorder char- Italy, 10Medical Genetics, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, acterized by very early childhood blindness due to degenerative and 11Instituto di Genetica Medica, Universita Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, proliferative changes of the neuroretina. Norrie disease is caused by Italy, 12Department of Biomedicine of Developmental Age, University of Bari, mutation in the gene encoding norrin (NDP; 300658). Bari, Italy, 13Auxoendocrinologia, Ospedale Pediatrico, Brescia, Italy, 14Bambino We reported three generations Russian Norrie disease family. The pro- Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy. band was a ten years old boy which was normal except for lens opaci- Noonan syndrome (NS) is genetically heterogeneous and mutations in ties found at initial examination at 3 months of age. He had atrophic the PTPN11, KRAS, SOS1, RAF1, BRAF, MEK1, SHOC2 and NRAS irides and the fundus was filled with a proliferating retrolental yellowish genes have been identified in up to 75% of cases. Here, we screened mass. At 12 months of age, the left eye was enucleated on suspicion a large cohort of PTPN11 and KRAS mutation-negative NS patients of retinoblastoma. Histologic examination showed a hyperplasia of for SOS1 mutations and found 6 distinct pathogenic SOS1 mutations retinal, ciliary, and iris pigment epithelium, hypoplasia and necrosis of in 26 independent cases, and one rare unclassified variant. Seven the inner layer of the retina, cataract, and phthisis bulbi. CT imaging of SOS1 mutations were novel. Among the new mutations identified, we the eyes showed small lenses attached to the cornea, opacification of observed 5 missense mutations and one small in-frame deletion. De- the lenses, corneal opacities. Pars plana vitrectomy and lensectomy tailed clinical evaluation of SOS1 mutation-positive subjects confirmed was performed. the occurrence of a distinctive phenotype characterized by ectodermal NDP gene was localized at Xp11.4 and consist of 3 exons, coding anomalies and congenital heart defects (CHDs), particularly pulmonic exons are exons 2-3. We identified a novel missense mutation Cys- valve stenosis and atrial septal defects, with lower prevalence of short 128Trp at exon 3 at proband, his mother and aunt were carriers of this stature and cognitive impairment. Two individuals developed tumors. mutation. There were performed two prenatal diagnostics in this family. One had mandibular giant cell granuloma (MGCG), while the other One fetus was ill male, and the second was healthy female. had multiple tumors (MGCG, abdominal rhabdomyosarcoma, cerebral glioma and granular cell tumors of the skin), providing further molecu- P12.153 A novel frameshift mutation at codon 66 (HBB: lar evidence of the linking of these tumors to the RAS-MAPK signaling c.del201A) in the beta-globin genes pathway. Possible involvement of germline SOS1 mutations in isolated H. Kim1, Y. Cha1, E. Park2; CHD commonly encountered in individuals with SOS1 mutations (i.e., 1laboratory medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2internal medicine, Seoul, atrial [23 patients] and ventricular [15 patients] septal defects, and pul- Korea, Republic of. monic valve stenosis [21 patients]) was also explored. None of the Thalassemias are hereditary anemias. In beta-thalassemia (beta-thal), patients with isolated CHD was found to carry a functionally relevant beta-globin synthesis is either deficient or absent. Smaller, but sig- change in the entire SOS1 coding sequence, excluding a major contri- nificant concentrations of beta-thal are present throughout the Middle bution of the gene in the pathogenesis of the investigated CHDs. East, India, Pakistan and China, while sporadic cases have been re- ported in most ethnic groups. Over 200 beta-thal mutations have been P12.151 Identification of a new Jnk-activating familial SOS1 and described so far. We report here a novel deletional variant beta-thal a de novo RAF1 mutations in a Noonan syndrome patient allele in an ethnic Korean patient, hitherto unreported in the literature. M. Longoni1, S. Moncini1, M. Cisternino2, I. Morella3, S. Ferraiuolo4, S. Russo4, The deletion spans exon 2 at nt -201 causing a frameshift and the pre- C. Paola2, R. Zippel3, M. Venturin1, P. Riva1; mature appearance of a stop codon. A frameshift mutation in exon 2 of 1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, the beta-globin gene [codon 66 (-A)], was associated with a beta-thal Italy, 2Dipartimento di Pediatria, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, phenotype. We report on a 41-year-old woman, of Korean origin, and Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Biomolecolari e born out of nonconsanguineous union. She had a history of transfusion Biotecnologie, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 4IRCCS Istituto dependent anemia since 4 years age. Analysis of her red blood cell parameters and hemoglobin showed microcytic normochromic anemia Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  with severe anisopoikilocytosis and an elevated unknown Hb band lev- 4NHGRI/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States. el of 10.4%. This mutation was detected with a polymerase chain reac- Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a genetic disorder characterized by tion (PCR) and direct sequencing method, using a primer designed to bone fragility. Recessive forms of OI are caused by mutations in the detect mutations in total 3 exon. Identification of new mutations will be three genes coding for the collagen 3-hydroxylation complex. This helpful in better management and counseling for the family regarding complex post-translationally hydroxylates α1(I)Pro986 and residues prenatal diagnosis in future pregnancies.. on types II and V collagen. Null mutations in CRTAP or LEPRE1 lead to severe/lethal forms of OI with white sclerae and rhizomelia. Fibro- P12.154 consortium for Osteogenesis imperfecta mutations blast collagen has minimal Pro986 hydroxylation, but is overmodified, in the Helical Region of type i collagen: analysis of genotype- indicating delay in collagen folding. In Senegalese siblings, we identi- phenotype relationship using an updated list that doubles the fied a homozygous mutation in the start codon of PPIB, which encodes number of previous reported mutations. cyclophilin B (CyPB) the third member of the 3-hydroxylation complex. A. Forlino1,2, A. M. Barnes2, W. A. Cabral2, J. D. San Antonio3, D. J. Prockop4, These children have moderate OI and white sclerae, but not rhizo- A. De Paepe5, F. H. Glorieux6, A. M. Lund7, H. Hartikka8, K. Kuurila-Svahn9,10, D. melia. Proband fibroblast RNA had 55% of normal PPIB transcripts. H. Cohn11, R. Dalgleish12, L. San Giorgi13, G. Pals14, A. Lebre15, M. Mottes16, O. On Western blot, no CyPB protein was detectable, while both CRTAP Ljunggren17, Y. Xu18, P. H. Byers19, J. C. Marini2; and P3H1 levels were reduced. Immunofluorescence microscopy 1Department of Biochemistry, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Bone and confirmed these findings in vivo. CyPB is a peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans Extracellular Matrix Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human isomerase and thought to be involved in the rate-limiting step of type I Development, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Department of Medicine, collagen folding. Surprisingly, proband collagen was not overmodified Hematology/Cardeza Foundation, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, and had normal levels of lysyl and 4-prolyl hydroxylation, in contrast PA, United States, 4Center for Gene Therapy, Tulane University, New Orleans, to collagen overmodification by cells with recessive defects in CRTAP LA, United States, 5Center for Medical Genetics, Universiy Hospital Ghent, or LEPRE1, or with PPIB mutations which lead to misfolded CyPB. Ghent, Belgium, 6Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, Pro986 hydroxylation was also normal in proband collagen, indicat- QC, Canada, 7Department of Cinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, ing that the complex can 3-hydroxylate collagen in absence of CyPB. Denmark, 8Collagen Research Unit, Biocenter and Department of Medical Therefore, complete absence of CyPB does not appear to delay colla- Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oulo, Oulo, Finland, gen folding, strongly suggesting a redundancy for collagen isomeriza- 9Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Headand Neck Surgery, Vaasa Central tion, or CyPB may not be the major type I collagen folding isomerase. Research Unit Hospital, Vaasa, Finland, 10Department of Otorhinolaryngology- Head and Neck Surgery, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland, 11Medical P12.156 PARK2 mutations are rare among Polish patients with Genetic Institute, Steven Spielberg Pediatric Research Center, Cedars- Parkinson disease. Sinai Research Insitute, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 12Department of D. Hoffman-Zacharska1, D. Koziorowski2, R. Tataj1, A. Friedman2, J. Bal1; Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 13Medical Genetic 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical University of Warsaw, Department, Rizzoli Orthopaedic Institute, Bologna, Italy, 14Department of Warsaw, Poland. Cinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Netherlands, 15Department Parkinson disease (PD) is the most common neurodegenerative dis- of Genetics, Hospital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 16Department order, affecting more than 1% of the population above the age of 60. of Mother and Child, Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Mutations in the PARK2 gene result in early-onset PD (EO-PD). The Italy, 17Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppala, Sweden, frequency of the PARK2 mutations as a cause of EO-PD is a matter of 18Department of Chemistry, Hunter Collage, City University of New York, New a debate now. According to the early studies up to 18% of EO sporadic York, NY, United States, 19Department of Pathology, University of Washington, PD carry PARK2 mutations. In familial cases this frequency was up Seattle, WA, United States. to 50%. The last years’ studies show the data overestimation. For the Osteogenesis imperfecta is caused predominantly by mutations in Polish EO-PD patients the frequency of PARK2 mutations in both al- COL1A1 and COL1A2, encoding the proα1(I) and proα2(I) chains of leles was estimated at the level of about 2.5%. type I collagen, respectively. The Consortium has assembled 1574 in- The aim of presented study was to analyse the frequency/type of dependent mutations, of which 1273 result in glycine substitutions in changes in PARK2 gene in PD patients. the triple helical region and 301 alter splice sites. Doubling the number The group of patients consisted 160 subjects (104 EO-PD, 56 LO-PD), of previously reported mutations (Marini et al. Hum Mut 2007) does mainly sporadic but also familial. Mutation analysis of all PARK2 exons not alter prior findings that mutations at the N-terminal end of both was performed by direct sequencing and dosage analysis. chains have a non-lethal outcome and that distinct genotype-pheno- The detected variability in PARK2 in - 3.1% alleles (without coding poly- type relationships can be drawn for each chain. About 40% of glycine morphisms p.S167N, p.V380L, p.D394N, p.R402C) included exon de- substitutions in α1(I) are lethal and the two exclusively lethal regions letion and duplication (Ex4,5,6,7 del, Ex2 dup, Ex 2,3,4,5 dup) as well (aa.691-823 and 910-964) aligning with Major Ligand Binding Regions as point mutations (c.203_204 AG del/p.Q34Xfs, c.346C>A/p.A82E, (MLBR) remain well defined, suggesting crucial interactions of colla- c.478_479 CAC ins/p.P133dup, c.734A>T/p.K211N, c.924C>T/ gen with extracellular matrix proteins. Currently, 80% of glycine sub- p.R275W). Only c.203_204AG del was a recurrent mutation (frequen- stitutions in α2(I) are non-lethal. Refining the Regional Model yields 9 cy 0.94%), the remaining represented singe cases (0.31%). lethal clusters and correctly predicts the outcome of 89% of cases in Mutations of two alleles of the PARK2 gene were identified only in 3 α2(I). Lethal regions align with proteoglycan binding sites, suggesting EO-PD patients - 1 familial (AR inheritance) and 2 sporadic cases. a role in fibril-matrix interactions. About 20% of mutations alter splice Heterozygous mutation carriers were identified among EO and LO- sites, and are mainly associated with a non-lethal outcome. The Tm of PD patients (Ex2dup and p.R275W and p.A82E, c.478_479 CAC/ the triplet carboxyl to the mutation predicts over 70% of non-lethal out- p.P133dup respectively). comes for Ser substitutions in α1(I) and Ser and Cys substitutions in α2(I), but does not apply to lethality predictions. Salt bridge disruption P12.157 Whole Exome sequencing in Parkinson patients due to Gly substitutions in KGE/D triplets in α1(I) are associated with D. Böhm1, T. Scheurenbrand1, C. Schulte2, M. Sharma2, O. Stephan3, L. lethal outcomes. The expanded mutation database supports different Bertram4, T. Gasser2, S. Biskup2,1; roles for each chain in collagen stability and matrix organization. 1CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 2Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tübingen, Germany, 3Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany, P12.155 Absence of cyclophilin B causes Recessive 4Neuropsychiatric Genetics Group, Dept. Vertebrate Genomics, Max-Planck- Osteogenesis imperfecta but Does Not impair type i collagen Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. Peptidyl-Prolyl isomerization Genetic factors have been identified as risk factors for the develop- J. C. Marini1, A. M. Barnes1, E. M. Carter2, W. A. Cabral1, M. Weis3, W. Chang1, ment of Parkinson’s disease (PD). Overall these genes only explain E. Makareeva1, S. Leikin1, C. N. Rotimi4, D. R. Eyre3, C. L. Raggio2; a minority of PD cases. It has recently become possible to sequence 1NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Hospital for Special Surgery, New all coding exons in one single experiment. PD is a late onset complex York, NY, United States, 3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, disease with several known pathways being central to the disease. Here we used whole exome sequencing as the most suitable approach to identify novel high penetrance PD genes.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  Genomic DNA was enriched by NimbleGen on array and Agilent in so- residues p.G2019 in exon 41 and p.R1441 in the exon 31 are common lution enrichment. Sequencing was performed on the SOLiD platform. confirmed disease-associated variations. The frequencies of these Each sample was sequenced on four Quads generating a minimum of mutations are highly population dependent as well as the putative risk 60 million 50 base pair reads per exome. factor variations R1628P (exon 34) and G2385R (exon 48). With the Agilent protocol 97.73% of targeted exons were represented We hereby present the preliminary results of mutation screening of ex- by reads (versus 89.89% with NimbleGen). In total, 95% of reads were ons 31, 34, 35, 38, and 48 of LRRK2 gene in 80 autosomal dominat PD on target using Agilent versus 65% of reads for NimbleGen. Nimble- patients from Southern Italy. Mutation analysis was performed by PCR Gen enrichment is designed for the 454 platform which might explain and sequencing. Our cohort was negative for alpha-synuclein gene off target reads. Using an end depletion protocol to remove NimbleGen mutations and LRRK2 exon 41 mutations (p.G2019S, p.I2012T and adaptors the percentage of reads on target did not improve. Overall, p.I2020T). Until now we screened 35 patients for these five LRRK2 95% of targeted exons were covered 10X with a maximum coverage exon. We identified three described polymorphisms (IVS47-9 del(T), reaching 1500. With sufficient coverage for SNP calling, approximately A7155G in exon 48; IVS35+23T→A intr 36) but no mutations in these 60000 variants were identified per patient. In total, 5234 variants within patients. Preliminary data showed a low mutation frequency of LRRK2 a 20 basepair window of exons could not be found in dbSNP and Hap- gene in our Southern Italy PD cohort. Map databases. We are in the process of analysing these SNPs with respect to potential pathogenicity. P12.160 Exon 41 LRRK2 point mutation analysis in italian patients with Parkinson disease. P12.158 F. Sironi1,2, T. Brambilla1,2, P. Primignani1, L. Trotta1,2, D. A. Coviello1, S. Tunesi3, molecular analysis of the parkin and PiNK-1 genes in patients L. Mariani4, S. Tesei4, G. Pezzoli4, S. Goldwurm4; with early-onset Parkinson disease 1Medical Genetics Laboratory - Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale L. de Jorge1, J. Corral1, H. San Nicolás1, D. Genís2, V. Volpini1; Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Parkinson Institute - Istituti Clinici di 1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM)-IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 3Institute of Medical Statistics and Biometry, Llobregat, Spain, 2- Dep. of Neurology. Hospital Universitari Josep Trueta., University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4Parkinson Institute - Istituti Clinici di Girona, Spain. Perfezionamento,, Milan, Italy. Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen- Mutations in LRRK2 gene (OMIM 607060) have been found in a large erative disorder where genetic as well as environmental factors are number of Parkinson’s disease patients. LRRK2 encodes a large pro- implicated in its etiology. tein of 2527 amino acids with multiple domains, including a non-recep- Mutations in the parkin and PINK1 (PTEN-induced putative kinase) tor tyrosine kinase-like domain, a Ras-like small guanidine triphospha- genes have been identified as the most common causes of autosomal tase family domain (Roc), and several ankyrin, leucine-rich, and WD40 recessive early-onset Parkinson disease (EOPD). repeats. Several mutations in different functional regions of LRRK2 We performed the mutational screening in thirty-four clinic patients with occur at a high frequency both in familial and sporadic PD (sPD). Of a mean age: 40,2 years, including both familial ( n=6 ) and sporadic ( these, the p.Gly2019Ser mutation laying in exon 41 has been reported n=28 ) cases for parkin and PINK1 mutations. to account for 5-6% of familial PD and 1.6% of sPD in Europe. Over sporadic cases, we found five variants in parkin gene: homozy- In this study we screened LRRK2 exon 41 by DHPLC and/or direct se- gous deletion of exon 3 was found in one patient and homozygous mis- quencing to examine whether p.Gly2019Ser, the most common point sense mutation (Cys212Tyr) in another index case. A compound het- mutation, was present in our cohort of 1348 PD patients with different erozygote genotype was detected (Del154A in exon 2 and Thr415Asn ages of onset. All samples derived from the „Human genetic Bank of in exon 11) and two heterozygous carriers with deletion of exon 6 and patients affected by Parkinson disease and parkinsonisms“ (http://par- a missense mutation in exon 3, respectively. kinson.it/dnabank.htlm) Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan-Italy. We detected a heterozygous individual with a nonsense mutation (Gl- A total of 42 patients were found to carry exon 41 LRRK2 mutations/ n456X) in PINK1 gene. variants/polymorphisms: All of variants were previously reported as aetiology of the disease. 34 p.Gly2019Ser heterozygotes No mutations were found in patients with a positive familial history. 1 p.Gly2019Ser homozygote Mutations in DJ-1 (Park 7) are also associated with EOPD but are less 1 p.Gly2019Ser - IVS41+30 A>G compound heterozygote frequent. 1 p.Ile2020Leu heterozygote In conclusion, mutations in the studied genes account for 17.64% of 1 p.Pro2036Arg heterozygote our casuistic. We show a wide variety of different mutations that are 1 p.Tyr2018Tyr heterozygote associated with EOPD. 1 p.Pro2007Pro heterozygote Interestingly, in three early onset cases we have detected only one 2 IVS40-39 A>G heterozygotes mutation with putative dominant effect which suggests that heterozy- According to previous European studies we found that the most fre- gous cases of parkin and PINK1 genes could be penetrant depending quent amino acid change in the LRRK2 gene is the p.Gly2019Ser. on the type of mutation. Meanwhile other aminoacid changes have also been identified. We speculate that some of them may also be pathogenic for the LRRK2 P12.159 LRRK2 mutation analysis in a cohort of Parkinson’s protein kinase activity. Disease patients with a dominant pattern of inheritance from southern italy P12.161 Influence of paraoxonase 1 status on age at onset and V. Scornaienchi1, E. V. De Marco1, D. Civitelli1, F. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1,2, F. progression of LRRK2-linked Parkinson’s disease. E. Rocca1, G. Provenzano1,2, V. Greco1, A. Gambardella1,3, A. Quattrone1,3, G. A. S. Drozdova1, V. V. Miroshnikova1, E. Y. Zakharova2, T. I. Rodygina1, A. F. Annesi1; Yakimovskii3, S. N. Pchelina1,3; 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Piano 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, RAS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Lago di Mangone, Italy, 2Departement of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Anaesthesiology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, Federation, 3St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. Russian Federation. Mutations in the LRRK2 gene (locus PARK8) have been associated Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the both in PD patients with a dominant pattern of inheritance and patients most frequent cause of the familial Parkinson’s disease (PD). The vari- which appear to be sporadic. In most populations studied, LRRK2 ability in age at disease onset (AAO) and neuropathology in LRRK2- gene mutation frequencies range from 1.7 to 13% among familial linked PD patients suggests that genetic and environmental factors cases, and from 0.4 to 2.7% in sporadic cases. Reported frequen- may influence the course of the disease other than mutation itself. cies may be lower limits because only particular exons or mutations Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is a detoxifying enzyme of human’s blood were screened in most studies. Although many variations have been plasma which protects from the influence of potential neurotoxins (or- identified in LRRK2, assessment of association with the PD phenotype ganophosphates such as pesticides, etc.). The 54M PON1 allele vari- has not been clear-cut because of incomplete penetrance and lack of ant and the reduced activity of paraoxonase 1 were associated with an segregation data for many of the familial cases. Mutations affecting increased risk of PD. We studied the influence of PON1 status (L54M Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  PON1 polymorphism, activity of the enzyme) on AAO and disease pro- in the same gene. gression of LRRK2-linked PD. Eleven LRRK2-linked patients (8 pa- In the present study we screened 121 unrelated families indicated with tients patients with G2019S mutation, 2 - V1613A, 1 patient - R1441C; unspecified CMT and 2 unrelated families indicated with HNPP for average age 67.6±10.3), patients with sporadic PD (sPD) (average causative mutations in PMP22. We detected the CMT1A duplication age 70.6±5.3) and individuals of control group (average age 67.1±8.2) in 41 families, whereas the HNPP deletion was present in 8 families of were taken into analyses. L54M PON1 genotyping was carried out by which 7 were originally diagnosed as CMT. Further screening identi- PCR with the following restriction digestion analysis. Paraoxonase 1 fied one family with an already described point mutation in exon 5, activity was measured comparatively to the paraoxon substrate on the namely c.327C>A (Cys109X). Our results suggest that the spectrum spectrophotometer “SmartSmecPlus“. We didn’t reveal any significant and frequency of mutations in Slovak patients with CMT and HNPP is differences between studied groups (p>0,05) (Table 1). Thus, the para- similar to that seen in the global ethnic population. Altogether, mutation oxonase 1 status doesn’t influence the development of LRRK2-associ- analysis of the PMP22 gene revealed the underlying cause of disease ated PD. in 40,65% of examined families. LRRK2- LRRK2- LRRK2- LRRK2- linked PD linked PD linked PD linked PD sPD Controls P12.164 the coexistence of the PmP22 gene deletion and the AAO<60 AAO≥60 with rapid with slow (n=15) (n=15) EGR2 gene mutation in background of patients with cmt 1/a years years progression progression hereditary sensomotor neuropathy Frequency of V. Remenyi1, A. Szabo2, A. Gal1, F. Mechler2, G. Bathori1, M. Molnar1; 54M PON1 0.50 0.58(n=6) 0.33 (n=3) 0.63 (n=8) 0.33 0.40 1Clinical and Research Centre for Molecular Neurology Semmelweis University, allele (n=5) Budapest, Hungary, 22Department of Neurology, Debrecen University, Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. 27.89± 25.67± Paraoxonase 1 23.78± 11.00 29.19± 29.32± Background: A number of genetic defects may cause hereditary neu- 15.91 11.86 43.50 (n=1) activity (n=6) 9.09 9.85 ropathies. The most frequent form of HMSN is CMT disease. The de- (n=3) (n=4) myelinating form of CMT1a is caused by a 1.5MB duplication of the P12.162 to facilitate automatic variant pathogenicity PM22 gene in 70% of the cases. The genetic defect of the EGR2 gene assessment gene variant databases need to provide structured may result in also autosomal dominant neuropathy. general disease information Methods: Above a thorough clinical examination, ENG, EMG, sural P. Taschner, J. den Dunnen; nerve biopsy and genetic testing has also been performed. Quanti- Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands. fication of the PMP22 gene was carried out by Real-Time PCR. The Gene sequence variant databases (Locus-Specific DataBases, LS- coding exons of the MPZ and EGR2 genes where sequenced using DBs) store DNA variants in genes involved in hereditary disease, the the ABI Prims 3100 sequencing machine. The obtained sequence was way they were detected and by whom (a reference). Details on the compared with the human reference sequence. associated clinical phenotype and the potential disease-causing effect Results: The first symptoms of the 44 and 48 year old brothers ap- (pathogenicity) are rare or absent. Recently, prediction of the patho- peared in their early twenties with distal type muscle atrophy and pa- genic effect of sequence variants by computational means has be- resis. ENG showed severe demyelinating polyneuropathy. Segmental come feasible. Clinicians and researchers working in DNA diagnostics demyelination could be seen in the sural nerve biopsy of the younger check LSDBs frequently to classify and evaluate the effect of a spe- patient. Genetic testing found a deletion of the PMP22 gene in the old- cific variant in a particular carrier. Most LSDBs provide links to OMIM er brother, who had more severe symptoms. In both brother a patho- disease information, but not much information about the mechanism gen substitution c. 1142 G>A (Arg381His) was revealed in exon 4 of causing a particular disease (disease etiology). As a consequence in- the EGR2 gene. sufficient disease information is presented to allow correct interpreta- Discussion: It is the first report about the coexistence of PMP22 gene tion of the pathogenic effect of variants and this may lead to incorrect deletion and a pathogen mutation of the EGR 2. The coexisting 2 mu- interpretation of individual risks. This may cause distress in patients tations did not aggravate the clinical symptoms. Previously the c. 1142 and their families accessing variant data in web-based databases. In G>A (Arg381His) mutation was shown to be associated with cranial addition it prevents large-scale automatic pathogenicity assessment of nerve involvement, which was not present in our patient. variants identified by genome-wide re-sequencing. We propose that LSDBs add general disease information to their homepages to support P12.165 study of Peutz- Jeghers syndrome patients in Poland correct individual risk prediction by computational means. For each as- M. Podralska1, W. Cichy2, D. Nowakowska3, B. Kozak-Klonowska4, M. sociated phenotype, the minimal information necessary for risk predic- Teisseyre5, S. Pieczarkowski6, K. Ilnicka-Borowczyk2, E. Czkawanianc7, A. tions includes a.o: inheritance pattern, locus heterogeneity, imprinting Plawski1; and known additional genetic and environmental factors involved in 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Karol Marcinkowski University disease etiology. In the near future, these details should be accessible of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Genetic Counseling Unit Cancer Center through webservices for automated analysis by specific reasoners. and Institute of Oncology, Warszawa, Poland, 4Regional Oncology Center, Funded in part by the European Community‘s Seventh Framework Kielce, Poland, 5Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Immunology. Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement nº 200754 - the The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warszawa, Poland, 6Institute of GEN2PHEN project. Pediatrics, Polish-American Children‘s Hospital, Kraków, Poland, 7Department of Pediatrics and Gastroenterology Institute of Polish Mother’s Memorial, Lodz, P12.163 mutation analysis of the gene PMP22 in a cohort of Poland. slovak patients with charcot-marie-tooth disease and hereditary Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is rare, genetically conditioned dis- neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies ease. PJS is heredited in autosomal dominant manner and is charac- P. Resko1, J. Radvansky1, M. Baldovic1,2, G. Minarik1, L. Kadasi1,3; terized by occurrence of hamartomatous polys. The hamartomatous 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular polyps are manifested during second or third decade of life. The polyps Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 22nd Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of can be located throughout digestive tract. Occurrence hamartomatous Medicine, Comenius University, University Children‘s Hospital, Bratislava, polys in PJS may cause of many gastrointestinal discomforts. Although Slovakia, 3Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of in PJS patients the risk of malignant transformation is lower then oth- Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia. ers hereditary neoplastic disease, an increased risk to development The aim of our study was to identify the spectrum of mutations and malignancies such as the pancreas, the breast, female and male re- their frequencies in Slovak patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease productive organs is observed. The second characteristic manifesta- type 1A (CMT1A) and hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure tions of JPS are brown, dark or blue spots. PJS is caused by muta- palsies (HNPP), which are the two most prevalent inherited peripheral tions in the LKB1 (STK11) on chromosome 19. LKB1 gene encodes neuropathies. Both of them are caused by distinct mutations of a single a serine/threonine protein kinase participating in very important cell gene encoding peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22), duplication and signaling pathways. The PJS diagnosis of 20 patients was based on deletion of the whole gene being the most frequent underlying muta- presence of two or more polyps, or one polyp and typical pigmented tions. The rest of CMT1A and HNPP patients harbour point mutations lesions, or one polyp and a family history of PJS. Mutations screen-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 77 ing analysis reveled seven mutations and one polymorphism. These tions; no mutation was found in those regions. mutations are located in different position in gene. With the Multiplex Genetic testing is useful to confirm the diagnosis of HR, to identify Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) - assay we detected mild forms of HR in family members, and for appropriate genetic coun- additional genomic mutations. For our screening we used the SALSA selling. Our data indicate that there is no single predominant PHEX P101 STK11 kit which contains MLPA probes for most STK11 exons. mutation XLH. In seven patients we identified exonic deletions or duplications range from one to five exons. P12.168 Molecular studies of the PANK2 gene in patients with The study was financed by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher PKAN Education, project no. N402 481537 F. Annesi1, M. Doco-Fenzy2, G. Lesca3, P. Tarantino1,4, E. V. De Marco1, D. Civitelli1, F. E. Rocca1, G. Provenzano1,4, V. Greco1, V. Scornaienchi1, A. P12.166 the mutational analysis of the PAH gene in families Gambardella1,5, A. Quattrone1,5, G. Annesi1; with phenylketonuria 1National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Service de Génétique, V. L. Akhmetova, M. A. Bermisheva, R. R. Valiev, I. R. Gilyazova, E. K. Hopital-Maison Blanche, CHU-Reims, 45 rue Cognacq Jay, 51092, REIMS, Khusnutdinova; France, 3Service de Génétique moléculaire et clinique, CHRU de Lyon - Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. Hôpital Edouard Herriot, 5 Place d‘Arsonval, 69437, Lyon cedex 03, France, Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a common autosomal recessive genetic 4Departement of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiology University disorder caused by a large variety of mutations in the phenylalanine of Messina, Messina, Italy, 5Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, hydroxylase gene (PAH). Catanzaro, Italy. We have carried out the mutational analysis of the PAH gene in 174 Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) is an families with PKU from Bashkortostan Republic, North Caucasus autosomal recessive disorder characterized by progressive dystonia, and Kazakhstan. Consequently we revealed 32 various mutations rigidity, choreoathetosis, spasticity, retinitis pigmentosa, optic atrophy, that spectrum was specific for each region. Our results indicated that parkinsonism and iron accumulation in the brain. Clinical data suggest R408W mutation accounted for 54.27% PKU in Bashkortostan and two forms of PKAN: a classic form characterized by early onset and 42.5% in Kazakhstan. Mutation R261X of the PAH gene is found out rapid progression and an atypical form with later onset and a more only in patients from the North Caucasus with frequency of 38.16 % slowly progressive course. Many patients with classical and atypical whereas mutation R408W in the given region is revealed with frequency PKAN have mutations in the gene encoding pantothenate kinase 2 of 13.16 %. In addition we identified mutations R261Q, c.1315+1g>a, (PANK2) and a specific magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) pattern c.1066-11g>a, R158Q, R252W and P281L of the PAH gene with fre- called eye-of-the-tiger. quencies from 9.77 to 1.72 % on the average. Using SSCP analysis fol- In this study we performed a mutational analysis of the PANK2 gene lowed by sequencing of the PAH gene we have detected 19 mutations in 10 PKAN patients from Italy and France. Brain MRI examinations with frequencies from 1.72 to 0.29%: c.663-664delAG, S349P, L48S, were not available for all the patients. The entire coding region (seven c.441+5g>t, c.47-48delCT, Y414C, c.208-210del3bp, E390G, A300S, exons) was investigated for point mutations by sequencing analysis; P211T, R413P, c.168+5g>a, R243X, R243Q, E280K, c.1089delG, furthermore, we used PCR real time to identify any possible exonic D415N, c.509+5delg and R111X. Six new mutations were revealed rearrangements. In 9 patients no PANK2 mutations were identified; as well: R252P, c.116delT, Y206X (c.618TAC> TAA), c.1315+del4 in only one patient showed an already described point mutation, but in PKU patients from Bashkortostan, F331S - from North Caucasus and the heterozygous state. S350Y - from Kazakhstan. Our results excluded PANK2 point mutations and exonic rearrange- 80.5% of the studied families with PKU have appeared completely in- ments in our patients, both in atypical and classic forms. This confirms formative for direct DNA-diagnostics, 17.8% - partially-informative, and the genetic heterogeneity in PKAN and therefore the importance of 1.7% - absolutely not informative. investigating the role of other responsible genes. Thus the data of mutational analysis may be used for prenatal diag- This work was partially supported by a Grant from the Province of nostics and carrier screening in PKU families. Cosenza, Italy P12.167 X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets: mutational P12.169 mutations in the PKHD1 gene at autosomal recessive analysis of PHEX gene in an italian cohort polycystic kidney disease in patients from Russian Federation. B. Toschi1, A. Michelucci1, A. Fogli1, F. Baldinotti1, P. Simi1, G. I. Baroncelli2; N. N. Vasserman, A. L. Chuhrova, N. V. Poltavets, N. V. Punina; 1U.O. Citogenetica e Genetica Molecolare, Dipartimento Materno-Infantile, Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, PISA, Italy, 2U.O. Pediatria II, Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD, MIM 263200) Dipartimento Materno-Infantile, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, is a severe disorder with variable clinical spectrum. It is an important PISA, Italy. cause of renal-related and liver-related morbidity and mortality. 30- Phosphate (P) plays a key role in bone and mineral metabolism. 50% of affected babies die shortly after birth in respiratory insufficiency Among various causes of hypophosphatemia are inherited disorders because of pulmonary hypoplasia. Due to the poor prognosis there is of P homeostasis, including X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), au- a strong demand for prenatal diagnosis. ARPKD gene was mapped to tosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR), and autosomal chromosome 6p21 and prenatal diagnosis was performed with poly- recessive hypophosphatemia (ARHR). Affected patients show similar morphic microsatellite markers from this region. But sometimes mate- clinical features, such as short stature, bowing of the legs, and signs of rial from the dead baby was not available. That is why very important rickets, and typical biochemical findings (hypophosphatemia, reduced to looking for gene mutations in materials of the parents. PKHD1 gene TmPO/GFR, high-normal PTH with low or normal 1,25(OH)D con- (MIM 606702) has the longest open reading frame that is encoded by 4 2 centrations). a 67-exon transcript. Mutations were found to be scattered throughout XLH, ADHR and ARHR are caused by mutations in PHEX, FGF23 and the gene without evidence of clustering. DMP1 genes, respectively. For DNA analysis we select 11 exons where were found according to We describe a cohort of 22 pedigrees with clinical, biochemical and ra- literature more than one mutation in more than one family. We ana- diological diagnosis of HR: 9 were familial cases and 12 were sporadic lyzed DNA samples of babies and parents from 49 families. We found cases. Using DHPLC (denaturing high-performance liquid chromatog- 12 mutations on 28 chromosomes for 21 families. There were iden- raphy), MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) and tified 6 previously unknown mutations: G130A, C1427A, 3797delC, sequence analysis, we screened all affected individuals for mutations G5908A, A8864G, 10585_10588delGAAT and 6 previously described in PHEX gene: 21 mutations were identified (95%), 14 of which are mutations. There were no mutations identified in 28 families. It could novel. The mutations include 5 missense (23.8%) and 5 nonsense mu- be because of genetic heterogeneity or assumed diagnosis of ARPKD tations (23.8%), 3 small deletions (14.3%), 2 small insertions (9.5%), might be incorrect in some cases. Mutation analysis in PKHD1 gene is 3 splice-site mutations (14.3%), and 3 gross deletions (14.3%). One very important for the confirmation of the ARPKD diagnosis and for the patient did not have a PHEX mutation. She was subjected to muta- genetic consultation with following prenatal diagnosis. tional analysis of both the untranslated regions (5’ UTR and 3’ UTR) of PHEX, as well as was screened for FGF23 and DMP1 genes muta-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  P12.170 the study of PAH Gene (classic PKU) in iranian P12.172 molecular investigation of PmP22 gene in Russia cmt1 Patients patients: comparison of different methods M. Dehghan Manshadi, O. Aryani, M. Houshmand; T. B. Tiburkova1, O. A. Schagina1, V. P. Fedotov2, E. L. Dadaly1; special medical lab, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2VOCDC Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency results in intolerance genetic counseling, Voronezh, Russian Federation. to the dietary intake of the essential amino acid phenylalanine and Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease, also known as hereditary motor produces a spectrum of disorders including phenylketonuria (PKU), and sensory neuropathy, is among the most frequent hereditary disor- non-PKU hyperphenylalaninemia (non-PKU HPA), and variant PKU. ders of the nervous system. Classic PKU is caused by a complete or near-complete deficiency of 225 unrelated patients with clinical and electrophysiological data of phenylalanine hydroxylase activity; without dietary restriction of phe- CMT1 were observed by us. In the first time the most common muta- nylalanine, most children with PKU develop profound and irreversible tion - duplication at the chromosome 17p11.2-12 locus - was investi- mental retardation gate by polymorphic (CA)n repeats that flanking PMP22 gene. At 121 PAH deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At con- patients duplication was educed. Next time multiplex ligation-depen- ception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being dent probe analysis (MLPA) was carried out for all patients without affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% mutations. We created two systems: the first - using a probes were chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Prenatal diagnosis of designed to evaluate all PMP22 coding exons and four control genes: PAH deficiency is possible in pregnancies at 25% risk either when mo- TBP, SIRT3, USP3 and B2M, the second - using a probes were de- lecular genetic testing has revealed the disease-causing mutations in signed to evaluate first, second, third and fifth PMP22 exons and four the PAH gene in an affected family member, or when linkage analysis control genes: TBP, SIRT3, USP3 and B2M. At three patients dele- has identified informative markers. tion of the second PMP22 exon was educed and at one patient the The PAH gene, located on chromosome 12q22-24, consists of 13 ex- disease-cause tetraplication of 17p11.2-12 region was detected. In ons and spans 90 kilobase. the absence direct sequence analysis of the all PMP22 exons 1-5, Our laboratory uses PCR-based sequencing technology to identify including their intron/exon boundaries was undertaken. At one patient mutations among the 13 exons. This method identifies approximately Leu147Arg mutation was detected. 99% of mutations. Accordingly the part of CMT1A compose 56% in all cases of CMT in 30 patients investigated for PAH in this study .6 mutations were fund; Russia and the necessity of use complex access at the diagnostics of 969+5 G>A in 3 patients , 1089 del G in 2 patients , 782 G>A in 2 pa- CMT1A was shown. tients , 843-5 T>C in 1 patient , 168+5 G>C in 1 patient , 441+1 G>C in 1 patient. P12.173 molecular and cytogenetic investigations of patients affected with premature ovarian failure. P12.171 Screening for phosphomannomutase deficiency in M. Rajkiewicz1, K. Szlendak-Sauer2, A. Sulek1, W. Krysa1, S. Radowicki2, J. samples of foetuses and newborn infants with congenital Zaremba1; malformations 1Instiute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2University Hospital of B. Pérez1, C. Pérez-Cerdá1, E. Bermejo2, E. Quintana3, A. Vega1, A. Navarro3, Princess Anna Mazowiecka, Warsaw, Poland. F. Leal1, M. Martínez-Fernandez2, M. Sánchez-Izquierdo2, A. Soler3, R. Acosta4, Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a heterogeneous disorder, defined L. Desviat1, E. Gratacos4, P. Briones3, M. Martínez-Frias2, M. Ugarte1; also as premature menopause or hypergonadotropic ovarian insuffi- 1Centro de Biología Molecular, CIBERER Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 2CIAC, ciency. Clinically, it is manifested by the secondary amenorrhea for at Instituto de Salud Carlos III, CIBERER Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 3IBC, CDB, least four months in women under 40 years of age with elevated level CIBERER Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, of follicle-stimulating hormone FSH > 40 IU/l and decreased level of CIBERER Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. estradiol E2 < 20 IU/L. Investigations involving cytogenetic tests have Phosphomannomutase (PMM2) deficiency is the most frequent glyco- shown that POF occurrence may be associated with aberrations local- sylation disorder affecting the N-glycosylation. The clinical manifesta- ized mainly in the long arm of chromosome X or premutation in FMR1 tion spans from severe hydrops fetalis, fetal loss and multisystemic gene. disorders and central nervous system involvement in infancy. The The material used in this study comprised 40 DNA samples from pa- aim of this work was to investigate the presence of PMM2 deficiency tients with clinical symptoms of POF. in a cohort of 228 foetal samples and 230 dried blood samples from The cytogenetic analysis of the material revealed two X/autosome newborns, all with congenital malformations. We have identified ten translocations, whereas DNA analysis showed FMR1 gene premuta- samples with PMM2 changes in heterozygosity. We have identified tion in three patients. The frequency of X/autosome translocation in four previously described nucleotide changes (p.R141H, p.R123Q, this material was 2/40 (5.0%) and FMR1 gene premutation was 3/40 p.C241S and p.T237R) and three novel ones (p.R238H, p.F157S and (7.5%). Overall the applied genetic tests allowed the identification of IVS3-5T>C). The most frequent disease-causing mutation p.R141H in the cause of POF in 5 per 40 cases (12.5%). the PMM2 gene was identified in four independent alleles (4/460 al- leles). This fact was not surprising according to the high allelic frequen- P12.174 Identification of a chromosomal loci associated with cy reported in the general population (1/79). The rest of the variant recessive Primary ciliary Dyskinesia in a Bedouin family changes were identified in only one allele each. In addition, no aber- M. Mazor1,2, R. Parvari1,2, S. Alkrinawi3, M. Aviram3; rant transcripts or deletions have been detected using whole genome 1Ben Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2The National Institute for SNP array (Illumina610K) and transcriptional profiling analysis in two Biotechnology in the Negev, Israel, 3Pediatric Division Soroka medical Center, samples bearing p.R141H and p.R238H, respectively. Expression Beer-Sheva, Israel. analysis in a prokaryotic expression system of the changes p.R123Q, Primary ciliary dyskinesia is a rare genetic disorder, autosomal reces- p.F157S, p.C241S and p.R238H showed 1%, 0%, 60% and 100% sive, caused by inherited defects of ciliary structure and function. The PMM 2 residual activity, respectively. These results suggest that all the clinical features reflect the distribution of dysmotile cilia and include changes detected in the PMM2 gene are disease-causing mutations neonatal and chronic respiratory distress due to lack of coordinated with the exception of p.R238H that might be a non-synonymous SNP. ciliary movement. In approximately half of the PCD patients, there These findings are clearly in disequilibrium with the reported frequency is apparent randomization of left-right axis development, or situs in- of PMM2-CDG-Ia and require further genetic and functional analysis to versus totalis proposed to result from defective function of embryonic provide more insight about these interesting results. nodal cilia. We have characterized a consanguineous Bedouin family from the Ne- gev, who has two siblings diagnosed with situs inversus and respira- tory symptoms. Numerous healthy siblings making the family suitable for positional cloning of the affected genes. Linkage to the 13 known genes associated with the disease was ne- gated. Genome wide linkage analysis using the Affymetrix GeneChip map-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  ping 250K array was performed on two patients and their parents from some of which were crusted or ulcerated and firm. A heterozygous the family. c.3475delC mutation in exon 21 of PTCH was found. To the best of our Homozygosity mapping identified a chromosomal region larger than knowledge, this is a novel mutation, which due to its truncating nature, 16cM. Genotyping the region by analyzing polymorphic markers to all it is most likely disease-causing. Outstandingly, she presented also family members has defined a locus of 30Mb on chromosome 18q. pronounced androgenic alopecia. It is not currently known whether Prioritizing genes for search of the mutation and initial sequencing, PTCH plays a role in male pattern alopecia but PTCH protein is in- was preformed according to databases of proteome collections, and volved in Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling required for the initiation of derived from evolutionarily distant organisms which combines inde- anagen phase of the hair follicles. Thus, we postulate that epidermal pendently assembled ciliary, basal body and centrosome. cells lacking normal PTCH function may exhibit a defect in responding Identification of additional genes involved in cilia function will provide to Shh during the hair cycle. This is the first case in the relative litera- new insights into the molecular mechanisms of the cilia and help to ture of pronounced androgenic alopecia in female patient with Gorlin develop novel techniques to diagnose subjects with PCD. syndrome. P12.175 Identification and characterization by MLPA and aCGH P12.177 R408W mutation among PKU patients of Leningrad of a whole PROP1 deletion in a girl with pituitary mass and province combined pituitary hormone deficiency I. F. Nikiforova1, M. O. Mkheidze2,1, I. A. Ivanov1, I. M. Andreeva1, S. E. T. Akcay1, O. Zurita2, K. Heath2, D. Kirac3, K. Ulucan4, A. Campos- Barros5; Khalchitsky1; 1Sisli Etfal Education and Research Hospital, Department of Pediatric 1District Children Hospital, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Institute of Medical & Molecular Genetics, Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, and CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder arising 3Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Istanbul, from the deficiency of some enzymes which catalyze the essential Turkey, 4Marmara University, Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Medical conversion of Phe to Tyr. In the majority of cases PKU is caused by Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 5MInstitute of Medical & Molecular the mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. More than Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, and CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, 500 mutations have been described worldwide. The incidence of this Spain. inborn error of metabolism in the population of Leningrad province was Introduction: Mutations in at least five genes encoding pituitary specific estimated to be 1:6400 - 1:10266. R408W is one of the most frequent transcription factors (PROP1, POU1F1, LHX3, LHX4, HESX1) result mutation in St. Petersburg population. In present study we have iden- in combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD), characterized by tified the mutant allele R408W in 57 patients revealed according to proportionate growth deficit, due to impaired production of growth hor- the data of neonatal screening in Leningrad province. Identification of mone and one or more of the other five pituitary hormones. Recessive R408W allele in the dry spot samples was done with PCR method. mutations in PROP1 are the most frequent defect detected in CPHD. 21 probands were found to be homozygous (R408W/R408W). 36 The girl, born to a consanguineous relationship, first presented at the probands were shown to be compound with R408W as one mutant endocrinology clinic at the age of 8.8 yr with growth failure (height allele. There were 68,4% of R408W allele among chromosomes in- 108.8 cm, -3.48 SDS). She was diagnosed with CPHD after hormonal vestigated evaluation. MRI of the pituitary gland showed a suprasellar mass. She did not have diabetes insipidus, neuro-ophthalmologic complaints or P12.178 Homozygosity Mapping in Consanguineous Spanish visual fields abnormalities. We decided to undertake PROP1 mutation Families with Autosomal Recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa screening. A. Avila-Fernandez1, M. I. Khan2,3, R. W. Collin2, D. Cantalapiedra1, R. Methods: PROP1 mutation screening included MLPA (Salsa P216, Fernandez-Sanchez1, M. I. Lopez-Molina4, A. Estrada-Cuzcano2, F. P. M. MRC Holland) and array CGH of chromosome 5 (Nimblegen). Cremers2, C. Ayuso1; Results: A homozygous deletion of the entire PROP1 was detected in 1Department of Human Genetics, Fundacion Jimenez Diaz-CIBERER, Madrid, the girl. Both parents were shown to be heterozygous for this deletion. Spain, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical The deletion was delimited to at least 7.3kb upstream of PROP1 and Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Biosciences, COMSATS more finely to ~907bp downstream from the stop codon. Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, 4Department of Conclusion: We describe the third CPHD case with a complete PROP1 Ophthalmology, Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain. deletion in homozygosity. The 5´ breakpoint appears to lie in a highly Purpose: To identify the genetic defect in Spanish pedigrees affected repetitive region, rich in Alu sequences. The 3´ breakpoint lies within by autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP). an AluSx repeat suggesting that the deletion may have arisen through Methods: A total of 14 patients from five consanguineous Spanish non-allelic homologous recombination. In the presence of CPHD and families with typical RP was included in this study. After exclusion of pituitary mass, PROP1 analyses should be considered before referring the known mutations using the arRP and LCA genotyping microarray the patient to a neurosurgeon. chips (Asper Biotech), whole-genome SNP genotyping combined with homozygosity mapping was performed to find the causative genetic P12.176 Nevoid basal carcinoma syndrome (Gorlin syndrome) defect. In significant homozygous regions, microsatellite markers were and pronounced androgenic alopecia in a female with a novel used to confirm and narrow down the linkage intervals. Direct se- mutation p.Leu 1159fsX32 of the PTCH gene. quencing of candidates genes in these regions was performed to find S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, P. Willems2, M. Kosmadaki3, E. Leze1, C. Vrettou1, E. the causative mutations. Kanavakis1, A. Katsarou3; Results: In two out of five families studied (RP0055 and RP0285), ho- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 2GENDIA (GENetic mozygous regions encompassing the EYS gene were identified. Direct DIAgnostic Network), Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Dermatology, sequencing of EYS revealed a homozygous c.5928-2A>G mutation in University of Athens, «Andreas Sygros» Hospital, Athens, Greece. all affected members of the RP0055 family, producing an alteration Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome(NBCCS) or Basal cell nevus in the splice site. In family RP0509, the largest and second largest syndrome (BCNS)(OMIM109400) or Gorlin syndrome is an autosomal homozygous regions included ABCA4 and CNGB1 respectively. For dominant disorder with complete penetrance. Prevalence varies form the RP1190 family the two largest regions overlapped with the RP22 1:57,000-1:256,000 with no sexual predisposition. PTCH1 gene has locus and CNGB1 whereas for family RP0371, homozygosity mapping been mapped to the long arm of chromosome 9(q22.3-q31), and con- and microsatellites analysis revealed a novel locus with a significant sists of 23 exons (34kB) enconding a transmembrane protein. Data LOD Score (2.12). suggests that PTCH1 gene functions both as a tumor-suppressor gene Discussion: Homozygosity mapping is a useful tool as a first step to and as a developmental regulator of normal tissues. More than 284 dif- identify the genetic cause in Spanish RP families. In four out of five ferent type mutations have been reported in patients with NBCCS with families studied, our results suggested that mutations in known RP over 80% resulting in truncation of the coded protein and haplo-insuf- genes are implicated in this retinal disorder. We present the first splic- ficiency. We report a 55-year-old woman with multiple(>80) BCCs all ing defect in EYS and furthermore identified a novel arRP locus. over her body, mostly of the nodular type, appeared as done-shaped papules with telangiectatic surface and a pearly translucent border, Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 00 P12.179 Identification of two novel CDKL5 mutations in of their first- and second-degree relatives had diabetes or glucose Hungarian patients with Rett syndrome phenotype intolerance. This infant contributed to the identification of the RFX6 N. Polgar1, K. Hadzsiev1, J. Bene1, J. Karteszi1, K. Hollody2, G. Kosztolanyi1, B. winged helix transcription factor as the cause of the Riley-Mitchell syn- Melegh1; drome of digestive tract malformation and congenital diabetes, by a 1Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Pediatrics, strategy of homozygosity mapping and high-throughput sequencing. Pécs, Hungary. In early stages of mouse development, RFX6 is broadly expressed in In our study we screened 159 individuals for MECP2 mutations with the endoderm, and is restricted to the pancreas and some gut foci in Rett phenotype. A total of 22 different known mutations were identified later stages. In the adult it is essentially expressed in the pancreatic in 40 subjects: 8 frameshift-deletions, 4 nonsense mutations, 10 mis- islets. The infant we report here was homozygous for the Arg181Gln sense mutations. Among the pathologic mutations the most frequent mutation, which abolished binding of RFX6 to its cognate DNA site. It were the Arg133Cys (9.8%), Thr158Met (9.8%), Arg255Stop (7.8%), is unclear to what extent the Riley-Mitchell syndrome differs from the and Arg294Stop (7.8%) changes. We also detected the missense Martinez-Frias syndrome. Our observation suggests that congenital C925T (Arg309Trp) mutation in an affected patient; however, the role hemochromatosis might be a feature of the RFX6 defect. of this alteration in Rett pathogenesis is still unknown according to mu- tation databases. As a unique variant, we detected an inherited 18bp P12.182** The RIN2 syndrome: a new autosomal recessive deletion, 1162_1179del18 in a patient who carried the frameshift-as- connective tissue disorder caused by deficiency of Ras and Rab sociated mutation of 276insG. interactor 2 (RiN2) In all patients (n=108) having no MECP2 defects detectable by direct D. M. S. Syx1, F. Malfait1, L. Van Laer1, J. Hellemans1, T. Hermanns-Lê2, A. sequencing, we screened for mutations of CDKL5, a serine-threonine Willaert1, A. Benmansour3, A. De Paepe1, A. Verloes4; kinase gene recently identified in patients with Rett phenotype. We 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of discovered two novel nonsense mutations: G607T that results in a Dermatopathology, University Hospital of Sart-Tilman, Liège, Belgium, premature termination codon at amino acid position 203 disrupting 3Pediatrician, Oran, Algeria, 4Department of Genetics, AP-HP Robert Debré the catalytic domain of the CDKL5 protein, and G1708T leading to University Hospital and INSERM U676, Paris, France. a premature stop at amino acid position 570 of the C-terminal region In 2005 we reported a new recessive EDS-like syndrome with fleshy involved in either the catalytic activity or the subcellular localization. swelling of facial tissues and severe scoliosis in a consanguineous Our results suggest the need of screening for CDKL5 mutations in pa- Algerian family with three affected siblings. Recently, a homozygous tients with Rett phenotype tested negative for MECP2 mutations. 1-bp deletion in the RIN2 gene, encoding the Ras and Rab interactor 2, was shown to be involved in a similar phenotype, termed MACS P12.180 Mutational analysis of the MECP2 gene in Tunisian (Macrocephaly, Alopecia, Cutis laxa and Scoliosis) syndrome. Impor- patients with Rett syndrome: a novel double-mutation tant phenotypic overlap between our EDS-like family and the MACS N. Fendri1,2, E. Mkaouar-Rebai1,2, D. Moall1,2, N. Belguith1,2, N. Louhichi1,2, R. family prompted us to re-assess our family and perform molecular Zemni3,2, F. Slama3,2, C. Triki4,2, F. Fakhfakh1,2; analysis of RIN2. 1laboratoire de genetique moleculaire humaine faculté de medecine Sfax, Sfax, The most striking clinical features included progressive facial dys- Tunisia, 2Tunisian network on mental retardation (PRF: Projet de Recherche morphism and (kypho)scoliosis, sparse hair as well as skin- and joint Fédéré)., Tunisia, 3Unité d’immunologie. Faculté de Médecine de Sousse, Sfax, hypermobility. Ultrastructural studies of the skin revealed important Tunisia, 4Service de Neurologie Infantile, C.H.U. Hédi Chaker de Sfax, Tunisia, abnormalities in the collagen fibril morphology. Fibroblasts exhibited Sfax, Tunisia. a dilated endoplasmic reticulum and an abnormal Golgi apparatus Rett syndrome is a severe disorder characterized by loss of acquired with rarefied and dilated cisternae. Molecular analysis of RIN2 identi- skills after a period of normal development in infant girls. Purposeful fied a novel homozygous 2-bp deletion in all affected individuals. The hand use is often lost and replaced by repetitive, stereotypic move- c.1914_1915delGC mutation introduces a frameshift and creates a ments. This X-linked dominant disorder is caused mainly by mutations premature termination codon. The resulting aberrant mRNA is prone to in the MECP2 gene. In this report, we performed a mutational analysis nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, probably resulting in loss-of-func- of the MECP2 gene in 7 Tunisian patients with classical Rett syndrome. tion of the corresponding protein. The results showed the presence of a double-mutation: p.R306C and Our findings show that RIN2 defects are associated with a distinct the c.1461+98insA which create a new hypothetical polyadenylation autosomal recessive genodermatosis of which the progressive facial site in the 3’UTR of the MECP2 gene. We also detected a new variant coarsening, gingival hypertrophy and scoliosis are the most striking c.1461+92C>G in the 3’UTR located previous to 34 bp from the poly- features. Although, the current family displays considerable pheno- adenylation site with a score of 4.085. This variation is located in a hy- typic overlap with MACS syndrome, the skin phenotype belongs to pothetical splicing enhancer with a score of 1.96277 according to the the Ehlers-Danlos, rather than the cutis laxa spectrum. This study un- ESE finder program. We also found 2 common mutations: p.T158M derscores the involvement of RIN2 and associated intracellular traf- (57.14 %) and p.R168X (14.28 %). ficking pathways in the pathogenesis of heritable connective tissue disorders. P12.181** RFX6 mutation in a newborn with congenital diabetes and hemochromatosis P12.183 Molecular investigation for Rett Syndrome in female J. Désir1, N. Taleb2, D. Martinovici3, V. Ransy3, S. Vanden Eijnden3, C. patients with severe mental retardation. Ridremont3, A. Pardou3, M. Cassart4, F. Avni4, C. Donner5, P. Lingier6, A. C. Sofocleous1,2, S. Psoni1, V. Economakis1, H. Fryssira1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, J. Mathieu7, B. Gulbis8, V. De Brouckère9, M. Cnop9, C. Polychronakos2, M. Traeger-Synodinos1, E. Kanavakis1; Abramowicz1; 1Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Athens University, Aghia Sophia , 1Medical Genetics Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, Children‘s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Research Institute for the Study of 2Departments of Paediatrics and Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Genetic and Malignant Disorders in Childhood, St Sophia’s Children’s Hospital, QC, Canada, 3Neonatal Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, Athens, Greece. 4Radiology Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 5Fetal Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental Medicine Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 6Pediatric disorder affecting mostly girls. RTT is characterized by normal early Surgery Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 7Pathology development, followed by psychomotor regression and gradual onset Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 8Clinical Biology of microcephaly. Most RTT cases (70-95%) are caused by mutations Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 9Endocrinology in MECP2 gene, while recently another gene, CDKL5 has also been Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium. correlated with the RTT phenotype. This study reports on the inci- A newborn from consanguineous parents was referred prenatally for dence and spectrum of MECP2 gene alterations, in female patients intrauterine growth retardation and anomalies of the digestive tract. referred for variable phenotypes within the RTT spectrum. During the The prenatal work up included an in utero MRI, which showed ab- last five years, 159 girls - of which only 35 completed the RTT scoring normalities consistent with hemochromatosis, intestinal atresia, and system- underwent molecular investigation for severe developmental gallbladder aplasia. These diagnoses were confirmed postnatally. Dia- delay/ mental retardation (MR). Of those, 56 requested analysis for betes was present since birth. Interestingly, both parents, and many RTT (group 1) and 103 analysis for RTT and Angelman syndrome Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 11 (AS) (group 2). Molecular analysis with ECMA (Enzymatic Cleavage double-mutant allele with p.P237Q, as described for Moroccan patients. Mismatch Analysis) and direct sequencing of exons 3 and 4 of the Interestingly, we found p.P237Q in 3 alleles from 118 Moroccan healthy MECP2 gene was performed in 135 subjects allowing detection and individuals. These data, together with expression results, confirm that characterization of disease causing mutations.RTT was confirmed in it is a low frequent polymorphism. A haplotype analysis was performed 41/159 subjects [29/56 (group 1) and 12/103 (group 2)] where com- using a novel polymorphism and 14 previously described SNPs. The mon mutations, novel alterations and previously reported disease re- results are consistent with a single origin for each one of these two lated polymorphisms were detected. Silent polymorphisms were also frequent mutations. Mutation c.234+1G>A seems to have a common revealed and remain under investigation. Three patients carried altera- origin, due to founder effect, in Moroccan and Spanish patients. tions of the CDKL5 gene and were also classified as having RTT. In addition, alterations of the 15q11-13 region were disclosed in three P12.186 Several SCA17 minor expanded CAG/CAA alleles with girls classified as AS.MECP2 gene alterations should be considered incomplete penetrance and variable expression coexist with as a cause of MR. Clinical evaluation using the RTT scoring system other scA1 and scA3 expansions. would improve the diagnosis and research of RTT especially in respect H. San Nicolás1, J. Corral1, M. Calopa2, D. Genís3, J. Gámez4, L. De Jorge1, V. to phenotype-genotype correlation. Volpini1; 1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) - IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet P12.184 A rare un-explained case of Sandhoff disease among de Llobregat, Spain, 2Dep of Neurology. Hosp. Univ. de Bellvitge - IDIBELL, iranian population L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3Dep. of Neurology. Hosp. Univ. Josep Trueta, H. Aryan1, O. Aryani1, M. Houshmand1,2; Girona, Spain, 4Dep. of Neurology. Hospital General Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, 1Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of Spain. Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) is an autosomal dominant Sandhoff disease is a rare, genetic, lipid storage disorder resulting in neurodegenerative disease characterized principally by ataxia, py- progressive neurodegenerative disorder and caused by a deficiency ramidal and extrapyramidal signs, cognitive impairments, psychosis of the enzyme beta-hexosaminidase (HEX), which results in the ac- and seizures. It is caused by a CAG repeat expansion in the TATA- cumulation of GM2 gangliosides in the brain and other organs of the box binding protein gene (TBP gene) (6q27), which is translated into body. Sandhoff disease is a severe form of Tay-Sachs disease. Weak- a polyglutamine tract. The disease threshold goes from 43 to > 60 ness begins in the first 6 months of life. Inheritance pattern is autoso- CAG/CAA repeats, with reduced penetrance in lower alleles (43 to 48). mal recessive with multiple alleles and compounds. Mutations occur in In one pedigree we found one 65 years female carrying a 44 CAG/CAA HEXB, encoding the β-subunit, cause the neurodegenerative condi- allele but without any symptoms of the disease. Surprisingly, also has tion, Sandhoff disease. This gene contains 14 coding exons that lo- an allele of 44 repeats in SCA3 locus (14q24), in pre-mutation and low cated on chromosome 5q13. The proband was a one year old boy with penetrance range. She has transmitted the SCA17 expansion twice progressive muscle weakness and psychomotor retardation. Biochem- to their offspring: a daughter has inherited an expanded allele of 44 istry analyses of hexosaminidase A and B showed HEXB deficiency repeats and suffers disartria, dementia and cerebellum atrophy; and a in the patient. This case admitted with muscle weakness, seizures, soon also with 44 repeats but minor psychiatric symptoms and without myoclonus, visual impairment and cherry-red macular spots. Molecu- cognitive impairments or ataxia. We present also four SCA17 affected lar assessment revealed a homozygote missense mutation „K 121 R“ cases with 43 CAG/CAA repeats with several particular clinical features in exon 2 of this gene and his parents showed a heterozygote state as ataxia, vertigo, axonal neuropathy and in one case camptocornia in this region. In spite of the Banerjee report (1991) such a mutation (to our knowledge the first description of this symptom associated with converted „K 121 R“, as a polymorphism since it also occurs in some an expanded allele in the TBP gene). Interestingly, two of these indi- normal subjects, our finding from whole gene sequencing suggest that viduals show also expanded alleles from SCA1 (6p23) (48 CAG) and this mutation can cause the disease in homozygote condition. How- SCA3 (41 CAG). Our results show the eventual penetrance of minor ever, more functional study is needed to clarify this molecular aspect SCA17 alleles of 43 repeats, the great clinical variability expression of the disease. in SCA17 affected cases and the unexplained coexistences between SCA17 and other SCA repeat expansions as SCA1 and SCA3. P12.185 Identification of seven novel HGSNAT mutations in eleven Sanfilippo C patients: characterization at the enzyme P12.187 SCA8 and other SCA or FRDA expansions coexist in activity and RNA levels, and analysis of the origin of frequent members of several pedigrees with ataxia. mutations J. Corral1, H. San Nicolás1, D. Genís2, M. Calopa3, L. De Jorge1, V. Volpini1; I. Canals1,2, M. J. Coll3,2, A. Chabás3,2, S. C. Elalaoui4, A. Sefiani4, I. C. Jaouad4, 1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) - IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet M. Szlago5, D. Grinberg1,2, L. Vilageliu1,2; de Llobregat, Spain, 2Dep. of Neurology. Hosp. Univ. Josep Trueta, Girona, 1Universitat de Barcelona, Departament de Genética, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, Spain, 3Dep. of Neurology. Hosp. Univ. de Bellvitge - IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de 2CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 3Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Clínic, Llobregat, Spain. Barcelona, Spain, 4Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) and Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) are d’Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, 5Laboratorio Dr. Chamoles, Buenos Aires, a group of neurodegenerative diseases in which several genes have Argentina. been cloned: SCAs 1-3, SCAs 6-7, SCA12 & SCA17 with dominant in- Mucopolysaccharidosis III (MPS III), or Sanfilippo syndrome, include heritance; and FXN (frataxin) for FRDA, a recessive disorder. In SCAs four autosomal recessive diseases characterized by a deficient hepa- the mutation usually consists in a CAG or CTG (for SCA8) triple nucle- ran sulphate degradation. Clinical symptoms are similar for all types of otide repeat expansions, which normally localize in exonic regions and MPS III, including progressive and severe deterioration of the central codifies for a polyglutamine tracts of respective proteins. In FRDA the nervous system during childhood. HGSNAT is the gene responsible of mutation is a triple nucleotide GAA great expansion in the first intron MPS IIIC, which encodes the acetyl CoA:α-glucosaminide N-acetyl- of FXN gene. In a Spanish sample of N = 166 unrelated index cas- transferase, a lysosomal membrane protein. es, 6.02% were SCA1; 26.51% SCA2; 34.94% SCA3; 7.23% SCA6; In this study we have identified all the mutant alleles in eleven patients, 6.02% SCA7; 15.06% SCA8; 1.20% SCA17; and 3.01% DRPLA. We seven Spanish, three Moroccan and one Argentinean. Nine different present here five pedigrees in which SCA8 coexists with other SCA changes have been found. Seven of them were novel: two splice-site expansions in affected index cases or in relatives. In three pedigrees mutations (c.633+1G>A and c.1378-1G>A), four missense mutations SCA8 expansions coexist respectively with SCA2, SCA3 and FRDA (c.161C>T, c.338T>C, c.1271G>T and c.1334T>C, and one 19-nucleo- in the respective index cases. In relatives of each mentioned families tide intronic deletion. The deleterious effect of latter was demonstrated the expansions segregates independently one from each other, as we by a minigene assay. Splicing defects were all confirmed at the RNA could expect between loci belonging to different chromosomes. Other level. Heterologous expression analyses in COS-7 cells of HGSNAT family shows SCA8 and SCA1 expansions in several members, but cDNAs bearing missense mutations showed negligible enzyme activity none joint both. The same occurs in a pedigree with SCA6 and SCA8. for all of them. More unexplained SCA8 coexistences have been reported, involving The two most frequent mutations, c.234+1G>A and c.372-2A>G, had other neurodegenerative disorders as Parkinson or Alzheimer’s dis- been previously described. Mutation c.234+1G>A was always found in a eases. These coexistences could be due to high population prevalence Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 22 of SCA8 non penetrant expanded alleles of moderate size. More evi- P12.190 characterization of four familial sHOX duplications by dences should be addressed to propose alternative hypothesis about mLPA cause - effect relationship. B. Hernandez Charro, A. Bengoa, M. Artigas, S. Moreno, R. Narvaiza, M. Ramos-Arroyo; P12.188 Mutation spectrum in the SMARCB1 and NF2 genes of Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain. sporadic and familial schwannomatosis patients. SHOX duplications limited PAR1 region appear to be very rare and the A. Piotrowski, A. Poplawski, S. Yao, L. Messiaen; presence of long range transcriptional enhancers (ECS) located 3´and Medical Genomics Lab, Department of Genetics; University of Alabama at possibly 5´of the SHOX gene makes complicated phenotype-genotype Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States. correlations and the clinical significance of the only four cases report Schwannomatosis is a genetic disorder which is characterized by mul- is unclear (Thomas et al, 2009). That study concluded that only larger tiple peripheral nerve schwannomas and, in contrast to NF2, absence duplications including the transcriptional enhancers represent a poten- of VIII cranial nerve tumors. Schwannomatosis patients carry muta- tial cause in cases of idiopathic tall stature. tions in the SMARCB1 or NF2 genes, of which the former has been In our study we describe the clinical and MLPA characterization of four reported as the main casual factor of Schwannomatosis. familial duplications (table 1). MLPA analysis was carried out using Here we report the results of comprehensive SMARCB1 mutation SALSA P018D1 SHOX MLPA(MRC Holland), which includes probes screening in sporadic and familial Shwannomatosis cases. We identi- for each exon of SHOX and promoter and regulation regions. fied a group of 18/55 patients, including four familial cases, who had All duplications are between, at least 50kb and 460kb, and contain all germline mutations in the SMARCB1 gene (one nonsense, two mis- the SHOX coding sequence but different amounts of flanking sequence sense, two duplications, four frameshift and nine splice site mutations). (table 1). In two cases (family 3 and 4) duplication encompasses sev- We have also identified a cohort of 37/55 patients (characterized by eral ECS including two shown to have transcriptional activity, but in absence of vestibular schwannomas by MRI and presence of multiple only one case is associated with tall stature - macrosomy (family 4). All schwannomas) with no germline mutation in the SMARCB1 and NF2 duplications were transmitted from one of their parents. gene, including 6 familial cases. These results do not seem to support an association between the pres- In 15/55 patients, we analyzed at least 1 tumor sample besides the ence of transcriptional ECS in duplicated region and tall stature, nor peripheral blood (a total of 22 distinct tumor lesions were analyzed from identify any potential phenotypic consequences of SHOX duplications. 15 patients). We found SMARCB1 or NF2 mutations in 14/22 tumors. Anyway, it would be interesting to perform another specific analysis Deletions encompassing both SMARCB1 and NF2 genes were the with these cases (more probes, microsatellites, aCGH) to specify size most prominent change in the tumors. of duplications. Our results strengthen the hypothesis that there is another, as yet un- Table 1: identified factor behind the pathogenesis of Schwannomatosis. This size of sHOX casual factor might be shared between Schwannomatosis and AT/RT cases: Phenotype / Karyotype subtelom duplication. PAR1 phenotypes as cases of both disorders were diagnosed in different rela- (mLPA) region map(scale kb) tives in one of the families from our study. Speech delay and Arkadiusz Piotrowski and Andrzej Poplawski contributed equally. macrosomy (8 yrs. W: >p95 P036/070 Duplication >=50 kb (MLPA Family 1 Correspondence to: lmessiaen@genetics.uab.edu H: >p95 and OFC: 1,3 SD). Dup X/Yp P018C) Sources of support: CTF Young Investigator Award, Grant ID: 2009- 46,XY 01-004 Short stature (2 yrs. W, H and Duplication between. 390-680 Family 2 OFC <p3). 46,XX kb (MLPA P018-D1) P12.189 Molecular analysis of the SCN1A gene in patients with Speech delay and learning Two duplications: first between P036: severe myoclonic Epilepsy of infancy Family 3 disabilities (7 years. W: p50, H: 185-500kb and second between Dup X/Yp F. E. Rocca1, F. Annesi1, G. Provenzano1,2, E. V. De Marco1, P. Tarantino1,2, p75 and OFC: 2SD). 46,XY 560-695 kb (MLPA P018-D1) V. Greco1, D. Civitelli1, V. Scornaienchi1, G. Tortorella2, A. Gambardella1,3, G. Psychomotor retardation and Annesi1; macrosomy (14 mths. W: P036/070: Duplication between 460-730 kb Family 4 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Departement p75-90, H: p97 and OFC >2SD). Dup X/Yp (MLPA P018-D1) of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiology University of Messina, 46, XY Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. P12.191 PAR1 deletion/duplication in patients with Severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI), or Dravet syndrome, dyschondrosteosis or idiopathic short stature is a severe autosomal dominant epileptic encephalopathy mainly A. Baxova, V. Kebrdlova, R. Solc, P. Lnenicka, M. Florianova, J. Stekrova, R. caused by de novo mutations in the voltage-gated sodium channel Mihalova, K. Vesela, K. Hirschfeldova; gene (SCN1A). Most of these mutations are nonsense or frameshift; Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st FM and GTH, Charles University missense mutations are also common. Recent studies have already in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. reported that about 12% of mutation-negative SMEI patients have mi- Mutations or deletions affecting production of the short stature homeo- crochromosomal abnormalities involving SCN1A. However, the rates box-containing gene (SHOX) are found in subjects ranging from iso- of detection of SCN1A mutation in SMEI patients range widely in the lated short stature (ISS) to Léri-Weill (dyschondrosteosis), and Langer different populations. To investigate the frequency of SCN1A muta- syndromes. tions in our population, we analyzed 19 SMEI patients (10 males and Our sample was made of 42 unrelated probands in charge of the De- 9 females) from Southern Italy, who fulfilled the strict clinical definition partment of Medical Genetics (GTH and 1stFM, Charles University in of SMEI. Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing; the Prague). Eleven of them were diagnosed as patients with dyschon- genomic anomalies were screened using multiplex ligation-dependent drosteosis and 30 of them as ISS. All probands were analysed using probe amplification (MLPA). Six different heterozygous coding vari- the MLPA kit P018 that covers PAR1 pseudoautosomal region (includ- ants were found in 6 unrelated SMEI cases (31.5%): 4 novel muta- ing SHOX gene) and neighbouring X specific sequences. Overall, ten tions (Thr1289Ile, 3840insT, IVS7+4delA, Glu1021X) and 2 previously unique PAR1 rearrangements were detected, eight in the group with described (IVS24-2A/G, Ser1505X). Using MLPA assay we identified dyschondrosteosis (73%), and two in the ISS group (7%). As for the a deletion of exons 1-25 in one of the 13 patients without SCN1A point dyschondrosteosis group, seven deletions were indicated as casual mutations (8%). The 3840insT and IVS24-2A/G mutations were de what was not the case of found duplication outside the SHOX gene. novo; the parents of the other patients were not available. The fre- In the ISS group, one casual deletion spanning SHOX gene, and one quency of SCN1A mutations is lower in our SMEI patients in com- duplication outside the SHOX gene, with ambiguous effect, was ob- parison to other populations. Our results confirm the importance of served. In addition, a frequent small deletion was traced in one subject screening the coding regions with both direct sequencing and a quan- with dyschondrosteosis (9%) and in seven individuals with ISS (23%). titative method and suggest that further genetic studies are needed to Our study indicates that small PAR1 rearrangements are quite fre- determine the causative mutations and genes involved in the remain- quent in Czech population. ing SCN1A-negative patients. This work was supported by Grant No. IGAMZCR NS/ 10327-3/2009.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  P12.192 A case of homozygous sickle cell disease in a patient of Metabolism, University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Functional from senegal. Genomics Center Zurich, ETH and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, C. Curcio, C. Lodrini, C. Melles, A. Biasi, D. A. Coviello; 5Division of Medical Genetics, Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. The SLC40A1 gene product, a protein called ferroportin 1, plays an es- A patient from Senegal was referred to our center with suspected sick- sential role in the regulation of iron levels in the body. Several hetero- le cell disease; he was in good general health conditions and never zygous mutations in the SLC40A1 gene have been described to date transfused. The haematological data showed an increased rate of HbF. and were found to cause an autosomal dominant form of iron overload, We confirmed the homozygosity for HbS with Reverse Dot Blot (RDB) known as hemochromatosis type 4 (HFE4) or ferroportin disease. The for the β globin gene. The clinical manifestation were not in agreement family described in our study carries the complete loss of one allele of with molecular result so we analysed the α and γ globin genes. The α- the SLC40A1 gene due to a hemizygous deletion, leading to a-priori RDB showed the -4,2 deletion in the α gene and sequencing analysis true haploinsufficiency. Blood samples from four members of this fam- an heterozygous point mutation in the promoter of γG gene (-158 C>T). ily (three deletion carriers and one non-carrier as a control subject) We confirmed this mutational framework by familiar analysis to define were available for genetic and biochemical investigations. Thorough the reproductive risk of the parents. analysis of blood parameters revealed that none of the deletion car- The father genotype was heterozygous both for HbS and the γ muta- riers (15-year-old female, 18-year-old male, and 49-year-old male) tion but in addition he presented two defects in the α gene (- 4.2 dele- developed hyperferritinemia. This finding is in contrast to the situation tion and triplication of α genes ααα). The mother was heterozygous for with heterozygous SLC40A1 mutations, which have been reported to the HbS and the γG mutation and negative regarding α gene. The sister cause an early increase in serum ferritin. Our study is the first descrip- was heterozygous for HbS and the γG mutation. She also inherited the tion of a hemizygous deletion of the entire SLC40A1 gene (true hap- ααα from the father. The brother presented only the ααα. loinsufficiency) and the corresponding normal phenotype, extending We can now fully explain the phenotype of the proband by the pres- the molecular aetiology of HFE4. Potential mechanisms leading to the ence of the α and γ defects. In addition we defined the reproductive identified lack of association of SLC40A1 deletion/haploinsufficiency risk of the family: for the parents in case of an homozygous HbS fetus and HFE4 are discussed. with co-inheritance of the ααα; for the sister and the brother, in case of a β carrier partner of having an affected fetus with respectively severe P12.195 Genotyping the survival motoneuron genes by an high- or mild clinical manifestation. performance single-base extension: carriers and smA affected people identification plus prognostic evaluation of SMN2 copy P12.193 multilocus hypomethylation in silver-Russell number and sNPs. syndrome: does tissue-specific distribution of epigenetic S. Radovic1, G. Dubsky de Wittenau2, N. Passon2, M. Morgante1,3, I. R. mosaicism explain the phenotype? Lonigro2,4; M. Begemann1, S. Spengler1, I. Leisten1, M. Baudis2, A. Haake3, D. Kanber4, S. 1Department of Agricultural and Enviromental Sciences, University of Udine, Markus5, S. Fricke-Otto6, R. Siebert3, K. Buiting4, T. Eggermann1; Udine, Italy, 2Department of Sciences and Biomedical Technologies, University 1Institute of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany, 2Institute of Udine, Udine, Italy, 3Applied Genomics Institute, Udine, Italy, 4Institute of of Molecular Biology, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 3Institute of Genetics, A.O.U. of Udine, Udine, Italy. Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 4Institute By combining the basis of quantitative genotyping assay and the guid- of Human Genetics, University of Essen, Essen, Germany, 5Praxis für ing principles of quantitative real-time PCR we developed a sensitive Humangenetik, Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 6Helios Klinikum, Krefeld, method with large dynamic range and the potential for high-throughput Krefeld, Germany. accurate quantification of allele-specific copy number and SNPs rec- Aberrant methylation or mutations at specific loci are common find- ognition. ings in all known congenital imprinting disorders. Interestingly, recent We apply this method to the spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) carriers studies revealed that patients with transient neonatal diabetes mel- and affected people identification as well as to the allelic and SNP litus and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) may carry multilocus quantification of the disease modifier SMN2 gene. SMA is a severe hypomethylation (MLH). Additionally single BWS and Silver-Russel neuromuscular disease characterized by degeneration of alpha motor syndrome (SRS) patients have been reported carrying the same MLH neurons in the spinal cord, which results in progressive muscle weak- pattern in blood lymphocytes affecting paternally as well as maternally ness and paralysis. The vast majority of SMA cases have a childhood imprinted genes. However, the reason why the same MLH patterns onset and different disease severity and course being subdivided in may either result in BWS or SRS is currently unclear. different clinical groups. The primary SMA-determining gene is the We now report on the molecular findings in blood and buccal swab SMN1 gene that in about 95% of affected patients is absent indepen- DNA in three SRS patients with hypomethylation of both imprinting dent of the type of SMA. A nearly identical gene, indicated as SMN2, center regions (ICRs) in 11p15. can vary the allelic copy number per genome and has been shown to Whereas this aberrant methylation affected both ICRs in leukocytes, in decrease the severity of SMA phenotype in a dose-dependent manner. buccal swab DNA of two patients only the ICR1 hypomethylation was Furthermore, a single base substitution (c859G>C), recently identified visible. One of these patients had a healthy monozygotic twin who also in SMN2 gene, seems to act as a further positive modifier of SMA carried ICR1 and ICR2 hypomethylation in leukocytes but not in buc- phenotype. Our new genotyping method will be applied to an appropri- cal swab DNA. A third patient showed loss of methylation of both ICRs ate cohort of patients, in a phenotype-genotype association study, to in 11p15 but also of the MEST locus on chromosome 7, this aberrant evaluate the diagnostic and prognostic potential of SMN2 copy num- pattern could also be detected in buccal epithelium. ber variation and single base substitution. Screening of several factors involved in establishment and mainte- nance of methylation marks including ZFP57 did not reveal the mo- P12.196 Detection of heterozygousSMN1 deletions in smA lecular clue for the MLH in our patients. However, our data provide families using a simple fluorescent multiplex PCR method evidence that in case of MLH the epimutation which is predominant in S. A. Kocheva1,2, S. Madzunkova1, G. D. Efremov1; tissues others than blood is causative for the phenotype and therefore 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic explains the clinical outcome. Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2University Children‘s Hospital, P12.194 No evidence for hemochromatosis type 4 in Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. hemizygous sLc40A1 deletion carriers With a prevalence of 1/6000 live births, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) K. Spanaus1, J. Meienberg2, M. Rohrbach3, S. Neuenschwander4, C. Giunta3, represents the second most common fatal autosomal recessive dis- S. Alonso2, C. Henggeler2, S. Azzarello-Burri5, B. Steiner5, W. Berger2, B. order. The heterozygote frequency has been estimated to be 1/40. Steinmann3, G. Matyas2; TheSMA locus has been mapped to chromosome 5q11.2-q13.3 within 1Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, a region characterized by the large inverted duplication of a 500 kb 2Division of Medical Molecular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Institute of element. However, the duplication of the SMA locus makes the detec- Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 3Division tion of SMA carriers in the general population difficult, and this has Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  hampered genetic counseling in affected families. Initial attempts to (Tab.1) These results confirmed the lower copy number of SMNc gene, estimate the SMN copy number were based on the measurement of the higher the severity of disease. theSMN1/SMN2ratios, but the broad variability of SMN2 copy num- Number of SMNc gene copies and ber hinders reliable quantification. In the present study, we describe the size of deletion in SMA region a method, which allows easy detection of heterozygous SMN1 dele- SMNc gene- Absence of tions in SMA carriers and SMA patients without homozygousSMN1 n=2 n=3 n=4 n=5 copy number NAIP gene deletions. We simultaneously amplified exon 7 of the SMN1and SMN2 SMAI SMA0 (n=20) 90% 10% 45% genes using a mismatch primer X7-Dra, which introduced a DraI re- SMAI (n=24) 58% 33% 9% 17% striction site into amplified SMN1 exon 7 and RB exon 13 genes as SMAII (n=43) 56% 40% 4% 7% a control fragment with a two copies of the gene. Digestion samples SMAIII SMAIIIa (n=12) 50% 42% 8% were analyzed by capillary electrophoresis on ABI PRISM 310 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). The size of the peak is determined SMAIIIb (n=31) 39% 29% 29% 3% by measuring its peak area. Given that there are two copies of the RB gene, the relationship between SMN1/RB is used to determine the P12.199 Expanding scN2A-associated phenotypes from relative number of copies of SMN1-gene. Using this method, we found neonatal epilepsy to episodic ataxia, myoclonus and pain heterozygous deletion of exon 7 and/or 8 of 50 analyzed parents of A. Anttonen1,2, Y. Liao3,4, E. Liukkonen5, E. Gaily5, S. Maljevic3,4, S. Schubert3, children with SMA. A. Bellan-Koch3, S. Petrou6, E. Ahonen2, H. Lerche4, A. Lehesjoki2; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland, P12.197 Effect of copy number variation of SMN1 neighboring 2Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Finland, 3Neurological genes on smA phenotype in tunisian patients Clinic and Institute of Applied Physiology, University of Ulm, Germany, 4Dept A. Amara1, M. Gribaa1, L. Adala1, I. Ben Charfeddine1, O. Mamaï1, A. Mili1, T. of Neurology and Epileptology, Hertie Institute of Clinical Brain Research, Ben lazreg1, D. H’mida1, F. Amri2, N. Salem3, L. Boughammoura4, A. Saad1; University Hospital Tübingen, Germany, 5Epilepsy Unit, Department of Pediatric 1Laboratory of cytogenetics, molecular genetics and reproductive biology. Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland, 6Florey Neurosciences CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of pediatrics, Hospital Ibn Institute, The Centre for Neuroscience, The University of Melbourne, Australia. El Jazzar, Kairouan, Tunisia, 3Department of neonatology, University Hospital Inherited and de novo mutations in sodium channel genes underlie Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Department of pediatrics, University Hospital a variety of epilepsy phenotypes. Mutations in SCN2A, encoding the Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia. brain sodium channel Na 1.2, have previously been reported to be V Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neuromus- associated with benign familial neonatal-infantile seizures, febrile cular disorder with an estimated incidence of 1 in 10,000 live births. seizures plus and intractable epilepsy of infancy. We evaluated the SMA is characterized by destruction of α motor neurons of anterior clinical characteristics in a patient with a neonatal-onset complex epi- horn cells of spinal cord, which leads to muscle weakness and atrophy. sodic neurological phenotype. We screened SCN2A for mutations and This disease is characterized by a high clinical variability. It has been carried out in vitro electrophysiological analyses to study the conse- classified into four types (type I: severe, type II: intermediate, type III: quences of the identified mutation. We studied the developmental ex- mild and type IV: adult). In 95% of cases, SMA is related to homozy- pression of Na 1.2 in cerebellum by immunohistochemical analysis. V gous deletion of exon7 of SMN1 gene localized on 5q13. The patient presented with neonatal-onset seizures and variable epi- The main objective of this study was to determine a genotype-pheno- sodes of ataxia, myoclonia, headache and back pain after 18 months type correlation between the copy number of SMN2, NAIP, p44, H4F5 of age. The patient carries a de novo missense mutation (p.Ala263Val) and occludin genes localized in the same region and the severity of in SCN2A, which leads to a pronounced gain-of-function, in particu- the disease in SMA Tunisian patients. Twenty six unrelated patients lar an increased persistent Na+ current. Immunohistochemical studies affected by SMA were enrolled in the study. MLPA and QMPSF were suggest a developmentally increasing expression of Na 1.2 in granule V used to measure copy numbers of these genes. cell axons projecting to Purkinje neurons. These results can explain Our results showed that 31.3 % of type I patients carried one copy of a neuronal hyperexcitability resulting in seizures and other episodic SMN2, while all patients of other forms had at least 2 copies. NAIP was symptoms extending the spectrum of SCN2A-associated phenotypes. absent in 87.5% of type I patients. Furthermore, all SMA type I patients The developmentally increasing expression of Na 1.2 in cerebellum V had one copy of H4F5. No correlation was found for p44 and occludin. may be responsible for the later onset of episodic ataxia. We conclude that there is a close relationship between SMN2, NAIP and H4F5 gene copy numbers and SMA disease severity, which is P12.200 A 134 kb duplication 0.5 mb upstream of sOX9 compatible with the previous reports. associated with hermaphroditism in an XX male and autism in his XY brother P12.198 The assessment of influence of 5q13 locus genes copy- A. Brendehaug1, O. Bruland1, A. Molven2, G. Houge1; number on the severity of spinal muscular atrophy in Russian 1Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2The Gade Insttitute, UiB, patients. Bergen, Norway. V. V. Zabnenkova, E. L. Dadali, A. V. Polyakov; In a sibship of six a 46,XX male hermaphrodite with ovotestes and no Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. detectable SRY sequence had a brother with infantile autism without Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive mental retardation. Both brothers had inherited an identical 134 Kb neurodegenerative disorder caused by the loss of a-motor neurons in duplication of the regulatory genomic region 0.5 Mb upstream of SOX9 the spinal cord. SMA patients are subdivided into types I-III accord- from their mother. In another brother who had inherited the same ma- ing to age of onset and achieved motor abilities. All three forms of ternal SOX9 haplotype, no upstream duplication was found, proving proximal SMA are caused by mutations in SMNt gene. About 95% of that the mother was a gonadal mosaic for the duplication. We hypoth- SMA cases are caused by homozygous deletion of the SMNt gene or esize that the duplication caused sufficient SRY-independent SOX9 conversion events. The phenotype variability of the disease with such expression in the undifferentiated fetal gonads to promote testicular molecular homogenity can be explained by presence of phenotype development. Apparently, this effect was tissue- and/or fetal-specific as modifiers. In this study SMNc and NAIP gene-copy number has been no SOX9 expression was detectable in leukocytes and skin fibroblasts analyzed for establishing of the phenotype-genotype correlation in 130 from any of the siblings. The observations in the family also suggest SMA patients with homozygous deletion of SMNt gene (SMAI n=44, that such a SOX9 regulatory region duplication may predispose for SMAII n=43, SMAIII n=43). Thereto, it had been developed a quantita- autism in the presence of a Y chromosome, i.e. a SRY gene. This hy- tive assay based on Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification. pothesis is supported by the SOX9 segregation pattern which as a less Also, we studied phenotype-genotype correlation within the one type than 8,2 % probability of being a random event, and the unexplained of SMA. SMAI patients were subdivided into two groups: SMA0 (inher- general excess of autistic features in males. We therefore propose that ent, diminished fetal movements in utero, with asphyxia and severe an additional role of SOX9, directly linked to testicular differentiation, weakness at birth) and SMAI (the classical form of severe spinal mus- could be the promotion of male-specific brain development. cular atrophy). Type III SMA was subdivided into two groups: SMAIIIa (onset below 3 years of age) and SMAIIIb (onset at the age ≥ 3 years). Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  P12.201 Validation of 7500Dx (Applied Biosystems) real time drugs that increase full-length SMN mRNA production by SMN2 gene PCR instrument for the identification of spinal muscular atrophy are in progress. SMN2 gene copy number seems to be useful molecu- (smA) healthy carriers. lar marker for SMA diagnostics. R. Lomastro1, S. Fiori1, R. Petraroli2, M. O’Donoghue3, G. Neri1, C. Brahe1, F. SMN2 gene dosage analysis was performed for 61 patients affected D. Tiziano1; by II and III types of SMA (42 and 19 patients accordingly) by means of 1Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 2Applied Biosystems, real-time quantitative PCR. Most of II type patients had 3 SMN2 copies Monza, Italy, 3Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. (76.19%), 11.90% of patients had 2 SMN2 copies and 11.90% had 4 Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder SMN2 copies, none of them showed one copy. Most of III type patients caused by degeneration of spinal alpha-motor neurons. On the basis possess 3 SMN2 copies (57.89%), 36.84% of patients had 4 SMN2 of clinical severity, three forms of infantile SMA can be identified (type copies and only one person showed 2 SMN2 copies. Also we found the I-III). All forms of SMA share the same genetic defect: about 95% of pa- family with SMN1-deleted son and his mother. Son was II type SMA tients have the homozygous absence of SMN1 gene, due to deletion patient whereas mother was unaffected. It was estimated that son has or gene conversion. SMA is a relatively common condition, being the 2 SMN2 copies while mother has 5 SMN2 copies. Our results confirm prevalence about 1/6000 and the frequency of healthy carriers around genotype-phenotype correlation between the SMN2 copy number and 1/36. Due to the frequency of this condition, the identification of carri- SMA severity. Extremely high SMN2 gene copy number may promote ers among relatives of patients is a common request to genetic clinics. the development of asymptomatic phenotype. Thus we conclude that A number of molecular assays for carrier testing have been developed SMN2 gene copy quantification could be reasonable for precise SMA so far, based on real time PCR or multiplex ligation-dependent probe molecular genetic testing. amplification assay (MLPA). In our Centre we have developed an as- say based on real time PCR for SMA carrier testing by which we have P12.204 smA carrier testing by real-time PcR quantitative analyzed almost 1000 individuals, using 7900 HT Fast Real Time PCR analysis of smN1 System (Applied Biosytems). Recently, in a collaborative project with M. L. Essawi, H. Ameen, H. N. Soliman; Applied Biosystems we have validated the 7500Dx instrument for SMA National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. carrier testing. To this aim, DNA samples from 50 consecutive individu- Background: Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is one of the als, relatives of SMA patients or their partners, afferent to the Genet- most common autosomal recessive diseases, where it has an estimat- ics Clinic at the Catholic University Hospital, were analyzed both by ed incidence of 1 in 6000-10000 live births and a carrier frequency of 7900HT and 7500Dx instruments. The results were concordant among 1 in 40-60. SMA patients are classified into three clinical types based the two instruments in 100% of samples analyzed. Our data indicate on age of onset and severity of symptoms. Mutations in the survival that 7500Dx instrument is a powerful tool for the identification of SMA motor neuron gene 1 (SMN1) are determinant for development of the healthy carriers. disease, whereas the number of copies of SMN2 gene plays a role as a phenotypic modifier factor. Approximately 94% of patients have P12.202 spectrum of phenotypes associated with the SMN2 homozygous absence of the SMN1 whereas most carriers have only c.859G>C variant in Spanish SMA patients. one SMN1 gene copy, this study aimed to establish SMA carrier de- S. Bernal1, L. Alias1, E. Also-Rallo1, R. Martínez-Hernández1, C. Hernández- tection test through SMN1 quantitative analyses using real-time PCR Chico2, F. J. Rodríguez-Alvarez2, J. M. Millan3, S. Borrego4, M. Baiget1, P. technique. Fuentes-Prior1, E. F. Tizzano1; Patients and methods: The study included twenty obligate heterozy- 1Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, gotes, ten patients with homozygous deletion of SMN1 and twenty 3Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 4Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain. normal controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neuromus- samples. Real-time PCR test for SMN1 gene was optimized and relat- cular disorder caused by loss or deficiency of the telomeric copy of the ed to that of albumin as a reference gene. The copy number of SMN1 Survival of Motor Neuron (SMN) gene, SMN1. A second, highly similar gene was determined by comparative threshold cycle (Ct) method. centromeric gene (SMN2) can only partially compensate for SMN1 de- Results: The homozygous SMN1 deletion ratio of patients was 0.00, ficiency because exon 7 is skipped from most SMN2 transcripts due to the hemizygous SMN1 deletion ratio of carriers ranged from 0.39-0.59 a single C-to-T transition, which results in a partially defective, unstable and about 0.84-2.19 in normal controls. protein. Recent reports have indicated that the rare c.859G>C nucleo- Conclusion: The study provided accurate and reliable test for SMA car- tide exchange in SMN2 is a positive modifier of SMA; patients with only rier detection, genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis. two SMN2 copies present an unexpectedly mild phenotype, which is related to the enhanced inclusion of exon 7 in transcripts of the SMN2 P12.205 Genetics of spinocerebellar ataxias in Portuguese variant. We analyzed the prevalence of the c.859G>C base change patients: screening for SCA15, SCA28, and FXTAS in a cohort of 253 unrelated Spanish SMA patients and in six pairs of A. I. Seixas1, J. Vale2,3, C. Cagnoli4, A. Brusco4, J. Sequeiros1,5, I. Silveira1; SMA discordant siblings; all patients had homozygous absence of the 1UnIGENE, IBMC-Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Porto, Portugal, SMN1 gene. We identified the gene variant in 10 unrelated SMA pa- 2Department of Neurology, Hospital Egas Moniz, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Faculty of tients. In contrast to previously reported cases, we find that c.859G>C Medical Sciences, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 4A.O.U. San is associated with a wide spectrum of phenotypes from typical type II Giovanni Battista, S.C.D.U. Medical Genetics, Department of Genetics, Biology, patients who can only sit to adult walkers with type IIIb. Further, all 10 and Biochemistry, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 5ICBAS, University of Porto, patients share common alleles with multicopy markers linked to SMN Porto, Portugal. genes, strongly suggesting that the variant originated from a common The autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a hetero- ancestor. Structural data support the view that the variant reduces af- geneous group of rare, late-onset neurological disorders caused by finity for the splicing repressor hnRNP A1, favouring the inclusion of progressive neuronal degeneration, mainly affecting the cerebellum. exon 7 and increasing the amount of functional SMN protein. More than 25 SCA loci have been mapped and 18 disease-causing Supported by GENAME Project, CIBERER and FIS08-0729. genes identified to date. Mutation screening has allowed us to geneti- cally characterize almost 200 Portuguese ataxia families. However, P12.203 Quantification of SMN2 gene copy number for more than 100 families and an even larger number of apparently spo- molecular diagnostics in Russian smA patients radic cases, remain without a genetic diagnosis. Here, we present the G. Zheleznyakova1, A. Kiselev2, V. Vakharlovsky2, V. Baranov2; results of mutation screenings for two recently described SCA sub- 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, types, SCA15 and SCA28, in Portuguese patients clinically diagnosed 2Ott‘s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian with dominant ataxia, and the results of FMR1 premutation analysis Federation. in males with sporadic late-onset movement disorders. All SCA15 pa- Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is neuromuscular disorder caused by tients identified so far have deletions of at least several exons of the homozygous deletion of SMN1 gene in more than 90% patients. SMN2 gene ITPR1. SCA28 is caused by point mutations in the gene AFG3L2. gene copy number, a nearly identical centromeric copy gene of SMN1, The fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is caused correlates with SMA severity because SMN2 gene produces 10-20% by intermediate expansions of CGG repeats in the FMR1 gene. of full-length SMN mRNA and functional SMN protein. Clinical trials of We carried out quantitative real-time PCR or direct sequencing of the Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  exons of interest to screen for ITPR1 genomic deletions or SCA28 University Hospital Brno, Institute of Forensic Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, mutations, respectively, and failed to find any pathogenic alterations. 4University Hospital Brno, Internal and Cardiological Dept., Brno, Czech We detected one patient carrying a FMR1 premutation and presenting Republic. with a clinical and radiological phenotype compatible with a FXTAS Background: The sudden unexpected death in young age is relatively diagnosis. rare and in some cases (4,3% to 50%) it remains unexplained even af- In conclusion, SCA15 and SCA28 mutations are very rare in the Por- ter autopsy (including toxicology and histology examinations). In these tuguese population of ataxia patients, while the frequency of FXTAS is cases, we suppose a malignant arrhythmia to be the leading cause of very low. A substantial number of SCA genotypes likely remain to be death. Recent studies showed theat genetic disorders of ion channels found in the Portuguese ataxia patient population. are responsible for 22% to 28% of sudden deaths. Most commonly, the Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is present, but also some other disorders, P12.206 the analysis of (cAG) and (cAt) repeats of the like catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) n n ATXN1 gene in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 patients from and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) have been described. Bashkortostan Republic and populations of the Volga-Ural The aim of the project is to apply genetic analysis (in these selected region of Russia. group we intended to perform mutation analysis of the following genes: I. Khidiyatova, E. Mingazova, R. Magzhanov, E. Khusnutdinova; KCNQ1, KCNH2, KCNE1, SCN5A, KCNE2 and ANK2 genes ) in cas- Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. es of sudden unexpected deaths under 40 years of age, to discover Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is known to be the most com- the occurrence of particular genetic disturbances related to malignant mon form of autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (AD SCAs) arrhythmias (ion channels disesaes - LQTS and CPVT, HCM), and in European populations, caused by expansion of (CAG) repeats in to perform clinical examination of surviving relatives aimed to identify n the coding region of ATXN1 gene. Normal variation of gene contains the families endangered by sudden cardiac death. We suppose, that 6-37 CAG repeats, broken by insertion of 1-3 triplets, which serve as from all cases of sudden death without pathological findings, we will stabilizing factor for (CAG) tract. The prevalence of SCA1 in Bashkor- discover at least 20% to be caused by ion channel genetic disorder n tostan Republic is 0,07 per 100000 population. The analysis of ATXN1 (LQTS, CPVT) gene revealed no (CAG) alleles without CAT insertions in healthy Conclusion: Combining the genetic examination of dead subjects with n individuals from Bashkortostan. The control DNA sample with known examination of first-degree relatives (ECG, echocardiography, exer- nucleotide sequence had 4 CAT insertions. Thus, in populations of the cise ECG testing, clinical examination) is possible to identify the cause Volga-Ural region of Russia there is a combination of low SCA1 fre- of 40% of sudden unexpected deaths. quency and absence (or extreme low frequency) of (CAG) alleles of This work was carried through the finnancial support of granr IGA MZ n the ATXN1 gene without CAT insertions. Normal ATXN1 gene variation NR/10444-3. of (CAG) repeats is investigated in 12 populations of the Volga-Ural n region of Russia: significant heterogeneity of the studied populations is P12.209 molecular analysis of cOcH gene in patients with found. We found 13 allele variants with the number of triplets from 22 superior semicircular canal dehiscence to 35, the most frequent of them are from 28 to 31, which correspond to N. Liaño1, E. Sarasola1, B. Santos1, M. Crovetto2, M. J. García-Barcina1; number of triplets in the most of European populations. Thus, (CAG) 1Unidad de Genética del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA n repeats of the ATXN1 gene will contribute to diagnostic possibilities as / Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Servicio de ORL del Hospital informative genetic marker of populations. Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA / Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain. P12.207 mRNA analysis revealed molecular defect of cFtR Superior semicircular canal dehiscence (SSCD) was originally de- gene in uncharacterized cF patients scribed by Minor and colleagues in 1998, and it is characterised by L. Costantino1, L. Claut2, V. Paracchini1, D. A. Coviello1, C. Colombo2, L. the absence of bone overlying the superior semicircular canal, which Porcaro1, P. Capasso1, D. Degiorgio1, M. Seia1; creates a third labyrinthine window (with the oval and round windows). 1Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale The consequence is the loss of acoustic energy and abnormal stimula- Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Cystic Fibrosis Center, Fondazione IRCCS tion of the vestibular system; the clinical manifestations include Val- Ca’ Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. salva- and exercise-induced vertigo, sound-induced vertigo (tullio phe- At present time, CFTR mRNA analysis represents more a research nomenon), and variable conductive hearing loss. It is important to de- tool for the identification of unknown molecular defects of the CFTR tect SSCD because it could be partially or fully corrected with surgery. gene in specific rare cases than a routine approach to complete a di- The genetics of SSCD have not been studied. On the contrary, au- agnostic procedure. In particular mRNA analysis may allow research- tosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss at the DFNA9 locus ers to find sequence variations not yet defined like specific splicing (characterised by vestibular dysfunction) is known to be caused by defects. Molecular analysis of CFTR performed at DNA level on 800 mutations in the COCH gene (chromosome 14q12), which encodes patients was not able to identify the defect in 101 (6%) CF alleles. In cochlin. Recently, an association between a mutation in the COCH order to characterize these unidentified alleles, 36 cases out of 50 pa- gene and the presence of SSCD has been reported (Am J Med Genet tients were re-contacted and a nasal epithelium sample was collected 2009; 149A: 280-5). to analyze the mRNA. We performed complete sequencing of COCH gene in 3 patients with The RNA defects were characterized in about the 30.5 % of analyzed proven SSCD, previously diagnosed by CT and surgically corrected. patients. The cDNA analysis showed that 8 patients had a novel tran- We didn’t find any nucleotide change in the COCH gene sequence. scription product: 4 patients carry an insertion of intron sequence of The molecular basis of this rare disorder remains to be elucidated. about 100bp near exon 6b, 2 patients carry a 104bp insertion located between exons 10 and 11; 2 patients presented at DNA level a nucleo- P12.210 Frequency of positive XmnI Gγ polymorphism and tide variation described as polymorphism, which instead determines coinheritance of common alpha thalassemia mutations do not an aberrant splicing at RNA level. show statistically significant difference between thalassemia In addition in 2 patients we observed a low level of mRNA product that major and intermedia cases with homozygous iVsii-1 mutation will be analyzed by quantitative technique. The remaining patients are M. Neishabury1, A. Azarkeivan2, H. Najmabadi1,3; still under evaluation. 11. Genetics Research Center (GRC), University of Social Welfare and Our results confirm the efficacy of the CFTR analysis at mRNA level as Rehabilitation Sciences (USWR), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, a diagnostic method in characterizing mutations and in checking their 22. Thalssemia Clinic, Research Center, Iranian Blood Transfusion effect on normal splicing processes and transcription rates. Organization(IBTO), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 33. Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P12.208 Sudden unexpected death and genetic analysis of LQTs From 362 thalassemia cases referred to Adult thalassemia clinic of the genes Iranian blood transfusion organization (IBTO) for genotyping and fur- J. Kadlecová1,2, I. Valášková1,2, R. Gallyová1,2, T. Pexa3, T. Novotný4, M. Sepši4; ther studies, 103 cases (28.5%) had a common primary disease factor, 1University Hospital Brno, Medical Genetics Dept., Brno, Czech Republic, IVSII-1 mutation in homozygous state. 61 (59.2%) of these individuals 2Fakulty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3St. Anne´s represented thalassemia major and 42 (40.8%) thalassemia interme-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 77 dia clinical phenotype. To re-evaluate our current diagnostic criteria, exons of TCOF1 which will detect point mutations, splicing mutations XmnI Gγ polymorphism and coexistence of alpha thalassemia muta- and small indels. Patients with classical TCS without a TCOF1 se- tions, frequently recalled as important factors modifying the clinical quence variant may reflect genetic heterogeneity; however, no alter- phenotype of homozygous beta zero thalassemia cases in our country, native genes have been identified. Alternatively, it may indicate that, were examined in both groups. No statistically significant difference due to incomplete gene screening, certain TCOF1 variants remain un- in the frequency of positive XmnI Gγ polymorphism was observed be- detected. We therefore hypothesised that gene rearrangements may tween thalassemia intermedia and thalassemia major patients. Double underlie a proportion of TCS cases without a molecular diagnosis. gene deletion --Med was observed in only one thalassemia major case, We collaborated with MRC-Holland to develop an MLPA kit that tests while -a3.7 in heterozygous state (-a3.7/aa) was identified in 6 (9.8%) of TCOF1 for gene rearrangements. After test validation, patients re- thalassemia major and 8(19%) of thalassemia intermedia patients and ferred for TCOF1 analysis but tested negative by sequencing were -a4.2 was observed in only one thalassemia major case. No statistically tested. Out of 53 patients tested, 5 (9.4%) were found to have a dele- significant difference in the frequency of coinheritance of alpha thalas- tion involving part of TCOF1. This is the first report of gross deletions semia was observed between the two groups. These results imply that resulting in TCS, and indicates that gene rearrangements do account other interacting mechanisms which modify the phenotype of thalas- for a significant proportion of cases. semia patients is still in the dark in our current diagnostic criteria of thalassemia. P12.213 A novel nonsense mutation in UNC1D causing a severe form of Familial Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis. P12.211 Development of the oral cavity : from gene to clinical M. E. van Gijn1, E. Elstak2, D. M. W. M. te Loo3, K. Tesselaar4, J. Loeffen3, F. A. expression in human M. Hennekam1, J. J. Boelens5, P. M. Hoogerbrugge3, P. van der Sluijs2, L. van A. Bloch-Zupan1,2, V. Laugel2, R. Ripp2, A. Langer1, P. Choquet3, A. de Corput4; Constantinesco3, J. Marrie2, M. Schmittbuhl1,4, P. Dolle2; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 1Faculty of Dentistry University of Strasbourg, Reference Centre for OroDental Netherlands, 2Department of Cell Biology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Manifestations of Rare Diseases, HUS, Strasbourg, France, 2IGBMC; Inserm, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University Nijmegen U964; CNRS-UdS UMR7104, Illkirch, France, 3Service de Biophysique et Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Immunology, University Médecine Nucléaire, CHRU Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Department of Pediatric France, 4INSERM U977, Strasbourg, France. Immunology, Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital/University Medical Center Utrecht, Pathologies or developmental anomalies of the oral cavity are one clin- Utrecht, Netherlands. ical aspect, leading eventually to diagnosis, but often underestimated Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHLH) is a life-threaten- and considered, especially in their management, of genetic diseases ing autosomal recessive disorder of immune regulation. It is character- or syndromes. Among more than 7000 known rare diseases, 850 have ized by severe hyperinflammation caused by the uncontrolled prolifera- dental/oral/facial manifestations and more than 300 include in their tion of activated lymphocytes and histiocytes. HLH is a heterogeneous clinical synopsis a cleft lip/palate. disease with regard to genotype and phenotype. Four genes PRF1, This original research project offers to combine complementary and UNC13D, STX11, and STXBP2 have been linked to the disease so far. convergent approaches in bioinformatics, developmental biology es- Here we report the characterization of a novel nonsense mutation in pecially through the study of genetically engineered mice, to improve the UNC13D gene that was detected in three unrelated patients. the knowledge and understanding of the formation of the oral cavity All three patients were admitted to the hospital at very young age (6, 8 and specifically of the palate and dentition. It uses the following ap- and 12 weeks old) and fulfilled the criteria of HLH, i.e. fever, cytopenia, proaches: (hepato)splenomegaly, hemophagocytosis in central nervous system 1) Selection of known genes responsible for rare diseases but for (CNS), elevated levels of ferritin and soluble CD25. Treatment was which expression and/or roles are insufficiently characterised. given according to the HLH 2004 protocol, but all three infants de- (2) Identification of new candidate genes, through a systematic anal- ceased at an age of 5 to 6 months. Homozygosity for the c. 2695C>T ysis of their craniofacial and dental expression patterns using the (p.Arg899X) mutation in exon 28 of UNC13D was shown in two pa- EURExpress mouse transcriptome-wide atlas (http://www.eurexpress. tients. The third patient showed compound heterozygosity for the org/ee/) and the “Odontogenesis” related database. c.2695C>T (p.Arg899X) and another mutation in UNC13D. In patient (3) A detailed analysis of the expression patterns of the most inter- tissues UNC13D mRNA was present. Further investigation revealed esting genes, is performed by in situ hybridisation techniques, in the that the mutation resulted in a misfolded dysfunctional protein. Geo- mouse at various stages of odontogenesis. graphical clustering of the patient families and genealogical research, (4) Animal models craniofacial and orodental phenotypes are detailed where two patients could be traced to a common link, suggests that using an imaging platform (micro-CT) a single ancestral founder might have introduced the mutation in the (5) In vitro organ culture and manipulation Netherlands. Conclusion; the novel c.2695C>T (p.Arg899X) mutation This work federates scientists and clinicians and should stimulate the in UNC13D, which most likely originates from a common founder is implementation of science based evidence diagnosis and new thera- associated with severe early lethal HLH. peutic options (treatment of teeth agenesis by stimulation of odonto- genesis in situ; tissue engineering) thus contributing to the wellbeing P12.214 Genetics and clinical Aspects of Usher and Pendred and orodental and general health care of the patient (Grants APIHUS, syndromes in iranian Population IFRO, UdS, MAEE PHC Thai). K. Kahrizi1, G. Asaadi tehrani1, N. Sadeghpour1, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Mohseni1, K. Jalalvand1, s. Arzhangi1, S. Saketkhoo1, N. Meyer2, W. P12.212 Identification of gross deletions in TCOF1: Use of mLPA Kimberling3, R. Smith2, H. Najmabadi1; in the diagnosis of treacher collins-Franceschetti syndrome. 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social and Rehabilitation Sciences, M. A. Bowman1, R. Brekelmans2, A. Seller1, T. Lester1; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research 1Oxford Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2MRC- Laboratories , Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery , Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands. University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 3United States Boys Town National Treacher Collins-Franceschetti syndrome (TCS) is an autosomal dom- Hospital , Omaha , NE and University of Iowa Medical School, Iowa, Iowa, IA, inant craniofacial disorder characterised by midface hypoplasia, mi- United States. crognathia, downslanting palpebral fissures, eyelid coloboma, and ear Syndromic hearing impairment accounts for 30% of prelingual deaf- deformities that often lead to conductive deafness. High inter- and in- ness.The two most common types are Usher and Pendred syndromes tra-familial clinical variability is observed, ranging from perinatal death both of them have AR pattern of inheritance. Three different types of due to a compromised airway to a phenotype that goes undetected by Usher syndrome USH I (50%), USHII (35%) and USH III (15%) have medical examination. TCS is caused by null mutations in the TCOF1 been recognized. Up to now 13 different loci and 8 genes have been gene. identified. Also Pendred is characterized by congenital sensorineural The Oxford Molecular Genetics Laboratory provides a specialist mo- hearing loss, goiter (40-60%) and inner ear abnormalities and impaired lecular genetics service for rare craniofacial and skeletal disorders, vestibular function test. The objective of this study was to identify the which includes TCS. Our testing strategy is to sequence the 27 coding prevalence of USH loci in deaf-blind patients and PDS gene mutations Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  in Iranian Population. an important impact on diagnostic testing and genetic counseling and Thirty USH families and 120 families with Pendred syndrome were increase our fundamental knowledge on this glycosylation pathway. subjected to linkage analysis using STR markers. The sequencing for mutation screening was performed for the linked families. P12.217 Haplotype mapping of the Welander distal myopathy eleven out of thirty USH families were linked to the studied USH loci region on chromosome 2p13. which we identified the mutation in four of these families and muta- H. Örlén1, A. Melberg2, M. Entesarian1, J. Klar1, N. Dahl1; tion screening in the other linked families is on the way. Also we were 1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, UPPSALA, able to link fourteen autosomal recessive hearing impaired families to Sweden, 2Department of Neuroscience, Neurology, Uppsala University DFNB 4 locus and nine of them showed different types of PDS mu- Hospital, UPPSALA, Sweden. tations. In conclusion 33% of the families with USH syndrome were Welander distal myopathy (WDM) (MIM 604454) is an autosomal linked to one of the known loci, however additional study needed to dominant inherited muscle dystrophy with late onset. The disorder is determine the causative genes involve in the other families .We have characterized by progressive weakening of the distal limbs with exten- also been able to determine Pendred syndrome as the second cause sor muscles in hands and feet first afflicted. Disease onset is usually of hearing loss in our population. around 40-60 years of age and the incidence is high in regions of Swe- den and Finland. A candidate region on chromosome 2p13 flanked by P12.215 molecular characterization of iranian patients with type marker D2S358 and D2S2835 has previously been reported (von Tell 3 von Willebrand disease et al. 2003) but no disease causing mutation has been identified. Novel S. Shahbazi1,2, R. Mahdian3, F. A. Ala4, J. M. Lavergne2, C. V. Denis2, O. D. genome assemblies show that the candidate gene region is larger and Christophe2; contains more genes than first anticipated. 1Medical Genetics Department, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares We investigated 26 non-related and affected individuals originating University, Tehran,, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2INSERM U770, Faculte´ de from Sweden and Finland. Affected individuals were genotyped us- Me´decine Paris-Sud, Universite´ Paris-Sud, IFR93, Le Kremlin-Biceˆtre, ing 13 microsatellites spanning the candidate region on chromosome France, 3Molecular Medicine Department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran,, 2p13 confirming an association to WDM. All patients share a common Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Iranian Comprehensive Haemophilia Care Centre haplotype between marker D2S358 and D2S291 spanning 2,1cM. The (ICHCC),Tehran, Iran, Tehran,, Islamic Republic of Iran. size of the shared region is 3,0 Mb containing 55 annotated genes. von Willebrand’s disease (VWD) type 3 is a rare but severe autoso- The conserved haplotype segregating disease suggests a founder ef- mal-recessive inherited bleeding disorder with a prevalence higher fect with an estimated age of 95 generations (calculated as 2/g mor- in certain locations where consanguineous marriages are relatively gans) (Boehnke 1994). We hypothesize that a large chromosomal re- frequent. The genetic defects causing recessive type 3 VWD in 10 arrangement, e.g. an inversion, may explain the conserved haplotype. unrelated families from Iran have been investigated and the genetic Such a rearrangement may also disrupt a gene at one of the inversion heterogeneity among these patients was evaluated. All exons and breakpoints. The haplotype segregating WDM is now being restricted their flanking regions of von Willebrand factor gene were amplified in search for candidate genes. by PCR and sequenced using specific primers. Eight patients were fully characterized at the molecular level. Six different gene alterations P12.218 Strategy for mutation detection in Serbian patients with were identified. All the mutations caused null alleles, three being non- Wilson disease sense mutations (Q104X, Q793X and E1981X), two possible splice V. S. Dobricic, A. Tomic, N. Kresojevic, M. Svetel, I. Novakovic, V. Kostic; site mutations (2443- 1G>C and 1110-1G>A) and one small dele- Institute of Neurology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. tion (3237delA). Three of them have not been described previously. Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper Most patients were born from consanguineous marriages and all were metabolism resulting in pathological accumulation of copper in many homozygous for their mutations. The results confirm that molecular organs and tissues. This condition is caused by mutations in the gene defects in type 3 VWD are heterogeneous with mutations arising ran- coding for a copper-transporting CPx-type ATPase (ATP7B). More than domly within the entire gene. 300 distinct mutations of ATP7B are described, but in most populations majority of the WD cases are due to a small number of specific gene P12.216 Dissecting the genetic heterogeneity in Walker-Warburg changes. In Central and Eastern Europe the most common mutations syndrome and related cobblestone lissencephalies are located in exons 14, 8, 5, 13 and 15. That has already been con- T. Roscioli, E. van Beusekom, J. van Reeuwijk, C. van den Elzen, E. firmed for Serbian WD patients in pilot study realized in Italy. There- Kamsteeg, H. Brunner, D. Lefeber, H. van Bokhoven; fore, as the first step in establishing molecular genetic testing for WD Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. in our country, we performed direct sequencing of those five exons of Walker Warburg syndrome (WWS; OMIM 236670) is an autosomal re- ATP7B gene. We analyzed DNA samples of 34 unrelated Serbian WD cessive disorder characterized by muscular dystrophy, eye and neural patients using ABI 310 Genetic Analyzer. Total number of 43 mutated migration defects and other structural brain anomalies, such as cerebel- alleles were found (63.2%). 17 patients (50%) carried two mutations lar hypoplasia and hydrocephalus. Other WWS-like disorders include in ATP7B gene (homozygous or compound heterozygous), while 9 pa- Fukuyama Congenital Muscular Dystrophy (FCMD, OMIM 253800), tients (26.5%) carried only one ATP7B mutation. In 8 patients (23.5%) and Muscle-Eye-Brain disease (MEB, OMIM 253280). A common no mutations were found. We detected 11 different mutations, one of feature of these syndromes is neural overmigration during neocortex which is novel. The most common mutations are: H1069Q (39.5%), lamination, giving rise to cobblestone lissencephaly, disorganized ce- 2304_2305insC (25.6%), A1003T (11.6%), and R616Q (7%). rebral cortices and multiple coarse gyri with agyric regions. Mutations These results indicate that sequencing of exons 14, 8, 5, 13 and 15 in six genes have been associated with cobblestone lissencephaly. is good start strategy for mutation detection in WD patients in Serbia. Mutations in these genes commonly result in decreased O-linked gly- However, mutation analysis of the remaining exons in ATP7B gene cosylation of alpha-dystroglycan. The six known genes account for ap- should be developed. proximately 1/3 of cases of WWS, suggesting that there are significant number of genes yet to be identified. At least a percentage of these are P12.219 mutational analysis and genotype-phenotype hypothesized to be involved in O-linked glycosylation. correlation of Wilson disease patients in an isolated Romanian Genetic and functional genomics approaches are being applied to population identify the remaining WWS genes. Homozygous regions in 30 con- R. Cocoş, F. Raicu, L. C. Bohîlţea; sanguineous and outbred families with one or more affected individu- “Carol Davila”University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. als have been identified by a homozygosity mapping approach. Our Wilson disease is a rare condition characterized by a defect in ex- data are consistent with at least ten additional WWS genes being pres- cretion of copper, due to a mutation of both alleles of ATP7B gene. ent. Additional novel methodologies for gene identification include next The mutations in the ATP7B gene lead to intracellular accumulation generation sequencing and comparative expression profiling in fibro- of copper and severe hepatic and neurological abnormalities. The blasts from patients and unaffected siblings are in progress. We an- human ATOX1 protein is an metallochaperone that interacts directly ticipate that the results of the combined studies will identify additional with copper- transporting ATP-ase (ATP7B) and can regulate its cop- genes that are crucial for glycosylation of dystroglycan, which will have per occupancy. We report the further results of an ongoing project Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders  concerning the spectrum of mutations of ATP7B and ATOX1 genes P12.222 the tunisian experience in X linked mental retardation in WD patients and their relatives (5 WD patients and 152 autoch- l. ben jemaa1,2, i. rejeb3, f. maazoul1, r. mrad1,2, m. chaabouni1,2, m. trabelsi1, j. thonous inhabitants to the third generation originated from the same chelly4, h. chaabouni1,5; village) from an isolated Romanian populations with high prevelance of 1service des maladies congénitales et héréditaires, tunis, Tunisia, 2faculté de WD. Patients‘ demographic, clinical and histopathological parameters médecine de Tunis, Tunisia, 3faculté de médecine de Tunis, tunis, Tunisia, were obtained. Direct sequencing of all 21 exons of ATP7B shown that 4institut cochin de génétique moléculaire, paris, France, 5faculté de médecine four WD patients are hetreozygotes or compound heterozygotes for de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia. three mutations P767P-fs, H1069Q or K832R and one WD patient Mental retardation is the most frequent cause of handicap. Linkage was homozygous for K832R. Mutation analysis of the four exons of studies followed by mutational analysis of known MRX genes localized the ATOX1 gene including the intron- exon boundaries revealed one within defined genetic intervals represent a good strategy to identify known polymorphism (5’UTR -99 T>C) in 27 out of 157 autochthonous a genetic cause of the disorder. We report the Tunisian experience in inhabitants. Based on the data of this study, no major role can be at- X linked mental retardation. Our study of more than 10 families has tributed to ATOX1 in the pathophysiology or clinical variation of Wilson concluded on three important families. The first one was the MRX54 disease. Phenotype variation among subjects with the same ATP7B including 14 males which allowed us to identify a new mutation on genotype suggests that modifying factors play an additional role in the the ARX gene a substitution of a leucine (CTG) with proline (CCG) pathogenesis of WD. on the amino acid number 33(L33P) .The second family shows mod- erate mental retardation with behavioral symptoms, common dys- P12.220 Novel missense mutation in WisP3 gene associated morphic features. Linkage analysis showed that affected males and with childhood onset progressive pseudorheumatoid obligate carrier females share a common haplotype in the Xp21.31 arthropathy (c.667 t>G) - Xq23 region that contains PAK3 gene. Sequencing of PAK3 allowed L. Kapur1, N. Lojo-Kadric1, J. Ramic1, I. Gavrankapetanovic2, K. Bajrovic1; us to identify the first splice mutation in PAK3 gene located at the 5’ 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and end of intron 6 (c.276+4A>G). The third family including 3 males with Herzegovina, 2Clinic of Orthopaedics and Traumathology, Clinical University severe to mild mental retardation, short stature, lean body and mi- Center Sarajevo, Bolnička 25, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. crocephaly. The disease was mapped into an interval encompassing Childhood onset progressive pseudorheumatoid arthropathy Xp21.1-Xq21.33 (maximum LOD score of 0.90). Mutation analysis of (OMIM#208230) was first desribed by Spranger et al. (1983) as an genes located here allowed us to identify a truncating mutation in the arthropathy of childhood beginning at about age 3 to 8 years with pro- PQBP1 gene. This mutation is an insertion of a one adenosine residue gressive joint stiffness. This condition is characterized by that it first in exon 5 (c.631insA). This frameshift insertion causes premature stop affects the hips with pseudorheumathoid manifestations i.e. morning codon at amino acid position 226. This study shows that small families stiffness and decreased mobility of the cervical spine. Hurvitz et al. too must be explored despite their non informativity and mutations can (1999) described mutations in WISP3 gene family members as caus- be identified. ative for the disease. Here we report a novel familial mutation within WISP 3 gene most P12.223 molecular investigation of a novel clinical expression of probably associated with the condition clinically recognized as spon- Xeroderma Pigmentosum in a tunisian family dyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda with progressive arthropathy and sent O. MESSAOUD1, M. Ben Rekaya1, M. Zghal2, R. Kefi1, S. Chebel3, A. for familial genetic testing. Boughammoura-Bouatay3, H. Bel Hadj Ali4, N. Gouider-Khouja5, J. ZILI4, M. Mutation was detected by gene screening approach using direct au- Frih-Ayed3, I. Mokhtar2, S. Abdelhak1; tomatic sequencing. This information was utilized for development of 1Pasteur Institute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Dermatology Department, Habib PCR based assay for familial genotyping. Mutation in homozygous Thameur Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Neurology Department, Fattouma Bourguiba form in index-patient and as heterozygous in patients was confirmed Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia, 4Dermatology Department, Fattouma Bourguiba implying the actual etiopathological basis for progressive pseudorheu- Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia, 5Neurology Institute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia. matoid arthropathy in this family. For definite confirmation of this hy- Xeroderma Pigmentosum is a rare genodermatosis predisposing to pothesis, functional analysis should be performed. skin cancers. The disease is classified into eight groups. Among them, the Xeroderma Pigmentosum group A (XP-A), which is characterized P12.221 A novel WT1 mutation identified in a patient with by the presence of neurological abnormalities in addition to cutaneous steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome symptoms. O. Beltcheva1,2, A. Boueva3, E. Boiadjieva1, S. Marinova3, R. Kaneva1,2, V. In the present study, we report on a particular XPA family where some Mitev1,2; members showed an atypical clinical presentation i.e. unlabelled neu- 1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Dept. of rological abnormalities with discrete skin manifestations. Dermatologi- Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, cal examination showed a small number of monomorphic and discrete 3Dept. of Pediatrics, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. pigmented maculae, which were not evocative of the clinical diagnosis Idiopathic nephritic syndrome is the most frequent disease of the glo- of XP. merular ultra-filter in children. The established treatment of the affected Molecular investigation allowed identification of a novel XPA muta- individuals includes corticosteroid administration, which, unfortunately, tion p.V241GfsX5. All patients with this novel phenotypic expression fails to give positive result in app. 10% of the cases and, as a result, of XPA are compound heterozygous for (p.[R228X(+).V241GfsX5]) the children often progress towards end-stage renal disease. Several mutations. genes have been shown to be involved in the pathogenesis of this ste- Our report shows that mutations in the XPA gene could lead to other roid-resistant form of nephrotic syndrome (SRNS). Among those, most phenotypic expressions. We suggest that this phenotype should be commonly affected are NPHS1, NPHS2 and WT1. Here, we report the considered as a novel clinical entity allelic to XP-A. identification of a novel WT1 mutation in a girl diagnosed with SRNS at the age of 2. The initial genetic screening revealed no mutation in J12.1 molecular analysis of phenylketonuria in Belarus the NPHS2 gene, which prompted us to look for defects in the WT1 J. Tsukerman, K. Mosse; gene. A heterozygous nucleotide change, C1184T in exon 9, resulting National Center of Research and Applied Medicine “Mother and Child”, Minsk, in amino acid substitution Ser395Tyr was identified. In order to deter- Belarus. mine whether this novel variant is indeed a disease causing change Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by we checked if it was present in healthy controls. The substitution was mutations in phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene (MIM#261600). not found in any of the 240 chromosomes tested. The affected amino PKU is the most common inborn error of amino acid metabolism in Be- acid, Ser395, was found to be conserved among multiple species as larus (1/6000). Nowadays more than 500 mutations are known in PAH diverse as Drosophila, Xenopus and human. It is located in zink-finger locus. The major mutation in our country is R408W, which is routinely 3, part of the DNA binding domain of WT1. The absence of the variant screened in PKU patients since 1992, having frequency 68%. among healthy population controls and the fact that it involves residue In order to explore the spectrum of mutations, we conducted the study located in a conserved part of the protein, allowed us to conclude that of PKU chromosomes with previously unknown primary gene defect. it is, indeed, the disease causing mutation in this case. At first step we performed RFLP analysis for the most common Eu-Metabolic disorders 0 ropean mutations. The established frequencies were: R158Q - 6,6% and their combinations with Z allele the real frequency may be even (37/564), R261Q - 1,6% (9/564), IVS12nt1 - 1,2% (7/564), IVS10nt11 higher. These findings underlie the need for genetic testing being intro- - 0,4 % (2/564) and Y414C - 0,5% (3/564). duced into a common clinical practice. Sequencing of full coding region of PAH gene in patients with unidenti- fied mutations is now in progress. Our research revealed that muta- P13.03 A mitochondrial DNA mutation (t4454c) in the tRNAmet tions of the exon 7 cover about 6% of alleles in Belarusian PKU pa- Gene in iranian Patients with Brugada syndrome tients. We found 6 different nucleotide substitutions in 21 patient with M. Khatami, M. Heidari; following frequencies: E280K -1,7% (10/564), R252W - 1,2% (7/564), Department of Biology, Science School, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran, Yazd, P281L - 0,5% (3/564), R243X - 0,4 % (2/564), R241C and G272X Islamic Republic of Iran. - 0,2% (1/564). Point mutations in mitochondrial tRNAs can cause severe multisys- Identified mutations represent 82% of PKU alleles. Currently, prenatal temic disorders and impaired mitochondrial function. Recently interest- diagnosis can be done in 97% of high-risk families by direct mutation ing genetic data became available regarding the importance of mtDNA analysis of the PAH gene and indirect analysis of STR and VNTR poly- mutations in the etiology of arrhythmia and cardiac function. Brugada morphic sequences. syndrome is clinically cause sudden death in young ages. We report here mutational analysis of mtDNA from 15 unrelated patients with Brugada syndrome and identified a homoplasmic tRNAMet 4454 T>C P13 metabolic disorders mutation in 8 cases with variable severity and 18- 41 years old. All of them have typical Brugada- type ECG changes. This sequence change P13.01 Segregation of four new STRs in 28 Tunisian patients is located in the T-stem loop of tRNA, a moderately conserved region. affected by 11 β Hydroxylase Deficiency It was not found in 45 local controls and previously in other disorders I. Ben Charfeddine1, M. Gribaa1, N. Kahloul2, L. Adala1, O. Mamai1, T. Ben reported as a polymorphism. It was considered non- pathologic but Lazreg1, A. Mili1, F. AMRI2, F. Riepe3, A. Saad1; we suggest that the high level conservation in secondary and tertiary 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, de Génétique Moléculaire et de Biologie de la structures of this tRNA, make the tRNAMet as unique case because Reproduction, Humaines, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service de Pédiatrie de CHU Ibn only one type of this tRNA encoded in the mammalian mtDNAs. Thus Eljazzar, Kairouan, Tunisia, 3Division of Paediatric Endocrinology, Department any changes in primary sequence may potentially pathologic in cardiac of Paediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany. cells but further investigations necessary to clarify this correlation. Eleven beta hydroxylase deficiency (11βHD), is the second most common form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), accounting P13.04 Analysis of cYP21A2 gene mutations in iranian for 5-8%. It’s an autosomal recessive enzyme defect impairing the population biosynthesis of cortisol. In Tunisia, the incidence of 11 β hydroxylase B. Rabbani1, N. Mahdieh2, R. Bagheri2, E. Zaridust3, B. Larijani4, M. Haghi deficiency appears higher (17,5% of congenital adrenal hyperplasia Ashtiani5, F. Sayarifar3, M. Akbari1, A. Rabbani2,3; etiology). The identical presentation of genital ambiguity (females) and 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Growth and pseudo-precocious puberty (males) can lead to misdiagnosis with 21 Development Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, hydroxylase deficiency. The clinical hallmark of 11β hydroxylase defi- Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Tehran University of ciency is variable, and biochemical identification of elevated precursor Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Metabolic and Endocrine metabolites is not readily available. To avoid these problems, genetic Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic analysis of CYP11B1 gene is an alternative diagnostic test. Republic of Iran, 5Molecular Genetic Lab, Children‘s Medical Center Hospital, In the present study, we performed a molecular genetic analysis of Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. CYP11B1 gene in 28 Tunisian patients clinically affected by 11β hy- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is comprised of a family of au- droxylase deficiency. They belong to 26 families originate from the tosomal recessive disorders leading to the defect in cortisol biosyn- Center of the country. We studied four extra-genic microsatellites thesis. The 21-hydroxylase deficiency is the most common cause of markers; MI8S501, MI8S502, MI8S302 and MI8S301, surrounding the CAH which accounts for 90% of the CAH patients. There are various CYP11B1 gene (localized on 8q21-22). phenotypes due to combination of different mutations. Eight common Our results showed 4 different haplotypes shared by all the families. mutations in CYP21A2 gene, located on 6q21.3, have been reported in They seem to come from one common ancestor. In addition, exons many populations around the world. We have studied the spectrum of sequencing of CYP11B1 gene reveals a rare and presumably specific CYP21A2 mutations including the most common mutations, rare muta- «G379V» mutation probably specific for Tunisian population. tions, large deletions, duplications and gene conversions in Iranian pa- tients affected by CAH. 30 CAH affected families were included in the P13.02 The prevalence of alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency in a study. Allele-specific amplification of CYP21A2 gene was performed representative population sample from slovakia to detect the common mutations. Dosage analysis of the affected in- S. Mikulova1, M. Baldovic1,2, L. Kadasi1,3; dividuals was done to find out deletions and duplications by multiplex 1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 22nd Department of ligation probe amplification (MLPA) method. Also, sequencing proce- Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, University Children‘s dure was applied for the remaining mutations. The allele specific am- Hospital, Limbová 1, Slovakia, 3Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, plification assay detected p.P30L, g.655A/C>G (I2G), p.G110_Y112, SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia. p.I172N, Cluster 6 (p.I236N, p.V237G, p.M239L), p.V281L, p.Q318X, AAlpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) deficiency is reported as one of the most and p.R356W. Some affected individuals carried partial gene con- frequent autosomal recessive genetic disorders in Caucasians. Aber- version, duplication and others were carrier of deletion resulting in a rant A1AT protein leads to emphysema and chronic obstructive pul- chimeric CYP21A1P-CYP21A2 gene. Due to high prevalence of con- monary disease or prolonged neonatal jaundice, cirrhosis and can- sanguineous marriage in Iran, the recurrence risk of the disease is cer. Hence the primary aim of the present study was to screen entire high. Screening the heterozygotes of at risk families would help to di- coding sequence of A1AT gene for causative mutations in 24 affected minish the psychological and economical stress these families would patients in Slovakia. Three different deficient alleles were identified in deal with through out their life. Moreover, these findings could be used the study: Mprocida (c.T693C, p.L65P) and S (c.A1362T, p.E288V) in for prenatal diagnosis and detecting the heterozygotes in non-related single copy; and Z allele (c.G1595A, p.E366K) in 9 copies (only one CAH families without having a previously CAH affected child. homozygous state, estimated frequency 0.02). In order to assess an unbiased frequency of Z allele in Slovak population, we have designed P13.05 congenital adrenal hyperplasia in Alexandria, Egypt: rapid and cost effective BI-PASA PCR test method. In the population A high prevalence justifying the need for a community-based sample of 338 adult subjects 10 Z allele carrying heterozygotes have newborn screening program been identified, giving allele frequency to be of 0.0148. Therefore, the S. M. Tayel1,2, H. Ismael1,3, H. Kandil4, A. Abd Rabuh1, H. Sallam1,5,5; estimated prevalence of Z homozygotes in Slovakia is 1/4600; and 1Suzanne Mubarak Regional Centre for Women‘s Health & Development, thus expected number of subjects with severe A1AT deficiency in the Alexandria, Egypt, 2Clinical Genomic Centre, Alexandria Faculty of Medicine, whole population of Slovakia (5.5 millions) is about 1200. Considering Alexandria, Egypt, 3High Institute of Public Health, Alexandria, Egypt, less frequent pathogenic alleles (not tested in population in this study) 4Consultant Pediatrician, Ministry of Health, Alexandria, Egypt, 5Obstetrics & Metabolic disorders 1 Gynaecology Department, Alexandria faculty of Medicine, Alexandria, Egypt. polymorphism was determined by PCR-RFLP analysis. Results: Eigh- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is one of the most common teen of 29 (62%) CF patients were homozygous for C-allele of MTHFR inborn endocrine disorders. Its prevalence ranges between 1:23,344 C677T, 8 (28%) had heterozygous CT genotype, and 3 (10%) were (New Zealand) and 1:282 (Alaska). CAH is world-wide increasingly carriers of homozygotes for T-allele. Correlation analysis did not reveal being included in newborn screening programs. Benefits of screening any parameter, including homocysteine level, to be associated with are avoidance of salt loss crises and early proper gender assignment MTHFR C677T status in CF patients. However, a difference in pulmo- in virilized girls. To determine the prevalence of CAH in Alexandria, nary exacerbations frequency between carriers of delF508 mutation Egypt, a total of 7254 samples from newborns at 5-7 days of age were (n=23) and non-carriers (n=6) was noted (average 2.8 and 1.5, respec- screened by time resolved fluoroimmunoassay (DELFIA; PerkinElmer) tively). Conclusion: This study failed to demonstrate an appreciable for 17OHP determination from June, 2008 to May, 2009 at SMC, Al- association of clinical presentation of CF and biochemical parameters exandria, Egypt. Neonates with a value > 30 nmol/l were considered with MTHFR C677T polymorphism. positive. Six cases were diagnosed as positive. Only one recall was made giving a very low recall rate (0.00014). Prevalence of CAH in Al- P13.08 Clinical and molecular analysis of a large Italian cohort exandria, Egypt was 0.08 % (1/1209) with a sensitivity of 100 %, speci- of cHi patients ficity of 99.99 %, and a positive predictive value of 0.86. One affected F. Faletra1, E. Athanasakis2, F. Furlan3, C. Dionisi-Vici4, A. Burlina5, A. Ventura6, female newborn had the simple virilizing form, 2 were salt wasting, and P. Gasparini1; one had the non-classic (NC) form of the disease. One male died in the 1Medical Genetics-Department of Reproductive and Development Sciences, neonatal period from an adrenal crisis, and another male had the NC Trieste, Italy, 2Medical Genetics-Burlo Garofolo Children Hospital, Trieste, Italy, type of the disease. All the positive cases were reported to the ministry 3Pediatrics-San Geranrdo Hospital, Monza, Italy, 4Pediatrics-Bambino Gesù of health to start immediate treatment for salt loss and genital ambigu- Children‘s Hospital, Roma, Italy, 5Pediatrics-University of Padua, Padua, Italy, ity. Implementation of a community-based newborn screening program 6Pediatrcs-Department of Reproductive and Development Sciences, Trieste, Italy. for CAH in Egypt is justified due to the efficiency of time resolved fluo- Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a common cause of hypoglycae- roimmunoassay for screening in the neonates, and the high frequency mia in infancy. The prevalence of the disease is approximately 1/50000 of CAH and its serious complications if untreated. live births. Hypoglycaemia can cause systemic manifestations and symptoms in the CNS. Histologically there are primarily two forms: a P13.06 GROWtH FActOR siGNALiNG PROmOtEs tUmOR diffuse form, responsible for 60-70% of cases and a focal form, respon- mEtABOLism BY REGULAtiNG EXPREssiON AND ActiVitY OF sible for the remaining 30-40%. HH is caused by mutation in ABCC8, KEY ENZYmEs KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK and HADH genes. In addition to expressing M. A. Iqbal, V. Gupta, S. Chattopadhyay, P. Baindara, R. N. K. Bamezai; the disease, patients with GLUD1 mutations have hyperammonaemia National Centre of Applied Human Genetics School of Life Sciences Jawaharlal and those with HADH mutations showed raised plasma hydroxybutyr- Nehru University, New Delhi, India. ylcarnitine and urinary 3-hydroxyglutarate. The CHI is most commonly Growth factor signaling promotes cellular proliferation. It does so by inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and less commonly in an promoting anabolic metabolism in proliferating cells and hence it posi- autosomal dominant manner. No really genotype-phenotype correla- tively drives the metabolic needs of tumor cells. We have investigated tions have appeared until now. In our study, we enrolled 34 patients how growth factor signaling promotes anabolic tumor metabolism by from different Italian Hospitals, 27 patients having classical CHI and studying the effect of its inhibition on expression and activity of key 4 having hyperinsulinism / hyperammonaemia (HI/HA). Anamnestic enzymes- pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) and transketolase like enzyme- data for all patients were collected. For all patients we analyzed all 1 (TKTL1), known to be important for tumor metabolism. On inhibiting the genes CHI-related by direct sequencing. We found 16 mutations in growth factor signaling, we have observed decreased mRNA levels of 13 patients with classical CHI (Detection Rate 48%) and 5 mutations both enzymes but increased activity of PKM2 compared to control in in 7 HA/HI patients (Detection Rate 71%). Most of the mutations are treated cell lines as judged by quantitaive PCR and spectrophotometric missense mutations (62%), but also stop codon (14%), altered splicing assay respectively. Expression of high activity PKM2 form and down site (5%), insertion (9,5%) and insertion-deletion (9,5%) were detect- regulation of TKTL1 expression inhibits tumor metabolism as judged ed. All missense mutations involve aminoacid highly conserved across by decreased cellular proliferation. This correlates with previously re- species and none of the 100 healthy controls analyzed DNAs showed ported observation that expression of low activity PKM2 form and up- the same variant. Finally, this is the first clinical and molecular analysis regulation of TKTL1 is an important event in metabolic transformation. of a large Italian cohort of CHI patients. Our results demonstrate that inhibition of growth factor signaling has a negative effect on tumor metabolism by modulating expression of P13.09 Linking cholesterol metabolism and human behaviour TKTL1 and expression/activity of PKM2. C. du Souich1, K. McClarren1, R. Larstone1, R. Friedlander1, J. Livesley1, T. M. Severson2, D. W. Stockton3, F. L. Raymond4, M. A. Marra5, C. F. Boerkoel1; P13.07 mtHFR c677t Polymorphism in Russian Patients with 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Nederlands Kanker cystic Fibrosis Instituute, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Wayne State University School of K. G. Buslov1, V. N. Kovalev1, E. M. Koroleva2, V. I. Larionova1, L. A. Medicine, Detroit, MI, United States, 4Cambridge Institute of Medical Research, Zhelenina1, A. V. Orlov3; Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, 1Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Russian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg Chemical-Pharmaceutical Academy, Introduction: The molecular bases of human behavior have largely Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3St-Petersburg Medical Academy of eluded identification using standard diagnostic criteria. This likely Postgraduate Studies, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. arises because standard diagnoses are amalgams of symptoms and MTHFR C677T polymorphism has been recognized as one of key signs that are the product of several underlying causal mechanisms. regulatory factors of both homocysteine level and oxidative stress re- In contrast, dissection of human behavior into unidimensional, homog- sponse. Objectives: (1) study on MTHFR C677T alleles distribution enous traits should enable identification of coherent, causally active in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and (2) evaluation of correlation psychological entities. of MTHFR C677T polymorphism with clinical presentation (severity of Methodology: Testing this, we identified an X-linked disorder of cho- the disease and exacerbations frequency during last six months) along lesterol metabolism with intellectual and behavioral abnormalities that with biochemical parameters (blood levels of glutathione, glutathione establishes this link. Affected males have CK syndrome, a syndromic peroxidase, zinc, uric acid, and homocystein). Material and methods: intellectual disability, whereas affected females segregate high levels CF patients group comprised 13 females (average age 11.0 yo) and 16 of callousness, a component of psychopathy. males (average age 12.6 yo). Severity of the disease was estimated Results: Partial loss-of-function mutations of NSDHL (NAD(P)H ste- as a frequency of pulmonary exacerbations during last six months. All roid dehydrogenase-like) are responsible for this disorder. patients were tested for a presence of 21 mutations of CFTR (delF508, Conclusion: Thus we establish a genetic link between human behavior delI507, del21kb, 394delTT , R334X, R347P, G542X, G551d, R553X, and cholesterol metabolism and demonstrate that dissection of human N1303K, 2143delT, 2184insA, 2113delA, 2118del4, 2141insA, delE672, behavior into homogenous traits allows ready identification of genetic 2176insC, 2183AA/G, 2183delAA, 2184delA, W128R). MTHFR C677T factors modulating behavior.Metabolic disorders 2 P13.10 Altered expression profiles of human clock genes of polymorphisms on paroxetine and risperidone treatment is studied T. Ben lazreg1, M. gribaa1, w. naiija2, m. dogui3; at Department of Medical Genetics and Psychiatric clinic. Polymor- 1laboratoire de cytogénétique et de la biologie de reproduction CHU Farhat phisms occuring in coding part of CYP2D6 gene are determinated by Hached, SOUSSE, Tunisia, 2service de réanimation CHU sahloul, SOUSSE, sequencing, Real Time PCR, High Resolution Melting analysis and Tunisia, 3aboratoire de physiolgie et des explorations fonctionnelles du système agarose electrophoresis. This paper provides an overview of current nerveux faculté de medecine de monastir, SOUSSE, Tunisia. technologies available for assessing CYP2D6 polymorphisms at De- Circadian rhythms in physiology and behavior are observed in all partment of Medical Genetics. mammals, including humans. These rhythms are generated by circa- Supported by NS9676-4/2008 dian clocks located in the hypothalamus and also in most peripheral tissues. Recently, clock genes were identified as the genes that control P13.13 Risk factors for cystic fibrosis liver disease a vast array of circadian rhythms. In our study we investigated the I. M. Ciuca1, L. Pop1, I. Popa1, Z. Popa2, L. Tamas3; circadian expression of clock genes (PER1, PER,2, PER3, CLOCK, 1Pediatric II Department, Timisoara, Romania, 2National Cystic Fibrosis Centre, BMAL1,CRY1) in human whole blood cells of 10 patients following sur- Timisoara, Romania, 3Biochemistry Department, University of Medicine and gery and exposed to a 24h artificial light. Clock genes were found to Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. oscillate throughout the light-dark cycle. Severe disturbance of the en- Introduction: Cystic fibrosis(CF) associated liver disease is the second docrine rhythm as well as clock gene expression profiles in peripheral cause of death in CF and may be the first disease expression in CF. It blood mononuclear were noticed. This deregulation might be the result seems that many recognized risk factors like severe mutations history of the direct effects of injury on the biological clock and the absence of of meconium ileus and male gender could suggest the occurrence of synchronizer essentially light/dark rhythm. the liver disease. Aims & Methods: Aim study was to asses liver disease`s frequency and P13.11 New mutations of cYP21 in turkish population its correlation with recognized risk factors. Study was prospective for a N. Y. Kutlay1, F. Sadeghi1, M. Berberoğlu2, E. Çetinkaya3, Z. Aycan3, C. Kara4, five years period; 158 patients, with median age at diagnosis = 13.94 H. Ilgın-Ruhi1, G. Ocal2, Z. Şıklar2, H. G. Karabulut1, T. Tuncalı1, V. Topcu1, A. years were followed up by clinical assessment, liver function tests Elhan5, A. Tukun1; (LFTs), abdominal ultrasound examinations (US) and CFTR tests. In 1Medical Genetics Department, Ankara University faculty of Medicine, Ankara, some cases liver biopsy, MRI and elastogramme was performed. Turkey, 2Pediatric Endocrinology Department, Ankara University School of Results: Cystic fibrosis associated liver disease (CFLD) was diag- Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 3Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Ankara Dışkapı nosed in 51 patients (32.27%), slightly predominance of boys. The Children‘s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 4Department of Pediatric Endogrinology, disease occurred more frequently in adult patients and among children Dr. Sami Ulus Children‘s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 5Department of Biostatistics, age 7-14 years, most of cases being diagnosed after 10 years. Ankara University faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. Class I and II mutation were present in 56.87% CFLD patients. Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) is an autosomal recessive dis- Meconium ileus was a risk factor (OR=1.12) for developing CFLD, be- ease and most frequently occurs as a result of deficiency in 21 hydrox- ing present in 21% from CFLD patients. Pancreatic insufficiency was ylase enzyme. Many mutations of steroid 21 hydroxylase enzyme gene strongly associated with LD, certified to be risk factor (OR=1.25). (CYP21) have been reported before. A/C659G, 8bp deletion, com- Conclusion: The frequency of CF associated liver disease is rising. plete deletion of exon 3, P30L, I172N, exon 6 cluster (I236N, V237E, CF children older then 10 year, with severe mutation, history of meco- M239K), V281L, Q318X and R356W are most frequent mutations. nium ileus, pancreatic insufficiency and are more likely predisposed Although incidence of the disease is not known in Turkey, frequency to develop liver disease. In witch way the disease evolution or the risk of these nine mutations among CAH patients with classic forms (clas- factors control can be influence remain to be determine. sic salt-wasting and classic simple virilizing) was found as 75 %. 264 patients diagnosed as CAH according to clinical and laboratory find- P13.14 Procalcitonin is a specific marker of diabetic ings were admitted to our department for genetic testing. These known complication process nine mutations were tested by PCR and RLFP in peripheral blood DNA M. A. Soylemez; sample of these patients. We did not find any of these mutations in Marmara University Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey. 33 of 47 patients who have classic CAH phenotype. These mutations Introduction: The procalcitonin (PCT) gene, referred to as Calc-1, is lo- were found as heterozygous form in 14 of these patients. The alleles cated on chromosome 11p15.4 and was sequenced in 1989. The pro- without any mutations were sequenced. The sequencing analysis re- moter has sites for basal transcription factors but more interestingly, sults will be presented. also has sites for Nuclear factor |[kappa]||[beta]| (NF|[kappa]||[beta]|) and activator protein -1 (AP-1), factors induced under inflammatory P13.12 Detection of the polymorphisms in the cYP2D6 gene and conditions. Diabetes Mellitus is associated with oxidative stress and their influence on the metabolism of drugs elevation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs). AGEs are pro- J. Zrůstová1, E. Flodrová2, J. Juřica3, R. Barteček2,4, T. Kašpárek2,4, R. duced by a non-enzymatic, maillard reaction between reducing sugars Gaillyová1,2, A. Žourková2,4; and either proteins or lipids. AGEs interacts with the receptor for ad- 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, vanced glycation end products (RAGE) and RAGE activation is caused 2Masaryk University Brno, Faculty of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, by elevation of the transcriptional factors NF|[kappa]||[beta]| and AP-1. 3Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital, Brno, These factors induce PCT gene expression. Czech Republic, 4Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Aim: To determine whether serum PCT level is a specific marker in Republic. patients with diabetic complications . The response to many drugs in common use varies greatly among Patients: Twenty patients with diabetic foot were studied along with patients. The cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) is an enzyme respon- age and sex matched normal non-diabetic subjects (10 males and 10 sible for metabolism of many commonly used drugs such as antide- females) Blood samples were taken for the measurement of serum pressants, neuroleptics, beta blockers and antiarrhytmics. The gene PCT levels. Serum PCT levels were analized by a kryptor analizator CYP2D6 (22q13.1-13.1) that encodes this enzyme is highly polymor- using kryptor-PCT kit designed for KAIA phic and shows a great inter-individual and inter-ethnic variability. The Results: Serum PCT levels were elevated in diabetic foot patients polymorphisms lead to different individual responses which result in an when compared with those of normal subjects (p<0.01). increased risk of adverse drug reactions or the lack of the therapeutical Conclusions: It revealed a raise in serum PCT levels in patients with response. According to the enzymatic activity the Caucasian popula- diabetic complications. Our study results and experimental design im- tion can be classified into four subgroups - (1) poor metabolizers, who ply PCT as an important mediator during the development of diabetic degradate the CYP2D6 substrates slowly and who are exposed to a complications. This algorithmic mechanism was based on genetic ex- greater incidence of side effects of therapy, (2) extensive metaboliz- pression of PCT. Thus, the results of this study show procalcitonin as ers, their metabolism follows the presupposed mechanism, (3) inter- a new marker for diabetic complications. mediate metabolizers, the subgroup between poor and effective me- tabolizers, and (4) ultrarapid metabolizers, their metabolism is without adequate clinical response to common drug dosages. The influence Metabolic disorders  P13.15 Quick evaluation and classification of alpha- control (P=0.005). In the same time, T-regulatory cell quantity was de- Galactosidase A mutants in Anderson Fabry Disease - Prediction creased for the first time revealed diabetes group in comparison with of disease relevant mutations pGTT group (P=0.001). It is interesting that T-regulatory cells were J. Lukas1, U. Goelnitz2, A. Wree3, R. Köhling4, A. Rolfs1,2; decreased both among patients with remission (P=0.03) and without 11Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, University of Rostock, (P=0.0004) in comparison with pGTT although their quantity under re- Rostock, Germany, 2Centogene GmbH, Rostock, Germany, 3Department of mission were 1.5 times more than without remission. The FoxP3 ex- Anatomy, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 4Department of Physiology, pression was changed in this proportion also. During 10 years after University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany. type 1 diabetes mellitus onset FoxP3 expression was decreasing and Fabry disease, a lysosomal storage disorder is based on the deficiency lower than in control (P=0.0006). In the group of patients through 6-10 of α-galactosidase A (GLA) activity. Some amino acid exchanges might years after disease beginning FoxP3 expression was three times lower have only mild effects on enzyme activity reduction. Thus, we devel- than in the group for the first time revealed diabetes. After 10 years of oped an in vitro model based on the overexpression of GLA mutants disease the level of FoxP3 expression was increased and was signifi- using a HEK293 cell system. Using fluorimetric enzyme activity assay, cantly different from the control. we are able to determine the activity of mutant enzyme. We tested over 100 mutations with regard to enzyme activity, protein stability and P13.18 THE GENETIC ORIGIN OF GALACTOSEMIA IN BELARUS response to the Pharmacological Chaperone (PC) 1-Deoxygalactono- T. Dzemidovitch, E. Budzeika, T. Zimovina, N. Gusina; jirimycine (DGJ). We raised the data in order to classify the mutations, National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, find hints for the right therapy for the patients and make predictions on Belarus. the importance of certain amino acids and their positioning inside the A study of the most common mutations Q188R and K285N in the ga- molecule by analysing partially novel and described mutations stretch- lactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT) gene from 15 unrelated ing along the whole gene. galactosemia families is reported here. Diagnosis was based on thin layer chromatography for galactosuria/galactosemia, galactose and P13.16 FBs vs. Osteogenesis imperfeeta.Report of an iranian galactose-1-phosphate determinations and assays of erythrocyte Girl with a Private Novel mutation in GLUt2 gene GALT activity. Patients were screened for the common K285N and Y. Shafeghati1,2, P. Sarkheil1, T. Baghdadi3, F. Hadipour1, Z. Hadipour1, R. Q188R transferase gene mutations, using PCR-based assays. All the Santer4; patients showed markedly above-normal concentrations of galactose 1Medical Genetics Department, Sarem Women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic and galactose-1-phosphate and less than 10% activity of GALT. Ac- Republic of Iran, 2University of Social Welfare Science and Rehabilitation, cording to the laboratory findings K285N and Q188R alleles together Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Imam represented 64% of detected mutations. We detected 11 alleles carry- Khomeini Hosp. Ped.Orthopedy Depart., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, ing the Q188R mutation out of the analyzed 34 (32 % allele frequency). 4Universitatsklinikum, Hamburg-Ependorf, Hamburg, Germany. From these, 4 patients were found to be homozygous for the mutation Fanconi-Bickel Syndrome is a very rare hereditary metabolic disease, and 3 to be heterozygous, 2 of them were compound heterozygous characterized by hepatomegaly due to glycogen storage, refractory for the Q188R and the K285N sequence changes. K285N mutation hypophosphatemic rickets, marked growth retardation and proximal was also identified in 11 alleles (32 % allele frequency), 2 patients ap- renal tubular acidosis. Recurrent bone fractures are one of the hall- peared to be homozygous. Our results support the idea about Slavic mark findings. It is a single gene disorder; the responsible gene is be- origin of K285N mutation and prove the assumption that the frequency longing to the facilitative glucose transporters family (GLUT2) gene or of Q188R decreases from west to east across Europe. It is also sup- (SLC2A2). It was mapped to the q26.1-26.3 locus on chromosome 3, posed that classical galactosemia shows low allelic heterogeneity in encodes the glucose transporter protein 2. This protein is expressed in Byelorussian patients. pancreatic ß-cells, hepatocytes, renal tubules, and intestinal mucosa. Several mutations in the GLUT2 gene have been reported in different P13.19 Hemochromatosis gene (HFE) variants and risk of iron populations. overload: a meta-analysis Herein we report an Iranian girl with a missed diagnosis of osteogen- A. M. Neghina, A. Anghel, I. Marincu, R. Neghina; esis imperfecta. Proband was product of a normal pregnancy, an un- Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. eventful delivery, and product of a complex consanguineous marriage. Purpose: The incomplete phenotypic penetrance of HFE genotypes She was referred with the history of frequent fractures, and severe in relation to hemochromatosis poses a practical problem in the in- motor delay. Following the case we detected refractory rickets instead terpretation of the genotyping results by clinicians. We performed of OI, sever growth failure, proximal renal tubulopathy and RTA, and meta-analyses of the associations between hemochromatosis geno- enlarged kidneys by sono, progressive hepatomegaly, and GSD on types C282Y/C282Y, C282Y/H63D, C282Y/wild type, H63D/H63D, liver biopsy. Glucose and galactose tolerance test confirmed abnormal H63D/wild type, versus wild type/wild type and iron status. Methods: carbohydrate metabolism. Diagnosis of FBS was suspected, and treat- MEDLINE search was performed from 1997 to 2008. After reviewing ment with corn starch, Rocartrol, and GH ameliorated her condition 3572 article titles and evaluating 92 articles in detail, odds ratios (OR) satisfactorily. were pooled from 43 study populations using a random-effects model. Molecular analysis on GLUT2 revealed a homozygous private novel Potential sources of heterogeneity were also explored. Results: A total mutation in exon 5; it was 15 nucleotide deletion and 7 nucleotide in- of 9,986 cases and 24,852 controls were included in the meta-analy- sertion in the point c.685-707 of the gene. It is a frame shift mutation sis. The aggregate overall results showed that homozygosity for the and a premature termination of translation (P.A229QFsX19). C282Y mutation conferred the highest risk for iron overload (pooled OR, 1006.14 [95% confidence interval, 443.21 to 2284.08]) whereas P13.17 FoxP3 expression and regulatory t-cells on earlier and H63D/wild type genotype was associated with the lowest risk of iron advanced stages of type 1 diabetes mellitus. overload (OR, 1.68 [95% CI, 1.33 to 2.12]). The subgroup analyses P. V. Apanovich1, T. V. Nikonova2, N. V. Apanovich1, M. V. Shestakova2, A. V. performed showed strong associations between all genotypes and Karpukhin1; elevated serum ferritin, transferrin saturation, serum iron concentra- 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical tion, hepatic iron score, hepatic iron index, and mobilization of iron in Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Endocrinological Research Center, phlebotomy, except for H63D/H63D homozygotes that were strongly Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. associated with elevated hepatic iron index and mobilizable iron by We investigated FoxP3 expression and T-regulatory CD4+ CD25+ cell quantitative phlebotomy. Conclusions: The present meta-analysis reli- quantity on different stage of type 1 diabetes mellitus development and ably quantifies the effects of genetic risk on iron overload. It shows an in control group. The T-regulatory cell quantity in the group of individu- important role for liver biopsy and assessment of mobilizable iron by als positive on glucose tolerance test (pGTT) was not different from quantitative phlebotomy in the diagnostic pathway of hereditary he- the control. FoxP3 expression level in this group was twice lower than mochromatosis. The results, mainly from case-control studies, cannot in control. Among for the first time revealed type 1 diabetes mellitus necessarily be extrapolated to the general population. patients (up to 1 year, early disease stage) FoxP3 expression was approximately as in pGTT group and significantly different from the Metabolic disorders  P13.20 study of mutations in 9 exons of LDLR gene in possible megaly, failure to thrive, muscle weakness. Renal insufficiency, lung familial hypercholesterolemia patlents in a province of iran involvement and hematological abnormalities are also found. F. Shayesteh1, E. Farrokhi1, M. Modarresi2, M. Hashemzadeh1; Mutations in SLC7A7 gene are responsible for this disease, but no 1Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, genotype-phenotype correlations have been defined. 2Assistant professor , Animal Sci Dept, Islamic Azad Univ ,Khorasgan. Iran, Treatment is based on low-protein diet and supplementation with oral isffahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. citrulline. Background and aim: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autoso- Our patient is a 2 year-old boy, first child from consanguineous couple. mal dominant disorder caused mainly by mutations in the low-density Pregnancy and delivery was uneventful. By one month hepatomegaly lipoprotein receptor (LDLR).Until now, the molecular basis of FH has was noticed. Invasive diarrhea and recurrent infections started after been demonstrated in detail in many populations , but there is still very weaning. He evolved with pulmonary symptoms and chronic respira- limited molecular data concerning FH in Iran . The aim of this study tory insufficiency by 1y9mo. Laboratorial investigations were: pulmo- was to investigate frequency of LDLR gene mutations in an Iranian nary biopsy- pulmonary alveolar proteinosis; hepatic biopsy- steatosis population. and discrete cholestasis; quantitative amino acids analysis- elevated Method : in this descriptive -lab based study a total of 50 non-related lysine and orothic acid in urine, elevated glutamine in plasma; hyper- possible FH subjects from Cheharmahal va Bakhtiari were studies .All ammonia, elevated chitotriosidase; isoelectric focusing and filipin test samples were tested for presence of LDLR gene mutations in 9 exons in fibroblasts were normal. Molecular analysis of SLC7A7 gene was of the LDLR gene including 2 , 4 , 6 ,7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 and 14 using not done. Presently the patient is alive, 3y5mo, and improved respira- SSCP technique. The shifted bands were detected on gels and con- tory distress with protein restriction diet. firmed by sequencing. This is the first Brazilian case of LPI. The diagnosis of LPI is often dif- Result:.In this study after using SSCP technique and confirmed by se- ficult due to unspecific symptoms with multisystem involvement over- quencing we were found 4 Polymorphisms including 1413 G >A , 1725 lapping with several other metabolic diseases. Molecular analyze of C >T , 1773 C >T and 2140 + 5G>A in %18 of population studied. SLC7A7 gene should be performed to confirm the diagnosis. Conclusion: our data indicated that LDLR gene mutations have not contribution to FH in samples studied here. However, we examined P13.23 Benefit of inherited metabolic disorders screening in for only 9 exons of LDLR gene in only 50 patients, and to determine child with cardiomyopathy the role of mutations of this gene in developing FH in Cheharmahal S. Farshidi, S. Saber; va Bakhtiari province, more FH samples/populations needed to be in- Welfare Organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. vestigated. Cardiomyopathy (Cm), a rare form of cardiac disease in infancy, is receiving increasing attention stimulated by the availability of endocar- P13.21 A novel mtDNA mutation in a child with Leigh-like dial biopsy and new forms of therapy. syndrome Through a survey ,we calculated the prevalence inherited metabolic Y. S. Itkis, G. E. Rudenskaya, P. G. Tsygankova, E. Y. Zakharova; disorders in children with unknown cardiomyopathy . Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. In accordance with these strict criteria, Our studies involved 87 patient A case of Leigh syndrome with atypical manifestation caused by a nov- . el mtDNA mutation in a 2.5-year-old boy is presented. The delivery at In seventeen children symptoms were present between ages 10-25 ( 36-37 weeks of gestation passed with no serious complications. Early mean 17 ) months with general loss of abilities and fallow by cardiac motor development was moderately delayed, in 15 months the boy symptoms . had lurch. In 1.5 years, after a gastrointestinal infection, the unsteadi- We measured their, lactate, pyrovate, carnitine profile& blood glucose ness increased dramatically. Since this episode the disease has an un- and ketone body. Then we controlled organic acid, amino acid, mito- dulating course with motor deteriorations triggered by common infec- chondrial respiratovy chain complex activity in skeletal muscle & acid tions. In ‘good’ periods the boy walks unsteadily though independently -alfa - glucosidase activity was measured in infants whom have hyper- and attempts to run. Speech and mental development is delayed but trophic cardiomyopathy. never worsened. Expressive language is poor but receptive language Result: The prevalence of metabolic disorders was : is satisfactory, emotions and behavior are adequate. There were no Pompe disease (5) ,MPS (7) ,fatty acid - beta - oxidative seizures, vision, hearing or somatic problems. On examination moder- defect(4)VLCHD, respiratory enzyme deficiency. ate microcephaly (46 cm) was noted. MRI showed symmetric lesion Conclusion :Search for inherited Metabolic disorders is better to be of capsula externa and putamen. Leigh disease was supposed. Af- performed in all children with cardiomyopathy as the prevalence of ter SURF1 gene mutations were excluded, a search of mtDNA muta- metabolic disorders is high in this group and in our country because tions in blood cells was performed. A novel substitution m.8839G>C high incidence of consanguity marriage .In other hand it may help us in mtATP6 gene was detected in homopasmic state in the child and for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis for families who have heteropasmic state in the mother. affected child . We proposed this substitution being pathogenic because the involved mtDNA region is highly conservative and a nucleotide replacement P13.24** Association between symptoms of depression and leads to substitution of aminoacid Ala to Pro. In 205 control DNA sam- anxiety and metabolic syndrome: the modifying effect of c- ples the same substitution was not found. reactive protein gene (CRP) polymorphisms Thus, this case contributes to clinical variability of Leigh syndrome. D. Gaysina1,2, M. Pierce2, M. Richards2, M. Hotopf3, D. Kuh2, R. Hardy2; Such cases prove the necessity of whole mtDNA sequencing, because 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2MRC Unit for very often there is no evidence of causative mutation, if frequent muta- Lifelong Health and Ageing, London, United Kingdom, 3King’s College London, tions are excluded. Institute of Psychiatry, London, United Kingdom. Depression is associated with the development of the metabolic syn- P13.22 First Brazilian case of lysinuric protein intolerance (LPi). drome (MetS) and both disorders with markers of systemic inflamma- I. M. Furquim1, R. Honjo1, C. M. Lourenço2, T. Mauad3, D. R. Bertola1, L. M. J. tion, such as C-reactive protein. We examined associations between Albano1, C. A. Kim1; symptoms of depression and anxiety at age 13-15 years and at age 1Unidade de Genética, ICr/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Departamento de 36 years, and MetS at age 53 years in a large representative British Neurologia, FMRP/USP, Ribeirão Preto,, Brazil, 3Departamento de Patologia, birth cohort. We also investigated whether two CRP polymorphisms HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil. (rs1205 and rs3093068) were associated with affective symptoms Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI) is an autosomal recessive disease, and the MetS, and whether the risk of the MetS in those with affective relatively common in Finland. It is caused by defective intracellular symptoms was modified by these CRP gene polymorphisms. Those transport of cationic amino acids, which leads to inefficient renal tu- with depression/anxiety in adolescence (OR=1.30, 95%CI: 0.98, 1.74) bular reabsorption and intestinal absorption of lysine, arginine and or- and adulthood (OR=1.41, 95%CI: 0.97, 2.45) were more likely to have thine, considered essential in urea cycle. the MetS. These associations were stronger in women than in men. It is a multisystemic disease with a variety of clinical symptoms in- Although CRP SNPs were not associated with affective status or the cluding nausea and vomiting after protein ingestion, hepatoespleno- MetS, the association of adolescent emotional problems with the MetS Metabolic disorders  was stronger in those who were homozygous for the major allele (C) P13.27 mitochondrial disorders due to mitochondrial DNA of rs1205 (OR=1.83, 95%CI: 1.17, 2.86) than in carriers of the T al- mutations on respiratory chain in Bulgaria lele (OR=1.01, 95%CI: 0.66, 1.55) (p=0.05 for gene by affective status B. I. Radeva1, E. Naumova2, M. Stancheva1; interaction). Adolescent-onset depression and anxiety may play an im- 1Cinical Genetics,University Childrens Hospital, Medical University, Sofia, portant role in the MetS risk later in life, particularly in those homozy- Bulgaria, 2Cinical Genetics,University Childrens Hospital,Immunogenetics gous for the major allele of CRP rs1205. These findings may highlight Labotory, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. new ways of identifying depressed people at high risk of developing Mitochondrial disorders are rare disorders due to mitochodrial DNA the MetS, which is of great importance for the treatment and clinical or DNA mutations.By integral approach with clinical ,biochemical management of depressive patients. methods,EEG, EMG ,KAT ,MRI and MT- DNA investigation in peripher- al intravenous blood and skin fibroblast,sequenced PSR-SBT method P13.25 Proteomics reveals new insights into the causes of of mT DNA regions were diagnosed various mitochodrial disorders. hyperammonemia in methylmalonic acidemia The aim of our work were to evaluate the received data ,to make geno- R. J. Chandler1,2, D. Phillips3, E. S. Boja3, N. Carrillo-Carrasco1, L. Caldovic4, type /phenotype correlations and to proceed the results of treatment. H. Morizono4, R. S. Balaban3, C. P. Venditti1; There were diagnosed 40 children with mitochodrial DNA disorders of 1National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Compex I,Complex III and ComplexV.All found mutation of Mt -DNA Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Institute for Biomedical Sciences, The George were new ,not registrated to this time in international register for mi- Washington University, Washington, DC, United States, 3Laboratory of Cardiac tochondrial DNA mutation.All these mutation were unknown function. Energetics and Proteomics Core Facility, National Heart, Lung and Blood We discovered 3, ATP synthase 8 deficiency patientsThe clinical pre- Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Research santation of the found mutations were the same as similar mutations Center for Genetic Medicine, Children‘s National Medical Center, Washington, descriebed in the literature.For treatment of our children were used low DC, United States. protein diet ,very high doses vitamins,l-carnitine.The best results were Methylmalonic Acidemia (MMA) is an inborn error of metabolism that received in patients with Complex 1 deficiency ,in the other there were is caused by a deficiency in the mitochondrial enzyme methylmalonyl- decrease the convulsions,but no significant improvement in mental de- CoA mutase. Clinically, patients with MMA exhibit elevated levels of velopment and neurologic symptomatics.On the parents were offered methylmalonic acid in their plasma and urine. During periods of illness, genetic consultation and possibility for prenatal diagnosis. MMA patients can experience life-threatening metabolic instability with intermittent bouts of hyperammonemia; the underlying mechanisms of P13.28 Novel phenotype associated to mutations in the SDHD the pathology of these episodes are not well understood. Presently, gene resulting in complex II deficiency the inhibition of N-acetylglutamate synthetase (NAGS) by propionyl- C. B. Jackson1, D. Hahn2, S. Vella3, J. Nuoffer2, A. Häberli2, S. Gallati1, A. CoA, a metabolite elevated in MMA, is thought to indirectly decrease Schaller1; carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I (CPS1) activity causing hyperam- 1Division of Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland, 2Institute of Clinical Chemistry, monemia. To investigate possible mechanism(s) of pathology, we Bern, Switzerland, 3Lindenhofspital, Bern, Switzerland. performed proteomic analysis of liver extracts from a mouse model Defects of the mitochondrial respiratory complex II (succinate dehy- of MMA using two dimensional fluorescence difference in-gel electro- drogenase, SDH) are extremely rare. Of the four nuclear encoded pro- phoresis (DIGE) and quantitative analysis using iTRAQ labeling and teins composing complex II, only mutations in the 70kDa Flavoprotein tandem mass spectrometry. Proteomics of the liver from MMA mice (SDHA) and the recently identified complex II assembly factor (SD- revealed changes in the expression of the urea cycle (UC) enzymes HAF1) have been found to be causative of a mitochondrial disorder. CPS1, ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), argininosuccinate synthe- Mutations in the other three subunits (SDHB, SDHC, SDHD) and the tase 1 (ASS1), argininosuccinate lyase and arginase compared to con- second assembly factor (SDHAF2) have so far only been associated trols. MMA mice have decreased levels of plasma ornithine, but normal with hereditary paragangliomas and phaeochromocytomas. levels of urine orotate, plasma arginine and plasma citrulline. Limited Here we report the first ever described case of a mutated subunit other CPS1 activity due to NAGS inhibition is consistent with low to normal than SDHA and SDHAF1 causing a mitochondrial disorder with an iso- urinary orotate levels. Since deficiencies in CPS1 and OTC can cause lated complex II deficiency. The patient showed a progressive retarda- hyperammonemia, we propose that the changes in the expression urea tion after the age of six months evolving in a severe encephalopathy cycle enzymes contribute to the occurrence of hyperammonemia. with choreo-athetotic movements, optic atrophy and intractable myo- clonic seizures at the age of eight years. MRI and MRS were normal P13.26 Analysis of MUT gene mutations in turkish patients at the age of ten months. Complex II had a residual activity of 10% in with methylmalonic acidemia using resequencing microarrays: muscle. Analysis by comparative 2D BN-PAGE following MALDI-TOF identification of fourteen novel mutations MS demonstrated the absence of SDHA. Further western blot analysis H. Dündar1, R. K. Özgül2, A. Dursun1; confirmed reduced expression of SDHA and SDHB in skeletal muscle. 1Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolism Unit, Molecular genetic analysis of SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF1 Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health and Department and SDHAF2 revealed compound heterozygosity for two mutations lo- of Pediatrics, Metabolism Unit, Ankara, Turkey. cated in a transmembrane domain of SDHD. Methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) is an autosomal recessive inborn We conclude that the mutations of the SDHD-gene result in abolition error of the organic acid metabolism. The condition is resulted from of its protein to integrate into the membrane impairing all other sub- functional defects in the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MCM) enzyme units to assemble into a functional SDH-complex and are subjected or disorders of cobalamin metabolism. Patients with methylmalonic to degradation. acidemia have increased levels of methylmalonic acid in blood and urine and can suffer from extreme acidosis. The human MCM gene P13.29 mitochondrial ND5 mutations mimicking brainstem tectal (MUT) is located on chromosome 6 and comprised of 13 exons span- glioma ning over 35 kb. M. Rio1, A. Lebre1, P. de Lonlay1, V. Valayannopoulos1, I. Desguerre1, J. In this study, 34 Turkish patients diagnosed with methymalonic aci- Dufier2, D. Grévent1, M. Zilbovicius1, C. Tréguier3, F. Brunelle1, C. de Barace4, demia were screened for mutations using Affymetrix resequencing J. Kaplan1, M. Espinasse-Berrod2, C. Sainte-Rose5, S. Puget5, A. Rötig1, A. microarrays and all the detected mutations were confirmed by direct Munnich1, N. Boddaert1; sequencing. As a consequence of direct sequencing, mutations of 29 1Départements de Génétique, Radiologie pédiatrique et Maladies du patients were detected. The resulted mutations consisted of twenty développement et Inserm U781 et U797, paris, France, 2Département one missense mutations, six nonsense mutations, one splicing muta- d’ophtalmologie, hôpital Necker, paris, France, 3Département de Radiologie tion, one insertion mutation, and two deletion mutations, 21 of 29 pa- pédiatrique, Rouen, France, 4Département de Pédiatrie, Saint Brieuc, France, tients were homozygous for the both mutant alleles. DNA sequencing 5Département de Neurochirurgie, hôpital Necker, paris, France. analysis revealed fourteen novel mutations. The most common of the We report MRI-periaqueductal T2-hypersignal suggestive of tectal gli- missense mutations were P615T mutation in exon 11, accounting for oma in three unrelated children with reduced vision and normal men- nearly 43% of the all missense mutations and nearly 30% of the all the tal development . Increased CSF lactate and optic atrophy in the first mutations. case suggested mitochondrial dysfunction. Muscle biopsy revealed Metabolic disorders  Complex-I deficiency. A heteroplasmic mt-ND5 mutation was found P13.32 Application of mLPA technique in detection of single (m.13513G>A). The second case presented with similar clinico-ra- large-scale mitochondrial DNA deletions. diological features, Complex-I deficiency and the same heteroplasmic D. Piekutowska - Abramczuk1, A. Tanska1, P. Kowalski1, K. Tonska2, E. mutation. The third case had visual disturbance without optic atrophy, Ciara1, D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, S. Luczak1, M. Pelc1, J. Sykut- normal muscle enzyme activities, but a heteroplasmic mt-ND5 muta- Cegielska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, E. Pronicka1; tion (m.13514A>G). Even in absence of optic atrophy, mental retarda- 1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2The Institute of tion or multiorgan dysfunction, the combination of visual disturbance Genetics and Biotechnology, Warsaw, Poland. and periaqueductal T2-hypersignal should prompt the search for mito- Single large-scale mitochondrial DNA deletions varying in size and lo- chondrial-DNA mutation. cation, occur mainly as sporadic cases and are usually associated with known deletion syndromes (KSS, PS and PEO). Characteristic clini- P13.30 mitOcHONDRiAL mYOPAtHY OF cHiLDHOOD cal features include: progressive external ophtalmoplegia, generalized AssOciAtED WitH mitOcHONDRiAL DNA DEPLEtiON muscle weakness with difficulties in swallowing and articulation, short D. Mehaney1, F. Hassan1, L. Selim2, S. Abdelhady2, E. Bertini3, F. Santorelli3, F. stature, deafness, conduct disturbances, delayed puberty, and endo- Fattori3, R. Carrozo3, D. Verrigni3; crine dysfunction. The most common deletion responsible for almost 1Chemical Pathology department,Faculty of Medicine, Cairo, Egypt, 2Pediatrics 30% of deletion syndromes, contains 4977 bp and is located between department,Faculty of Medicine, Cairo, Egypt, 3Unit of Molecular Medicine, nucleotides m.8469 and m.13147. Children’s Hospital Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy. The aim of the study was to examine the utility of the MLPA tech- Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndromes (MDSs) form a group of au- nique in the detection of mtDNA deletions. The SALSA MLPA KIT P125 tosomal recessive disorders characterized by profoundly decreased Mitochondria (MRC-Holland) contains 31 probes for different mtDNA mitochondrial DNA copy numbers in affected tissues. Three main clini- sequences, and 1 mutation-specific probe for the frequent point sub- cal presentations are known: myopathic, encephalomyopathic and he- stitution m.3243A>G. patocerebral. The first is associated with mutations in thymidine kinase Fifteen patients with mitochondrial cytopathies (including 5 KSS), 2 (TK2) and p53-induced ribonucleotide reductase B subunit (RRM2B) and seven controls (5 healthy subjects, and 2 patients with known genes.This study aimed at the description of the molecular diagnosis of m.3243A>G mutation) were enrolled into our study. 1 Egyption pediatric patient presented to the Cairo University Pediatric Various heteroplasmic deletions spanning regions: m.9169_14174 Hospital (CUPH) with the clinical suspicion of mitochondrial myopa- (ATP6, MTCOIII, MTND3 - MTND6 genes), and m.10922_15765 thy. Results of histochemical staining of the muscle biopsy specimens (MTND4 - MTND6, CYB genes) were identified in two patients. The showed Cytochrome Oxidase negative fibers. Biochemical analysis of last one was confirmed by Southern hybridization. In other six children the muscle homogenate revealed absence of Complex I and Complex no hybridization of single probes to sequences of MTND2, MTND4, IV activity compared to age matched controls. Quantitative radioactive MTND6 and MTATP8 genes was found. The presence of m.3243A>G Southern blot analysis showed reduction of the mitochondrial/nuclear mutation was confirmed in both control cases, whereas remaining (mt/n) DNA ratio (≈30 % of aged-matched controls). Sequencing of changes require verification by other methods. the TK2 gene revealed no sequence variation. Targeted molecular di- MLPA technique seems to be a useful tool in identification of hetero- agnosis based on the biochemical analysis of the respiratory chain plasmic large-scale mtDNA deletions. enzymes makes the molecular evaluation of pediatric mitochondrial The study was supported by CMHI grant No. S111/2009. disorders much easier. Involvement of other nuclear genes rather than TK2 gene in the pathogenesis of the myopathic form of MDS should P13.33 the diagnosis of mucopolysaccharidosis over 11year: be considered. the Egyptian experience. M. M. M. Ibrahim, A. Gouda, E. Fateen, Z. Youssef; P13.31 New mPV17 mutations in a child with mitochodrial National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. hepatoencephalopathy. case report Mucopolysaccharidosis is a group of inherited metabolic disorders P. Tsygankova1, E. Zakharova1, E. Nikolaeva2; caused by deficiency of specific enzymes needed for the metabolism of 1Research center for medical genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, mucopolysaccharides called glycosaminoglycans(GAGs) which leads 2Institute of pediatrics and child surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. to their accumulation in lysosomes of different tissues and organs. Mitochondrial hepatoencephalopathies comprise the group of mito- Aim: Laboratory diagnosis of MPS among the clinically suspected chondrial cytopathies that affect children and young adults. Most of cases& to find out the distribution and frequency of each type of MPS them characterized by severe reduction mtDNA copy number (mtD- among our population. NA depletion).Several genes recently have been identified to cause Subjects and Method: The present study included 1041 patients re- mtDNA depletion syndrome (MDS): TK2, SUCLA2, DGUOK, POLG, ferred during the last 11 years for the diagnosis or exclusion of MPS. RRM2B and MPV17. Here we report a case of 3 year old girl with Each patient was subjected to quantitative determination of urinary hepatoencephalopathy and mutations in MPV17 gene. First symptoms GAGS. Cases with high concentration were subjected to extraction manifested at 3 months of age by failure to thrive, vomiting and dry of GAGS from urine followed by electrophoretic separation. Activity of skin. At 7 months she developed ophthalmoplegia and episodes of the specific enzymes according to the abnormal pattern was assayed subfebrile temperature. MRI at 12 months showed meningoencephalic flourometricaly. lesions. Later she developed hepatopathy, myopathy, hypoglycemia Results: Among 1041 patients screened for MPS, 540 had elevated and ketoacidosis. At the age of 2 years the girl was able to sit, stand GAGS in urine. Using the electrophoretic separation of GAGS, 319 with support, had speech and normal mental development. After the cases proved to have MPS. The specific enzyme assay for the 319 episode of hypoglycemic coma she developed severe myopathy and positive cases revealed the following distribution: MPS type I n = 81, areflexia. Muscle biopsy showed red ragged fibers and increase num- MPS type II n = 51, MPS type III n = 45, MPS type IV n = 65 and MPS ber of paracrystalline mitochondria. 6 months later patient’s condition type VI n = 74. worse a lot. She presented with dysarthria, ataxia, polyneuropathy, Conclusion: Quantitative determination of GAGS in urine is a simple cardiomyopathy and hyperextention of the knee joints. The patient procedure to select cases for its electrophoretic separation.However, was diagnosed with hepatic cirrosis at the age of 3 years. We made enzymatic assay is mandatory to confirm the MPS types.The common- full sequence of genes POLG and MPV17 and revealed two novel het- est MPS disorders among the diagnosed cases in this study were MPS erozygous mutations in the MPV17 gene: c.185delT and c. 121C>T type I and type VI followed by type IV. (R41W). To our knowledge about 30 patients with MPV17 gene muta- tions have been described in the literature. We consider MPV17 gene P13.34 mucopolysaccharidosis type i: Outcome of an Early analysis to be done for MDS patients, especially with slowly progres- Diagnosis and treatment of two saudi siblings sive liver disease. N. A. Al-Sanna‘a, I. H. Bouholaigah; Dhahran Health Center, Dhahrab, Saudi Arabia. Here, we present an eleven and five years old Saudi siblings with Mucopolysaccharidosis type I. They are homozygous for P533R mu- tation. The first one was diagnosed at 14 months and the younger Metabolic disorders 7 one at birth. The family history is significant for an older affected sis- analyzed for association with surrogate measures of NAFLD (obesity, ter who died at 15 years of age of cardiopulmanory arrest. Enzyme waist, HOMA-IR, plasma glucose, and serum triglycerides) in 6,514 replacement therapy (Aldurazyme 1mg/kg) was commenced on both Danes from the population-based Inter99 cohort. of them in a weekly base at 3 ½ years and 9 months of age respec- Results: Four SNPs in EHHADH showed an association with increased tively. There was significant decrease in glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) fasting serum insulin and HOMA-IR levels. The G-allele of rs11101721 excretion within the first three month of treatment. Both of the siblings in ECHS1 associated with obesity (OR =1.33(1.06-1.68), p =0.02). add add had achieved a normal growth velocity. Their cardiac involvement re- Quantitative trait analysis showed an increase in BMI with a per allele mained stable with a normal cardiac function. The first sibling con- effect of 1.5 kg/m2 [0.7;2.3], p =0.0005. This effect was only seen in add tinued to have repeated episodes of otitis media. He has sustained individuals with impaired glucose regulation (IGR), and hence an inter- hearing impairment, speech delay with learning difficulty. The younger action between rs11101721 and glucose-tolerance status with effect sibling had no further ear infection following the treatment. Her speech on BMI was shown (p =0.002). The T-allele of rs892447 in HADHA/ int and cognitive function were normal. Progressive skeletal deformities HADHB associated with increased fasting serum insulin (β=4%[8;0.3], mainly of the spine were documented on the first child. On the hand, p =0.04) and HOMA-IR (β=5%[10;1.0], p =0.02) among IGR indi- add add the younger child had a mild skeletal involvement with maintaining viduals. Three SNPs in ACADL associated with obesity measures. of normal joints mobility. This data emphasized the importance of an Conclusion: By using a bioinformatic approach, variation in five can- early diagnosis and treatment of such condition. A detail description of didate genes was found to be associated with several surrogate mea- the clinical data and outcome of both siblings in addition to literature sures of NAFLD. review will be presented. P13.37 comparative genotyping of obese and lean children in P13.35 mucopolysaccharidosis type i in Belarus: clinical Belarus: preliminary results characterization of 7 patients E. A. Aksyonova1, T. N. Pokladok2, L. S. Viasova3, A. V. Solntsava3, A. V. A. Kulpanovich, I. Naumchik; Sukalo3, N. G. Danilenko2; National Medical Center «Mother and child», Minsk, Belarus. 1Institute of Genetics and Cytology Belarus National Academy of Sciences, The assessment of wide variation of clinical presentation in patients Minsk, cytoplasmic@mail.ru, Belarus, 2Institute of Genetics and Cytology, with mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I), dynamic of the disease Minsk, Belarus, 3Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus. progression is directed toward the early diagnosis of this rare lyso- Last year started the project concerning the investigations of factor-pre- somal storage disorder. dictors childhood obesity in belarussian population. 83 obese children We present here the clinical observation of 6 cases with Hurler (MPS from 3 groups: 0,5-8 years old (BMI 20-35 kg/m2), 9-12 years old (BMI IH) and 1 patient with Hurler/Scheie (MPS IH/S) which were confirmed 24-35 kg/m2), 13-17 years old (BMI 25-41 kg/m2) and 83 lean control by laboratory biochemical methods. children (1-16 years old) were genotyped using PCR-RFLP analysis of The clinical study includes the analysis of 139 phenotype features: polymorphic alleles of Gln223Arg (A/G) leptin receptor (LEPR) gene, facial abnormalities, neurologic, ophthalmologic, auditory, cardiovas- -174G/C interleukin 6 (IL-6), -308 A/G tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), cular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal symptoms etc. -23/HphIA/T insulin (INS) gene. No significant differences in genotype MPS IH. Median age at diagnosis in 3 males and 3 females with MPS and allele frequencies were found. IH was 1,87 years (range: 0,5-5 years), median age at onset of symp- Integrated assessment of metabolic and neuroendocrine status of toms was 0,25 years (range: at birth - 1 year). Interval from symptom obese children as well as genotypes of their parents is under inves- onset to disease diagnosis was 1,6 years (range: 0,5-4 years). tigations. All patients (100%) presented severe mental retardation, “coarse” fa- Age group Ins -2HphI (%) LEPR (%) TNFα (%) IL- (%) cial features, joint stiffness and contractures. Over 83,3% of our pa- n and Bmi AA At tt AA(QQ) AG GG(RR) AA AG GG GG Gc cc tients showed macrocephaly, umbilical hernia, corneal clouding, hepa- 0-8 >20kg/m2 39 71,8 20,5 7,7 23,1 61,5 15,4 0,0 29,7 70,3 29,3 58,5 12,2 tosplenomegaly and cardiac abnormalities. 9-12 >24kg/m2 27 77,8 14,8 7,4 24,1 69,0 6,9 0,0 24,0 76,0 37,0 51,9 11,1 MPS IH/S. 1 male with MPS IH/S had “coarse” facial features, normal 13-16 >25kg/m2 17 35,3 52,9 11,8 33,3 61,1 5,6 0,0 18,8 81,3 44,4 44,4 11,1 intelligence, joint stiffness, contractures and claw hands, hepatomega- All obese 83 66,3 25,3 8,4 25,6 64,0 10,5 0,0 25,6 74,4 34,9 53,5 11,6 ly and moderate mitral regurgitation. Median age at diagnosis was 3,8 years, median age at onset of symptoms was 3 years old.Conclusions: girls >20kg/m2 34 70,6 17,6 11,8 28,6 65,7 5,7 0,0 29,0 71,0 31,4 60,0 8,6 Patients with MPS I are very heterogeneous group including three clin- boys >20kg/m2 49 62,5 31,3 6,3 24,0 66,0 10,0 0,0 25,5 74,5 42,0 46,0 12,0 ically delineated types.The detailed analysis of clinical data provides controls 83 61,9 34,5 3,6 19,1 62,9 18,0 0,0 28,6 71,4 34,5 47,1 18,4 the evidence-based approaches of the formation high-risk groups of patients both severe Hurler syndrome and mild types Hurler/Scheie P13.38 Resistin gene (RETN) promoter polymorphism and and Scheie and contributes to the early clinical diagnostics develop- serum resistin level in patient with abdominal obesity ment. V. B. Timoshin1, O. D. Belyaeva2, O. A. Garanina2, Î. À. Bercovitch2, E. I. Baranova2, V. I. Larionova1; P13.36 Identification of novel candidate genes for non-alcoholic 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian fatty liver disease (NAFLD) using a bioinformatic approach Federation, 2St. Petersburg State I.P. Pavlov Medical University, St. Petersburg, K. Banasik1, J. Justesen1, M. Hornbak1, N. T. Krarup1, C. Sandholt1, T. Russian Federation. Jørgensen2,3, D. R. Witte4, T. S. Jensen5, S. Brunak5, T. Hansen1,6, O. Resistin is a member of a class of cysteine-rich proteins and may pres- Pedersen1,2; ent an important link between obesity and insulin resistance. OBJEC- 1Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark, 2Faculty of Health Science, TIVES: (1) to compare the frequency of RETN polymorphism -180C>G University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Research Centre for (rs1862513) of the resistin gene in patients with abdominal obesity and Prevention and Health, Glostrup University Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, 4Steno in control group. (2) to study an effect of particular genotypes on serum Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Denmark, 5Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, resistin level and indicators of lipid metabolism. STUDY POPULATION: Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark, 6Faculty of Health Science, 130 males and 328 females with abdominal obesity aged 30-55 years University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. old. Control group included 110 children and adolescent. METHODS: Aim: This project applies a bioinformatic approach to identify potential Serum resistin was measured using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent new candidate genes for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). assay kit, indicators of lipid metabolism were evaluated according to Methods: Text-mining in PubMed and OMIM for genes related to liver standard protocols. Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP. RE- disease, visceral obesity, and waist-circumference and subsequent SULTS: In patients with abdominal obesity, the frequency of C-allele protein-protein interaction analysis were used to identify a small isolat- and G-allele was 0.71 and 0.29, respectively. There was no difference ed interactome containing genes highly expressed in the liver. This in- in both CC, CG, and GG genotype distribution and in rates of C- and teractome included EHHADH, ECHS1, HADHA, HADHB, and ACADL G-alleles of resistin gene between the studied groups (0.7 and 0.3 which are involved in the mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation. Twenty- respectively, p>0.05). No difference was found in serum resistin level, one tagSNPs (HapMap, CEU, R2>0.8) capture all common variation in waist circle and in BMI between patients carrying different RETN in the 5 genes. All tagSNPs were genotyped using KASPar® and genotypes. However LDL-C levels was higher in patients carrying Metabolic disorders  CC-genotype compared to patients carrying CG-genotype (4,06±0,08 our mutational analysis of PAH gene in Slovenia. Here we report a mmol/l and 3,8±0,08 mmol/l respectively, (p<0,05)). CONCLUSIONS: molecular characterization of the first 20 patients. The entire coding We did not reveal any difference in serum resistin level in patients with region of the PAH gene spanning 13 exons was PCR amplified and abdominal obesity carrying different resistin gene genotypes. LDL-C analysed with denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography level was higher in patients carrying CC-genotype. (dHPLC). On all the identified PCR fragments we subsequently per- formed an automated sequencing analysis. P13.39 Identification of L194R, novel mutation in phenylalanine The cumulative mutation detection rate in this group of patients was hydroxylase gene (PAH) in iranian population 100%. We have identified 13 different disease-causing mutations, S. Zare Karizi1, M. Hosseini Mazinani2, G. Javadi1, S. Zeinali3; three of them novel: p.Arg157Ser, p.Leu15GlnfsX24 and c.845-2A>G. 1Department of Biology, Islamic Azad University Science and Research All patients were found to be compound heterozygotes. The single Campus, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Molecular Genetic, most frequent mutation in Slovenian PKU population is p.R408W in National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic exon 12 (approximately 27.5%), which is in concordance with previous Republic of Iran, 3Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology Research European and regional studies of PAH gene. Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. dHPLC proved to be a fast and sensitive method for mutational screen- Phenylketonuria (PKU), the most common disorder of amino acid me- ing of the PAH gene. In combination with sequencing method, it rep- tabolism, is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in resents a reliable and cost-effective diagnostic tool for detection and the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. The incidence of PKU in identification of unknown molecular defects in patients with PKU. Iran has been estimated at 1 in 3627 live births. To date, hundreds of mutations leading to PKU have been identified in the PAH gene. The P13.42 the role of carrier enzyme systems in the clinical spectrum of these mutations differs among different populations. In the polymorphism of Phenylketonuria present study, a novel mutation has been identified- during the muta- N. Usurelu1, V. Tsourea2, L. Lysyi2, S. Garaeva3; tional screening of the PAH gene in 150 Iranian families- in the human 1The National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, phenylalanine hydroxylase gene of a patient with classical PKU. It is Moldova, Republic of, 2The State University of Medicine and Pharmacy “N. a single base transversion of T to G at the second base of codon 194 Testemitsanu”, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of, 3The Institute of Physiology and in exon 6 of PAH gene. This mutation results in a Leu to Arg change in Sanocreatology of Academy of Science, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of. the catalytic domain of the protein. Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inborn poly-enzymatic multi-system pa- thology of the metabolism, its primary block being the Phenylalanine P13.40 maternal phenylketonuria in Russia (Phe) hydroxylation that leads to severe mental retardation with clinical A. S. Latypov, L. Zhuchenko, A. Khodunova, E. Proskurina; and biochemical polymorphism. MONIIAG, Moscow, Russian Federation. Methods: 30 PKU children were investigated for the level of free amino Background acids in blood and urine determined through liquid chromatography on Charles Dent [1957] was first who drew attention to the maternal Phe- amino acid analyzer Kovo AAA339, Czech. nylketonuria as syndrome. He described three children with mental re- The analysis of amino acids concentrations grouped according to the tardation without PKU which were born from PKU women. There was enzyme carrier systems (L:, A/ASC:, X- :, y+:, Pro:, β:, Gly:) deduced AG described many different antenatal effects of high blood phenylalanine the decreasing of their function in blood and at the kidney level with level on the foetus. But actually the knowledge about such children increasing tendency only of the carrier system of Gly: and significant health and development is limited. We wanted to determine the prob- statistically (p<0,001 )increasing of the L: carrier system function in lem of maternal PKU in Russia. blood in PKU patients. As the result, in addition to the Phe disorders, Method the troubles of the Met and Trp metabolism, ornithinic cycle were ap- Were interviewed the leaders of regional genetic service in Russia. preciated. The questionnaire was developed and included information about: In metabolic disorders of PKU have been appreciated many important • Regional medical statistic data (for local Russian territory) pathways as: the decreasing of excitatory of CNS amino acids level • Reproductive activities of registered PKU women (Asp, p<0,01, Glu p<0,001, His p<0,001), increased urinary ecxretion • Local healthcare regulation of stabilizing CNS amino acids (Tau, Tyr, Trp p<0,01), also the ten- Materials dency of increasing of inhibitory amino acids quantity (Gly, GABA). At In October 2009 we distributed 47 questionnaires, 17 questionnaires the consequences, the inhibitory processes in CNS are prevalenting, were retrieved till January 2010. evoluating with slow mental development. Screening period ranged from 40 till 12 years for different regions. Conclusion: The effectiveness of the PKU treatment increases if com- Total number of PKU reproductive age women has reached 206. There bining the low Phe diet with a metabolical correction of enzyme carrier were registered 33 pregnancies, were born 22 children (only 13 wom- systems disfunctions. en received strong service and metabolic control during pregnancy). Discussion P13.43 The information we received shows the low (40%) level of dispensary Variable Number tandem Repeat marker for carrier Detection of coverage of women identified by screening and insufficient mainte- Pku in central iran nance of metabolic control (59%) within pregnancy. We need con- K. Parivar1, M. Seifati2, J. Koochmeshgi3, M. Hashemi1; tinued research for state and local recommendations developing for 1Islamic Azad University Science and Research branch, Tehran, Islamic management PKU women. Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University Ashkezar branch, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Research Institute for Life, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. P13.41 mutational analysis of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene Phenylketonuria (PKU) is the most common error in the metabolism in slovenian patients with phenylketonuria: a preliminary report of amino acids and an important genetic disorder, which- if untreated- T. Hovnik1, U. Grošelj2, J. Kovač1, M. Žerjav Tanšek2, T. Battelino2; results in mental retardation. The incidence of PKU among the Cau- 1Center for Medical Genetics, University Children‘s Hospital, UMC, Ljubljana, casians in general is 1 in 10000. The highest prevalence for PKU has Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes and been reported from Iran and its neighboring countries (around 1 in Metabolic Diseases, University Children‘s Hospital, UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4000). This is due to the high prevalence of consanguineous marriag- Ljubljana, Slovenia. es in this region. Due to the large number of PKU-causing mutations in Phenylkatonuria (PKU, OMIM 261600) is an autosomal recessive met- the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene, segregation analysis of the Vari- abolic disorder arising from the deficiency of hepatic enzyme phenyl- able Number Tandem Repeat (VNTR) polymorphic marker associated alanine hydroxylase (PAH). In the majority of all cases PKU is caused with this gene is applied in carrier detection of PKU. Level of Informa- by missense mutations in the PAH gene, which maps to chromosome tively of this marker in carrier detection of PKU in a population depends 12, region 12q23.2. on the number of its alleles and distribution pattern of these alleles in The average birth incidence of PKU in Slovenia is approximately 1 in the population. Considering the population heterogeneity in Iran, we 8000. Currently, Slovenian national register of PKU patients contains investigated allelic frequencies of this marker in the province of Yazd more than 130 patients. Most of them are planned to be included into (central Iran). 33 mutant and normal chromosomes from 9 unrelated Metabolic disorders  PKU families were studied by PCR and gel electrophoresis. 5 VNTR al- Conclusion: Seven (9.3%) previously diagnosed Estonian PKU pa- leles were identified. All of them were present in normal chromosomes tients with R408W/I306V, R408W/L48S and R408W/R261Q genotype but only 4 of them were present in mutant chromosomes. One of these from mild to classical PKU form, can be good candidates for the BH 4 4 alleles accounted for 78% of mutant chromosomes. Pattern of dis- treatment after positive results on loading test. Therefore, in the future tribution of alleles in normal and mutant chromosomes were markedly it is also reasonable to perform a BH loading test in all PKU patients 4 different (20%, 20%, 33%, 13.5%, 13.5%). Polymorphic Information after the detection by newborn screening. Content (PIC) of this marker was 63%, which indicates it as a suitable marker for carrier detection of PKU in the population under study. P13.46 completization of mutation spectrum among slovak PKU patients P13.44 Tissue-specific activity of a new phenylalanine E. Polák1, A. Ficek1, L. Kádaši1,2; hydroxylase gene enhancer 1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular M. Stojiljkovic, B. Zukic, N. Tosic, T. Karan-Djurasevic, M. Radmilovic, V. Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Science, Bratislava, Slovakia. Spasovski, S. Pavlovic; Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a heterogenous autosomal recessive inher- Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia. ited disorder arising from a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase Phenylketonuria (PKU) is metabolic disorder caused by mutations in (PAH), which catalyses the essential conversion of phenylalanine the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH). Although PAH genotype (Phe) to tyrosine (Tyr). In the majority of cases, PKU is caused by is the main determinant of the severity of patient’s phenotype, incon- mutations in the PAH gene, and it presents with different phenotypes sistencies were reported. To explain phenotypic differences between which are classified according to Phe tolerance. More than 500 mu- patients with the same genotype, we analyzed a potential transcription tations have been described world-wide and the PAH enzyme has regulatory sequence from PAH gene intron 8 (I8). been fully characterized. The incidence of the disease in the Slovak Electromobility shift assays (EMSA) confirmed interaction of I8 with population had been estimated to be 1:10 000 newborn. Thirty-two nuclear extracts from both, HepG2 and K562 cell lines. Competition mutations have been identified so far, and these make up 88 % of all and supershift EMSA experiments revealed that GATA-1 transcription PKU alleles. The aim of this work was to carry out a complete muta- factor binds to I8, while South-Western blot verified that the protein tion analysis in a sample of 75 unrelated PKU patients with 1, or with complex bound to I8 contains GATA-1 among other tissue-specific no known mutation. HRM (High Resolution Melting) and MLPA (Multi- transcription factors. plex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification) methods were applied to Furthermore, we analysed activity of pBLCAT5_I8 construct in func- screen all 13 exons of the PAH gene. Amplicons with differing melting tional in vitro assays. Analysed construct showed 3.8 times higher re- curves were subsequently sequenced to characterize the DNA vari- porter activity in comparison to basal activity of pBLCAT5 in HepG2 ants. Sequencing revealed several different substitution mutations and cell line. Student’s t-test confirmed the statistical significance of this polymorphisms. MLPA analysis was applied for the detection of large finding (p=0.04). In contrast, the same construct expressed 0.8 times deletions and gene duplications, not previously found in the Slovak lower activity in K562 cell line, demonstrating importance of charac- population. Additionally, the corresponding frequencies for all muta- teristic hepatoma cell line transcriptional factors for I8 activity as an tions were estimated, and their classification according to phenotypic enhancer. categories of PKU was identified. Detailed results will be presented in We concluded that PAH intron 8 contains a new transcriptional regu- our poster. latory element which binds GATA-1 transcription factor and acts as an enhancer specifically in the hepatoma cell lines. Revelation of this P13.47 Detection of a novel mutation in the GAA gene in an modulated PAH expression could have an impact on the better under- iranian child suffering glycogen storage disease type ii standing of PKU phenotype complexity. In addition, it is the first time H. Galehdari1, G. Mohammadian2, M. Pedram3, B. Salehi3; that an enhancer has been identified in the PAH intron. Thus, present- 1Genetics, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic center, welfare ed data could unlock new area for analysis of PAH gene expression. organization, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Research center for thalassemia and hemoglobinopathies, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. P13.45 the analysis of genotype and phenotype of Estonian Glycogen storage disease II (GSDII or pompe disease, OMIM # phenylketonuria patients for finding out potentially BH- 232300), is a hereditary lysosomal disorder with an autosomal reces- 4 responsible forms sive mode. Mutations in the GAA gene on the chromosome 17q25.2- M. Uudelepp1, K. Joost2,3, I. Kerna1, N. Tõnisson1, K. Õunap1,4; q25.3 are usually leading to the absent activity of the acid alpha-glu- 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, cosidase (acid maltase, GAA, OMIM *606800, EC 3.1.26.2), which Tartu, Estonia, 2Tallinn Children‘s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 3Department of results in impaired degradation and subsequent accumulation of Biochemistry, University of Tartu, The Centre of Excellence for Translational glycogen within the lysosomes. The pompe disease is classified into Medicine, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, the classical infantile-onset and the late-onset. The late-onset form is Estonia. subdivided in the childhood, juvenile and adult-onset; thereby the clas- Introduction: The clinical phenotype of phenylketonuria (PKU) and sification is based on the age of onset, organ involvement, severity, potential tetrahydrobiopterin (BH) - responsiveness depends on re- and the rate of progression. 4 sidual phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) activity and can be predicted In the present report, the molecular analysis of the entire coding re- by patient’s genotype. The aim of the study was to analyze the geno- gion and the flanking introns of the GAA gene were performed in an type-phenotype data of present Estonian PKU patients, to find out the Iranian infant suspected with pompe disease regarding to the classical prevalence of potentially BH-responsive PKU forms, and in order to symptoms as hypotonia, cardiomegaly, muscle weakness and acid al- 4 suggest the inclusion of the BH loading test in the PKU diagnostic pha-glucosidase deficiency. According to the human genome mutation 4 protocol in newborn screening program. database (www.hgmd.org), we found in the exon 15 of the GAA gene a Material and Methods: The clinical data about 75 PKU patients in Es- novel single base insertion (insA) at codon 691 that leads to a prema- tonia is partly available since 1979 and fully available since 1993 when ture stop codon at codon 736. To validate the molecular analysis from newborn screening for PKU was started. The genotypic data was the infant, the parents were subjected to sequencing of GAA gene. available in 72 of them. Both the mother and the father were heterozygote for the same muta- Results: Forty eight of patients (67%) were homozygous for R408W tion. The detected mutation in the GAA gene may cause the disease, mutation in the PAH gene and had clinically classical PKU. Patients which is in accordance with the measured deficient acid alpha-glucosi- with R408W/IVS12nt1, R408W/R252W, R408W/P281L, R408W/ dase activity and other clinical symptoms in the proband. E221D222fsdelAG and R158Q/IVS12nt1 genotype showed classical PKU, except one moderate PKU patient with genotype R408W/R252W. P13.48 The effect of lactose intolerance and lactose intake on Patients with R408W/I306V genotype had mild and with R408W/L48S, metabolic traits R408W/S349P genotype moderate PKU. Two classical PKU patients L. Zgaga1, V. Vitart2, C. Hayward2, E. Theodoratou1, I. Kirac3, I. Rudan1; had R408W/R261Q genotype with many complaints in spite of dietary 1University of Edinburgh, Public Health Sciences, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, treatment. In one of them we have started BH treatment with good 2MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3University 4 response.Metabolic disorders 0 Department of Surgery, Sestre milosrdnice University Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia. (VA) preparations are in progress in our institute as well as in many Lactose intolerance is a condition where one is unable to metabolise other Centers. Detoxification of VA and its major metabolic products lactose and it is almost completely determined by a single nucleotide is known to be carried out by cytochrome P450 enzyme system, with polymorphism (rs4988235) on the chromosome 2q21.3. The condition special emphasis on cytochromes CYP2C9 and CYP2C19. Analysis of affects the majority of the adult human population and is associated the relevant genes polymorphisms (430C>T & 1075A>C for CYP2C9) with a range of health problems. We want to investigate the effects (681G>A for CYP2C19) and their association with efficiency of SMA of lactose consumption on seventeen classical biochemical traits in treatment was a major goal of the present study. PCR-RFLP analysis individuals with different genotype at rs4988235 locus. was carried out in 35 SMA patients and in 210 individuals of the control Individuals from three populations (Vis and Korcula, Croatia, and group. The genotype and allele frequencies for both studied genes Orkney, Scotland; N=2935) were studied, for whom a large number were also quite comparable in the patient and control groups. No cor- of metabolic traits was available. They were typed at C/T locus relation of genotype and allele frequencies for CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 -13910 (rs4988235), and lactase persistence phenotype was inferred from the polymorphisms respective of VA treatment efficacy were found. genotype: TT and TC were considered lactose tolerant. Lactose intake The work was partly supported by Saint-Petersburg Personal grant for was estimated from food frequency questionnaires. Linear regression PhD 2009 was used to investigate the effects of lactose intake, lactose tolerance and their interaction on numerous metabolic traits. P13.51 screening for metabolic diseases in 414 families with In the islands of Korcula and Vis there were 42% and 50% of lactose hereditary mental retardation in iran tolerant individuals, respectively, but as much as 96% in Orkney. The M. Mohseni1, O. Blankenstein2, K. Kahrizi1, A. Tzschach3, H. Darvish1, G. strongest association was found in Vis between rs4988235 and tissue Bahrami Monajemi1, S. Abedini1, S. Banihashemi1, S. Tadayon1, S. Arjangi1, H. plasminogen activator, tPA, (p-value=0.0004), but association did not Ropers4, A. Grüters5, H. Najmabadi1; replicate in Korcula (tPA not measured) or Orkney (too few intolerant 1GRC, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Pediatric Department, Charité individuals). Significant association was found for lactose intake and University Hospital, Berlin, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular HDL in Vis (p-value=0.031), and the association was replicated in Ko- Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, rcula (p-value=0.047). Germany, 5Pediatric Department, Charité University Hospital, Germany. Lactose tolerance, intake and their interaction seem to affect metabolic Metabolic disorders account for about 3% of hereditary disorders as- traits. Better understanding of this association might have implication sociated with mental retardation in developed countries. Due to the in health recommendations. progressive nature of metabolic disorders, MR is often not apparent early in life and becomes manifest only later. P13.49 A new UKGtN (UK Genetic testing Network) service for In this study we asked the question what percentage of adults with DHCR7 mutation analysis in smith Lemli Opitz syndrome hereditary mental retardation have inborn errors of metabolism and H. Sawyer1, M. Greenslade1, S. Burton-Jones1, J. Honeychurch1, M. Gable1, A. what their prevalence is in our population. Brown2, M. Williams3; A total of 414 families were investigated by Tandem Mass Spectrom- 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Southmead Hospital, North Bristol NHS Trust, etry (MS). The blood was spotted on Guthrie cards for one proband Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Biochemical Genetics Unit, Clinical Chemistry from each family. The samples were analyzed at the Charité Hospital Department, Southmead Hospital, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, United in Berlin. Our results revealed a total of 14 positive cases among our Kingdom, 3Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Southmead Hospital, North Bristol NHS samples (3.4%). PKU was the most prevalent form (6 families), fol- Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom. lowed by four cases of MCAD, three cases of CPT-1 and one patient Smith Lemli Opitz syndrome is an autosomal recessive metabolic dis- with homocystinuria. The frequency of metabolic disorders in our pa- order causing multiple congenital malformations; there is continuum tient cohort was 1.5% for PKU, 1% for MCAD, 0.7% for CPT-1 and of severity from intrauterine lethality to mild dysmorphism/mental im- 0.25% for homocystinuria. Mutation screening is under way for the pairment. It results from deficiency of 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase, positive samples to help the families with carrier detection and prena- which catalyses the last step of endogenous cholesterol synthesis, tal diagnosis. due to pathogenic mutations in the DHCR7 gene. The incidence of SLOS in the UK is estimated at 1/15,000 - 1/60,000 P13.52 type 2 diabetes risk alleles near ADcY5, cDKAL1 and births. The carrier frequency may be as high as 3% in Caucasian pop- HHEX-iDE are associated with reduced birth weight ulations. The incidence of SLOS is lower than expected from carrier E. A. Andersson1, K. Pilgaard2, C. Pisinger3, M. N. Harder1, N. Grarup1, K. rates from mutation studies. This discrepancy may be due to under- Færch2, P. Poulsen4, D. R. Witte2, T. Jørgensen3,5, A. Vaag2, T. Hansen1,6, O. diagnosis and lethality of severe cases in utero. Pedersen1,5; The local Biochemical Genetics service has offered SLOS testing by 1Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark, 2Steno Diabetes Center, quantitation of 7-DHC since 1995, hence molecular genetic analysis Gentofte, Denmark, 3Research Centre for Prevention and Health, Glostrup, of DHCR7 builds upon existing local expertise and clinical interest to Denmark, 4Novo Nordisk, Bagsværd, Denmark, 5Faculty of Health Sciences, provide a comprehensive service. University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Faculty of Health The drivers for developing the molecular service were: 1) biochemi- Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. cal carrier testing on fibroblasts requires cholesterol-free culture media Aims: The fetal insulin hypothesis suggests that variation in the fe- which is challenging and not readily available, 2) clarification where tal genotype influencing insulin secretion or action may predispose to the biochemical test result is equivocal or normal but the phenotype both low birth weight and type 2 diabetes (T2D). We examined asso- is strongly suggestive of SLOS, 3) testing of parents for retrospec- ciations between 25 confirmed T2D risk variants and birth weight in a) tive diagnosis of a deceased child or fetus where no other material is individuals from the Danish Inter99 population and b) meta-analyses available. including own data and reported studies. We present results from patients tested to date (8 proband referrals, 3 Methods: Midwife records from the Danish State Archives provided sets of parents at the time of the abstract): 6/8 patients carry at least information on mother’s age, parity, as well as birth weight, length at one copy of the common c.964-1G>C mutation, 9 other different muta- birth and prematurity of the newborn in 4,740 individuals from the pop- tions have been detected in these patients, including one apparently ulation-based Inter99 study. Twenty five risk alleles showing genome- novel nonsense variant. wide associations with T2D were genotyped. Results: Birth weight was inversely associated with the ADCY5- P13.50 Studying of efficiency valproic acid treatment of rs11708067 T2D risk allele (β=-33g [-55;-10], P=0.004) and with the patiens with spinal muscular atrophy respective of CYP2C and CDKAL1-rs7756992 T2D risk allele (β=-22g [-43;-1, P=0.04). The asso- CYP2C1 polymorphism ciation for the latter locus was confirmed in a meta-analysis (n=24,885) M. M. Danilova1,2, A. S. Glotov1,2, V. G. Vaharlovsky1, V. S. Baranov1; (β=-20g [-29;-11], P=5*10-6). The HHEX-IDE variant showed no signifi- 1Ott‘s Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, cant association among Danes (P=0.09); however, in a meta-analysis 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. (n=25,164) the T2D risk allele was associated with lower birth weight Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a severe autosomal recessive neu- (β=-16g [-24;-8], P=8*10-5). On average, individuals with high genetic romuscular disorder. Clinical trails on SMA treatment with valproic acid risk (>=25 T2D risk alleles) weighed marginally less at birth than those Metabolic disorders 1 with low genetic risk (<25 T2D risk alleles) (β=-33g [-66;0], P=0.05) transporting P-type ATPase (ATP7B). More than 400 mutations of the Conclusions: We report a novel association between the fetal ADCY5 ATP7B gene have been identified to date. Here we report preliminary T2D risk allele and lower birth weight. In meta-analyses we confirm results of sequencing analysis of the ATP7B gene. We have analyzed associations between lower birth weight and the HHEX-IDE and CD- exons 5, 8, 13 and 14 of 19 clinically diagnosed WD patients from KAL1 T2D risk alleles. No strong general effect on birth weight can be Croatia, already screened for the most common His1069Gln mutation. ascribed the 25 T2D risk alleles. It accounts for 35-45% of Wilson disease alleles in a mixed European population. Genomic DNA was used to amplify 21 exons of the AT- P13.53 Influence of Wfs1 gene deletion and chronic valproate P7B gene. Sequencing analysis was performed by PCR and capillary treatment on glucose metabolism and ER stress. electrophoresis with BigDye Terminator v3.1 kit on AB Genetic ana- K. Douroudis1,2, A. Terasmaa1,2, M. Eltermaa2, M. Ivask2, J. Oflijan2, E. Vasar1,2, lyzer 3130xl. Out of the total number of 19 tested patients with WD, S. Kõks1,2; molecular analysis has confirmed the clinical diagnosis in 6 patients 1Department of Physiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Centre of (31.6%) so far. Two patients are homozygous for mutations Arg616Gln Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. and Ala1003Thr, respectively. Three patients are compound hetero- The WFS1 gene encodes a protein expressed in the endoplasmatic zygotes for mutations Ala1003Thr and His1069Gln and one patient reticulum (ER) membrane and its deficiency causes ER stress. ER is compound heterozygote for mutations H1069Q and 2304delC. We stress plays an important role in the pathogenesis of diabetes, contrib- also found deleterious mutation in heterozygous state in three more uting to β-cell loss and insulin resistance. The XBP1 molecule modu- patients: 2304dupC (two patients) and Gly591Asp. Sequencing analy- lates the ER stress response and it is critical for the regulation of Wfs1. sis of the ATP7B gene is the best method to establish the frequency of GLUT2 protein enables passive glucose movement across cell mem- mutations in specific population so the screening test panel for most branes with a suggestive role in the control of insulin secretion. The common mutations can be developed for this population. aim of the study was to evaluate the impact of Wfs1 gene deficiency and chronic valproate (cVLA) treatment on hyperglycemia in mice. The P13.56 POPULAtiON stUDY OF WiLsON DisEAsE iN gene expression of ER stress and insulin pathway molecules in liver BELARUS: INCIDENCE AND CARRIER FREQUENCY tissue has been analyzed. The glucose tolerance test revealed that the S. Dubovick, N. Gusina; blood glucose levels on 30 minutes after glucose administration were National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, significantly higher (p=0.0049) in the Wfs1+/+ cVLA treatment group Belarus. compared to Wfs1+/+ saline group. The expression of the XBP1 splice Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by variant was significantly higher (p=0.041) in the Wfs1+/+ saline group impairment of copper transport. More than 300 mutations in ATP7B when compared to the Wfs1+/+ cVLA group. In addition, a significant gene causing WD have been identified. The incidence of WD in many higher expression (p=0.025) of the GLUT2 was observed in the cVLA populations is thought to be 1:40000 and a carrier frequency is 1:90. Wfs1-/- group when compared to the saline Wfs1-/- group. No significant The molecular bases of WD in Byelorussian patients have been stud- differences in expression of the Wfs1 gene between the saline and ied. The frequency of H1069G in Byelorussian WD patients was found the cVLA groups were observed. In conclusion, the chronic valproate to be 56%. The other identified mutant alleles were 2299insC (3,7 %), administration increases glucose levels and induces the expression 3400delC (2,4 %) and I1102T (2,4 %). The estimated incidence of WD of GLUT2 in Wfs1-/- mice without improvement of glucose tolerance. in Belarus was found to be 1:17000 according to the correlation of The effect of VLA in insulin signal transduction pathway needs further the number of WD patients revealed from 2000 to 2008 with the birth investigation. rate. This value can be underestimated. We used mutation analysis approach to determine WD frequency in Byelorussian population. The P13.54 Frequent AtP7B gene mutations in Russian Wilson screening for the H1069G mutation has been done in 560 newborns. disease patients The total number of alleles was 1120 and 6 WD alleles was revealed. M. E. Metzger, O. A. Schagina; This data corresponds to allelic frequency 0,53% (95% confidence in- Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. terval (CI) 0,25% - 1,16%) and carrier frequency 1 in 93. Considering The ATP7B gene mapped to 13q14.3-q21.1 encodes copper-trans- that H1069G mutation accounts for 56% of all WD alleles we obtained porting P-type ATPase. Mutations in this gene cause Wilson disease the total WD alleles frequency and carrier frequency as 0,95% (95% (Hepatolenticular degeneration), - an autosomal recessive disorder of CI 0,55% - 1,75%) and 1 in 52 respectively. Assuming Hardy-Wein- cooper metabolism. berg equilibrium, these data could be translated into a WD incidence of The aim of our investigation was to determine the most frequent muta- 1:11000 live births. The study demonstrates the importance of mutation tions in the ATP7B gene among Russian patients. We researched a analysis for estimation the true incidence of the disease in population. sample consisted of 186 Russian unrelated patients of our laboratory with clinical characteristics of Wilson disease. This sample was previ- P13.57 increased expression of mt2A gene in growth delayed ously researched for c.C3207A. Then we created a system for 7 muta- and zinc deficient children tions (deletions and insertions) search by AFLP method and tested the C. Coker1, A. Toylu2,3, A. R. Sisman1, B. Deveci1, N. Atabey2, M. Coker4; sample by this system. The results of the investigation are represented 1Dokuz Eylul University, Department of Biochemistry, Izmir, Turkey, 2Dokuz in a table below. Eylul University, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, Genotype and allele frequencies of the mutations in ATP7B gene in Russian Wilson disease 3Izmir Institute of Technology, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University, Department of patients Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey. Background: Zinc has an essential role for the activity of many en- c. c. c. c. C c. c. zymes involved in different metabolic pathways. Zinc deficiency is 2532 3402 2304 c. 1340_ c. 3627_ Mutation 3207 1770 3649_3654 resulting with diseases of growth, maturity, immunity and nervous sys- del del ins 1343 del 4 3630 del 4 A ins T del 6 tem. However prediction of zinc deficiency is still very difficult, due to A C C absence of a reliable marker. Since, the binding of zinc with some pro- Number of 33 0 7 9 3 0 1 0 teins such as Metallothionein 2A (MT2A) are crucial for zinc homeo- heterozygotes stasis, we hypothesed that zinc-binding storage protein MT2A mRNA Number of 27 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 expression level may be a biomarker of zinc status for screening. homozygotes Aim: Among normal and growth delayed children, presence of a rela- Allele frequency 23,4 0 1,9 2,4 0,8 0 0,3 0 tionship between serum zinc concentration and MT2A gene expres- (%) sion level was questioned. P13.55 sequencing analysis of ATP7B gene in patients with Methods: Zinc measurements of serum and hemolysate were per- Wilson disease in croatia formed with atomic absorption spectrometry. MT2A gene expression H. Ljubić, L. Juričić, A. Acman, D. Caban, M. Kalauz, B. Vucelić, J. Sertić; at mRNA level was detected by quantitative PCR in cells of peripheral University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. blood with Taqman probe. G6PDH was used as a reference. Statistical Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of cop- analysis was made by using Mann-Whitney test. per metabolism resulting from the absence or dysfunction of copper Results: Serum zinc concentrations were significantly reduced in Therapy for genetic disorders 2 growth delayed children compared to healthy children. Expression of defined by single alleles Glu1038Gly, Ser1613Gly, Gly1140ser and MT2A gene in growth delayed children was displayed a considerable simultaneously Glu1038Gly, Gly1140Ser are associated with low-pen- induction. Within growth delayed children group, with the increase of etrance predisposition to breast or ovarian cancer. Further studies are serum zinc concentrations expression of MT2A has closed to the level required to confirm the hypothesis that genetic polymorphisms are as- of healthy children but, in the presence of lower levels of zinc, expres- sociated with breast cancer. sion of MT2A has elevated significantly over control. Conclusion: Among growth delayed children presence of the low levels P14.02 Expression of human factor iX in Drosophila s2 cell of zinc was identified and, elevated expression of MT2A gene may im- J. Vatandoost1,2, A. Zomorodipour2, F. Ataei2; ply an abnormal regulation of zinc homeostasis of circulating cells. 1Department of Genetic, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of Genetics Engineering and Biotechnology of Iran, J13.1 A novel tYmP c.1001c>t mutation in a patient with mNGiE Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. S. A. Kurbatov1, V. P. Fedotov1, L. A. Elkanova2, E. Y. Zakharova2, P. G. Gamma-carboxylation is essential for biological activities of certain Tsygankova2; proteins, including the human coagulation factor IX (hFIX), which is a 1Genetic counseling, Medical Diagnostic Centre, Voronezh, Russian plasma glycoprotein participating in the intrinsic pathway of blood co- Federation, 2Research centre for medical genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian agulation. A pro-peptide sequence in the hFIX precursor is recognized Federation. by a γ-glutamyl carboxylase, to direct the carboxylation of 12 glutamic Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy syndrome (MN- acid residues in the N-terminal portion of the molecule. This enzyme GIE) (OMIM #603041) is a rare autosomal recessive progressive has been characterized in two invertebrates; Drosophila melanogaster multisystem disorder. MNGIE is caused by mutations in the gene en- and cone snails in addition to vertebrates. No γ-carboxylase substrate coding thymidine phosphorylase (TYMP), locus 22q13. Mitochondrial of Drosophila origin has been identified so far. However, pro-peptide of dysfunction represents multiple deletions and depletion of mtDNA and the human FIX and prothrombin are recognizable more efficiently by ragged-red fibers on a muscle biopsy. the Drosophila enzyme than by that of mammalians. The yield of car- We describe a case of 37 year’s old, subgroup Armenian (Hamshen) boxylated product for the Drosophila enzyme is about five times more woman born from healthy cousins. She had been complained about than that obtained with the human enzyme. hearing loss and myasthenic syndrome for the past five years. The The Drosophila melanogaster Schnider (S2) cells were transiently disease manifested in childhood with mild gastrointestinal symptoms. transfected with a plasmid encoding the hFIX gene under the Dro- Today she is presented with cachexia (height - 161 cm, weight - 34 sophila metallothionein promoter (pMT). Based on ELISA the hFIX kg), mild gastrointestinal dismortility, ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, sen- antigen was detectable in the cultured media taken from the trans- sorineural deafness, symmetric mild low limbs weakness, decrease fected S2 cells, indicating for the potential of the insect cells for the tendon reflexes, distal sensory loss, primary amenorrhea. hFIX expression. In order to evaluate the biological activity of the hFIX Electromyographical assay revealed peripheral demyelinating poly- expressed by S2 cells in comparison with the hFIX expressed by mam- neuropathy with axonal loss. Needle EMG showed denervation malian cells, in parallel a CMV-regulated hFIX expressing plasmid was changes without myodistrophic pattern. The decrement was detected also transiently transfected into CHO cells. The two recombinant hFIX on rapid repetitive nerve stimulation. MRI showed severe diffuse leu- (rhFIX) expressed by S2 and CHO cells will be examined, for their γ- koencephalopathy. carboxylation and for their coagulation activities, subsequently. Sequence analysis of coding regions of TYMP gene revealed mis- sense homozygous mutation in the position c.1001C>T. This transition P14.03 Favorable evolution after early rehabilitation in a case cause to substitution leucine for arginin in the 334 a.a. position of the with cri du chat syndrome polypeptide chain. To our knowledge this mutation wasn’t described M. Cevei1, D. Stoicanescu2; earlier. 1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, Myasthenic syndrome in our patient seems to be a unique clinical fea- 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes“, Timisoara, Romania. ture that isn’t usually included in the MNGIE phenotype. Cri-du-chat syndrome is a relatively rare chromosomal disorder with an estimated incidence of 1 in 20000 to 50000 newborns, resulting from loss of varying lengths of the short arm of chromosome 5. We pres- P14 therapy for genetic disorders ent a case report on the rehabilitation treatment of a patient with this condition, aged 18 months, who received multidisciplinary treatment P14.01 Breast cancer susceptibility Genes Polymorphisms and and precocious stimulation. The baby was born from healthy, young pathologic effects in high risk iranian families parents, with a birth weight of 2250 g. At examination this patient pre- F. Keshavarzi1, S. Zeinali2; sented cranio-facial dysmorphy, transverse flexion creases, important 1Islamic Azad University of Sanadaj, Iran, sanandaj, Islamic Republic of Iran, growth and psychomotor retardation, axial hypotonia and hypotrophy, 2Medical Genetics Laboratory of Dr.Zeinali , Kawsar Human Genetics Research bilateral varus equine, positive Babinski sign, lively deep tendinous Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. reflexes, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, unclosed sagittal and lambdoid Nearly 15% of all breast cancer cases are associated with a strong ge- sutures. The child had a happy aspect, was able to sit and to roll, but netic predisposition and BRCA1 and BRCA2 are responsible for 30% was not able to stay in the quadruped position. Rehabilitation program of this genetic predisposition. More than 3000 (1600 in BRCA1 and started at 15 months and consisted of hydrokinetotherapy in the pool 1800 in BRCA2) different sequence variants have been reported in for 15 minutes each day, physiotherapy for global tonisation, re-educa- these genes that many of them are disease-associated, but also in- tion of motor control stages, tonisation of paravertebral, quadriceps, cluded are unclassified variants and polymorphisms. We investigated gluteal muscles, paraffin therapy for the legs, cervico-dorso-lumbar mutations in BRCA genes in many high risk Iranian families and deter- and leg tonic massage. Occupational therapy, coordination exercises mined the genetic polymorphisms in these genes. A total of 63 breast and speech therapy were also performed. The evolution of the child cancer patients and 50 controls were selected from subjects who had was very good, he was able to stand with assistance after the first come to Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center for other purpose. rehabilitation period of three weeks. Improvements in management of All samples were fully sequenced for BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. patients with this disorder by a multidisciplinary team, with the applica- Many missense substitutions in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes were iden- tion of early rehabilitation programs increase psychomotor develop- tified. The missense substitution Gly1738Glu of BRCA1 is pathogenic. ment, improve autonomy and finally lead to a better social adaptation. Here two novel mutations are reported (Gly1140Ser in BRCA1 and Glu1391Gly in BRCA2). The missense substitutions Glu1038Pro, P14.04 moxonidine effectively alleviates excessive Gly1140Ser were found in large series of breast and ovarian cancer noradrenaline release and cold-induced sweating in two siblings patients aged 30-35 years and 20% < of matched controls. Based on with crisponi syndrome our preliminary results some haplotypes may have a pathogenic role J. Herholz1, L. Crisponi2, B. N. Mallick3, F. Rutsch1; in breast cancer development ,the haplotypes at the BRCA1 locus 1University Children’s Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 2Istituto di Neurogenetica defined by alleles Leu871Pro, GLu1038Gly, Ser1613Gly, Gly1140Ser e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale della Ricerche c/o Citadella was found in 10 affected families. In addition, haplotypes of BRCA1 Universitaria di Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy, 3School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Therapy for genetic disorders  Nehru University, New Delhi, India. ment of coin picking decreased 20 seconds (46.8%). Joint Pain and Crisponi syndrome is a rare autosomal-recessive disorder involving Stiffness Questionnaire scores improved by 0.66 points (38.9%) in 4 contractions of the facial muscles, severe hyperthermia, major feeding patients. Improvement in pulmonary function (FVC and FEV1) was ob- and respiratory difficulties, physical dysmorphisms and often sudden served in 4 patients. All 8 patients achieved a mean decrease of 75.4% death in early childhood. Surviving patients can develop cold-induced in urinary GAG excretion. Episodes of hypersensitivity happened on 3 sweating (CIS), which has also been reported in Cold-Induced Sweat- patients, but the reactions resolved in 5 months after premedication,. ing Syndrome (CISS) type 1 and type 2. CIS has not been extensively Conclusions: rhASB improved endurance, mobility, joint function, re- characterized in patients with Crisponi syndrome. Our aim was to ef- duced GAG, and had an acceptable safety profile for most Taiwanese fectively alleviate this symptom and to shed light on the underlying patients with MPS VI. ERT for MPS VI has been endorsed by the Na- pathogenic mechanism. tional Health Insurance program for the treatment of MPS VI in Taiwan We present two Turkish siblings diagnosed to suffer from Crisponi syn- since February, 2006. The patients in our study were not selected on drome, who developed CIS during adolescence. Both patients were the basis of disease severity, this point is in contrast with the previous proven to be homozygous carriers of the c.708-709delCCinsT (Pro- clinical trials. Long term observation is needed to determine whether 238ArgfsX6) mutation in CRLF1. At 19°C ambient temperature, the ERT for all MPS VI actually improves physical endurance and QoL. probands showed excessive plasma noradrenaline release and pro- fuse sweating of the upper part of the body. Treatment with clonidine P14.07 insulin resistance in Romanian type 1 Gaucher patients was effective in reducing sweating but was associated with excessive C. Coldea1, A. Zimmermann2, R. A. Popp3, A. P. Trifa3, C. Al-Khzouz1, A. fatigue. Moxonidine, however, ameliorated CIS and catecholamine Craciun4, P. Grigorescu-Sido1; release with negligible side effects. We propose that in Crisponi syn- 1First Pediatric Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, drome, CIS is triggered by excess noradrenaline acting centrally on Romania, 2First Medical Clinic, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic α-adrenoceptors and can be successfully treated with moxonidine by Diseases, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany, 3Department 1 reducing noradrenaline release. of Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 4Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj- P14.05 Aerobics and airway clearance techniques in children Napoca, Romania. with cystic fibrosis This study investigates insulin resistance (IR) measured by HOMA pa- B. Almajan-Guta1,2, V. Almajan-Guta3, M. Oravitan4, C. Avram4; rameters and the impact of Pro12Ala polymorphism of the transcripi- 1University Politehnica Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2National Cystic tional factor PPAR-gamma, in Romanian Gaucher patients. Thirty-six Fibrosis Center, Timisoara, Romania, 3Special Care Center „Speranta“, patients, 30 receiving enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), with Imiglu- Timisoara, Romania, 4West University, Timisoara, Romania. cerase, for 3.96+/-1.23 years (group A) and 6 untreated (group B) were Background: Physiotherapy management is a key element of care for analyzed. PPAR-gamma polymorphism was identified by PCR-RFLP people with cystic fibrosis. Airway clearance techniques, physical ex- method. Twenty-six patients presented a Pro/Pro genotype (group A1) ercise and inhalation therapy are part of treatment and are associated and 4 patients were Ala carriers (group A2). with improved long-term outcomes. Fasting glucose and insulin levels were determined by enzymatic Hypothesis: aerobic fitness is an independent predictor of survival and methods. HOMA indices - HOMA-IR, QUICKI, IRI and HOMA-B - were those with better physical fitness have better quality of life. calculated, using standard formulas. Method and materials: 20 children with CF from Romanian National Prevalence of impaired fasting glucose and insulin resistance among Cystic Fibrosis Center, Timisoara, with age between 10-14 years old treated patients was 10% and 6.6%, respectively. Untreated patients all randomized in 2 groups: control (clearance techniques: ACTB, PD, did not show dysglycemia. oscillating PEP ) and study (same clearance techniques and aerobic Results are summarized in table I. training-3 days per week, 30 minutes per session; heart rate 75% of In treated patients insulin resistance was directly correlated with ERT maximum heart rate). duration (significantly) and severity score index (moderately). Weight, Objective: was to evaluate the efficiency of aerobic exercises com- chitotriosidase, global and pre-ERT duration of the disease had no in- bined with airway clearance techniques. fluence on IR. The results showed an improvement in all measured values of qual- In untreated patients, insulin resistance correlated directly, moderately ity of well-being (the quality of sleep, respiratory manifestations, re- with chitotriosidase. Fasting insulin correlated significantly with weight, spiratory infections, number of hospitalization, fatigue during normal but inversely with fasting glucose, demonstrating a normal insulin sen- activities or effort, and the participation at school activities) at the study sitivity. group compare to the control group. Conclusion: Treated Gaucher patients showed higher insulin resis- Conclusions: Aerobic training promoted mucociliary clearance, im- tance and a relative hyperinsulinemia over untreated patients, mildly proved maximum exercise capacity, strength and quality of life. Exer- correlated with severity of the disease. When treated, presence of Ala, cise should be considered and encouraged as part of overall physio- in position 12 of the PPAR-gamma structure, improves significantly therapy management in CF. From time of diagnosis physical activity insulin sensitivity. should be incorporated into the daily routine. Table I. Insulin resistance parameters in Romanian type 1 Gaucher patients All patients: A+B (n=36) Treated patients: A (n=30) P14.06 Enzyme replacement therapy for mPs Vi --- Experience Group A Group B in taiwan NoParameter Treated Untreated Subgroup A1 Subgroup A2 S. P. Lin1,2, H. Y. Lin1,2,3, D. S. Lin1,2, C. K. Chuang1, F. J. Tsai4, S. J. Lin5, Y. Y. p p Patients Patients (n=26) (n=4) Ke6, Y. H. Chien7, N. C. Lee7, W. L. Hwu7; (n=30) (n=6) 1Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Early Childhood Care and Education, Mackay Medicine, Nursing and Management College, 1 Glucose 79.96+/-16.65 81.00+/-16.88 0.894 81.65+/-16.85 69.00+/-11.34 0.108 Taipei, Taiwan, 3Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, (mg/dl) Taipei, Taiwan, 4China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, 5National Insulinemia 2 7.92+/-3.88 5.25+/-2.30 0.043 8.54+/-3.80 3.93+/-1.11 0.0001 Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan, 6Changhua Christian Hospital, (microUI/ml) Changhua, Taiwan, 7National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. 3 HOMA-IR 1.59+/-0.89 0.97+/-0.23 0.002 1.73+/-0.87 0.66+/-0.23 0.00005 We evaluated the safety and efficacy of weekly treatment with recom- 4 QUICKI 0.37+/-0.04 0.38+/-0.01 0.131 0.36+/-0.03 0.41+/-0.02 0.016 binant human arylsulfatase B (rhASB) in Taiwanese MPS VI patients. 5 IRI 2.73+/-0.28 2.58+/-0.12 0.056 2.77+/-0.27 2.41+/-0.15 0.006 Eight patients (3 male, 5 female; age 1.5-21 years) receiving weekly iv 6 HOMA-B 213.1+/-221.2 136.7+/-119.7 0.249 220.6+/-234.9 164.0+/-97.0 0.417 infusions of rhASB 1.0 mg/kg for at least 12 months were enrolled. We assessed biochemical and clinical responses every 3 months. Results: After 24 months of treatment, 4 patients experienced a 259.9- m (41.8 %) improvement in 12-minute walk, a 49.6-m (16.6%) improve- ment at 6-minute time point of the walk, and a 50-stair (36.8%) gain in 3-minute stair climb comparing with the baselines. The time require-Therapy for genetic disorders  P14.08 Clinical Observation: Alendronate Improves Bone Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain. Mineral Density and Quality of Life in a Boy with Gaucher Mutations in any of the three different genes BCKDHA, BCKDHB and Disease DBT encoding for E1b and E2 catalytic components of the branched- N. V. Buchinskaya, O. V. Kalashnikova, M. F. Dubko, V. G. Chasnyk; chain α-ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKD) complex can cause Maple State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. Syrup Urine Disease (MSUD). The disease presents heterogeneous Splenomegaly, Gaucher cells in the spleen and bone marrow are the clinical and molecular phenotypes, which ranges from classical to the hallmarks of all 3 clinical forms of the Gaucher Disease (GD). Almost mildest variant types. Up to now, 26 out of 55 MSUD Spanish patients all patients also have skeletal involvement with episodes of bone pain, analyzed show a defect in the BCKDHB gene and a high frequency focal abnormalities on plain x-ray (“Erlenmeyer flask”, lytic lesions) of mutations resulting in premature termination codon (PTC) (14/52 and generalized osteopenia, etiology of which is not clear. Enzyme BCKDHB alleles) have been identified in this series. replacement therapy (ERT) results in rapid decrease of glucosylce- Herein, we have tested the hypothesis that some of these PTCs ramide storage, but skeletal involvement seems to be totally resistant changes could be functionally rescued by “in vitro” and/or “in vivo” to ERT or improves too slowly. Several reports on additional to ERT treatment with aminoglycoside antibiotics known for their ability to sup- bisphosphonate treatment have been published recently (Wenstrup et press translational stop codon recognition. Regarding the importance al., 2004; Cox, 2008). of both; type and sequence context of the nonsense mutation and For 2 years we observe a boy who is now 17 years old with saposin level of nonsense transcript available for read-through, two changes, form of GD, diagnosed by typical chititriosidase, glucocerebrosidase p.R285X and p.R324X have been selected as targets for the study. activity and bone marrow infiltration. At the age of 15 he had 66% bone The efficacy of treatment has been assessed using an “in vitro” cDNA mineral density deficiency (BMDD), pain crisis and vertebra fractures, coupled transcription/translation test and the overexpression of a c- which were the arguments to administer Alendronate with calcium and myc reporter vector containing the complete cDNA BCKDHB with the vitamin D supplementation. ERT or substrate reduction therapy were selected PTCs in cell lines. never provided. After 6 months of Alendronate treatment BMDD was Positive responses have been obtained for both changes and antibiot- 45% and after 1 year BMDD was 23%. During the course of treat- ics, with recoveries of full length protein using TNT of around 30% and ment the pains were tapered and stopped, we didn’t find any vertebra 10% of the total protein synthesized for 0.50 µg/mL geneticin and 10 fractures. There were no side effects. The course of treatment with µg/mL gentamicin respectively. Alendronate, calcium and vitamin D without ERT also significantly im- These results highlight the possible use of read-through drugs as a proved the quality of life (QOL): the boy has higher everyday activity therapeutic option for this inherited metabolic disorder. and makes progress in schooling. We consider that Alendronate treatment makes BMDD lower and im- P14.11 Reduction of glycosaminoglycan synthesis in proves QOL even without ERT in children with GD. mucopolysacharidosis type i cells by using siRNA D. Dziedzic, G. Wegrzyn, J. Jakobkiewicz-Banecka; P14.09 studying the secretory Expression of the Human University of Gdansk, Department of Molecular Biology, Gdansk, Poland. coagulation Factor iX Using Gaussia princeps Luciferase and Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) are severe, inherited metabolic diseas- Human coagulation Factor Vii signal Peptides in cultured es caused by deficiencies in activities of enzymes involved in degra- mammalian cells dation of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Incomplete GAGs degradation M. Ghorbani, A. Zomorodipour, F. Ataei; leads to their lysosomal accumulation in cells of patients. Recent stud- National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, tehran, Islamic ies indicated that substrate reduction therapy (SRT) may be a novel Republic of Iran. therapeutic approach for lysosomal storage diseases. We had previ- Use of suitable signal peptide (SP) is crucial for both expression level ously demonstrated that siRNA-mediated silencing of genes coding and secretion efficiency of a protein in heterologous expression sys- for enzymes involved in the synthesis of the linkage tetrasaccharide tems. Using SPs from Gaussia princeps Luciferase (LUC) and Human sequence, common to both heparan sulfate and chondroitin/dermatan Coagulation Factor VII (FVII), we have studied the secretory expres- sulfate, resulted in a decrease in the levels of the genes’ products and sion of the human coagulation Factor IX (hFIX) in comparison with the reduction of GAG synthesis in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA (MPS IIIA, native hFIX-SP. Considering the key role of host-preferential codon Sanfilippo disease) fibroblasts. usage, RNA secondary structure and SP processing efficiency for the In the present study, we have used an RNA interference-based strat- synthesis/secretion efficiency; we reconstructed the coding fragments egy to reduce mRNA levels of two genes, whose products are involved of LUC and FVII SPs and used them at the N-terminal the hFIX. The in chondroitin/dermatan sulfate synthesis: CSGALNACT1 and CS- chimeric fragments were examined for the secretion of the hFIX in GALNACT2, in MPS I fibroblasts. This decrease in levels of transcripts comparison with native hFIX-SP transiently in CHO-K1 and HEK-293T corresponded to a decrease of chondroitin/dermatan sulfate synthesis cultured cell lines, in a CMV-regulated vectors. At various post-trans- in these fibroblasts after the treatment of the cells with siRNA. These fection times, presence of hFIX in the cultured media and cell extract results indicate that reduction of GAG synthesis by the use of siRNA were evaluated by coagulation test and ELISA. In the case of the LUC- may be considered as a potential therapy for MPS I and could consti- SP in both cell lines expression of the hFIX was dramatically reduced tute a novel approach for MPS treatment, which may either comple- (<1 ng/ml). In the case of the hFVII-SP containing construct, in spite of ment or be used as an alternative approach to enzyme replacement its low expression level a relatively lower intracellular FIX was docu- therapy (ERT). mented, which indicate a relatively higher secretion efficiency of the hFVII-SP in comparison with the hFIX-SP. The native hFIX-SP con- P14.12 scoliosis in patients with Prader-Willi syndrome struct appeared to be the most efficient hFIX expressing one, among V. L. David1, M. C. Popoiu2, C. Rus3, E. S. Boia2, M. Puiu2; the examined constructs. However, considerable intracellular accumu- 1Emergency Children’s Hospital „Louis Turcanu“, Timisoara, Romania, lation of the hFIX for the hFIX-SP, suggest for a need for the optimiza- 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, tion of the hFIX native SP to achieve an efficient secretion of the hFIX 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Grigore T. Popa”, Iasi, Romania. in such heterologous mammalian hosts. Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genetic disorder with an estimated incidence of 1 in 25,000. PWS patients suffer from various medical P14.10 Reading-through premature termination codons conditions that require the attention of many professionals. Affecting identified in the BCKDHB gene of classical maple syrup Urine up to 80% of the PWS patients scoliosis is a major concern for the Disease patients orthopedist and choosing the proper treatment for these patients is P. Fernández-Guerra1, R. Sanchez Alcudia1, B. Merinero1, M. Vilaseca2, B. challenging job because of the other clinical manifestations of PWS Pérez1, L. Desviat1, M. Ugarte1, P. Rodríguez-Pombo1; that can complicate the perspective. In 2008 several Romanian uni- 1Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares (CEDEM), Dpto Biol. versities and health institution across the country joined together in a Mol., Centro de Biología Molecular-SO, UAM-CSIC, Centro de Investigación research program aimed to bring a multidisciplinary approach to PWS en Red de Enfermedades Raras, (CIBERER), Universidad Autónoma Madrid, and Angelman Syndrome. In this article we do a review of the orthope- Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Joan de Déu and Centro de Investigación dically problems of 14 cases of PWS that were included in this project. Age of the patients ranged between 7 and 28 years, mean 15 years. Therapy for genetic disorders  There were 9 female and 5 male patients. Scoliosis was diagnosed P14.15 salbutamol increases smN mRNA in spinal muscular in 7 cases (50%), 2 boys and 5 girls, age 9 to 28 years. In all the 7 atrophy patients (smA): relevance for clinical trial design patients the Cobb angle was less than 30 degrees and the disease F. D. Tiziano1, R. Lomastro1, A. M. Pinto1, S. Messina2, A. D’Amico3, S. Fiori1, were controlled only by physical exercise and regular surveillance. C. Angelozzi1, M. Pane1, E. Mercuri1, E. Bertini3, G. Neri1, C. Brahe1; Nonsurgical treatment should the primarily option for PWS patients 1Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 2University of Messina, with scoliosis. Spinal surgery has a higher rate of complications than Messina, Italy, 3Ospedale Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy. general populations. Regular physical exercises corroborated with Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neuromuscular disorder caused physiokinetotherapy besides improving the spinal curve increase the by homozygous absence of the SMN1 gene. Based on severity, three muscle tonus and help maintaining body weight, and can control the forms of SMA are recognized (type I-III). All patients have at least one scoliosis in up to 90% of the patients. (usually 2-4) copies of a highly homologous gene (SMN2) which pro- duces insufficient levels of functional SMN protein, due to alternative P14.13 Pseudoexon exclusion by antisense therapy in 6- splicing of exon7. Recently, we have provided evidence that SMN2 pyruvoyl-tetrahydropterin synthase deficiency expression can be enhanced in vitro by albuterol/salbutamol, a beta2- S. Brasil*1, D. Meilli*2, A. Rassi2, L. Desviat1, M. Ugarte1, B. Pérez1, B. Thöny2; adrenergic agonist. This compound has also been shown to improve 1Centro de Biología Molecular, CIBERER Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 2Division of motor function of SMA patients in two different open pilot trials. In the Clinical Chemistry and Biochemistry, University Children´s Hospital, Zurich, present study, we have evaluated the in vivo molecular efficacy of Switzerland. salbutamol in SMA patients. We have recruited 12 type II-III patients * Equally contributed who received the compound orally for six months. SMN2 full length The number of mutations identified in deep intronic sequences that transcript levels have been determined in peripheral blood leukocytes activate disease-causing pseudoexon-inclusion in mRNAs is in- by absolute real time PCR, at baseline and after 3 and 6 months of creasing. Here we report the effect of cellular antisense therapy to treatment. A significant and constant increase in SMN2-full length tran- suppress pseudoexon activation in primary dermal fibroblasts from script levels was detected and the response was directly proportional three independent patients with mutations in the gene encoding the to SMN2 gene copy number. Our data strongly support salbutamol as 6-pyruvoyltetrahydropterin synthase (PTPS), which leads to the most potential candidate for SMA treatment, and suggest that SMN2 copy common form of tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency (OMIM 261640). Pa- number may predict the molecular response to treatment and may tient MD130 presented an insertion of 45 nt between exon 2 and 3 be useful as a randomization parameter in double blind placebo-con- (r.163_164ins45) due to an intronic deletion (g.3760_3816del57) locat- trolled clinical trial design. ed in the 3´splice site of an inserted antisense Alu pseudoexon. Simi- larly, patient MD335 had inserted the same antisense Alu sequence P14.16 chemical coupling of targeting moiety on phage surface; due to a mutation (c.164-716A>T) located in the 5´splice site of the A distinct approach for transgene delivery into eukaryotic cells pseudoexon. In patient MD96, a 79-nt pseudoexon between exons 1 M. Khalaj-Kondori, M. Sadeghizadeh, M. Behmanesh; and 2 was activated by an A>T substitution (c.84-322A>T) at the 3’ 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares end of a LINE-2 sequence (r.84--85ins79). Antisense morpholino oli- University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. gonucleotides directed to the 3’ or 5´splice sites of the corresponding Targeting gene carriers to specific cell/tissue is of great interest. Some pseudoexons were designed to block intronic insertions into the mRNA approaches including displaying peptide or monoclonal antibody on for all three patients. Twenty-four hours post transfection, mRNA was phage surface have been tried yet. However, taking advantage of isolated and transcriptional profiling analysis was performed. The RT- phage display has improved gene delivery and expression of trans- PCR pattern indicated that in all three cases a dose and sequence gene to eukaryotic cells, but its efficiency has been remained to be specific recovery of normal splicing was achieved. Furthermore, PTPS improved. Previous studies reported that the efficiency of phage pen- enzyme activity in all three patients’ fibroblasts was recovered to nor- etrating to eukaryotic cells is directly related to the copy number of mal values 2-3 days posttransfection. These results represent another displayed moiety. On the other hand, the number of phage coat fusion- excellent example of pseudoexon exclusion therapy in inherited meta- bearing proteins in each phage particle is limited because of their inter- bolic disease. ference at phage particle assembly process. To increase the number of displayed moieties on each phage particle, we have addressed the P14.14 Use of read-through drugs as a novel therapeutical problem from a distinct point of view. The lambda bacteriophage par- approach in propionic acidemia ticles bearing the GFP have been utilized to couple with human holo- R. Sánchez-Alcudia, B. Pérez, M. Ugarte, L. R. Desviat; transferrin chemically to formulate targeted lambda phage nanobiopar- Centro De Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa Csic-Uam, Madrid, Spain. ticles. Coupling conjugation efficiency has been evaluated by ELISA Mutation-specific therapies are a promising option for human genetic using HRP-conjugated anti human apo-transferrin. Cell penetrating diseases. Among them, the use of aminoglycosides and drugs identi- efficiency of targeted nanobioparticles and nontargeted lambda par- fied after high-throughput screens such as Ataluren (PTC124) have ticles was compared using ELISA and PCR. The GFP expression was shown to read through nonsense mutations in several diseases. In evaluated by RT-PCR and florescent microscopy followed by flow-cy- propionic acidemia, caused by a defect of propionylCoA carboxylase tometery. Our results revealed more efficient penetrating and delivery (PCC) involved in the metabolism of several amino acids, odd-chain of transgene into AGS cell line and highlight the potency of coupling fatty acids and cholesterol, nonsense mutations constitute ~10% of conjugation procedure as a distinctively efficient alternative route to the total alleles in both the PCCA and PCCB genes encoding both standard phage display system in eukaryotic cell gene delivery trails. subunits of the PCC enzyme. Among the patients’ samples available in the laboratory we have selected fibroblasts with nonsense mutations P14.17** siRNA-mediated reduction of MBD2 results in up in which the stop codon is UGA, which has been shown to be most regulation of γ-globin in human model cells susceptible to read-through. We have confirmed the greatly decreased J. Gharesouran1,2, M. Banan2, Z. Deylami3, M. Asghariyan4, H. Najmabadi2; levels of both immunorreactive protein and mRNA, probably due to 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of the NMD mechanism. PCCA and PCCB cDNAs have been cloned in Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Research Center, vectors under the control of the T7 promoter to allow the synthesis in a University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation sciences, Tehran, Islamic coupled transcription-translation assay (TNT). The selected nonsense Republic of Iran, 3Department of Biology, Azad University, Zanjan, Islamic mutations have been introduced by PCR mutagenesis in the corre- Republic of Iran, 4Department of Biology, Azad University, Tonekabon, Islamic sponding vectors. The TNT assay in the presence of 35SMet-Cys con- Republic of Iran. firms the synthesis of truncated proteins of the expected size. Different The β-thalassemias are congenital anemias that are caused by mu- concentrations of gentamicin and of geneticin have been assayed. Our tations that reduce or abolish expression of the beta-globin gene. first results indicate that the inclusion of geneticin (0.1-0.25 µg/mL) in Excess alpha-globin precipitates in erythroid progenitor cells result- the synthesis reaction results in the production of up to 10% of full- ing in cell death, ineffective erythropoiesis and severe anemia. The length protein. To determine if this results in a functional recovery of chicken homolog to an MBD2 containing NuRD co-repressor complex the defect the corresponding patients’ fibroblasts will be treated with (MeCPC) has previously been purified from primary erythroid cells and the read-through compounds. characterized as binding to the methylated ρ-globin promoter in ery-Laboratory and quality management  throid cells of adult chickens in which the gene is silent [Kransdorf and in some with measurements or pictures. The specific intervention et al. Blood 2006; 108:2836-45]. Knockdown of MBD2 by siRNA in was conducted with remarkable results in Down syndrome cases, the MEL cells stably transfected with a methylated ρ-globin gene construct main aspect - motor development was better correct when the cases leads to a greater than 10-fold increase in ρ-globin gene expression. were sent to therapy in the first month of life. Conclusions: The team Likewise, knockout of MBD2 results in a ~20 fold upregulation of the work with toddlers genetic disorders and an early diagnose followed human gamma globin gene in adult erythroid cells of βYAC transgenic by individual plan for physical therapy can give other chance for inte- mice [Rupon et al. PNAS 2006; 103:6617-22]. Other group addressed gration in future life and low the medical costs in upcoming years of the role of DNA hypomethylation in the induction of -globin expres- existence. sion by 5-azacytidine [Mabaera et al. Blood 2008; 111:411-420]. These observations provide an impetus to investigate the role of MBD2 in J14.2 the importance of sight in early motor development -globin induction and 5-aza pathway. We investigated by northern blot V. Almajan-Guta1, B. Almajan-Guta2; and quantitative PCR assay that -globin could be induced by 5-aza 1Special Care Center, Timisoara, Romania, 2University “Politehnica”, Timisoara, in the model cells. In the second step -globin levels increased in the Romania. presence of MBD2 siRNA. Finally, as predicted, treatment of cells with Background: Studies made on groups of blind children and groups of 5-azacytidine in the presence of MBD2 siRNA induces only a small, children without visual impairment in similar conditions have pointed nonadditive induction of -globin mRNA, signifying that DNA methyla- out the fact that the medium age at which the mains milestones of tion acts primarily through MBD2 to maintain γ-globin suppression in motor development are performed, are significant delayed. Fine and adult erythroid cells. gross motor development of the blind babies are crucial in order to achieve maximum independence. P14.18** The therapeutic potential of δ globin gene in “Th3/+” Method and materials: the longitudinal study compared the develop- mouse mental data concerning 9 motor skills of 11 blind children (retinopathy M. F. Marongiu, M. F. Manchinu, S. Porcu, D. Poddie, F. Crobu, C. Casu, M. S. of prematurity) from Special Care Center “Speranta” Timisoara with Ristaldi; age 2 months -3 years old, to a control group of sighted children at Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, CNR CAGLIARI, Monserrato the same age. (CA), Italy. Objectives: to establish the age when they perform the milestones; to The delta globin gene produces a small amount of delta globin, being evaluate the motor behavior of the blind children; to advise the parents part of the HbA2 synthesis. how to handle their babies. The delta globin chain could be a valid substitute of the beta globin The results the motor development of blind children was delayed in all chain in thalassemia and also an antisickling agent in sickle cell ane- the stages, but significant in 5 motor skills that were examined (p<0, mia. 05). This delay shows the major importance of vision in motor develop- Our previous work in vitro showed that the creation of the CACCC box ment and in self-care skills, but also is caused by the lack of stimula- consensus sequence on the delta globin gene promoter is sufficient to tion and no/poor motor experience. enhance its expression to a considerable extent. Conclusions: Early intervention of the physiotherapist for the achieve- We produced a transgenic line carrying the mini LCR (HS-HS4) and the ment of maximum potential of the child, a safe and an adequate stimu- delta gene driven by the CACCC containing delta promoter (CACCC- lating environment, proper handling could shorten the motor develop- delta-LCR). mental delay and could improve the quality of life of those children. Here we show that the delta globin gene can be activated in vivo reach- ing high levels of expression in our transgenic mouse model. Our results on a single copy transgenic line show an expression level P15 Laboratory and quality management of the delta gene of 30% compared to the endogenous beta major. This level of expression could be considered curative for beta thalas- P15.01 Quantitative Study of bacterial DNA effects on aged bone semia and sickle cell disease. DNA amplification After this result, we decided to intercross the homozygous transgenic A. Ghasemi1, N. Mahdieh2, M. Tavallaei3, M. Aslani4, M. Kargar5, F. Kafilzadeh5, line CACCC-delta-LCR with the heterozygous mouse model of beta- R. Yaghoubi6, A. Shirkavand7,8, Z. Zafari7,9, S. Zeinali7,10; thalassemia (Hbb-th3/+). 1Azad University of Jahrom,Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Ilam Hematological analysis performed at 8 weeks after-born mice Hbb- University of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Human th3/+ revealed 8,7±1,2 g/dL of total hemoglobin levels versus 10,5 g/dL Genetic Research Center,Baqyatallah Medical Sciences University, Tehran, ± 1,3 in heterozygous CACCC-delta-LCR/Hbb-th3/+ mice, 11,6±0,94 Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Microbiolology Research Center, Pasteur Institute g/dL in homozygous CACCC-delta-LCR/CACCC-delta-LCR/Hbb-th3/+ of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Azad University of Jahrom, Tehran, and 15.48±1.4 g/dL in wild type mice. Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Shiraz Transplantation research center, Namazi We plan to obtain the final validation of the delta globin gene as a ther- hospital, Shiraz university of medical sciences, Shriaz, Islamic Republic of apeutic gene by the rescue of the thalassemic mouse model th3/th3. Iran, 7Kawsar‘s Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 8Biology Group, Faculty of Sciences, Razi University, Kermanshah, J14.1 Early physical therapy for children with genetic disorders Islamic Republic of Iran, 9Khatam university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, M. Gafencu1, M. Puiu1, C. Apostol2, G. Doros1; 10Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic 1University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Roumania, Timisoara, Republic of Iran. Romania, 2Children Hospital L Turcanu, Timisoara, Roumania, Timisoara, Molecular human identification is one of the most important tests per- Romania. formed in forensic laboratories. These tests are applied for identifica- Aim: To focus upon the crucial moments from the first years of ge- tion of human remains from natural disasters, wars, etc., but two prob- netic affected children s life, when an accurate diagnosis followed by lems may occur as a result of DNA degradation and contamination.We well-oriented physical therapy can modulate the prognosis, in some are planning to test probable effects of bacterial DNA on amplifying cases. Material and methods: We worked with a cohort of kids with aged bone DNA. DNA was extracted from bone remains and E.Coli. genetic transmitted diseases included in long and complex therapy, Despite the large amount of DNA observed, PCR amplification for mo- including physical. The diagnostic was established in the Emergency lecular identification was failed. Using different aged bone and bacte- Children Hospital L. Turcanu Timisoara (between 2006 and 2009) and rial DNA dilutions along with PCR based methods, we tried to test their the physical treatment performed in ambulatory department next to the positive, negative or inhibitory effects on each other. Quantification of same hospital. The children’s were diagnosed with Down syndrome these effects is carrying out by real time PCR. Based on our prelimi- - 11 cases, and other different diseases as Goldenhar syndrome, ar- nary data, addition of bacterial DNA is a valid biological test for testing throgryposis, neurofibromatosis, Horner Syndrome, and more than 10 quality of bone DNA to enable us for the identification testing of human children with cerebral palsy. The physical specialist identifies potential remains. This method will help to detect DNA and DNA contamination or existing problems and consults the other medical team members which are usually present in the archeological remains. (surgeon, psychiatrist, genetician). Results: In all cases the quantifi- able outcome was documented with individual observational papers Laboratory and quality management 7 P15.02 European validation of a new molecular diagnostic test more represented. for cystic Fibrosis We believe that to correctly perform molecular diagnosis of genetic X. Pepermans, A. Bosmans, T. Leal, M. Philippe; disorders a deep cultural medical genetics background is needed. Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Human Genetic Center, Bruxelles, Belgium. The patients referring to our Lab are sent by the Genetic Counselling The efficacy of a new molecular screening method for CF, the xTAG® Service of our Department, or by other specialised Institutes. Our Lab Cystic Fibrosis 71v2 kit (Luminex 200), allowing identification of 71 ensures a deep and continuous interaction with requesting doctors, in CFTR mutations and 6 polymorphisms, was compared with a routine order to chose the best diagnostic flow-chart for obtaining the correct reference method, the INNO-LiPA from Innogenetics. The latter con- interpretation of the molecular results. sisting on the combination of CFTR17+Tn Update and INNO-LiPA Note: Please see the online version of the abstract database (www. CFTR19 allows identification of 36 mutations and 3 polymorphisms. eshg.org/eshg2010) for the table included in this abstract. For validation purposes, CF positive and negative DNA samples were In conclusion, we believe that only laboratories with recognised and tested in parallel by both methods. Initially, 30 DNA INNO-LiPA positive experienced background can assure consistent and accurate testing samples were analysed by Luminex and results were compared with since they are able to perform extensive, up-to date molecular diag- those obtained by INNO-LiPA. Wild-type DNA samples (n: 60) were nostics by using articulated methods, and can give accurate interpreta- also compared. If a new substitution was detected, a CFTR exonic se- tions of data. quencing (BDT3.1/3130xl, Applied Biosystems) was performed. Final- ly, DNA samples obtained from different biological matrix (10 samples P15.05 How to prepare samples to molecular genetic tests? for each: whole blood, chorionic villi, amniotic fluid and blood spot from K. M. Sasin1, A. M. Czarnecka2; Guthrie cards) were processed. Samples were analysed in triplicate by 1GENE Association for Children with Genetic Disorders, Poznań, Poland, 3 different operators at 3 different days. 2Department of Oncology, Institute of Military Medicine, Warsaw, Poland. For all DNA samples, the new and the reference method provided simi- Molecular genetic testing is often performed as part of a routine diag- lar results for each corresponding CFTR mutation. The reproducibility nostic procedure. It is often based on taking a sample of blood. This of the new method was comparable and no significant inter-operator study investigates the use of a simple DNA extraction technique for variability was noted. application in medical and research studies and systematically ana- As conclusions, the Luminex kit is a robust CFTR screening method lyzes the potential impact of time lag and temperature of storage be- allowing a twice as large CFTR mutation detection rate and applicable tween blood drawing and DNA isolation. It compares the influence of in routine lab analysis. Currently more than 300 screening tests have various blood sample storage conditions on the quantity and quality of been performed by the new method at our lab. isolated DNA. A modified phenol/chloroform isolation technique was used. DNA was isolated from samples collected from 13 participants P15.03 cytochrome P450 analysis using HRmA and DHPLc and processed in triplicate: a) after storing blood at 20°C for 3 days; b) A. Kaczmarek1, M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska1,2, M. Zimniak1, D. Hoevelmans1, U. after storing blood at 4°C for 7 days; c) after storing blood at -20°C for G. Froster1; 28 days. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA concentra- 1Institute of Human Genetics and Oncogenetics, Leipzig, Germany, 2Institute of tion measurements were performed to analyze the quality of isolated Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. the DNA. The amount of DNA isolated was as low as 1.37 ng/mL after Cytochrome P450 is a superfamily of enzymes catalyzing the oxidative storage at 4°C and 865.0 ng/mL when stored at -20°C. This pilot study metabolism of many endogenous compounds and xenobiotics. Two suggests that storage at -20°C for 28 days and at 20°C for 3 days enzymes, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19, are primarily involved in the trans- allows isolation of high quality DNA. Further studies are needed to formation of pharmaceuticals; together they metabolize around 20% investigate the influence of long-term storage of biological specimens of widely prescribed drugs. Genes CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 encoding on DNA isolation and quality. those enzymes are highly polymorphic. Many of alleles account for a deficient metabolism, resulting in phenotypes of poor (PMs) and in- P15.06 European external quality assessment (EQA) for termediate metabolizers (IMs). In our study we investigated the three constitutional molecular karyotyping: Experiences from the most common alleles responsible for a decreased enzyme activity: CEQA/EMQN pilot scheme. CYP2C9*2 (p.Arg144Cys), CYP2C9*3 (p.Ile359Leu) and CYP2C19*2 H. Gabriel1, J. R. Vermeesch2, S. J. Patton3, R. Elles3, R. J. Hastings4; (c.19154G>A in exon 5, causing aberration in splicing site) in a control 1Diagenos, Osnabrueck, Germany, 2Center for Genetics, K.U. Leuven, Belgium, population of 100 patients from Saxony and Thuringia. We tested the 3Regional Molecular Genetics Service, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4John effectiveness and reliability of DHPLC (Denaturing High Performance Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. Liquid Chromatography)and the more recently developed HRMA (High The Cytogenetics European Quality Assessment scheme (CEQA) and Resolution Melting Analysis) used for genotyping as alternative meth- the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) initiated a ods to automatic sequencing. Both methods turned out to be equally joint pilot scheme for molecular karyotyping. sensitive and precise. However, HRMA required less preparation steps Based on a questionnaire 10 labs were selected for each method and allowed a higher throughput than DHPLC. HRMA showed a great (BAC-ArrayCGH, Oligo-ArrayCGH, SNPArray). 10 ugDNA isolated potential as a rapid genotyping technique and it helps limiting the need from a transformed cell line derived from a patient with developmental for sequencing. Allele frequencies estimated in our study (13 % for and mental retardation was sent out. The patient was carrier of two CYP2C9*2, 5 % for CYP2C9*3 and 19 % for CYP2C19*2) were similar clinical significant aberrations: a 1.7 Mb telomeric deletion at 20p and to the ones determined in other Caucasian populations. a 9.1 Mb terminal duplication at 18p11.32p11.22. A 30 year old male patient with obesity, microgenitalia, no philtrum and P15.04 A window on the lab: one year of diagnostic activity in mental retardation was presented as case scenario. the molecular Genetics Laboratory of Ferrara - italy Participating labs were asked to proceed according to their standard A. Ravani, P. Rimessi, A. Venturoli, B. Dolcini, M. Taddei Masieri, C. Trabanelli, methods and to return their results (genotype and clinical interpreta- S. Carturan, S. Brioschi, R. Selvatici, F. Gualandi, A. Ferlini; tion). One lab failed to perform testing. Six labs made significant geno- Sezione di Genetica Medica, Ferrara, Italy. typing errors (21%). 24 labs (83%) failed to provide an adequate inter- FERRARA is a small town in Emilia Romagna (Italy), but with an im- pretation. Moreover, 7 of these labs (24%) provided no interpretation portant Centre for Molecular Genetics, not only at regional but also at at all. Only 3 labs (10%) fulfilled the required criteria (correct genotype national level and receiving international requests for molecular test- and major aspects of the interpretation). ing. Defining both the means and the safety of genetic testing is not From this EQA, it became clear that many labs have serious technical only important for public health care organisation planning and evalua- problems to detect even large chromosomal imbalances using array tion but also for the intense public interest and concern about anything CGH. In addition, this EQA reveals a large variation in the reporting labelled ‘genetics’. methodology of those laboratories. Here we intend to give an overview of the specific pathologies/genes The scheme demonstrated that a significant proportion of the laboratories we analyse, the number of examinations performed per year, the tech- currently offering molecular karyotyping in a clinical diagnostic context are niques used, and finally the participation to National or European Ex- poor performers. In addition, this EQA has set criteria for reporting which ternal Quality Assessment Schemes at least for the tests quantitatively will in the future result in more uniform reporting of array results.Laboratory and quality management  P15.07 customer satisfaction survey as a tool to improve the patients and their family members to get a clear picture of the geno- Cystic Fibrosis External Quality Assessment scheme type-phenotype relation. The only way to collect sufficient numbers is S. Berwouts1,2, E. Dequeker1,2; by sharing the data in databases such as DECIPHER, ECARUCA, 1Centre of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Cystic Fibrosis European HGMD, and Leiden Open (source) Variant Databases (LOVD), etc. Network, Leuven, Belgium. This cannot be the effort of a few enthusiastic individuals who tend to The Cystic Fibrosis Network aims to provide well organized External their pet gene database or chromosomal region into the small hours. Quality Assessment (EQA) schemes for cystic fibrosis (CF). In order to Reporting all detected variants to one single database should be an define the needs of the EQA participants and to continuously improve integral part of the quality system of the diagnostic laboratory. Each ac- the scheme, a customer satisfaction survey was developed. credited laboratory, be it public, academic or commercial, should have All 213 laboratories that participated in the CF EQA scheme round of a small share in database curation proportional to its annual turnover. 2008 were invited to complete an online questionnaire, which touched Our scientific societies, national and international, should take up the upon different aspects such as user friendliness of the different online challenge to co-ordinate this effort. forms, clarity of instructions, suitability of sample concentration, under- Funding from health insurance cannot be expected. However, in the standability of the report and complaint handling. longer run the system finances itself, since the interpretation of se- Responses were collected from 32% of the laboratories, located in quence variants will expedited. Eventually this will help diagnostic 22 different countries, and put into an importance-satisfaction matrix. laboratories cope with their increasing workload. This matrix gave the scheme provider an overview of both the relative importance of the different aspects and participants’ satisfaction. P15.10 European external quality assessment for the The general satisfaction about the service of the CF Network was improvement of KRAS testing good, demonstrated by an average of 4.33 on a scale of 1 to 5. Issues K. Cox1, M. Ligtenberg2, K. de Stricker3, A. Edsjö4, V. Gorgoulis5, G. Höfler6, that fulfill or exceed participants’ expectations include clarity of the in- A. Jung7, A. Kotsinas5, P. Laurent-Puig8, F. López-Ríos9, E. Rouleau8, J. van structions to register and accurate time schedule, as well as suitability Krieken2, E. Dequeker1; of DNA purity and sample packages. On the other hand it was shown 1University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Radboud University Nijmegen that the CF EQA scheme could improve with respect to the online form Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Odense University Hospital, used to submit genotype results, reports and raw data, and the under- Odense, Denmark, 4Clinical pathology Malmö, Malmö, Sweden, 5National standability of individual comments and general report. and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 6Medical University This survey and its results provide a tool to identify shortcomings and of Graz, Graz, Austria, 7Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München, München, strong points, and to prepare to fulfil the requirements of ISO 17043, Germany, 8Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique St Cloud, St Cloud, France, 9Hospital the new accreditation standard for EQA providers. Universitario Madrid Sanchinarro, Madrid, Spain. KRAS mutational status in tumour cells has become an important de- P15.08 Assessment of the Fragile X PCR screen assay in terminant for the successful application of EGFR targeting therapy in retrospective genotyping patients with colorectal cancer. To provide optimal and reliable testing Z. Musova, M. Macek Jr., A. Krepelova, M. Simandlova, M. Malikova, M. for patients throughout Europe, regional KRAS External Quality As- Havlovicova; sessment (EQA) schemes in 8 different European countries were set Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech up to evaluate the performance of KRAS testing, including the assess- Republic. ment of the percentage tumour cells evaluated (a critical step in the We present our initial assessment of the novel Fragile X PCR Screen testing) and the correct identification of the mutations. assay (Abbott Molecular). Retrospective analysis was performed in Consecutive unstained sections paraffin-embedded material from 10 80 samples characterized previously by Southern blot, except for the invasive colorectal carcinomas with known KRAS mutation status normal male controls. This evaluation was performed in 22 samples were sent to each participating laboratory. The laboratories could use with full mutations, in 21 samples with premutations, in 3 samples with their method of testing of choice and were required to provide the re- alleles localized within the “grey zone”, in 2 mosaics of normal alleles sults within 10 working days. In total, 61 laboratories participated in with full mutations, in 3 mosaics of a premutation with a full mutation the regional schemes. From these 61 laboratories, 44 reported all 10 and in 29 normal cases. Altogether 43 female and 37 male samples genotypes correctly. 9, 6 and 1 laboratories made 1, 2 and 3 geno- were tested. Expansions were detected using Fragile X PCR Screen type mistakes, respectively. A wide variety of different DNA extraction assay in all samples with pre-mutations or full mutations. The signal of methods and KRAS mutation detection methods is being used. The trinucleotide repeat peaks was clear up to 90 CGG in all female sam- estimation of % tumour cells showed a large difference among the ples with full mutations and up to 115 CGG in all male samples with participants. full mutations. Our data provided evidence that the new assay is fast We conclude that more standardization in estimating tumour cell per- and efficacious for detecting Fragile X-related expansions. Moreover, centages is required but that about 70% of laboratories correctly identi- the test is useful for exact determination of borderline alleles within the fied the KRAS mutational status in all cases. We expect that this EQA normal, grey zone and permutation ranges. Based on our experience scheme is a useful educational tool that provides information about the this new assay could be used as a rapid first choice to exclude the performance of a laboratory compared to other laboratories, finds the presence of an expansion alone. The current commercial Fragile X source of the genotype mistake(s) and eliminates them. PCR ‚sizing‘ assay from the same vendor could be used in the second step to substantiate the exact sizing of alleles at risk. In summary, both P15.11 Evaluation of two commercially available multiplex assays can provide an integrated, Southern blot free and fast diagnos- Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) software tics of the Fragile X Syndrome. programs. Supported by Eurogentest and MZOFNM2005. S. L. Hume, M. Hicks, R. Tomaszewski, C. L. Walker, M. J. Somerville, P. Scott; University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. P15.09 How to survive the sequence boom? submit your In order to maintain quality assurance and control in a diagnostic lab mutations and unclassified variants to databases setting, MLPA analysis is best achieved with controlled software. Our M. H. Breuning, E. Bakker, J. T. den Dunnen; lab chose to review two commercially available MLPA software analy- Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. sis programs: GeneMarker v.1.9 (Softgenetics) and Sequence Pilot The ever-increasing speed of DNA sequencing and other forms of ge- MLPA v.3.3 (JSI medical systems GmbH) using the results from a num- nome analysis leads to a fast growing mountain of DNA variants of ber of MLPA kits purchased from MRC-Holland. These two software unknown clinical significance. All laboratories are facing the challenge programs were evaluated with respect to their ease of use, audit trail of interpreting these correctly, and provide evidence based answers to capability, network performance, accuracy of allele sizing (automated the questions asked by clinicians. Since the majority of variants are not binning), ease of template modification, user manual, ability to dis- reported in the literature, and single centers will never collect sufficient criminate various allele copy numbers (ie. from 0 - 4 alleles), and the data on a variant on their own, it will remain very difficult to interpret ease of interpretation of methylation-specific MLPA data. Furthermore, variants under the current system. examination of the standard deviations from 100 data sets permitted To characterize variants we need large numbers of well-documented a comparison of the two algorithms used by the software. These data Laboratory and quality management  sets also allowed calculation of program sensitivity and specificity us- same sensitivity. ing real-time PCR to classify discordant or out-of-range allele calls. The results from this study have shown that both software programs P15.14** Genetic investigations in paternity cases in Portugal: a are comparable and selection of software is dependent on laboratory call for psychosocial and ethical recommendations requirements and preferences. S. Silva1,2, H. Machado3,4, A. Amorim5,6, C. Alves5; 1Institute of Public Health (ISPUP), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, P15.12 towards better mtDNA population samples by inspecting 2Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Porto Medical School, autosomal stR markers Porto, Portugal, 3Department of Sociology, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal, M. Bodner, W. Parson; 4Center for Social Studies, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Institute Institute of Legal Medicine, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria. of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Mitochondrial DNA with its features of a circular genome, strictly mater- Porto, Portugal, 6Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. nal inheritance and high copy number is an intriguing marker applied in The Paternity Testing Commission of the International Society for Fo- population, medical and forensic genetics and phylogeography. rensic Genetics has published several recommendations on biostatis- Reliable data are required for all these applications. Quality control tics, laboratory management and quality control for genetic investiga- measures have been introduced to ensure highest standards in se- tions in paternity cases. In this paper we aim to expand the traditional quence data generation, validation and a posteriori inspection. A phy- technical and scientific requirements related to the collection, use and logenetic alignment strategy has been widely accepted as a prerequi- storage of genetic information in paternity cases by exploring the un- ste for data comparability and database searches, for a reconstruction specified practices of informed consent and individual identification of human migrations and for a correct interpretation of mtDNA muta- performed by experts working in Portuguese laboratories involved in tions in medical genetics. paternity testing. There is continuing effort in enhancing the number of worldwide popu- A qualitative and interpretative design was followed, grounded on the lation samples in order to contribute to a better understanding of hu- following sources of information: (a) interviews conducted with experts man mtDNA variation. This often means to rely on convenience sam- involved in genetic paternity investigations ordered by courts by labo- ples collected for other purposes that do not meet all quality require- ratories located in Portugal; (b) the consent forms and the individual ments for mtDNA data sets. Here, we introduce an additional quality identification sheets used in genetic investigations of paternity cases. control means that deals with this limitation: by combining autosomal Official technical and scientific recommendations on standard proce- marker with mtDNA information, it helps to avoid the bias introduced dures and quality control in the field of paternity testing coexist with by related individuals included in the same (small) sample. By STR informal and heterogeneous laboratory practices. Specific recommen- analysis of individuals sharing their mitochondrial haplotype, pedigree dations on ethics and psychosocial issues related to genetic inves- construction and subsequent calculation of likelihood ratios based on tigations in paternity cases are needed, drawing on debates around the allele frequencies found in the population, closely maternally re- the implications of this activity to citizens’ individual rights, personal lated individuals can be identified and excluded. An ideal population autonomy and privacy. Good practices for genetic investigations of sample would be representative for its population: this new approach paternity cases should also incorporate guidelines concerning the represents another contribution towards this goal. anonymization of data, the storage and content of biological samples This work was supported by the Austrian Science Fund FWF, project and possible uses of the genetic information, in order to guarantee the L397. quality and safety of the genetic databases. P15.13 EmmA, an innovative diagnostic method for P15.15 comparison of PEP and nested PcR for analysis of simultaneous detection of point mutations and large scale single cell and low quantity DNAs rearrangements: routine screening of 1224 patients on BRCA1 M. Mashayekhi1, K. Parivar1, N. Mahdieh2, M. Raiesi3, M. Masoudifard3, M. and BRCA2 Asheri3, F. Keshavarzi1, S. Zeinali3; V. Moncoutier1, L. Castéra1, C. Tirapo1, D. Michaux1, M. A. Remon1, J. L. 1Science and research Unit, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Faculty of Viovy2, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,3,4, C. Houdayer1,3; Medicine, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 1Institut Curie, Service de Génétique Oncologique, Paris, France, 3Kawsar‘s Human Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 2Physicochimie Curie - Institut Curie / CNRS UMR 168 / UPMC, Paris, France, Molecular analysis of a single cell is essential in many genetic studies 3Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 4Inserm U830, Paris, France. such as preimplantation genetic diagnosis and forensic investigations. EMMA (Enhanced Mismatch Mutation Analysis®, Fluigent) is a new Whole genome amplification methods have been introduced as pow- method for mutation screening based on heteroduplex analysis by erful tools for DNA analysis in a single cell. A molecular technique, capillary electrophoresis thanks to an innovative polymer. In combi- named primer extension preamplification (PEP), has been introduced nation with limiting PCR conditions, point mutation and large scale as a method for whole genome amplification. In other hands, nested rearrangement are detected in a single run. High profile specificity PCR has been used for amplifying DNA from single cell and very few and reproducibility allow the interpretation of polymorphisms based cell samples. Here, we are planning to compare the efficiency of these on their profiles. This was checked by blind analysis of 402 patients techniques. DNAs were extracted from 30 blood samples, 10 bone. and following sequencing of all polymorphic profiles: as expected, all Also, thirty blastomers were obtained using a standard IVF procedure. polymorphic profiles showed the expected polymorphism without any PEP procedure was applied on DNA samples and blastomers using a other variant. 15-base random oligonucleotide primer followed by PCR amplification We report on the routine diagnostic use of this method for BRCA1 using specific primers for three regions (exon1 form FVIII and a seg- and BRCA2 screening on a series of 1224 unrelated patients. BRCA1 ment of beta globin, GJB2 gene). These regions were also amplified and BRCA2 were amplified in 24 multiplex PCRs (81 fragments) using by nested PCR in two steps.Briefly, for PEP-PCR analysis, 147 of 450 a single condition. PCRs were electrophoresed with a single analyti- samples (32.67%) for FVIII gene, 122 of 450 samples (27.11%) for beta cal condition on an ABI3100 and data were analysed using dedicated globin gene and 137 of 450 samples (30.44%) for GJB2 gene were software (Emmalys). determined. However, for nested PCR, 290 of 450 samples (65.56%), Mutation detection rate was 12%, which is in line with the results we 302 of 450 (67.11%) and 295 of 450 (58.89%) were determined for previously obtained for 3700 index cases analysed by DHPLC. FVIII, beta globin and GJB2 genes. Our preliminary data showed that This easy-to-use method relies on i) a single condition of analysis: good amplification efficiencies are provided when performing nested modelling related to melting domain is not required, ii) simultaneous PCR. Thus, the nested PCR has a higher efficiency than PEP-PCR detection of point mutations and large rearrangements, iii) ready-to for single cells. Our data highlights the application of nested PCR for -use optimized polymer, iv) throughput: 30 cases are screened on both diagnostic purposes such as PGD. BRCA1 and BRCA2 in one week by one technician (DNA extraction and sequencing excluded) v) low reagent costs: 3 times cheaper com- pared to DHPLC. Overall EMMA demonstrates considerable simplification and cost re- duction with regards to previous diagnostic methods while keeping the Laboratory and quality management 70 P15.16 A standardized framework for the validation and pected accuracy of the test under given conditions. The validation or verification of diagnostic molecular genetic tests. verification of methods are formal requirements for the accreditation C. J. Mattocks1, M. A. Morris2, G. Matthijs3, E. Swinnen3, A. Corveleyn3, E. of laboratories. Although the general requirements are clearly stated Dequeker3, C. R. Müller4, V. Pratt5, A. Wallace6, -. For the EuroGentest working in the standards, very little guidance is available about the specific group on validation7; requirements and concepts in molecular genetics. 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Wessex), Salisbury, United To address these shortcomings EuroGentest created a working group Kingdom, 2Diagnostic Laboratory, Service of Genetic Medicine, CMU, Geneva, comprising clinical scientists and experts on quality assurance and Switzerland, 3Centre for Human Genetics (EuroGentest), Leuven, Belgium, statistics. Through a series of meetings literature review and consulta- 4Dept. of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, tion we have produced a guidance document outlining the principles 5Quest Diagnostics, Chantilly, VA, United States, 6National Genetics Reference of validation and verification in the context of molecular genetics. We Laboratory (Manchester), Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Various. describe implementation processes, key components, types of tests The validation and verification of laboratory methods and procedures and suggest some relevant statistical approaches that can be used by prior to their use in clinical testing is an essential component of provid- individual laboratories to ensure that tests are performed to defined ing a safe and useful service to clinicians and patients. standards. As a practical tool we have also developed a standard pro After test design and development are complete, it is necessary to forma that can be used as a plan to guide validation or verification pro- determine whether the performance of the test, in terms of accuracy, cedures, act as a checklist to ensure all points are adequately covered meets the required diagnostic standards. Whether this is achieved by and provide a framework for systematic documentation. performing analytical validation or verification depends on the ex- istence of a suitable performance specification that details the ex-EMPAG Plenary Lectures 71 Abstracts of EmPAG Plenary sessions EPL1.3 Living with Huntington‘s disease from the partner‘s perspective EPL1.1 Adapting to the new genetic status after predictive A. J. A. G. Van Tongerloo, A. M. J. J. De Paepe; testing for Huntington’s disease - the experiences of non- University Hospital Gent, 9000 Gent, Belgium. carriers Introduction: Huntington‘s disease (HD) is an incurable, autosomal E. Winnberg1, U. Almqvist1, A. Hagberg2, T. Bui3; dominant, late onset neurodegenerative disorder. Although the impact 1Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, of the disease on medical, procreative and psychosocial issues in HD Huddinge, Sweden, 2Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala patients has been studied extensively over the last years, little data on University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska the consequences for the close relatives, in particular the partners, is University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. available. Little is known about the personal experiences of receiving a negative Materials and Methods: A qualitative study using thematic analysis test result after predictive testing for Huntington’s Disease. was set up to identify the psychosocial issues experienced by healthy The aim of this study was to explore how the test results have in- partners of HD patients, the daily challenges with which they are deal- fluenced the non-carriers’ lives, seen in a long term perspective (> 5 ing and their experiences as caregivers. Semi-structured interviews years). were conducted in 12 partners and following topics were questioned: Method: Semi-structured interviews were carried out with 21 non-car- 1/ What disease-related issues are most difficult to cope with? 2/ How riers, tested for the HD mutation 6-12 years ago. The interviews were has your personal life changed? 3/ Are you able to cope with these audio-taped and analysed with a qualitative content analysis method. changes? 4/ Do you communicate about the disease? 5/ How do you Results: A broad variety of reactions to the new genetic status were view the future? revealed. The informants witnessed both positive and negative reac- Results: The major problem for the partners is experiencing the virtual tions. Everybody experienced a great Relief of anxiety, but for some ‚loss‘ of their partner in life, resulting from an increasingly antisocial it was accompanied by Anxiety of receiving a second chance in life. behavior and lack of communication by their diseased spouse. Their It was stressful living up to their expectations of doing something im- partner‘s illness affects them to the extent that they feel as if becoming portant and worthy this extraordinary lottery win. Others experienced ill themselves. Nevertheless, all show great loyalty and responsibility a feeling of Emptiness immediately after receiving the test results. A to their diseased spouse. Communicating about the disease to fam- couple of informants experienced severe problems with adapting to ily or friends is felt to alleviate the burden. None of the partners are the test results which they described as A need of a new identity. A preoccupied with the future; they handle the problems on a day-to-day common negative reaction of the test results was Feelings of guilt basis. towards untested siblings or siblings affected by HD. Two infor- Conclusions: Documenting experiences of partners of HD individuals mants made major positive changes directly related to the test results: is important to guide genetic counseling and psychological support in one completely changed lifestyle from being a criminal to becoming a HD families. serious student and another quit smoking on the day the test results were given. EPL1.4 the challenge of Adolescent clients: Using Predictive Conclusion: This study shows the importance of long term follow-up testing for FAP as a case study for Exploring Developmentally after predictive testing to support non-carriers to adjust to a new ge- Appropriate care netic status. R. E. Duncan1,2, M. B. Delatycki3, L. Gillam4,5, S. M. Sawyer6,5; 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 2Centre EPL1.2 Early experiences with a genetic disorder: for Adolescent Health, Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research & consequences in later life Children‘s Bioethics Centre, Royal Children‘s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, L. B. Van der Meer1, A. Tibben1,2; 3Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, Melbourne, Australia, 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical 4Children‘s Bioethics Centre, Royal Children‘s Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Australia, 5Murdoch Children‘s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, Persons who are at 50% risk for a late onset genetic disorder with high 6Centre for Adolescent Health, Royal Children‘s Hospital & Department of clinical severity may have experienced negative life events in child- Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. hood due to the disease process of a parent. This may have influenced Predictive genetic tests are routinely offered to young people during their attachment process, possibly resulting in higher-than-average early adolescence as long as medical benefit is conferred by the test. levels of attachment insecurity in adulthood. Nonetheless, it can be highly challenging to engage, work with and Using Rolland’s Psychosocial Typology of Genomic Disorders, we support young people through this process due to (i) their unique de- compare attachment style and emotion regulation in persons at risk for velopmental stage of life, (ii) the frequent and simultaneous involve- a fully penetrant, unpreventable and incurable neurodegenerative dis- ment of multiple family members, and (iii) the lack of training provided order (Huntington’s Disease, CADASIL, or HCHWA-D) and in persons to most genetic health professionals in adolescent health and de- at risk for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC), which is par- velopment. Young people sit between childhood and adulthood; old tially penetrant and for which there are preventive or treatment options. enough to have their developing autonomy respected yet too young to Participants are persons who apply for predictive testing (n=168), and be treated exactly as adults. They differ from adults in their cognitive their partners (n=96). capacities, communication styles, health risks, independence and the In our study, we find more insecure attachment in persons at risk than influence of peers. For these reasons, young people require a different in partners. Persons at risk for a neurodegenerative disorder have clinical approach from that provided to adults. This presentation draws more attachment anxiety than persons at risk for HBOC. We find inse- on findings from ten in-depth interviews with young people who under- cure attachment to be significantly associated with less adequate pat- went predictive testing for familial adenomatous polyposis (four male, terns of emotion regulation and less psychological well being, which six female; five gene-positive, five gene-negative; aged 10-17 years at may have important consequences during the period of testing and the time of their test). Using real cases and first-hand accounts from dealing with test results. young people, the key challenges associated with adolescent clients We present our data along with clinical experiences in a predictive will be highlighted. These will then be used to propose a model of best testing program, to show how attachment may be used to adapt psy- practice for adolescent care in clinical genetics, drawing on established chological counseling to the specific needs of persons who apply for practice wisdom in the field of adolescent medicine more broadly. The testing for a disorder that has influenced their lives to a considerable specific challenges brought to clinical genetics by adolescent clients extent. require distinct and separate attention if developmentally appropriate care is to be provided both now and in the future.EMPAG Plenary Lectures 72 EPL1.5 Empowerment: Development and validation of a 1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, new outcome measure for evaluating genetic counselling Parkville, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, interventions 3Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia, 4Royal M. McAllister1, A. M. Wood1, G. Dunn1, S. Shiloh2, C. Todd1; Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 5Murdoch Childrens Research 1The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2The University of Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 6Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel. 7Centenary Institute, Sydney, Australia, 8Royal Brisbane and Women‘s The aim in this study was to develop, and perform preliminary psy- Hospital, Brisbane, Australia, 9Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia, 10University chometric validation, of a new Patient Reported Outcome Measure of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 11University College London, London, United specific to genetic counselling and clinical genetics services to cap- Kingdom, 12University College London Hospitals, London, United Kingdom, ture the previously identified construct of Empowerment. Findings from 13Kings College London, London, United Kingdom. previous qualitative research, and the published research literature Background: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and Long QT syn- were used to develop a draft 84-item questionnaire to capture the five drome (LQTS) are inherited cardiovascular conditions for which pre- dimensions of the Empowerment construct suggested by qualitative dictive testing has become more common. The most concerning fea- research: Cognitive control, Decisional Control, Behavioural Control, ture of these conditions is sudden death which can be prevented if Emotional Regulation and Hope. The draft questionnaire (paper and those at risk are identified. online versions) was completed by 549 members of patient support Methods: We conducted a multi-centre prospective questionnaire- groups for genetic conditions. Responses were subjected to explor- based study to examine the impact of predictive testing for HCM/ atory factor analysis, and parallel analysis was used to identify the LQTS. Understanding of test results, risk perception, motivations for number of factors to extract using promax rotation. Internal consis- and concerns about testing and psychological impact of result disclo- tency was calculated using Cronbach’s alpha. Test retest reliability sure were examined. Participants (n=77, 14-67 years old, 29 (37.6%) was calculated using analysis of variance. Exploratory factor analysis tested positive) were recruited from four Australian and one British site. identified a 7 dimensional solution: Hope, Perceived Personal Control, Questionnaires were completed before testing and at 2 weeks and 3 Emotional Regulation, Family Implications, Helplessness, Referral Co- months post-disclosure. herence and Control/Benefit-Finding. Hierarchical factor analysis con- Results: Only one participant regretted being tested and one could firmed a single overarching construct, Empowerment. 24 questions not accurately recall their result. Perceptions of the likelihood of de- were selected to form the final questionnaire, informed by (a) the size veloping disease, level of worry, and the number of concerns about of factor loadings (b) the issues that the qualitative research suggested LQTS/HCM reported were consistent with gene test result. Younger were most troubling for families affected by genetic conditions (c) clini- gene positive participants were more worried about developing dis- cal judgement. Internal consistency (α= 0.87) and test-retest reliability ease than older ones (p=0.003). Regression analysis adjusting for (0.86) are acceptable. The Empowerment questionnaire has potential baseline scores demonstrated a higher mean anxiety (p=0.005) and as a clinical genetics-specific Patient Reported Outcome Measure for distress (p=0.003) score in gene positive compared to gene negative use in evaluating genetic counselling interventions in both research participants at 2 weeks, but these differences were less apparent at and clinical contexts. The findings may also be useful for targeting ge- 3 months. There was no difference in depression scores at any time netic counselling interventions. point. Results did not change significantly after adjusting for potential confounders using analysis of covariance. EPL1.6 “All is done by Allah”? Understandings of Down Conclusion: Participants were pleased to have undergone testing, syndrome in Pakistan understood the implications of their result and seemed to cope well L. Bryant1, S. Ahmed1, M. Ahmed2, H. Jafri3, Y. Rashid4; psychologically. 1Leeds Institute of Health Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Leeds Hospitals Teaching EPL2.2 Risk factors for sudden cardiac death and follow-up in NHS Trust, Leeds, United Kingdom, 3Gentec Laboratory, Lahore, Pakistan, a large nationwide cohort of predictively tested hypertrophic 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Rawalpindi Medical College, cardiomyopathy mutation carriers Rawalpindi, Pakistan. I. Christiaans1, I. M. van Langen1, E. Birnie2, G. J. Bonsel2, A. A. M. Wilde3; The psychosocial impact of a genetic condition can only be properly 1Academic Medical Centre, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, understood within the wider cultural context of the affected individual Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical Centre, Institute of Health Policy and and their family. This study used Q-methodology to characterise un- Management, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Academic Medical Centre, Department derstandings of Down syndrome in Pakistan in a sample of health pro- of Cardiology, Amsterdam, Netherlands. fessionals and parents of children with the condition. Fifty statements Aims: We investigated the presence of a clinical diagnosis of hyper- originally developed for a UK study were translated into Urdu and trophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), risk factors for sudden cardiac death Q-sorted by 61 participants. Statements reflected different attitudes (SCD), and cardiac events during follow-up in all known Dutch predic- towards Down syndrome in terms of its impact on the individual, their tively tested asymptomatic carriers of a sarcomeric gene mutation. family and wider society. Using factor analytic techniques three inde- Methods and results: In total 136 (30%) of 447 mutation carriers were pendent accounts of the condition were identified and qualitative data diagnosed with HCM at one or more cardiological evaluation(s). Ka- collected during the Q-sorting exercise was used in their interpretation. plan-Meier curves suggested slower progression to manifest HCM in For two accounts, conceptualisations of the ‘will of God’ were central carriers <40 years. Male gender (hazard ratio (HR) 1.69 [95%-confi- to an understanding of the existence of people with Down syndrome. dence interval 1.20-2.37]) and age (HR per year 1.02 [95%-confidence However, perceptions about the value and quality of life of the indi- interval 1.01-1.03]) were independent predictors for manifest disease. vidual differed significantly between these accounts as did views about Thirty-three percent of carriers, with and without manifest disease, had the impact on the immediate and extended family. The third account risk factor(s) for SCD. During an average follow-up of 3.5±1.7 years privileged a more ‘natural scientific’ view of Down syndrome as a ge- two carriers, both with manifest disease, died suddenly (0.13%/per- netic abnormality but also a belief that society can further contribute to son-year). A high risk status for SCD (≥2 risk factors and manifest disabling those affected. Attitudes towards prenatal testing and termi- HCM) was present in 16 carriers during follow-up (1.1%/person-year). nation were collected and results demonstrated that a belief in the will Age was a significant predictor for a high risk status for SCD (HR per of Allah was not always associated with a rejection of these technolo- year 1.03 [95%-confidence interval 1.00-1.06). gies. All views were situated within the cultural and economic context Conclusions: Thirty percent of carriers had or developed manifest of Pakistan and reflected issues associated with raising a child with a HCM after predictive DNA testing. Older age and male gender were in- learning disability and health problems in that country. dependent predictors for manifest disease. Risk factors for SCD were frequently present. The low SCD rate during follow-up disallows prog- EPL2.1 the impact of predictive gene testing for hypertrophic nostic evaluation of risk factors for SCD. Our data suggest that SCD cardiomyopathy and long QT syndrome risk is low, that risk stratification for SCD can be omitted in carriers I. Macciocca1,2, O. Ukoumunne3,2, A. Davis4,5, R. Weintraub4, V. Connell4, without manifest disease and that frequency of cardiological evalua- L. Yeates6,7, J. Ingles8,7, M. Delatycki9,5, S. Wake1,2, C. Semsarian10,7, W. J. tions can be decreased in carriers <40 years as long as hypertrophy McKenna11,12, T. Marteau13, V. Collins5; is absent.EMPAG Plenary Lectures 7 EPL2.3 Adolescents with implantable cardioverter defibrillators: department of Cardiology, Groningen, Netherlands. a patient and parent perspective Purpose: Increasing numbers of patients are being referred to cardio- B. Rahman1, I. Macciocca2, M. Sahhar2, S. Kamberi3, V. Connell3, R. Duncan4; genetics outpatient clinics with potentially inherited cardiomyopathies 1University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 2Genetic Health Services (CM) and arrhythmias (ARR). To inform family members at risk, we Victoria, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 3Royal ask index-patients to distribute “family-letters” containing information Children‘s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 4Centre for Adolescent Health, on risks, possibility of (genetic) screening and preventive options to Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia. close relatives. The goal of this study is to assess the response to An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is a device used in the these letters in terms of actual referral to a cardiologist and/or clinical treatment of individuals with life-threatening cardiac conditions. These geneticist. include genetic disorders such as long QT syndrome, hypertrophic Methods: Fifty-six index-patients had been asked to distribute 249 cardiomyopathy and Brugada syndrome, which are associated with family-letters: 85 in the ARR group and 164 in the CM group. We ana- sudden cardiac death. The ICD detects abnormal heart rhythms and lyzed: delivers a shock to the heart to restore it to a normal rhythm. Adult ICD (1) Whether these family-letters had reached relatives and whether patients consistently report elevated levels of anxiety and depression, relatives had been referred to a cardiologist/clinical geneticist. There- as well as negative lifestyle changes associated with the device. Com- fore a questionnaire was sent to 52 index-patients. pared to older ICD recipients, young patients face decades of life with (2) The numbers of family members that were referred to the clini- the device and the long term impact and implications are important to cal geneticist and/or cardiologist by studying our files at the genetics consider. department. This presentation draws on findings from qualitative interviews to ex- Results: (1) Fifty percent of index-patients responded to the ques- plore the experience of living with an ICD as an adolescent. Six ado- tionnaire; 23/26 (88%) had passed the letters on to their relatives. In lescents and six of their parents participated; three of the six partici- 19/23 index-patients ≥1 family-member had been screened. (2) Within pants had received an ICD as part of treatment for a genetic cardiac a mean follow-up period of 2 years the number of relatives actually condition. Eight key themes emerged: (1) Restrictions, (2) Adjusting to referred differed significantly (P<0.01) between the ARR (80%) and Life, (3) Professional Communication, (4) Benefits, (5) Ongoing Chal- CM group (45.1%). lenges, (6) ICD Shocks, (7) Not Being Normal, and (8) Holding Back. Conclusions: A high percentage of family-members of index-patients Some themes reflect experiences previously reported in the literature with a potentially inherited cardiac disease undergo screening, particu- such as the restrictions adolescents face, and the ICD shock experi- larly in the ARR group, suggesting a higher anxiety in this last group. ence. New findings have also emerged relating to communication be- This study shows that distribution of “family-letters” is an effective tween health professionals, patients and parents, and the limitations means to inform and motivate relatives to undergo screening for high adolescents impose on themselves post-ICD implantation. These find- risk inherited cardiac disease. ings have important implications for medical management, and may inform genetic counselling practice to ensure adolescents with ICDs EPL2.6 and their families are managed sensitively and effectively. Prenatal and preimplantation diagnoses in marfan syndrome: the point of view of French patients and geneticists EPL2.4 congenital heart defects and heredity: what do adult F. Coron1, G. Jondeau2, V. Cusin2, S. Odent3, O. Dulac4, H. Plauchu5, P. patients know and want to know? Collignon6, M. Delrue7, B. Leheup8, C. Cassini1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, C. K. van Engelen1, M. J. H. Baars1, L. T. van Rongen1, E. T. van der Velde2, E. Boileau9, L. Faivre1; M. A. Smets1, B. J. M. Mulder1; 1Centre de génétique, Hopital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 2Centre de référence 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Leiden University Maladie de Marfan, Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France, 3Service de génétique, Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Rennes, France, 4Service de génétique, Toulouse, France, 5Service de Most patients with congenital heart defects (CHD) survive to reproduc- génétique, Lyon, France, 6Service de génétique, Marseille, France, 7Service tive age. Inheritance and transmission of CHD to offspring are impor- de génétique, Bordeaux, France, 8Service de génétique, Nancy, France, tant issues in this population. We evaluated patients’ knowledge and 9Laboratoire de biologie moléculaire, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France. concerns on the heredity of their CHD and the information patients Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant connective tissue received from health care providers. A questionnaire was sent to 490 disorder with manifestations mainly involving the skeletal, ocular, and adult patients with (non-syndromic) CHD aged 20 to 45 years in one cardiovascular systems. The phenotypic variability observed in MFS university hospital. Until now, 328 patients (67%) completed the ques- makes genetic counseling difficult. Prenatal (PND) and preimplanta- tionnaire. Interim analysis of 145 patients (49% male, mean age 31.7 ± tion diagnoses (PID) are technically feasible when a causal mutation 7.5 years) showed that only 28% of patients recalled to have received is identified, but both raise many ethical questions. Little is known re- information on heredity of their CHD from their cardiologist. Eleven garding opinions and practices in such reproductive issues in MFS. percent of patients consulted a clinical geneticist. Patients estimated The goal of this study was to report on patients’ points of view and the recurrence risk for CHD in their (future) offspring correctly in 48%, geneticists’ standard practices. Two different questionnaires were pro- too low in 8% and too high in 44%. Additional information on the he- duced. Patients questionnaires were sent by the “Association Fran- redity of their CHD was desired by 47% of patients. Worries about çaise pour le Syndrome de Marfan” to its members. Fifty-four answers transmitting CHD to offspring were reported by 49%. Patients who were collected, 65% from patients and 35% from unaffected relatives. estimated the recurrence risk too high were more often worried than Most of them (74%) thought that PND was acceptable, and that the patients who estimated the recurrence risk correctly (P = 0.03), and choice should be given to the parents. Seventy percent were aware more often desired additional information (P = 0.03). Other predictors of the possibility of performing PND in MFS, and 54% of PID. Fifty ge- for inadequate knowledge, concerns and desire for additional informa- neticists filled in the questionnaire. Forty-four percent had already had tion will be discussed. We conclude that a subset of adult patients with to deal with patients requiring information regarding PND or PID. This CHD lack adequate knowledge on heredity and recurrence risk of their information led to PND or PID in a minority of cases. Twenty-two per- CHD and a large proportion of patients desire additional information. cent of geneticists thought that PND was acceptable, 72% debatable This study shows that better patient education on heredity of CHD is and 6% not acceptable. PID was more often reported acceptable (34% needed. of answers). This study showed that the majority patients were in favor of PND and that among practitioners opinions varied considerably. EPL2.5 Family letters are an effective way to inform relatives about inherited cardiac disease EPL3.1 Desirability of early identification of Duchenne Muscular W. P. van der Roest1, J. M. Pennings2, M. Bakker1, M. P. van den Berg3, J. P. Dystrophy (DmD): parents’ experiences of the period prior to van Tintelen1; diagnosis 1University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, department R. Eilers1, J. H. Kleinveld2, E. Vroom3, M. J. Westerman1, M. C. Cornel2,4, A. C. of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Groningen, Plass2,5; University of Groningen, department of health science/metamedica, Groningen, 1VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2VU University Medical Center, Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Duchenne Parent Project, Amsterdam, Netherlands, EMPAG Plenary Lectures 7 4The EMGO Institute for Health and care research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, els of ambivalence (r=0.76 and r=0.49, respectively) than in women 5The EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, Netherlands. with higher levels of ambivalence (r=0.45 and r=0.03, respectively). Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD), X-linked recessively inherited, The difference between the correlation coefficients for each, intentions is the most common progressive muscular disorder in children. Early and uptake, was significant (p=0.0294 and p=0.0192, respectively). diagnosis could offer opportunities for timely initiation of treatment Conclusion: These findings suggest that higher ambivalence modifies possibilities, genetic counselling, and prevent a long diagnostic quest. the relationship between attitudes and test uptake in invasive prenatal Despite the availability of a test, DMD is not included in the newborn testing decisions. Practice Implications: Reducing ambivalence among screening programs. Ethical concerns, e.g. parents would not be able women facing decisions about prenatal testing may be a useful coun- to enjoy the first carefree years of their child before learning that the seling intervention to enhance informed choices. child is affected with DMD, are considered strong arguments for not considering DMD screening. However, this has never been properly EPL3.4 Reproductive decisions of couples with an increased assessed. risk of having a child with retinoblastoma, a cross-sectional Aim: This study aimed to explore the way in which parents experienced survey the period from their child’s birth to the time the diagnosis was made. C. J. Dommering1, M. M. Garvelink1, A. C. Moll2, H. J. Meijers-Heijboer1, L. Method: A qualitative face-to-face semi-structured interview was held Henneman1,3; with parents of sons affected with DMD. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Results: 8 parent-couples, invited by the Dutch Duchenne Parent Netherlands, 2Department of Ophthalmology, VU University Medical Center, project, participated. They reported minor worries starting shortly af- Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Public and Occupational Health, ter birth, increasing over time. All parents wished they had known the EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, diagnosis earlier, preferably before the child was two years of age, for Amsterdam, Netherlands. they regretted the way they had treated their child during the period in Aim: To investigate reproductive decisions of individuals at risk for a which they were unaware of the disorder in their child. child with retinoblastoma (Rb), and examine factors influencing these Conclusion: A true carefree period seemingly does not exist. Early di- decisions. agnosis would have enabled parents to treat their child in the best Methods: Cross-sectional questionnaire survey, 1-10 years post-ge- possible way, adjusted to their child’s condition (‘good parenting’). This netic counseling of individuals with an increased risk of a child with Rb emerging need for ‘good parenting’, parents expressed, by far out- who visited the National Retinoblastoma Treatment Center in the Neth- weighed the possibility of enjoying a carefree period in the child. erlands. Risk for having a child with Rb ranged from <1% to 50%. Results: The response rate was 69% (81/118). Rb influenced past EPL3.2 New non-invasive prenatal genetic technologies: Public reproductive decisions in 25 respondents, by refraining from having understandings and concerns (more) children (n=17), undergoing sterilization (n=3) or using prena- H. R. Farrimond, S. E. Kelly; tal diagnosis (n=5). Sixteen respondents had accepted their increased University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom. risk and had more children, although five of them indicated they have ‘Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis’ (NIPD) is a group of novel technolo- had doubts about the decisions made. Of the 40 respondents who did gies which has the potential to allow earlier and safer genetic diagnosis not have (more) children after being aware of their increased risk, 25 of the fetus in the womb from a sample of maternal blood. At a clinical did not have a future desire to have children for reasons other than reti- level, this represents an advantageous risk reduction in comparison noblastoma (e.g. family completed, gynaecological problems). Of the with existing invasive prenatal diagnostic techniques, such as am- 15 remaining respondents, who indicated to have a future child wish, niocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. Existing academic work has 11 indicated intentions to use prenatal diagnosis, preimplantation ge- focused primarily on the bioethics of NIPD, particularly over fears of netic diagnosis or adoption, because of their increased risk. The most exacerbating routinization and the problem of obtaining informed con- important factor that influenced reproductive decision-making was per- sent. However, little if any research, has considered what the public ceived risk, more than actual risk (p<.05). themselves think of the introduction of NIPD technologies. This study Conclusion: Rb has had a substantial effect on past and future repro- aimed to identify shared ‘lay discourses’ on NIPD amongst a sample ductive decisions. Ongoing access to genetic counseling and support of 71 UK participants using Q-methodology, a form of factor analysis. in the decisional process of couples at increased risk of having a child Participants were asked to read a short description of NIPD, and then with Rb is warranted. sort 70 statements on the topic on whether they agreed or disagreed with them. A by-person factor analysis resulted in a seven factor model, EPL3.5 Longitudinal evaluation 7 years after termination of with each factor representing a different lay discourse. Factors differed pregnancy (tOP) on the context of prenatal diagnosis on several dimensions; the framing of termination decisions, the right F. Afonso1, J. Rocha1,2, P. Rendeiro2, A. Leonardo3, M. Correia4, P. Tavares2; to know/not know and perceived societal impact of NIPD. A consen- 1UnIPSa-CICS, ISCS-N, Porto, Portugal, 2Centro Genética Clínica, Porto, sus emerged over fears of commercial testing misuse and over ‘trivial’ Portugal, 3H. Sta. Maria, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Mat. Alfredo Costa, Lisbon, testing, with a desire for ongoing regulation by health professionals. Portugal. However, discourses were strongly polarized. In conclusion, amongst TOP, when a fetal problem is diagnosed, frequently generates consid- this sample in the UK, there was no one public understanding of NIPD. erable emotional problems, however the lack of research concerning This raises challenging questions about how public attitudes towards long term consequences is evident. Our goal is focused on obtaining NIPD should be incorporated into policy decisions. information about the long-term responses of perinatal grief, trauma and depression and its evolution, after TOP on the context of an ad- EPL3.3 Attitudes and intentions to undergo invasive prenatal verse prenatal diagnosis. testing: the moderating role of ambivalence On the present evaluation, the following instruments were applied: B. B. Biesecker1, M. Hankins2, M. Schwartz3, T. Marteau2; semi-structured interview, Impact of Event-Revised Scale (IES-R), 1National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, Perinatal Grief Scale (PGS) and Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Our 2Kings College, London, United Kingdom, 3Georgetown University, Washington sample consists of 28 women with history of TOP seven years ago, DC, DC, United States. which consented to participate and have been evaluated also on previ- Objective: Attitudes strongly predict prenatal screening decisions, with ous moments, 15 days (BDI) and six months after (BDI and PGS). ambivalence as a moderator. This study examined ambivalence as a On the evaluation seven years after TOP we observe 21.4% of wom- moderator of the relationship between attitudes and uptake of invasive en with depression (BDI>12) and 42.9% with high levels of traumatic prenatal testing. Methods: Eighty-four pregnant women referred for stress (IES-R>35). Comparing the previous evaluations of depression, prenatal genetic counseling completed measures of attitudes, ambiva- we found that there is a considerable decrease between first and sec- lence and intentions to undergo invasive prenatal testing. Telephone ond evaluation (p<0.01), however there is no decrease on seventh calls were made to participants four weeks later to learn of their test year. Considering perinatal grief symptoms there is no significant de- decision. Results: Attitudes were a strong predictor of both intentions crease after the sixth month. Attrition rates were analyzed and the lon- and test uptake. The correlations between attitudes and intentions and gitudinal bias controlled. between attitudes and uptake were greater in women with lower lev- The results show a high degree of traumatic symptoms, even seven EMPAG Plenary Lectures 7 years after TOP, describing the termination of pregnancy as a particu- suggestions how to reduce their risk. Receiving emotional support or larly intense life event, which repercussions arise continuously, em- help in communicating the information to at-risk relatives was regarded phasizing the importance of a meaningful support and regular moni- as least important. toring. Understanding of these symptoms should be considered key element in future approaches of the genetic counselling on the peculiar EPL4.2 managing anxiety in individuals undergoing cancer context of the TOP. genetic risk assessment: a self-help coping intervention can reduce psychological distress and avoidance of genetic risk EPL3.6 Exploring health professionals’ views on Perinatal information. Hospice care: a qualitative study. C. Phelps1, P. Bennett2, K. Hood2, K. Brain2, A. Murray3; A. Horwood1, S. Buscombe2, J. Hodgson1,3; 1Swansea Metropolitan University, Swansea, United Kingdom, 2Cardiff 1The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 2Peter MacCallum Cancer University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Cancer Genetics Service for Wales, Centre, East Melbourne, Australia, 3Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Parkville, Australia. Undergoing cancer genetic risk assessment and testing can cause Pregnant women receiving a diagnosis of a ‘lethal fetal abnormality’ psychological distress in vulnerable individuals. We have developed a may choose to either terminate their pregnancy, or continue the preg- self-help written coping intervention, based upon psychological theory, nancy in the knowledge that their baby is likely to die before or shortly which teaches patients strategies to control intrusive worries whilst after birth. In some countries perinatal hospice care is offered in these waiting for cancer genetic information. circumstances. It comprises provision of medical and psychosocial The impact of the intervention was evaluated through a national ran- care within a multidisciplinary team. This caring environment allows domised controlled trial. Referrals into the Cancer Genetics Service families to engage with the ongoing pregnancy and value whatever for Wales over a 12 month period were randomised into intervention time they have with their baby. or control condition and completed questionnaires upon referral (Q1), This presentation explores the views and experiences of key informant four weeks later (Q2) and one month post-risk notification (Q3). 590 health professionals in Victoria, Australia involved in caring for these participants completed Q1, 429 completed Q2, and 280 completed Q3 women about a) the current practice of care for women who choose to with an equitable response rate across trial groups. Key psychologi- continue a pregnancy diagnosed with a ‘lethal fetal abnormality’, and cal outcomes included psychological distress, intrusive thoughts, and b) the acceptability of perinatal hospice care. Eight semi-structured negative mood. interviews were analysed using a qualitative approach allowing a num- The intervention significantly reduced intrusive thoughts in those re- ber of themes to emerge. porting moderate worries (p<0.05) whilst having no adverse longer- Findings revealed that: term impact in the sample as a whole. Participants in the control group -The term ‘lethal fetal abnormality’ was viewed by this cohort as an (but not the intervention group) who dropped out of the study reported inaccurate and inadequate term for these frequently complex situa- significantly higher levels of avoidance (mean=11.49) than those who tions. remained in the study (mean=8.99, p=0.05), and had significantly high- -Current practice in Victoria is variable, commonly referred to as ‘ad er levels of negative affect (mean=19.94) than those who remained in hoc’, with some components of care needing improvement. the study (mean=16.91, p=.004). -All participants were supportive of perinatal hospice care and made The intervention offers an effective means of controlling worries in suggestions about other factors to consider. large patient populations undergoing genetic assessment or other -A number of professional issues emerged including the need for edu- cancer screening programmes. The intervention may also reduce the cation and support for professionals working in this area of practice. number of patients likely to drop out of such programmes due to high These findings have practice implications for health professionals and levels of avoidance or negative affect. women who choose to continue a pregnancy diagnosed with a ‘lethal fetal abnormality’. EPL4.3 Quality of life after breast cancer: information provision regarding DIEP flap and implant breast reconstruction EPL4.1 What information do cancer genetic counselees J. P. Gopie1, R. Timman2, M. A. M. Mureau2, M. T. Hilhorst2, A. Tibben1,2; prioritize? 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Erasmus University C. Ingvoldstad1, A. Roshanai1, K. Nordin1, C. Lampic1, R. Rosenquist2; Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 1Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Purpose: Breast reconstruction (BR) after (prophylactic) mastectomy Sweden, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, has shown to improve quality of life in patients who deal with breast Sweden. cancer. Exploring aspects of information provision regarding BR can Purpose: The study objective was to explore counselees’ expectations help improve counseling concerning the decision-making process of and the preferred issues to be discussed prior to the first genetic coun- BR. This might make BR more accessible and the decision for a spe- seling due to a personal and/or familial history of breast or colorectal cific type of BR easier. We explored the informational and psychologi- cancer. cal characteristics of patients who either undergo DIEP flap BR (DBR) Method: 110 counselees attending the cancer genetic counselling or implant BR (IBR). in 2009 constituted the study sample. The data was collected using Methods: This study was part of a multi-centred prospective follow-up Q-methodology and the QUOTE-GENEca questionnaire. Counselees study (N ≈ 200). We included women who were about to undergo DBR ranked 30 items, based on the order of importance to them. The re- or IBR. Preoperatively, women filled in psychological questionnaires sponses were forced onto a quasi-normal distribution, asking the and a study-specific questionnaire regarding information provision participants to identify the 3 most important, 3 least important, 7 very concerning BR. Analyses were aimed at the specific psychological important, 7 next to least important and 10 items that were neither characteristics that we associated with actively seeking information important nor unimportant. regarding BR. Results: The counselees expected the counsellor to be skilled, provide Results: Preliminary results show significant differences between the them with clear explanations and risk estimations. The most important reconstruction groups in the use of informational sources and the ex- issues for counselees were to receive regular clinical examinations tent to which one makes decisions autonomously. An active coping and information about symptoms that are important to be attentive to strategy and more autonomy are associated with choosing for DBR. and seek further medical follow-up for. To receive general information The physician/plastic surgeon appeared to play an important role in on genetics, reassurance, discussing emotional issues, and receiving the decision-making process of BR. supportive calls or receiving support in communication with relatives Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first study exploring informa- was regarded as the least important topics. tional and psychological characteristics of patients who either undergo Conclusion: Unlike previously assumed, emotional and communica- DBR or IBR. Differences found between the two groups in aspects tive difficulties relating to cancer genetic information, was not among concerning information provision, suggest information provision re- the most important issues for the counselees. The counselee´s highest garding BR is not well standardized. This is an important implication priority appeared to be the practical aspects of the cancer susceptibil- for patient counselling which can be improved to make reconstruction ity, to receive counselling including medical and risk information and options clear and accessible for all patients considering BR.EMPAG Plenary Lectures 7 EPL4.4 Acceptance, experiences and information preferences at the time of RGCT was valued. Currently, a large, prospective ran- of young women newly diagnosed with breast cancer regarding domized clinical trial is being conducted to investigate these issues treatment-focused genetic testing further. B. Meiser1,2, M. Gleeson1, K. J. Watts1,2, C. Saunders3, G. Mitchell4, E. Lobb5,6, K. Barlow-Stewart7, J. Kirk8, K. Tucker1; EPL4.6 Psychological impact of msi testing shortly after cRc 1Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, NSW, diagnosis Australia, 2Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Wales, K. M. Landsbergen, J. B. Prins, H. G. Brunner, P. van Duijvendijk, F. M. Sydney, NSW, Australia, 3School of Surgery, University of Western Australia, Nagengast, M. J. L. Ligtenberg, N. Hoogerbrugge; Perth, WA, Australia, 4Familial Cancer Centre, Peter MacCallum Cancer Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 5Calvary Health Care Sydney, Kogarah, Introduction: The aim of the present study is to determine psychologi- NSW, Australia, 6WA Centre for Cancer & Palliative Care, Curtin University cal distress and effects on family communication in recently diagnosed of Technology and Edith Cowan University, Perth, WA, Australia, 7Centre for patients with CRC after MSI testing. Genetics Education, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia, Method: Newly diagnosed patients (n=400) with CRC from 33 Dutch 8Familial Cancer Research Group, Westmead Millenium Institute for Medical hospitals whose CRC had been tested for MSI were identified by the Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. researcher and invited to participate by their surgeons. Patients re- Background. An increasing number of women newly diagnosed with ceived questionnaires immediately after MSI-test disclosure (T1) and breast cancer and with a family history of breast/ovarian cancer or 6 months later (T2). with other features indicative of a high mutation carrier risk are be- Results: Response rates of patients with high (MSI+) and with low (MSI- ing offered genetic testing to guide their treatment (treatment-focused ) risk for Lynch syndrome were 30% (n=23/77) and 18% (n=57/323) re- genetic testing - TFGT). This qualitative study aimed to identify young spectively. At T1, mean levels of cancer specific distress (IES-cancer) women’s attitudes; prior experiences if any; and information prefer- of MSI+ patients and MSI- patients were high (25.1, SD 9.4 and 26.2, ences regarding TFGT. SD 4.7, respectively) but not statistically significant different. Levels of Methods. Women (N=26) with breast cancer (<50 yrs) who had either cancer specific distress reached a post traumatic stress disorder level (i) previously had TFGT (N=14) or (ii) had a recent breast cancer diag- (IES >26) in 49% of this newly diagnosed patient group, consisting of nosis and were asked about their hypothetical views of TFGT (N=12) 9 MSI+ patients and 30 MSI- patients (P=0.16). At T1, mean levels of participated in semi-structured interviews. The interviews were tran- general psychological distress (SCL-90) of MSI+ patients and MSI- pa- scribed verbatim and coded using NVivo software. tients were 137.0 (SD 43.9) and 128.7 (SD 36.2) respectively (P=0.4). Results: TFGT was highly acceptable. Most women wanted to be in- MSI+ patients had statistically significant less family communication formed about it at or around the time of their cancer diagnosis. The compared to MSI- patients, 12.8 (SD 5.5) and 15.9 (SD 4.5) respec- primary motivation for TFGT was to obtain information to inform ap- tively (P=0.01). Results of T2 are expected in May 2010. propriate surgical decisions. Assisting family with risk information was Conclusion: Newly diagnosed patients at high risk for hereditary CRC another significant motivation, while a small number also identified report similar levels of psychological distress, but had less open family decision-making about reproduction and breast reconstruction. Half communication as compared to patients who are at low risk for heredi- of the women preferred to receive the information from a genetics spe- tary CRC. cialist, genetic counsellor or their breast care nurse, while half pre- ferred to receive information from their surgeon or medical oncologist. EPL6.1 communicating BRcA1/2 genetic test results within The preferred format for the educational materials was brief written families: implications for genetic counselling information. C. Jacobs1, C. Dancyger2, S. Michie2, J. Smith3; Conclusion: TFGT is highly acceptable to many women, and they want 1Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, to be informed about the testing around the time of their breast cancer 2University College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Birkbeck College, diagnosis. We are currently in the process of developing and pilot-test- London, United Kingdom. ing a brief pamphlet on TFGT. Background: Communication of genetic risk information is central to clinical genetics. In the UK patients are encouraged to disseminate EPL4.5 Genetic counseling between breast cancer diagnosis risk information throughout their families, but the processes involved and treatment: Psychosocial burden and clinical consequences in doing this and subsequent impact upon family relationships are not D. E. E. Hahn1, M. R. Wevers1,2, S. Verhoef1, M. D. K. Bolhaar1, N. K. well understood. This study explored the flow of BRCA1/2 test informa- Aaronson1, M. G. E. M. Ausems2, E. M. A. Bleiker1; tion through families, factors that influenced communication, and the 1Netherlands Cancer Institute-Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, process and outcomes of communication within the family. Netherlands, 2University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Method: Results consultations with 10 women affected with breast/ Background: In 15% of high-risk families, a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene ovarian cancer receiving positive BRCA1/2 genetic test results were mutation can be found. Female carriers with breast cancer have an audio-recorded. Semi-structured interviews were later conducted to increased risk of new primary tumours and may opt for preventive sur- explore the womens’ understanding of their results and experiences gery. Our aim was to evaluate the psychological impact and treatment of communicating this information to relatives. For each family, similar consequences of rapid genetic counseling and testing (RGCT) offered interviews were then conducted with two relatives with whom test re- in the period between breast cancer diagnosis and initial surgical treat- sults had been shared. Data were analysed using Interpretative Phe- ment. nomenological Analysis. Methods: Female breast cancer patients, who had received RGCT at Findings: Analyses indicated that not all information was accurately the Family Cancer Clinic of the Netherlands Cancer Institute between communicated or understood by relatives, and not all relatives were January 2006 and November 2008, were invited to complete a ques- informed of results. Three themes emerged: responsibility to tell; emo- tionnaire in 2009. tional and developmental readiness and communicating in the context Results: Of the 31 eligible patients, 27 completed the self-report ques- of the existing family culture. tionnaire. In total 26 patients had rapid counseling and DNA-testing, Discussion: These findings highlight the importance for clinicians of one had rapid counseling only. Ten BRCA mutations were found. communicating genetic information in the context of the family’s exist- Almost all mutation-carriers (n=9) opted for a bilateral mastectomy, ing communication patterns and relationships; of acknowledging the compared with 44% of the other patients. Despite frequent worries influence of feelings of responsibility and obligation within families and about cancer recurrence being reported by 19% of the women, daily of supporting patients in considering who will take responsibility for functioning was not impaired by these worries. Ten patients received communicating test results to relatives, and what will happen if their psychosocial counseling at the time of RGCT; 8 reported that this was normal channels of communication are unavailable. (very) useful. More than 90% of patients were (very) satisfied with the timing of RGCT and with the decisional process. Conclusions: This small retrospective study suggests that RGCT in high-risk breast cancer patients may influence surgical treatment, with- out causing long-term distress. The offer of psychosocial counseling EMPAG Plenary Lectures 77 EPL6.2 Psychological distress in women at risk for hereditary EPL6.4 A whisper-game perspective on the family breast cancer: the role of family communication and perceived communication of DNA-test results: A retrospective study on social support the communication process of BRcA1/2-test results between M. den Heijer; genetic-counsellor, proband and relatives Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. J. Vos1, A. M. Jansen1, F. Menko2, C. J. Van Asperen1, A. M. Stiggelbout3, A. Background: Hereditary breast cancer has a profound impact on individ- Tibben1; ual family members and on their mutual communication and interactions. 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, The way at-risk women cope with the threat of hereditary breast cancer Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical may depend on the quality of family communication about hereditary Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Decision-Making, breast cancer and on the perceived social support from family and friends. Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Objective: To examine the associations of family communi- Purpose - We analyzed how DNA-test result information was commu- cation and social support with long-term psychological dis- nicated and perceived within families. tress in a group of women at risk for hereditary breast cancer. Method - We conducted a retrospective descriptive study in 13 pro- Methods: The study cohort consisted of 222 women at risk for he- bands with an unclassified variant, 7 with a pathogenic mutation, 5 with reditary breast cancer, 4-9 years after they participated in stud- an uninformative result, and in respectively 44, 14, and 12 of their rela- ies on the psychological consequences of either regular breast tives. We examined differences and correlations between: (a) informa- surveillance or prophylactic surgery. Two months before a sur- tion actually communicated by genetic-counsellors, (b) probands‘ per- veillance appointment at the clinic general and breast cancer ception, (c) relatives‘ perception. The perception consisted of recollec- specific distress, hereditary cancer related family communica- tions and interpretations of both cancer-risks and heredity-likelihood. tion, perceived social support and demographics were assessed. Results - Differences and low correlations suggested few similari- Results: We found that open communication about hereditary cancer ties between the actually communicated information, the probands‘ within the family was associated with less general and breast can- and the relatives‘ perception. More specifically, probands recalled cer specific distress. In addition, perceived support from family and the communicated information differently compared to the actually friends was indirectly associated with less general and breast can- communicated information(R=.40), and reinterpreted this information cer specific distress through open communication within the family. differently(R=.30). The relatives‘ perception was best correlated with Discussion: These findings show that family communication and per- the proband‘s interpretation(R=.08), but this perception differed signifi- ceived social support from friends and family are of paramount impor- cantly from their proband‘s perception. Finally, relatives reinterpreted tance in the long-term adaptation to being at risk for hereditary breast the information they received from their proband differently(R=.25), cancer. Sources of support and family communication about hereditary and this interpretation was only slightly related with the original mes- cancer need to be addressed and explored by clinicians working with sage communicated by the genetic-counsellor(R=.15). Unclassified- women at risk for hereditary breast cancer. variant were most frequently misinterpreted by probands and rela- tives, and had largest differences between probands‘ and relatives‘ EPL6.3 is telegenetics as effective as face-to-face consultations perceptions. The low correlations between the proband‘s and relatives‘ for hereditary breast/ovarian cancer genetic counseling? perception could be explained by the way in which the proband had E. M. Zilliacus1, B. Meiser2, E. A. Lobb3, K. Barlow-Stewart4, P. Kelly5, J. Kirk6, communicated the DNA-test result, especially the amount of provided A. Spigelman7, L. Warwick8, K. Tucker9; reassurance. 1University of New South Wales, Randwick, Australia, 2Department of Medical Discussion - Like in a children‘s whisper-game, many errors occur in Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 3Calvary Health the transmission of DNA-test result information in families. More at- Care, Sydney, Australia, 4Centre for Genetics Education, North Shore Hospital, tention is required for how probands disseminate information to rela- St Leonards, Australia, 5Sydney School of Public Health, Sydney, Australia, tives. Genetic-counsellors may directly communicate to relatives, e.g. 6Familial Cancer Service, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, Australia, 7UNSW St via letters. Vincent‘s Clinical School, Sydney, Australia, 8ACT Genetics Service, Canberra Hospital, Woden, Australia, 9Dept Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, EPL6.5 taking on passing on: A grounded theory on containing Randwick, Australia. cancer in BRcA carriers Purpose: Telegenetics is increasingly being used to deliver familial L. A. Jeffers1,2, d. Fitzsimons2,1, E. McCaughan3, P. Morrison1; cancer services for hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC) to out- 1Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, United Kingdom, 2University of reach areas; however there has been little research evaluating this Ulster, Jordanstown, United Kingdom, 3University of Ulster, Coleraine, United method of service delivery. This study aimed to evaluate the effec- Kingdom. tiveness and acceptability of genetic counseling through videocon- Background: Psychosocial research into the BRCA1/2 breast cancer ferencing. Methods: Three hundred women were recruited between susceptibility genes has yet to account for any long term psychosocial December 2007 and December 2009. Ninety-three women seen by effects of genetic testing in gene carriers who have a personal history videoconferencing and 78 women seen face-to-face participated in the of HBOC. evaluation. A questionnaire was administered prior to genetic coun- Aim of Study: To address this deficit in the literature this study was seling, and one month post-consultation. The questionnaire measured concerned with exploring the experience and needs of this group of knowledge of HBOC, expectations, satisfaction, perceived personal women over time. control, perceived clinician empathy, cancer-specific anxiety, general- Methodology: A grounded theory approach was taken using qualitative ized anxiety and depression. Results: No significant differences were interviews (n= 42) and reflective diaries. found between telegenetics and face-to-face genetic counseling in Analysis and Results: Containing cancer emerged as the basic social terms of changes in knowledge (p = 0.36), patient satisfaction (p = psychological process through which BRCA carriers with a personal 0.18), perceived empathy of the genetic clinician (p = 0.20), and de- history of HBOC respond to and resolve what is for them, a major con- pression (p = 0.67). Telegenetics performed significantly better than cern - the passing on of a cancer gene to their offspring. face-to-face counseling in meeting patients’ expectations ( p < 0.001), Constant comparative analysis of the data traces the development of promoting perceived personal control (p < 0.001), reducing breast can- the process through the stages (1) Hypothesising Risk, (2) Formalising cer-specific anxiety (p < 0.001), and in terms of perceived empathy of Risk (3) Minimising Risk and Maximising Survival the genetic counselor (p = 0.03). By contrast, face-to-face counseling The theory adds to the literature on coping and adaption, health psy- was more effective than telegenetics in terms of reducing generalized chology theories and dimensions of women’s health in relation to their anxiety (p = 0.007). multiplicity of roles. Conclusion: Telegenetics performed as well as, if not better than, tradi- Implications for Clinical Practice: This prospective longitudinal study tional face-to-face genetic counseling in all outcomes other than gen- adds to clinical practice by contributing to our understanding of how eralized anxiety. It appears to be an acceptable and effective method women cope with learning their genetic status and manage its im- of delivering genetic counseling services for HBOC to outreach areas. plications at a personal, familial and societal level over time. It has highlighted ongoing needs of women after they leave a cancer ge- netic clinic and part of the genetic counselling role would be preparing EMPAG Plenary Lectures 7 women and other pertinent health professionals in how best to meet Austria, 6Royal Children‘s Hospital, Parkville, Australia, 7The University of the needs of this group. Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. Klinefelter Syndrome (KS) is a genetic condition (47XXY) affecting EPL6.6 Genetic testing for Brca and Hungtington’s disease in males, which results in a spectrum of clinical features including in- twins: experience of 10 cases fertility, androgen deficiency, gynaecomastia, behavioural and learn- M. M. Bottomley, T. Clancy, G. Evans, G. Hall, W. Beckett, L. Kerzin-Storrar; ing difficulties. The prevalence has been estimated at 1:650, yet up Department of Genetic Medicine, St Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United to 70% remain undiagnosed. While the medical aspects have been Kingdom. explored, almost no evidence exists regarding the personal impact of We present our experience with 10 families with presumed identical KS. This study aims to determine (a) the psychosocial impact of KS (b) twins/triplets presenting to the genetic service for discussion about the influence on adult quality of life of age at diagnosis, testosterone genetic testing for BrCa or Huntington’s disease. The cases included treatments and other interventions, and (c) attitudes of men with KS one set of female triplets, and all but one of the twin pairs were also towards optimal diagnosis age, acceptability of screening, and effec- female. Seven cases involved presymptomatic genetic tests, the other tiveness of therapeutic interventions. 3 were diagnostic tests for one twin and presymptomatic for the other. A population-based sample was recruited from a broad range of sourc- For half of the cases, both twins were seen in our genetic clinic, for the es. 87 participants completed a written questionnaire. Of these, 79 pro- other half the second twin was either seen in another genetic service vided a saliva sample for genetic analysis and 77 agreed to take part in or did not have a genetic consultation for a variety of reasons. In all an interview. The mean age was 43 years (range 19 to 76). Compared but one case, decisions about testing were agreed between the twins/ to population normative data, there was strong evidence (p<0.001) of triplets. In the remaining case the presenting twin was encouraged to the KS cohort having differences in: subjective well-being (PWI), body make contact with her estranged twin in another country, but has not image (MBSRQ), self-esteem (RSE), and mental health (K-10). 72% of proceeded to testing. participants were diagnosed as adults, and 66% of these wished they We encountered several issues relating to the process and outcome of had been diagnosed earlier. Two thirds of all participants supported testing, including consent, value of zygosity testing, relative prepared- population screening for KS. ness for testing, coordination of result disclosure, as well as impact For men with KS, there is a measurably negative psychosocial impact of result for twins and the family. We will discuss strategies which we of having this condition. The possible benefits of achieving earlier di- found helpful in genetic counselling management of these cases, in- agnosis through population screening should be considered in relation cluding using zygosity testing to increase preparedness for the test to possible negative impacts, using available frameworks (Herlihy et result, encouraging the initially presenting twin to consider the impli- al, 2010). cations of testing for their twin and on the twin-twin relationship, and careful planning for timely progression and result giving. EPL7.3 the clinical utility of web-based familial risk information for diabetes prevention: do people adopt risk-reducing EPL7.1 Descriptive and numeric estimation of risk for psychotic behaviours? disorders among affected individuals and relatives: implications M. Wijdenes-Pijl1, D. Timmermans1, M. Cornel2, L. Henneman1,2; for clinical practice 1Department of Public and Occupational Health, EMGO Institute for Health J. C. Austin, W. G. Honer; and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 2Department of Clinical Genetics, section Community Genetics, EMGO Institute Background: Psychotic illnesses cumulatively affect 3% of the popu- for Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, lation. Affected individuals and their families want information about Netherlands. psychosis risks for other family members. Deriving accurate numeric Aim: To investigate how personalized prevention messages based on probabilities for psychosis risk is challenging, and people have difficul- familial risk information using a web-based tool affect (determinants ty interpreting probabilistic information, thus it is tempting for clinicians of) self-reported health behaviour (i.e. saturated fat intake and physi- to use risk descriptors rather than numbers. Relationships between cal activity). families’ perceptions of numeric probabilities and risk descriptors in Methods: Overweight individuals with and without a family history of the context of psychosis are unknown. Purpose: We explored numeric diabetes (aged 45 - 65 years) were randomized to receive web-based and descriptive estimations of psychosis risk in a cohort of individuals diabetes risk information based on: (1) general risk factors alone (con- with psychotic disorders and unaffected first-degree relatives. Method: trol group, n=588), (2) general as well as familial risk factors (interven- An online survey was posted on an Early Psychosis Intervention web- tion group, n=586). Outcomes were assessed using questionnaires at site. Respondents numerically and descriptively estimated risk for an baseline, post-test, and 3-months follow-up. individual to develop psychosis in two scenarios. In scenario 1, the Results: There was no overall effect of familial risk information on health individual had no affected family members, in scenario 2, the individ- behaviour, except for low educated people a decrease in self-reported ual had an affected sibling. Results: 250 affected individuals and 268 saturated fat intake was found (p=0.05). For people with a family his- first-degree relatives estimated numeric probabilities and attributed a tory, there was no effect on the perception that heredity is an important descriptor in at least one scenario. Affected individuals significantly es- cause of diabetes (p=0.43). In contrast, there was an increase of this timated higher risks than relatives. Numeric probabilities of 1%, 10%, perception for people without a family history (p<0.01). The interven- 25% and 50% were attributed all descriptors between “very low” and tion resulted in a lower increase in perceived susceptibility of diabetes “very high” by respondents. There were significant differences between for people with a family history (p<0.05). Whereas, no effect was found distributions of descriptors attributed to identical numeric probabilities on perceived susceptibility for people without a family history. between scenarios, with more certain descriptors being used in sce- Conclusions: People with a family history already seem to be aware of nario 2. Conclusion: Considerable inter-individual and inter-contextual heredity as a cause of diabetes. Web-based familial risk information variability exists in terms of how risk descriptors are applied to numeric did not motivate risk-reducing behaviour, but might be effective for low probabilities for psychosis. For those providing counseling about risks educated people. Of note, the emphasis on familial risk information did for psychosis, in clinical practice, using risk descriptors only with cau- not result in false reassurance for people without a family history, since tion may be appropriate. there was no effect on perceived susceptibility . EPL7.2 A population based study of the psychosocial impact EPL7.4 Parents‘, patients‘ and professionals‘ views on genetic of Klinefelter syndrome and attitudes towards diagnosis and counselling for cleft lip and palate screening R. M. MacLeod, M. McAllister, A. Callard, J. Clayton-Smith; A. S. Herlihy1,2,3, R. I. McLachlan4,5,3, L. Gillam1,6,7, M. L. Cock3,2, J. L. The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Halliday1,7; Manchester, United Kingdom. 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2Monash University, Background: Individuals and parents of children with cleft lip and pal- Clayton, Australia, 3Andrology Australia, Clayton, Australia, 4Prince Henry‘s ate (CLP) may benefit from genetic counselling to discuss aetiology Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Australia, 5Monash University, Clayton, and recurrence risk. However, it is not clear what is the best way to EMPAG Plenary Lectures 7 offer these services to achieve the balance between raising concerns dorsed European recommendations for genetic counselling related to amongst families at low risk, and providing risk information to those genetic testing (www.eurogentest.org). These guidelines outline pre families who may benefit. and post test counselling for a range of situations including predictive, Aim: To explore the views of families affected by CLP, and of profes- carrier and prenatal testing. Forty-six (response rate 35%) of invited sionals involved in their care about how genetic counselling for CLP genetic counselling professionals (25 medical geneticists, 25 genetic might best be provided. counsellors, and 4 psychologists) from 19 European countries partici- Method: A qualitative approach was used, involving 3 focus groups pated, comprising a professionally and geographically diverse group of (n=13), with healthcare professionals caring for families affected by respondents all currently in clinical practice. A questionnaire including CLP in Manchester (including speech therapists, surgeons and pae- opportunities for free text responses was used to evaluate attitudes to diatricians) and 8 telephone interviews with patients and family mem- the recommendations and relevance to their practice. bers. Semi structured interview schedules were used that included Participants were unanimously positive to having European guide- questions about perceived advantages and disadvantages of attend- lines. The most frequent reasons reported were: advantages to the ing a genetics appointment, preferences for receiving genetic informa- professional of accessing collective expertise, promoting consistent tion and understanding of roles within the CLP team. Transcripts were quality of service provision, and providing a framework for developing analysed using a modified grounded theory approach. local or national guidelines where this did not already exist. Ninety Results: Health professional participants had concerns about timing of percent of participants reported that their current practice meets all referral, and uncertainties about how to approach the offer of genetic or most of the recommendations, however half described areas for counselling. Patients wanted information from an ‘expert’ but felt the improvement, most commonly provision of written information to pa- period immediately following the birth of an affected child was prob- tients and adequate psychological support following test results. Lack ably too soon. Patients and health professionals both wanted a clear of time and resources was the barrier to providing adequate provision plan for follow up, and access to information for specific groups e.g. in these areas and several respondents stated that genetic counselling teenagers. had a low national priority leading to insufficient resources. Interest- Conclusion: Findings will be used to develop a model of service deliv- ingly, very few professional or societal cultural barriers to implementing ery for CLP families, for evaluation in a follow-up study. the guidelines were reported, although a few participants commented that recommendations could lead to a loss of professional flexibility EPL7.5 New European recommendations for genetic and freedom. counselling - the views of clinical genetics professionals R. A. Pestoff1,2, H. Kääriäinen3, L. Kerzin-Storrar4; 1Regional Oncogenetic Clinic, Oncology Department, Linköping University Hospital, Linköping, Sweden, 2Genetic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, CMFT and University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3National Insitute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 4Genetic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, CMFT and University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. This study, carried out in collaboration with EuroGentest, sought to investigate practicing genetic professionals views of new ESHG en-EMPAG Concurrent Sessions 0 Abstracts of EmPAG concurrent sessions mal result (p<.001). No significant changes in general anxiety (p=.25) or depression (p=.64) were observed. Conclusion: These preliminary Ec5.1 Genetic testing of newborns for type 1 diabetes results suggest that participating in ovarian cancer screening leads to susceptibility: A prospective cohort study on effects on maternal increased cancer-related distress in the short-term, but not increased mental health general anxiety or depression. Future analyses will compare longer- K. K. Aas1, K. Tambs1, M. S. Kise2, P. Magnus1, K. S. Rønningen1; term changes in distress and anxiety over time between women with 1Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway, 2Norwegian Directorate of normal results and women with intermediate results who are returned Health, Oslo, Norway. to routine screening following further tests. Background Genetic testing for susceptibility for type 1 diabetes was performed Ec5.3 Psychological distress in high-risk individuals for a cohort of Norwegian newborns in the prospective study “Envi- undergoing pancreatic cancer screening ronmental Triggers of Type 1 Diabetes” (MIDIA). This study assesses T. Nagtegaal1, F. Harinck2, I. Kluijt1, C. M. Aalfs3, E. Smets3, J. Poley2, A. whether mothers of the children that test positively suffer from poorer Wagner2, J. van Hooft3, P. Fockens3, M. J. Bruno2, E. M. A. Bleiker1; mental health and well-being after receiving genetic risk information 1The Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, about their children. Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Methods 3Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. The study was based on data from the Norwegian Mother and Child Introduction In a research setting, individuals identified by clinical ge- Cohort Study (MoBa). Many of the mothers in the MoBa study took neticists to be at high-risk for pancreatic cancer (PC) are offered PC part in the MIDIA study where their newborn child was tested for ge- screening (MRI and endoscopic ultrasound). However, it is yet unclear netic susceptibility for type 1 diabetes. what the benefits, in terms of mortality are. This study investigates the We used MoBa questionnaire data from the 30th week of pregnancy psychological burden of, and experiences with, the PC surveillance (baseline) and 6 months post partum (3 months post test). We mea- program. sured maternal symptoms of anxiety and depression (SCL-8), mater- Methods Either mutation carriers of PC prone hereditary tumor syn- nal self-esteem (RSES) and satisfaction with life (SWLS). We com- dromes (HTS; p16-Leiden, BRCA, p53, Peutz Jeghers Syndrome), or pared questionnaire data from mothers who had received information first degree relatives of patients with familial-PC (FPC) were invited that their newborn had high genetic risk for type 1 diabetes (N=166) to undergo PC screening. After screening, a questionnaire was sent with data from mothers who were informed that their baby did not have assessing reasons for, and experiences with, screening, benefits and a high-risk genotype (N=7224). The association between risk informa- barriers of screening, concerns about cancer (Cancer Worry Scale), tion and maternal mental health measures was analysed using mul- and anxiety and depression (Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale). tiple linear regression analysis, controlling for baseline mental health Results Forty-seven individuals (85%) completed the questionnaire scores. (49% male, 26 HTS, 21 FPC). Most respondents underwent both EUS Results and MRI (94%). Most reported reason to undergo screening was: Information on genetic risk in their newborns showed no significant “Possible early detection of PC” (100%). Screening was reported as impact on maternal symptoms of anxiety and depression (p=0.9), self “very to extremely uncomfortable” by 13% for MRI, and 19% for EUS. esteem (p=0.2) or satisfaction with life (p=0.2). Furthermore 32% worried most about the chance that relatives get Conclusions cancer and 32% are “often” or “almost always” concerned about devel- This study did not support that genetic risk information about their oping cancer themselves. Eight respondents (17%) have clinical levels newborns has a negative impact on the mental health in Norwegian of depression or anxiety. Almost all respondents (92%) reported that mothers. perceived advantages outweighed disadvantages of screening. Conclusion Results indicate that one third of the respondents worry Ec5.2 short-term psychological outcomes of ovarian cancer frequently about cancer, both for themselves and relatives. A minority screening in women at high genetic risk seem to be in need of professional psychosocial care. However, the K. Brain1, K. J. Lifford1, J. Austoker2, L. Bayne3, A. Clements2, L. Fraser4, R. benefits of screening outweigh the barriers. Iredale1, I. Jacobs4, D. Lancastle5, U. Menon4, C. Phelps6, M. T. Rogers1, A. Rosenthal4,7, E. Watson8; Ec5.4 Applying measures of informed decision making to 1School of Medicine, Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, population carrier screening for fragile X syndrome United Kingdom, 2Primary Care Research Education Group, University of S. A. Metcalfe1, A. Ames1, A. Archibald1, J. Cohen2, J. Emery3, M. Hill4,5, M. Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Ovacome, London, United Kingdom, Martyn4, O. Ukoumunne1; 4Gynaecological Oncology, University College London Institute for Women‘s 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Dept Paediatrics, University Health, London, United Kingdom, 5Department of Humanities and Social of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 2Fragile X Alliance Inc and Monash Sciences, University of Glamorgan, Pontypridd, United Kingdom, 6School of University, Melbourne, Australia, 3University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Psychology, Swansea Metropolitan University, Swansea, United Kingdom, Australia, 4Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 7Institute of Cancer, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 5Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Queen Mary University London, London, United Kingdom, 8School of Health Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom. and Social Care, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom. Informed decision making (IDM) is important in order for individuals to Purpose: PsyFOCS is an ongoing multi-centre, prospective cohort make autonomous decisions without coercion or deception. Tools have study of the psychological effects of screening in women taking part in been developed to measure IDM in prenatal Down syndrome screen- Phase 2 of the UK Familial Ovarian Cancer Screening Study. Phase 2 ing, eg the multidimensional measure of informed choice (MMIC), screening involves an annual scan of the ovaries and 4-monthly CA125 plus a deliberation scale (MMIC+D). We are currently offering carrier blood tests, with further tests prompted by receipt of either an interme- screening for fragile X syndrome (FXS) to women from the general diate blood result (rising CA125) or abnormal scan. These analyses population and applying existing tools to examine IDM in this context. examine the short-term outcomes for women who have received their Women completed a questionnaire at the time of deciding about test- first Phase 2 blood test result. Method: Women who received a nor- ing and provided a saliva sample (if tested). The questionnaire con- mal result (n=799) and women who received an intermediate result tained measures of FXS knowledge, attitudes and deliberation, as well (n=105) completed questionnaires at baseline and one week after re- as other questions derived from the Health Belief Model. The MMIC ceiving their results. The questionnaires included measures of cancer- model was applied to these data, including that of test uptake. A sub- related distress (Impact of Event Scale) and general anxiety and de- group of women were also interviewed. Responses in the structured pression (Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale). Results: There was interviews were compared with corresponding responses in the ques- a significant overall effect of time, with women reporting significantly tionnaires to triangulate the findings. Interview responses were sub- greater levels of cancer-related distress one week after receiving a jected to content analysis, coded by three independent researchers. screening result compared to baseline (p<.001). However, women who Results are summarised in the table. 73% of women were classified as received an intermediate result reported significantly greater increases having made an ‘informed choice’ based on MMIC. Adding the deliber- in cancer-related distress compared to women who received a nor- ation scale resulted in 65% of women having made an ‘informed deci-EMPAG Concurrent Sessions 1 sion’. While interview and questionnaire findings concurred, interviews did not link their child’s carrier status to their own future reproductive highlighted factors other than poor knowledge, which contributed to choices. the apparent lack of IDM. These factors are not captured by these Conclusion measures, requiring different approaches. The way in which information on carrier status of sickle cell anaemia is being disclosed needs to be improved. The most important reason Questionnaire measures N = 118 for disclosing this information - to enable the parents to make future • Test uptake 83% reproductive choices - is not yet being achieved. • Good knowledge (K) 81% • Positive attitudes (A) 87% Ec5.6 Knowledge and perceived risks in couples undergoing • Deliberated (D) * 86% genetic testing after recurrent miscarriage or in men with poor mmic - ‘informed choice’ 73% semen quality. (tested, good K, +ve A or not tested, good K, -ve A) F. Vansenne1, M. Goddijn1, B. Redeker1, S. Snijder1, K. Gerssen-Schoorl2, H. mmic+D * - ‘informed decision’ H. Lemmink2, N. J. Leschot1, F. van der Veen1, P. M. M. Bossuyt1, C. A. J. M. de (tested, good K, +ve A, D or not tested, good K, -ve A, D) 65% Borgie1; * N = 116 1Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. EC5.5 Parental feelings towards the unsought identification In reproductive medicine, couples with recurrent miscarriage (RM) and of newborns as carrier of sickle cell anaemia through newborn men with poor semen quality may undergo genetic testing as part of screening the diagnostic work-up. We explored the knowledge and perception of A. C. Plass1,2, M. Westerman3,2, M. C. Cornel1,2; genetic testing in those couples, evaluated their psychological well-be- 1VU University medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2EMGO-institute ing and identified associated variables. for Health and Care research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3VU University, A prospective questionnaire study was conducted in 7 Clinical Genet- Amsterdam, Netherlands. ics Centres and referring gynaecological departments in couples with In 2007, the neonatal screening programme in the Netherlands was RM or poor semen quality. Questionnaires were completed before dis- expanded to include sickle cell anaemia. Besides identifying patients, closure of genetic test result. Main outcome measures were knowl- this also leads to unsought identification of sickle cell carriers. Since edge, perceived risk, anxiety and depression. the latter is not directly in the child’s’ best interest, parents may ‘opt-out’ Almost 60% of participants (256 of 439) were not aware genetic testing from receiving this information. The most important reason to disclose was part of their diagnostic work-up. One third (36% RM, 33% poor this information to the parents is to enable them to base their future semen quality) indicated they had not received information about the reproductive choices on this. The aim of this study was to explore how genetic test from their doctor. Perceived risk of receiving an abnormal parents perceive their child’s carrier status being disclosed to them, genetic test result was higher than objective risk. Anxiety was highly and to see whether they take this information into account regarding correlated with perceived risk. Women with RM were more anxious their future reproductive choices. than women in the poor semen quality group or men (p<0.01). There Method were no higher levels of depression. From March to September 2007, parents of newborns identified as Couples undergoing genetic testing after RM or with poor semen qual- sickle cell carriers, were invited to take part in a qualitative semi-struc- ity have a suboptimal understanding of the nature of testing, overes- tured face-to-face interview. timate the risks of receiving an abnormal result, and some indicate Results high levels of anxiety. Improved knowledge of genetic testing in these 48 parent-couples were invited, 19 accepted; eventually 13 interviews couples is needed before a genetic test is performed. This could lead could be held. Parents were unaware of the possibility to ‘opt-out’ from to more realistic expectations of patients about the consequences of receiving information about their child’s carrier status. Initially, parents the genetic test and to less anxiety before disclosure of the genetic were shocked after receiving carrier information. Parents did not un- test result. derstand the proper meaning of carrier status. They had not under- stood that their child would not suffer from sickle cell anaemia. They EMPAG Workshops 2 Abstracts of EmPAG Workshops ity towards their children. Splitting up children and parents during the counselling may make children anxious. Counselling them together, EWs1.1 teaching counselling skills for genetic counselling however, gives little information on the psychosocial family background practice as parents may dread to speak openly. With this in mind we developed R. M. MacLeod1, D. Scotcher1, J. Hodgson2, M. Sahhar2; a counselling strategy with emphasis on support and protection of the 1The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, children and their parents. Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Department of Paediatrics, University of Methods and results Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Our multidisciplinary team developed an informative booklet for par- Teaching counselling skills for genetic practice is a core element of ents with information on communication with their children on the ge- most genetic counselling programmes. In Europe there has recently netic condition. Although this booklet helped parents to prepare their been an increase in the number of Master level genetic counselling children, assessing the psychosocial family background remained dif- programmes with more due to start. The University of Manchester and ficult. Nowadays, parents receive the booklet and have a psychosocial University of Melbourne have been involved in teaching counselling intake by telephone with the psychosocial worker before the visit to our skills to genetic counselling students since 1992 and 1996 respectively. clinic. This provides us with enough information to tailor counselling to A workshop is planned to discuss our combined experiences highlight- the needs and questions of the family. ing the need to balance theory with acquisition of skills, and to foster Conclusion both relationship skills and reflective practice. This will be set against By trial and error we developed a counselling strategy for families with the competencies expected for professional certification. In addition children being tested for cardiogenetic conditions, which involves an we will demonstrate how new genetic counselling research evidence informative booklet and telephonic consultation with a psychosocial is integrated into the curriculum. Both programmes emphasize the im- worker before the counselling session. In a workshop we would like to portance of students having the opportunity to tape their own consulta- discuss and present our strategy in more detail and exchange experi- tions/role plays, reflect on the process and receive feedback from their ences to optimise counselling for these families. peer group and lecturer. The way role plays are set up for students and how feedback is provided will also be discussed. Excerpts from a pre- EWs3.2 cardiac chaos: A hypothetical about cardiac genetic pared teaching videotape, using an actor as a simulated patient, will services, issues and challenges. be shown. The second half of the workshop will include small group I. Macciocca1, I. M. van Langen2, R. Duncan3, M. Nicol4,5, S. Jenkins6,7, P. discussions with a facilitator to exchange views and ideas on methods James1; of teaching counselling skills and theories considered relevant to ge- 1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department of netic counselling practice. Clinical Genetics, University Medical Centre, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Centre for Adolescent Health, Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, EWs2.1 Embedding genetic counsellors into clinical genetics in Children’s Bioethics Centre, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute., Melbourne, Europe Australia, 4All Wales Medical Genetics Service, Cardiff and Vale University H. Skirton1, M. Voelckel2; Health Board, University Hospital of Wales Cardiff, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 1Faculty of Health, Taunton, United Kingdom, 2Hôpital d‘Enfants de la Timone, 5Association of Inherited Cardiovascular Conditions (AICC) UK, Cardiff, United Marseille, France, Marseille, France. Kingdom, 6The Heart Hospital, University College London Hospitals NHS Across Europe there are wide variations in the roles and duties under- Trust, London, United Kingdom, 7University College London, London, United taken by genetic counsellors. In some countries, there are few genetic Kingdom. counsellors and no structure for involving them in clinical healthcare, Follow the journey of the main character, Olivia, who, in this interac- while in other countries genetic counsellors have a formal registration tive hypothetical discovers that she has an inherited cardiovascular system and are integral to the delivery of specialist genetic services. condition (ICC) in her family. Hear from an expert panel, how genetic However, there is increasing evidence of the need for genetic counsel- counsellors, geneticists and cardiologists manage her problems and lors to contribute to patient care in many contexts. For example, the discover why researchers and ethicists have become involved. As ge- guidelines on genetic testing developed by the EuroGentest project netic testing for ICCs such as long QT syndrome and hypertrophic indicate that health professionals with specific training in genetic coun- cardiomyopathy becomes more common, genetics professionals need selling should be involved in supporting patients in the pre- and post- to be familiar not only with the medical and genetic aspects of these test periods. In this workshop, we will explore the developing involve- conditions, but also the unique challenges faced by families with ICCs. ment of genetic counsellors in services across Europe. Perspectives Sudden death, a small but real risk in these conditions, can occur at from a range of cultural, national contexts and disciplinary contexts will any time in individuals who are unaware of their risk status. Thus, the be presented. stakes are high for members of these families, which raises many In the first session, patients who have experienced genetic services dilemmas: are the usual strategies used by genetic professionals to will contribute their perspectives on what the service user requires and facilitate communication about genetic risk sufficient in these cases? expects from a genetic counsellor. The role of genetic counsellors in Could a more proactive approach be taken that honours patient confi- multi-disciplinary clinics and reference centres for rare diseases will be dentiality and respects individual autonomy? How should cardiac ge- discussed by expert practitioners in the field of clinical genetics, while netic services be delivered to meet these needs? new and innovative approaches to embedding the work of genetic It is hoped that this hypothetical will stimulate discussion about differ- counsellors in other specialties will be presented by practitioners from ent models of service delivery as well as the ethical issues and practi- Spain. Finally, the need to ensure patient safety through the use of cal demands of ICCs on families and health practitioners. Audience counselling supervision for genetic counsellors will be explored. There participation will be encouraged to enable participants to compare will be opportunities for members of the audience to contribute their and contrast approaches to the provision of cardiac genetic services own opinions on the topic. around the world and reflect on counselling strategies that optimize outcomes. EWs3.1 Predictive testing for cardiogenetic conditions in children: practical considerations from a multidisciplinary team A. M. Schiphorst, I. Christiaans, C. M. Aalfs; Academic Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Background Since 1996 we perform DNA-diagnostics for cardiogenetic conditions at our multidisciplinary outpatient clinic. In families with a pathogen- ic mutation predictive genetic testing is offered to relatives. Cardiac evaluations and/or treatment to prevent sudden death are advised to carriers. Familial sudden death often hurries relatives to get tested. Especially parents can feel powerless in their care and responsibil-Reproductive issues in genetics, prenatal and preimplantation genetic diagnosis  Abstracts of EmPAG Posters ever, is PGD always justified? Aim: To describe our experience in 41 PGD cycles for cancer predispo- EP01.01 Genetic counselling for ambiguity: 46,XX/46,XY on sition syndromes that were approved by a Scoring System appraising chorionic villus sampling: what is the differential? PGD justification. D. M. Lambert1,2, L. McArdle2, S. A. Lynch2, S. Roring2; Methods: A semi-quantitative Scoring System was developed by 1Children‘s University Hospital Temple Street, Dublin, Ireland, 2National Centre evaluation of the disease characteristics (onset, severity, risk for off- for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland. spring and penetrance) and patient variables (co-requirement for IVF, A G3P2 couple was referred to the local maternity hospital for chorionic objection to TOP). PGD cycles were performed by blastomere biopsy villus sampling (CVS) as a large nuchal fold was detected at 12 weeks of cleavage stage embryos or polar body biopsy, followed by single gestation. A dating scan at 7 weeks gestation had confirmed a nor- cell multiplex PCR that amplifies the cancer mutation and 3-5 flanking mal singleton pregnancy. Cultured CVS showed 46,XX[17]/47,XY[3], polymorphic markers. and FISH XX in 294 cells and XY in 86 cells in 3 separate culture Results: 17 couples applied for PGD for cancer predisposition. Four- flasks. Rapid aneuploidy screen on direct CVS showed no Y chromo- teen couples were accepted according to our Scoring System and 3 some contribution. The couple was referred for genetic counselling to couples were rejected due to under-thershold scoring values. Of the discuss the possible range of outcomes. Maternal cell contamination, accepted couples, 9 were affected with cancer, 13 had at least one vanishing twin, and chimerism were discussed with the couple, as well family member affected and 11 couples co-required IVF. In total, 6 as the pros and cons of parental genotyping, fetal ultrasound sexing pregnancies were achieved and 2 healthy children were born. and amniocentesis to resolve uncertainty. The likelihood of maternal Conclusion: We envision that the continuous discovery of cancer pre- cell contamination was reduced by the finding of a female fetus on ul- disposition mutations and identification of at-risk-families will result trasound. Amniocentesis showed 46,XX[10] and FISH XX on 500 cells, in an ever-increasing demand for prevention by PGD. We propose a with female sex confirmed by molecular techniques. The couple was Scoring System that takes into account the disease characteristics as informed that an early vanishing twin was most likely responsible for well as the patients‘ clinical variables to determine which of these con- the XX/XY CVS result despite the normal 7 week scan. These results ditions and in which patients is PGD justified. have important implications about how we discuss accuracy of CVS, fetal sexing on maternal blood, and first trimester screening with our EP01.04 choosing a hearing child: Attitudes towards the patients. This case illustrates the limitations of the technologies that possibility of prenatal diagnosis for deafness in hearing parents we use and the challenges in explaining uncertain information to pa- of deaf children with cochlear implants tients. A. Taylor1,2; 1Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United EP01.02 counselling on reproductive options in marfan Kingdom, 2Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. syndrome Prenatal diagnosis (PND) of deafness in some families is now a theo- N. Bosch1, V. Seidel2, M. del Campo3,4; retical possibility. At present, this is controversial and is neither rou- 1Fundació Institut de Recerca Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut tinely asked for nor routinely offered by genetics services. The majority Municipal d‘Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 3Unidad of deaf children are born to parents with normal hearing, and it is these de Genética, Departamento de Ciencias Experimentales, UPF, Barcelona, people whose decisions may be affected if PND for deafness were Spain, 4Programa de Medicina Molecular y Genetica, Hospital Vall d´Hebron, more widely available. This study investigates the attitudes of a subset Barcelona, Spain. of these parents whose deaf child has had a cochlear implant fitted. Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a progressive disorder with autosomal In opting for cochlear implantation, this group have actively chosen for dominant inheritance and variable expression, that affects connective their child to hear, so their views on PND are particularly pertinent. tissues. Cardinal manifestations involve the ocular, skeletal, and car- These parents gave qualified support for PND for deafness, but were diovascular systems and strict criteria are used to establish the clinical unanimous in their opposition to subsequent termination of pregnancy, diagnosis. MFS is caused by a defect in the fibrillin gene (FBN1) and the prevailing theme being that deafness was not serious enough to mutations are found in ≈ 80% of families with positive Ghent criteria. warrant such action. Their accounts demonstrate they are well in- The search for these mutations is often driven by the reproductive risks formed and highly motivated to obtain the best possible treatment and and wishes of the affected individuals. This study was aimed at ex- support for their child, particularly with reference to participation in the ploring the understanding of patients and their partners regarding re- hearing world. However, they describe their children as deaf, support productive risks and options, through questionnaires before and after their Deaf identities and do not perceive deafness as a serious disabil- counselling, in the setting of the Marfan clinic in Hospital Vall d’Hebron. ity. They have not ‘chosen a hearing child’, and are not interested in A total of 36 individuals answered this survey and the major conclu- using genetic technology to ensure a hearing child in future pregnan- sions were: 1. Their understanding of the inheritance pattern, recur- cies. Their point of view is closer to the cultural model than the medical rence risks, medical risks of pregnancy and reproductive options were model of deafness, which may be of some reassurance to those in the deficient even in those previously diagnosed, and improved markedly Deaf community who have viewed cochlear implantation as a threat after counselling. 2. Those individuals who ignored their diagnoses to their future. or had not received appropriate counselling when they had their first offspring, showed anxiety and guilt. 3. Most individuals perceived the EP01.05 Psychological impact of preimplantation genetic counselling as being useful and reducing their uncertainties and anxi- diagnosis: A prospective Australian study. ety. 4. Every participant accepted prenatal and preimplantation (PGD) J. C. Karatas1, K. Barlow-Stewart2, B. Meiser3, C. McMahon4, K. Strong5, C. diagnoses as a method for avoiding having affected offspring. 5. Pre- Roberts6; natal diagnosis with the option of termination of pregnancy was the 1Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2Centre for first choice among most individuals, particularly in those looking for Genetics Education, NSW Health, Sydney, Australia, 3Psychosocial Research their first child. PGD was second. Globally, reproductive counselling Group, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 4Centre for Emotional appears to be essential in this group of patients. Health, Department of Psychology, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia, 5Centre for Values, Ethics and the Law in Medicine, University of Sydney, EP01.03 PGD for cancer predisposition syndromes Sydney, Australia, 6Sydney IVF Limited, Sydney, Australia. M. Malcov1, D. Ben-Yosef1, V. Gold1, T. Frumkin1, A. Carmon1, A. Amit1, Y. The psychological impact of preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) Yaron2; was prospectively explored with fifty women from Sydney, Australia, 1Racine IVF Unit, Department of Ob/Gyn, Lis Maternity Hospital, Sourasky using self-administered questionnaires. At pre-treatment (T1), anxiety Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, Genetic and depression rates were similar to normal population data. State Institute, Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel. anxiety was associated with degree of financial worry and living in an Introduction: Most cases of cancer are sporadic. Nonetheless, ~ 5- inner metropolitan area. The women’s perception of their chance of 10% of the cases demonstrate an autosomal dominant inheritance achieving a viable pregnancy were higher than the actual clinic rate pattern with variable penetrance. Prevention of unaffected offspring and was positively associated with financial worry. The degree of finan- may be achieved by preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). How- cial worry may reflect the cost of PGD in Australia compounded by the Prenatal and newborn screening  high cost of home ownership in Sydney, despite these women having take decisions. The average anxiety level was in the intermediate-high on average high household incomes. The need for information about range, mostly related to the indication for testing and previous history coping strategies if PGD was unsuccessful was identified. Unmet in- (previous offspring, assisted reproductive technologies, other…). The formation needs were low but positively associated with women’s edu- academic level of progenitors also influenced the reasons to partici- cation levels and information-seeking behaviours. Women completed pate and their understanding of the benefits and limitations of these follow-up questionnaires assessing anxiety and depression following techniques. Refusal of the study was related to anxiety, birth place and embryo transfer (T2), pregnancy result notification (T3) and, for wom- the indication for the invasive sampling. en who achieved a pregnancy, at 24 weeks of pregnancy (T4). Anxi- In conclusion, our data show a high level of acceptance of new mo- ety levels significantly increased following T2 and T3, though they re- lecular techniques in prenatal setting and provide information about turned to baseline levels at T4. Depression levels did not significantly the most important aspects to discuss during genetic counselling con- fluctuate over time in this group. At T4, maternal-fetal attachment was cerning these novel molecular techniques. assessed and found to be sound. A deeper understanding of these results was gained through additional in-depth interviews conducted EP02.03 Providing genetic risk information to parents of with a subset of women (n=14). While describing PGD as stressful, newborns with sickle cell trait: Role of the general practitioner in women also reported PGD as empowering. Women reported previous neonatal screening. reproductive trauma affected their PGD experience and their bonding F. Vansenne, C. A. J. M. de Borgie, M. Peters; with their fetus in early pregnancy. Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. In 2007 the newborn screening programme in the Netherlands includ- EP02.01 Pregnant women‘s beliefs about prenatal testing for ed national screening of sickle cell disease (SCD). In addition, sickle chromosome abnormalities. cell trait (SCT) is identified and disclosed to parents of carriers. Since M. R. Susman, D. Amor, J. Bayer, J. Halliday; the introduction of this disclosure of SCT, general practitioners (GP’s) MCRI, Parkville, Australia. are expected to play an important role in providing genetic risk infor- Current prenatal screening focuses on Down syndrome, whilst diag- mation and refer at-risk couples appropriately. We aimed to investigate nostic testing gives information about all chromosomes. If noninvasive disease related knowledge, intention and motivational factors in order prenatal diagnosis for Down syndrome replaces current screening to evaluate this new role of GP’s. programmes, some non-Down syndrome chromosome abnormalities An assessment questionnaire was send in May 2009 to 285 GP’s who will no longer be detected. One way of minimizing reduced detection received notice of a child with SCT in 2007 or 2008. The questionnaire is inclusion of other chromosome abnormalities in noninvasive tests. contained questions on clinical experience and knowledge with SCD Pregnant women’s attitudes about appropriate inclusion may differ and SCT, communicating the result and potential barriers in the com- from that of experts and health professionals, as is seen with newborn munication. screening programmes.2 Response rate was 49%. Most GP’s did not report barriers in counsel- The aims of our study are to determine pregnant women’s opinions ing parents about SCT and providing risk information, even though on which chromosome abnormalities should be included in prenatal the majority indicates they lack clinical experience with and knowledge testing and the beliefs underpinning those opinions. Using a health about SCD and SCT. In our study only 23% of the identified couples behaviour model based on the theories of Planned Behaviour and at risk were tested for hemoglobinopathy, whereas 90% of GP’s stated Reasoned Action, questionnaires were designed. A leaflet describing they informed parents. There was a great variation in knowledge of the outcomes of seven different chromosome abnormalities, including GP’s in both the information they provided and the steps they took. Down syndrome, was also provided. This study shows that disclosure of SCT in the newborn screening at The preliminary questionnaire elicits the beliefs from approximately this moment only in a small percentage of cases leads to consecutive 160 pregnant women. Using content analysis, the beliefs will be cate- testing of parents for hemoglobinopathy. Much more effort is needed to gorized into themes based on the main variables of the model; attitude provide better information to GP’s and to help facilitate their work. toward the behaviour (positive or negative values towards the test), subjective norm (social pressure that may influence their decisions), EP02.04 the changing landscape of genetic screening criteria and perceived behavioural control (what might get in the way of them C. G. van El, M. C. Cornel, T. Pieters; actually having a test). The results will inform the main study question- VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands. naire and ultimately assist in finding out what pregnant women want In the past three decades in the Netherlands remarkable changes from prenatal testing for chromosome abnormalities. have occurred in population genetic screening. Governmental re- References: straint in reproductive screening, based on an enduring emphasis on treatability as screening criterion, has given way to prenatal screening EP02.02 Acceptance of novel molecular techniques for prenatal being available to all pregnant women, and neonatal screening has screening of chromosomal alterations expanded dramatically, as in many countries. C. Serra-Juhé1, L. Fernández2, N. Bosch1, N. Capdevila1, M. Cendrós1, F. Based on interviews, literature research, and results from a witness García-Santiago2, C. Giménez1, E. Mansilla2, I. Valenzuela1, M. Del Campo1,3, seminar, we will highlight three mechanisms that can put these chang- P. Lapunzina2, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,3; es into perspective. 1Unitat de Genètica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 1.Widening circles: 2Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La In the 1980s and 1990s the pros and cons of genetic prenatal testing Paz, CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Programa de Medicina Molecular i Genètica, on medical indication were known and weighed by a small circle of Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. experts and health professionals. With the introduction of new tech- Pregnant women with an indication of prenatal invasive sampling due niques, making it possible to screen all pregnant women, wider circles to risk for foetal anomalies, visited in Vall d’Hebron (Barcelona) and (in society and Parliament) were confronted with ethical issues. When- La Paz (Madrid) hospitals during 2009, were offered to take part in a ever circles widen ethical issues have to be assessed anew. study of the feasibility and cost-efficiency of novel methods for pre- 2.Differentiating between screening aims: natal screening of chromosomal abnormalities (MLPA, aCGH), and a Where population screening is seen as a public health instrument (aim- parallel study to identify factors influencing their acceptance of these ing for health gain by prevention or treatment through early detection) screening tests. We provided pre-test genetic counselling to all women, it is ill at ease with genetic screening providing reproductive options. including information on risks, expected detection rates and potential Countries differ in their solutions to differentiate these domains. findings of unknown significance, as well as post-test genetic counsel- 3. Balancing protection and autonomy: ling when genomic alterations were detected. A short questionnaire Traditional screening policy emphasized the protection of citizens about social and demographic characteristics and reasons to accept against harmful or unsound screening, as is laid down in the Popula- or refuse advanced prenatal testing was obtained. tion Screening Act (1996). In the age of preventive genomics more The analysis of 450 surveys indicated that the great majority of women tests and screening becomes available, and the demand for tests in- agreed to extend prenatal studies (94%). All women considered they creases. These developments call for transparent alternatives to cre- had enough information, provided by pretest counselling, in order to ate a new balance between protection and autonomy.Risk perception and genetic testing  EP02.05 POPULAtiON cARRiER scREENiNG FOR FRAGiLE X EP03.01 Family construction of genetic meaning sYNDROmE: cHALLENGEs FOR GENEtic cOUNsELLiNG J. Karwoski; A. D. Archibald1,2, A. M. Jaques1, S. Wake1,2,3, C. Hickerton1, J. Cohen4, S. A. University of Nevada-Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, United States. Metcalfe1,2; Testing minors to determine carrier status in X-linked disorders has 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2The University of generally been discouraged by professional organizations. One point Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, of concern has been that of potentially harmful psychosocial impact Australia, 4Fragile X Alliance Inc, Melbourne, Australia. upon the minor. Whether knowledge of carrier status will have a nega- Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the leading cause of inherited intellec- tive effect on minors, however, depends upon its meaning within the tual disability. Carrier screening can provide individuals with informa- family system. Since testing is increasingly commercially available, tion about their health and their risk of having a child with FXS. This health professionals now serve less often as gate-keepers, but can study explored views about population carrier screening for FXS and retain a valuable advisory role. Professionals who are asked to test here we discuss the relevance of these findings to genetic counselling. the sister of an affected child can assess what implications a positive Interviews and focus groups were conducted with 141 participants: result might have within that particular family, being alert to the pos- healthcare providers (81), relatives of individuals with FXS (29) and sibly great difference between parents‘ and daughter‘s perspective. women from the general population who were offered carrier screen- Some parents may overestimate risk due to a cognitive error known ing for FXS (31). Participants discussed issues relevant to genetic as the availability heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). This short- counselling including: challenges relating to decision-making; consid- cut in reasoning makes unlikely events that have actually happened, erations about the most appropriate stage of life at which to offering and are therefore readily available to memory, seem more likely than carrier screening; the counselling needs of individuals who receive a objective estimates would indicate. Thus, parents‘ sense of the likeli- grey zone, premutation, or full mutation result and perceptions of the hood of grandchildren being born with a disorder that has affected a role of genetic counselling in a population carrier screening program child of their own may be substantially elevated. Consequently, they for FXS. The results indicate that there is support for preconception may wish to protect their daughter, at all costs, from the ordeal they population-based FXS carrier screening, however, due to limited themselves have experienced, exerting undue pressure upon her to awareness of the condition, individuals from the general population abandon hopes of child-bearing. Such parents who view the risk faced will face unique challenges when making a decision about screening. by carriers, or potential carriers, as overwhelming, need help in appre- Further, individuals should be supported to consider the best time in ciating the dangers inherent in usurping control over future reproduc- their lives to learn their carrier status. The most appropriate setting for tive decisions that rightfully belong to their daughter. offering screening was primary care, with genetic counsellors provid- ing the service. These results will help inform future development of EP03.02 Opening the psychological black box in genetic- genetic counselling practice in this context and suggest that develop- counselling: the counsellees‘ perception explains the ing counselling protocols tailored to offering screening in the general psychological impact of DNA-testing, pathogenic-mutations the population should be considered. medical impact J. Vos1, R. Stoel2, J. C. Oosterwijk3, E. Gomez4, F. Menko5, C. J. Van Asperen1, EP02.06 Haemoglobinopathy screening in the Netherlands: A. M. Stiggelbout6, A. Tibben1; witnessing the past, lessons for the future. 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, S. M. P. J. Jans1,2, C. G. van El1, A. M. C. Plass1, T. M. Lagro-Janssen2, E. Leiden, Netherlands, 2Netherlands Forensic Institute, The Hague, Netherlands, Houwaart1, M. C. Cornel1; 3Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Groningen, Groningen, 1EMGO Institute for Health and Care research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical 2Institute for Gender Studies, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, VU In The Netherlands there were no formal recommendations for haemo- University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Department of Medical globinopathy (HbP) screening until recently. In 2007 neonatal screen- Decision-Making, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. ing was expanded to include sickle cell disease. As a result carriers of Background- It is often hypothesized that the Outcomes of DNA-test- this disease are also identified. ing (O) are better predicted and/or mediated by the counsellees‘ Per- This study aimed to explore the decision-making process in the past: ception (P) than by the actually communicated genetic-Information (I). why had it been decided that HbP-screening was not ‘opportune’, and Method- Women tested for BRCA1/2 5 years before (sd=2.0), par- to investigate the role of ethnicity in the Dutch debate on haemoglo- ticipated in a retrospective questionnaire study. Communicated In- binopathy screening. formation was (I): cancer-risks and BRCA1/2-test result, i.e. unclas- Methods: Literature search identifying key-figures involved in the de- sified-variant testresults (n=76), uninformative (n=76) or pathogenic- cision-making process. They were telephone-interviewed, and invited mutations (n=51). Four perception-variables were included (P): the to attend a so-called witness-seminar: i.e. elaborating on traditional counsellees‘ recollections and interpretations of both the cancer-risks sources of historical research, and adding new perspectives on past and the likelihood that the cancer in their family is heritable. The 25 events. The transcript was content analyzed. outcome-variables (O) included life changes, medical decision-mak- Results: During the 1980s and 1990s official screening policy was ing, BRCA-self-concept, current psychological well-being and qual- restrained regarding reproductive issues. Political parties expressed ity-of-life. Bootstrapping mediation analyses determined whether re- concerns about eugenics. However, locally screening practices did oc- lationships were direct (I->O or P->O) or indirect via the mediation of cur. In the nineties a research report requested by the government perception (I->P->O). played a central role: Screening was considered not opportune due Results- Only the communication of pathogenic mutation or uninfor- to low prevalence, and lack of knowledge amongst both professionals mative directly predicted medical-outcomes (I->O),viz. performed and and high-risk groups. The heritage of WWII seemed to have influenced intended surgery. All other outcomes were predicted by the coun- the decision-making process: registration of ethnicity surfaces as an sellees‘ recollection and interpretation of their own cancer-risks and important impeding factor. heredity-likelihood (P->O), or this perception mediated all effects Future issues for debate: Restrictive attitude to registration of ethnic- (I->P->O). However, this perception was significantly different from ity seems to have been relevant, but is changing as a result of in- actually communicated cancer-risks (I->P). The misperception of un- creasing multi-ethnicity. The prevalence of haemoglobinopathies has classified-variants predicted both psychological outcomes and radical increased. For future decision-making on haemoglobinopathy screen- medical decisions. ing programmes, it is important to include representatives of high-risk Discussion- Genetic-counsellors need to explicitly address the coun- groups in the discussion. These challenges will need to be addressed sellee‘s interpretations and intended medical decisions. In case of in policymaking. rigid misinterpretations additional psychological counseling might be offered. Communication of unclassified-variants needs close attention given the pitfall of ambiguity.Access to genetic services (challenges in Europe)  EP03.03 Overestimated lifetime breast cancer risk can be members at risk and provide personally tailored, sensitive and expert reduced by feedback on preexisting risk estimation. support, diagnosis, treatment, information and advice to close rela- P. Stam, E. van der Looij, I. van der Burgt, N. Hoogerbrugge; tives’. Department of Human Genetics Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, In Wales and parts of the UK there is a ‘fragmented’ approach to meet- 6500 HB Nijmegen, Netherlands. ing the NSF quality requirements and recommendations due to (a) The majority of women with a family history of breast cancer estimate Inadequate funding and service infrastructure to meet the rapidly in- their lifetime risk (LTR) of breast cancer too high, even after genetic creasing referral numbers (b) New technologies are available enabling counseling. By discussing the counselee’s estimation and emphasiz- gene testing before patient pathways / protocols can be put in place (c) ing the actual risk during counseling, a more accurate LTR estimation Multiple professionals being involved in SCD families, e.g. the inves- is expected afterwards. tigation of the Coroners and Police may cause delay in referral of ‘at Counselees estimated their LTR in a pre- and post-counseling ques- risk’ relatives for cardiac screening and clinical genetic assessment. A tionnaire. Their actual LTR was calculated using Claus tables and Florence Nightingale Travel Award to MN facilitated an observational standardized breast cancer risk percentages. The intervention during study in Australia, Canada and Wales, to compare the delivery of clini- counseling beholds a dialog on a counselee’s LTR estimation and the cal genetic services to family members affected by SCD/SADS. actual LTR. This intervention was compared to standard counseling. Results confirm women in intervention and control group overesti- EP04.03 Genetic counsellor: the swiss experience. mate their LTR prior to counseling with an average overestimation of V. Cina1, A. Ayme2, A. E. Murphy2; 43% and 42% respectively. Both groups showed a reduction of their 1Service of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, overestimation after counseling. However the average overestimation Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Oncogenetics Unit, University Hospital of Geneva, of the actual LTR in the intervention group is significantly lower than Geneva, Switzerland. the control group (11% to 31%, p = 0,016). In the control group 76% In Switzerland, genetic counselling is mainly provided by board certi- overestimate their LTR for at least 10% versus a significantly lower fied clinical geneticists or oncologists. The medical genetic services of 36% doing so after intervention (p = 0,034).Conclusion: Integration of five university hospitals cover a population of 7.5 million inhabitants. counselee’s pre-existing risk estimations and feedback on actual LTR A few private laboratories also provide genetic testing and counsel- during counseling results in counselees estimating their breast cancer ling. Specific genetic counselling training is not available and genetic risk more accurately and therefore improved risk communication counsellors are not officially recognised by the Swiss Confederation. However, a step forward was made in 2008 when this profession was EP04.01 Access to the Genetic services in cyprus recognised in the Canton de Vaud, one of the 26 regional structures T. Delikurt1, E. S. Aristidou1, A. Kotti2, V. Christophidou Anastasiadou1,2; of the country. 1Clinical Genetics Service, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, We show the activity of three genetic counsellors working in the French Cyprus, 2Clinical Genetics Service, Makarios Medical Center, Nicosia, Cyprus. speaking part of Switzerland and the evolution of their role. We also In the recent years the bicommunal composition (Greek and Turkish discuss the challenges and the aspects that have facilitated the devel- Cypriots) of Cyprus has further diversified with the increase in “ethni- opment of this new profession. cally mixed” marriages (Cypriots with spouses mostly of Eastern-Euro- Two genetic counsellors work in Geneva in cancer genetics. The third pean and Asian ethnicity) and the increase in migration rates from both works in Lausanne in a general genetic counselling setting. We ob- EU/non-EU countries. The Clinical Genetics Clinic (CGC), established serve an evolution towards a diversification of the activity and a more in 1994, is the only reference center for clinical genetics and genetic autonomous role. The organisation of the clinical activity within the counselling on the island. The CGC is therefore accessed by over 3500 services, the lack of legal recognition and the lack of colleagues with patients and their families from all over Cyprus who are living with or the same background represent some of the challenges encountered. are at risk of inheriting genetic conditions. The CGC offers diagnostic On the other hand, the establishment of a trust relationship with the assessment, management/ treatment and genetic counselling in adult, colleagues and the hierarchy as well as the support from international prenatal, cancer and pediatric genetics for the whole spectrum of ge- networks have been helpful for the development of the role of genetic netic conditions including chromosomal aberration syndromes, single counsellor. gene disorders, mitochondrial diseases, multifactorial conditions and In the future, we will work towards a wider recognition of the profession prenatal exposure syndromes. In accordance to changing popula- in the country and the implementation of more genetic counsellor job tion composition, the CGC-patient-population has shown a gradual positions. increase in diversity. Patients/families may face challenges in access if i) language needs aren’t met by the staff or a professional-transla- EP04.04 Organisation and development of cancer genetics in tor ii) geographical location is unfavourable iii) religious/cultural beliefs sweden. (e.g emotional reactions/disbelief on genetic testing) are diverse iv) A. Baan; physicians knowledge/understanding of clinical genetics is insufficient Dept of oncology, Gothenburg, Sweden. v) low socioeconomic status vi) patient is from a ‘paternalistic health Purpose: The purpose of this study was to descibe the organizational care’ culture, may view MD as the only expert over non-MD genetic background and developments at cancer genetic centres in Sweden, counsellor. Such challenges are important to the members of the CGC as well as associated ethical issues. who has to further enhance their cultural competence and adapt to the Selection: Six cancer genetic centres were included in the study. In the increasing diversity. initila phase the individuels in charge of their respective clinics were contacted and requested to select actors who participated in the de- EP04.02 Dealing with sudden cardiac Death. A comparison velopment of the centres´ operation. between Welsh (UK), Australian and North American Practice Method: Qualitative content analysis was used to assess the material. M. C. Nicol1, D. Kumar1, A. Clarke1, I. Macciocca2, M. Care3; The goal of content analysisi is to provide knowledge and understand- 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Victoria Genetic ing of the phenomenon under study. Narrative content is analysed to Services, Murdoch Children‘s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 3The discern themes and categories. Fred Litwin Family Centre, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. Conclusion: In summary, study findings showed that cancer genetics Genetic counselling for Inherited Cardiovascular Conditions (ICCs) teams in Sweden need additional expertise. This line of work also re- is challenging to most Genetic Counsellors and Geneticists. Sudden quiresconstant ethical reflection to keep pace with technical and medi- unexplained/cardiac death (SUD/SCD) is a recognised (and often the cal developments involving the human genome. As information related first) presentation in Mendelian ICCs. The chapter 8 (Standard 5 for to these issues reaches the public through communication channels Wales) National Service Framework (NSF) in England for Coronary such as the mass media andscientific publications, expextations of Heart Disease includes recommendations and sets out quality require- helth care resources are based on what published, and not what is ments, criteria and systems needed to provide diagnosis, treatment, technically possible and ethically jusfiable. These considerations de- information and support to families affected by SCD, in particular the termine the planning and they shape the life choices made. sudden arrhythmic death syndrome (SADS). It states, ‘When sudden death occurs, NHS services have systems in place to identify family Lay beliefs and public understanding of genetics 7 EP05.01 Declining genetic testing for hereditary breast cancer: the demand for genetic counseling for bipolar disorder will increase. psychological issues. Genetic counselors are well-equipped to educate patients and family P. De Wilde, B. Poppe, A. De Paepe; members about the condition, to discuss their concerns about the risk Centre for Medical Genetics Gent, Gent, Belgium. of bipolar disorder, and to offer genetic testing should it become avail- Empirical studies show that only about 50 percent of women followed able. For this qualitative study, interviews were conducted to explore in high risk hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC) clinics opt to be the opinions and perceptions of individuals with bipolar disorder and/or tested. their siblings. The open-ended questions were designed to elicit the The most common reasons for declining are concerns about the emo- thoughts and attitudes about bipolar disorder and genetic counseling. tional impact, concerns about insurance issues, concerns about the Thematic analysis was performed on the transcripts from 12 inter- absence of a concrete benefit on surveillance, worries about the limita- views. Data analysis is ongoing, but the preliminary analysis reveals tions of screening and concerns about test accuracy. some common themes. These include: 1.) a perceived need/interest To our knowledge, all studies so far which have investigated the emo- for a diagnostic test, 2.) excessive disease burden on patients and tional functioning and motivations of test decliners included only indi- family members, 3.) individuals sometimes use their family history to viduals enrolled in HBOC clinics and thus were focused on a relatively make reproductive planning decisions, 4.) the causal attributions for selected group of persons who all received genetic counseling or took bipolar disorder vary among individuals, and 5.) an interest in genetic part in a surveillance program. People who are anxious or unfavorable counseling to learn more about bipolar disorder. about testing are not likely to participate in this type of research. In the presented study we specifically aim at interviewing people who EP06.01 Psychological follow-up after disclosure of cancer are unknown to the genetic center. Recruitment of individuals is done genetic test results in BRcA ½ mutated families through a tested family member who is willing to participate. We use A. Bouhnik1, I. Pellegrini1, C. Noguès2, P. Berthet3, P. Berthet3, O. Caron4, J. semi-structured interviews and qualitative data analysis (IPA). Fricker5, M. Gauthier-Villars6, L. Gladieff7, C. Lasset8, E. Luporsi9, C. Julian- The study is ongoing and so far, recruitment has proven to be difficult. Reynier1; Preliminary results indicate deeply rooted fatalistic beliefs and doubts 1INSERM-U912, Marseille, France, 2Centre René-Huguenin, St-Cloud, France, about the idea of manageability. 3Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France, 4Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, Investigating these psychological issues can also be important in the France, 5Centre Paul Strauss, Strasbourg, France, 6Institut Curie, Paris, light of a more general debate about the role of genetic services in France, 7Institut Claudius Regaud, Toulouse, France, 8Centre Léon Bérard, disclosing genetic information within families. Lyon, France, 9Centre Alexis Vautrin, Nancy, France. Objective: To describe the psychosocial support of BRCA1/2 carriers/ EP05.02 Debating genetics with young people: the GAmY non carriers by two years after test result delivery. (Genetics and merthyr Youth) Project Methods: French national cohort of unaffected carriers/non carriers N. V. Taverner, K. Madden, R. Iredale; (N=622) within BRCA1/2 families. Questionnaires including medical, University of Glamorgan, Pontypridd, United Kingdom. psychosocial (IES, CES-D, BIS, social support…) and socio-demo- Purpose: Young people’s opinions about genetics are rarely heard, graphic characteristics were completed before and 15 days, 12 months although they are most likely to be affected by advances in genetic and 24 months after test result disclosure. knowledge. The GAMY (Genetics and Merthyr Youth) Project worked Results: Answer rate (N=533; 86%, 40 years old on average; SD=12). with teenagers from South Wales over a two year period to explore Psychological referral has been offered to 72% and 32% of carriers how confident they felt about discussing genetics and investigate their (n=232) and non carriers (n=301) respectively (p<0.001). After multi- attitudes. variate adjustment, carriers were more frequently offered referral when Method: Participants (aged 16 to 19 years old) engaged in four group they were younger, when a psychologist attended at the result consul- days involving learning and discussion about genetics topics including tation, and when they had a higher psychological distress. Among the inheritance, risk, family history, genetic testing and ethical issues. They non carriers, the level of distress was the only factor correlated to psy- completed genetics tasks, expressing their ideas through creative me- chological referral. By one and 2 years, 20% of the carriers attended dia such as digital photography and storytelling. A mixed methods ap- at a psychological consultation, compared to 8% of the non-carriers proach was used to collect a variety of data from all aspects of the (p<0.05). Related factors will be detailed. project. Results: 21 young people were recruited, though participation declined EP06.02 Predictive genetic testing in adolescents for late-onset over time. They had learned about genetics at school, but did not un- conditions: First-hand accounts from minors derstand how to relate this to their own lives. Through involvement with C. Mand1,2, L. Gillam1,3, R. E. Duncan1,3, M. B. Delatycki1,4; the project, most became more confident to discuss genetic issues 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department and their understanding increased, although they retained some mis- of Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 3Children‘s Bioethics conceptions and their opinions can be resistant to change. In general, Centre, Royal Children‘s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 4Austin Health, they were interested in genetic advances, though found it difficult to Melbourne, Australia. appreciate the potential psychosocial impact. Due to advances in genetic technology, asymptomatic individuals at- Conclusions: With appropriate support and information, young people risk of genetic conditions can undergo predictive testing (PT) to find become more genetically literate, and acquire the skills and confidence out if they will develop the condition later in life. PT is routinely offered to discuss genetics issues. Further research is needed to explore how to adults at-risk of late-onset conditions (eg: Huntington’s disease, genetic literacy can be promoted more broadly within this age group to BRCA, HNPCC). More controversial is the application of PT in minors enable them to be involved in debates about genetic developments. for late-onset conditions where no effective treatment or prevention is available. The ethical discourse concerning PT in minors is lively, EP05.03 Perceptions of Genetic counseling from Adults with yet it remains one of speculation, with a relative scarcity of empirical Bipolar Disorder evidence. While sporadic reports of PT in minors and the rise of the S. M. Perschke, BS, E. A. Gettig, MS, GCG, R. E. Grubs, PhD, CGC; ‘mature-minor’ doctrine have led to slightly greater flexibility in recom- University of Pittsburgh, Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, PA, mendations worldwide, most maintain a general position against PT in United States. minors for conditions without effective medical intervention. Bipolar disorder is a mood disorder that affects about 1% of the popu- This study employed a qualitative methodology to explore young lation. Twin studies provide evidence that genetics plays a role in the people’s experience of being tested for an adult-onset genetic con- etiology of bipolar disorder with heritability estimates as high as 93% dition (including a range of cancers and neuorogenetic disorders). It in some studies. Molecular genetic studies were initially promising, but entailed semi-structured interviews with adolescents and their families. no genes with large effect sizes have been discovered. There is also Ten interviews were conducted. Interviews were transcribed and the- evidence that suggests a multifactorial inheritance pattern. Genetic matically analysed to reveal a range of harms and benefits associated testing is not yet available. However, as advances are made in the with participants’ PT experience, many of which were unrelated to the understanding of genetics and psychiatric disorders, it is expected that actual test result.Predictive testing: process and impact  Through the presentation of detailed case-studies, this paper will de- EP07.02 Development and testing of a screening questionnaire scribe a range of harms and benefits associated with PT in minors. for psychosocial problems in genetic counseling and testing for For the first time this study gives a voice to the adolescents who are cancer. the centre of this debate, provoking consideration of current guidelines W. Eijzenga, N. K. Aaronson, D. E. E. Hahn, I. Kluijt, E. M. A. Bleiker; and questioning whether we have reached the correct balance in exist- The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. ing recommendations. Introduction: Approximately 20% of all individuals undergoing genetic counseling and testing for cancer experience significant psychosocial EP06.03 Quality assessment of genetic counselling process in problems during or after the counseling process. However, in approxi- predictive testing for late-onset disorders: What we know? mately 30%, of these cases, such problems remain undetected. The M. Paneque1, J. Sequeiros1, H. Skirton2; aim of this study is to develop and validate a psychosocial screening 1IBMC - University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2School of Nursing and Midwifery, questionnaire for use in genetic counseling for cancer. University of Plymouth, Taunton, United Kingdom. Methods: EORTC Quality of Life Group guidelines for questionnaire Little is known about the impact of the amount and quality of genetic development are being used to develop the questionnaire. This in- counselling on the psychosocial sequelae of genetic testing for late- volves four phases: 1) generation of relevant issues, 2) operational- onset disorders. Although some guidelines have been written regard- ization of these issues into a set of items, 3) pre-testing, and 4) larger ing number of sessions, involvement of multidisciplinary teams and scale field testing. topics for pre-test discussions, more understanding about what helps Results: To identify relevant problems, we carried out a literature consultands prepare effectively for testing is needed. search and interviewed 26 experts and 5 former counselees. Twenty- We conducted a systematic review of papers reporting reviews on six issues were identified and operationalized into items covering the the quality of genetic counselling aiming at: 1) exploring the current following six problem-areas: family, children, genetics, cancer, prac- evidence available; 2) identifying quality assessment indicators for the tical issues, and emotions. The screening questionnaire has been genetic counselling process in late-onset disorders; and 3) proposing transferred to a web-based platform with touchscreen computer facili- some recommendations for genetic services to improve the quality of ties in the clinic. In total, 120 counselees will be invited to complete health care. After quality appraisal of the papers thus identified, four the screening questionnaire, along with the Hospital Anxiety and De- were included. pression Scale and the Distress Thermometer. The questionnaire data Our preliminary findings revealed that research on counselling in the will be compared with data obtained from a semi-structured interview context of genetic testing for cancer tends to be related to outcomes conducted by an experienced psychosocial worker (“gold standard”). and process indicators for quality assessment. Research concerning Conclusion: This project will yield a screening questionnaire that can testing for other late-onset diseases is mainly focused on the psycho- aid in systematically identifying counselees with specific psychosocial logical impact of the results, but much is insufficiently articulated re- problems in cancer genetics. Subsequent to validation, a trial will be garding quality and content of the whole process. Number of sessions, carried out to investigate the effectiveness of the screening question- time spent, consultation environment, follow-up, multidisciplinarity, naire in facilitating communication and triggering appropriate counsel- among others are identified as measures for quality assessment. ing and referrals. However, despite the fact that presymptomatic testing for disorders such as Huntington disease and other degenerative conditions has EP07.03 “I have always believed I was at high risk...“ the role been offered for more than 20 years, good methodological approaches of expectation in emotional responses to the receipt of a cancer to assess the quality of genetic counselling for predictive remain elu- genetic risk assessment result: A thematic analysis of free-text sive. This restricts improvement of the protocols for genetic services questionnaire comments. and in general health care for the at-risk population. C. Phelps1, P. Bennett2, J. Hilgart2, K. Hood2, K. Brain2, A. Murray3; 1Swansea Metropolitan University, Swansea, United Kingdom, 2Cardiff EP07.01 tracking coping responses over time with the Genetic University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Cancer Genetics Service for Wales, Risk Assessment coping Evaluation (GRAcE). Cardiff, United Kingdom. C. Phelps1, P. Bennett2, J. Hilgart2, K. Hood2, K. Brain2, A. Murray2; Background: The receipt of cancer genetic risk information can evoke 1Swansea Metropolitan University, Swansea, United Kingdom, 2Cardiff a mix of both positive and negative emotional responses. Objective University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. risk itself is not necessarily predictive of emotional response to receipt Objective: To develop and evaluate the effectiveness of a cancer-ge- of risk information and the Cue Adaptive Reasoning Account (CARA; netic specific measure of coping (The Genetic Risk Assessment Cop- Renner, 2004) suggests that that the degree to which level of risk is ing Evaluation (GRACE). consistent with expectations may influence emotional responses. Method: GRACE measures the degree of stress associated with 11 Method: Free-text questionnaire data was analysed from 123 women stressors for individuals undergoing cancer genetic risk assessment, and 15 men, after receiving their cancer genetic risk assessment re- and the use of up to eight coping strategies they may elicit. sult. A thematic analysis was structured around spontaneous respons- Results: 194 patients completed GRACE upon referral to the All-Wales es to the three risk labels: average, moderate or high. Medical Genetics Service and one month later whilst awaiting genetic Results: Reactions to risk information appear to be dependent upon risk information. The most highly endorsed source of stress at both participants’ pre-conceived expectations about their level of cancer time points related to the implications of risk for family members, en- risk, often due to family or personal history of cancer. Many average dorsed by 72% of patients at Time1 and 57% at Time 2. Patients made risk respondents questioned the accuracy of their result, whereas high use of multiple coping strategies across different sources of stress. risk information was often expected. There was a significant decrease over time across all stressors in in- Discussion: The current findings provide support for the CARA model, formation-seeking (23.9% to 14.7%) and emotional expression (13.2% as receiving a high risk result may have been consistent with expec- to 8%). Positive appraisal remained one of the most commonly used tations and therefore did not evoke an extreme emotional response coping strategies across all stressors ranging from 24%-45% at Time in many respondents. The CARA model provides a theoretical expla- 1 and 16%-47% at Time 2. nation for the negative reaction from respondents at average risk, as Conclusions: Responses suggested that patients were using appropri- unexpected risk information may require high cognitive effort and a ate coping strategies for the type of stressor faced. The completion tendency to downplay the accuracy of the information. rates for the matrix and specificity of responses provided suggests the GRACE may be an acceptable and useful measurement tool and may EP07.04 An online screening decision aid for men with a family also help genetic counsellors identify individuals in need to extra sup- history of prostate cancer: development and pilot-testing port. K. J. Watts1,2, C. E. Wakefield3,4, B. Meiser1,2, U. Sansom-Daly4,5, A. Barratt6, M. A. Patel7, E. A. Lobb8,9, C. L. Gaff10,11,12, K. Howard6, G. J. Mann13; 1Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 3School of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 4Centre for Children’s Cancer Psycho-social issues in cancer genetics  and Blood Disorders, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia, egies for coping with risk. 5School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Discussion: Withdrawal from familial ovarian cancer screening may be Australia, 6School of Public Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, influenced by both clinical and psychological factors. This may reflect Australia, 7Department of Surgery, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, women’s clearer understanding of ovarian cancer risk and the pros Australia, 8Calvary Health Care Sydney, Kogarah, NSW, Australia, 9WA Centre and cons of screening. for Cancer & Palliative Care, Curtin University of Technology and Edith Cowan University, Wa, Australia, 10Genetic Health Services Victoria, VIC, Australia, EP07.06 Genetic counseling and hereditary cancer. A 11Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Vic, Australia, 12Departments of prospective study with emphasis on psychosocial aspects Paediatrics and Medicine, University of Melbourne, Vic, Australia, 13Westmead C. Bjorvatn1,2, H. H. Vetti1; Institute for Cancer Research, University of Sydney at Westmead Millennium 1Haukeland University Hospital, Western Norway Familial Cancer Center, Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Bergen, Norway, 2University in Bergen, Department of Public Health and Background: Men with a family history of prostate cancer have unmet Primary Health Care, Bergen, Norway. information needs relating to how best to manage their cancer risk. Background: During the last few decades there has been an increased This study aimed to develop and pilot test an online decision aid (DA) demand for genetic counseling (GC). This trend is expected to con- tailored to men with a family history of prostate cancer to assist them tinue. Thus, we need more knowledge of patients undergoing GC and to make an informed choice about screening. tools that can identify those in need of extra attention from the counsel- Methods: Men aged 40-79 years with a family history of prostate can- or, and those who will manage with an ordinary counseling session. cer were invited to participate in the study by a letter conveyed to them Aims: The overall aims of the present study were to describe and study by an affected male relative who attended a urology outpatient clinic. the course and outcome of GC for hereditary cancer and to identify The DA was evaluated by eligible men in two stages. First, men evalu- characteristics of vulnerable subjects, in order to tailor and increase ated the acceptability of a paper-based version of the DA in a ques- the efficiency of the GC process. tionnaire (N = 22). Second, the same men were asked to appraise Methods: A prospective multicenter study was undertaken among sub- the functionality of an online version of the DA and to provide their jects undergoing GC for hereditary breast- ovarian cancer and heredi- feedback in a telephone interview (N = 20). tary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Results: Ninety-one percent of participants reported that they found Results: On the average, the participants reported high levels of social the paper-based DA useful, and that it contained enough information support, GC-specific self-efficacy, general self-efficacy and physical to make a decision about screening (73%). All men reported that the functioning. The average levels of anxiety, depression was low and online DA was easy to use, with the majority reporting that they would cancer-related intrusion and avoidance was moderate. Both anxiety recommend the website to other men. Most men also reported that and depression declined over time and both more social support and they would prefer to receive information about screening via a website GC-specific self-efficacy predicted lower anxiety and depression af- rather than in a booklet (78%). ter GC. Subjects reporting lower level of GC-specific self-efficacy and Conclusions: This study provides a valuable insight into the optimal high level of worry were vulnerable to both intrusion and avoidance. design and distribution of information about prostate cancer screening Conclusion: The majority of the subjects undergoing GC for hereditary for men who are at increased risk of this disease. cancer were coping well. Still, we identified a subgroup that seems to be more vulnerable during follow-up. They were characterized by less EP07.05 Women‘s decisions to withdraw from a familial ovarian social support, lower GC-specific self-efficacy, higher level of worry, cancer screening programme and by young age. In the years to come a tailored, individualized coun- K. J. Lifford1, K. Brain1, L. Fraser2, J. Austoker3, L. Bayne4, A. Clements3, R. seling approach may be necessary. Iredale1, I. Jacobs2, D. Lancastle5, U. Menon2, C. Phelps6, M. T. Rogers1, A. Rosenthal2,7, E. Watson8; EP08.01 The views of health professionals regarding the 1School of Medicine, Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, management and care of families affected by sudden arrhythmic United Kingdom, 2Gynaecological Oncology, University College London Institute death syndrome for Women‘s Health, London, United Kingdom, 3Primary Care Research K. Brain1, B. Henderson2, D. Kumar3, M. Nicol3, R. Iredale4, A. Clarke1; Education Group, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Ovacome, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, London, United Kingdom, 5Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, United Kingdom, 2School of Psychology, Bangor University, Bangor, United University of Glamorgan, Pontypridd, United Kingdom, 6School of Psychology, Kingdom, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, Swansea Metropolitan University, Swansea, United Kingdom, 7Institute of United Kingdom, 4Genomics Policy Unit, Glamorgan University, Pontypridd, Cancer, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary United Kingdom. University London, London, United Kingdom, 8School of Health and Social Purpose: Intense media and public pressure led to the inclusion of sud- Care, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom. den death related to a genetic cause in the UK National Service Frame- Background: A prospective psychological evaluation study (PsyFOCS) work for heart diseases. However, there is no agreed process for provid- is underway in partnership with a familial ovarian cancer screening ing adequate support to families affected by sudden arrhythmic death study (UK FOCSS, Phase 2). The screening study aims to detect ovar- syndrome (SADS). Method: Focus groups were carried out with health ian cancer at an early stage when treatment is most effective, using professionals and patient representatives in Wales to explore views on 4-monthly CA125 blood tests and annual scans. Cross-sectional data the current management of families affected by SADS and how ser- are presented describing the factors associated with women’s deci- vices could be improved. Results: Focus group participants described sions to withdraw from screening. the often ad hoc nature of current service provision, the difficulties in Methods: 1,390 out of 2,395 women completed a baseline question- informing families about the possibility of inherited risk in a sensitive naire. Measures included cancer-related distress (Impact of Event and timely manner, and lack of awareness of SADS in people potentially Scale), anxiety and depression (Hospital Anxiety and Depression working with these families. Family members were described as having Scale), and illness representations (adapted Illness Perceptions Ques- different information needs at different stages in their dual process of tionnaire-Revised; IPQ-R), along with a free text section. 77 women grieving and adapting to genetic risk. Possible solutions proposed by fo- withdrew from screening before their first Phase 2 blood test. cus group participants centred on the need for an adequately resourced, Findings: The main reason women withdrew from screening was to uniform approach combining cardiology and genetics. Key components have their ovaries removed to reduce their risk of developing ovar- of this approach included having a dedicated coordinator who could ian cancer. Logistic regression indicated that previous experience of work proactively across professional boundaries, raise awareness of requiring repeat tests for non-normal screening results was associated SADS, and take an individualised approach with families; recognition with withdrawal from screening (p<0.01), as was testing positive for a of the therapeutic nature of encounters with families; and access to gene mutation known to increase the risk of ovarian cancer (p<0.05) specialist bereavement counselling where appropriate. Conclusions: As and greater cancer-related distress (p≤0.05). Marginal associations cardiac genetic knowledge increases, families affected by SADS are were found for greater IPQ-R illness coherence (p=0.08) and marital increasingly likely to benefit from referral to joint cardiology and clinical status (p=0.09). Thematic analysis of free text data highlighted factors genetic services. A coordinated, sustainable approach would meet the such as the practicalities and emotional impact of screening, and strat- complex, evolving needs of families affected by SADS.Psychosocial issues in cardiac genetics 0 EP08.02 The psychosocial impact of a complex genetic results EP09.02 Finding contentment after prophylactic interventions in in a family with Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Hcm). women with BRcA1 or BRcA2 mutations. C. Lim, N. Khan, L. Kerzin-Storrar, W. Newman; A. Baan; Genetic Medicine, St.Mary‘s Hospital,, Manchester, United Kingdom. Dept of oncology, Gothenburg, Sweden. Screening for mutations in 4 of the 8 genes associated with HCM is Purpose: To describe the decision-making process for women who are available clinically and identifies mutations in 70-80% of cases. The BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers and choose to undergo a prophy- use of genetic testing in HCM families has helped to clarify individuals’ lactic operation. risks and to guide clinical management including cardiac screening. Method: A qualitative cross-section analysis in which eleven women There is increasing recognition of the importance of digenic inheritance are interviewed who have undergone genetic screening for cancer at in inherited cardiac conditions, however, when an additional unclassi- Sahlgrenska University Hospital in Gothenburg, Sweden. The material fied variant is identified this can increase uncertainty for the family. has been subjected to qualitative content analysis. We present a case where a variant of uncertain significance, in addi- Results: The decision-making process is part of a time flow in which tion to a known pathogenic mutation, was identified which highlights various components stand out as important conditions that enable de- the difficulty in communicating complex results to the family and the cisions to be made about prophylactic operations: psychological impact. A 45 year old man with HCM was tested. His Threat against life, which comprises both a subjective threat in the results showed a known pathogenic mutation in the MYH7 gene and form of the woman’s familial history and an objective threat in the form an unclassified variant in the MBPC3 gene. The variant had not previ- of the results of the genetic testing. ously been reported, but is predicted to result in an amnio acid substi- Time - a space for manageability, a meaningful time during which both tution leading to an exchange of an uncharged polar amino acid with internal and external resources provide support for the woman in her a non-polar amino acid, at a position conserved across some species, process. suggesting the potential for pathogenicity. With these provisos, cas- The experience and insight that the woman is at a crossroads where cade screening in the next generation was initiated. The results raised she has an opportunity to make a choice, which means that she is several issues for the family: i)the change in dynamics within the family given the opportunity to choose life. Many times there will be a specific with the carriers being more protected, ii) anxiety caused by cardiac event that has a very strong effect on the woman and facilitates the screening for the asymptomatic children and iii) uncertainty due to the decision to have a prophylactic operation. variability in phenotype in the context of two variants. Finding contentment is the theme that deals with where the woman finds herself today, and gives expression to what has come of the pro- EP09.01 Attitudes toward hypothetical genetic testing, cess. satisfaction with clinical care, and information needs among high risk melanoma survivors: A mixed methods study EP10.01 communication of genetic information by other health K. Watts1,2, N. Kasparian1,3, J. McLoone1,2, B. Meiser1,2, P. Butow4, K. Barlow- professionals: the role of the genetic counsellor in specialist Stewart5, S. Menzies6, G. Mann7; clinics. 1Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, NSW, R. O‘Shea1, E. Treacy2, A. Murphy3, S. Lynch4, K. Thirlaway5, D. Lambert1; Australia, 2Prince of Wales Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, University 1Department of Genetics, Children‘s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, of New South Wales, Kensington NSW, Australia, 3School of Women’s and 2National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Dublin, Ireland, 3The Children’s Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Dublin, Ireland, 4National Kensington NSW, Australia, 4Centre for Medical Psychology and Evidence- Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, 5University of Wales in Cardiff, Based Decision-Making, School of Psychology, University of Sydney, Sydney, Cardiff, United Kingdom. NSW, Australia, 5Centre for Genetics Education, Royal North Shore Hospital, Many children with chronic genetic diseases are followed by specialty St Leonards, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6Sydney Melanoma Diagnostic Centre, clinics who address the family‘s genetic issues as part of the child‘s Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown NSW, Australia and Discipline care. Health services restrictions can make accessibility for an ap- of Dermatology, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 7Westmead pointment with a genetic counsellor difficult. We examined whether Institute for Cancer Research, University of Sydney at Westmead Millennium genetic information was being adequately understood when presented Institute and Melanoma Institute Australia, Westmead, NSW, Australia. by medical, but non-genetics staff to long term patients, using our Na- Background: A previous diagnosis of melanoma plus multiple dysplas- tional metabolic service as an example. Little research has been car- tic naevi, or multiple primary melanomas constitute a 10 to 20-fold risk ried looking at communication of genetic information with metabolic of developing further melanomas; a risk comparable to that of indi- conditions. This study aimed to inform health professionals about the viduals with a strong family history of the disease. Currently, genetic need or role of a genetic counsellor in specialist settings. We investi- testing for melanoma risk is not available. The High Risk Clinic (HRC) gated knowledge about recessive conditions and the reproductive im- at the Sydney Melanoma Diagnostic Centre provides a specialist ser- pact of the information in patients with Galactosemia and Maple Syrup vice dedicated to the treatment and follow-up of high-risk melanoma Urine Disease (MSUD) and their parents. Adult patients and parents survivors. The aim of this mixed methods study was to explore high- of affected children were interviewed in person using a questionnaire risk melanoma survivors’ attitudes toward hypothetical genetic testing, to focus on disease and genetic knowledge of these conditions. Par- satisfaction with clinical care at the HRC, and their support and infor- ents showed a good level of knowledge but there were misunderstand- mation needs. ings about the risk or implications of carrier status. Adult patients with Methods: Twenty patients at increased risk of developing further mel- Galactosemia had more misunderstandings in relation to inheritance, anomas, who had attended the HRC, were invited to take part in a recurrence risks and carrier status than their parents. We found that semi-structured telephone interview. Information preferences were as- there was a statistically significant difference between adult patients sessed with structured questions at the end of each interview. and their parents for Galactosemia and between Irish and Irish Trav- Results: Participants appraised their experience of clinical care positive- eller parents. The knowledge difference between parents and adults ly with most reporting that they felt well informed and supported. More may reflect a reluctance to transmit genetic information within families. information regarding the role of genetics and moles in the development Results suggest that patients with inherited conditions under long-term of melanoma was identified as an unmet need. Despite limited knowl- care of other health conditions could still benefit from input from a ge- edge of genetic risk assessment for melanoma, 70% of participants en- netic counsellor. dorsed hypothetical genetic testing. A consultation with an expert or a pamphlet was the preferred source of information about melanoma. EP10.02 impact of genetic testing in couples with recurrent Conclusions: High-risk melanoma survivors expressed satisfaction miscarriage or with poor semen quality: anxiety and distress 3 with the clinical care received at the HRC and more than half endorsed and 12 months after disclosure. hypothetical genetic testing. The development of tailored written infor- F. Vansenne, M. Goddijn, B. Redeker, S. Snijder, N. J. Leschot, F. van der mation in addition to expert clinical consultation is warranted. Veen, P. M. M. Bossuyt, C. A. J. M. de Borgie; Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Most research on the consequences of genetic testing is performed in persons with an increased risk for a specific disease (pre-symptomatic Genetic counselling: communicating genetic information 1 subjects) but not in patients already affected by disease. In reproduc- cade testing using genotyping has recently become available in South tive medicine, couples with recurrent miscarriage (RM) and men with Wales on a research basis. poor semen quality may undergo genetic testing as part of the diag- The main aims of this study were to explore how patients and their nostic work-up. It is unknown if psycho-social outcomes are influenced family members receive, make sense of and transmit genetic informa- when receiving an abnormal genetic testresult in these couples. tion and the impact this dynamic process has on perceptions of risk. We conducted a prospective index-control questionnaire study in 7 Face to face semi structured interviews were conducted with seven Academic Medical Centres at the departments of Clinical Genetics and patients in whom a clinical diagnosis of FH had been made and who their referring gynaecological departments. Questionnaires were sent had recently undergone genetic testing and received a mutation posi- to both partners of couples with RM or poor semen quality (between tive result. A further seven interviews were conducted with members of 2006-2009). Questionnaires were completed before disclosure, and their families who had also undergone genetic testing to follow the flow 3 and 12 months after disclosure of the genetic testresult. Main out- of this genetic risk information. The interview transcripts were themati- comes were anxiety and depression. Anxiety was measured with the cally analysed to gain insight into their experiences. State Trait Anxiety Inventory and depression with the Beck’s Depres- The findings suggest that this genetic information help the patients to sion Inventory. Participants in whom a genetic abnormality was found make sense of their condition. Family members reported an open style were compared to participants in whom no genetic abnormality was of communication although this process and emotional responses to found. Questionnaires were returned by 439 participants (222 men genetic risk information were complex. and 217 women), 172 participants with RM (39%) and 267 participants with poor semen quality (61%). A genetic abnormality was found in 36 EP10.05 tactile Diagrams to improve communication couples with RM and in 48 couples with poor semen quality. At the time with patients with severe visual impairment in the genetic of submission of this abstract, the database is being finalized, with clo- counselling clinic. sure scheduled on April 1st 2010. Definite data on the 3 and 12 month A. R. Clarke, G. E. Hall, A. Turgut, D. Trump, G. Black; follow-up will be presented at the EMPAG meeting in June 2010. Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Tr, Manchester, United Kingdom. EP10.03 the family secret in cyprus. Health professionals’ Genetic counselling for inherited blindness presents communication accounts of family communication for Huntington’s disease. challenges. Traditionally, genetic services use diagrams to explain in- D. Georgiou1, M. Arribas-Ayllon2; heritance patterns and recent evidence also suggests that the “per- 1MSc Genetic Counselling, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2ESRC sonalised diagram” helps families put the scientific information into the Centre for the Economic and Social Aspects of Genomics (Cesagen) Cardiff context of their family experience (Gale T et al, 2010). Patients with University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. a visual impairment (VI) are not able to access traditional drawings Facilitating risk communication among HD families is challenging for or diagrams and are therefore disadvantaged in the genetic counsel- health professionals in Cyprus. Given the availability of options such ling clinic. Within the UK, it is our legal obligation to provide equal as PND and PGD, it is crucial that families at risk are informed by the access to services for patients with disability (UK Disability Act, 1995) proband. This paper presents an illustrative case of how cultural and and therefore we are undertaking a project to evaluate communication institutional practices in Cyprus have shaped current patterns of risk tools within genetic ophthalmic service including summary letters and communication. leaflets in audio files and email and computer technology for enlarging This paper investigates factors that influence family communication in diagrams in clinics. Cyprus and how health professionals experience such factors in clinic. Patients with a severe visual impairment require tactile diagrams to Health professionals working at the Cyprus Institute of Neurology and explore pictures of inheritance. However, we do not know the accept- Genetics were interviewed in 2009. Semi-structured interviews (n = 5) ability to the patient, the skills needed by the clinician or which dia- were conducted in Greek. Data was translated, transcribed and anal- grams may be most useful. Tactile diagrams for inheritance patterns ysed using thematic analysis and grounded theory. were developed using focus groups composed of visually impaired Cultural factors such as discrimination, over-protectiveness, family patients and representatives from specialist organisations for people duty and the value of “philotimo” greatly influence communication and with visual problems including Action for Blind People and the Royal decision making in Cypriot families. Professionals perceive their re- National Institute for the Blind (RNIB). We will present outcomes from sponsibilities and roles differently according to their background and the focus groups and the use of tactile diagrams in the genetic clinic training. For instance, neurologists tend to focus on medical options which reveal how these might be successfully introduced in clinical and hold a public health perspective, while professionals with psycho- practice. We hope to show how these communication aids improve social training were more client-centred, less directive and less judge- communication with VI patients in the genetic clinic with minimal cost mental. Elements of medical paternalism were identified and linked or effort. with health professional-client relationship. Existing structural and organizational problems increase the burden on health professionals EP10.06 Knowledge about hereditary nonplyposis colorectal and cause mistrust towards the health system. cancer; mutation carriers and physicians at equal levels Cultural awareness and understanding of client experience within C. Carlsson, K. Domanska, P. Bendahl, M. NIlbert; health care settings might help professionals who work with HD fami- Institute of Clinical Sciences, Lund, Sweden. lies. Psychosocial counselling and unconditional positive regard are Background: Identification and adequate management of individuals at important when dealing with clients who have been exposed to dis- risk for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is crucial crimination and paternalism. since surveillance programmes reduce morbidity and mortality. We in- vestigated knowledge about key features of HNPCC in at risk individu- EP10.04 Familial Hypercholesterolaemia: the challenge of als and physicians in surgery, gynecology and oncology. implementing the NicE guidelines. Methods: Data were collected using a questionnaire which was an- M. S. Watson1, D. Townsend2, I. McDowell2; swered by 67 mutation carriers and 102 physicians from the southern 1Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, United Kingdom, Swedish health care region. The statements were related to colorectal 2Department of Medical Biochemistry, Cardiff, United Kingdom. cancer, heredity and surveillance and the physicians were also asked Clinical guidance from the National Institute of Clinical Excellence questions about cancer risks and surveillance strategies. (NICE) have recently made recommendations regarding the identifi- Results: Both groups answered questions on colorectal cancer risk, cation and management of Familial Hypercholesterolaemia. The key surveillance and genetic priorites for implementation include DNA cascading testing if the family testing well, whereas answers about inheritance and risks for HNPCC mutation is known. associated cancer were less accurate. Only half of the family members Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disor- and one third of the physicians correctly estimated the risk to inherit der with a prevalence of 1 in 500, approximately 110,000 people are an HNPCC predisposing mutation. Among family members, young age thought to be affected in the UK, but unfortunately the majority remain (<57 years), female sex and recent genetic counseling significantly undiagnosed. Effective preventative treatment is available, if untreated correlated with better results. Physicians generally underestimated the it leads to premature Coronary Heart Disease (CHD) and death. Cas- risk of HNPCC associated cancers and three out of four suggested a Genetic counselling: communicating genetic information 2 later starting age for surveillance than recommended. Unadjusted Adjusted Proportion Conclusion: The finding of similar levels of knowledge about key fea- Variable analysis analysis tested tures of HNPCC in at risk OR (95% ci) OR (95% ci) individuals and physicians reflect the challenge physicians face in Gender of relative keeping up to date on hereditary cancer and may have implications Female 42% 1.8 (1.1 to 3.1) 2.0 (0.9 to 4.3) for the clinical management and professional relations with HNPCC Male 29% reference group reference group family members. p=0.02 p=0.07 category of EP10.07 Factors influencing the uptake of genetic counselling relationship in female relatives of people with haemophilia. Parent 53% reference group reference group B. J. Greyling1, S. Gillham2; Aunt/uncle 53% 0.9 (0.4 to 2.3) 1.4 (0.5 to 4.2) 1Genetic Counsellor, Division of Human Genetics, National Health Grandparent 35% 0.4 (0.2 to 1.1) 0.6 (0.2 to 1.5) Laboratory Service and School of Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, Other 16% 0.1 (0.0 to 0.3) 0.2 (0.1 to 0.7) Johannesburg, South Africa, 2Haemophilia Nurse Coordinator, Haemophilia Comprehensive Care Centre, Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic p<0.001 p=0.01 Hospital, Johannesburg, South Africa. Have children Since 1988, about 200 people with haemophilia (PWH) and their already families have been seen by genetic counsellors at the Haemophilia Yes 40% 2.6 (1.5 to 4.5) 2.9 (0.9 to 8.7) Care Centre at Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital. No 21% reference group reference group However, very few of their at-risk female relatives have attended ge- p<0.001 p=0.06 netic counselling to discuss their reproductive risks and options or their Plan to have potential bleeding risks. Minimal research has been conducted inter- (more) children nationally or in South Africa around the factors influencing uptake of Yes 30% reference group reference group genetic counselling and testing amongst female relatives of PWH. No 38% 1.3 (0.5 to 3.2) 0.4 (0.1 to 1.7) This prospective qualitative study aims to: (a) determine what factors Currently pregnant 75% 5.7 (1.0 to 33.0) 2.5 (0.0 to 123.6) influence obligate and potential carriers’ uptake of genetic counsel- Don’t know 43% 1.6 (0.5to 5.4) 0.9 (0.1 to 7.1) ling and testing, (b) determine what would assist subjects in managing p=0.1 p=0.4 their carrier status, and (c) assess what would help these women to Knowledge score 2.7 (1.8 to 4.2) 2.0 (1.1 to 3.8) obtain genetic counselling and testing. p=<0.001 p=0.03 An open-ended semi-structured interview schedule was developed to incorporate potential predictors of genetic counselling and testing Attitude score 1.5 (1.2 to 2.0) 1.3 (0.9 to 1.8) uptake as well as recommendations for improved carrier care and ge- p=0.003 p=0.1 netic service. Subjects include female relatives of PWH who at least have a family member who has been counselled. Content analysis will EP10.09 Quality assessment of genetic counseling with focus be used to identify themes in the 20 subjects interviewed. on prenatal diagnoses -Bilateral survey of counseling staff and Preliminary findings indicate that some of the deterrents to uptake of clients- genetic counselling and testing include: misunderstanding its purpose, M. Mizoguchi1, K. Akane2, S. Izumi2, H. Maeda3, M. Morita4, Y. Nishimura5, K. fear of knowing carrier status, lack of knowledge about reproductive Shibue6, H. Yokoyama1, K. Takahashi7, Y. Onuki8; risks and potential bleeding symptoms. 1Sch. of Health Sciences,Tokai University, Kanagawa, Japan, 2Dept. of The information gained from the research will be used to provide a OB/GYN, Sch. of Medicine, Tokai University, Kanagawa, Japan, 3Liberal better service to female relatives of PWH; with a goal being to set up a Arts Education Center, Tokai University, Kanagawa, Japan, 4The Japanese dedicated clinic for these women. Red Cross College of Nursing, Tokyo, Japan, 5Center for the Study of Communication-Design, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan, 6Shizuoka University, EP10.08 Factors influencing uptake of cascade carrier testing Shizuoka, Japan, 7Dept. of OB/GYN, Sch. of Medicine,Tokai University, by adult relatives after a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis through Kanagawa, Japan, 8Dept. of Neurology, Sch. Medicine, Tokai University, newborn screening Kanagawa, Japan. B. J. McClaren1,2, M. A. Aitken1, D. J. Amor1,3, J. Massie4, O. C. Ukoummune1, Objective: Tokai University Hospital is a core regional medical facil- S. A. Metcalfe1,2; ity with 800 beds offering advanced, and emergency medical care. 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2The University of Genetic counseling was started in 2007, and geneticists, nurses, and Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, clinical psychologists provide counseling to approximately 200 clients/ Australia, 4Royal Children‘s Hospital, Parkville, Australia. year (2009), regarding prenatal diagnoses (90%), congenital abnor- In Victoria, Australia, carrier testing for cystic fibrosis (CF) is performed malities, and genetic disorders. Counseling quality was surveyed in by a state-wide laboratory and counselling service. CF carrier testing the largest body of clients seeking prenatal diagnoses and medical (cascade testing) is offered free to relatives of babies diagnosed with staff, in the interest of improving service quality. CF through newborn screening. Although cascade testing is known Method: Clients and two attending staff (physician and nurse) were to detect carriers for CF, its effectiveness has been questioned be- asked to complete an 8-item 5-point Likert scale_the Genetic Coun- cause most babies with CF are born to couples who do not have a seling Satisfaction Scale (adapted from K.P. Tercyak, 2001) directly family history. Uptake of testing was audited by examining pedigrees after counseling. Client-version questionnaires carried additional items of newborns diagnosed with CF, and performing data linkage to the addressing age, objective/reason for seeking counseling, accompany- laboratory database records. Uptake of carrier testing amongst adult ing persons, extent of prior knowledge, waiting/consulting time, deci- relatives was adjusted for clustering within families; three relatives per sion-making, and budgetary concerns. The study was conducted from family, other than the parents, have had carrier testing. The majority March 2009 through January 2010. Responses were obtained from 64 of relatives have not had cascade carrier testing despite being at high clients and 128 staff members. risk. We identified factors influencing uptake of CF carrier testing by Results: Most clients were in their 30s, and 60% of the consultations administering a questionnaire to a sample of relatives, and interview- were age related. Following counseling, 33% elected to undergo amnio- ing parents of children with CF. The response rate was 79% (n=225). centesis, 8.6% against, with the remainder postponing decisions pend- The results of logistic regression analysis are summarised in the table. ing further consultation. Mean client Satisfaction Scale scores for items Qualitative data from the questionnaire and interviews indicate the ranged between 4.3-4.7, higher than staff scores by 0.5-1.7 points. Low- main barrier to testing was lack of awareness that cascade testing was est evaluation by clients (4.3 points) was for „Readily understandable available through the clinical service. Findings provide insight into the explanations,“ and among staff, „Explanation of basic knowledge“ (2.8 characteristics of relatives who are tested and those who are not, and points). Client comments requesting information on fees, test sched- inform clinical service delivery around offering carrier testing to family ules, and need of genealogical data when making the initial appointment members. indicated their wish to approach the consultation well prepared.Strategies to facilitate decision making in genetics  EP10.10 Adaptation of a cancer communication skills training Mandarin and Urdu. Statements reflected different values of informed model for professional development in genetic counseling: choice in antenatal screening in terms of understandings of the test; description and evaluation the role of health professionals in decision-making; social influences; K. L. Dunlop1, K. Barlow-Stewart1,2; autonomy; structural factors; values of diagnostic testing, termina- 1Centre for Genetics Education NSW Health, Sydney, Australia, 2Sydney tion of pregnancy and religion. Q-Factor analysis produced statisti- Medical School, Sydney University, Sydney, Australia. cally independent viewpoints of the value of informed choice. These Ongoing professional development for genetic counselors is critical were interpreted using comments participants made in post-Q-sorting in maintaining best practice in knowledge and skills. Communication interviews. The findings show that women hold a variety of views of skills training (CST) workshops for doctors and nurses in oncology to the nature of ‘informed choice’, and that, contradictory to policies of provide counseling skills, utilizing trained actors in role plays with fa- non-directiveness many women seek and value the ‘advice’ of health cilitator and group feedback, have been implemented for many years professionals. The findings have implications for the role of health pro- in Australia. This model has been adapted in the provision of continu- fessionals in facilitating informed choice, quality of care and equity of ing professional development in counseling skills for practicing genetic access. counselors in Australia since 2002, providing a unique opportunity for reflection and focus on practice rather than teaching new skills. Pre- EP12.01 case study: Herlitz junctional epidermolysis bullosa. workshop, actors worked with a director to develop their characters Genetic counselling challenges in a highly consanguineous new and explore responses in scenarios designed to illustrate issues de- migrant family. rived from reported challenges in genetic counseling practice. Evalua- K. N. LeMarquand1, J. Jonasson2, A. Colley1; tion of participants’ experience and impact included surveys following 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Hospital, NSW, Australia, 2Clinical immediately post the one day workshops (2002, 2004, 2005 and 2008 Genetics, Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital of Umea, Sweden. (x2); n= 88/100) and 2-5 years later, (2007; n=21/38) and a focus group This case study involves a large Iraqi family with multiple consan- with previous participants (2007; n=7). All rated the workshop as effec- guineous loops with a devastating family history of Herlitz junctional tive methodology for professional development. Aspects highly valued epidermolysis bullosa (H-JEB). H-JEB is a rare autosomal recessive included facilitator feedback; actors rather than role-playing with peers skin disorder, usually fatal in infancy. It is characterized by skin fragil- and so being able to stop and try things differently; group feedback; ity and blistering, nail inflammation; granulated wounds particularly on addressing new challenges; reassurance about their own practice and the face and a hoarse cry due to laryngeal involvement. The defective ”material to work on in the workplace”. Perceived outcomes on prac- protein is laminin 332, a key component of the junction of the epider- tice included the opportunity to reflect, bring focus to communication, mis and dermis. Mutations in four genes have been described in JEB increase motivation and confidence. The high level of satisfaction is a with the LAMB3 mutation accounting for 70% of all cases, including strong endorsement for ongoing communication skills training in this this family. format as part of professional development for genetic counselors. The family believes at least 30 babies have died with this condition in the past 100 years and until 2008 the diagnosis was not known. EP11.01 Facilitating decision making and providing support in The psychosocial issues in counseling this large extended family were the face of uncertainty complex and challenging. All communication was with an Arabic inter- L. A. Boyes; preter. Interviews with the women in this family revealed they: feared Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United for every pregnancy, grieved for previous losses, experienced guilt Kingdom. from the perception of passing on faulty genes, had their religious be- Many families pursue genetic counselling in the hope of obtaining a liefs challenged, and struggled to make reproductive choices. greater level of certainty around the condition in the family, the risks A Swedish branch of the family was the first to have mutational analy- to them and their children, and information about possible options to sis and following this Dr Jonasson and associates in Sweden provided manage these risks. Genetic testing aims to help provide answers to mutation testing on the Australian branches of the family. The mutation some of these questions. However, in some cases testing fails to pro- was found in the LAMB3 gene in exon6 (c.430C>T) introducing a stop vide a confirmatory diagnosis. Genetic counselling in these circum- codon p.R144X. Four branches of the family in Australia have now had stances can be challenging. Individuals may find it more difficult to mutational analysis for carrier diagnosis and reproductive options. make decisions in the face of uncertainty. This can leave both patients and professionals feeling powerless. EP12.02 How often is disclosure of genetic information Here we present 2 cases illustrating the difficulties inherent in facilitat- important in genetic counselling? ing decision making in the absence of a confirmed genetic diagnosis. 1) J. Halliday1,2, J. Paul3,2, C. Gaff4, L. Skene5, J. Hodgson3,2; A couple presenting at 9 weeks of pregnancy whose previous daughter 1Public Health Genetics, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, died aged 3 months from Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID) Australia, 2The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Genetics where genetic testing has not identified a causative mutation. 2) Two Education and Health Research, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, sisters in their early twenties concerned about a strong family history Melbourne, Australia, 4Genetic Health Services Victoria, Royal Children‘s of young onset breast cancer where no mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 5Melbourne Law School, The University of or p53 were found. Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. We describe the counselling techniques and models utilised in these Section 95AA of the Australian Privacy Act addresses the potential cases to assist the decision making process and consider the impact need for health professionals to disclose genetic information to rela- of these scenarios on the families. tives, even without consent, when there is a “…serious threat to life, health or safety of their genetic relatives…”. These guidelines (October EP11.02 cross-cultural values of ‚informed choice‘ in antenatal 2009) provide examples of how this might eventuate. genetic screening We are undertaking a RCT of a genetic counselling intervention to fa- S. Ahmed, Z. Tizro, L. D. Bryant, D. Shickle; cilitate communication of genetic information within families, expecting University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. that disclosure issues would be prevalent amongst the clientele in our Policies for UK antenatal genetic screening programmes state that population. their primary aim is to facilitate ‘informed choices’. These policies are Four participating clinics were asked to audit their clients for approxi- largely guided by Western ethical principles of autonomy but imple- mately 3 months to determine the number eligible for recruitment i.e. mented within a multi-ethnic population. Building on the evidence for there was a need for disclosure of genetic information within the family. cultural differences with respect to patient autonomy, this is the first If they were ineligible, the genetic counsellors were asked to provide study to explore values of informed choice within a multiethnic popula- a reason. tion within the context of antenatal genetic screening. The study used There were 513 clients attending the clinics and 27 (5%) clients who Q methodology to characterise understandings of informed choice in were eligible for recruitment in the audit period. Seven exclusion cat- a multiethnic sample of postnatal women. Ninety-eight participants of egories emerged: African, British white, Caribbean, Chinese and Pakistani origin com- pleted a 41-statement Q-sort, which was also translated into French, Family dynamics and genetic conditions  Not ing of carriership of a balanced chromosomal translocation in child- Exclusion Prenatal No family Results No genetic index Review Other# hood. Then the preference is to give the children their own choice to category testing implications* pending diagnosis case know their genetic status in adulthood. As long as they are minors Number of counsellors have to consider that the child is not (fully) aware of all clients the consequences of the test-outcomes. Off course there are excep- (% of total 91 106 72 19 tions, there are some reasons to test during childhood on a disorder 82 (16%) 33 (6%) 86 (17%) clients (18%) (21%) (14%) (4%) with adult onset. Preferably this decision is made by parents and the attending child together. Psychosocial support during and after the test period is clinics) important We give some examples of testing of (adult-onset) genetic * e.g. sporadic chromosome mutation, teratogen, de novo mutation, condition may not be disorders in childhood. genetic # e.g. interpreter required, cancer patients, genetic counsellor not present, hereditary EP12.05 Experiences in men belonging to a family where haemochromatosis, client already recruited, parent with an intellectual disability. women have a risk to fall ill with hereditary breast and ovarain cancer. A. Baan; In only 5% of genetic counselling sessions was disclosure of genetic in- Dept of oncology, Gothenburg, Sweden. formation to relatives found to be applicable. As previous studies have Introduction: At present, focus is mainly on the women in families un- indicated that instances of non-disclosure within families are rare, in dergoing screening for familial breast cancer and/or ovarian cancer. the professional experience of a genetic counsellor the magnitude of This is only to be expected, since this involves the risk of develop- the need for disclosure without consent is going to be extremely small; ing cancer diseases primarily in the female organs. The family being although where they arise the Section 95AA guidelines can now be screened have often experienced the devastation of the family when used. female relatives have died, which is perceived as an imminent threat. The men in the family are often contacted after confirmation of a muta- EP12.03 tion in the family. The men may thus be carriers of the mutation and communication of risk in families living with Huntington’s pass it on to any children. disease: a web survey to explore what they think, what they do. Purpose: The purpose of the literature review was to gain deeper un- P. Zinzi1, I. Carriero2, D. Salmaso3, A. Cordi2, M. Frontali4, G. Jacopini1; derstanding of how men think and feel when they may be carriers of 1Institute of Cognitive Science and Technologies, National Research Council, a known mutation, aimed at expanding the communicative arsenal for Rome, Italy, 2AICH-Roma Onlus, Rome, Italy, 3Institute of Cognitive Science genetic counsellors / nurses in their encounters with these men. and Technologies, National Research Council, Padua, Italy, 4Institute of Institute Method: The material included in the literature review was analysed of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, National Research Council, Rome, using content analysis and the findings presented in two themes: deci- Italy. sion-making and communication. Huntington’s disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative, autosomal domi- Findings: The findings are reported in sub-themes, which clarified nant, late-onset disease neither curable nor preventable. how the family influences men in their decisions prior to carrier test- We explored parental practices of informing children of risk for HD ing. These are related to worries about their own health as well as and the differences, if any, in truth disclosure from a generation to the thoughts about whether their carrier status implies a responsibility to other. An anonymous Internet survey was proposed to visitors from HD refrain from reproduction. Men also have personal experience of can- families on the lay Association website www.aichroma.com. cer through their mothers, sisters and daughters. The study findings The survey explored the following issues: reveal the key role of the genetic counsellor / nurse in the human en- • The way they, as children, had been informed of risk for HD counter and communication with men in the healthcare setting. • The best age to receive the information and the ideal provider • Whether being informed is useful or not EP12.06 the baby who was not born after a prenatal diagnosis: • The way they, as parents, had informed (or planned to inform) their the un-tkinkable hole in the family’s net. children A. Sá Leonardo; Eighty-five individuals responded: 80 were HD families members and Hospital Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal. 5 partners. In this presentation I hope to show how prenatal diagnosis (PND) can Preliminary data show that parents have difficulty communicating chil- be revolutionary for the couple and family dinamics. Since 2001, I have dren about disease and risk. The majority of respondents had children accompanied in the Genetics Department more than 200 couples who in condition of risk: about 80% of children had a parent who was carrier went through termination of pregnancy (TOP) for medical reasons. or symptomatic or at risk. Among respondents, those who did not have Drawing from these clinical cases, we will see how the experience children stated they would inform them in case they had while the ma- of TOP is a de-meshing attack on the couple’s mesh, and how a psy- jority of those who actually had children did not provide any information chotherapeutical intervention assists in the family’s re-meshing (Beng- nor showed any clear intention of doing it in the future. hozi,2009, 2005). Telling children the truth about HD and risk raises ambivalence. The The techniques of PND take place in the most dynamic phase of the opportunity to access good sources of counseling and support seems baby’s representation. Although the baby is still unborn, at this stage relevant in order to enable families to manage the emotional distress future parents are organising a new intersubjective link (Benghozi, of giving such information. 2009, 2005) with the baby, as are other family members. In a word, broadening of the familiar net is already taking place. Could the experi- EP12.04 Ethical aspects of genetics; testing asymptomatic ence of TOP tear the mesh that unites the couple and family? minors: our experience The baby who was not born becomes a hole in the family’s net, a B. A. H. Caanen1, L. H. A. Dols2, M. I. Schouten1; “ghost” with an un-thinkable, un-nameable and un-confessable1 1Maastricht University Hospital, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Maastricht University, representation. This may explain why women often go alone to the Maastricht, Netherlands. therapeutical sessions. This “ghost” bears also the power to haunt the When a genetic disorder is diagnosed other family members, includ- family’s capacity to dream of the next baby, the one not yet conceived ing minors, can also be at risk for the disorder. For many medical is- but who already carries the risk of inheriting a family’s psychic material sues parents give informed consent for their children. In genetic test- which could not be elaborated by the previous generations (Benghozi, ing of children there are some special points of interest. It has to be 2005). considered what the advantages are of testing during childhood. An Psychoterapeutical intervention should help the couple make this hole important factor is the possible onset of the disorder in childhood and nameable and go through the work of re-meshing the intersubjective the opportunity to decrease the risk of health problems with a specific links of the family’s net. periodic control scheme. The choice of the moment of testing depends on several factors. If there is an adult onset of the disorder there are less advantages of testing in childhood. A comparable issue is test-Living with genetic disease  EP12.07 Familial breast cancer: incongruence between the also have significant associated psychosocial issues, which add to the understanding of an inconclusive test result and informing already challenging role faced by those affected by the condition and relatives at risk. health professionals. A review of recent literature revealed limited pub- C. M. Aalfs1, S. Ten Kate2, A. Onderwater3, E. Smets3; lished qualitative work on the psychosocial needs and experiences of 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of individuals and families affected by EB, particularly those affected by Clinical Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Psychology, the more common but generally less severe form of the disease, EB Amsterdam, Netherlands. Simplex. This study involved semi-structured interviews with 7 people Objective: In many families with a strong history of breast cancer no with a personal or family history of EB who were members of DebRA. mutation in the BRCA1/2 genes is identified. In these families, rela- The verbatim transcripts were thematically analysed to identify impor- tives may nevertheless need to be informed about their increased risk tant and common issues. The issues raised were varied, which was to and screening advices. Little is known about this group and the aim of be expected, given the complex and multi-faceted nature of the condi- this study was to explore index patients’ perspective on whether rela- tion. These were divided into two main themes of ‘awareness’ and ‘bur- tives at risk were informed, to what extent relatives were informed and den of illness’, which included both physical and psychological chal- which difficulties they experienced when transmitting risk information. lenges, such as pain, appearance, visibility and quality of life issues Methods: Semi-structured interviews were performed by telephone caused by the constant need to plan ahead and adapt. The theme with eighteen index patients who had attended genetic counselling. of awareness covered issues such as education, knowledge amongst Transcribed interviews were analyzed qualitatively. health professionals and other people’s awareness of EB. The experi- Results: Nearly all first degree relatives at risk were informed about ences and attitudes of those affected by EB are vital to broadening our the test result and their screening advice, second and third degree understanding of this complex condition and improving treatment and relatives were not. Most participants interpreted the test result as ‘truly care of families. negative’. In some cases this misunderstanding led to non-disclosure because according to the index patient there was no or little risk. How- EP13.03 EXtERNAL VALiDAtiON OF tHE HEREDitARY ever, in others cases it facilitated disclosure because no mutation be- NONPOLYPOs cOLOREctAL cANcER sELF-cONcEPt scALE ing found was seen as a reassuring message. Several other factors iN tHREE cOUNtRiEs influencing the process of disclosure emerged, including the degree H. V. Petersen; of contact with relatives, the sense of responsibility to inform and the Hvidovre University hospital, Copenhagen, Hvidovre, Denmark. attitude of relatives towards genetic testing. Purpose Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) renders Conclusions: Informing relatives about their increased risk for develop- high risks of colorectal and gynecological cancer and implies life-long ing breast cancer is influenced by many factors. It appeared that impli- surveillance. Knowledge of an increased risk of cancer offers possibili- cations of inclusive test results are complex and difficult to understand. ties for prevention, but may also influence self-perception and increase Despite this, nearly all first degree relatives were informed. Second psychological distress. A 20-item self-concept scale has recently been and third degree relatives, however, were not. developed with the aim to capture HNPCC-specific psychosocial diffi- culties. We assessed the external validity of this instrument, using data EP13.01 Development of a new measure of adaptation to living from three HNPCC populations in Denmark, Canada, and Sweden. with a genetic condition or at risk. Methods Self-concept scores were available from 591 individuals with B. B. Biesecker1, L. Erby2; HNPCC-predisposing germline mutations. The subgroups included 1National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 415 Danes, 108 Canadians, and 68 Swedes without differences in 2Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States. sex and age between the populations and with 43-63% being affected We propose a new scale for measuring adaptation to a genetic condi- with cancer. ANOVA analyses were used to test for differences in the tion or risk. Living with a genetic condition or risk often leads to stress subgroups and principal component analysis was used to explain vari- that patients learn to cope with. Adaptation refers to the process of ance. coming to terms with the health threat and the observable outcomes of Results Overall, the HNPCC self-concept scale provided similar re- that process. Definitions of adaptation and synonyms like “adjustment” sults in the three countries, through differences were recognized for in- and “acceptance” differ in the literature. A variety of scales have been dividual questions. Danes expressed lower degrees of guilt, but more used to measure these related concepts. There is need for an adapta- pronounced worries for cancer, whereas Canadians more often ex- tion scale based upon stress and coping models that captures both pressed feelings of isolation and loss of privacy. PCA analysis demon- intrapersonal and interpersonal outcomes of the process. Based on strated that all 20 items contribute to variability with questions related the theoretical and empirical evidence, we identified four primary do- to gastrointestinal anxiety being major determinants. mains of adaptation: coping responses to the condition, self-esteem, Conclusion The HNPCC self-concept scale was found to be valid and social relationships, and the search for spiritual or existential mean- reliable. Subtle differences in feelings of guilt, worries for cancer, isola- ing. Using items available in the PROMIS “positive outcomes of ill- tion, and loss of privacy were identified between the countries. ness” item bank, we constructed a scale with five items for each of the All items contributed to the variation in scores with items linked to gas- four domains. The scale has been used in six studies of adaptation to: trointestinal anxiety central. Huntington disease risk (n=191), a child with pervasive developmental disorder (n=324), neurofibromatosis (n=482), a child with Down syn- EP13.04 A review of the literature comparing the burden of drome (n=546), XXY syndrome (n=249), and a child with Rhett syn- disability and social factors on living with charcot-marie-tooth drome (n=400). The Cronbach alpha measures of reliability exceed 0.8 or myotonic Dystrophy in each study and confirmatory factor analysis suggests that each set C. V. Lamb, D. Scotcher; of five items converge on a single domain. Use of the scale is intended University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, to lead to comparisons across different populations of individuals living Manchester, United Kingdom. with a genetic condition or at risk. The burden of living with a progressive neuromuscular condition has received very little attention in the literature. A total of 15 papers were EP13.02 Epidermolysis Bullosa - exploring the experiences of identified as satisfying the inclusion criteria that examined the burden affected individuals and families of living with an inherited skin of living with Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) or Myotonic Dystrophy (DM). condition The majority used quantitative research methods to measure quality of S. Gibson1, P. Price2, A. Clarke3; life (QoL), while one paper used qualitative methods. CMT is classed 1Ferguson Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics, Glasgow, United Kingdom, as a relatively mild condition with variable but often late onset. DM 2Department of Wound Healing, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, also has variable onset but is associated with increased cognitive and 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom. physical impairment which becomes worse in successive generations. Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB) is a rare inherited skin disease, affecting In the papers examined, higher levels of disability were found to cor- at least 5000 people in the UK. It is a genetically and clinically hetero- relate with decreased QoL. In these progressively deteriorating con- geneous disorder, which encompasses a broad spectrum of symptoms ditions it is often assumed that as the individual gets older, and the of varying clinical severity. As found in many other skin diseases it may disease progresses, that QoL would deteriorate. This is not always the Other relevant psychological and social topics in genetics  case. A “response shift” (Bostrom and Ahlstrom, 2004) is thought to oc- EP15.01 statutory Regulation for Genetic counsellors in the UK. cur between expectations and reality, making disability easier to cope G. Hall1, C. Patch2, C. Barnes2, C. Jacobs2, S. Durell3, J. Birch4, L. Snadden5, with over time, despite the progression of the condition. Interestingly A. Middleton6; in DM, social factors were found to have a greater impact on QoL than 1Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Central Manchester University level of disability. Lower levels of education and employment were ob- Hospitals NHS Foundation Tr, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Guy‘s and St. served in DM compared to CMT. Lack of education or employment Thomas‘ Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Clinical Genetics, Churchill was found to negatively influence QoL. The study identifies areas of Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Liverpool Women‘s NHS Foundation Trust, concern for patients that have relevance in clinical practice in Genetic Liverpool, United Kingdom, 5Ferguson-Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics, Medicine, as well as possibilities for future research in this subject. Yorkhill Hospitals, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 6University of Cardiff, Cardiff, United Kingdom. EP13.05 Huntington Disease - A practical cD-guide Professional registration for UK genetic counsellors began in 2001 and U. M. Hösterey Ugander1, C. Hvalstedt2; over half of the UK genetic counsellors now have a voluntary certifi- 1Clinical genetics, Sahlgrenska Univeristy Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden, cate of registration. Regulation of health care professionals has been 2Dahlheimers Hus, Göteborg, Sweden. prominent on the UK government agenda over the last few years and Background: Huntington disease is rare and knowledge about the dis- the resulting White Paper, “Trust, Assurance and Safety: The regu- ease varies among professionals. A person affected by the condition lation of health professionals” (2007) highlighted the need for public who needs healthcare often meets professionals who lack adequate protection and proportionate regulation for new and emerging health knowledge and may have have to inform the professionals about Hun- professions. tington disease. Within affected families many questions arise, espe- Within clinical genetics, doctors and clinical scientists are registered cially among children at risk of inheriting the disease. with statutory regulation bodies such as the General Medical Council Aim: The purpose was to create and disseminate easily accessible, (GMC), genetic counsellors are not statutory regulated with growing detailed resources about Huntington disease, directed to profession- numbers of non-regulated MSc trained genetic counsellors and nurse als, the affected, and to families. trained genetic counsellors now working within a new scope of practice. Method: We made a detailed description of the progressive illness in The Association of Genetic Nurses and Counsellors formed a steering five phases, connecting the different needs in each phase to special group in 2006 to prepare an application for statutory regulation to the training, healthcare and social services. This was sent to all Hunting- Health Professions Council (HPC). In order to join the HPC, profes- ton disease teams in Sweden for comments, which were incorporated sions must have evidence that they are an autonomous, stand-alone into the resource. Researchers and persons with connections to Hun- profession with evidenced based practice, a code of conduct, defined tington disease were interviewed and the recorded interviews were entry level criteria and demonstrate a registration process with fitness included in the final resource, a CD-Rom. to practice and commitment to continuing professional development. Result: T resource was presented at the national Huntington disease We will present the case for statutory regulation of genetic counsel- meeting in January 2010 but was already well known by the specialist ling, the importance of public protection, and the professional achieve- teams through their participation in creating the CD. We are spreading ments in the UK, which lead to the approval of genetic counsellors information about the CD through patient organizations and media. by the HPC in December 2009. The profession is now awaiting the The anticipated outcome is that this resource should fill the knowledge government’s consideration, including public consultation, for the nec- gap for professionals and affected families. essary changes in law for statutory regulation in the UK. Future plans -Write a guide for professionals who work with affected patients in daily EP15.02 Genetic counsellors‘ perceptions of the blurred care. boundaries between clinical research and clinical care -Create an e-learning program from the resource material for profes- M. R. Bogwitz; sionals. Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia. -Develop information for children in different ages. As genetics embeds itself in mainstream medicine, the degree of spe- -Translate the CD to English through the Euro-HD-network. cialisation of genetic counsellors is growing and we are finding our- selves with increasing opportunities to be involved in research as part EP14.01 Development and evaluation of a telephone counselling of our everyday clinical care. strategy to enhance family communication about genetics We recognise that research improves our clients’ lives, and that our J. M. Hodgson1,2, J. Paul1,2, C. Gaff3,2; involvement in research helps to develop genetic counselling as an 1Genetics Education and Health Research, Murdoch Childrens Research independent profession. Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2Dept Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Research and clinical care are theoretically distinct due to their dif- Melbourne, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, Australia. fering motivations, aims, and outcomes. However in practice, these Individuals who receive a diagnosis of a genetic condition are gener- activities can become blurred in the eyes of both the clients and the ally advised to inform at-risk family members of this information. How- genetic counsellors, creating a sense of unease for both groups for ever, many family members appear to remain uninformed about their differing reasons. risk status. The responsibilities of health professionals towards these This study uses an online survey to investigate practising genetic family members and ethical approaches have been debated but with counsellors’ experiences in introducing clients into, or actively recruit- little resolution. ing them for, clinical research. It aims to uncover some of our appre- Instead, we focus on the affected individual and present a client-cen- hensions about this process in the hope that our awareness of the tred genetic counselling strategy to facilitate family communication of issues can help us distinguish these two parts of our roles, enhancing genetic information. This can be delivered by telephone and comple- the overall care for the client in an ethical and responsible way. ments face to face consultations. Development of the strategy was Some of the concerns include the appropriateness of timing of recruit- iterative and informed by empirical research about family communica- ment (soon after or during clinical care sessions), the feelings of coer- tion. Counselling and communication theories were drawn on in order cion associated with development of client rapport, the ethical dilem- to optimise clinical feasibility and maintain congruence with the tenets mas associated with having incentives to recruit clients to projects, and of genetic counselling. being unable to ensure our clients are aware of the distinction between The process of evaluation of the strategy and the training protocol for the clinical and research activities. genetic counsellors will be described. We will reflect upon the ethical challenges presented and the ways in which these were resolved. EP15.03 A pilot study of music therapy in the treatment of The efficacy of the intervention is currently being tested by means of children with developmental delay a randomised controlled trial funded by the Australian National Health D. R. Aldridge1, I. Fernandez Carvajal2; and Medical Research Council. (NHMRC). 1Nordoff/Robbins Zentrum, Witten, Germany, 2IBGM-UVA, Valladolid, Spain. Music therapy is known as an anxiolytic and musical play promotes non-verbal interaction and dialogue, specifically enhancing the pro- sodic elements of communication.Genetic analysis, linkage ans association 7 Goal: To assess what changes occur in developmentally delayed chil- psychological support. Psychologist has to understand and sense of dren when treated with active music therapy. these problems and difficulties. Knowledge of the milestones of hu- Methods: A crossover study of music therapy in twelve developmen- man genetics gives good grounds for successful professional activity tally delayed patients were assessed, selected and randomly allocated of the psychologists. In 2006 year a course of human genetics (28 into two groups.Each child received individual music therapy. hours) was included in the curriculum of the third year students of the This formed a treatment group and an initial non- treatment group to Family and Childhood Psychology Faculty of St. Petersburg University serve as a waiting-list control. The non-treatment group received mu- of Culture. This course includes basic genetics, molecular and bio- sic therapy after waiting for three months, while the previously treated chemical genetics, cytogenetics. The chromosomal and monogenic children had a break from therapy.The main assessment was develop- diseases are discussed using a lot of clinical cases. Roleplay in small mental according to psychological and functional criteria (the Griffiths‘ group learning is used for teaching communication skills. The students test), and musical. have to create and analyze their own pedigrees. This task is one of the Results: The children in the initial treatment group change more than most important and difficult for them. All students studied with interest the children on the waiting list. Such changes can be demonstrated at and showed enthusiasm. They confirmed that the knowledge of basic a level of clinical significance (p <0.05, Cohen’s d 1.7796). genetic problems were very important for their professional skill. In When the waiting list group are treated and then tested, the newly the context of the psychological problems of the families with children treated children catch up in their development.There is a continuing handicapped the psychologists will integrate the tools of genetics in improvement in hearing and speech, hand-eye co-ordination, and per- their practice for the most successful prediction and prevention psy- sonal-social interaction. chological conflicts. Summary: Music making and music therapy brings about some of the developmental changes necessary to achieving communicative inter- EP15.06 An unexpected finding in the NF1 clinic action, and this is the basis of social ineraction and independence. A. Turgut, S. Huson; That these factors are pre-verbal and not lexically dependent, arguea Genetic Medicine, St Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. for the importance of music making in the treatment of developmental- This case report reflects on the genetic counselling implications of an ly delayed infants. Music therapy is a suitable integrative psychosocial unexpected new differential diagnosis in a 13 year old girl (LS) at- treatment for children with developmental delay. tending a NF1 Management clinic. It will discuss the implications of both breaking and receiving bad news in this context and the specific EP15.04 Participation in biobanks and research: motivations counselling considerations when the patient is an adolescent and ac- and expectations of cancer patients companied by both her parents. I. Pellegrini1, C. Chabannon2,3, J. Mancini1,4, F. Viret2, N. Vey2, C. Julian- LS was referred by a paediatrician for diagnostic and management Reynier1; advice where NF1 was suspected but not confirmed by genetic test- 1INSERM UMR912, Marseille, France, 2IPC, Marseille, France, 3INSERM ing. The patient had presented with neurofibromas of the tongue and UMR891, Marseille, France, 4CHU Timone, Marseille, France. thickened corneal nerves. Following clinical examination a diagnosis Background: Biobanks have become strategic resources for biomedi- of NF1 was excluded but this was replaced by a new, potentially life cal and genetic research. Few empiric data exist describing patients’ threatening diagnosis requiring an urgent surgical assessment. How views. this information was communicated, the medical and psychosocial im- Objectives: To investigate motivations and expectations of cancer pa- plications for LS and her family and the counselling implications will tients when they are solicited to grant access to their own biological be discussed. specimen for research projects. Kessler (1992) refers to the importance of transitions in genetic coun- Methods: The point of view of patients (n=19, aged 28-82) treated for selling consultations. In this case the shift in tone and nature of the colorectal cancer or leukaemia was explored by in depth interviews. information to be conveyed was traumatic for the family. With no prior Grounded theory was used to guide sampling, data collection and preparation the medical consultant and genetic counsellor were faced analysis. with breaking bad news, outlining an urgent management plan and Findings: All patients were willing to participate in biobanking and first ensuring appropriate on-going support to the family. This paper will motivated by a desire to help others and to contribute to advances in consider the counselling strategies adopted and the advantages and cancer research. Their attitudes were modulated by the context of the challenges of the co-counselling model in a complex and evolving situ- disease and by their previous attitudes towards donation in general, or ation. in medical research context. Contribution to biobanks was further de- scribed as an act of solidarity and reciprocity, which makes patients as EP15.07 Diamonds in the defects: logotherapy in medical being part of a community (they benefit from past research and future genetics patients may benefit from present research), but also as an individual N. E. Gregersen; experience with psychological issues (dimension of hope associated National Health Laboratory Service and University of the Witwatersrand, to research, of self rewarding and of personal empowerment). Johannesburg, South Africa. Discussion: The results reported here are in support for a benevolence Introduction: Logotherapy (LT) is a form of psychotherapy based on account of the act of contribution to biobanks, and urge on getting the premise that we find healing through finding meaning. Meaning out of the cleavage between participants being truly altruistic or driven can be found in every situation in life, including the ‘tragic triad’ of pain/ by personal gain. Knowledge of patients’ perspective may guide the suffering, guilt and death. Logotherapy’s founder, Viktor Frankl, was governance of biobanks, and facilitate the (re-)writing of information clear that it should be used in medical practice, but, to date, LT’s main documents and consent forms, as well as establishment of institutional application has been in palliative care, psychiatry and the treatment of policies to collect these consents. addictions. Presented here is my experience, as a clinical geneticist, with the use of LT in the field of medical genetics, a new application EP15.05 the course of human genetics for the students of the for this therapy. Family and childhood Psychology Faculty of st.Petersburg Methods: During my year of advanced training in LT, I provided LT University of culture to four individuals, or their mothers, who either had birth defects or M. O. Mkheidze1,2; genetic disorders. All sessions were voice recorded, transcribed, and 1Medical Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, Russian submitted for supervision. They were studied to identify the present- Federation, 2St.Petersburg University of Culture, St.Petersburg, Russian ing logoproblem, achievements of each session, common emerging Federation. themes, and individual gains. Hereditary and congenital disorders result in early and severe physical Results: Each participant will be briefly discussed in terms of back- and mental disability. Interpersonal relations are tense and nervous in ground and presenting logoproblem. Common emerging themes will the families having children handicapped and psychological climate be highlighted, and individual meaning-making will be discussed. is far from positive one. More often a father can not bear it any lon- Conclusion: All the participants found meaning in their suffering. Logo- ger and a marriage is broken down. These families stand in need of therapy is suitable for use in the context of medical genetics, and it Genetic analysis, linkage ans association  transcends cultural, educational and language barriers. Protracted French and Quebecer participants (aOR = 1.77; 95% CI, 0.07-4.51). counseling is not required to facilitate meaning-making.. Overall, 33% of French women and 39% of Quebecer women under- EP15.08 Direct to consumer genetic testing : marketing strate- went at least one ovarian ultrasound during the 2-year period following gies and ethical and societal issues. BRCA1/2 test result with no significant difference between cohorts of P. Ducournau1,2, A. Bulle1, A. Cambon-Thomsen1, P. Gourraud1,3, E. Rial- women <50 years of age. Among older women, Quebecers reported Sebbag1; more frequently than French women that they had undergone ultra- 1INSERM U 558, Epidémiologie et analyses en santé publique: risques, sound once (aOR = 3.00; 95% CI, 1.02-8.83). maladies chroniques, handicaps, Toulouse, France, 2CUFR J.F. Champollion, Conclusions: The frequency of cancer screening practices for female Albi, France, 3Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, non-carriers from BRCA1/2 mutation-positive families in both France CA, United States. and Quebec exceeded those recommended for similarly aged women Direct to consumer genetic testing on Internet for various pathologies in the general population. Our findings highlight the need for clear-cut and behaviour traits appears as a marketing success. What kinds of recommendations on the follow-up of women from BRCA1/2 families commercial strategies use the companies offering these genetic tests who are not themselves carriers of a BRCA1/2 mutation. and on what categories of social expectations do they play at the same time? Through a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the web sites EP15.10 Producing genetics education resources for offering such tests, it seems that these companies develop on the ba- primary care practitioners is just the beginning: challenges in sis of the exploitation of a triple market: that of the „healthism“ (evolu- dissemination and engagement. tion of the mentalities by which health and hygiene are raised to the K. Barlow-Stewart1,2, L. Forrest3, L. Purser1, S. Metcalfe4, J. Emery5; pantheon of the social values), that of the contemporary demands of 1Centre for Genetics Education NSW Health, Sydney, Australia, 2Sydney the users of health systems to be able to become actual actors of Medical School, Sydney, Australia, 3Australian Primary Health Care Research the decisions concerning their health, and finally that of the bio-social Institute, Canberra, Australia, 4Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, relationship. Each of these three commercial strategies underpins vari- Melbourne, Australia, 5University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. ous ethical and societal stakes that need to be explored in the context Genetics in Family Medicine: The Australian Handbook for General of this important and unprecedented development of this market of Practitioners (GPs) (http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/your_health/egenetics/ genetic tests. practitioners/gems.htm) was developed by the Genetics Education in Medicine consortium for the Australian Government in both print and EP15.09 Breast and ovarian cancer screening practices for on-line formats (June 2007). A summary sheet (Genetics at a Glance non-carriers from BRcA1/2 mutation-positive families: two- (G@G)) contained guidelines for practice from the 17 modules, con- year follow-up of prospective cohorts from France and Quebec, tacts for genetics services throughout Australia and a web-link to the canada full resource which was also available in hardcopy ($A40). Promotion M. Dorval; included a small launch at a national GP conference and a mail-out Faculty of Pharmacy, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada. of the G@G with the October 2007 edition of the journal Australian Background: We described and compared breast and ovarian screen- Family Physician to every registered medical practitioner. Two years ing practices in the 2-year period following test result disclosure in later, 768 GPs working in an urban or a rural and remote area were female non-carriers from BRCA1/2 mutation-positive families living in approached to participate in a survey of the dissemination strategy and two countries, France and Quebec, Canada, which provide universal use and relevance of the resource to GPs’ practice. While participation health care. in the survey has been small (14% RR), early findings confirm the con- Methods: 402 (France n=293; Quebec n=109) unaffected female non- sortium’s concerns that the dissemination strategy and lack of associ- carriers from BRCA-proven mutation families provided information ated educational activities has resulted in extremely limited awareness about the uptake of mammography, clinical breast examination, breast of the resource: 17% remember receiving G@G and 6% can still locate self-examination, and ovarian ultrasounds using self-administered it while only 4% and 1% have accessed the resource on-line or in print questionnaires. The frequency of screening practices between study format, respectively. However, of those who opted into the learning cohorts were compared using logistic regression. activity for 2 CPD points, the vast majority found the information useful Results: Annual mammography was conducted in 23% and 43% of or very useful in completing the activity and the modules of informa- French and Quebecer women participants <50 years of age, respec- tion were rated highly as relevant to GP practice. Educational activities tively (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] = 2.72; 95% CI, 1.08-6.81). In women suggested by GPs to promote the resource will be presented. >50 years of age, mammography was conducted in 49% and 65% of